AN ANSWER TO THE LORD DIGBIES Speech in the House of COMMONS; To the Bill of
Attainder of the Earl of Strafford, the 21th. of April. 1641. Written by
occasion of the first publishing of that speech of his Lordships. And now
printed in regard of the reprinting of that Speech.

Printed in the year, 1641.

AN ANSWER To the Lord Digbies Speech in the House of COMMONS. To the Bill of
Attainder of the Earl of Strafford, the 21. of April. 1641.
THE interest which every good subject has in the actions of the King and
State, is sufficient to defend him from the imputation of being a busy body in
maintaining the Justice of them. That, and my desire to do the Lord Digby
service, by endeavoring to give him satisfaction in those scruples, which made
him differ from his former self, have moved me to enter into an examination,
of the grounds of that change which his Lordsh. has declared in his speech to
the Bill of Attainder of the Lord Strafford. They are but two.

The first and maine is the failing of that in the proof, which induced his
Lordsh. to consent, that it was fit the Lord of Strafford should be accused of
Treason, which was, his advising the King to employ the Army of Ireland to
reduce England.

For admitting the circumstances of Master Secretary Vanes, three several
examinations at the Preparatory Committee, to be the same his Lordship has
reported, yet why they should prevail so much with his Lordship, as to work to
an utter overthrow of his evidence, as unto the Army of Ireland: I must
confess, I therefore cannot comprehend, because all his Lordship does, or
would have others infer thereupon is; That he who twice upon oath, with time
of recollection could not remember any thing of such abusines, might well a
third time misremember somewhat.

For certainly notes taken by Sir Henry Vane himself, of words spoken by the
Lord Strafford, either at the time, and upon the place when, and where they
were uttered, or soon after when they were fresh in memory, are a stronger
confirmation that his remembrance at last fixed upon the point of truth;
notwithstanding the long trepidation about it, then the notes of any other
Counselor could have been. And there was a time when his Lordship avoweth,
that he was fortified in his belief by the imagination that the notes he had
been told of would have proved some other Counselors.

So strong indeed to my understanding, that I cannot see how the validity of
Mr. Secretaries testimony can be in the least degree infringed, without making
a great breach into his conscierce.

For if I should allow (which I do not) that there could be no other use of
committing those venomous parts of discourses to paper, but to accuse men, and
to bring them into danger, certainly it then behooved Mr. Secretary to be
very careful that the notes he took were no such disioynted fragments, as by
falling into other hands, (as it happened) might make a great Minister of state,
and his fellow Counselor to be thought to have said that which was never
intended by him.

And if it betrue, as I rather believe, that Mr. Secretaries end in registring
that indeed truly venomous advise of the Lord Strafford, was to make sure of
his memory, in case he should ever be called to testify what had passed at
that Iunto (which has also happened;) it then behoved him no less to consider
well what he put down in writing, for the support of his memory; and much
more to recollect himself very well before he deposed any thing in
remembrance of his notes, after the paper was burnt. And considering his having
at first rashly said, that he could not charge the Lord Strafford with that of
the Irish Army, it was a great providence of God, that a copy of the paper he
had burned should have been taken, produced, and attested in the manner it
was, without his having had any hand in any of them. For I do not know even
what I should have thought of Master Secretaries testimony without this
foreign help, although with it I think no single testimony can be stronger,
and that his had not been so strong, though he had at first deposed the same
he did at last, as it is now, notwithstanding his variation, taking in the
confirming circumstances from without.

I humbly beseech the Lord Digby, who I see has a noble and Christian care not
to have any thing driven to an aspertion on Master Secretary, first to think
well upon the things I have now suggested to his consideration, touching the
necessity which in duty lay on Mr. Secretary to take heed that there were not a
syllable, nor title amiss in his notes, and then to tell himself what place
there is left; for imagining there might be a mistake of herefor there, or
this for that, and that it is probable there was so, since it is confessed on all
hands, that the debate then was concerning a war with Scotland. For that
there was any such mistake in the copy of his notes, cannot be fancied without
infinite injury to Mr. Secretaries son, and to that most worthy Gentleman
Master Pimme, who took the copy with a purpose to make the use has been made
of it, and who, I hear, have in general but high terms averred the truth
thereof, having both had a sight of the original, and being both of untainted,
and undoubted veracity. And that Master Secretary could not so mistake in the
making of his memorial, is very manifest, by the incoherence of the Lord
Digbies Criticisme with the whole context of the preceding words, viz. That
having tried the affections of his people, his Majesty was loose and absolved
from all rules of government, and was to do every thing, that power would
admit, and that his Majesty had tried all ways, and was refused, and should be
acquitted, both with God and man; and that he had an Army in Ireland, which
he might employ to reduce this Kingdom.

For what need was there to make so great a Muster of things done in England,
for the acquitting of his Majesty with God, and man; toward the employing of
the Irish Army, to reduce the Kingdom of Scotland.

And though the primary debate of that day was concerning a war with
Scotland, yet that debate must needs bring in a second, viz. how moneys might
be raised in England toward the making of that war, the Parliament having
refused to supply his Majesty, as the Lord Strafford most wickedly slaundered
the house of Commons.

And if in the Lord Digbies conceit, it were not hard for Mr. Secretary to
mistake in the manner aforesaid, then why was his Lordship so easily engaged to
prosecute his accusation of the Lord Strafford of high Treason, with so much
earnestness, founding his judgment on a Basis that might so easily fail, and
which by the wavering of Mr. Secretary in his testimony he had cause to fear
would fail; nay which had already actually failed so far, that there was no
expectance of more then a single testimony fortified with circumstances, some
time before his Lordship gave over his former fervor.

Or if it should be admitted, that there is no improbality of such an
unwilfull mistake in Mr. Secretary Vane, then it cannot be denied, but that an
other Counselor of that Iunto might as easily have committed the same, or the
like error in his notes; and allowing me this, I shall then beseech his
Lordship without prejudice to Mr. Secretary, to give himself a good reason,
why that ground of his accusation, that spur of his prosecution, that basis
of his Judgment of the Earl of Strafford as unto Treason, should be quite
vanished away to his understanding, so soon as he knew the notes were Sir
Henry Vanes, which till that instant had been in such force of belief with
him, that had it remained in the same, he should not have been tender in the
Lord Straffords condemnation. For in the scales of my weak Judgment there is
no such difference in the weight of two Counselors notes, especially those
which proved to be Mr. Secretary Vanes, having been at last, though slowly
confirmed by his memory upon oath, without help of his paper; whereas those of
some other Counselors might have proved inferior in those two great
credentiall circumstances, for ought his Lordship had then heard, or had reason
to imagine.

For it will not help his Lordship to say, that he has expressed himself in
those wary terms, that to his understanding that ground is quite vanished away,
as unto Treason, toward the legal proof whereof a single witness is no
better then none; because no notes could have supplied the defect of another
witness, and all the rest of the Iunto had already upon their oaths remembered
nothing of this matter. Before his Lordship changed his judgment, and for
ought he could know, might have continued to do so, not withstanding the
production of any of their notes, which they upon their re-examination might
also have evaded, as his Lordship would these of Mr. Secretaries.

So that upon the whole matter had this particular of the Irish Army been the
sole charge, and proved no otherwise then his Lordship imagined it would have
been, that is to say by Sir Henry Vanes single testimony without his notes,
and some other Counselors nores without his testimony, I cannot see how his
Lordship could judiciously have condemned the Lord Strafford of treason with
innocence according to his plinciples.

And as for a diffusing of a complexion of treason over all, if that particular
had been sufficiently witnessed, or becoming a With to bind all the scattered
and lesser branches, as it were into a faggot of Treason, Sure the antecedent
words are so much more powerful to that effect, as they are more
comprehensive, and they were clearly deposed by my Lord the Earl of
Northumberland, as well as by Sir Henry Vane, though no other of the Iunto
remembered any thing of them neither, which does take off much of the
strangeness of Mr. Secretaries single testimony, and I believe has bin the
ground whereupon many a tender conscience has passed that Bill, wherein his
Lordship was more scrupulous then I canyetfind sufficient cause for.

For I crave leave to ask his Lordship this Question, whether, if some
miscreant had been tampering with others to take away the life of the King, and
this had been evidenced by two witnesses, whereof one had deposed, that he
advised the doing of it by poison as the surest and safest way, the other
denying those words upon oath, should notwithstanding have sworn clearly that
he heard him persuade the killing of the King, and giving reasons for the
necessity and lawfulness thereof, and his Lordship had been one of the Jury,
whether he would have made any more bones of condemning that villainy, then if
they had both agreed in a tale touching the matter of poison: And if his
Lordship could have swallowed that difference in their depositions well enough,
it may then be a matter worthy of his further enquiry, from what quarter that
Gnat came, which stuck so fast with his Lordship in a case fully parallel:
There resting as little doubt in one that his Majesty might lawfully have
employed the Irish Army to reduce this kingdom, if he might, and was to have
done every thing that power would admit for the raising of moneys otherwise,
after the Parliament had not supplied him, as there would have rested in
another, whether he might have poisoned the King, after he had been satisfied
that he might have killed him.

The Lord Strafford saw very well, that the knot of the With was in this part
of that desperate advise of his, and the Lord Digby may remember the poor shift
he made to loose it by explaining himself thus. His Majesty was to do every
thing that power would admit, that is every thing that power would lawfully
admit, to the doing whereof I suppose his Majesty needed not to be loosed, and
absolved from all rules of government. And so for those other words in the end
of the 22. Article, that his Majesty should first try the Parliament here, and
if that did not supply him according to his occasions, he might then use his
prerogative as he pleased to leavy what he needed, and that he should be
acquitted both of God and man, if he took some other courses, though it were
against the will of his subjects. And the declaration he made in open counsel
mentioned in the end of the 21 Article. That he would serve his Majesty in any
other way in case the Parliament did not supply him; that is lawful way, and
lawful courses, said the Lord Strafford, now he found the point of these
mischievous words turned upon himself. And yet there was a time when no man
urged with more vehemency, that no such Prerogative courses to raise moneys
could be lawful; and I am sure no lawful courses at any time would have been
against the wills of any of his Majesty's subjects.

This was all that the mighty wit of the Lord Strafford could devise in
avoydance of the stabbing guilt of that most treacherous, and wicked Counsel
of his. But the Lord Digby helps him with many better guards.

First, by professing that he can have no notion of any bodies intent to
subvert the Laws treasonably, but by force. What a wide door has his
Lordship in few words set open to wicked Judges and Counselors, to trample the
public liberty of Kingdoms and States under foot, and then to escape without
punishment, or with less then can restrain them; or secure others from their
lewd practices. May not their concurrence and constancy in giving such wicked
judgments, and counsels upon all emergent occasions, be as sure evidences of
their intents to subvert the Laws, as the readiness of swordmen to abet and
maintain them therein. May not a free mighty Monarchy be thus in an age, or
two, quietly converted into a most slavish, and impotent tyranny, by the pen,
and abuse of the sword of Justice, without the use of any other on the Princes
part, if the Laws of the land, and of the Religion professed in it, bind the
people from drawing their swords in maintenance of their liberty? and shall
their obedience to God, and the King, and their Laws, leave them without hope
or means of redress by the same Laws or what sufficient redress, and
reparation can be made then if the result of a hundred such wicked judgments
and Counsels shall be only a great misdemeanour, and a hundred misdemeanors
cannot make a felony; nor a hundred Felonies amount to a Treason, according to
the Lord Straffords position maintained publicly at his trial: I wish the
Lord Digby had longer ruminated upon his ill digested judgment in this point,
before he put it over for good.

I proceed to the next words. They are. And this design of force not
appearing, all his other wicked practices cannot amount so high with me. Wherein
if by this design his Lordship mean the particular design of bringing the
Irish Army into England, then is the consequence most inconsequent. For sure if
the Lord Strafford had not, he might have had some other design upon this
Kingdom, that would have amounted to hight treason in the Lord Digbies eye: or
if by this design his Lordship intend generally the design of using force,
then sure it was made plain enough to his Lordship at the trial, that the
Lord Strafford did more then design the using of force to the subversion of
more then one of the fundamental Laws of England and Ireland, having actually
levied war upon the Kings liege people, to constrain obedience to his
illegal summons and orders upon Paper-petitions, and to raise moneys upon them
against their wills.

But his Lordship says, He can find a more natural spring from whence to
derive those, and all his other Crimes then from an intention to bring in
Tyranny, and to make his own posterity, as well as ours slaves. As from
revenge, from pride, from Avarice, from passion, from insolence of nature. Is
it possible that so sharp a wit as the Lord Digbyes, that can so quickly espy
the mishap of any argument brought forth against the Lord Strafford, should not
see this misconception of his own in his excuse? Shall no man be a Traitor,
that can find another more natural, spring from whence to derive his
treasonable designs and actions, then from an intent to commit Treason? Then
the Lord Strafford would not have been a Traitor with the Lord Digby, though
he had brought the Irish Army into England, if that action had originally
flowed from one of the foresaid Springs, as I believe it would have done. Then
his Lordship may absolve many, and I am sure will one of the Gunpowder
Traitors, whose son has found so much Princely compassion and favor from his
Majesty, and the King his Father, upon (I believe) a well-grounded opinion,
that the Fathers design to have destroyed the King his Master, proceeded not
from any malicious mind to his sacred person, but was derived from his zeal to
his Religion, a purer spring then any of those his Lordship has found out, to
wash the Lord Strafford, which certainly have been the springs of all the
fowlest treasons in the world.

And as for the Lord Straffords respect to his posterity, since the Lord Digby
knows (no man better) that we are all deceived with a show of good in every
sin we are drawn into by him, who (he thinks) gave the Lord Strafford the
application of his rare abilities: And that not only many Ministers of State
are easily engaged to be Instruments of overthrowing the Commonwealth, and
glory of Kingdoms, so they may advance themselves and their Families to riches
and honor, because that in so doing they imagine they get more in their
private fortunes then they lose in their parts of the public; But even the
wisest Princes themselves have by this deceit been drawn into the same error,
as Philip the second of Spain, and Lewis the eleventh of France, (For an error
it was in them, and may be demonstrated to have been so, as far as Politic
matters are capable of demonstration.)

Nay since the Lord Digby avoweth that the consideration of his posterity did
not hold the Lord Strafford himself from becoming the grand Apostate to the
Commonwealth, not only in opinions, but by falling from them to practices, as
high, as tyrannical, as any subject ever ventured on, and such as made him the
most dangerous Minister, the most insupportable to free subjects that can be
Charactered; I know not why his Lordship should esteem it so sure a
preservative against the Treason he has suffered for.

I had almost said justly, and so does his Lordship; For he does not say, but
the Lord Strafford was worthy to dye, and perhaps worthier then many a Traitor.
He does not say but his words, counsels, and actions, have been proved to be
such as may direct the King and Parliament to enact, that the like shall be
Treason for the future, but only prays God to keep him from giving judgment
of death on any man, or of ruin to his innocent posterity upon a Law made a
Posteriori. So that if his Lordship may be freed from this scruple of
Conscience, there is hope that he may change his opinion, and be brought a
Posteriori; to declare his agreeing in judgment with himself, and the so much
greater part of the House of Commons. And that I shall now hope to do by
showing him a fallacy in the second, and last ground of his Argument.

The fallacy lies in this, that his Lordship does divide those things in his
consideration which God has joined, and in doing this, will needs be wiser
then the State, and Laws he lives under, which no man ought to be, unless
they thwart the Law of God. This he does where he faith: There is in
Parliament a double power of life and death by Bill, a Judicial power, and a
Legaslative, that the measure of the one is what is legally just, of the other
what is prudentially, and politiquely fit for the good and preservation of the
whole, but these may not be confounded in judgment, we may not piece up want
of legallity with prudentiall fitness.

And truly if his Lordship had but added these words, Except some Case as yet
wholly omitted, or not yet sufficiently declared, come to be judged in
Parliament. I should have fully assented to his whole discourse in this point;
But in either of those Cases to deny unto that representative Body, the High
Court of the Kingdom a liberty to do any thing not unjust in it self (though
not as yet legally declared to be just) for the preservation of that greater
body it represents, when according to the sincere, and dispassionate judgment
of Prudence, and Policy, it cannot be sufficiently secured by Laws already
made, is neither agreeable to the Law of Nature, nor of the Land, nor of God,
nor to a rule of his Lordships own.

Not to the law of Nature, which, in any case where the safety of the whole
comes into question, does not bind it self from ordering, in the great
world, that light things shall descend, heavy ascend. In the little, that the
whole man upon consultation shall consent to the cutting off, of a gangrened
hand, or foot, though the former be contrary to that Common Law, whereby
elementall bodies are governed in their motions; And the latter against that
dictate of Nature, which inclines each member to have a compassionate care of
the preservation of another so strongly, that except in a like case, no part,
nor the rest of the whole may, nor can consent to such a mutilation.

Not to the Law of the Land, For in that very Statute of 25. Edw. 3. Cap. 2.
whereby Treasons were first declared, there is a passage which does quite
overthrow his Lordships distinction, and rules squared to his present purpose,
as is yet plainer by diverse subsequent statutes if I understand English, and
there be no more but that, and a little right reason requisite to understand
Statute law, as there ought to be. I will here transcribe the several
passages, wherein I observe, that some or all of the latter Statutes are
repealed, but that is not material to the purpose for which I cite them.

25. Ed. 3. Cap. 2. And because that many other like Cases of treason may
happen in time to come, which a man cannot think nor declare at this present
time: It is accorded, that if any other Case supposed Treason, which is not
above specified does happen before any Justices, the Justices shall tarry
without geing to judgment of the Treason, till the Case be showed, and
declared before the King, and his Parliament, whether it ought to be judged
Treason or Felony.

21. Rich. 2. Cap. 3. And that this Statute shall extend and hold place as well
to them which be judged, or attainted for these four points of the said
Treason in this present Parliament, as of them which shall be judged or
attainted in the Parliament in time to time of any of the four points of
Treason before said.

8. Hen. 6. cap. 6. And that this ordinance extend as well to such hurnings
made after the first day of the reign if our Sovereign Lord the King till
this time, as to burnings to be made in time to come.

22. Hen. 8. cap. 9. And that the said Richard Roose, for the said murder and
poisoning of the sard two persons, as is aforesaid by authority of this present
Parliament shall stand and be attainted of High treason. And because that
detestable offense now newly practiced and committed, requires condign
punishment for the same. It is ordained and enacted by Authority of this
present Parliament, that the said Richard Roose shall therefore be boiled to
death. His offense was poisoning a Pot of Pottage.

By all which I conceive it to be elcere as the Noonday, that the Parliaments
of England, have heretofore as now, used to look backward as well as forwards,
if the occasion required it. And so, that his Lordships distinction, has no
ground in the Law of the Land.

And truly it has is little in the law of God. For in that we read, that
Moses and Aaron, and all the Congregation, to whom the man that was found
gathering sticks on the Sabbath day was brought, at first indeed did only put
him in ward, because it was not yet declared what should be done to him: But
when it was declared, they then stoned that same man to death for that former
fact by a Law made a posteriori.

The very same proceeding was held with the son of the Israelitish woman,
whose Father was an Egyptian for blaspheming or cursing for he was also stoned
to death a posteriori, and a general Law declared upon the occasion, that as
well the stranger, as he that is borne in the Land, when he blasphemeth the name
of the Lord shall be put to death.

This furnishes an Answer to the Objection I have heard made to the former
Instance, that the gatherer of sticks on the Sabbath, was put to death by a
special direction from God, which may no more be drawn into example now,
then Abraham's going about to sacrifice his Son.

For, not to divert into that Question, whether that Declaration of God
Almighty, ought to have been a direction to the Jews to punish the breach of
the Sabbath with death, which for ought appears, was not so understood by
them, unless Nehemiahs threatening, Neh. 13.21. may be taken in that sense. I
humbly conceive, that by the generality of the Law, which ordained, that
Blasphemy should be punished with death, it is plain that the execution of
that Mungrell Egyptian Jew, for that sin was not extraordinary. And from both
those Instances, that by the example of the God of Heaven it is lawful for the
Assembly of Gods on Earth to put offenders to death for Crimes desorving
capital punishment, though committed before they were declared to be such.
And it may be, so much may also be gathered from that famous place, Deuteronomy.
17.9.10. which I refer to further consideration.

Lastly, his Lordships own Rule in his speech for the Tryenniall Parliament,
is this, That the King out of Parliament has a limited, a circomscribed
Jurisdiction; But waited on by his Parliament, no Monarch of the East is so
absolute in dispelling grievances. For it is well known, that if any man how
great soever do once become a public grievance, That is to say, A dangerous
and insupportable Minister to the State; those Eastern Monarchs do not use to
stand upon punctilios of Laws made, or to be made, no nor so much as upon the
formality of legal proceedings, Wherein there has been more either right, or
favor showed to the Lord Strafford by the King and his Parliament, then I
believe ever was to any like Offender in the whole world before him, which I
(...) to his Majesty's, and their eternal glory and praise.

I know well what may be replied by so me others, not by the Lord Digby of the
dangerousnesse of this last mentioned doctrine of his, and am as sensible
thereof as another man.

But I do humbly conceive, that there is yet more danger in the Lord Digbies
fore-rehearted doctrine: And that all that is in the last recited (being also
as I take it more conformable to the Law of the Land) may be prevented by some
good Ordinances, otherwise needful to be made, which is an Argument I must not
digress into here.

In sum I hope ere this it is plain, that in stead of the Prayer his
Lordship made, it had been more needful for him, to have prayed to God to
keep him from making distinctions, where God himself has made none, which
his Lordship knows is not well pleasing to God, and must needs have observed
to have been the original of many great divisions, and combustions in the
Church, and so might now have been in this State, if God of his mercy, and by
his overruling, power had not prevented it, contrary to his Lordships
prudentiall judgment, who I perceive would else have found a wrong Father for
those seared distractions of the Kingdom.

Or if all I have yet said be not enough, let this suffice, that the Lord
Digby himself, not only in a former speech made before he altered his mind,
but in this very speech does clearly allow of this very kind of proceeding,
which he would feign see me to disallow.

For after all the expression of his so nice tenderness of conscience in this
point, even his Lordship notwithstanding moved, that laying aside the Bill of
Attainder, the House would think of another such a one as might secure the
state from the Lord of Strafford, saving only his life. Which under favor had
not only been to condemn him a posteriori to worse then death, That is,
either to have lived in perpetual imprisonment, or to have become an
ignominious fugitive, and vagabond, after he had been branded by the House of
Commons, by his Lordship, and by his most sacred Majesty in such a manner, as
might well have put the same thoughts into him, that every-one that met him
would have killed him, which made Caine cry out, That his punishment was
greater then he could bear; But for ought his Lordship has expressed, the
Bill he moved for, might have trenched as deep to the ruin of his innocent
posterity as the Bill of Attainder.

Nay, I pray tell me, how but by a Law a posteriori could his Lordship have
condemned the Lord Strafford of high treason, as he has professed that he
should and might have done with Innocence, if that of the Irish Army had been
proved to his understanding: For I do not know whether as the case may be
put, those words touching the Irish Army, had been treason, as yet declared by
the Statute of 25. Edw 3. But it they be, then I am sure the former words are a
much vaster treason.

And to leave no lease of his Lordships defense unventilated his reason drawn
from the marking of a house infected with the plague being the same in other
words with the Lo. Straffords taken from a boy, is of a little show, but no
force at all: For under favor, these comparisons show no more, but that no
action in it self indifferent, (such as that the old Rhetoricians make use of,
the going up to the top of the walls of a Town of Garrison) ought to be made
capital to any man that had no knowledge of that Law, which I allow to be
good reason; But am sure his Lordship will not allow, that the Lord Strafford
was charged with any such slight Article, and much less that the result of
them all is a matter of indifference, or such a one to which the Lord Strafford
could plead ignorance of the heinousness of the crime: For there is no man
capable of committing the treason for which he has suffered, but must needs
know, That as the safety of the people is the supreme Law, so the attempting to
introduce any new form of government, without their consents, especially an
Arbitrary and Tyrannical one, is the greatest wrong can be done, and the
highest Treason can be committed against a State.

And sure Sir Thomas Wentworth who (as the Lord Digby himself has noted in
his foresaid speech for the Trichniall Parliament was the man that whilome in
the House of Commons first moved for the inserting of that clause in the
Petition of Right And that your Majesty would be also graciously pleased, for
the further conmfort and safety of your people to declare your Royal will and
pleasure, that in the things aforesaid all your Officers, and Ministers shall
serve you according to the Loves and Statutes of this Realm, as they tender
the honor of your Majesty, and prosperity of this Kingdom) was not ignorant
of the greatness of this offense: If the Lord Wentworth, and the Lord
Strafford were, as indeed a man may well think they were, that in their Story
shall hereafter observe, that they no sooner were admitted to the honor of
being in the number of his Majesty's Officers and Ministers, but they began and
so continued to be the great transgressors and violaters of all the heads of
the same Petition of Right, in the Kingdoms of England, or Ireland, and of
most of them in both.

I cannot observe any thing more in the Lord Digbies speech, that without wrong
to his judgment may be thought to have been a ground of his so solemn
Protestation, that his vote went not to the taking away of the Lord Straffords
life: But I have observed two passages which may give a little light, how his
judgment, so neat in other things, came to be corrupted in this.

The first is an ungrounded apprehension, that neither the Lords nor the King
would have passed the Bill, and consequently, that the passing of it in the
House of Commons would be cause of great divisions in the State. For there is
no passion does multiply faster, or which in shorter time will raise a greater
mist in the mind of a wise man then groundless fear.

The second is; His Lordships having upon this occasion much inculcated to his
own conscience, the height and weight of the Crime of committing murder with
the sword of Justice; But for ought appears in his Speech, having quite
forgotten to put in a due Counterpoyse thereunto, from a no less serious
consideration of that saying of the Wise man; He that justifies the wicked,
and he that condemns the just, Even they both are abomination to the Lord.
And the president made upon King Ahab recorded in those words; Because thou
have let go out of thy hands a man whom I appointed to utter destruction, thy
life shall go for his life.

Wherein notwithstanding I would not be so understood, as if I who am a private
man, did take upon me to judge of the Lord Staffords Cause. For, as I declared
at the beginning, my intention throughout has been only to vindicate the
public proceedings from scandal; and to clear that Lord Digby from his
scruples. The first of which now I have done with the zeal that became me, I
shall henceforth with aequanimity expect to see what grounds there was of the
Lord Straffords hopes, that he may hereafter appear less guilty of the death
he died, then as yet he does to me.

And though in the later I have used necessary freedom in expressing my
present conceits of the Lord Digbyes Reasons, yet I reserve a thought that the
weakness may be in my own understanding, and that though of my self I am
not, yet by his Lordship I may be made capable of them, being one that has his
eminent abilities in no less admiration then any other whatsoever.

FINIS.

