THE ANTIQUITY OF ENGLANDS Superiority over SCOTLAND.

AND The Equity of Incorporating Scotland, or other Conquered Nation, into the
Commonwealth of ENGLAND.

WITH Parallels to our former Transactions with WALES, and IRELAND.

AND Illustrations out of the Scottish, English, Jewish, Grecian, Assyrian, and
Roman Histories.

By a Well-wisher to this Commonwealth.

LONDON, Printed by R. Ibbitson, 1652. June.28.

The Antiquity of the Superiority of England over Scotland.
THat Scotland was anciently an Appendix, Province, or subjected state, to
England, appears thus:

1 We find in Marianus (a Scotch Writer) his History, that before the
Conquest, Edward the son of King Alured had the King of Scots under his
obedience, as the said Marianus confesses.

2 After him, Athelstan King of England, disposed of the Crown of Scotland to
one Constantine.

3 Some four and twenty years after King Eldred took homage of the King of
Scots.

4 After thirty years more, King Edgar received homage from Kinabe, King of
Scots.

5 About the year of our Lord Christ 1018. Malcolm King of Scotland, did homage
to King Canutus.

6 About the year 1056. King Edward the Confessor, deposed the said Malcolm
King of Scots, and put his son Malcolm into his fathers Throne, from whom the
said King Edward received homage.

7 There was another Malcolm that did homage to William the Conqueror.

8 As also the same Malcolm did the like homage to William Rufus.

9 About seven years after Edgar King of Scotland did homage to our Henry the
first.

10 The like did David King of Scots, to our King Stephen.

11 Also William King of Scots did homage to our Henry the second.

12 And after the same William came into England as far as Canterbury to do
homage to Richard the first.

13 And after that near to Lincoln, to perform homage to King John.

14 Homage was done to our Henry the third, by Alexander King of Scots.

15 And Alexander the son of the said Alexander did homage to our Edward the
first.

16 After him John Baliol King of Scots did homage to the same Edward the first.

17 In Edward the seconds time it was omitted by reason of the civil broils,
and infirmities of Edward the second; but to Edward the third was homage again
paid by Edward Baliol King of Scots, upon whom he bestowed the Kingdom of
Scotland as a gift.

After him the Civil wars of England coming on, and our Nation being taken up
with contests about Title at home, it had little list or leisure to make good
the homage due from Scotland, and our Title to it.

And thus you see what right we have had of old to Scotland, which right now
descends to the people of England (in whose right alone, our Kings held all
they possessed) and is now more firm then ever, being recovered again, by a
total conquest of the sword.

The Equity of Incorporating Scotland, or other Conquered Nation, into the
Commonwealth of England.
HAving seen the right of England to their Superiority over Scotland; And
having now attained jus inre as well as jus ad rem, a full possession of what
we have a right to, the next Virtue to our Valor is our prudence to keep what
we have won.

There are but two ways chiefly, of holding and maintaining of a Conquest over
a neighbor Nation.

1 Either by a powerful restraint, and constraint under the Superiority of the
Conqueror, the said conquered as a distinct Nation.

2 Or by an amicable invitation of the conquered unto an Integration and
Incorporation into the Respublick of the Conqueror, so as to sit and vote with
that conquering Commonweal in their Law-making, and paramount Assemblies, or
Representatives.

Some have conceived, that by reason it is generally suspected that the Scots
have been formerly for many generations complexionated, and as it were
naturalized into an inveterate and strong Antipathy against the English, the
only way were to retain them under force as a subjugated people to England.

But first against this, we must balance two great attempt that must
necessarily concur to that course, which though very feisable for the power of
England, yet too unbecoming and unseemly (if not unrighteous and irreligious)
in the eyes of so ingenuous candid and pious a Conqueror as England is, and
have all along showed themselves.

For we cannot well hold a conquered people under force as a distinct Nation,
unless we should first drive away their contrary minded Ministers. Secondly,
Extirpate their Grandees in interest with the people.

The non-doing of which two, has made it so difficult (as some have conceived)
for England formerly to hold Scotland as a distinct Nation in subjection to
England; and so troublesome and chargeable to hold Ireland to their duty to
England. And therefore this course did the harsh Heathen Assyrian conquerours
take with the Jews, in their several captivities, carrying away all their
Ministers, and secular men of note, for the general, quite from their own
Country.

Secondly, if a Conqueror should dare to do both those, yet would it be
almost impossible, without infinite expense, and labor to retain a conquered
Nation under force, because as long as you so keep them, as a separate and
distinct Nation, severed in point of common interest and privilege, so long
also occasion is represented and ministered unto them (as before their eyes)
freshly and affectionately to remember their old condition, and to revive their
Antipathy either to an anti-acting to the utmost as often as opportunity opens it
self, or to a sluggish non-acting for the peace and welfare of the Mistress
Commonweal. The Greeks found this true of the Jews in the wars of the
Maccabees. And so did the Romans in the often insurrections of the Jews in the
time of Vespasian, and Adrian and Constantine the Roman Emperors.

The Romans therefore learning this experience of the Jews, as also of their
nearer neighbors whom they subdued, namely the Albans, Vosscians, Tusculans,
Urians, Sabins, and Hernicaus after they had subdcued the said near neighbors,
in Civitatem (says Cicero) receperun^, that is, they admitted them into the
Roman privilege, as if they had been all one and the same City. By which
means only, they immediately enlarged at once the bounds of their Territory
and Government; which at first reaching but fifteen miles beyond their walls, in
so short a space fixed, were at to great a distance enlarged, as to comprise all
that which we now call Italy.

All Historians (especially Livy and his Commentatours) applaud this as a most
prudent course of the Romans, to be imitated by all the world, upon the same
occasion of Conquest made upon a neighbor inhabiting the same terra firma, or
continent lying next the Conqueror, without a maine sea subdividing them at an
inconvenient distance.

For instance, even at home, almost at our doors in Wales, though all the great
ones were extinct, yet we had much ado to hold it, yea we could not hold it
with peace or profit against the common people, till they were incorporated
with us. For though Edward the first was so kind to them as to summon them to
our Parliament, where they had liberty to vote, so as it was only in order to
the interest of their own Country, yet because their votes extended no
further, they never took it as a courtesy; but contrariwise that liberty of
voting upon a separate and distinct interest, gave in^o their minds, still to
remember they were once a distinct Nation; upon which score they ever flew out
into ^ebellion, till it quitted the notion of a distinct Nation or Province,
and was incorporated with us by Henry the eight, made a member and brought
under the same fundamental Law with England. Since which time all Antipathies
and Emulations have by this means been buried in oblivion.

But yet it may be that the incorporating of a conquered neighbor Nation may
not be done hastily, if we will have it solid. And therefore these two rules
are to be observed:

1 After the example of the Romans (thus far) to extinguish the great families
as to their interest and power, in, and over the common people. The reason is
plain, because these are the only available incendiaries of the common sort,
and will be the last that will sorget their old condition.

2 According to the pattern of the Romans, to admit the conquered by degrees
unto an incorporation, as a trial whether the Commonalty will meetly settle;
if so, well. But if the great spirits mean while grow impatient, and draw
parties into fresh commotions, they will give new occasion of laying them
lower, more stripped of power and estate, and to further punish their adherents.
Which additional smart, being uneasier then the former, and sinking them into
deeper despair of delivering themselves, they will with open arms, and
thankful hearts embrace so high a favor, as to be received into a
participation of interest, and immunities with their Conquerours, and will, as
Wales did, soon forget those deadly feudes, and sodder into amity, as if all of
one blood.

FINIS.

