THE COMFORT OF THE SOUL Laid down by way of Meditation upon some heads of
Christian Religion, very profitable for every true Christian.

Composed and written by John Anthony of London* Doctor of Physic.

Psalm. 19. ver. 14. Let the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart
be always acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength and my Redeemer.
LONDON, Printed for G. Dawson, and are to be sold by John Mountague, at the
Sign of the White-Dragon in Duck-Lane, 1654.

I have perused these Divine Meditations, Entitled the Comfort of the Soul,
and do find them to be so Orthodox and solid, pious and profitable, that I do
approve them well worthy to be Printed and Published.

JOHN DOWNHAM.

To the Right Honorable Dame Elizabeth Dygby, Baroness of Geshal, in the
Kingdom of Ireland, Grace, Mercy and Peace from God the Father, and from our
Lord Jesus Christ.
HAving nothing of mine own that is worthy your Acceptance, to express my
Cordial respects and thankfulness for those many favors which I have
received from you, I have taken some spiritual Receipts out of Gods sacred
Dispensatory which I am bold to present or Dedicate to your Honor, because
they are special Cordialls for the spirits, and precious Antidotes against the
evil of sad times: Wherein also you will find some Balm of Gilead for the
cure of all spiritual diseases, if it be applied close to the part that is ill
affected, with the hand of Faith. If these things do relish well with your
spiritual Palate, then I am confident you will take sometime to ruminate
hereupon: for I know it has been your constant course to Meditate something
daily of Divine and heavenly things; which did strongly induce me to present
these unripe fruits of my labors to you, which I gathered in mine old age for
mine own use, according to my first Intention. Though I have thus labored out
of my Calling, as I am a Physician; yet I am not out of my profession, as I am
a Christian.

Now seeing this Work is come to Public view, I do humbly desire your
favorable construction of the frailties that are in it, and that you will be
pleased to vindicate it from carping spirits: for I did not write it to please
their curiosity: but to refresh and comfort those that do any way stand in need
of spiritual consolation. If any thing herein can give you any reasonable
satisfaction, let God have the honor and glory of his own Work, and I shall
greatly rejoice therein, and shall still remain your much obliged Servant,

JOHN ANTHONY.

To the READER.
COurteous Reader, if thou do live under the Cross, and art sensible of
these sad times, or if Gods visitation be upon thee, which makes thee to sigh
and groan under the burden and pressure of thy sorrows, so that thy soul
desires comfort, and thy spirits want spiritual refreshing and heavenly
consolation: then I have written this Treatise for thee, which I present to thy
view, wherein thou shall find the true way how to demean thy self under Gods
visitation, how to bear thy cross with a contented patience, how to make the
burden of thy sorrows more easy, or how to be delivered out of them, if God
sees it to be most for his glory, and best for thy good; also how to refresh
thy spirits and comfort thy soul in what kind soever it is afflicted. Here
also thou shall find that many of Gods dear servants have suffered as great
afflictions as thou can, and yet God did send them comfort and deliverance;
but specially what Christ thy Savior has suffered for thee, and what benefit
and comfort thou may have by it, if thou can draw it to thy self, and make
a particular application of it to thine own sorrowful condition, without which
it will yield thee but small consolation in thy miseries. If thou do meet
with any thing here that will fit thy present condition, either for
edification, or for comfort, thou must ruminate well upon it, to suck out the
spiritual jui^e, to imprint it in thy mind, and to bring it close home to thy
heart, that it may comfort thy soul, and cure thy wounded Spirit. David found
great comfort when he did Meditate on the Word of God. My soul, says he, shall
be satisfied as with marrow and fatness; and my mouth shall praise thee with
joyful Psalm 63. 5, 6
lips; when I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night
watches. And it must needs be so: for this is a duty which God requires, and
he takes special notice of those that do practice it, to pour down his
blessings upon them, as he did, upon Isaac, who went out daily into the field
to Meditate Genesis 24. 63, 64.
upon the wonderful Works of God, and then at that very time God sent him a
virtuous Wife. If the Spirit of God goes along with thee in thy holy
Meditations, they cannot but be comfortable to thy soul; thou will then
conceive aright of the secret and hidden things of God, and thou will see the
infinite wisdom and power of God in all the Creatures, his goodness and bounty
to thee in them, and a glympse of the Majesty and glory of the great Creator,
God Almighty. His holy Spirit will also open thy heart to let in whatsoever
spiritual good thou reapest by thy pious Meditations: For if thou look upon
the creature, and do not Meditate something of God in it, thou do look
upon it in vain, and if thou read or hear his Word Preached, and do not
settle it upon thy affections by ruminating upon it, thou can not edify thy
heart, nor comfort thy soul thereby: So likewise, if thou do read any thing
in this Treatise that is comfortable to poor dejected Spirits, it will not
comfort thee, if it be not well digested in thy heart, and applied to thine own
soul. If thou art not acquainted with this holy Duty, I have given thee some
directions how to perform it; and if thou do first practice it upon thy
self, to meditate upon thine own condition, what thou art by nature, and what
by grace, and considerest seriously in thy thoughts what way thou walk, what
steps thou treadest, and to what end thy ways do tend, thou will not only
come to the knowledge of thy self; but thou will also learn how to Meditate
profitably and comfortably upon God thy Creator, upon Jesus Christ thy
Redeemer, and upon the Holy Ghost thy Sanctifier and Comforter. I conclude with
this saying of an ancient Father: Nothing is found more sweet in this life,
nothing is conceived more comfortable, nothing does so separate the affections
from the love of this world, nothing does so fortify the mind against
temptations, nothing does so stir up man, and further him to every good work
and duty, as the grace and benefit of Divine Meditation, and heavenly
contemplation.

Thine in the Lord Christ, JOHN ANTHONY.

A Table of these several Heads contained in this Book.
MEditation is a Duty which God requires. FOL. 1 Rules of direction for our
holy Meditations. 4 Holy Meditation is the Prerogative only of a true
Christian. 9 How dreadful it is to Meditate on God. 12 How to Meditate
comfortably on God. 20 How to Meditate on the Holy Ghost. 30 How to Meditate on
the Works of God. 48 Concerning the Creation of Man. 60 To what end and purpose
Man was Created. 64 Concerning the Fall of Man. 69 Concerning the Redemption of
Man. 73 The Time of Grace. 80 The danger of delays in seeking Grace. 92 Of
Christ our Redeemer. 97 Of Christ's Prophetical Office. 106 Of Christ's Priestly
Office. 112 Of Christ's Kingly Office. 116 Of the Passion of Christ. 121 Of
Christ's Agony in the Garden. 128 Concerning the fidelity of Peter, and the
creachery of Judas. 141 What Christ suffered under Caiaphas. 157 Peter's denial
of Christ. 165 Christ's sufferings under Pilate. 179 Christ's sufferings under
the Cross. 201 Who were the Agents in the Passion of Christ. 211 Of the
Penitent Thief. 214 Of the Virgin Mary. 216 The darkning of the Sun. 235 Of the
death of our Savior Christ. 248 What happened at Christ's death. 255 Of the
burial of Christ. 261 A brief sum of the Humiliation of Christ. 266 Of the
Resurrection of Christ. 270 Of Christ's Ascension up into heaven. 275 A brief
sum of the Exaltation of Christ. 279 Our Advantage and gain by Christ in this
life. 282 Our Advantage and gain by Christ in death. 290 Our Advantage and gain
by Christ after death. 296 How Christ is our spiritual life. 303 How to enjoy
true happiness. 314 Concerning our Justification. 318 The Benefits and
Comforts of true Faith. 322 How to increase Faith. 329 How to esteem of Faith.
333 The sense of Faith may be lost. 341 The Stability of true Faith. 346 The
Conclusion of this Treatise. 354
THE COMFORT OF THE SOUL.
Meditation is a Duty which God requires.
WE read in the sacred Scriptures that God commanded his people Deuteronomy. 6. 8, 9.
, to bind the Words of his Law for a sign upon their hands, and to be as
frontlets between their eyes, to write them upon the posts of their houses, and
on their gates, to teach them diligently unto their children, to talk of them
in their houses, and to think upon them, when they walk by the way, when they
lie down and when they rise up: all which was to this end and purpose, Deuteronomy. 11
18.
that they might lay up his Words in their hearts, and in their souls, to
meditate upon them for their instruction, for their spiritual comfort, and for
their direction in a virtuous life, and holy Conversation. This is the counsel
of the wiseman, Prove. 7. 3
To bind the Commandments of God upon our fingers, and to write them upon the
table of our hearts, that we may be familiarly acquainted with them, and to
meditate on them upon all occasions. Paul gave Timothy diverse holy precepts,
concerning his life and doctrine, 1 Timothy 4. 15
and then he gave him express charge to meditate upon them, and to give
himself wholly to them, that they might be well fastened in his heart to observe
them. Also when Moses was dead, God made Joshua the chief commander of his
people, and appointed him to bring them into the land of Canaan, and to give
them the possession of it; which was a work so great, so difficult, and so
dangerous, by reason of the great strength of the inhabitants of that Land, as
might make Joshua to shrink from it, and afraid to undertake it; but God did
encourage him by many gracious promises of his assistance, to make him able to
effect it, and therefore he commanded him three several times, to be strong
and of a good courage, not to be afraid, but to rest upon his Word for strength
and ability to do that work whereunto God had called him, and would assuredly
perform his Word, if he did observe to do according to all the Law which Moses
commanded him, and not turn from it to the right hand or to the left, that he
might prosper whithersoever he went: Wherefore God says thus unto him, Josh.
1. 8.
This book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall
meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe to do according to all
that is written therein: for then thou shall make thy way prosperous, and then
thou shall have good success. Have not I commanded thee?

This is an holy duty which ought to be fixed upon holy things, and performed
to an holy end: for it is very useful and profitable, very sweet and
comfortable to every true Believers soul, if it be rightly performed. The
Saints and servants of God have been very frequent in the practice of this
duty, whose hearts were enlarged to meditate upon heavenly and spiritual
things, and they did thereby draw true consolation to their souls. Psalm. 63. 6
This was holy David's exercise day and night; Psalm. 119.
sometimes in the precepts and Statutes of God, Psalm 143. 5.
sometimes on his wonderful Acts, and excellent Works; Psalm. 104. 34
and his heart found great sweetness in these his Meditations.

Now then it is richly worth our pains to get this Art of Divine Meditation:
for it will increase our knowledge of God and of his Laws, it will make grace
more fruitful in us, and our sorrows less grievous: It will also strengthen
our faith in the promises of God, to make us stout and courageous in his Cause,
to withstand the assaults of the devil, and all the oppositions of wicked men.
How can we be edified by the Preaching of the Word of God, if we let it depart
out of our minds, and do not chew the cud, and ruminate upon it in our hearts?
How can we teach our children and servants the Laws of God, if they come not
frequently into our own meditations? How can our ways be prosperous here upon
earth, and how can we hope to have good success in what we take in hand, if we
do not meditate something concerning God day and night? If we neglect this
pious Duty, we do then estrange our selves from God, and we bereave our souls
of those spiritual benefits and comforts which otherwise they might receive,
and we lose a great part of the comfort of our lives.

But this Art is not easily learned, common grace or humane learning cannot
attain unto it: for the affections of the heart cannot be raised up to heavenly
contemplations, if they are not seasoned with sanctifying grace; neither can
they delight in spiritual things, if they are clogged with earthly cares, or
drawn away after worldly vanities. A true child of God is not always prepared
to meditate as he ought, to make his meditations edifying and comfortable to
his soul: for the inward corruptions of his unregenerate part will hinder him,
the thoughts of his worldly affairs will distract his mind, that he cannot be
so well disposed for such an heavenly duty, or else the devil will be ready to
suggest unto him evil thoughts, or to bring into his remembrance some of his
former sins, to disquiet the peace of his conscience, to trouble the
tranquillity of his mind, and so to interrupt his thoughts, that his
meditations may not be for the honor of God, nor yet fruitful and profitable
to himself; and therefore he must crave the assistance of the Spirit of GOD by
Prayer.

Rules of direction for our holy Meditations.
Wherefore now, that our Meditations may be holy and acceptable to God, and
that we may find sweetness and comfort in them, we must carefully observe
these few Directions following,

The first is, to fix our meditations upon holy things, and not upon that which
is vain and unprofitable: for they do most conduce to the glory of God, and to
the comfort of our souls. This is Paul's counsel, Col. 3. 1, 2
to set our affections on things above, not on things on the earth: whereby we
shall give a clear evidence, that we are risen with Christ from the death of
sin to the life of grace. As our affections are carried, so are our
meditations: if they are carried to worldly vanities, our minds will be so
incumbered, that we cannot freely meditate upon those things that concern the
Kingdom of heaven, neither will our meditations be for Gods glory, or for our
eternal good. But if our affections are carried toward heavenly things, then
our meditations will be spiritual and heavenly, and our actions will be
tending to the honor of God. 1 Chronicles. 29. 3.
David set his affection to the house of his God, and therefore he prepared
abundantly of his own proper good, of gold and silver which he gave to the
building of it. Wherefore it concerns us very much to keep our hearts close
unto God, that our minds may be raised up to him in our heavenly
contemplations, and that he may be glorified in all our actions:

The second direction is, that our meditations must be of the heart, as well as
of the brain; otherwise this Duty is not so performed that God will accept it.
It is the heart which God respects in all our services to him; without which
our best duties are not regarded. Luke 2. 19
The blessed Virgin kept all the sayings of the shepherds and others concerning
Christ, and pondered them in her heart. Oh, how acceptable is that sacrifice
which is offered up to God with a pure and perfect heart? how effectual is
that Prayer which is presented unto him with a true and faithful heart? how
pleasing are those Alms to God that are given to the poor with a willing
heart? and how comfortable are those meditations which proceed from an upright
heart? The brain may work, and the cogitations of the mind may be set upon
holy objects, and all to little purpose, if the affections of the heart be
wanting.

Thirdly, the end of our meditations must crown the work with gracious
acceptance, and this must be the glory of God. We do greatly honor God in our
meditations when we ruminate upon his incomprehensible Essence, how infinite he
is in all his Divine Attributes, and how wonderful in all his works: also,
when we meditate upon his Law, and upon his gracious promises to us in Christ,
if hereby we are brought to reverence and adore his Sacred Majesty, to love him
for his goodness, and to yield due obedience unto his commands, and if we can
rest upon his promises, and discern his wisdom and glory by his Works. This
must be the main end of our meditations; and if we do seriously meditate upon
the holy things of God to an holy end, then God will accept them, and we shall
be edified by them. But if we propound any other end to our selves, whether it
be for discourse or vainglory, or the like, we seek not the honor of God
herein, but we delude our selves, and defraud our souls of that heavenly
comfort which otherwise they might have.

Fourthly, our hearts and consciences must be purified and cleansed from dead
works by faith, and true repentance, that an holy zeal may be kindled in our
affections, and that our souls may feel the comfort of a spiritual warmth by
our holy meditations. For if there be any guilt of sin that cleaves fast to
our consciences, because we have no assurance by repentance, that it is washed
away in the blood of Christ by faith, it will cool the zeal of our affections,
and stop the current of Gods assisting grace; so that our meditations can make
no holy impression in our hearts, no print of Piety in our lives and
conversations; neither can they send forth any beams of true consolation to our
souls. Wherefore if our hearts are not sanctified and seasoned with grace, our
meditations cannot be to the glory of God, nor to our own spiritual good,
neither can we say as the Psalmist did Psalm. 104 34.
My meditation of God shall be sweet, I will be glad in the Lord. This will
move our hearts and affections, and will put a spiritual life into our
meditations, when our hearts are cleansed from the guilt of sin; so that we can
freely meditate upon the bounty and goodness of God in all his dealings with
us: this we may do if faith goes along in all our holy meditations.

Fifthly, we must have some spiritual understanding in those things whereon we
desire to meditate, that the holy Ghost may guide us in our meditations, and
then we shall glorify God, and comfort our souls thereby; otherwise the
thoughts of our hearts will wander, and go far astray from the matter,
whereupon they should be fixed; and we may easily lose our selves in the dark,
if the spirit of God does not give us some spiritual light, to guide and direct
us therein, and we can receive no benefit by this holy service, if it be not
performed with an understanding heart. The more knowledge we have of what we
intend to meditate, the more will our hearts be enlarged for it, and the deeper
impressions will our meditations make in our affections, and the greater will
be the comfort of our souls. This was the saying of the Psalmist. Psalm. 49. 3.
The meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. Thus says Paul: 1 Cor.
14 15
I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also; I
will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also: so
likewise we must meditate with the spirit, and with the understanding also. How
can we learn the Commandments of God, and how can we keep his Law, if the Lord
does not give us understanding in them by his Spirit.

This heavenly wisdom is the gift of God, which we must with all care and
diligence labor for, according to this of Solomon: Prove. 4. 7.
Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get Wisdom: and with all thy
getting get understanding. This is a special means to come to the true way of
holy and devout meditation.

Sixthly, We must daily practice this religious duty, and if we learn to
meditate upon our selves, what our state and condition is, whether it be of
nature or of grace, it will bring us to the meditation of spiritual things.

Though it be a very hard matter for a true child of God to meditate upon
heavenly things for his own benefit and comfort; yet by use and exercise we may
attain unto it, and the sweetness that we shall find in it will by degrees
bring us to delight in this pious duty. Phil. 3. ^0
For by this means we shall have our conversation in heaven, though we live
upon earth, and we shall enjoy heaven and heavenly happiness in some part
while we live in this world: for if we be frequent in our meditations on the
Kingdom of heaven, 2 Cor. 1. 12
the grace of God will make our conversation in this world to be in simplicity
and godly sincerity.

The seventh Direction is, to choose such times, and such places as are most
fitting and most convenienient for this holy duty, that we be not interrupted
by any occurrence of worldly occasions, but that our minds and our hearts may
agree, and go together in our meditations.

The fittest time for this religious service is, when God is pleased to give an
inclination of will, and to move our hearts thereunto by his holy Spirit: which
time we ought not to let slip, nor to lose this opportunity which he tendereth
to us; because it is the time for grace of his own choosing, and the time which
he will accept.

If we take this time and set it apart to employ our selves in this holy
service, he will then enlarge our hearts for it, he will direct us in it, and
he will graciously assist us with his Spirit, to conceive aright of those
things whereon we do intend to meditate. As we must be free at that time from
all incumberances by our affairs; so we must retire to such a place, where we
may be solitary and private, that our hearts may wholly intend our meditations.

A solitary field is a fitting place to ruminate upon the works of God: Mat. 6.
6.
Our closet is most convenient to meditate on the Law of God. If we choose such
times and places, we may freely delight our selves with heavenly and spiritual
contemplations.

Lastly, we must prepare our hearts for this pious duty by faithful prayer,
that God will be pleased to aid and assist us herein with his blessed Spirit,
to raise up our affections, to enlighten our understandings, and to purge and
cleanse our hearts from all sinful thoughts, worldly cares, and from every
evil concupisence, that we may fully devote our selves to the meditation of
heavenly things, that this holy service may be performed to the glory af God,
to the increase of our spiritual knowledge, to the strengthening of our faith
and confidence in God, and to carry us on cheerfully through all the
troublesome chances and changes, that are incident to this life: for our holy
Meditations will lift up our hearts and affections above all worldly cares, and
above all the crosses and sorrows that we shall meet with here upon earth.

Holy Meditation is the prerogative only of a true Christian.
AMong many Prerogatives that a true believing Christian has above all other
men, this is not the least, that he can raise up the Affections of his heart to
heavenly contemplations, by the power of the Spirit of grace that is in him:
whereas unregenerate men cannot attain to this high degree of true Christianity
by all the means that art or nature can afford them: for their Meditations
reach but to the notions of the brain, and are practiced only by the outward
man, which can yield them no spiritual consolation; because they have not the
power of grace to move the affections of the heart to heavenly things, which
only can minister sweetness and true consolation to an afflicted soul, and to a
troubled conscience, to give them good hope and assurance of the grace and
favor of God, and of the pardon and forgiveness of their sins.

Carnal men set their minds and affections upon carnal delights; voluptuous
men do daily study how to satisfy their souls with unprofitable pleasures, and
worldly minded men set their hearts upon covetousness, and upon the pomp and
vanity of this present world.

These and the like kind of men are so pressed down with the burden of sin,
and they are so encumbered with worldly cares and sinful delights, that they
have no power to mount up toward heaven in their affections, and no hearts fit
for Divine contemplations; because they have no interest in Christ; and
therefore they can have no spiritual light to discern aright of heavenly
things.

But a true believing Christian has the light of Gods Spirit to give him
spiritual understanding, he has strength of grace to withstand all spiritual
lets and hindrances, and to raise up his affections above all earthly things,
and with the wings of faith he can mount up above all the blocks and
impediments, that the devil or wicked men can cast in his way to depresse his
spirits, and to keep down the cogitations of his heart from pious and devout
Meditations.

It cannot be denied, but that the dearest of Gods servants cannot sometimes
perform this religious Duty as they should, because they do often find the
flesh to war against the spirit, Romans 7. 21, 23.
as Paul did, and that they are so yoked with their unregenerate part, that
when they would do good, either for the glory of God, or for the comfort of
their own souls, evil is present with them, which does disturb the peace of
their consciences, the quiet of their minds, and the freedom of their
spirits; and does also stop the sweet influence of comfort that should come to
their souls: but especially they are hindered in their Meditations, which is a
Duty merely spiritual, and cannot be performed but by the spirit; yet through
Christ they get the victory, and they will break through all opposition,
because Romans 7. 22.
they delight in the Law of God, and in heavenly contemplations after the
inward man, and their minds will be set at liberty to serve him, Romans 7. 25.
though with the flesh they do sometimes serve the law of sin.

If we have given up our names unto Christ, and are listed in his roll to fight
under his banner, we must look for continual conflicts and combats with our
spiritual enemies, which daily seek to ruin our souls by hindering us in our
Religious duties; but we are sure to have comfort in Christ; and power from him
to prevail against them, and to get the conquest over them all, if we can raise
up our hearts to contemplate his Omnipotent power, his infinite Wisdom, and
his wonderful care of us.

Sometimes we have conflicts with pleasure, and plenty; sometimes with
afflictions and penury, with sin and temptations, with pain and sickness, and
with the terrors of death: all which for a time may hinder the freedom of our
spirits, that we cannot compose our thoughts, nor settle our hearts for holy
Meditations; but we shall recover our selves again by the power of Christ,
whose Grace is sufficient to hold us up against all opposition whatsoever, and
to set our hearts in such a frame as is fitting for the performance of this
holy Duty.

Wherefore Ephesians. 6. 11, 12.
seeing we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities,
against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, and against
spiritual wickedness in high places; we must put on the whole armor of God,
that we may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. 2 Cor. 10. 3, 4.
Though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh: for the weapons of
our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of
strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it
self against the Knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to
the obedience of Christ.

The same power that pulls down the strong holds of sin in us, and the
sinful imaginations of our minds, will also raise up the affections of our
hearts to devout and pious Meditations of the heavenly and spiritual things.

The more free we keep our hearts from worldly cares and our minds from
sinful thoughts, the fitter we shall be for this holy Duty, the better we
shall perform it, and we shall reap the more comfort by it.

But unregenerate men are not acquainted with this spiritual armor, they have
no power against their spiritual enemies, they have no weapons fit for this
warfare: for until they are brought out of their natural condition into the
State of grace, and have interest in Christ by faith they are so clogged with
their worldly affairs, so wedded to earthly vanities, and so entangled with the
corruptions of their nature, that there is no room in their hearts for any holy
contemplations, and they have no grace that can give them strength to fight
against the allurements of the world, the intisements of the flesh, and the
cunning stratagems of the devil.

How dreadful it is to Meditate on God.
NOw prepare thy heart, and all the faculties of thy soul by those former
Directions, and by prayer to meditate on Neh. 1. 5. Psalm. 47. 2. Dan. 9. 4.
the great and terrible God, who in himself is infinite in Majesty, and
eternal in glory, and the great Creator of heaven and of earth, whose Essence
and Being is incomprehensible: for thou can not but stand confounded at the
consideration of his greatness, which the blessed Angels are not able to
comprehend.

Wherefore, empty thy heart of all sinful cogitations, and lay aside all thy
worldly cares, that thou may freely set thy mind upon God, to contemplate
with all fear and due reverence something of his excellencies and greatness,
so far as God has revealed himself, and according to the measure of that
heavenly knowledge which he has given thee: let thy Meditations of these
things be guided with good understanding, and let them be bounded with
Christian sobriety, lest thou be swallowed up in the depth of this infinite and
incomprehensible Ocean.

Let thy faith regulate thee in thy Meditations: for what thou can not
comprehend thou art bound to believe, because thou do deal with the hidden
things of God, Joh. 5. 6.
who is Truth it self.

Thus meditate with dreadful reverence on the high and mighty God: for as he
is infinite in his Essence, so he is also infinite in all his Divine
Attributes: Wherefore content thy self with what he has revealed in his Word,
and by his Works, and do not curiously search into those things, which are not
yet to be known, but are sealed up in his own secret counsel, until he shall
be pleased hereafter to reveal them.

1 Samuel 6. 19.
The Lord smote the men of Bethshemesh with a very great slaughter, because
they looked into the Ark of the Lord, which was not lawful to any, save only
to Aaron and his sons.

Beware then, that he smite not thee, if thou presumest to look further into
his secret counsels than Christ has revealed.

If we duly consider the transcendent majesty and glory of God, it will cast
great dreadfullnesse into our Meditations: for it will dazel the eye of our
understanding far more than the brightness of the Sun beams can dazel the
eyes of our bodies, which may strongly move us to a dreadful fear and
reverence of him: Job. 37. 22
for, as Elihu said to Job, with God is terrible majesty. Also, Job speaks
thus of God to his three friends. Job 13. 11.
Shall not his his excellency make you afraid? and his dreadfall upon you? Genesis
28. 17.
How dreadful, says Jacob, is this place? and it was because God was there.

Thus says the Lord of hosts by his Prophet: Mal. 1. 14.
I am a great King, and my Name is dreadful among the Heathen.

Heb. 12. 21.
When God gave the Law at Mount Sinai, the sight was so terrible that Moses
himself said, I exceedingly fear and quake. Exodus 34.
Moses did earnestly desire to see the face of God, to whom he gave this
answer, that no man could see him and live; but yet (to satisfy his request,
and to show him in part what a terrible and glorious God he was) he told Moses
that he should see some piece of his glory: but he added, that it was needful
he should hide himself in the hole of a rock, and be covered with Gods own hand
for his defense, while God in some measure of his Majesty, did pass by in his
glory. And when he was past, God took away his hand, and suffered him to see
his hinder parts only, which was notwithstanding most terrible to behold.

Dan. 7.
Daniel also did see in a vision the Majesty of this great and terrible God,
which is recorded in the sacred Scriptures, to teach us thereby what a Prince
of Majesty is, and how dreadful in his judgments, when he is offended.

Now consider what makes it so dreadful to Meditate on God; it is not only
the consideration of his incomprehensible and Divine Essence, or the
transcendent glory of his sacred Majesty, or his infinite Power, whereby all
creatures, all principalities and powers are under his subjection; but also the
consideration of the frailty and weakness of our nature, and the vileness of
our condition by reason of our many sins, wherewith we have offended him, and
justly incurred his high displeasure, and have deserved his wrath and fury to
be poured out upon us, whereby we stand in continual fear of his judgments,
and of the severity of his justice.

For if we have a true sight of our own baseness, that we are but as clay in
the hand of the Potter, or as an earthen pitcher which is easily broken in
pieces, we cannot but be afraid to draw near so great and glorious a Majesty,
to contemplate his greatness and power, the breath of whose Nostrils is able
to consume us.

But if we consider that our sins have laid us open to the rigor of his
justice, and have justly moved him to pour down upon us the full vialls of his
wrath and indignation to our eternal destruction; it must needs then strike
terror into our hearts, when we come before him in our heavenly Meditations:
for he is a sinrevenging God, Heb. 12. 29.
and a consuming fire, he will suffer no sin to go unpunished.

This does make our sins the more heinous, and the punishment of them the more
grievous; because they are committed against an Omnipotent and most glorious
God, from whom we had our first being, and from whose goodness we do daily
receive all blessings, both spiritual and temporal that are needful for us.

Wherefore we cannot Meditate with comfort upon God, when the guilt of our sins
cleaves to our souls: We cannot cheerfully lift up our hearts unto him, when
our consciences do accuse us of sin, that we have offended God our Creator, and
that we lie under the curse of his Law, and are in continual expectation to
have the penalty of it inflicted upon us, which we know we have justly deserved.

Thus it is with us until we can apprehend God to be reconciled unto us by the
merit of the death of Christ, which we must apply to our own hearts by faith.

When God does visit us with afflictions and troubles, as he has done to many
of his dear servants, that we feel the smart of his rod, and his hand heavy
upon us, it will take away the comfort of our Meditations, and make us afraid
of his judgments, as it was with holy Job, David and others; because sometimes
they are very terrible to us.

Thus says Job unto God in his afflictions: Job. 13. 21.
Withdraw thine hand far from me, and let not thy dread make me afraid.

Again he says thus, Job 6. 4.
The terrors of God do set themselves in array against me.

If God be so dreadful to his own servants, how then can the wicked and
sinners appear before him? how can they withstand his judgments, or bear the
fierceness of his wrath and fury? he cast the disobedient Angels out of heaven
without any hope of redemption; he cast Adam out of Paradise, and laid a severe
curse upon the earth for his sake, and upon all his posterity for his sin: he
drowned the whole world, and consumed Sodom and Gomorrah with fire: he gave his
own people into the hands of their enemies for their transgressions, and
brought grievous judgments upon many particular offenders. Wherefore we cannot
deny but that the Meditation of these and the like works of Gods justice must
needs be dreadful and uncomfortable to us, if we look only upon the justice of
God, and not also upon his mercy.

But above all it is most dreadful to Meditate upon the day of judgment, when
we must appear before this great and terrible God, to give a strict account
unto him of whatsoever we have done here in the flesh, whether it be good or
evil.

Joel. 2. 11.
That day is great and terrible, who can abide it? Then shall all our secret
sins be brought to light, and laid open to the view of heaven and earth, then
it will appear how we have served God, what good we have done, and what evil we
have shunned, and then we must answer for every idle word that we have spoken.

Then shall be great confusion both in heaven and in earth, to the astonishment
of all Nations: for, Luke 21. 27.
they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with much power
and glory, and with great authority and majesty. 2 Cor. 5. 10.
All must then be presented before the judgment seat of Christ, 1 Cor. 4. 5.
who will bring to light those things that were hidden in darkness, and will
manifest all the thoughts of every man's heart.

Luke 23. 30. Rev. 6. 16
Then the wicked shall say to the hills, fall upon us, and hide us from the
face of him that sits on the throne, and from the anger of the Lamb, because
the great day of wrath is come.

This terror will be so unspeakable, that it will make every man's heart to
tremble: for the just men, and the Angels themselves are said to fear; surely
then it must needs be dreadful to think upon it.

What a fearful day will it be to careless and loose livers, who carry the
guilt of sin upon their souls with them unto judgment? how will it terrify
them when they see such dreadful fears and miseries to rush in upon them?

Math. 24. 29.
Then they shall see the Sun to be darkened, and the moon not to give her
light; then the Stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens
shall be shaken.

Thus says the Prophet, Isa. 13. 13, 14.
The earth shall remove out of her place in the wrath of the LORD of hosts, and
in the day of his fierce anger, and it shall be as the chased Roe, and as the
sheep that no man takes up.

Then shall they see all sepulchers open, and to yield forth their dead bodies
of all men, high and low, rich and poor, to stand there naked before the Judge,
and before his Angels, and in the face of all creatures: their sins shall be
revealed, their secret offenses shall be laid open, and they shall be
constrained to give an account of those things, whereof they would disdain to
have been told in this life.

Consider now who can Meditate upon the eternal God, this great and terrible
Judge without much fear and dread, if he cannot appear before him with a good
conscience; and who can think upon that fearful day of account without much
terror and trouble of spirit, if he has not some good assurance of the pardon
of his sins by his true repentance, and that he is reconciled to God by faith
in Christ? Wealth and honors cannot help, the Judge will not be partial,
neither will he be corrupted, an evil conscience will not be silent, no
intercession of worldly friends can prevail at that day: all things will cry for
vengeance upon the wicked and reprobate, to yield them cause of fear and
terror; but nothing will yield them any hope of comfort.

Above them shall be their dreadful Judge, who is offended with them for their
wickedness; beneath them they shall see hell open, and the cruel furnace
ready boiling to receive then; on their right hand their sins accusing them; on
the left hand the devils are ready to execute Gods eternal sentence of
condemnation upon them; within them is conscience gnaw^ng like the worm that
dies not, because it is full of the guilt of sin, without them all damned
souls are howling and yelling, and on every side the whole world is burning.
What shall a wretched sinner now do, that carries the guilt of his sins with
him to this great day of judgment? how can his heart bear these fearful
perplexities? What way will he take to escape this dreadful judgment? to go
back it is impossible, to go forward is intolerable; death will slay from him,
the grave cannot hold him, the hills cannot cover him, but there he must stand
as a miserable forlorn and desperate wretch, until he receive this doleful
and irrecoverable sentence. Go ye cursed into everlastingfire; the thought of
these things cannot be but most terrible.

Now it concerns every one to set his heart in an holy frame of fear and
reverence, and to humble his soul greatly before God, when he intends to
ruminate upon the glorious Majesty of this great Judge, or upon this great and
terrible day, when a most severe account shall be required of every one, of
whatsoever they have done in this life, whether it be good or evil; also when
they meditate on the fearful sentence which shall then be pronounced against
all offenders, and executed upon them to all eternity, without any hope of ease
or remedy.

This is not to deter or afright us from an holy and pious Meditation of these
things, though they be every sad and doleful to natural men, neither is it to
drive us into despair, as if there were no hope to stand before this Judge with
comfort at that day, or to avoid that dreadful sentence of condemnation: but
it is to stir us up to use all care and diligence to make our peace with God in
time, and to get a modest and a sober assurance of the pardon of our sins by
repentance; and that by a true and lively faith we may be united unto Christ
our blessed Savior and Redeemer, who shall be then our Judge.

This consideration must needs comfort us much, if we have any clear evidence
that we belong unto Christ. To this end Mark 13.
Christ foretold his disciples the fearful manner of his coming to judgment,
that they should watch and pray, that so it might not come suddenly upon them,
to find them sleeping in security, or unprepared for it; and what he said unto
them, he says unto all, that we should also watch and pray, to escape the
great danger of that terrible day, and to stand with confidence before the
throne of the Son of Man at that time.

When 2 Pet. 3. 10, 11, 12.
Peter had described with what terror the Lord would come to judgment, he
exhorts us to an holy conversation, and to godliness, looking for, and
hasting unto the coming of the day of God, and therefore to be diligent that we
may be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless.

Thus we may meet the day of judgment with comfort, if we can earnestly long
after it, and can heartily desire to meet our Lord Christ, when he comes in
the clouds unto judgment; which we cannot do until we find by due examination
that we are in the state of grace, and that by faith we are invested into the
new Covenant, and have lived unto God, and not unto our selves.

Wherefore thus says the son of Sirach, Eccl. 18. 20.
Before judgment examine thy self, and in the day of visitation thou shall
find mercy.

And as Paul says, 1 Cor. 11. 31.
If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged.

This trying and judging of our selves must be done in this life: for after
death there is no faith, no repentance, and no reformation of life: if we die
in our sins, they will follow us unto judgment, and accuse us before the great
Judge of heaven and earth, and they will cry in the ears of God for the
sentence of condemnation to be passed against us, which also will presently be
put in execution to the utter destruction of our souls and bodies in
everlasting burnings.

How to Meditate comfortably on God.
IF we desire to make our Meditations on God to be comfortable to our souls, we
must not look only upon his greatness, but also upon his goodness: for our
shallow Meditations cannot reach so far, as to draw any true comfort to our
selves from the consideration of of his greatness and power, unless we do
also look upon his goodness to us in Christ, which does open a fountain of
true consolation to us, not only in our Meditations of him, but also in our
sufferings for him. So likewise if we look only upon the justice of God
without any relation to his mercies in Christ, we shall find little comfort in
our Meditations of him: for we cannot but quake and tremble at the severity of
his justice; because we have broken all his commandments, and have
transgressed his Law, and therefore we lie under the curse and penalty of it.

Also, if we look upon our selves altogether as we are by nature, polluted and
stained with the guilt of sin, both original and actual, without any relation
to the blood of Christ by faith, it will make us ashamed to come into the
presence of God, and afraid to think upon him; because he is a sin-revenging
God, and will not suffer sin to go unpunished.

But thus we shall have comfort in our Meditation of God, if we look upon him
in Christ by faith, for then we shall see that Christ has wrought our
reconciliation with him by his death, that he has made an atonement for us,
that he has satisf^ed his justice, and the penalty of the Law by the merit of
his blood, and that he has taken the guilt of our sins upon himself, and has
nailed it to his own cross, Romans 3. 24, 25, 26.
and therefore we are justified fr^ly by his grace, through the redemption that
is in Jesus Christ; whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith
in his blood, to declare his righteousness, that he might be just, and the
justifier of him which believes in Jesus.

Wherefore as John says. 1 John 2. 1, 2.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the prepitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but
also for the sins of the whole world.

The same John does express the wonderful love of God to us in these words: 1 John 4. 10.
Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his son
to be the propitiation for our sins.

Now we may receive plenty of spiritual comfort, when we meditate on God,
either in his greatness or in his goodness, in his justice, or in his mercy:
for by this atonement, which Christ has made for us, God does not now look
upon us as his enemies, or as rebels to him; but he takes us for his own
people, and as his servants, Ier. 31. 33.
according to his promise in the new Covenant: and also as his children by
adoption in Christ, which makes the Meditations of our hearts sweet and
comfortable to our souls.

It is a great honor to be servants to an earthly Prince; but it is a far
higher title of honor to be servants to the King of heaven.

The holy Patriarchs and Prophets, all the Apostles and Saints of God, did
account it their highest honor to be the servants of God, and they did much
glory in this honorable title.

Thus says that Kingly Prophet David: Psalm. 116. 16.
O Lord, truly I am thy servant, and the son of thy handmaid: thou have loosed
my bonds.

David uses this as a strong motive to God, to hear his prayers, and to grant
his requests. Psalm. 86. 2, 4, 16.
O thou my God, save thy servant that trusts in thee. Rejoice the soul of thy
servant: f^r unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul. O turn unto me, and have
mercy upon me, give thy strength unto thy servant, and save the son of thine
handmaid.

God gave this title of honor to his choicest servants, as to Abraham, to
Jacob, to Moses, to David, Job, Zor^bab^l, and to CHRIST himself, as he was
man: For thus he says by his Prophet, Zech. 3. 8.
Behold, I will bring forth my servant, the Branch.

This honor have all they that truly believe in Christ, because he has
reconciled them to God his Father, and has made them his servants by grace.

Wherefore now, if we have any clear evidence to our consciences, that we are
the servants of God by virtue of this atonement, if we do serve and obey him
with faithful hearts, in sincerity and in truth; we may then cheerfully fix
our Meditations upon God, which will be acceptable in his sight, and
comfortable to our own souls. For by this sweet relation that we have unto God
through faith in Christ, our duties and services to him will be accepted,
though they be imperfectly performed by us, if we show our best care to please
him from an upright heart, as his faithful servants ought to do. Also we may
apply our selves by holy supplications to our heavenly Lord, as being his
servants to protect us from our enemies, to provide for us in our necessities,
to succor us in our tribulations, and to countenance us as his servants in all
our temptations, that our faith may not fail us, and that our spirits may not
sink under the burden of them.

Whatsoever we want we may have it of God, and whatsoever we fear may come upon
us, he will prevent it, or fit us for it, or else he will sanctify it for our
good, that we may find comfort in it. Wherefore we need not be afraid to
contemplate his greatness, for his goodness will sweeten that fear; we need
not fear death in a servile way, for it has no sting to hurt us: and we need
not be terrified at the Majesty of the great Judge of quick and dead, nor at
the rigor and severity of his justice at the day of judgment; for Christ
Jesus shall be then our Judge, who is now our Savior and Redeemer.

We cannot then but show our duty to God, and our love to Christ by our willing
and ready obedience to the commands of God, and by our thankful remembrance of
our Redemption wrought by Christ, by ruminating on his Word, and by
contemplating his wonderful works: our thoughts will be continually upon him,
our delight will be to Meditate on him, and the affections of our hearts will
be always toward him

Consider further what Christ has done for us, that we may the more
comfortably Meditate on God: he has not only redeemed us out of the servitude
of sin and Satan, and made us the servants of God by grace; but also, John 1. 12
he has given power to as many as believe on his Name to become the sons of
God; which privilege and honor we have only by faith, Gal. 4. 5, 6.
who has redeemed us that were under the Law, that we might receive the
adoption of sons. And because we are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of
his son into our hearts, crying Abba Ftther.

How comfortable then will our Meditations be to our souls, when we ruminate
upon God as he is our Father? what can deject our spirits, or make us afraid,
if we have a sure confidence that God is our Father? Can we be brought to a
lower degree of misery, than Luke 15. 18, 19.
the poor prodigal in the Gospel was? and yet when he remembered his Father, he
was comforted and refreshed.

Can any poor soul be deeper plunged in sin, or lead a more vicious life than
this prodigal did? and yet his Father did not cast him off, but upon his true
submission he received him again as his son. Why then should we despair of
mercy, though our sins are many and very great?

Why should we fear the terrors of death, if we be well persuaded of our
adoption? for Gal. 4. 7.
we are heirs of God through Christ, and we go to possess that inheritance
which belongs to us as sons; and why should the thought of the day of
judgment be terrible to us, seeing Christ our Redeemer will make up our
accounts for us, and will perfect with his own righteousness whatsoever is
wanting on our parts? Do we think that Christ will redeem us out of the bondage
of Satan, and will free us from the strictness of the Law, the dominion of
sin, and from the sting of death, and at last will leave us to our selves to
answer the rigor of Gods justice for whatsoever we have done here in the
flesh? Surely no: for then the Work of our Redemption had not been perfectly
finished; but Christ will be then our hiding place, he will cover all our sins
under the Robe of his own Righteousness, and will shelter us from the
fierceness of Gods wrath, and from the severity of Gods justice.

We have now much matter for Divine and Heavenly Meditations to comfort and
refresh our languishing souls, when they are any way perplexed with sorrows,
fears, or doubtings, if we ruminate upon our happy condition by being in grace
and favor with God: for we have the honor and dignity to be the servants of
the great King of heaven and earth by the right of purchase, and so are none
but such only whom Christ has bought with his own blood.

Also, if we Meditate upon our Adoption it will be very comfortable to us, and
exceeding sweet to our spiritual taste: for Christ has given us hereby all
the privileges of sons, both in what we are freed from, and in what we have
right unto: for we are freed from all evil of sin, and from all evil of
punishment: sin has no power to condemn us, though it will still molest and
trouble us; and there is no evil in our afflictions and sufferings, because
the nature of them is changed into Fatherly chastisements, which conduce to our
good, and not to our hurt. Also, we may draw great consolation from our
Adoption, if we Meditate upon the right, which we have thereby to all the
promises of God, to all his holy Ordinances, to all his blessings, to
whatsoever is good for us, or we stand in need of, and also to an heavenly
inheritance after this life is ended.

If we consider the mercies of God to us in Christ, they will afford us matter
enough of comfortable Meditations: for if we search the Scriptures, Zech. 13. 1.
we shall find a fountain of mercy that God has opened to the house of David,
and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for nucleannesse; wherein we
may wash away all the guilt and stains of our sins, if we can apply the
streams thereof to our hearts by faith: this Fountain is the blood of Christ,
which the holy Ghost here means; Joh. 4. 10
In Christ we shall find water of life to refresh our panting souls, when we
are in any distress, or lie languishing under the sense of our sins.

John 6. 48. 58.
Christ is also the bread of life, whereof if we eat by faith, we shall live
for ever. Col. 3. 11
Thus Christ is made all in all to us by faith: 1 Cor. 1 13.
for he is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification and
redemption.

His wisdom will teach us the way of truth, it will guide us in it, and it
will dispose of all things for our good.

His Righteousness is a garment of salvation to us; his Spirit of grace will
enrich us with all heavenly endowments, to lead an holy and sanctified life and
conversation.

Also, Psalm. 103 3, 4
by his redemption all our iniquities are forgiven, all our spiritual diseases
are healed, our life is redeemed from destruction, and we are crowned with
loving kindness and tender mercies.

Let us consider also for our further comfort in our Meditations on God, Ephesians.
3. 17
that Christ, the eternal son of God, does spiritually dwell in our hearts by
faith, and he does not come to lodge with us as a guest, or to sojourn there
for a time, and then to be gone from us; but he comes to abide and to dwell
with us for ever, he has taken up his habitation there, and our faith will
cleave so close to him, that he will never depart from us, neither will he
suffer us to depart from him.

We read that Ittai the Gittite, one of David's worthies would not leave the
King when he fled from his son Absalom, but he answered the King in this
manner: 2 Samuel 15 21
As the Lord lives, and as my lord the King lives, surely, in what place my
Lord the King shall be, whether in death or life, even there also will thy
servant be.

Thus close does our faith cleave unto Christ: for it will not suffer us to
leave him, neither will he leave us, but our faith will be still with Christ,
both in life and in death.

O happy is our condition if we have such an Inhabitant in our hearts: if
Christ has settled his abode there, he will execute his Priestly Office, to make
intercession to his heavenly Father for us, 1 Pet. 2. 3
and he will make us a royal priesthood to offer up ourselves and our prayers
unto God, and to present unto him our spiritual sacrifices and oblations, our
thanks and praises for blessings and mercies received, and a broken and
contrite heart for sins committed, which sacrifices God will not refuse.

Christ will also execute his Prophetical Office in our hearts, to teach and
instruct us the right way to true holiness and godliness of life and
conversation, and how to attain unto eternal salvation in the life to come. So
likewise Christ will rule and reign in our hearts as King by his Spirit of
grace, to order and govern us in all our ways and actions, to overruled and
subdue all the Spiritual enemies of our salvation, to protect and keep us from
all perils and dangers, to provide for us what is needful for our good, and
also to comfort us in all our sorrows, and in the anguish of our souls, to
keep us out of the power of the devil at the hour of death, and 2 Timothy 4. 8
to give us a crown of righteousness, which he has laid up for us at the day
of his appearing.

Here is yet more matter of comfort to be drawn from Christ in our Meditations
of him, when he does spiritually dwell in our hearts, and that by faith we do
enjoy his sacred society: for he does cloth us with his own Righteousness for
our justification, and he does endow us with the graces of his Spirit for our
sanctification, that through him we may be able to overcome the world, the
flesh, and the devil, and so to overpower the corruptions of our nature, that
our sinful lusts, and the evil concupiscence of our flesh shall not have
dominion over us; Rom 8. 16
and his spirit will bear witness with our spirits that we are the children of
God.

Christ will also put a spiritual light into our understanding to discern the
things of God, which a natural man cannot do, and to know our own condition,
from whence we are fallen, and how to be recovered; he will give us grace upon
the sight and sense of our sins to be truly humbled for them, to repent and
turn to the Lord; for he delights to dwell with those that are of a broken
and a contrite heart; according as he speaks by his Prophet: Isaiah 57 15
Thus says the high and lofty One, that inhabiteth eternity, whose Name is
holy, I dwell in the high and lofty place; with him also that is of a contrite
and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart
of the contrite ones.

Christ will also change the perversenenesse of the will, to put it into a
frame of conformity to the will of God, and he will take off the immoderate
affections of our hearts from all earthly things, and will raise them up to
heavenly contemplations, to study holiness of life, to love that which Christ
loves, to delight in his Commandments, and in his Ordinances, and to practice
with a willing mind all holy duties which he requires, both to God and to our
neighbor, in Public and in private, at home in our families; and to others
upon all occasions.

Then we shall find heavenly joy, and spiritual consolation, when we set our
hearts to Meditate thus on God in Christ.

Wherefore the consideration of these great benefits and comforts which we have
by Christ, should be strong and prevalent motives to us, to prepare our hearts
to receive him, to enlarge our affections with holy desires to embrace him,
Psalm. 24. 7
and to set open the gates and doors of our souls, that this King of glory may
come in and dwell with us for ever.

If we do sincerely from the heart desire such a glorious King, and such a
bountiful Inhabitant to make his perpetual abode with us, then we must press
hard upon him, and importune him earnestly with our frequent and fervent
Prayers to abide and dwell with us. Genesis 19 2, 3.
The two Angels that came to Sodom refused to tarry all night with Lot upon
his first entreaty; but when he pressed greatly upon them, they turned in unto
him, and entered into his house, and he made them a feast, and they did eat,
and then they preserved him from the burning.

But behold, Revel. 3. 20
Christ stands at the door of our hearts and knocks; if we hear his voice,
and open the door, he will come in to us, and will sup with us, we shall sup
with him.

O the happiness of that soul that does hear the voice of Christ, when he
calls, and does open his heart unto him when he knocks, either by the Ministry
of his Word, by the motions of his Spirit, by afflictions, troubles, crosses,
or by any other means whatsoever.

But if we will intertain Christ, we must have no corrivall with him: for God
and Mammon, Christ and Belial cannot dwell together. Thus says Christ, Luke 26
13
Ye cannot serve God and Mammon: for no man can serve two masters.

Also, thus says Paul: 2 Cor. 6. 14 15
What communion has light with darkness? and what concord has Christ with
Belial? Mat. 10 37.
If we love father or mother, son or daughtor more then Christ, we are not
worthy of him.

If the affections of our hearts are carried after the riches, preferments, and
pleasures of this world, or after any darling sin; then Christ will not dwell
there and we lose the comfortable and blessed Presence of the eternal Son of
God, and the fullness of all his excellencies and rich endowments, for that
which is nothing else but vanity and vexation of spirit.

Wherefore now we may Meditate comfortably on God through Jesus Christ our
Savior: for the terriblenesse of his Majesty is clouded with the vail of his
goodness, the severity of his justice is sweetened with his mercy and tender
compassion,

Christ has taken our souls out of the hand of Gods justice, and has put them
into the hand of his mercy, where they shall be kept for true blessedness to
all eternity.

If his greatness does affright us, his goodness will allure us; if his
justice does drive us from him, his mercy and love will draw us to him: for by
Christ we have a near relation to God himself, either as his servants by grace,
or as his children by adoption, in both which respects our Meditations of him
will be exceedingly delightful to us: So likewise if we fix our thoughts upon
Christ, though his excellencies and dignities are far above the reach of our
humane capacity; yet by faith we do apprehend him to be our Redeemer, and our
Advocate now at the right hand of God his Father in the highest heavens; and
therefore our Meditations of him cannot but ravish our souls with heavenly joy,
and spiritual consolation, in the assurance of our Redemption, and of our
Atonement with God, and also in the hope of our eternal salvation, and to be
heirs of the kingdom of heaven, which he has purchased for us with his own
blood.

How to Meditate on the Holy Ghost.
THe Holy Geost is the same spiritual Essence and Being with the Father, and
with the Son, coequall and coeternall with them both; but as the Deity is
distinguished into three Persons, the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father,
and from the Son, and he is the third Person in the sacred Trinity.

Christ does prove that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father in these
words: John 15 26
But when the comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, he
shall testify of me.

That he proceeds from the Son is manifest by this of Paul: Gal. 4. 6
And because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying Abba Father.

John also the beloved Disciple of Christ makes it plain that the holy Ghost
is the third Person in the holy Trinity by these words: 2 John 5. 7
There are three that bear record in heaven, The Father, the Word, and the holy
Ghost, and these three a^e One.

The Prophet calls him, Isa. 11. 2
The spirit of Wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and strength,
the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the LORD.

Heb. 9. 14
He is the eternal spirit of God from whom nothing can be hidden, according to
this of David, Psalm. 139 7
Whither shall I go from thy Sptrit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence?

Christ calls him the Spirit of truth: Ioh 14. 16, 7.
And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another comforter; that he
may abide with you forever, even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot
receive. John calls him Rev. 11. 11
the Spirit of life, because by the power of his grace de does quicken our
hearts, and revive us when we are dead in our trespasses and sins.

Paul does also call him Romans 8. 15, 16
the Spirit of adoption to witness to our spirits that we are the children of
God.

If we fix our Meditations on the holy Ghost, as he is in his Divine Essence
and Being, or as he is one of the three Persons in the sacred Trinity, we shall
be confounded in these deep mysteries of the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in
Trinity; but if we Meditate upon him according to his proper Office, as he is a
Comforter, or according to his several operations in our hearts, we shall then
find much comfortable matter for our hearts to Meditate upon, which will
minister heavenly and spiritual consolation to our poor souls.

First, therefore we must consider that the proper Office of the holy Ghost is
to be a comforter to us in all our afflictions and sufferings: for we are daily
exposed to many tribulations and calamities, either for the profession of the
Name of Christ, for the trial of our graces, or for our correction when we lie
in sin without repentance, which would easily swallow us up, if we had not some
true comforter to support and comfort us in them.

1 Pet. 2. 1^ 1
There is also an host of sinful lusts in us that war against our souls, which
do daily assault us with strong temptations, and we are round beset with
perils, dangers and spiritual enemies, which continually threaten our
downfall and ruin, and do seek to hinder our salvation.

But above all we are sometimes wounded in our consciences with the guilt of
sin, which is a burden heavier than we can bear.

Thus says the wise man, Prove. 18. 14
A wounded spirit who can bear? We can have no true comfort in these or the
like afflictions, but what comes from the holy Ghost, and no hope of succor
or relief in our distresses without him, if our spirits are wounded, he only
can apply the true Balm of Gilead to cure them.

This Balm is the blood of Christ, which is an universal Remedy to cure all
the spiritual diseases of our souls, and none but the holy Ghost can apply it
to our hearts by Faith.

Also, if the holy Ghost does not refresh us with the comforts of grace, and
with the assurance of the love and favor of God, we shall be ready to sink
under the great weight of our calamities and miseries.

But we may draw comfort enough from the holy Ghost in what sad condition
soever we be: for he will sweeten the bitterness of all our sufferings with
true peace of conscience and tranquillity of mind, in the assurance of the
pardon of our sins; he will sanctify all our afflictions and sorrows with
saving grace, that they shall be for our good, and will witness to our spirits
that we are in grace and favor with God through Jesus Christ our Lord and
Savior.

Also, he will give us strength and courage to suffer any thing for Christ, and
for righteousness sake, and likewise heavenly wisdom rightly to use every
part of the whole armor of God, to defend our selves from all our spiritual
enemies, and to beat back or quench all the fiery darts of the devil, that his
temptations and evil suggestions may not wound our souls to the death. Lastly,
he will perfect all with the gift of perseverance, so that we shall be able to
stand fast in the day of trial, and we shall have assured hope of conquest and
victory in all our conflicts and combats here, and to be crowned with
immortal glory hereafter.

Now let this be the desire of our souls, and the Meditation of our hearts to
draw comfort from the holy Ghost, when we are afflicted, troubled, or any way
perplexed with grief of heart, sorrow of spirit, or anguish of soul, which we
may do, if we know that no outward comforts can support us without God, and
therefore we do not rest and rely upon them; but do seek to the true comforter
by earnest and faithful Prayer in all our necessities, which is a sure means
to draw comfort from him when we want it.

Also, if we be truly sensible that we do want his gracious assistance to carry
us on cheerfully through all the difficulties and dangers that we shall meet
with in this world, upon our humble supplications to him, he will return us a
comfortable answer, as shall be best for us.

So likewise, if the guilt of our sins does stick close unto us, or if we
possess our former iniquities by a sinful remembrance of them; so that we are
truly humbled in the sight and sense of them, and that our hearts are touched
with a godly sorrow for them; the holy Ghost will then come with spiritual
consolation to comfort our poor souls with an holy assurance, that all our sins
are washed away in the blood of Christ by faith.

Lastly, we may draw comfort from this spiritual fountain by our pious and
devout Meditations of him: for then he will give us a sweet taste of his
heavenly graces to comfort us in all conditions of life, and he will give us
spiritual joy in the midst of all our afflictions: also, he will unite us unto
Christ by Faith, and will seal our Redemption to us by his blood, whereby we
shall enjoy eternal felicity for ever.

O what sweet Meditations may we draw from this heavenly Comforter in all the
sadness of our hearts.

Thus we may Meditate on the holy Ghost, as he is the true comforter of our
souls; we come now to consider of his Divine Operations, from whence we may
also draw much profitable and comfortable matter for our holy Meditations.

And for our better understanding herein, this eternal spirit of life is set
forth in the holy Scriptures by several resemblances, to show in what manner,
and how variously he works in our hearts, that our Meditations may be ordered
accordingly.

First, the holy Ghost is resembled to a dove: for when Christ was baptized,
Mat. 3. 16
he descended in the similitude of a dove, and rested upon him, which was to
show his spiritual anointing to his Office of Mediatorship, and to set forth
the true nature of Christ, how humble and and meek he was, how innocent and
harmless, how loving, and how ready and willing he was to do good to all.

These dove-like qualities were poured upon Christ above measure, that we his
members might receive the same in some measure from him by the holy Ghost: for
he will put all the faculties of our souls, all the affections of our hearts,
and all the parts of our bodies into a new frame, he will change the
corruptions of our nature into an holy temper; of proud and haughty minded he
will make us lowly and meek, of hateful and malicious he will make us loving
and courteous to all, he will so season us with sanctifying grace throughout,
that our evil disposition shall be changed into a gracious condition.

This spirit of truth will bring us an Olive leaf, Genesis 8. 11
like Noah's dove, to let us know, that though we be in the midst of troubles,
dangers, or distresses; yet we shall be preserved and delivered, and though we
be troubled, disquieted, or perplexed in our minds, yet at the last we shall
have peace, tranquillity, spiritual joy and comfort

Now by this resemblance of the holy Ghost we may examine our selves what
purity and holiness he has wrought in us, what meekness of spirit, what
patience under the cross, what love to God and to our neighbor, and how far
we are sanctified in all the affections of our hearts, and in all the parts of
our bodies: also, how much the corruptions of our nature are weakened in us, and
how far we are changed from that which is sinful to newness of life, if we can
find these Operations of the holy Ghost in us, they will afford us profitable
matter for our hearts to meditate upon to the glory of God, and for the comfort
of our own souls.

Secondly, some of the operations of the holy Ghost are set forth unto us by
the resemblance of that Exodus 13 21
pillar of a cloud, which went before the children of Israel by day, when they
marched out of Egypt, to guide them the right way that God would have them go
toward the Land of Canaan. This pillar did also protect and defend them from
their enemies, it kept the scorching heat of the Sun from them, and it cooled
and moistened the earth with sweet and comfortable dewes, which was a great
refreshing to the people of God in their march through that hot Country.

We are by nature under the spiritual bondage of sin and Satan, which is far
worse than the Egyptian bondage was to the Israelites; and we have no means to
be brought out of it, but by an almighty power; and if God does deliver us, yet
we are so ignorant of the way to the heavenly Canaan, that we cannot set one
step toward it, except the holy Ghost does put a spiritual Light into our
understanding, to teach and instruct us in the right way to heavenly happiness.

And because we shall meet with many spiritual enemies, so long as we march
thorough the wilderness of this world, the holy Ghost will so protect and
defend us, that they shall neither hurt our souls by their power, nor keep us
out of Canaan by their subtilty or malice. He will guide and direct us into all
holy duties, he will give us holy desires and true endeavors to do the will of
God, and to walk humbly before him in this present world.

Also, the holy Ghost does protect us from the heat of Gods wrath, by working
faith in us to lay hold upon the merit of Christ's death for the pardon of our
sins, and by conferring grace for the sanctification of our lives.

So likewise he does refresh and comfort our fainting spirits with the sweet
dewes of heavenly consolations, and he does mollify and soften our obdurate
and stony hearts with those influences of grace that descend from him, that we
may Joel 2. 28 Gal. 5. 22, 23.
be fruitful in all good works.

This holy Spirit does also quench the fire of sin, which otherwise would
inflame the whole man with sinful lusts.

And lastly, the holy Ghost does purge and cleanse the soul from the filth of
sin, as water washes away the filth of the body.

This does God promise by his Prophet, Zech. 36 25.
I will pour clean water upon you, and you shall be clean from all your
filthiness, and from all your idols will I cleanse you.

Wherefore we ought seriously to ruminate upon these operations of the holy
Ghost: for we cannot find the right way to the heavenly Canaan by all that
nature or humane learning can afford us, we cannot over power our spiritual
enemies by our own strength, we have no holy desires, and no ability in our
selves to any thing that is good, nothing that is in our power can keep us from
the wrath of God, and we have nothing that can refresh and and comfort our
afflicted spirits.

But here we shall find that the holy Ghost will be our guide to this heavenly
Country, he will be our Protector against all adversary power, and he will be a
true comforter to us in all our sorrows, and upon all occasions in all
conditions of life.

He will bring us unto Christ, and will firmly unite us unto him by faith: 1
Cor. 10. 1, 2.
for as the ancient Fathers were all under the cloud, and all passed thorough
the sea, and were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea; so we
are baptized unto Christ by the holy Ghost, that our sins may be washed away in
his blood, and that we may be sanctified by this spirit of grace to live in
true holiness and righteousness all our days.

If we can thus Meditate on the holy Ghost, it will be exceeding profitable and
comfortable to our souls.

Thirdly, the holy Ghost is resembled to the pillar of fire, that conducted the
Israelites by night out of Egypt toward the Land of Canaan.

Now we must consider, that such as are the properties of fire, such are some
of the operations of the holy Ghost in our hearts.

Fire is the most pure Element, and purifies all other elements, it does
naturally mount upward, it is bright and shining, and gives light to all dark
places.

It does also warm and comfort every part of our bodies, and it is the most
active of all the other elements; it purifies the gold and burns away the
dross.

Thus it is with the holy Ghost; for he is essentially pure in himself, and
purifies every soul from dead works into which he comes, he will not suffer any
unclean lust, or evil concupiscence to have dominion where he dwells, and he
will raise up the cogitations of the mind, and the affections of the heart to
mount upwards in heavenly contemplations. Also, whereas by nature 1 Cor. 2. 10,
11.
we cannot receive the things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness
unto us; neither can we know them, because they are spiritually discerned: God
has revealed them to us by his Spirit: for the holy Ghost will put a spiritual
light into our hearts, to discern the deep things of God: he will also inflame
our affections with an holy zeal to the glory of God, and will make our love
fervent to the truth. So likewise the holy Ghost will melt our hard and stony
hearts, and make them tender and gracious, flexible and yielding to every holy
duty. And whereas our hearts are naturally bound up in unbelief, and heavy and
sluggish to any thing that is good, Psalm. 119. 32.
the holy Ghost will so enlarge them that with all cheerfulness of spirit, and
willingness of mind we shall run the way of Gods Commandments.

Wherefore now, if we have found any of these operations of the holy Ghost in
our hearts, we shall be in some measure purified and refined from our sins and
pollutions, we shall have some of the dross of our corrupted nature consumed,
and the heavenly graces of the Spirit of God will shine forth in the integrity
of our lives and conversations. Also, we shall have some spiritual light to
guide our darkened understandings in the knowledge of God, and of his ways,
some fervency in our Prayers, some love to the truth, and some holy zeal to the
true worship and service of God: we shall delight in his Law, we shall study to
do good works, and it will be the desire of our hearts, and the comfort of our
souls to Meditate day and night in the Commandments of God.

If these Operations of the holy Ghost, which are resembled to these two
pillars, cannot easily work upon us, if these cannot raise up our affections to
heavenly contemplations; and to be forward and ready to every good duty in the
service of God; then surely we are exceeding dull and stupid, and we have great
need to pray earnestly, that the holy Ghost will be pleased to come with his
unresistible power, and break our hard and stony hearts and molifie this
extreme obduracy that is in them with his suppling grace, that so we may more
easily take the impression of his sanctifying grace in us.

Consider further, that these two pillars which did lead the Israelites out of
Egypt, were a visible sign of the presence of God with them, to conduct them in
the way to Canaan, to protect and defend them from all their enemies, and to
deliver them out of all dangers. And they were in the form of pillars to be a
clear evidence to them, that the Lord would not leave them, nor forsake them;
but would constantly abide with them, until he had brought them past all
danger, and had delivered them out of all their troubles, and until he had
given them rest from all their enemies. Act. 12.
Thus the Angel of the Lord delivered Peter out of prison, and would not leave
him until he had brought him past the first and second ward, and through the
iron gate into the city, where he might secure himself from Herod, who sought
his life.

These pillars were also a witness to them of the Covenant and Promise which
God made to their Fathers, that he would give them the land of Canaan for their
inheritance, and that the people should always remember, to the glory of God,
their miraculous deliverance out of Egypt, and the wonderful goodness of God
to them all the time they traveled through the vast wilderness: for they had
still a pillar to conduct them, and God would have a memorial kept of all his
wonderful works. Thus Josh. 24
the Lord commanded Joshua to take twelve stones out of Jordan, and to leave
them in the place where they should lodge that night, to be a perpetual
memorial that the waters of Jerdan were out off before the Ark of the Covenant
of the Lord, when it passed over Jordan.

In Nehemiahs time Neh. 9. 12, 19.
the Levites in their confession of Gods goodness, do remember how God brought
his people out of Egypt, and led them by those two pillars; and though they did
highly provoke God by their molten calfe, yet he forsook them not in the
wilderness: the pillar of the cloud departed not from them by day, neither the
pillar of fire by night Genesis 19. 26.
Lots wife became a pillar of salt, because against Gods commandment she
looked back toward Sodom, Luke 17. 32
which great judgment Christ would have to be perpetually remembered. Genesis 31.
45, 52.
Jacob set up a stone for a Pillar, as a memorial of his integrity to Laban,
and for a witness of the Covenant that was between them. Also, Genesis 35. 20
he set a pillar upon Rachels grave for a perpetual memorial of her. 2 Samuel 18.
8.
Absalom reared up for himself a pillar in the Kings dale for the perpetuity of
his name: for he said, I have no son to keep my name in remembrance, and
therefore he called the Pillar after his own name.

If we do well ruminate upon these things, and imprint them in our hearts, it
will make much for our spiritual consolation: for where the holy Ghost does
settle his abode, it is to abide there for ever; and if we enjoy his blessed
presence, it is the greatest comfort of our souls. He will be as a strong
Pillar for us to rest upon, when we are assaulted with strong temptations, or
beset with perils and dangers, or any way visited with sorrows and
afflictions: he is also such a Pillar of true comfort, as will not leave us in
any sad condition, or misery, but will still continue with us, until he has
brought us out of all our troubles, dangers, and distresses.

This similitude of a Pillar does so strengthen our faith and hope in God, that
nothing shall be able to overthrow the foundation of it. This is also great
consolation to us, that we have the Spirit of truth to bear witness to our
spirits, that we are in the love and favor of God, though the outward man be
miserably afflicted, perplexed and tormented.

This consideration will appease the clamours of our sins, and the accusations
of our consciences; and though we are in our own apprehension, as quite
forsaken of God, yet we shall hereby be preserved from sinking under so great a
pressure of temptation; and though the devil does aggravate our sins to make
us cast off all hope of pardon; yet this blessed Spirit will make us look up to
Christ by faith, as he was upon the cross, and we shall see the guilt of all
our sins nailed to the same cross, and the righteousness of Christ to be
imputed to us, which will frustrate the malicious design of the devil against
the salvation of our souls.

Here also we may find profitable matter for our instruction and edification:
for it does teach us to rest firmly upon the aid and assistance of this blessed
Spirit in all conditions of life, and in all the calamities and tribulations
that we shall meet with in this present world.

It does also bind us to a thankful remembrance of all the benefits which we
have received from him, of all the heavenly endowments which he has bestowed
upon us, and of all the spiritual graces, which he has wrought in us, that we
may employ them to the glory of God, and to the good of our own souls; and
therefore we ought not to grieve the Holy Ghost, nor quench his gracious
motions, but to yield all willing and ready obedience to his good will and
pleasure.

This does also teach us to rest upon the promises of God, both for provision,
for succor in time of need, and for the salvation of our souls: for he that
has promised is faithful and true, and if we wait his appointed time, he will
assuredly perform it.

Lastly, we must mark and observe what special operations of the holy Ghost we
have found in our hearts, either for the illumination of our understandings in
heavenly things, or working our perverse wills to the will of God, or
sanctifying of our affections to newness of life, that we may glorify God by
our thankfulness for them.

Fourthly, the holy Ghost is resembled to a seal: for Ephesians. 13, 14.
We are sealed with this holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise
of his glory.

Also, Paul says, 2 Cor. 1. 12
that God has sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.
Also again he says, Ephesians. 4. 13.
Grieve not the holy Sptrit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption.

Whatsoever God has decreed for our preservation and salvation is sealed with
this Spirit of Truth, and cannot be reversed; but is more firm, Esth. 8. 8.
than the law of the Medes and Persians: 2 Timothy 2. 19.
for the foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows
them that are his In times of common calamities, God will set (...) seal of
preservation upon his own servants, that th^^ shall not be hurt. ^
The Angel that ascended f(...) East, having the seal of the living God, cried
with a loud voice to the four Angels, to whom it was given to hurt the earth
and the sea, saying, hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, until
we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads.

The holy Ghost does also seal the New Covenant, and all the gracious promises
of the Gospel to our hearts by faith: Joh. 3. 33.
and if we receive his testimony, we do set to our seal that God is true. Why
then do we not rest upon them? why is our faith shaken with every gust of
temptation, and with every little trouble that comes nere us? Are we so weak
in faith, that every blast of affliction shall blow us down? Why are we so
doubtful of our salvation, that we are ready to let go our hold on Christ,
when we look upon our daily slips and failings that are caused by the subtility
of the devil, by the enchantments of the world, and by the allurements of our
carnal lusts? We do not consider that we are sealed with the holy Ghost unto
the day of Redemption.

And when we suffer afflictions or tribulations, we do not consider that they
shall not hurt us: for we have the seal of God in our foreheads, and he will
sanctify all our sorrows for our good: whereas to the wicked they are the
beginnings of those eternal torments which they shall suffer hereafter for ever.

Here we may find sweet consolation in all conditions of life: for if we are
loath to leave this world, and those possessions which we do here enjoy, let
our hearts and minds be raised up to meditate upon that inheritance, and those
possessions which Christ has purchased for us by his blood, which we shall
enjoy in heaven: for we have the seal of the holy Ghost for the truth of it,
and then we shall be willing to leave these vain and earthly riches, and we shall
earnestly desire to enjoy those heavenly and durable treasures which are there
laid up for us.

If the foundation of our faith be shaken, this seal of the holy Ghost will
settle it sure; The Lord knows them that are his. The Covenant of Grace is
confirmed to us by this seal, and we may faithfully rest upon it: for all the
promises of God therein contained shall be performed in their season. Our
spiritual enemies, our crosses and tribulations, and death it self cannot hurt
us; because we have this seal of the holy Ghost: for he will take away the
print of the devils seal, which by nature is upon our hearts, and will stamp his
own image in the room. Rev. 9. 4. 5
But those men that have not the seal of God in their foreheads, lie open to
all the judgments of God, to be tormented as with the torment of a Scorpion,
when he strikes a man.

Lastly, the Holy Ghost is resembled to wind, for when he has any great work
to do in us, he will come with power to rectify our stubborn wills, our
obdurate hearts, and rebellious affections; he will come like a rushing wind,
to make us quake and tremble before him, and to beat down all the strong holds
of sin, that our hearts may be prepared to receive him, and that he may freely
work his own work in us.

Thus he came upon the Apostles Act. 2. 2, 3
with a sound from heaven, as of a rushing mighty wind, and filled all the
house where they were sitting; and then he gave them the gift of tongues, to
speak the language of every nation whither he should send them, and he gave
them all spiritual graces, and abilities fit for that Office and function
whereunto he had called them.

Secondly he is resembled to wind, because his Operations are free to himself,
and he is no way necessitated in his workings, for he works in every one when
and how he pleases.

Thus said Christ to Nicodemus, John 8. 3.
The wind blows where it lists; and thou hear the sound thereof, but
can not tell whence it comes and whither it goes: so is every one that is
born of the spirit.

Gods election is of free grace, not of works; Genesis 4. 4.
he had respect to Abell and to his offering; but he refused Cain and his
offering.

Romans 9. 11 13, 15, 20.
God did choose Jacob, and rejected Esau, the children being not yet born: for
thus says God to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I
will have compassion on whom I will have compassion.

We are as clay in the hand of the potter; cannot he make of the same lump, one
vessel unto honor and another unto dishonor? Shall the thing formed say unto
him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Thus says the Lord by his
Prophet, Isa. 45. 10
Woe unto him that says unto his Father what begettest thou? or to his mother,
what have thou brought forth? Jer. ^8. 6.
for we are in Gods hand as the clay is in the potters hand. So likewise 1 Cor.
12.
the holy Ghost bestows his gifts diversely, some have one gift, some another,
some have more, and some have less; none but Christ had a fullness of all
gifts, and John 1. 16
of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace.

As there is great diversity in the gifts, 1 Cor. 12. 6.
so there is as great in the operations of the holy Ghost, and yet all proceed
from the same Spirit: for God works all in all.

Thirdly, the holy Ghost is resembled to wind, because he does blow away the
chaff and vanity of our sinful inventions, and idle cogitations, that our
minds may be the better fitted and prepared for heavenly contemplations, and
for the worship and service of God.

Now to bring all this home in particular to thy self, consider what comforts
and benefits thou do enjoy by the holy Ghost, both as he is the true
comforter, whom Christ sent down from the Father to abide with thee for ever,
and also by his holy operations according to those several resemblances, and
then thy meditations of him will be comfortable to thy soul.

He will be a careful Father to provide for thee, he will be a wall of defense
round about thee, he will dull the sense of all thy pains and torments, that
thou may the better bear them, as he did to the three children in the fiery
furnace, and to some of the holy Martyrs in their torments.

Though thy sufferings are above humane strength; yet he will give thee
strength of grace to bear them contentedly: for he will raise up thy heart Heb.
11 20
to look to the recompense of reward, which God will give thee in heaven of his
own free love, bounty and goodness.

Also, if the cross lies long upon thee, and thou can not get it removed by
thy earnest supplications; yet thou need not be out of hope: for the
heavenly comforts of the holy Ghost will never fail thee, but will still bear
thee up, against all the boisterous billows of temptations and sorrows.

Though thy whole life be a life of misery; yet the end shall be comfortable to
thee, according to this of David, Ps 37. 35, 37, 38.
Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that man is
peace. But though the wicked are in great power, spreading themselves like a
green bay tree; yet they shall be destroyed together, and their end shall be
cut off.

If we have these benefits and comforts, and much more by the operations of the
holy Ghost, we must then study how to be thankful to him for his goodness and
how to express it by our conformity to his will, and by our ready obedience to
his holy motions. Also, we must have recourse unto him by fervent prayer for
what we want, as it may stand with his good pleasure to grant.

But we must take heed with what heart and with what affections we make our
addresses unto him: for if there be any secret or darling sin lurking in us, he
will easily find it out, he can search into the most secret corners of our
hearts, and nothing can be hidden from his all seeing eye. If our hearts are
more set upon carnal pleasures or worldly profits, than to meditate on his
gracious operations, and how to enjoy him, he will soon discover our
hypocrisy, and it will stop the current of his graces to our hearts; but if he
finds truth and sincerity in our inward parts, he will then plentifully
bestow his heavenly gifts and graces upon us: for he will give us more
meekness of spirit, more patience in our troubles, more comfort in our
sorrows, and more grace to cleanse and purge away the leprosy and filth of
our sins.

Also he will put our hard and stony hearts into a gracious condition, fit to
receive the print of his own image to seal unto us the assurance of our
salvation. No duty then in the service of God can be hard to us, if we are
guided by this eternal Spirit, and nothing that we suffer can be bitter to our
souls, if this heavenly comforter has made his abode in our hearts.

In the last place we must consider, that no saving and sanctifying grace can
be wrought in us, but by the holy Ghost, and we can discern nothing of the deep
things of God for our comfort, if we have not a spiritual light from him: he
works faith in us to unite us to Christ, and to make application to our
selves of the merit of his sufferings for our redemption: he works repentance
to assure us of the pardon of our sins, and to manifest the power of Christ's
death and resurrection in us, by the mortifying and killing of the power of our
sins, and by the quickening of us up unto newness of life.

The holy Ghost works our filial love to God, our hope in his promises, our
Christian patience in bearing the cross with a meek and a contented mind, our
Christian fortitude and courage in all our spiritual combats and trials, and
our constancy to hold out until we have obtained victory. He gives us the
assurance of our justification, the sanctification of our lives, ability to
pray unto God, and to meditate on him as we ought, and he works the
renovation of the whole man in us.

These heavenly graces are as so many precious jewels to adorn our souls, that
we may be all glorious within, Psalm. 45. 13
like Solomon's Queen, to be espoused unto Christ: for if we be decked with
these ornaments of grace, and clothed with the righteousness of Christ, to
cover the shame and the deformity of our sins, then God will accept of our
persons, and of our offerings, and will hereafter wed us to his own Son.

Wherefore, when we come into the presence of God to partake of his Divine
Ordinances, or to perform any holy service unto him, we must humbly crave the
assistance of the holy Ghost, to give us understanding hearts and sanctified
affections, and to put an holy zeal into our prayers and Meditations, that they
may mount up above all earthly things, and ascend up to the throne of grace,
where they shall be heard and graciously accepted.

Acts 7. 30, 32, 33.
When Moses perceived that God was in a flame of fire in a bush, he trembled
and durst not behold, until he had put off his shoes from his feet; because
the place where he stood was holy ground. So likewise, Josh. 5. 13, 14.
though Joshua was so valiant, as to withstand a man of war, that stood over
against him with his sword drawn in his hand; yet when he understood that he
was the captain of the host of the Lord, even God himself, he fell on his face
to the earth, and did worship, and losed his shoe from off his feet, because
the place whereon he stood was holy.

Thus we ought to appear before God with fear and trembling, and to come with
all due reverence into his Presence when we perform any holy duties unto him,
also to put off all our filthiness, and to put on the righteousness of Christ
by faith, because we come into an holy place, where God himself is present, who
will not suffer any unclean thing to come near unto him.

If we can thus Meditate on the holy Ghost, we shall find much sweetness and
comfort in our Meditations.

Now let thy heart Meditate freely on this blessed Comforter with an holy
devotion, and pure affections, when thou art in any sorrowful or afflicted
condition, or when any anguish of spirit does seize upon thee: for true
consolation is no where to be found, but only in him. Let thy heart also
ruminate upon those several resemblances of the holy Ghost, which will help
thine understanding to discern how he works in thy heart, to purge thee from
thy corruptions, to instruct thee in the ways of godliness, to confirm thee
in the Truth, to change thy sinful disposition into a sanctified condition, to
seal the assurance of thy Redemption to thy soul, to blow away all vain and
sinful cogitations out of thy mind, and to give thee all spiritual abilities
meet for a Christian warfare in this life, that thou may have a Crown of
righteousness in the life to come.

How to Meditate upon the Works of God.
IF we consider and look well upon the works of God, in the Creation of the
Heavens and of the Earth, how he has beautified and adorned the Heavens with
innumerable glorious bodies, and replenished the Earth with all variety of
Plants and fruitful trees, and with all kinds of living Creatures, both great
and small; also, how he has filled the bowels of the Earth with rich and
precious mineralls, and the seas with fishes of all kinds: we cannot then but
admire the Omnipotent Power, the infinite Wisdom, the transcendent glory, and
the wonderful Goodness of God the great Creator, who has made them all for
our use and service, and that he might be glorified by them.

This consideration will help our understandings in the knowledge of God, and
to raise up our hearts to Meditate upon his Almighty power, his Divine
Wisdom, his glorious Majesty, and his admirable goodness to the sons of men.
Romans 1. 20
For the invisible things of God, that is, his eternal power and Godhead are
seen by the Creation of the world, being understood by the things that are
made, to the intent that every man should be without excuse.

Thus says the Prophet: Jer. 10. 12
He has made the earth by his power, he has established the world by his
wisdom, and has stretched out the heavens by his discretion.

And thus says the Psalmist: Psalm. 111. 6, 7.
He has showed his people the power of his Works, that he may give them the
heritage of the heathen. The works of his hands are verity and judgment. Psalm.
104. 24, 25.
O Lord, how manifold are thy Works? in wisdom have thou made them all: the
earth is full of thy riches; so is this great and wide sea, wherein are things
creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts. Also David says thus; Psalm.
19. 1.
The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy
work. But if we consider the goodness of the Lord in all his Works, we shall
find no end thereof, Exodus: 34. 6
He is abundant in goodness and truth. Psalm. 33, 5
The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord. Psalm. 52. 2
The goodness of God endures continually.

There is no creature, though it be never so contemptible, but it finds the
goodness of God, and there is no moment of time, but we have experience of his
goodness and mercy to us.

Behold and see the beauty and splendour of the Sun, of the Moon, and of all the
Sarres, admire their gloririous bodies, and what luster they cast down upon the
earth, how they rejoice to run their course in their several orbs, wherein God
has placed them, and yet they do not cross or hinder each other in their
motions; also, how God does by them measure out time, how he governs the day
by the Sun, and how he rules the night by the Moon and Stars. Consider also,
how useful and comfortable these glorious creatures are to us, and how God
divided the year by them into Winter and Summer* Springtime, and Harvest* and
has continued these several seasons even to this day, as he said to Noah
presently after the flood. Genesis 8. 22
While the earth remains, seed time and Harvest, cold and heat, summer and
winter, and day and night shall not ce^se.

All these do clearly set forth the glory of God, the Wisdom, the Power, and
the goodness of the great Creator.

What shall we say now to our selves? Shall these irrational Creatures keep
their appointed stations, and shall we go astray from God? Shall they obey the
will of God, and shall we rebel against him? Shall they run their course with
joy and delight, according to the will of God, and shall we be backward in a
Religious and pious course of life, contrary to his will? Shall we have no
heavenly thoughts, no holy desires to do the will of God, and no sincere
devotion in the worship and service of our God? Oh, let the comfortable
presence of the Sun, and the beauty of the Moon, and the brightness of every
Star move us day and night to raise up our thoughts, and to set our
Meditations upon God their Maker, whose Glory does infinitely surpass the
brightness of them all, and let us study to praise and magnify him for his
goodness, and for his wonderful works that he has wrought for the sons of
men.

If we look upon the birds and ^ouls of the air, or upon the beasts of the
field, and consider how God provided food and raiment, and weapons of defense
for them all, how he preserves them in their kinds, and what great increase
they bring forth through his blessing we may see a glympse of the glory of God
even in them, his care in providing for them, and his great Wisdom in the
variety of their kinds. Job 39.
What goodly wings and feathers has God given to the Peacock, and to the
Ostrich, what strength to the horse? what swi^tnesse to the Eagle? how terrible
is the Leviathan? none is so ^ Job 41. 19
fierce that dare stir him up, who then is able to stand before God? Luk 12. 27
How has God clothed the Lillies? Solomon in all his glory was not arraied
like one of them.

There is no creature so base and contemptible in our eyes, but that we may see
the print of Gods finger upon it, and there is no plant that grows in the
earth, but is full of the goodness of God, and useful to man.

The Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 148.
that both the senseless and sensible creatures have a voice to praise the
goodness of the Lord; how can we then be silent?

Consider the Lark to imitate her: for the higher she mounteth* the more
cheerfully she sings; so likewise the higher we raise up our affections
toward heaven in singing praises unto God, the sweeter will our melody be in
his ears. If our spirits mount up to heaven in our contemplations upon the
Works of God, we cannot but acknowledge to his honor and glory, what excellent
Workmanship and Wisdom he has showed, even in the least of them, and how
wonderful good and gracious he has been to us; because he has made them all
for our good, that we should glorify God in the right use of them. But if we
look upon the Creatures with a superficial eye, and if we have the daily use
and service of them, and can find no matter to ruminate upon for the glory of
God, Deu. 29. 4
then the Lord has not given us an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and
ears to hear what great things God has done for us, and what blessings he has
bestowed upon us to this day.

Consider further, how plentifully God has provided for man; he has given him
some creatures for nutriment, some for clothing, others for ornament: some are
for his delight and lawful pleasure, and others are for his necessary
occasions: so likewise Luke 12. 22
God does feed the fowls of the air, and every living creature, and he does
cloth the very grass of the field.

Thus says the Lord unto Job, Job 38. 41
Who provideth for the raven his food? when his young ones cry unto God, they
wander for lack of ^eat.

This was to strengthen J^bs confidence in God, for though he were now brought
down from greatest plenty to the greatest want and penury, from the highest
honor to the lowest degree of ignominy and reproach; yet God had still a care
of him, and was all sufficient to raise him up again to honor, and to provide
what was needful for him. Also, though he were now in the furnace of
affliction, and upon the test for the trial of his patience, yet God would
bring him out of all his afflictions, and restore him again to joy and
gladness of heart.

Why then do we take so much thought for food and raiment? why do we cark and
care for the things of this life? why are we so cast down, if we want them? why
are we so disquieted, if trouble sickness or sorrow press heavy upon us? is
not the life more than meat, and the body more than raiment? has not Christ
had experience of these wants, and of the cross, and and has not he
sanctified them to us?

This is the counsel of our Savior Christ, Luke 12. 29 30.
That we should not be of doubtful mind, to seek after earthly things with
too much greediness, because our heavenly Father knows that we have need of
them. Holy David does thus parley with his own soul, when he was in a sad
condition: Psalm. 43. 5
Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? then
he does thus comfort him self; Hope in God, for I shall yet praiss him, who is
the health of my countenance, and my God: For he will provide for us, he will
sweetly comfort us in our necessities, and will put a blessed end to all our
soorows and trials.

But to look a little more about the Works of God: if we consider the wonders
that are in the sea, where the great Leviathan does sport himself; and the
costly and precious mineralls that are in the earth, which God has created for
the use of man; we shall see Gods stamp upon every creature, which gives us
just occasion to employ our pious thoughts, and the affections of our hearts in
the Meditation of his wonderful works, and how to praise him for his
goodness, and cheerfully to serve him in true thankfulness for all his
benefits to us.

We must not therefore be more ignorant and dull of understanding than the
beasts; we must not be like the Jews, of whom God complains thus by his
Prophet. Isa. 1. 3.
The ox knows his owner, and the ass his makers crib: but Israel does not
know, my people does not consider.

Wherefore let our hearts be now enlarged in the contemplation of the Works of
God, that we may Meditate his praise and glory for the comfort of our souls.
How can we forget God, seeing his Works are always before our eyes, and seeing
he does daily feed us and cloth us with his good creatures? and how can we
neglect our praises and thanksgivings unto him, when we lie down at night, and
when we rise up in the morning seeing he has created both the day and the
night for use and comfort?

Though God has given us the use of all his creatures here below, and power to
dispose of them at our own pleasure, so that it be for his glory; yet we know
not how long we shall enjoy them: for God only is the d^sposer of time, to
give more or less as he pleases; for as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 74. 16
The day is his, the night also is his: he has prepared the light and the Sun.

God has given us no more time but the very moment that is present; for if it
be past, we cannot recall it; if it be not yet come, we know not whether we
shall enjoy it, when one moment is past, it is at Gods pleasure to give us
another.

Wherefore every day and every night that we enjoy from God, should be spent to
that end, for which God has ordained them, which is, that his holy worship and
service be principally regarded, that our lawful calling be carefully followed
in their due seasons, which we may take for the glory of God, either by our
Meditations in his Word, or on his Works, or by some pious duties, as God shall
give us fit opportunity. For God did not create the day for works of sin and
wickedness; but for Works of piety and holiness: neither did he give us the
use of the day to spend it vainly, idly, or unprofitably; but to be spent about
that which does conduce to his honor and glory, and to the good of our own
souls.

Also, God did not create the night to be spent in works of darkness, neither
did he give us the use of the night for luxurious pleasures; but to weep and
mourn for our sins, Psalm. 6.
as David did, and for holy Meditations; also, to refresh our bodies and
spirits when they are wearied with the labors of the day before, to make us
the more fit for the duties following.

If we thus spend our time, it will keep us from sin in the day, and from
uncleanness in the night. Thus God does teach us highly to prize our time* and
to improve it to the best advantage of his honor, Phil. 2. 12
and to the working out of our own salvation with fear and trembling. So
likewise, Ephesians. 5. 16.
we ought to redeem the time that we have lost; because the days are evil;
and that must be by doubling our future obedience to Gods Commandments.

Thus we may enrich our souls in the knowledge of God, if we do devoutly
Meditate on him, and upon the creatures which he has made.

We have showed in general, how God provideth what is fitting for all living
creatures, we come now to show some special works of Divine Providence to the
Saints and Servants of God, when they are brought into such straits, that they
know not what to do, nor which way to turn themselves for safety. If we have
means to escape the danger, or to be delivered out of it, and we do neglect it;
we have then no ground to hope for safety, or deliverance by the Providence of
God, because we bring our selves into the danger: but if we have no means to
escape, and no way to be delivered out of any dangerous strait, we may then
cast our selves upon the Providence of God, and he will make a way for us to
escape; because he has brought us into this strait, to manifest his own work
of Providence for his own glory, and for our safety.

Genesis 22.
Thus he brought Abraham into a great strait, when he did expressly command him
to offer his only son Isaac, whom he loved, for a burnt offering. Abraham must
now either violate his faith and obedience to God, or else he must slay his own
dear son, who was the heir of the promise: but Abraham cast himself upon the
Providence of God, and would not disobey his command: then God showed him a
Ram, which he took and offered up for a burnt offering in the stead of his Son.

God did likewise bring the children of Israel into a terrible strait, when
they marched out of Egypt; for they could turn no way from apparent danger of
destruction: the red sea was before them, their enemies were behind them, and
mountains were on each side, so that there was no way or means to escape, Exodus
14. 10.
then they were sore afraid, and cried out to the Lord. And Moses said unto the
people, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord, which he
will show to you to day. Then the Lord made a way for them through the sea, and
saved them from their enemies: but the sea drowned all the host of the
Egyptians that pursued after them.

The Prophet Gad came to David and told him the Word of the Lord, b Shall seven
years of famine come unto thee in thy land? or will thou flee three months
before thine enemies, while they pursue thee? or that there be three days
pestilence in thy land? This put David into a great strait; but he cast himself
upon the mercies of God, and did choose to fall into the hand of the Lord, and
not into the hand of man; for he knew that his mercies were great. ^hil. 1. 23,
24.
Paul was in the like strait, for he knew not whether to choose to live, which
was more needful to the Philippians, or to dye, which was far better for
himself.

Sometimes God suffers the devil and wicked men to lay their traps to ensnare
his own servants, if he sees them secure and careless of their ways, and
though they do maliciously intend and purpose their hurt and d 1 Cor. 10. 10 13.
destruction; yet God, by his wise providence, will make a way for them to
escape the danger of them all, that he may magnify his own glory thereby.
Sometimes also, God does suffer his servants to be pinched with want and
scarcity, to be long under afflictions and under the cross, and for some ends
best known to his Divine wisdom, he does long defer to manifest his Providence
to them for their succor and comfort; which is a very great trial of their
faith, hope and dependence upon God; and many of Gods dear children have
complained that he did not help and relieve them, and that he suffered his
enemies so long to triumph over them. Thus says the Psalmist, Psalm. 94. 3
Lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph? Thus David
complains, Psalm, 42. 9
I will say unto God my rock Why have thou forsaken me? Why go I mourning
because of the oppression of the enemy? Also, thus Asaph complained when he was
in great distress: Psalm. 77. 7 7, 8, 9, 10.
Will the Lord cast off for ever? And will he be favorable no more? Is his
mercy clean gone for ever? ever? does his promise fail for evermore? has God
forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender mercies? And then
he does confess that it was his infirmity to question the good Providence of
God.

But some do repine and murmur against God, and against his wise Providence
through unbelief, if they have not their wants and necessities supplied at
their pleasure, and if they have not deliverance out of their troubles and
tribulations when they expect it. These are ready to say with Jehoram, that
wicked king, 2 Kin. 6. 33.
Behold, this evil is of the, Lord, what should I wait on him any longer?

Holy David does express in diverse of his Psalms, how he waited for the Lord
from day to day; how he rested on the Lord, and how patiently his soul waited
for him

If we thus wait upon God, Isa. 30. 18
then the Lord will wait that he may be gracious unto us, and therefore we
ought to wait for him. But if our Faith in God can reach no further, than
humane sense or reason can carry it, we dishonor God by our unbelief,, though
we have formerly had great experience of his good Providence to us, and we
shall provoke him to wrath as the Israelites did in the wilderness, when they
said, Psalm. 78. 19, 20.
Can God furnish a Table in the wilderness? Behold, he smote the rock, that
the waters gushed out, and the streams over flowed, can he give bread also? can
he provide flesh for his people? Thus they believed not in God, and rested not
upon his Providence, though they had seen so many of his great wonders, which
he had wrought for them.

Wherefore now, let this be the desire of our hearts, and souls, Ephesians. 3. 17
that our faith may be rooted and grounded in the love of God to us in Christ,
who with him has given us all things.

The glorious creatures in heaven are comfortable to us by our interest in
Christ, and all creatures here below are for our use, and at our command, and
service, because we have right to them by faith in Christ, without which we can
have no comfort in them, and no assurance that they belong unto us. If our
faith be well rooted, it will then be fruitful in all good works, and it will
never decay, because it does spring from a Divine Principle, and is continually
watered with a spiritual dew from heaven. Also, there is great need that it be
well grounded and built upon a sure rock, because we shall meet with strong
assaults and temptations, which like boisterous winds and billows, will seek
to overturn it, and we cannot comfortably enjoy the good creatures of God, if
we do not enjoy them in Christ our Savior, which must be only by faith in him.

God himself will sometimes try our faith, to the utmost by afflictions and
crosses, by suffering our enemies and wicked men to vex our very souls, or by
withdrawing his assisting grace from us, by clouding the light of his
countenance, or by deferring the manifestation of his Divine Providence, when
we are in any strait, or in any necessity, which we could not shun, and cannot
tell which way to turn our selves, because we have no means of help, comfort,
and salvation, but only to cast our selves upon the Providence of God, which
we cannot comfortably do, if our faith be not well grounded in Christ the rock
of our salvation. For if it be grounded upon any sandy foundation, as upon our
natural endowments, upon common grace, or upon any earthly thing, it will fall
at every gust of temptation, at every wave of affliction, and it will not
endure the fiery trial; it does rest more upon the arm of flesh than it does
upon God, and it seeks rather to secondary means for help and succor, than it
does unto God, and in the end it will deceive us.

In the last place God is wonderful in his works of justice, and in his Works
of mercy, both to the just and and to the unjust; but in a far differing
manner to them both, and to a farre-differing end. For God will not suffer sin
to be unpunished, wheresoever he finds it. If his own children offend, he
will chastise them with a fatherly correction in much love and tender
compassion, and to bring them to better obedience; but his loving kindness he
will not take from them, according as he said to David, 2 Samuel 7. 14, 15.
If thy son commit iniquity, I will chastise him with the rod of men, and with
the stripes of the children of men: but my mercy shall not depart away from
him. But God punishes the sins of the wicked in anger, and with much severity
for their destruction: his own children are reformed by their corrections, but
the wicked are more hardened in their sins by their punishments. This of the
Prophet is verified in them: Jer. 5. 3.
O Lord, thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved; thou have consumed
them, but they have refused to receive correction, they have made their faces
harder than a rock, they have refused to return.

God does also bestow his mercies and blessings upon them both; he does
commonly give more of his temporal blessings to the wicked than he does to the
godly, to leave them without excuse, and to give them means and ability to
glorify God, but they abuse them to sin and uncleanness, to excess and riot.
Eccl. 5. 13
This is that evil which the Preacher did see under the sun, namely, riches
kept for the owners thereof to their hurt.

But God has special gifts and blessings which he bestows only upon the
godly, and these are the saving and sanctifying graces of his Spirit, which are
peculiar only to them, and reserved for them.

Wherefore now, if we seriously ruminate upon the Works of God* we shall find
much matter for our instruction, and for our spiritual consolation. The
knowledge of the creature, is a ready way to bring us to the knowledge of the
Creator, and the due observation of the Works of God will bring us to the love
of him, to the fear and dread of him, and to the obedience of his commands We
have daily experience of the Works of Gods Providence, and of his goodness to
us in Christ, which should strengthen our faith, hope and confidence in him,
though he does sometimes bring us into great straits, and lays great trials
upon us; and it should keep us from murmuring and repining, though he does long
delay to send us help and comfort in time of need. Also it should keep us from
carking care, and from immoderate seeking of earthly things, because God will
provide for us, and will not suffer us to lack any thing that is good. We
should therefore wait upon him, and wait patiently for his salvation, in all
our wants and necessities, in all our troubles and tribulations, and in all
straits and distresses, which the malice of the devil or wicked men can bring
upon us, for God can and will by his wise Providence turn that to our good,
which they intend and purpose for our hurt* How should we then delight to
meditate on God in all his Works? seeing Psalm. 145. 17.
the Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works? What
comfort can we want in the saddest times, seeing God watches over us by his
Divine Providence for our good? what need we fear the malice or power of our
spiritual enemies, seeing we have Gods Protection to keep and defend us from
them? If we ^ay up these things in our hearts, our souls will have the comfort
of them in all the sadness and sorrows that we shall meet with in this life.

Concerning the Creation of Man.
NOw we come to the Principal piece of Gods Workmanship, which he wrought here
upon earth, and that is the Creation of man; in which great Work the three
Persons in the sacred Trinity did agree with one consent, and gave him such a
body as should be capable of immortality, and such a soul as should receive the
impression of the image of God: for thus says the Lord, Genesis 1. 26
Let us make man in our image, after our likeness. Man must needs then be
created in innocence, in righteousness and true holiness, without spot and
blemish, or any imperfection, either in his soul or body. There was no
perverseness in his will, no folly in his understanding, and no corruption in his
heart; for God gave him ability, and a willing mind to obey him, and a wise
and an understanding heart, able rightly to know God his Creator, and to
worship and serve him as he ought to be served. Also he did know the nature of
all the beasts in the field, of all the fowls in the air, and the virtue of
all herbs and Plants; and God made him presently fit for that rule, and
sovereignty which he gave him over the creatures. God did also set his love
upon him, and crowned him with glory and honor, according to the words of the
Prophet David: Psalm. 8. 4, 5, 6.
What is man that thou art mindful of him? or the son of man that thou
visitest him? For thou have made him a little lower than the Angels, and have
crowned him with glory and honor. Thou ma^est him to have dominion over the
work of thy hands, thou have put all things under his feet: For he was created
in his full perfection, fit to rule and govern the creatures, whom God had made
for his use, and service:

As God did show his wonderful wisdom and power in the creation of Man;
because he made him such an excellent creature of the dust of the earth; so he
now shows no less power and wisdom in fashioning him in the womb: for thus
says holy David: Psalm. 1* 39. 1^, 15.
I will praise thee: for I am fearfully and wonderfully made, marvelous are thy
Works, and that my soul knows right well: my substance was not hid from thee,
when I was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the
earth. The Preacher also says, Eccl. 11. 5
That we know not how the bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child.
There are more wonders in man, than there are parts and members of his body,
and every one of them calls for due consideration. The eye is but a little
member, and yet the best oculist cannot find out all the wonders that are
contained in it.

Who can discover the windings and turnings of the brain? how it works upon
whatsoever it apprehends? It is troubled with visions and dreams in the
night: it is at no quiet all the day, man has no command over his own
thoughts, but they fly swiftly from the East to the West, and they bring back
to remembrance things that were long past and gone. So likewise there are such
secret corners in the heart, that no man is able to discover what is hidden
there: God only that formed it knows the breadth and deepth of it, his
all-seeing eye can search into it, and nothing that lurketh there can be hid
from him.

Who can declare the wisdom of God in the Creation of man? in the faculties
and endowments of his soul? in the structure of his body? and how he is
fashioned in the womb? we may admire at these things, but we cannot comprehend
them. Now let us bring down our thoughts and cogitations to ruminate upon our
selves, and to consider what our condition was in our first creation: surely we
were in Adams loins when he was in his happy condition, and we did partake with
him in the perfection of his holiness; he had the Law of God imprinted in his
heart, so had we; he was able to keep it, so were we; the image of God was
stamped upon his soul, so it was upon ours: All which does afford us plenty of
matter for our holy Meditations, how to glorify our good God and great
Creator, with all our strength and with all our might, both of soul and body,
and how to express our thankfulness to him by our continual care to obey his
will, and to walk before him in holiness and righteousness all our days.

Wherefore now, beloved in Christ, let me thus expostulate with thee; Has God
made thee a man^, whereas he might have made thee a brute beast, or a worm?
Isa. 64. 8: Romans 9. 21.
for thou were in his hands, as the clay in the hand of the Potter, to be made
a vessel unto honor or unto dishonor as his pleasure. Has God given thee a
reasonable and immortal soul, whereas he might have given thee the soul of a
beast, which is mortal and perishes with the body? has he filled thy soul
with knowledge and with all heavenly gifts and graces? whereas he might have
made it empty and void of understanding, and incapable of instruction: then let
God be thy God, and honor thou him, let him be thy Lord, and serve and
reverence him in sincerity of heart, and in truth.

Has God given thee dominion over all the creatures here below, to rule and
govern them at thy will and pleasure? why then can thou not govern thy self,
to keep upright and straight in the ways of God? why do thou not rule thine
own passions, but suffer them to break out into rage and fury upon every
slight occasson? why art thou carried with a full stream, and with an unbridled
liberty to carnal lusts and sensuality? Does every creature serve and obey
thee, and wilt not thou serve thy God, who made them serviceable and obedient
to thee? do not they teach thee by their obedience to thy* will, that thou
should do the will and Commands of thy God? Jer. 35.
The Lord would have his people to learn obedience of the Rechabites. The wise
man sends the sluggard to the Ant to learn wisdom of her. Prove. 6. 6, 7, 8.
Go to the Ant, thou sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise, which having no
g^ide, overseer, or ruler, provideth her meat in the summer, and gathers her
food in the harvest. Thou do look for obedience of thy hired servant, and
will thou perform none unto God, to whom thou art bound in a far stronger bond?
can thou work thy head and thy heart about thy worldly affairs, and can
find no thoughts for heaven, no time and no matter to Meditate upon, for the
glory of God, and for the comfort of thy* soul?

Oh, let such gross stupidity be far from thee, learn of the very creatures to
obey God with more willingness of mind, and to be more zealous for his glory.
Thou were created in perfect holiness and righteousness; study therefore and
labor for purity of life and conversation, and do not stain and defile that
which God would have to be kept holy and unblameable in his sight.

Let the thoughts of thy mind and the Meditations of thy heart be thus
employed about thy creation, and about the wonderful goodness of God to thee,
that thine affections may be stirred up with an holy zeal to the constant
practice of pious and religious duties for the honor of God. If we thus look
upon our selves, we cannot want matter to magnify the wisdom and goodness of
God, neither can we be so fruitless and unprofitable in his service, as
naturally we are: for the grace of God, that is in us will constrain us, to
better obedience.

To what end and purpose man was Created.
IF we see a fair and stately Building, we will commend the Builder, and
presently conclude that he built it for his own habitation, or for some
honorable use and service. If we look upon our selves, we shall see an
admirable fabric of body, which is richly beautified and adorned, both within
and without, and we cannot but magnify our Omnipotent Creator, and presently
conclude, that surely God did make us such excellent creatures, and did enrich
us with such spiritual gifts and graces for some special end and purpose. We
were not made by our selves, we had no being nor beginning from our selves;
there was nothing in us to move toward our creation, and therefore we were not
created for our-selves, to follow our own pleasures, to serve our own lusts, or
to walk according to our own inventions. It is a vain thing to imagine that we
are bound to nothing, or shall be accountable for nothing that we do in this
life; but that Job. 11. 12
we are born like a wild asses colt in the wilderness, that has no master to
tame him. Let such great folly and impiety be far from us: for we were not born
to live as we Psalm. 12. 4.
list, as if none should control us, and as if there were no Lord over us; but
Eccl. 11. 9
God shall bring us unto judgment for all things whatsoever we do; Mat 22. 36
and we shall give account in the day of judgment of every idle word that we
shall speak. How careful then ought we to be so to live, as not to dishonor
God in any thing? and how watchful should we be over all our ways, because we
must give such a st^ict account unto God at the last day?

If then we demand of our selves, between God and our own consciences,
wherefore and to what end we were made, and sent hither into this world, what
to do, and wherein to bestow our time; then our hearts will tell us, that it
was for no other cause or end, but to serve God with pure affections in
righteousness and true holiness all the days of our life, and after that
service to enjoy eternal blessedness in the life to come; also, to use those
creatures which God has given us, that he may be honored and glorified
thereby. Wherefore in whatsoever we bestow our time, if it be not conducing and
profitable to this end and purpose, it is vanity and lost labor, it will give
us no ease or relief in our sorrows, and it will bring no comfort to our
souls. Likewise if we are immoderate in our desires after earthly things,
though they are in themselves lawful and good, and if we covet more riches,
honor and worldly preferments, or any thing else, than shall be best to enable
us in the true religious service of God, and to further the salvation of our
souls, we are then out of the right way, and we run from the true end for which
we were created.

Now we may take a view of our own condition, and we may see in what state we
stand with our God: For if if we do principally attend to the true end of our
Creation, that our studies, endeavors and all our actions are chiefly bent for
the glory of God, and that we can truly say with good Hezekiah, 2 Kin. 20. 3
I have walked before the Lord in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have
done that which is good in his sight: or as holy David said, Psalm. 26. 3
Judge me O Lord, for I have walked in mine integrity; I have walked in thy
truth. Also, if we can truly say, Phil. 2. 12
That our whole course of life has tended to the working out of our salvation
with carfulness, fear and trembling, then we are most happy, we steer our
course to the right end, and we shall at length attain to that Kingdom of
eternal glory, which we desire and hope for. But if upon a diligent search, we
find our selves to be in a contrary course, to sit with vain and profane
persons, to have fellowship with hypocrites, and dissemblers, to love the
society of evil doers, and to delight in earthly vanities, all which will
easily corrupt us by their evil example and sinful ways; then the course of
our life is not tending to the glory of God, but it is dishonorable to him,
and destructive to our own souls. Thus we are brought into a perilous and
dangerous way that leads directly into perdition, if God in mercy does not
bring us into the right way.

Wherefore it does greatly concern us to raise up our thoughts to God our
Creator, to fix the Meditations of our hearts upon him, Isa. 51. 7
to look unto the rock whence we are hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence
we are dug, to look unto Adam our first parent, as he was in the state of
innocence, before his fall, that we may labor for his purity, that we may
follow after his righteousness, and seek the Lord with pure affections, and
study how to serve and please him in all things, as Adam was then able to do.
Also it behooves us to consider how dangerous it is to conform our selves to
the common error of the world, that man was born to be for himself, and for
his ownn ends, which error we must carefully avoid, and then we shall labor
to s^eer our course the right way, and we shall bestow our time to the right
end; Mat. 6. 33
First, to seek the Kingdom of heaven and the righteousness thereof, and then
those things, that shall be needful for this present life, shall be added unto
us.

Concerning the fall of man.
MAn had power and ability given him to stand and continue in that perfect and
blessed condition, wherein he was created; but he did soon fall from God by
transgressing his command in eating the forbidden fruit, whereby he brought
himself and all his posterity, that were then in his loins, and came out from
him by natural propagation, under the severe curse that God laid upon him for
his sin; and this was the Original of sin to all his posterity.

By this means Adam def^ced the bright image of God that was stamped upon his
soul: for he lost the perfection of his understanding, the liberty of his will
and the integrity of his heart. Also the earth was cursed for his sake, and the
creatures became rebellious to him: he is now a slave to the devil, and to his
own sinful lusts, and he has no power to redeem himself out of that captivity
and bondage, only he has a possibility by Christ to be restored again to his
former happiness; whereas the Angels that kept not their first Station, but
sinned against God, and were thrust out of heaven, have no possibility to be
again restored. Adam also has made himself and all his posterity liable to all
outward crosses and sorrows of body, goods and good name, to all inward
troubles of mind, and anguish of spirit, to all temporal plagues and
punishments, and to all eternal pains and torments.

This was our condition in him, we did also fall from God with him, and our
loss hereby is as great as his was, our misery as much as his, he did eat of
the forbidden fruit, and our teeth are set on edge; so that now we have great
cause Isa. 38. 1, 2, 3.
to turn our faces toward the wall with good Hezekiah, and to weep with great
weeping, to be ashamed of our selves, and to be confounded in our selves: for
the sentence of eternal death is pronounced against us, and we are now under
the curse of the Law, and under the fierce wrath and fury of an omnipotent
Judge, because we have sinned against God our Maker; Psalm. 137 2, 3.
we may now hang up our harps on the willowes, for we can sing no more the
joyful songs of Zion; we are cast out of paradise, and out of the favor of
God, and we are now captives in a strange land, under the tyranny of the
devil. We have not now that sweet familiarity with God, which we had in the
loins of Adam before his fall, we cannot now enjoy the light of his
countenance, nor look upon him with comfort: for all the beauty of our first
holiness is stained, and polluted with sin and uncleanness, the pure image of
God is defaced in us, we have no knowledge in heavenly things, no holy zeal in
our hearts, no purity in our affections, and no readiness of will to obey God.

We have lost all those precious Ornaments of grace, of righteousness and true
holiness, of heavenly wisdom, understanding and fear of God, which made us
lovely in his sight; and now we are wholely naked, Ezekiel. 16
like a wretched infant that cannot help it self, and we are void of all
goodness, and of all help and comfort in our selves.

If we look further into our condition, we shall see how we are plunged into
the depth of all misery: for we are now slaves to every vanity, and to every
base sinful lust, and our servitude and bondage under them is very miserable,
because they tyrannize over our souls, and yet we do willingly submit unto it,
which make us not able to break those chains of sin, wherewith we are bound. We
have lost our right to the creatures, and our dominion and soveraignity over
them: the earth will yield us no increase without excessive labor and toil, we
ly open continually to all our spiritual enemies, to all kind of perils and
dangers, to all sorrows aad miseries in this life, and to eternal burnings in
the life to come. Whatsoever we want in spiritual or temporal blessings, and
whatsoever we suffer by outward afflictions, or inward troubles of mind, is
the fruit of sin, and should make us call to mind, and with much grief and
sadness of heart to think upon our fall in Adam, and how rebelliously we have
sinned against God in the whole course of our lives.

If this be our condition, which is most true, as we are in the Sta^^ of
nature; what comfort can we then take in all worldly pomp and dignities? what
contentment is there in all earthly pleasures and delight? they are all nothing
else but vanity and vexation of spirit. We may enjoy more of this world than
our hearts can desire, and yet our souls may starve for want of spiritual food
and comfort.

Genesis 4. 12
Cain was heir apparent to the whole world, and yet he was driven out from the
presence of God, and became a vagabond upon earth. So we may enjoy whatsoever
the world can afford us, and yet God will not look upon us with a gracious
aspect, and then our condition will be no better than that of Cain. We may
enjoy health, wealth, peace, liberty, and all manner of prosperity, and yet our
souls may be sick, they may languish with sadness of heart, they may be much
perplexed, and shut up as it were in a dungeon, because they are so restrained
by the corruptions of our nature that they have no freedom to mount upwards
toward heaven.

It is nothing so uncomfortable to live in perpetual darkness, and never to
see the light of the Sun; as it is to have our understandings spiritually
darkened, and to live without the light of the Mal. 4. 2
Sun of righteousness to have no appearance from him, to open the eyes of our
understandings, to be a guide to our reason, to season our hearts with grace,
and to show us the way that will bring us to heavenly happiness. This is our
condition by nature, we are out of the favor of God, our life is void of all
true comfort and consolation, we walk in darkness, Isa. 53. 6
we go astray like silly sheep, and follow our own inventions, and we have no
ability in our selves to return again into the right way.

Wherefore let our hearts be thoroughly affected with this our sad condition,
let our Meditations hereupon draw us to a godly sorrow for our sins, which may
bring us to true repentance and newness of life: let this be our chief care,
and the desire of our souls, to regain the grace and favor of God, and to be
reconciled unto him. Let our souls bewail our sins with hearty contrition and
true compunction: let our tears manifest the grief of our hearts, and the
truth of our repentance for our transgressions, and let us cast our selves down
at Gods footstool, and humbly acknowledge our offenses to him, suing earnestly
to God by prayer for the pardon and forgiveness of them through Faith in
Christ. Also, we ought to be humble petitioners to God for a supply of such
graces as we want to strengthen ^s against the corruptions of our nature, and
against all the enemies of our salvation.

This should be our constant practice every night before we sleep, to make our
peace with God for the sins of the day past, wherein we have failed of our
duty, and wherein we have dishonored God, that our souls may rest in peace, as
well as our bodies do rest in quiet. So likewise every morning we should
acknowledge our thankfulness to God for the comforts of the night past, and to
crave his blessing upon our labors the day following.

If we continually practice this duty, it will keep us from gross sins, and
great offenses, and it will make us take all occasions to renew our Repentance
with God for our sins. Every fit of pain or of sickness that we feel, and
every cross or affliction that we suffer, calls loud for repentance, because
it is a fruit of our sins: also, every blessing and every good thing that God
is pleased to bestow upon us, cries loud for our thankfulness; because it is
bestowed of his own free bounty, and goodness, and not for any merit or desert
of ours. Though we are miserable vile and wretched in our selves, yet God is
gracious and merciful, and does daily give us occasions to glorify him, and
he does use all means to bring us home again unto himself: for he does not
delight in the death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent and turn
unto him; neither does he deal with us according to our sins, nor reward us
according to our deservings, but has paid a great prize for our redemption out
of this miserable condition.

Concerning the Redemption of Man.
When God saw man in this sad condition, a lamentable spectacle of woeful
misery; then he took pity upon him, Ezekiel. 16. 8
and this time of his wretched estate was the time of Gods love to him: for
soon after his fall God made a gracious promise of Redemption to him, Genesis 3. 15
that the seed of the woman should break the serpents head. This promise God
did afterward renew to the Patriarks, which was concerning Christ the Lord,
that should come in his appointed time, whom God did plainly reveal to some of
the Prophets. Gal. 4* 4, 5
When the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his son made of a
woman, made under the Law to redeem them that are under the Law, that we might
receive the adoption of sons. 1 John 4 9, 10
In this was manifested the love of God toward us; because that God sent his
only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him.

Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his son
to be the Propitiation for our sins. John ^ 18
The only begotten son of God, who is in the bosom of his Father, came down
from heaven, and assumed our nature, and took upon himself the guilt of our
sins, to Redeem us from the curse of the Law, from the dominion of sin and
Satan, and from the power of death.

1 Cor. 7. 23
Christ has also paid an infinite price for our Redemption, even his own most
precious blood, and the full vialls of Gods wrath were poured out upon him,
because he did undertake to satisfy the justice of God for our sins: for thus
says the Prophet, Isa. 53. 6.
The Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. Acts 12. 7, 8
Now let us gird up our loins with Peter, and bind on our sandals, Ephesians. 6. 15
and let our feet be shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, to be
fitted and prepared for our deliverance out of prison: for the chains of our
sins are taken off, and the prison doors are opened to set us at liberty, and
to redeem our souls from destruction.

This Work of our Redemption is so great a mystery, that the blessed Angels do
adore it with much admiration, but they cannot comprehend it: it was decreed in
heaven before the world was, and all the three Persons in the holy Trinity had
their several operations in the effecting of it.

1. John 4 14.
The Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the world. And Christ himself
does testify that the Father sent him for this end and purpose. John 5. 36, 37
For the works, says he, which the Father has given me to finish, the same
works that I do, bear witness of me, that the Father has sent me. And the
Father himself, which has sent me, has born witness of me: For a voice came
from heaven when he was baptized, saying, Mat. 3. ^.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. The Son also assumed our
nature, both soul and body: Heb. 2. 17.
For he was like unto us in all things, Heb: 4. 15
sin only excepted; he was every way fully qualified to be our Mediator and
Redeemer, he became our surety, and he paid the debt that we did ^ow to the
justice of God for our sins, by his death and by the price of his blood. The
holy Ghost also rested upon him at his baptism, Heb. 1. 9.
and anointed him with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Col. 1. 19
that in him should all fullness dwell, John 1. 16.
and of his fullness have all we received and grace for grace. God has made
him the head of his Church, and the holy Ghost does convey all saving graces
from him to all the Members of that mystical body.

Wherefore if we are elected unto salvation, and do belong unto Christ by the
Election of grace, the holy Ghost will at some time or other work sanctifying
grace in us, and will unite us unto Christ by faith, that so we may have a
modest and sober assurance of our Redemption by him, and of our reconcilement
into the love and favor of God. Why then do we not seek to be ingrafted into
Christ for our Redemption? Why do we continue still in a voluntary captivity
and bondage, whereas we may be set at liberty? Why are we still exiles and
banished from the presence of God, whereas we may be brought again into his
favor? Why do we not seek hs face and the light of his countenance, seeing all
true felicity and happiness consists therein, Psa. 16. 11
and seeing at his right hand are pleasures for evermore? and why are we so
backward in seeing the kingdom of heaven? Alas, we have not a true sense of our
own miserable slavery, we do not feel the burden of our sins, we do not see how
the devil does tyrannize over us, how he does beguil us with a seeming
pleasure and profit in sin: for he will not let us see the greatness of the
loss that we sustain by it, nor the bitterness of the torments that will
follow after it, beside those temporal sorrows that it brings upon us in
this life.

Thus the devil brings us into security, and into a dead sleep of sin, and
does so stupifie all the faculties of our souls, that we have no sense of our
spiritual misery, and by this means he leads us into a dangerous way, that
tends to no other end but to the perdition and destruction of our souls. Also
we are so delighted with the vanities of this world, that we think of no other
happiness, than what we do now enjoy: or if there be any other heaven, than
this upon earth, we will be directed to it by the guidance of our own corrupted
will, and not by the Spirit of God: for the devil would persuade us that
nature can find out a readier and an easier way to heavenly felicity, than by
Christ.

Thus we are hindered, and kept back by the delusions of the devil by the
alluring vanities of the world, and by the deceitfulness of our own hearts,
that we cannot come unto Christ for our Redemption, and to make our peace with
God through faith in him, and to have an holy assurance of it by our sound and
true repentance

Wherefore it does now plainly appear that we have no power or ability in our
selves to come unto Christ; we must be taught of God, or else we cannot find
the way, he must draw us, or else we cannot come to Christ: For thus says
Christ himself, John 6. 44
No man can come unto me except the Father, which has sent me, draw him. God
does sometimes draw us unto Christ, Hos: 11. 4
as he drew Ephraim, with cords of a man, with bands of love: he will give us a
Spiritual light by his Spirit to find the way, he will kindle an holy zeal in
our hearts and affections to walk in it, and he will inflame our desires, that
by grace we may come to Christ our Redeemer. Gal. 3. 24
Sometimes God does bring us unto Christ by the Law, as our Schoolmaster with a
rod in his hand, by terrifying us with the threatenings of the Law; if that be
not sufficient, then he will make us feel the smart of his rod by afflictions,
crosses, and tribulations.

God does also send his Ministers, 2 Cor 5. 20
as his Ambassadors, that by the Preaching of the Gospel they might win us unto
Christ, and to be reconciled unto God. Christ does also sweetly draw us unto
himself, as the head draws the members of the body, and as the bridegroom
draws his spouse.

Thus says the Spouse to her beloved, Cant. 1. 3
Draw me, we will run after thee. Christ does also lovingly invite us to come
unto him, and to make us the more willing to come, he does allure us by his
gracious promises: Mat. 11. 28
Come unto me all ye that labor and are h^avy laden, and I will give you rest.
Thus also he says by his Prophet, Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3
Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money:
come ye, buy and eat, yea, come, buy wine and milk without money, and without
price: hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your
soul delight it self in fatness. Incline your ear, and come unto me: hear and
your soul shall live.

How could Christ express his love more freely to a poor sinful soul, than
now he does? what will move us to come unto him, if this free tender of grace
cannot? But to the end we may be quite without excuse, and that the love of God
may abundantly appear unto us, the holy Ghost does likewise draw us unto
Christ, by giving us a true sight and sense of our sins, by showing us the
means how we may be freed from the guilt, and from the condemning power of sin,
by working faith in us to apply to our selves the merits of Christ's blood, and
his righteousness for our justification, and by working us into newness of
life by the sanctification of the Spirit.

It does now plainly and evidently appear, that our sins have set us at a far
distance from God, according to this of the Prophet, Isa. 59. 2.
But your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins
have made him hide his face from you, that he will not hear: For God will not
regard us, until the pardon of our sins be sealed to us by faith in the blood
of Christ, and we can have no comfort in God, nor hope of his grace and favor,
until we have some assurance of the remission of our sins by true repentance,
and turning unto God. For thus says the Prophet, Isa. 56. 3, 4, 5, 7
Th^ugh we have been strangers to the people of God, and as fruitless as a dry
tree; yet if we now k^^p his Sabbaths, and choose the things that please him,
and take hold of his Covenant, he will give us a place in his house, and an
everlasting name, that shall not be cut off: he will bring us to his holy
mountain, and make us joyful in his house of Prayer, and all our offerings
shall be accepted.

Though Christ by his death and resurrection has perfectly wrought our
redemption from all our spiritual enemies, yet we have not the full virtue and
power of it in this life: for we are often foiled with the temptations and
suggestions of the devil, our sins do prevail against us, our sinful lusts
and unruly passions do often overpower us, Romans 7. 19, 20, 23.
and the corruptions of our unregenerate part do war against the Law of our
mind, and brings us captive to the Law of sin, so that the good which we
would we do not, but the evil which we would not, that we do; it is then no
more we that do it, but sin that dwells in us. Wherefore we can feel the
power of our redemption but in part, so long as we live in the flesh; but it
will be fully perfected when our corruptible shall put on incorruption, and our
mortal shall put on immortality, and that cannot be until the general
resurrection at the last day, when all the enemies of our salvation shall be
subdued: For death will seize upon our bodies, and will keep them in the prison
of the grave, until Christ shall come with power, and break open the prison
doors by the power of his resurrection, and raise them up to immortality, and
to eternal glory, and then our Redemption will be made perfect to us; and this
John 6. 54
Christ has promised, and he does plainly manifest it to us: for when he had
showed his disciples some signs and tokens of his second coming, which were
forerunners of the general resurrection, he said, Luke 21 ^ 28.
That when they see those things begin to come to pass, then they should look
up, and lift up their heads, for their Redemption draws nigh, whereof we are
as fully persuaded by faith in this life, as if we did already enjoy it.
Wherefore let nothing weaken our faith in our Redemption: for we may
confidently rest upon it, though we have it but in part in this life: for
Christ will perfect it to us at the last day, when he will raise up our bodies
out of the dust, by his Almighty Power, which is the last part of our
Redemption.

Here is matter of great comfort, if our hearts do piously ruminate upon the
transcendent love of God to us in our Redemption. John 3. 16
For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son; that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Redemption is freely offered to all, yet none can have the assurance of it,
but such as believe in Christ, and belong unto him through the election of
Grace; these and none but these shall have the benefit of it: for they are
within the New Covenant, Heb. 9. 15
which Christ has procured for them by his death: these only shall receive
the promise of an eternal inheritance, and shall be advanced to an higher
degree of felicity and blessedness, than they had in Adam before his fall.

Adam had but a dim light of his Redemption; yet it was sufficient to ground
his faith upon it, and the promise of grace was very mystically delivered to
him, but the Patriarks and Prophets had a clearer evidence of it: God has
given us a full demonstration of our Redemption, because Christ is come in the
flesh, and has finished the whole work of our Salvation, by treading down all
principalities and powers under his feet, and by subduing to us all the enemies
of our salvation; and because death is our last enemy, which will undoubtedly
seize upon our bodies, we do assuredly believe, that by the power of Christ's
Resurrection, who is our head, our bodies shall be raised up out of the dust at
the last day: for Christ has redeemed our bodies from death, as well as our
souls from the devil, that both in soul and in body we may live and reign with
Christ for evermore.

Wherefore if God has been so rich in goodness to us, and if his grace and
love has been so free, as to redeem our souls from hell, and our bodies from
the grave, even when we were his enemies, and when he saw nothing in us but
misery, then let us with the Prophet David, say thus with our selves, Psalm. 116
12, 13, 14
What shall we r^nder unto the Lord for all his benefits toward us? how shall
we pay our vows which we have made to him in our Baptism or at any other time?
we will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord, we will
be his servants, and will offer to him the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving. Thus let our thoughts, and the Meditations of our hearts be
always upon the love of God to us, and not upon the vanities of this world;
let them be set upon the joys and happiness of heaven, and not upon earthly
transitory pleasures and delights; let us study how to live a sanctified life
unto God, and a blameless life to our neighbors, and not how to fulfill our
own sinful desires, and the evil concupiscence of our flesh: otherwise we
have received the grace of God in vain, and we can have no good assurance of
our Redemption by Christ: for God bestows his grace upon us, and has given
us the light of his Spirit, that we should walk as in the light, and not in
darkness, that our conversation should be holy and pure; and not corrupted and
defiled with uncleanness; but that we should perform holy obedience unto God,
and serve him with pure affections.

Now let our hearts and souls devoutly Meditate upon the great Work of our
Redemption: for it was far greater than the Creation of the whole world; God
did but say the Word let such a thing be made, and it was made: he did not
disrobe himself of any part of his glory in the creation of any creature, but
rather his glory, wisdom and power was magnified in the making of the least of
them. But in the Redemption of man, Christ Jesus, the second Person in the
sacred Trinity laid aside all his celestial and heavenly glory, which was his
due from his first incarnation and from eternity, and came down from his Throne
of Majesty in heaven, and humbled himself to the meanest condition of life here
on earth, and to the basest and most accursed death, even to the death of the
cross, that he might Rede^m us from the lowest degree of misery, and advance
us to the highest degree of happiness, even above the blessed Angels in heaven.

This will be exceeding great joy and comfort to us, if we have an holy
persuasion of our Redemption by faith in Christ: for hereby we have a near
relation unto God, being made his sons by adoption in Christ, and then our
souls will so delight in him, that nothing will will be hard to us that we
shall suffer for his sake, and nothing will be too dear for him that he shall
require, and it will be the desire of our hearts to do his will, and the joy of
our souls to be joined nearer and closer unto him; also we shall willingly part
with our dearest sins, rather than our sins shall part us from our God. This
holy persuasion, if it be well grounded, will make us fear no adversary power,
and our spiritual enemies shall not daunt us: for we will flee unto Christ as
our best refuge in all our troubles and sorrows; we will crave his protection
in all our perils and dangers: for he is our Redeemer and our Savior, he is
the Rock of our salvation, in whom we must trust; he will give us strength of
grace to endure our trials, to fight his battles, and to stand for the truth
against all opposition.

We may safely rest upon Christ, and put our confidence in him for comfort and
succor, when any calamity does oppress us; for help and deliverance when any
spiritual enemy does assault us: for he will be our hiding place in times of
danger, and our comfort in all our sorrows and afflictions.

Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22.
For God has set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, far above
all principality and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is
named, no^ only in this world, but also in that which is to come: and has put
all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things to the
Church.

Wherefore let the consideration of all these benefits, which we have by our
Redemption, stir us up with all care and diligence to perform that duty and
obedience which we owe unto Christ, and to express all filial fear, and
reverence, all love, praise and thankfulness to him for our Redemption, which
Work neither God nor man could effect for us, but only Christ, who was both
God and Man.

The time of grace.
GOd is the sole Disposer of Time, and he keeps that precious Jewel in his own
Cabinet, to give to the sons of men what time he pleases, and he appoints
every one to improve their time for the gaining of the grace and favor of God,
and of those things that do conduce to the kingdom of heaven; and not to spend
it vainly, sinfully and licenciously. To some he gives more time, and to some
less, and all must employ it to the glory of God, and to the good of his
neighbor. God does measure out our life by time, and some have a longer
measure than others, and this measure is dispensed to us by moments: for we
cannot recall the time that is past, and we do not enjoy the time that is to
come; so that we have only the time that is now present, which is but a
moment, and when one moment of time is gone, God does give us another, until
the measure of time, that God has allotted us, be fulfilled. If we look upon
an hour-glasse, we shall see how swiftly one grain of sand runs after
another, and so continues until all be run out.

Thus it is with the moments of our life, one moment follows swiftly after
another, which God would have us duly to consider, that we may not waste our
time in vain things, but employ it to that end for which God gave it* and that
is, to the working out of our own salvation, that God may be honored and
glorified thereby; and therefore about whatsoever we spend our time, if it does
not conduce to that end, it is but lost and vainly spent.

God has given us a time for all our necessary occasions here upon earth, that
all things may be done in their season: For as the Preacher says, To every
thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven: ^
Eccles. 3. 1, 2.
A time to be born, and a time to dye, a time to plant, and a time to pluck up
that which is planted: and we do observe the times and seasons of the year,
when to till the ground, and when to sow our seed, when to reap our harvest,
and when to gather in the fruits of the earth.

The Celestial Bodies know their times, as the Psalm^st sait^: Psalm. 164: 19.
He appoints the Moon for seasons; the Sun knows his going down.

Also the fowls of heaven, and the birds in the air have their times
appointed: for thus God upbraideth his own people by his Prophet; Jer. 8. 7.
The Stork in the heaven knows her appointed times, and the Turtle, and the
Crane, and the Swallow observe the times of their coming; but my people knows
not the judgment of the Lord.

We are wise enough to know our times for earthly things; but we have no care
to observe the times of grace, how and when we may gain the grace and favor of
God, that he may accept of our persons, and of our holy oblations that we offer
unto him; and also when we may obtain from him the saving and sanctifying
graces of his most blessed Spirit.

The time of our life is the general and longest time of grace, that God has
given us, wherein we should seek his gracious acceptance of us in Christ, and
wherein he does work grace in the hearts of all his Elect by his Spirit.

Now if we measure this time of grace by the length of our days, acco^ding to
the course of nature, or according to the health and strength of our bodies, or
by our own foolish fancy, that measure is very uncertain: for who knows
whether his days shall be many or few? Are we not daily subject to
casualities, and to sudden death? if we be strong and have our health to day,
we may be weak and sick to morrow; though we dream of long life; yet it is but
a dream, for we have no assurance of it.

If we thus measure the time of grace, we shall put it off with delays, until
God does suddenly bereave us of all time. But we must measure out our days by
the Rule of Gods Word. and then we shall see, Genesis 47 9
that our days are few and evil; as Jacob said unto Pharaoh, and holy David
will tell us, Psa. 144. 4.
that man is like to vanity, his days are as a shadow that passes away: also,
Psalm. 39. 5.
that our days are as an hand-breadth, and our age is as nothing before God:
And in another Psalm, he says thus: Psalm. 103. 15, 16.
As for man, his days are as grass: as a flower of the field so he
flowrisheth: for the wind passes over it, and it is gone; and the place
thereof shall know it no more.

Thus says holy Job, Job 7. 6. 7
My days are swifter than a weavers shuttle, and are spent without hope. O
remember that my life is wind. If our life be wind, how soon then is it gone?
how little then is the time of grace? and yet upon this little moment depends
our eternal happiness: for when this life is ended, there is no more time for
grace, or to seek the favor of God.

Wherefore it is extreme folly to lose any part of this precious time without
some gain of grace,* or to spend it to any other end than to the glory of God:
then much more, to waste it in sinful pleasures, to the great dishonor of his
Name, and to the destruction and loss of our own souls.

Though we be in the State of Grace; yet through the corruption of our nature,
and the frailty of our unregenerate part, we are subject to many slips and
failings, and sometimes we do so dangerously fall, that God will hide his face
from us, and eclipse the bright beams of his gracious countenance for a time;
so that we shall have no sense nor apprehension of his Grace and favor to us,
and the fruits of his Spirit will seem to us to be withered and dried up.

But God has his special times of grace, when he will be found of us, and
when he will graciously accept us, and will manifest again the fruits of his
holy Spirit, and his sanctifying graces shall again shine forth in us, when God
has wrought his own work in our hearts, and has humbled us for our sins with
his rod, he will then call to us, saying, Psalm. 27. 8.
Seek ye my face, and our hearts must presently answer with David, Thy face
Lord will we seek: for to answer presently to Gods call is the time of gracious
acceptance, thus says David, I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine
iniquity have I not hid: I said k Ps. 32. 5, 6.
I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin. For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee in a
time when thou may be found. Also, when we seek with all faithful diligence
unto the Lord in our tribulations, and sue unto him with all our hearts, we
shall find him gracious and propitious to us, as the Lord himself says by his
Prophet, Jer. 29. 12, 13, 14.
Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will
hearken unto you. And ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for
me with all your heart, and I will be found of you, says the Lord.

But the holy Ghost sets down a more particular time of grace: Heb. 3. 7, 13.
To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not ^our hearts, and he gives this
reason, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin: for God
does call to us every day by some means or other, to seek his face and his
favor. Wherefore we must not put off the time of grace until the morrow: for
as James says, Jam. 4. 14
W^ know not what shall be on the morrow: For what is our life? It is even a
vap^r that appears for a little time and then vanishes away.

It is now plain and evident* that the principal time of grace is, when God is
pleased to offer it, and when he does give us the means to attain unto it: for
God keeps the gift of grace in his own power, to give it to whom, and when he
pleases, and except God does offer it, we cannot receive it. The very first
desires of seeking grace is Gods free offer of it to us: for he does incline
the will, and works those holy desires in our hearts by the operation of his
own Spirit. Sometimes the holy Ghost does work them in us upon the true sight
and sense of our sins, and thereby moves us to make our peace with God by true
repentance, according to this of the Prophet. Isa. 55. 6, 7
Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near. Let
the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him
return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he
will abundantly pardon.

The holy Ghost does also work thus in our hearts upon the sense of our wants
and necessities, and upon the sense of our afflictions and tribulations, to
humble our souls before God, that our hearts may be prepared to seek his love
and favor, by fervent prayer. Thus says the Prophet, Isa. 26. 16.
Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, they powered out a prayer, when thy
chastening was upon them.

If we do duly consider these thiogs, and ponder well upon them in our hearts,
it will teach us highly to prize that time which God does lend us here in this
life for the gain of Grace, that hereafter we may attain to eternal happiness
in the kingdom of heaven: also not to refuse any offer of Grace that God shall
make unto us: First, because o^r time is short and momentany, and we know not
how long we shall enjoy it. Secondly, because our little time is transitory,
and passes swiftly away, and we cannot recall one moment that is gone.
Thirdly, because it is the time which God has appointed for Grace, and the
time of his gracious acceptance. Fourthly, because the eternal salvation both
of our souls and bodies depends upon this short time of our life. Lastly, if
we lose any opportunity of grace that God does give us, we show great
unthankfulness to God, and we know not whether he will give us another
opportunity for it. Wherefore we should not spend our time idly, or
unprofitably; but we must with all care and diligence improve it to those ends
for which God has given it, to make our calling and election sure by faith in
Christ, to make our peace with God, whom we have offended, and to regain his
love and favor, when we have lost the apprehension of it by our sins.

Many heavenly comforts we shall find, if we listen to Gods call, and receive
Grace when he does offer it. First, God will be found of us, if we seek him
with pure affections, and in the uprightness of our hearts. Secondly, he will
hear our supplications and prayers, if they proceed from a true sense of the
want of what we pray for. Thirdly, he will succor and comfort us in our
sorrows and distresses, if we cry unto him in the true apprehension of our own
misery. Lastly, such is the goodness of God, that he will incline our will,
and put holy desires into our hearts, to seek the light of his countenance,
when we are prepared for it by true humiliation and sorrow for our sins: for
then he will hear our prayers, he will grant our requests, and will graciously
accept us; though our sins had formerly moved him to hide himself from us.

Consider further, that the principal means of grace is by Jesus Christ our
Savior, by whose righteousness we are justified, by whose grace we are
sanctified, and by the merit of whose blood we are saved: so that without
Christ we can neither come into grace and favor with God, neither can any
sanctifying and saving graces be wrought in us to make us capable of salvation.

Now God has appointed the sincere Preaching of his Word to be a special
means to reveal Christ perfectly, and fully to us, and to work faith in us,
whereby we are knit and united unto Christ, from whom all other sanctifying and
heavenly graces do plentifully flow, and they are conveyed to us by the
operations of the holy Ghost.

Thus says the Apostle, Romans 10. ^7.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God; and it brings in
with it all other spiritual Graces. For the Word of God contains in it
whatsoever is needful to salvation, and there is no grace but we may attain to
it by this means, if the holy Ghost does accompany the administration of it to
bring it close to our hearts.

God has also other means, which he uses for the working of grace in us, and
to bring us home when we go astray from him: for every blessing that we
receive, every affliction that he sends, and every motion of his Spirit that
we feel, is a call from God, and a means that conduces to the gain of some
grace or other. His blessings should stir us up to glorify God with our
praises and thankfulness: Romans 2. 4.
his goodness should lead us to repentance, and his love to us, should bind
us to love him again: also, the sorrows and miseries that we suffer in this
life should teach us godly sorrow for our sins, and patience under the cross,
they should humble us, and bring us to true repentance, and newness of life:
so likewise every motion of his holy Spirit should move us to obedience, and to
conformity of will to the will of God; and the daily experience we have of Gods
care over us, should teach us to confide in God, and to rest and depend upon
him in all conditions of life whatsoever.

These and the like means God does use to quicken up those graces that lie
languishing in us, and are as dead to our apprehension; and also to make us
seek unto him for his grace and favor, which is sufficient to support us in
all our trials and distresses.

These heavenly motions of the holy Ghost is Gods still voice, which should
make deep impression in our hearts, because he does thereby immediately from
himself reveal his will and pleasure to us, what we ought to do; to which holy
inspirations we ought to yield our willing obedience, though it be irksome to
our nature, and crossing the unregenerate part of our will, as to repent, and
to leave a darling sin, which we have long nourished in our bosoms This is a
time when we may gain the grace and favor of God, if we are ready to listen to
this voice, and cheerfully to obey it Wherefore this ought to be our care, to
embrace any means, or opportunity that God shall tender to us for grace,
because it is Gods time of grace, and he will second his own time and his own
means with a blessing, if we embrace it; but if we will be feasting, when we
should fast and pray, or rejoicing when we should mourn and weep, we do then
discover too much disobedience, and rebellion against the will of God.

Now we ought to examine our selves how we have profited under the means of
grace, how the Word of God has wrought upon our hearts and affections, what
heavenly graces have been wrought in us by it, or by any of Gods holy
Ordinances, and what spiritual comfort we have found by them. Also, we ought
to examine what thankfulness we have returned to God for his blessings, what
sorrow of heart we have had for our sins, how we have been humbled under the
cross, what reformation of life Grace has wrought in us, how we have obeyed
the holy motions of Gods Spirit, and how we have been ravished in soul with
earnest desires to do the will of God.

If we have lived long under a powerful Ministry, and yet have gained little
or no knowledge of Christ, and of the truth, and no faith or saving grace is
wrought in us by the power of it, we have then lost so much time of grace, and
we have not improved the means of grace to our best advantage, nor to the
right end as God has appointed, which is to gain grace for the spiritual good
of our souls.

Wherefore, let these be the Meditations of our hearts, how to improve the time
and the means of Grace to the right end, that we may be found good stewards,
and profitable servants to our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, by that gain which
we shall make of grace in this little stock of time which he has given us in
this life. For the more time, and the more means of grace we do enjoy, the
more fruits of grace we must bring forth, or else we shall be unprofitable
servants. If we improve our time for grace, as we ought, we shall gain the love
and favor of God in Christ, our hearts will be seasoned with all spiritual
graces, and our conversation will be in heaven, while we live here upon earth:
for we shall live a gracious and a comfortable life now, and a glorious and
blessed life hereafter. Also, let this be the true desire of our souls, to
redeem the time of grace that we have lost, and to improve the means of grace
to more profit, that the fruits of it may appear in our obedience to Gods
Commandments, in our zeal to the true worship and service of God, and in our
care to walk in all piety and virtue, which we may the better do, if we daily
address our selves to God by faithful prayer for the gracious assistance of
his holy Spirit herein.

In the last place we must consider, that though God does give us time and
means for grace; yet we cannot attain unto it without the special working of
the Spirit of grace in us, for he must put a spiritual light into our
understandings, he must open our hearts, and incline the will, or else we
cannot receive it.

All heavenly gifts and spiritual graces come from God, which the Father is
sometimes said to give, according to this of James, Jam. 1. 17
Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from
the Father of lights.

Sometimes also the Son is said to give them: for thus says the Apostle,
Ephesians. 4. 8.
when he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto
men, that is, he gave not only places of dignity and of authority to some in
his Church; but also he gave them all spiritual indowments of grace meet for
their several places and functions. But these heavenly graces are properly
wrought in our hearts by the holy Ghost, how and when he pleases.

We must therefore crave his help, we must wait his time, and attend upon the
means, until he shall be pleased to work grace in us, and we must resolve
without delays or excuses, Heb. 3. 7.
to accept of grace, even that very day when God does offer it, and not to
grieve his good Spirit by refusing the sweet tender of grace, or by losing any
opportunity, wherein God may be glorified by this heavenly work of grace in us.

Wherefore, Ps. 8. 4, 5.
be not thou like the deaf adder that stops her ear, which will not hearken
to the voice of charmers charming never so wisely; but when any means of grace
is offered, or when thou feel a good motion in thy heart, be ready to
embrace it: for that is Gods call, and then Christ knocks at the door of thy
heart, Rev. 3. 20.
as he did at the door of the Laodiceans: if thou do presently open unto him,
he will come in to thee, and will sup with thee, and thou shall sup with him;
but if thou deferrest it until the morrow, thou know not whether he will
knock again or not.

O, what a bountiful and gracious guest do thou lose, if thou will not open
thy heart, when the Spirit of Christ knocks there, either by the preaching of
his Word, by holy inspirations, by his blessings, by afflictions, or by any
other means whatsoever.

If thou belongest unto him, thou will know his knock, thou will know his
voice, thou will make have and prepare the best rooms in thine affections to
give him entertainment, and thou will clear away all the filth of thy sins by
faith and true repentance, that he may come into a clean heart, that nothing
may displease, or discontent him: for he comes not to lodge with thee a night
or two, as a stranger, or to sojourn with thee a month or a year, and then to
leave thee; Ephesians. 3. 17.
but he will dwell in thy heart by faith, Joh. 14. 23
and will abide with thee for ever by his holy Spirit. When he is come, he will
furnish his rooms with his own furniture, he will perfume them with his own
merits; so that whatsoever issue from thence, shall be a sweet savor, well
pleasing and acceptable to God: he will also beautify and adorn all the
faculties of thy soul with spiritual and heavenly graces, he will heal and cure
al thy spiritual diseases; he will be a Prophet to thee, to teach and instruct
thee in the ways of godliness; he will be thy High Priest to make intercession
for thee, and to present thy prayers and oblations unto God his Father; also,
he will be thy King to rule in thy heart with his scepter of righteousness, and
to subdue all the enemies of thy salvation.

Christ will feast thee at his own table with bread of life, water of life, and
with heavenly Manna, which are precious dainties, and spiritual food for thy
soul to feed upon, and thy heart will rejoice and be glad in him. Thou shall
also enjoy Gal. 5. 22, 23.
the fruits of his Spirit, which are love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance; and all that belong unto thee
shall partake of the riches of his goodness, and of his blessings. Ps. 24. 7.
Let thy gates therefore stand open, that the King of glory may enter in, and
be thou as ready to receive him with all joy and gladness of heart, Luc. 19. 6.
9.
as Zachaeus was to receive Christ, when he was in the flesh, who brought
salvation to his House. Be not thou like the spouse in the Canticles, Cant. 5.
2^
who would not rise out of her bed of security to open the door of her heart to
her beloved; but suffered him to stand knocking and calling, until his locks
were wet with the drops of the night.

Now if thou have any care of thy souls health, study and meditate how to
observe the times and means of grace, and how to improve them to the glory of
God, and to thine own spiritual gain.

Can thou observe the times and seasons of the year for the fruits of the
earth, and have thou no care to take the opportunities that God gives thee for
grace? learn of the mariner, who will hoyse up sail, when the wind serves for
him; and when God offers thee grace, do thou raise up thy heart and affections
to receive it. If thou refusest his gracious goodness to thee herein, it is no
wonder, if thou art barren of true virtue and piety, if thy soul be without
spiritual comfort in thy sorrows and afflictions; and it is no marvel if thou
art fruitless in all good works.

If thou will make the true gain of thy time, thou must diligently attend to
the holy ordinances of God, thou must thankfully receive his mercies and
blessings, thou must bear the Cross of Christ with patience and with meekness,
submitting thy self with all humbleness of spirit to the will and pleasure of
God. Also, thou must repent of holy duties omitted, as well as of sins
committed, and howsoever God shall deal with thee at that very time, make an
holy use of it for the glory of God, and for the comfort of thy soul.

If the devil has deluded thee with false pretenses, or has lulled thee
asleep in his bed of security; so that thou have slighted the means of grace,
and have vainly spent thy precious time without any spiritual or heavenly
gains, thou must labor with all Christian diligence to recover it again, which
thou may do by the gracious help and assistance of the holy Ghost herein: for
thou have no ability in thy self, to get out of these dangerous snares of the
devil; or to redeem the time that thou have lost.

To conclude, if thou do desire to make the true gain of the time of grace,
thou must strive to remove out of thy heart whatsoever does displease, or
dishonor God, and whatsoever may hinder the operations of the holy Ghost, and
the current of grace to thy heart. For if thy mind is carried after the love of
the world, after vain pleasures, or sinful delights, and if thou do prize any
thing above grace, or love any thing more than thou love Christ; the love of
God cannot dwell in thee, and spiritual grace cannot be wrought in thee, until
thy heart be prepared to receive it, which must be by the powerful working of
the holy Ghost.

The danger of delays in seeking Grace.
THere is now great need, that we do seriously bethink our selves, and that our
hearts do faithfully meditate upon it, what danger we may incur and run into,
if we do not accept of grace when God does offer it, if we do not come to God
when he calls, nor do what he commands at his own appointed time: also, how
dangerous it is to delay our repentance, and the reformation of our sinful
lives from day to day, and to cover our delays with this vain pretense, that
to morrow we will perform that which God commands, and then we will amend all
that is amiss; and thus we put off this precious time of grace, and thus we
defer our repentance for our sins, until God, who is the sole commander of
time, does shut us out of all time, to the utter perdition of our poor souls,
which he may justly do, if we thus abuse the singular benefit of time, which
God has given us here for the gaining of his grace and favor.

This is a dangerous and a cunning deceit, which the devil uses to bring us to
destruction; if he can persuade us to make delays in the work of grace, and in
doing that which God commands: for by this means we shall incur the wrath and
high displeasure of God, we shall in danger our repentance, and conversion unto
God, and consequently our eternal salvation, The devil knows that one sin
will draw on another, that custom will bring us to an habit of sinning; and he
that will not receive the tender of grace to day, may not have the time, or the
means of it to morrow, and he that refuses to repent to day, may be more
indisposed for it to morrow.

Also, he knows how hard it is to leave old sins, and and that God may justly
withdraw the comfo^t of his presence, and may deny us his grace, if we do abuse
his goodness and loving kindness to us: by these our delays in grace we do
exasperate the justice of God to punish us, aod thereby we heap vengeance upon
our own heads, Romans 2. 5.
and we do treasure up wrath against the day of wrath. Likewise he knows how
uncertain our life is, and the many and perilous chances that may come to
hinder us from making our peace with God in time, and therefore he will labou^
to persuade us to defer a little, and then a little more, and that hereafter
we shall have better occasion, and fitter opportunity to do that which God
commands, then for the present we have.

If we continue in sin without repentance, the power of the devil is more
established and confirmed in us, the good inclination of our will is more
weakened and perverted, the faculties of our mind are more corrupted, our
understanding is more darkened, and our unruly passions are more strengthened
against the rule of reason, and harder to be repressed by continuance of time,
than they were before.

Wherefore, we cannot be safe from the evil of those subtle suggestions of the
devil, unless we shroud our selves under the protection of God by prayer, and
keep our souls close unto Christ by faith: for then he will preserve us from
the danger of those snares, and he will keep us, that we be not deluded with
his enchantments, to lose the opportunities of grace, that God does give us.
For it is grace only that does keep us from the habit of sin, that no sin
shall be rooted in us; it is the strength of grace that gives us power over
our sins, and that keeps us from the delusions of the Devil: and therefore if
God withdraws his assisting grace from us, we have then no means to be
preserved from those dangerous deceits of the devil, or to make the way of
virtue, and of godliness easy to us.

If we have been deluded by the subtilty of the devil, by the allurements of
the world, or by the intisements of the flesh, to continue long in a sinful
course of life, and to neglect the means of grace, when it was offered, or to
delay our repentance, and turning unto God, to the great hazard of the
salvation of our souls; let our heart melt into godly sorrow for our long
delays in seeking the grace and favor of God, and for losing so much time
without the gain of some grace for the good of our souls, that God may be
glorified thereby. If God shall make our life but like the shortest day of the
year; yet we shall discover too much gross ingratitude to him, if we will not
afford him one hour of that day for his honor and glory: then much more is our
unthankfulness toward him, if our life be lengthned out to the longest day, and
if we do also enjoy the sunshine of the Gospel; and yet have no care to seek
his face, or to gain his favor, until the twilight of that day, when sickness
and infirmities will disable us, and when decrepit old age does seize upon us.
How can we expect that God will accept of our sower winter fruits, when we deny
him our sweet and pleasant summer fruits? what fruits can the seed of grace
produce, when our hearts have been overgrown with briars and thorns ah our
whole life? can we spend all the oil in our lamps in seeking for earthly
things, and provide none to have our lamps burning, that we may attend upon the
bridegroom when he comes? Mat. 25.
The foolish Virgins in the Gospel did thus, and therefore, when the bridegroom
came, they were not ready, and went not in with him to the marriage, and the
door was shut, we should therefore watch, for we know neither the day, nor the
hour, wherein the Son of man comes.

If we do seriously think upon the many and great benefits that we have already
received from God, and yet we do hope for, and expect much more, even eternal
happiness hereafter; we cannot but be more careful to labor for true saving
grace in the best part of our days, without which we cannot attain to it: and
not to spend our time vainly in seeking the profits and pleasures of this
world, reserving the last and worst part of our lives for the service of God,
and for the Kingdom of heaven: for we know not whether God will then accept it.

If God does give us grace then to repent (for repentance is absolutely his own
gift) yet we must then lament and bewail these dangerous delays which we have
made: for by how much the more we prolong our returning unto God, the more we
increase our sins, and so much the greater will be our pain and sorrow in our
repentance, if it be true, and sound: also, the amendment of our lives will be
much the harder. Time is not gained, but lost, which we spend without some
fruits of grace and godliness, which indeed is the true gain of time: and
therefore we should seek unto God while he may be found, Isa. 55. 6.
we should call upon him while he is near: otherwise, though we seek him, he
will not be found, and though we call upon him, he will not answer, nor be
entreated. Thus says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6. 2
now is the time acceptable, now is the day of salvation.

But we have just cause to bewail our condition: for the corruption of our
nature does so weaken us, and the power of our spiritual enemies does so
prevail against us, that we cannot break through such strong opposition, as
they make to hinder this holy work of grace in us.

I he devil does cunningly dissuade us from it, the world does strongly allure
us to follow still the vanities of it, and our own flesh does daily entice us
to carnal pleasures and delights; so that we can find no time to make our
peace with God, or to improve the means of grace to his glory, and to our own
comfort. Though we do sometimes strive against our sins; yet we cannot overcome
them, or if one sin be subdued, another is ready to rise up against us; also,
though we cannot actually commit a sin; yet we may commit it in our sinful
desires to it, in a sinful remembrance of it, in consenting to it, or in
suffering it to be done, when by our place and authority we might hinder it. We
have also just cause to bemoan our selves: for though we do labor for grace,
and do use all means for it to the best of our power, and yet we cannot attain
unto it. Though it be thus with us; yet we must still continue our best
endeavors to oppose all the enemies of our salvation, and we must still use
the means of grace, and wait upon God, until he shall please to work grace in
us by his Spirit; also, we must pray unto him with a faithful heart, that by
the omnipotent power of his grace, e and by the rod of his strength, which is
the Word and Sprit, he would make us able to overcome our corruptions by
seasoning our hearts with grace, to subdue the power of our sins by repentance,
to improve our time to the glory of God, and also to break through the snares
of the devil, the world and the flesh. Then God will so bless us in our pious
endeavors, that we shall prevail against all opposition and adversary power,
not by our own strength, but by the might, and power of Jesus Christ our
gracious Redeemer; 2 Cor. 12. 9.
whose grace and favor is sufficient for us, and whose strength is made
perfect in our weakness, under whose banner we fight these spiritual battles
for the honor of his great name.

Of Christ our Redeemer.
IF it be so, that Christ is our Redeemer, and has wrought our redemption with
his own blood, and has purchased for us a new Covenant, and an everlasting
inheritance in heaven, as formerly in part has been showed; also, if we have
all our strength and power from him against our spiritual enemies, without whom
we cannot stand against them, nor break through the bands of death to enjoy
that heavenly inheritance which he has prepared for us: we must then know who
Christ is, what is the nature of his Person, what is his power and strength,
and how he was qualified for this great work, that we may have a sure ground to
confide in him, and to rest upon him as our Redeemer and only Savior.

Also, we must know how he has satisfied the justice of God for our sins,
how he has conquered death, hell, and the devil, and what price he has paid
for our ransom: for without this heavenly knowledge and faith to apply it to
our selves, we can dravv no comfort to our souls from Christ, neither can we
have any good assurance, that we are freed from the curse of the Law, that
the justice of God is satisfied for our sins, that sin has no condemning power
over us, that the sting of death is taken away, and that we are reconciled
again unto the favor of God.

God has revealed these deep mysteries to us in his holy Word, that the
meditations of our hearts may be enlarged upon them for our instruction and
edification, and for the comfort of our souls, as God shall give light to our
understandings by his blessed Spirit. But as the Prophet says, Is. 53. 8.
Who can declare his generation, which was from eternity? for Christ our
Redeemer is the only begotten Son of God, Joh. 1. 18.
who is in the bosom of the Father, and was promised and expected since the
beginning of the world. And when the fullness of time was come, that God had
appointed for his incarnation, John 1. 14
the Word was made flesh: for Heb. 2. 16
he took on him the seed of Abraham, and personally united to his Divine nature
a true humane body, Luc. 1. 31, 32.
of the seed of the Virgin Mary, Mat. 26. 38
which was endued with a reasonable soul; and the holy Ghost did so sanctify
her womb, that he was born without sin, either original, or actual. And though
the humane nature of Christ was taken into his Deity, whereby this union was
never to be dissolved: yet either nature had their whole properties, and
operations remaining still unconfounded, and therefore he was true God, and
true man, Heb. 2. 17
like unto us in all things, Heb. 4. 15.
sin only excepted, and those two natures made but one person in Christ, Mat.
28. 18
to whom God the Father has given all power in heaven and in earth; so that he
commands and over-ruleth al created power whatsoever.

God did also give him three honorable offices, that he might be every way fit
to be our eternal Mediator between God and us: for God ordained him to be a
Prophet to teach and instruct us; to be a Priest to make intercession for us,
and to offer such a sacrifice to God for our sins, as he would accept; and to
be a King to rule and govern his Church, and also to rule in our hearts by his
Spirit.

Christ being thus qualified, has fulfilled for us and in our nature,
whatsoever the Law did require of us, and his righteousness is imputed to us by
faith for our justification, that no guilt of sin might cleave to us in the
sight of God.

When Christ did execute that part of his priestly office, which was the
offering up of his body a sacrifice for us, no heart can conceive, and no
tongue can express the bitter torments which he suffered both in his soul, and
in his body, to satisfy the justice of God, for our sins, and to purchase
our freedom and redemptition out of the captivity of sin and Satan. Isa. 53.
He was a man of sorrows, he was despised, he has born our griefs, he was
wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastizement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. All
we like sheep are gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way, and the
Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. Hereby it appears, that the
justice of God cannot dispense with any sin: for he did severely punish it in
his own dear Son; because he found the guilt of sin upon him, though it were
none of his own: for he was in his own nature free from any spot, or stain of
sin whatsoever.

Now learn this instruction, that when thy heart does meditate on Christ thy
gracious and blessed Redeemer, thy thoughts must not rest upon his humane
nature; but with the piercing eye and power of faith, thou must raise them up
to contemplate with all due reverence his Deity, and admire with great
admiration, that the eternal Son of God was pleased for thy sake, thou poor
silly worm, to leave his glorious mansions in heaven, and to lay down that
heavenly glory, which was ever his due, and to condescend so low as to be
clothed with thy nature, which thou have stained with the guilt of all manner
of sin, that he might cloth thee with his own righteousness, and restore thee
again to the first purity and integrity in Gods account, wherein thou were
created. Now then can thou ever put an end to thy meditations on his abundant
love to thee? can thou be unthankful to him, that he has been so rich in
goodness to thee, so free in his mercies, and so liberal in his benefits to
such a worthless creature, as thou art? let him therefore be the chief joy of
thy heart, and put thy whole confidence in him by faith for thy salvation: do
not forget so great love; but close with him, embrace him with the arms of thy
faith, be guided and directed by him in all thy ways, and yield all submission
to Christ thy King and Governor, to obey his Laws, and to observe his commands.

Feed thy heart then, and refresh thy soul by ruminating upon the excellencies
and al-sufficiency of Christ thy Savior, with thoughts beseeming the honor
and dignity of his sacred Person. For if thou think upon him only as he is
man, thou do too much undervalue his Highness, and if thou conceivest of
him, as only God, thou can not draw then near unto him without dread and
terror, by reason of his glory and majesty, and also by reason of thy
pollutions and defilements. If Christ were only man, he could not have
satisfied the justice of an infinite God, neither had his blood been a
sufficient price for man's redemption; and if only God, he could not have
suffered the penalty of the Law by his death. But if thou do meditate on
him, and apply thy self to him by a true and a lively faith; as he is thy only
Savior, both God and man, Heb. 4. 16.
then thou may come boldly to the throne of grace, where thou shall receive,
and find grace to help in time of need; and thy meditations of him will be
exceeding comfortable to thy soul. Thou may safely fix thy faith upon him,
and ground thy hope in him for thy salvation: Act. 4. 12
for there is no other name under heaven, whereby thou must be saved, but by
the name of Jesus: and according to the esteem thou have in thy heart of that
Name, such is thy faith, and such is thy hope and confidence in him. For if thy
thoughts concerning him are low, it is a manifest sign that thy faith in him is
weak; but if they are truly raised up to contemplate and acknowledge his Deity
through his humanity, its a good evidence that thy faith is strong in him.
Wherefore, renounce all that is in nature, or in humane learning, and trust not
to thine own abilities, or to common grace for thy redemption: for they profit
thee nothing for thy justification, though they may conduce much toward a well
ordered and civil life: but strive to get faith; and all sanctifying grace,
that the righteousness of Christ may be imputed to thee, and that thy life may
be truly sanctified, and reformed to the will of God.

We must consider further for our better understanding of Christ our blessed
Redeemer, that he is set forth in the holy Scriptures by some resemblances,
which are very comfortable for us to meditate upon; because they show our union
with him, his special care of us, and the great benefits that we shall have by
him, if we can make an holy application of him to our selves by faith. First,
he is resembled to a vine, and then we are the branches, Joh. 15. 5.
I am the vine, says Christ, ye are the branches. He that abides in me, and I
in him, the same brings forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing.
If we are ingrafted by faith into this true vine, we are then so firmly knit
and united unto Christ, that no power, nor policy can separate us from him: for
1 Pet. 1. 5.
we are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation: we shall be
purged and pruned from the guilt, and from the pollutions of all our sins, and
we shall be dressed and adorned with grace and virtue, that we may bring forth
much fruit in a pious life, and holy conversation.

Secondly, Christ is resembled to an head: Col. 1. 18.
for he is the head of the Church, and we are the members of that body, to be
guided and directed by him, to be taught and instructed of him, and as the head
preserves the natural body; Ephesians. 5. 23*
so is Christ the Savior of every member of his mystical body; and as all the
members of the natural body draw their sense and motion from the head, and are
serviceable, and obedient to the command of the head, as the hands to work, the
feet to run, the back to bear any heavy burden, and the like; so do we draw all
our sense and motion in heavenly things from Christ, by reason of the operation
of the holy Ghost, and we ought to yield all duty and obedience to him, to do
what he commands with all cheerfulness of spirit, and willingly to bear his
Cross, though the burden be very heavy to our weak nature. This will give us
great assurance, that we have a near relation unto Christ, if we find this
readiness of will in our selves, to submit to his most blessed and holy will.

Thirdly, Christ is called Heb. 13. 20
that great shepherd of the sheep, and thus he says of himself, Ioh. 10. 11,
14.
I am the good shepherd, and I know my sheep, and am known of mine: the good
shepherd gives his life for the sheep. The Prophet tells us from the Lords
own mouth, that it is the property of a good shepherd Ezec. 34. 3, 4
to feed the flock, to strengthen the diseased, to heal the sick, to bind up
that which is brok^n, to bring again that which is driven away, to seek that
which is lost, and to protect his flock from the danger of the wolf. Isaiah did
prophecy thus of Christ. Isa. 40. 11
He shall feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall grather the lambs with his
arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with
young.

This tender care Christ has over every lamb and every sheep that belongs to
his fould. If we are then his sheep, Ioh. 10. 3, 4.
we know his voice, we will hear it, we will follow him, and obey his voice.

Thus says David, I^sal. 23.
the Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want. If the Lord be our shepherd, then
surely our shepherd is the Lord Jehovah, under whose shadow we shall be
preserved, and from whom we shall receive all sweet consolation and refreshing.
Thus says the Lord by his Prophet, Eze. 34. 23
And I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my
servant David, which is Christ the Lord.

Fourthly, Christ is resembled Rev. 2 2. 2.
to the tree of life, which did bear twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her
fruit every month, and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the
Nations.

Now then, Cant. 2. 3.
if we sit down under the shadow of this tree, we shall find great pleasure and
delight, we shall be preserved from the heat of Gods wrath, we shall be
refreshed thereby in the scorching heat of afflictions and fiery trials, and
under this shadow the burning heat of our sinful lusts will be cooled and
assuaged. If we feed upon the fruit of this tree by faith, which is the body of
Christ crucified upon the Cross, and his blood powered out, it will be sweet and
pleasant to our spiritual taste: John 6. 5^
for it will ^e the bread of life to make us live for ever, Ioh. 4. 14.
and his blood will be a fountain of living water, which will spring up in us
unto everlasting life. The leaves of this tree are his gracious promises, which
will heal and cure all the spiritual diseases and wounds that our sins have
made in our souls, if we do apply them to every particular wound by faith.

Lastly, Christ is resembled to a bridegroom, and then the whole Church of God,
and every true believer is his spouse, and his bride. That is that which John
the Baptist said, John 3. 29
He that has the bride is the bridegroom, which he then spoke of Christ.

Now, there is a wonderful joy and rejoicing between the bridegroom and the
bride, and the Prophet expresses Gods rejoicing over his people by this mutual
joy that is between them. Isa. 62. 5
As the bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride, so shall thy God rejoice over
thee. Who can describe the perfect love of Jesus Christ to his spouse? who can
declare the loving affections of the bridegroom toward his bride? what
excellent benefits does he bestow upon her of his own bounty and grace, without
any of her deservings? though she has many spots and blemishes; yet he will
not forsake her, but will sanctify her, and make her holy, chaste, and pure,
fit to be his spouse, being adorned with his own ornaments of grace. This does
evidently appear in that excellent song of Solomon, where the admirable love of
Christ to his spouse is expressed, and also the entire affection of the Church
unto him. This is Christ our gracious Redeemer, and these are some of the
heavenly comforts that we shall enjoy by him, if we can embrace him by faith,
as our blessed Savior, and bridegroom of our souls.

We may now draw much comfortable matter from these several resemblances of
Christ, for the strengthening of our weak faith, and for the supporting of our
drooping spirits; also they will afford us excellent matter for our
instruction, to teach us how to demean our selves toward him; and where to
find true comfort in time of need. If we are branches of this vine, we shall
draw grace and virtue from him to make us fruitful in all good works, to walk
uprightly before God, and to live comfortable in what estate, or condition
soever we be. If Christ be our head, we will be directed by him in all our
ways, we will seek unto him for protection against all our enemies, for
preservation from all casualties, and dangers, and for deliverance out of all
our troubles: also, that we may receive from him some influence of spiritual
grace, without which we cannot move one step toward heaven.

If Christ be our shepherd, then we must be harmless and meek, as his lambs,
our ear must be open to his voice, we must follow him and none but him: Psa. 2.
2. 3
for he will make us to lie down in green pastures, he will lead us forth
beside the waters of comforts, and will bring us forth in the paths of
righteousness, and will also plentifully provide for us: though his rod of
correction, or his staff be upon us; yet they shall be for our great benefit
and consolation. So likewise, if we can shroud our selves by faith under the
shadow of this tree of life, it will greatly refresh our souls, and we may find
cure for all our spiritual diseases by applying the promises of the Gospel, and
the merit of Christ's sufferings to our selves by faith. But above all, if we
can feed upon the blessed fruit of this tree by faith, in the hearing of the
Word preached, in the worthy receiving of the Lords Supper, and in our devout
and zealous meditations on Christ crucified for us, it will nourish us up to
eternal life.

Lastly, if we are betrothed unto Christ by faith, he will then rejoice over us
to do us good, he will make us pure and holy, and will hide all our deformities
of sin under the robe of his own righteousness out of Gods sight, and will
adorn us with his own spiritual and heavenly graces, that we may be lovely in
his sight, and fit to be wedded unto him for ever hereafter in the Kindome of
heaven. We are also bound by virtue of this our union to love Christ with pure
affections, to honor him above all, and to keep our selves from spiritual
fornication, tha^ the may delight in us to do us good, and never to leave and
forsake us.

The consideration of these things is well worthy our serious and devout
meditations; because hereby we shall the better know Christ our Redeemer, and
we shall draw nearer into communion with him, who is the fountain of all true
consolation, and the only meritorious cause of our salvation, by that
redemption which he has wrought for us. This knowledge of Christ is above all
humane wisdom, and therefore 1 Cor. 2. 1, 2.
Paul came not to the Corinthians with excellency of speech, or of wisdom, to
declare unto them the testimony of God. For he determined not to know any thing
among them, save Jesus Christ and him crucified. Wherefore, if we can gain this
heavenly knowledge by our studies and meditations of Christ, we have enough to
make our souls gracious here, and eternally blessed hereafter.

Of Christ's Prophetical Office.
NOw we come to the several offices of Christ; from whence we may draw some
profitable matter for our instruction, and for our comfort. And in the first
place, God ordained him to be a Prophet, according as the Lord said unto Moses,
Deuteronomy. 18. 18.
I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, and
will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I shall
command him.

This is that great prophet of the Lord, Christ Jesus, who had not his
Prophetical gift by divine revelation, as all the Prophets had; but it was
inherent in him, and he had it from his own divine nature, and by his own
power, and therefore he needed not that any thing should be revealed unto him.
Christ gave some manifestation of this his office by way of prophecy: Luc. 21.
for he foretold the destruction of the Temple, Luke 19. 43, 44.
the great desolation that should shortly come upon Jerusalem, Lu. 21. 25
and also the signs which shall be before the day of Judgment, likewise he
foretold Mat. 20. 18, 19.
what should be done to himself in his passion, Mat. 26. 34
and how shamefully Peter should deny him; and not a word that proceeded out of
his mouth could fall to the ground, but must be fulfilled in due time, because
Joh. 14. 5
he that was the Truth did speak it. He Joh. 2. 24, 25.
did know the secrets of every man's heart, he knew who believed in him, and who
did not, and also what mischief his enemies intended against him, for nothing
could be hidden from him. Christ has given some glimps of his Prophetical gift
to his Ministers, to foresee the judgments of God that will fall upon a
Nation, or people, if they are above measure sinful, and will not be
reclaimed, nor brought to repentance; but Christ by his own preaching has now
put an end to the gift of Prophecy ordinarily.

If it be so, that every word which Christ has spoken must be fulfilled, how
ought we to fear and tremble at his threatenings? how careful should we be to
make our peace with him by sound repentance and turning unto God, before he
puts in execution what he has threatened? also how comfortable are his
promises, which in their time shall be performed, if we rest upon them by
faith? how can any affliction, or sorrow tire if we rest upon a promise of
succor from Christ? and how can we despair of our salvation, if we do believe,
that Christ has perfectly wrought our redemption, and has made our peace with
God his Father? Also, if it be so, that Christ does see by his divine nature
into the secrets of all hearts, we ought to be vigilant and careful to keep our
hearts cleansed, and purified from the guilt of sin into the blood of Christ,
by the daily renewing of our faith and true repentance, that no darling sin may
be cherished there: for he can see it and find it out.

But this was not the chief end that Christ did intend in this his office: for
he was anointed by the holy Ghost at his Baptism to preach the Gospel of peace,
according to this prophecy of him, Isa. 61. Luc. 4. 18.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to preach
good tidings unto the meek he has sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to
proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that
are bound, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, etc. Christ did execute
the part of his Prophetical office in the whole course of his Ministry, and
Mat. 7. 28, 29.
the people were astonished at his doctrine: for Luc. 4. 32
his word was with power, and he taught them as one having authority. His whole
doctrine was pure and divine, it was directed to the manifestation of his
heavenly Fathers will, and to the regulating of our sinful lives according to
Gods commandments, which he comprehended in this short sum, Mat. 22: 37. 39
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy mind; and thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Christ
did rightly interpret the moral Law, and freed it from the false glosses of the
Pharisees, for whereas that commanded only external obedience to the
commandments, according to their interpretation of them, as not to kill* not
to commit actual adultery, and the like; Mat. 5.
his doctrine adds internal observation, as not to speak angry words to our
neighbors hurt, not to lust, and the like And whereas the ceremonial Law
commanded to offer up a sheep, or an ox for our sins; the doctrine of Christ
does instruct us, to offer up a broken and a contrite heart, that our sins may
be washed away in the blood of Christ by faith, and to purpose and resolve the
reformation of our sinful lives. Christ's doctrine tended wholly to the perfect
service of God, to draw our minds from the vanities of this world, and to set
our affections upon the Kingdom of heaven. Also, it tended to the depression of
our spiritual pride, to the mortification of our sinful appetites, and to the
stiring up of our heavenly cogitations, to peace of conscience, tranquillity of
mind, purity of body, and the comfort of our soul: in brief, his doctrine did
contain whatsoever is necessary to salvation: for he did reveal the whole
counsel of God.

As the doctrine of Christ was divine and heavenly; so his whole life and
conversation was exactly suitable thereunto; for it was most upright and holy,
and a lively table, wherein was expressed the perfection of his doctrine. This
may teach all the Ministers of his word, to frame their lives according to the
purity of their doctrine, that their good example may confirm their doctrine,
and be a pattern for others to follow. Christ does still execute this part of
his Prophetical office in his Ministers, by the preaching of his Word, and the
virtue and power of his Spirit does also join with their continual preaching,
to make it powerful for edification and instruction, and effectual to
salvation. Wherefore our hearts and affections must be sanctified and seasoned
with grace, and our ears must be spiritually bored, when we come to hear the
Word of God preached, and we must faithfully pray, that his Spirit would
accompany the outward ministration of it, to make it profitable and comfortable
to our souls.

Examine now thy self, what impression the doctrine of Christ has made in thy
heart, which thou have often heard sincerely preached, and how thou have been
profited by it, what knowledge thou have gained in heavenly things, how thou
art confirmed in the truth of Gods Word, how thy faith in Christ is
established, what hope thou have of eternal salvation, and how firmly thy faith
is grounded upon the promises of God. Also, how thou art humbled for thy sins,
and what reformation of life it has wrought in thee, what patience and
meekness of Spirit thou have in thy sufferings, what zeal for the glory of God,
what constancy in thy trials, and what love thou bear to thy neighbor:
these and the like benefits thou may have by the Word of God, if thou art a
profitable hearer of it. If upon due examination of thy self, thou do find
any of these operations of the Spirit of God in thee, it is a sure evidence,
that he has made thee a profitable hearer of his Word.

Many did hear Christ's doctrine from his own mouth, and yet they received no
good by it; so thou may hear his holy Word, and be no whit the better for it,
if it be not preached as well to thy heart by the Holy Ghost, as it is to thine
ear by his Ministers. Oh, consider how many worthy sermons thou have heard
without profit, what thou have been taught, and yet not edified, nor reformed;
because thou did hear them with uncircumcised ears, and with a poluted and
unbelieving heart: for thy heart is naturally unfit to receive the heavenly
doctrine of Christ, until the holy Ghost does prepare it, and season it with
grace, that it may bring forth fruit unto newness of life. Hos. 10. 12
There is so much fallow ground in us, which is barren and unfruitful, that the
good seed of the Word of God cannot be sown to us in righteousness, to reap the
fruits of it in mercy, unt^l the holy Ghost breaks up this fallow ground with
the power of his sanctifying grace, neither can we seek the Lord, that he may
come and rain righteousness upon us. Wherefore, Ier. 4. 4.
we must be circumcised to the Lord, and the foreskins of our hearts must be
taken away, and the vail that is upon our understandings must be removed, and
we must be purified by faith, before we can be made fruitful, in an holy and
virtuous conversation, by the Ministry of the word.

Wherefore embrace the holy doctrine of Christ with pure affections, lay it up
in a clean heart, and ruminate upon it in thy serious meditations, that it may
abide with thee, to make thee grow daily in grace, virtue and godliness, until
thou come to a full stature in Christ. Consider therefore, and observe, how
thou art inwardly affected when thou hear it, what delight thou have in it,
and what impression of grace it makes in thy heart: for if thou delightest in
the Lords Sabbath, and rejoicest when his Word sounds in thine ears, Luc. 5.
41
as the babe did leap for joy in Elizabeth's womb, when she heard the
salutation of the Virgin Mary, because Christ was then in the Virgins womb;
thou art then in a blessed and comfortable condition, Isa. 58. 13, 14.
and thy soul shall delight in the Lord, who shall feed thee with the heritage
of Jacob.

Christ does also teach us what we ought to do, by his works that we daily see,
both of justice and of mercy, which are his silent Preachers, and therefore
they ought to be carefully regarded: for there is no act of his but is intended
for our instruction. Noah was many years in building the Ark, which was a long
sermon to teach the world of the ungodly what God intended to do. God 1 Pet. 3.
20
waited then for their repentance and conversion an hundred and twenty years.
while the Ark was a preparing. 2 Pet. 2. 5
Noah also was a Preacher of righteousness to them all that time, and did warn
them of the wrath of God, which did hang over their heads for their sins. Thus
does God also deal with us: for he does visit us with sickness, he does teach
us thereby to prepare our selves for the hour of dissolution, and to perfect
our account which we must make to the great Judge of heaven and earth at the
last day. that so we may willingly resign up our selves unto God, when death
shall part them from our bodies When God suffers us to fall into temptations,
then he calls us to pray for his assisting grace, for strength of faith, and
for constancy to stand out against the devil to the end, that he may give us
the crown of victory. If he does visit us with losses, troubles, or
afflictions, it is to teach us patience and meekness, and to humble our selves
under the hand of God, until he does deliver us. If he does chastise us for our
sins, it is to bring us to repentance. When God bestows his blessing upon us,
or removes the cross from us, Ps. 50. 15
then he calls for a thankful remembrance of his mercy and goodness to us:
howsoever God deals with us, either in judgment, or in mercy, it should
teach us to glorify him, as well in our sufferings as for his blessings.

Thus God does teach and instruct us what we should do, and how to obey his
will, both by his Word, and by his Works; and as our ear must be open to his
Word, that it may be conveyed to our hearts by the holy Ghost; so we should
daily observe the Works of God, and how he deals with us, that our hearts may
receive instruction, and our tongues may bless his great and glorious name.
Wherefore we ought to listen to Gods voice in them, that our hearts may return
an answer of obedience agreeable to his will.

Of Christ's Priestly Office.
GOd did also ordain Christ to be a Priest, accordto this of David, Ps. 110. 4.
The Lord swear, and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedeck. He was anointed to his office, not with the material oil
of the sanctuary, but with the spiritual unction of the holy Ghost, when he was
baptized, and he did execute it, partly by his prayers, which he did frequently
offer up to God his father for all his elect in the days of his flesh, and
partly by that sacrifice, which he offered up upon the cross at his death. Heb
7. 24, 25.
Christ's priesthood is unchangeable and eternal: for he is still our
Highpriest, and ever lives to make intercession for us; and therefore he is
able also to save us to the uttermost, that come unto God by him. Heb. 8.
We have such a High Priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of the
Majesty in the heaven. Heb. 7. 26, 27.
For such an High Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate
from sins, and made higher than the heavens.

When Christ did offer up himself a sacrifice to God, his whole humane nature
was bound to the altar of his Divinity with the cords of unseparable union,
and love, Isa: 53. 10
and his soul was made an offering for sin, as well as his body, which was
crucified, and his precious blood, which was poured out upon the Cross. Heb. 7.
27.
This sacrifice, though it were but once offered, was sufficient to satisfy
the justice of God, to appease his wrath, to blot all our sins out of his book
of remembrance, and to perfect for ever them that are sanctified.

This is also piously to be considered, Rev. 1. 6.
that Christ by his eternal Priesthood, has made us Kings and Priests unto
God, and his Father, 1 Pet. 2. 5
and an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by
Jesus Christ. These sacrifices are our prayers, our praises, thanksgivings, and
a broken and a contrite heart for our sins; Phil. 4. 1^.
also, our deeds of charity to the poor members of Christ, are and odor of a
sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable an well pleasing to God. Paul did beseech
the Romans Romans 12. 1
to present their bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is
their reasonable service: so that whatsoever we offer unto God, it must be
offered with a sanctified heart, which is washed and purified in the blood of
Christ by faith, and endued with sanctifying grace from above, and then our
sacrifice will be clean, and accepted of God. Though our prayers and praises be
imperfect, and come far short of that which they ought to be; yet if they
proceed from a sincere heart, and are offered up by Jesus Christ our
High Priest, then he will perfect them with his own righteousness, and present
them to God his Father for us, and we may rest assured, that God will be
pleased to accept them graciously.

Wherefore, seeing Christ has made us Priests unto God, because we belong unto
him, we must offer up our prayers and oblations to God, and not to Saints, or
Angels: for he is the author and the giver of every blessing and mercy that we
receive, he provideth for us food and raiment, and whatsoever is needful both
for this present life, and for that which is to come; he does protect us from
dangers, he does support us in our tribulations, and delivers us out of our
distresses, when we cry unto him with a faithful heart. We have therefore great
cause to ascribe all honor and glory unto him, and thankfully to acknowledge,
that God is the sole author of all our good, to whom we must return all praise
and thanks for it. Also, if our prayers and oblations have no relation unto
Christ by faith, they cannot be accepted, neither can we confidently hope to
receive a gracious return of them with a blessing, except we believe that
Christ our Advocate will present them to God his Father.

If we did duly consider, how much we stand in need of Gods helping hand, and
of his assisting grace, to carry us on through all the troubles and dangers,
that we shall meet with in this life; also, how God does continually follow us
with his tender mercies and loving kindness, we would not be so slack in our
prayers, and praises unto him; and if we did consider that our prayers must
mount up even to the throne of Gods Majesty, they would not be so cold, so
dull, and so much clogged with worldly cares and sinful thoughts as commonly
they are, which does hinder their swift ascent up to heaven: but we would
labor to be more heavenly minded, and to put more holy zeal and fervency into
them, and to send our faith along with them, which will soon bring them unto
Christ, and then he will present them unto God for us. So likewise, if we
consider how careless we are in the worship and service of God, how ready we
are to fall from him, how imperfectly our best duties are performed, what sins
we daily commit, and what wrath and fury we do justly deserve for them; we
should then be more humble, more affected with godly sorrow, and more careful
to renew our repentance every day; our sighs and groans for our sins would
proceed from our hearty contrition, and from true compunction of spirit, and
then our faith in Christ will give us a firm assurance of the pardon, and
forgiveness of them all: for thus says the Lord, Isa* 66. 2.
To this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit,
and trembles at my word. Also, Isa. 57. 15
Thus says the high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is
holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite
and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart
of the contrite ones.

Wherefore now, if we think to have our wants and necessities supplied by our
industry in our callings without prayer; if we think to be supported in our
troubles, or to be delivered out of our miseries with prayer; to be nourished
at our tables, or refreshed in our beds without prayer; and to be eased of our
pains, or recovered of our diseases without prayer, we shall either miss our
desires, or else we shall have them without a blessing. We cannot conceive how
prevailing faithful prayer is with God, if it be presented to him by Christ.
Thus says James, Jam. 5. 15 16, 17, 18
The prayer of faith shall save the sick; and if he commit sins, they shall be
forgiven him. And again. The effectual servent prayer of a righteous man
avails much. Elias prayed earnestly that it might not rain: and it rained not
on the earth by the space of three years, and six months; and he prayed again,
and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit. Genesis 20. 17
At the prayer of Abraham, God healed Abimelech, and his wife, and his maid
servants; and they bare children 1 Samuel 1.
By prayer Hannah obtained a son. Exodus 32. 11.
Moses by prayer did stop the flud* gates of Gods fury, that were ready to be
poured out upon his own people, for their idolatry in worshipping the golden
calf. By prayer we may obtain any blessings from God, and escape any judgment
that he has threatened, Likewise our interest that we have in Christ by faith
will make our praises and thanksgivings to God for blessings received to be
accepted; and will also make them not to return empty again into our bosoms.
If our repentance for our sins be without faith in Christ, it will give us no
good assurance of pardon, though we do express all the outward signs of true
humiliation; and though we break our hearts with grief, yet we can conceive no
hope of forgiveness without Christ: for Christ only must procure our pardon,
and bring us again into the love and favor of God.

Of Christ's Kingly Office.
GOd did likewise ordain Christ to be a King, according as he spoke by David,
Ps. 2. 6, ^.
I have set my King upon my holy hill of Sion. Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee. The Angel also that was sent to the Virgin Mary, told her, Luc.
1. 31 32, 33.
that she should conceive in her womb, and bring forth a Son, and should call
his name Jesus, who should be great, and should be called the Son of the
highest, and the Lord God should give unto him the throne of his father David,
and he should reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there
should be no end. But Christ came not to be a temporal King upon earth, but to
be a spiritual and heavenly King, to overruled and subdue all the enemies of
his Church, and to rule and reign in the hearts of all his elect by his Spirit:
for thus he says* of Pilate, Ioh. 28. 36*
My Kingdom is not of this world. Notwithstanding he did show some apparent
signs of his regal power and authority, when he was upon earth: Mar. 8. 27.
for he stilled the boisterous winds and raging seas by his command; Mar. 5.
he cast out devils by his own authority; Mat. 28. 6.
he triumphed victoriously over death, hell and the devil by his resurrection
from the dead, Act. 1. 8.
and by his glorious ascension up into heaven.

Christ was a King from eternity, Col. ^. 18.
and God made him the head of his Church at his ascension in the same nature as
he was our Mediator, God and man, to preserve and defend it from all adversary
power, and to rule and govern it by his word and spirit in righteousness and in
truth. Thus does Christ still execute his Kingly office, by setting up his
Kingdom of grace in our hearts, by restraining the power of the devil, and by
giving us a gracious ability to stand against all his temptations and wicked
suggestions. Also, Christ by his regal power in us does weaken and beat down
the power of all our sinful lusts, and evil concupisence, and of whatsoever
rebelleth against his Spirit, and he boweth our will by the powerful operation
of the holy Ghost, to yield him ready obedience, as our King and Governor, and
so to prepare us by the virtue and power of his grace, that at length he may
bring us to his eternal Kingdom of glory.

Christ is Eze. 7. 22, 23
that highest branch of that cedar, spoken of by the Prophet, who came of that
holy line by succession from Adam to Abraham, and so to David, and then to the
Virgin Mary, and he was of the same nature with that tree, but without sin:
him did God crop off by his death, and did plant it again at his ascension upon
an high mountain and eminent; when he made him the head of his Church, which
became a goodly cedar by the promulgation of his Gospel, under whose boughs
every true Believer shall have protection from dangers, comfort in their
tribulations* and refreshment for their dejected spirits and sorrowful souls:
none are exempted from Christ; but all fowl of every wing, both Jew and Gentile
shall dwell in the shadow of the branches of this cedar, they shall be
comforted and protected, 1 King. 19 4, 5, 6, 7.
as Elijah was from the rage and fury of Iezebell, when he sat under the
Juniper tree; they shall be preserved from eminent dangers, Judge. 4.
as Deborah was from Siseraes great host; Dan. 6. 22
and as Daniel was from the Lions: and as many more of the servants of God have
been preserved in their greatest perils. John calls this goodly cedar Rev. 22.
2.
the tree of life, whose leaves are for the healing of the Nations: for they
have a sovereign virtue to heal and cure all the spiritual diseases of our
souls, if we can rightly apply to our selves by a true faith the promises of
the Gospel, and the merits of Christ crucified for us. We need not then fear
the power, or malice of our spiritual enemies, or the dangers that are incident
to us in this life* if we can shroud our selves under the shadow of this tree.
Here is great consol^tion for our poor souls against the condemnation of sin,
the fierceness of Gods wrath, the fear of death, and against the devil, who
has the power of death; because Christ is our King, our head, and a tree of
life to us, to comfort us in all our miseries, to strengthen us against all the
assaults of the devil, to cure us of all the wounds that sin has made in our
souls, to shelter us from the wrath of God, and to bring us to eternal life.

Though Rev. ^8. 16
Christ be King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and has the command over all
created power and principalities; yet when he was in the flesh, he did vail the
glory of his Deity with our nature, and laid aside his regal power and
authority, Phil. 3. 7, 8
and made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, he
humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross:
and the more he suffered, the more did his innocence appear, and the greater
was his honor in the conquest that he got over all his enemies, that he might
strengthen us in our sufferings with assured hope of a glorious victory over
all our spiritual enemies, though sometimes we may be foiled by them; and also
to comfort us in all sadness of spirit, and in whatsoever we shall suffer for
his Names sake. It is no dishonor to us to be made like unto Christ our head,
though it be as he was in the lowest degree of his humiliation, when he was
made the scorn of men: 2 Timothy 2. 12.
for if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him: he has gone before
us in the same steps, to make the rugged path of afflictions plain and smooth
to us. Jam. 4. 7.
If we resist the devil, with the shield of faith, Christ our King will make
him fly from us. If we cease not to labor and strive against our sins and
corruptions, though our natural strength cannot overcome them, yet Christ will
give us strength of grace in his good time to subdue them: for he will not
suffer any enemy to overthrow his Kingdom of grace, if once it be planted in
our hearts; but he will keep and defend it from the spoilers: and though the
devil does take advantage of our sins, and thereby seeks to root out that
spiritual seed of grace which is in us; yet he shall never prevail: for it is
grounded upon an immortal foundation, which cannot be overthrown; it may be
shaken with his boistrous and violent temptation, but it shall never be cast
down; because our faith is built upon a sure rock, which is Christ Jesus our
King and head. If sorrows and crosses breaks in upon us, which we could not
prevent, nor avoid, we need not fear: for we shall see the salvation of Christ,
either in our strength and patience to bear them meekly, or in our deliverance
out of them, or else he will sanctify them to our good. We need not cark and
care for the things of this life; but when we have done our best endeavor in
an honest and lawful calling, we must leave the event and success to God, which
peculiarly belongs unto him, and then he will have a care of us: Deuteronomy. 8. 3.
for man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of the Lord. Luc. 12. 24
God feeds the young ravens, when they cry unto him; then much more will he
feed us: for it is part of his Kingly office, to provide all things that are
needful for those that belong unto him. Shall not the head provide for the
members of the same body? and shall not Christ provide for us, who have nearer
relation to him by faith.

Now try and examine thy self, search into thine own soul, to see if Christ
has set up his scepter of righteousness in thy heart, to bear rule in thine
affections, to regulate thy crooked and perverse will, and to bring unto his
subjection whatsoever resists, or rebelleth against the Spirit of grace. If
thou do find the fruits of sanctifying grace in thee, then make a further
scrutiny, to see unto what measure of grace thou have attained. What corruption
has it mortified in thee? what strong holds of sinful lusts has it beaten
down? how is the body of sin dismembered and weakened? how strong is thy faith,
to rest and depend upon Christ in all difficulties and dangers? can thou
joyfully bear the scandal of the Cross? can thou meekly bear the loss of thy
friends, of thy liberty, or estate for his sake? have thou faith and patience
to suffer afflictions, persecution, sword, or famine for him? and can thou
resist unto blood, if Christ thy King shall call thee to it? then it is an
evident sign, that his Kingdom of grace is well established in thy heart, and
hereafter thou shall have a large inheritance in his Kingdom of glory. Pet. 1.
10
Wherefore give all diligence to make thy calling and election sure, that thou
may be invested into his Kingdom of grace here, which will bring thee
hereafter to eternal blessedness in the Kingdom of heaven.

Now set thy mind and the meditations of thy heart upon Christ, as he is thy
King, and resolve with an holy resolution to submit thy self to his rule and
government, to be directed by him in all thy ways, and to expres thy
thankfulness to him for his great care of thee, who by his divine providence
disposes all things for thy good. If troubles and calamities follow thee like
the billows of the Sea, Christ will calm them: if they are ready to overwhelm
thee, then even then will Christ take thee by the hand, Mat. 14. 31
as he did Peter upon the sea, and will keep thee from sinking. If God looks
angerly upon thee for thy sins, Christ will appease his wrath, and make
intercession for thee. If death looks upon thee with a grim countenance, and is
ready to bereave thee of thy soul, and to expose thy body to the worms; yet
know with holy Job, Job 19. 25
that thy Redeemer lives: also, Luc* 6. 22.
that he will give his Angels charge to carry thy soul up into Abraham's bosom,
and at length he will raise up thy body out of the dust, and will make it a
glorious and incorruptible body, fit to live and reign with him for ever. Thus
and much more will Christ do for all those that have any relation to him by
faith, or that belong to his spiritual Kingdom, for the honor of his great
Name, and for the eternal good of his Church.

Of the Passion of Christ.
When Christ had finished his Prophetical office in his Ministry, and had
wrought so many miracles as seemed good to his divine wisdom, the time was
then come, that he must offer up a sacrifice to God for our redemption, which
was his whole humane nature, soul and body for our sins: then Romans 4. 25.
God delivered him up to the power of the devil, and into the hands of his
enemies for our offenses; because the guilt of all our si^nes was charged upon
him. For before this very time, neither the devil, nor his deadly enemies had
any power against him: this was the time which God had decreed in his secret
counsel, that Christ should submit himself to their malice and power, that the
work, which God had sent him to do might be finished: and when that work was
perfectly wrought, then God delivered him out of their power by his
resurrection and ascension. Wherefore we ought to prepare our hearts for holy
and devout meditations upon the Passion of Christ, which was most bitter to his
humane nature; because the wrath of God was poured out upon him for our sins,
and the powers of darkness were let loose against him, like so many wolves to
worry this immaculate Lamb of God, or like so many fierce mastifes against the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah; but the innocence of Christ did carry him through
his whole Passion, and by his own power he overcame the sury of all his
enemies; though they were permitted to torment and torture him at their
pleasure, even to the death. Christ suffered nothing for himself, but it was
for all those that were of the election of grace, the guilt of whose sins he
did take upon himself, and to pay their debt, to satisfy the penalty of the
Law for them by his death; and the justice of God by the merit of his blood:
also, it was to cloth them with his own righteousness, that they might be
justified in the sight of God. Therefore, let no circumstance of his Passion
pass without due consideration, Lam. 1. 12
Behold, and see, if there be any sorrow like unto his sorrow, which was done
unto him* wherewith the Lord has afflicted him in the day of his fierce anger.
How was the perfection of beauty stained? How was the Sun of righteousness
clouded? How was the bright morning star darkened? How was the Lord of glory
contemned, blasphemed, scorned, and spightfully used? How was perfect holiness
and innocence accused, rejected, condemned, cruelly tormented, and most
shamefully killed? And how was Truth it self despised and trodden under foot?
Can we think upon his Passion without tears, and mourning, if we belong unto
him? Can we ruminate upon it, and not accuse and condemn our selves, who were
the cause, why he suffered these things, and much more? For the guilt of our
sins brought all this evil upon him; our sins brought the eternal Son of God
from his glorious palace in heaven, to be of the lowest degree and condition
among men here upon earth, and to be exposed to all the ignominy, reproach and
cruelty, that the devil, and wicked men could put upon him; otherwise we had
been still aliens and strangers unto God; we had been still under the curse of
the Law, and under the dominion and power of sin and Satan.

Wherefore we have great cause to admire the riches of his mercy, of his
goodness and love to us; nothing could move him to do this for us, but his
tender mercy, and his free grace: for he saw nothing in us to move him to
pity, but our misery and wretched condition; this was the time of his love,
then did he cast his skirt over us to hide our shame, and then did he undertake
this great work of our r^demption. Now let the consideration of what Christ
has suffered for us, and of the great benefits which we received thereby, bind
us in a firm bond of love and thankfulness to him, and how to express it by our
due respect to all his Commandments.

The incarnation of Christ without his Passion could profit us nothing; the
purity of his doctrine could not edify our hearts, if he had not shed his
blood to cleanse us from our sins; his prayers to God could not avail us, nor
procure mercy for us, if he had not offered a sacrifice, and shed his blood to
satisfy the justice of God for all our transgressions; also, the perfect
pattern of his holy life could not bring us to the integrity of conversation,
if he had not died, that sin might be mortified, and killed in us, and if he
had not also rose again, to quicken us up to newness of life. It is therefore
the Passion of Christ that reconcileth us to God, that takes away the guilt of
our sins, that gives us power to mortify and subdue them, that pulls out
the sting of death, that brings heavenly joy and comfort to our dejected
spirits, and at length will bring salvation to our souls.

But an unregenerate man is not sensible of the bitter passion of Christ; he
can feel no sweetness in it, because he has no spiritual taste; he knows not
the power of it, and he can have no benefit by it, so long as he is in that
condition; because he has no spiritual relation to Christ. He lives in health,
wealth, and pleasure, he feels no misery, he is not afflicted with crosses,
troubles and sorrows, like other men; his mind is not troubled, and his
thoughts are not disquieted for his sins, they come not near his heart; and
therefore he regards not the afflictions of Joseph, he looks not after the
Passion of Christ, nor after the salvation of his own soul thereby; but he
blesses himself in this his condition, though there be no true comfort in it.
Thus the devil deludes him, and leads him on in blindness of understanding, in
hardness of heart, and in gross security, to the great danger and hazard of
his soul; unless God in much mercy does anoint his eyes with his spiritual eye
salve, to let him see his own sad condition, and to bring him unto Christ by
faith. Let no man therefore measure his spiritual condition by those outward
blessings that he enjoys: for a poor man may be rich in grace and godliness,
and a rich man may be empty and void of all piety and goodness. God does
commonly give more wealth to the wicked, than he does to his own servants,
Eccl. 5 3
and their large portion of earthly blessings may be for their hurt.

Consider now, O vain man, who blesses thy self in thy plenty, that thy misery
is so much the greater, by how much thou art less sensible of thy sin, and
the closer thou art joined to the world, the farther thou art from Christ, and
the more thou delightest in earthly pleasures, the less comfort can thou have
in the passion of Christ. Though thy riches and honors do daily increase; yet
thy sins will make them bitter to thee: for the least of all thy sins,
though conceived but in thought only, and never acted, will bring thee under
the curse of the Law, and will make thee liable to the eternal wrath of God,
and it will so pollute and defile thy soul, and so poison the whole man, that
God will abhor thee for thy filthiness, and whatsoever flows from that
corrupted fountain is unclean. Thy riches and pleasures will keep thee from
mount Calvary; where Christ was crucified, so long as thou delightest in them
more than in the meditation on the Passion of Christ. The blessings, which thou
injoyest, are curses unto thee, so long as thou art without Christ, and him
crucified, and continuest in thy sins without repentance. There is a sting in
every thing that thou possessest, which sting is the evil of sin, and it will
wound thy soul to the death, if it be not cured by the blood of Christ, which
he shed in his passion, and it must be truly applied to thy heart by faith. Do
not think that the mercy of God will save thee: for if thou have no interest in
Christ crucified, and neglectest the means of grace when it is offered, the
guilt of thy sins cleaves still to thy soul, and thou can lay no claim to
the mercies of God, but art under the severity of his justice.

Where is now the civil honest man's comfort, that thinks to gain heaven by his
outward form of godliness, without the blood of Christ? What is the condition
of the great men, and mighty hunters of this world, who think they are highly
in the favor of God, because they abound in all earthly pomp and pleasure, if
they have no interest in the passion of Christ? Surely, their condition is no
better than that of the Lacdiccans, Rev. 3. 27.
who thought themselves rich and increased with goods, and had need of nothing,
and knew not that they were spiritually wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked. If any cloud of afflictions and crosses does but shadow their
earthly felicity, it takes away all their joy, and it is ready to break their
hearts: for they think that to be their greatest misery; because they do not
see how poor, and naked they are of grace, nor the evil of their sins, how they
are holden in subjection to every carnal and base lust, and to every evil
concupiscence, which will bring all misery whatsoever upon their souls.

But let my heart still ruminate and meditate upon the Passion of my dear
Savior, 1 Cor. 2. 2
and let it be the desire of my soul to know Jesus Christ, and him crucified,
who is my wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption. For Heb. 9. 14.
it is only the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit, offered
himself without spot to God, that does purge our consciences from dead works,
to serve the living God. Also, John says, Rev. 1. 7:
that the blood of Christ the Son of God, cleanses us from all sin; so that
no spots, no stains, no guilt of sin shall cleave to our souls to our
condemnation; and as he in himself according to his divine nature was infinite,
so the price, which he paid at his Passion for our redemption, was of infinite
worth, and the benefits that we receive by him are likewise infinite.

If we are cleansed from the guilt of all our sins by the blood of Christ, then
the sting, which sin has put into all things that we possess, is taken away,
and we may comfortably use them to the glory of God; and Christ by his
resurrection and ascension has sanctified them to us for our good: riches
shall not make us proud, or ambitious, nor steal away our hearts from God; want
and penury shall not make us repine, or murmur against the providence of God,
to make us forsake him; but all things shall work together for our good: death
shall not be terrible, but advantage to us, and we shall sleep quietly in our
graves, until the general resurrection; because no guilt of sin will lie down
with us in the dust to follow us unto Judgment. Though sin has wounded our
souls; Mal. 4. 2.
yet if we fear his Name, the Sun of righteousness shall arise with healing in
his wings to cure it: for Luc. 10. 34.
Christ like the good Samaritan, will pour in wine and oil to cleanse and heal
it. Though sin does sometimes overpower us; yet Christ by virtue of his
death will subdue and kill it in us, and by the power of his resurrection he
will quicken us up to newness of life; and he will make our unruly passions and
sinful desires to be tributary and servants to us, by the power of his Spirit,
and of his sanctifying grace, Josh. 9. 23.
as Joshua made the Gibeonites hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the
house of God

Lastly, 1 These. 1. 10.
Christ has delivered us by his Passion from the wrath to come, and from all
the punishments that are due to us for our sins.

Christ did not begin his Passion, until he had fulfilled all righteousness in
his life and doctrine, that the Law required; though his whole life was a life
of suffering and of sorrow. But when he knew that the time was at hand, when he
must offer up his body a sacrifice to God for the sins of the world, Mat. 26.
21
he told his disciples, that one of them should betray him into the hands of
his enemies, Joh. 16. 32
and that they all should be scattered from him, and also what he should suffer
in his Passion: notwithstanding, he did not shrink from it, but did willingly
undertake it; because it was his Fathers will to have it so. Wherefore, he did
arm himself with divine patience and meekness to suffer whatsoever was
appointed in Gods decree should be put upon him, and he prepared himself by
prayer for that great work. This is to teach us to submit with all meekness of
spirit to the will of God in all our sufferings, how to prepare our selves for
them, and how to demean our selves in them.

God has appointed every man some work to do, and when one work is finished,
he has another ready for him: for God requires that we should be diligent, and
painful in our callings, frequent in holy duties, and industrious in his
vineyard. Mat. 20. 6
The good Householder in the Gospel rebuked those that did stand all the day
idle. Eze. 16. 49
Idleness was one of the sins of Sodom, which brought down fire and brimstone
from heaven upon it. This is one of the properties of a good wife, Pro. 31. 27
that she looks well to the ways of her household, and eats not the bread
of idleness.

God does not appoint to every one their work alike: for Paul had more work
appointed him, than any of the Apostles: 2 Cor. 11. 28.
for the care of all the Churches came daily upon him. Abraham had harder work
to do, when he was to offer up his only Son to God, than any of the
Patriarchs. If God appoints much work, he will give time to do it; if his
work be hard, strength, and ability to go thorough with it. Wherefore, if God
shall call us to any hard service, which is not pleasing to our nature, or may
seem impossible to humane strength, we ought not to consult with flesh and
blood what to do, but to be obedient to the will and pleasure of God, though we
can expect no outward help, nor support in it: for if we rest upon God, he
knows how and when to make us able to perform what he commands, and to bear
what he lays upon us. If we believe that God will assist us in his own work,
we shall set upon it with good courage and Christian fortitude. That we may the
better do any work that God commands, we must prepare our selves for it by
faithful prayer, and then rest upon the assisting grace of God with steadfast
hope, that he will both help us in it, and will bless and prosper our
endeavors to his glory and to our comfort. Thus we should do every day in the
works of our calling; but chiefly on the Lords day, when we should spend our
whole time in his worship and service.

Now let our hearts faithfully meditate upon the Passion of Christ, and upon
every particular that he suffered for our sakes, and then we shall find the
bitterness of it: for the wrath of God was in every part of his sufferings, and
followed him from place to place, even to mount Calvary, until divine justice
was fully satisfied for all our sins: then we shall embrace him with hearty
affections, and our souls will rest comforted in the assurance of our
redemption thereby.

of Christ's Agony in the garden.
THe hour is now come, when Christ must pay the whole debt to God his Father,
which he did undertake for us; now is the time, when the justice of God must be
satisfied for our sins, now does God deliver up his dear Son to the powers of
darkness, now does he cloud the bright beams of his glorious countenance from
him, and leaves him to himself to encounter with the devil; because be saw the
guilt of all our sins upon him, and now does the devil take a double advantage
against our dear Savior, and with all his power and malice he does fiercely
set upon him in a single combat, thinking now to prevail, because God did seem
to discountenance him, and also because there was sin, and that very great,
which was laid to his charge: for the guilt of all the detestable and
abominable sins of all the elect of God was imputed to him, and the devil
knew how odious and hateful sin was in the sight of God; also, the devil knew
that such was the rigor, and strictness of the justice of God, that he would
not spare his own natural Son, if he found him clothed with sinful and polluted
garments. But the devil was much deceived in Christ: for though he had sin
uphim; yet he had no sin in him, he had no sin of his own, but our iniquities
were laid upon him; because he did stand between the justice of God and us, to
shelter us from the anger, and wrath of God, which was our due for all our
transgressions, and also to suffer whatsoever was due to us by the Law, to free
us from the curse of the Law: but Christ was no longer under the severity of
Gods displeasure, than until his justice was satisfied, our redemption
perfectly finished, and our atonement made with God. Notwithstanding the devil
out of mere malice to mankind, does labor to the uttermost of his power, to
hinder this great work of our salvation, which Christ was now about to effect,
by seeking to destroy our blessed Savior.

From hence we may learn to be afraid of sin, because the justice of God will
spare none, if the guilt of sin be upon them, and if they are not washed and
made clean with the blood of Christ by faith, but do sleep in their sin
without repentance. Also, we may observe the cunning and the malice of the
devil against the children of God: for he will then soonest assault them with
his temptations, when they are under Gods visitation, or when he does hide the
light of his countenance from them; because he thinks then to prevail, and that
they are then least able to resist him; whereas God does usually give his
servants most grace, when crosses or afflictins are upon them. But this is our
comfort, that the devil can prevail no more against us, than he did against our
gracious Savior: for Christ will restrain his power in regard of our weakness,
and he will hide himself no longer from us, than until we are truly humbled for
our sins, and that our hearts are cleansed by faith and sound repentance.
Lastly, though the devil did what he could against Christ to hinder us of our
salvation; yet he was not able to compass his wicked design: for Christ did
confound him, and did fully finish his great work, which he had undertaken;
although it were exceeding bitter to his humane nature: thus will Christ
confound all the enemies that seek the ruin of our souls.

Now did Christ feel the burden of our sins press so hard upon him, that his
very soul was heavy even to the death; now did God begin to pour out his wrath
upon him, and to let loose the principalities and powers of darkness to torment
his innocent soul; and now did God offer his beloved Son a cup of trembling,
and wrung out the very dregs, which he did willingly drink, because his Father
gave it him: for thus he said unto Peter, Joh. 81. 11.
The cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? Luke 22. 44.
His Agony in the garden was but a taste of this cup, and yet it was so strong
and so bitter to him, that his sweat was like great drops of blood trickling
down to the ground: so that an Angel was sent from heaven to strengthen him,
and to comfort him in the assurance of his Fathers love. For the sorrow of his
heart, and the anguish of his soul, was so great, Mat. 26. 39.
that he prayed three several times to his heavenly Father, if it were
possible, to let that cup pass from him; which was, that he might in himself
express unto us a true Passion of humane weakness for our comfort and
consolation, when our weak flesh faints under the pressure of grief, or
calamity: Mat. 26. 41
for the spirit may be willing and ready to suffer, though the flesh be weak.

There were many bitter ingredients in this cup of our Saviors passion, which
he was to drink for our sakes: for every scorn and contumely that was put upon
him, every blasphemous word that was spoken against him, every stripe of the
whip, every thorn that pierced his tender temples, and every nail that fastened
him to his Crosss, were exceeding sharp and bitter to him: because it was for
sin, and they were all venomed with the malice of the devil, and the wrath of
God went along with him in all his Passion, until he had suffered so much as
the justice of God required: but chiefly the fear of death did most perplex his
humane nature, by reason of the sting that was now in it: whereby he did
manifest the truth of his humanity, which was not exempted from humane
passions, though it was always free from the infection of sin. If Christ had
not dyed for us, we had reaped no benefit by his life for; our justification,
the loathsome diseases of our souls had not been cured, but Ephesians. 2. 1.
we had still remained dead in our trespasses and sins: for nothing could
kill the power of sin in us, but the death of the eternal Son of God, and
nothing could quicken us up in a spiritual life, but his resurrection from the
dead, and nothing moved him to dye for us, but his tender love and compassion
to us. When Christ was in the flesh, he had a share in all our miseries, even
from his infancy, and when he was to dye, he suffered more than any heart is
able to conceive; whereby he has sweetened the bitterness of our miseries, and
has opened a ready way for us to find comfort in our sufferings, if we can
make our title good in him by a true faith.

God does keep this cup in his own hand to give to whom he pleases, Ps. 75. ^.
and if he gives it to us that are his servants, that we must drink of this
bitter cup of affliction and sorrow: though the wine be red, and it be full of
mixture, yet we shall not wring out the dregs thereof, and drink them; for they
are reserved for the wicked. Christ our blessed Redeemer has drunk the dregs
of this cup for us, and has made it a cup of salvation, and a cup of
consolation, healthful and profitable for us in the end, though it be bitter
and uncomfortable in the taste. We need not then be dejected in our spirits,
when we are under the Cross, if we consider that our sufferings come from the
hand of the loving and tender Father, Ier. 10. 24
to correct us with judgment, not in his anger, to refine the dross, and to
purge away the corruption that is in us, but not to consume and destroy us.

If we conceive through humane frailty, or through the weakness of our faith,
that this cup is to strong for us, and that we are not able to bear it, we may
pray, and that earnestly and often, to have it removed, and to pass from us,
if it may stand with Gods good pleasure, to whose holy will we must always
submit our desires: for if it be not his will to deliver us, it will be his
will to comfort us, if we do patiently attend his appointed time.

This is holy David's counsel, Ps. 27. 14
wait on the Lord, says he, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thy
heart: wait, I say on the Lord. And again he says, Ps. 34 8.
Blessed is the man that trusts in him. If we thus wait on the Lord, he will
also wait to do us good: for thus the Prophet expresses the wonderful
goodness of God to his people. Is. 30. 18
And therefore will the Lord wait, that he may be gracious unto you. What can
more strongly move us to wait patiently the Lords time, when he will be pleased
to send us comfort in our sorrows, and deliverance out of them? Psa. 50. 15
God has also commanded us to call upon him in our troubles, and he has
promised to deliver us; and as he has commanded the one, so he will never fail
to perform the other.

But when the Lord gives this cup to the wicked, Ier. 25. 25. 28.
it is the wine cup of his fury to them for their destruction, and though they
refuse to take it; yet they shall certainly drink it. Sometimes the Lord makes
his own people drink very deep of this cup: for thus the Prophet bewaileth the
sorrows and afflictions of Jerusalem, Isa 51. 17.
Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, which have drunk at the hand of the Lord
the cup of his fury, thou have drunk^n the dregs of the cup of trembling, and
wru^g them out. But the Lord their God will take a time to plead their causes
when they repent, and forsake their sins, and turn unto him. Is 51. 22, 23.
Behold, says the Lord, I have taken out of thy hand the cup of trembling,
even the dregs of the cup of my sury, thou shall no more drink it again, but I
will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee. If God be angry with his
servants, it will be but for a night, joy will come in the morning: if he does
suffer the wicked to afflict them, it will be for a short time, and then he
will give them a double measure of consolation for their sorrows, and at length
will pour out his fury in full measure upon their enemies

Though it was the will of God that Christ in his humane nature should drink
this cup, and the very dregs of it, which brought him so low in his own
apprehension, as if God had forsaken him; yet his divine nature did so uphold
him, that he was able to bear it; whereby he has made that cup mild and
gentle to us: for all that belong unto him, must taste of this cup in this life.
And as Peter says, If judgment first begins at the house of God, what shall
be the end of them that obey not the Gospel of God? and if the righteous
scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? If God gave
this cup of trembling to his own dear Son, who was full of all good, surely
then he will not spare us, that naturally are dry, barren and fruitles.

Wherefore, look narrowly to thy ways, and walk circumspectly before thy God:
for if thy sins and iniquities breaks upon thee, and thou continuest in them
without repentance, God will put his cup of fury in thy hand, and thou must
certainly drink it, which will make thy heart to quake and tremble, when thou
do taste it; ^an. 5. 5, 6.
King Belshazzars countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so
that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against
another, when he did but see the handwriting that was upon the wall against
him: how much then will thou tremble, that must drink the dregs of this cup, if
thou go on still in a rebellious way against God, without repentance. But if
thou will seek the Lord betimes, and meet him by faith in Christ, and with a
penitent heart, he will be found of thee, and this cup shall either pass from
thee, or else it shall be tempered to thy strength, that thou may drink it
with comfort.

If we look upon our Saviors bloody sweat, we shall see the anguish of his
soul, and with what violence the devil did assault him: thus terrible was his
Agony, because the great Dragon, that old serpent the devil did set upon him
with all his power, and cast his venomous and poisoned darts to wound his very
soul, if it had been possible, and to sting him unto death. Though the devil,
and his wicked instruments were suffered at last to take away his life; yet the
venom of their malice could not hurt him: for as he lived an innocent Lamb
without any spot, or stain of sin; so he died a sacrifice without blemish,
holy and acceptable to God, and by his death he did vanquish sin, which was
the sting of death, and by his resurrection he did vanquish the devil, who had
the power of death, and also he subdued all the power of wicked men, and
perfectly finished the whole work of man's redemption. In this Agony Christ
found the burden of sin so heavy upon him, and the power of the devil so
strong against him, that his soul was heavy even to the death. What could be
wanting to add sorrow to his soul, when the great dragon of hell was unchained
and let loose upon him? yet by the power of his Deity he overcame him, though
he were forced to a bloody sweat.

If the beginning of our Saviors Passion was thus bitter and painful to him,
when he was in his full strength of body, how terrible was it afterward, when
his body was faint and weak, and his spirits almost spent? If the devil by his
own power did thus afflict his soul, how was he afflicted, when his soul and
body were tortured and tormented by the devil and his cruel instruments in his
greatest weakness? Wherefore, if he did sweat drops of blood for our sakes, it
is a shame for us to take no pains in his service for the advancement of his
Name, and to suffer nothing for his glory? We can sweat abundantly about our
pleasure, and profit, and about our affairs in this world; but we can feel no
warmth of holy zeal in our affection; toward him; neither will we take any
pains about the affairs of the Kingdom of heaven. We will not suffer our own
name, or credit to be blemished; but we hear the sacred Name of our blessed
Redeemer dishonored and blasphemed, we are not moved at it, but we can suffer
it well enough. Also we can profess his Name when there is no opposition
against it; but if clouds, or storms of affliction and persecution do arise
upon us for his sake, we are ready quickly to shrink from it: or if his enemies
strike at him through our sides, we are then much troubled, and we can bear no
smart for him, though he did sweat clots of blood for us. If this be our
condition, if this be our love to our Redeemer, and our faithfulness to our
Savior, and if there be such cowardice in us, that we cannot stand for him, we
do then discover too much ingratitude, and unthankfulness to our most loving
and dear Savior, and too much forgetfulness of his great goodness to us.

If we do well consider how bitter Christ's Agony was to his very soul, it will
stir us up to magnify him for his grace and goodness, and to express our
thankfulness to his praise and glory by our piety in the duties of his worship
and service, and by our works of love and charity* to his Saints in their
necessities. For if we comfort the comfortless, and relieve the needy according
to our ability for his sake, he will then comfort us when we are in any sad
condition: for he is the fountain of all true consolation, and he knows by
his own experience how great a burden it is to have a sorrowful soul, according
to this of the wise man, Prove. 18. 14.
A wounded spirit who can bear? But if we hope to find comfort in our griefs
and sorrows by secondary means without Christ, our hope will deceive us: and we
cannot expect comfort from Christ, unless we are truly sensible of the burden
of our misery, and that we have relation to him by faith: for nothing can
comfort us without him, What true comfort can we have in our riches and
honors, if we do not enjoy Christ with them, and if we have not made our peace
with God by faith in him, and by our true repentance? What ease can the best
Physic give us in our pains, or sickness, if God does not send the Physician,
and also bless the Physic we take? Yea, What Angel can comfort us in the
anguish of our souls, if God does not send him to give us some assurance of his
love to us in Christ? Though it be the will of God, that in sickness we use the
lawful means of our health and recovery, and in our troubles to use the means
of our comfort and deliverance; yet it is not his will that we should rest upon
the means without him: but first we must have recourse unto God, and with all
humble reverence make known our state and condition to him, and withal to
crave his blessing upon the means we shall use according to our several
necessities; and thus we shall receive from God what we desire, or else what is
better for us.

From hence also we may learn by the example of our gracious Savior, to wait
upon God for comfort in our sorrows, and to be constant in our prayers, until
he shall be pleased to return us a gracious answer: for Mat. 26. 44.
Christ prayed three times in his Agony, before he had any answer from his
heavenly Father; and as the bitterness of his Agony did increase, so the
fervency and zeal of his prayers was stronger. But such is the weakness of our
faith and confidence in God, that we are ready to give over waiting upon him,
when we are in trouble, if he does not send us help and succor when we expect
it: neither can we with Christian constancy persevere in our prayers, if God
does not grant our requests at our own time, and according to our own desires;
except he does assist and strengthen us with his grace and holy Spirit. For it
is Gods peculiar work to corroborate our minds, and to confirm our hearts with
a settled resolution to rest and depend upon him in all our difficulties and
dangers? otherwise we shall soon start aside at the fear of every temptation
and trouble, Also, such is our security and carelessnesse, that we regard not
the sorrows of the servants of God, we cannot mourn, though the Church of God
be in great heaviness through afflictions, we cannot watch, though we see
eminent danger; our eyes are so dim and heavy, that we cannot see the
judgments of God, that are upon a nation, or upon a people, Mat. 26. 43.
The disciples were asleep, when Christ was in this sharp Agony, Jon. 1. 4, 5
Jo^as was also fast asleep in the ship, when it was like to be broken with a
mighty tempest. Thus are the best of Gods servants subject to the like
infirmities and failings through the frailty of the flesh, which will sometimes
prevail against the spiritual part that is in them.

Consider further, that as the first Adam lost that happiness, which he had in
his creation, in the garden of Eden, which was a place of as much pleasure, and
delight, as the whole earth could afford; so the second Adam Christ Jesus our
dear Savior began his Passion in a garden, to repair our lost happiness,
whither Christ did often resort to refresh himself, and for his own private
devotions; and yet there the devil did seduce our first parents, and here also
he did violently assault our blessed Redeemer, to cause the one to fall and
sin against God, and to hinder the other in the work of our redemption. Thus
the devil lays his traps and snares in our lawful pleasures and delights, to
catch us at advantage, and to make us sin against our God, and thus also he
does endeavor to hinder us in our holy devotions, and in any special work
which God has appointed us to do. How then can we be free from his evil
suggestions? and how can we be secure from danger? Though we can be no where
free from his temptations; yet we shall be preserved from the evil of them, if
we keep close unto Christ by a true and sincere faith. Though the devil is
most-maliciously bent to do us hurt; yet Christ will restrain his power, that
he shall not do so much as his malicious will desires: Isa. 37. 29.
for he will put an hock in his nose, and a bridle in his lips, to pull him
back, that he shall not hurt our souls, though he may be permitted to afflict
our bodies.

Wherefore this is our singular comfort, that if the devil be any way too
subtle, or too strong for us, Christ will give us heavenly wisdom to prevent
his subtilty, and strength of grace to overcome his power. If the devil does
suggest into us fears and doubtings of our salvation to afflict our minds, to
disquiet the peace of our consciences, or to perplex our souls, Christ will
sweetly refresh and comfort us with more assurance thereof by faith. Also, if
he does call our sins to remembrance, and does lay them before us with their
several aggravations, to affright and terrify us, and to drive us into
despair, Christ will show us the clots of blood which he did sweat in his Agony
for our sakes, and the wounds that were made in his body, that our sins might
be washed away in the blood that flowed from thence, and he will bid us put our
finger by faith into the print of the nails, and thrust our hand into his side,
that we may not be faithless, but faithful to believe that all this was done to
our beloved Redeemer for our deliverance out of the bondage of sin and Satan,
and for our eternal salvation: for Christ will not suffer any member of his
mystical body to be hurt, or wounded by the devil or wicked men to the anger
of their souls. It is a great honor to us, if we are made conformable to our
head Christ in his sufferings: Romans 8. 17 2 Timothy 2. 12.
if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. Let the devil rage what
he will; yet he can do nothing until his hour of permission be come, and then
he can do no more, but what Christ will suffer him to do, and that will be
according to our strength of grace, and not according to his malicious will and
purpose.

Concerning the fidelity of Peter, and the treachery of Judas.
NOw behold and see, how the sorrows of our sweet Savior comes upon him Job. 1.
like Jobs messengers, and like the throws of a woman in travel: for no sooner
was he out of his sharp Agony, and bloody sweat, and a little refresht with
the comfort of an Angel; but presently Luke 22.
a band of rude and cruel soldiers sent from the chief priest, and rulers of
the Jews, was ready at hand to apprehend him, and Judas one of his disciples,
who sold him for a prey to the blood thirsty Jews, was their guide to conduct
them to the place were Jesus was, and he gave them a sign how they should know
him, and also a watchword to hold him fast. But when Peter saw that his dear
Master was apprehended, and ready to be carried away by that base multitude;
his love and zeal to him was so inflamed, that he did hazard his own life in
his cause, and he cut off the Highpriests servants ear with his sword in his
masters defense; but Christ rebuked him for it, saying, Mat. 26, 52, 53.
Put up again thy sword into his place: think thou, that I cannot now pray
to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of
Angels? Yea, he was able by his own divine power to defend himself from them
all: for by the power of his word his enemies were smitten to the ground. But
to show how ready he was to obey his heavenly Fathers will, and to finish the
work of man's redemption, for which cause he was sent into the world, he did
meekly as a Lamb, submit to his Fathers will, and suffer himself to be bound,
and led away to Annas the High Priest.

Now we may see, that an holy and religious master may have a wicked, or
ungodly servant, though the example of his own life, and his discipline in his
family be pious and godly. 2 King 5.
Elisha the Prophet had a covetous Gehazi* Philemon had an unfaithful and
unprofitable Onesimus, until Paul did work upon him and convert him to the
faith. So likewise a good servant does sometimes dwell in the house of an
irreligious and ungodly master. Genesis 39.
Potiphar had a faithful and a chaste Joseph in his house. Naaman had a virtuous
maid in his 2 King. 5.
family; and there were Saints in Cesars household, Phil. 4. 22.
who sent their salutations to the Philippians, Also, a godly and religious
father has often times a wicked and ungracious son, Adam had a wicked Cain* Noah
had a cursed Cham. Abraham had a scoffing Ishmael, Isaac had a profane Esau,
and David also had an incestuous Amnon, and a rebellious Absalom: for good
education and holy instructions cannot make children to be virtuous and godly,
unless the holy Ghost does season their hearts with grace.

If we settle and compose our thoughts to ruminate seriously upon these two
disciples of Christ, we shall see the damnable treason of wretched Judas, and
the courageous boldness of blessed Peter. Both of them did hear the heavenly
doctrine that Christ preached; yet they were not alike edified by it: for it
was as good seed sown in good ground to Peter, which brought forth fruit unto
holiness and righteousness; but to Judas that good seed was sown in barren
ground: for his heart was stony, full of unbelief, and void of all grace and
goodness, and could not receive it: the preaching of Christ was but as a bare
sound to his ear, which did not profit him to salvation; because the holy Ghost
did not spiritually bore his ear and convey it to his heart. They did also see
the great miracles that Christ wrought; but they were not alike instructed by
them: for Peter by the eye of his faith did thereby see his Deity, and did
believe and confess, that he was the Christ, the Son of the ever-living God;
but Judas could see no more of Christ but his humane nature, though he might
conceive him to be a great Prophet.

These two Disciples were like Genesis 25. 23, 24.
the twins in Rebeckahs womb: Romans 9. 13.
for God loved Jacob, but he hated Esau; so Christ loved Peter, Joh. 6. 70.
but Judas was a devil. For the devil entered into him, and took possession of
his heart; and then he plotted and contrived how to betray his most gracious
and loving Master, whom he knew to be blameless, and free from any offense;
and his treason was carried on in a most deceitful and malicious way against
him: Mat. 26. 15.
for he betrayed him to the Rulers of the Jews for a small sum of money, who
were his deadly enemies, and sought his life; and to color his devilish
mischief, he betrayed him to the Soldiers with a kiss. Thus apt was Judas to
learn any wickedness in the devils school; but he could learn no goodness in
the school of Christ, though Christ himself was the schoolmaster. But such was
the faithfulness of Peter to his dear Lord, that he would not be danted at the
band of Soldiers, neither would he shrink from him when he was in this danger,
but did greatly jeopard his own life for his Masters safety.

If it be so, that the devil teaches wicked and ungodly men, to hide their
mischievous designs under some pretense of love and kindness, we shall hardly
escape their snares: for we cannot tell what is intended under a fair show of
friendship, and we cannot be free from danger, when it lurketh so privily under
plausible pretenses. Abner did not suspect that Joab intended to kill him, 2 Samuel 3. 27.
when he took him aside in the gate to speak with him quietly. Joab also
saluted Amasa with these kind words, 2 Samuel 20. 9, 10.
Art thou in health my brother? and he took him by the beard with the right
hand to kiss him, and then he smote him with his sword, and he died. 2 Samuel
13. 28, 29.
Thus treacherously did Absalom kill his brother Amnon, when he invited him to
a feast in his own house. The Disciples did little think that Judas betrayed
his Master when he came and saluted him with a kiss; but Christ knew it, who is
the searcher of all hearts, and none but he could know it; for he knew what he
had done with the Rulers, what compact and bargain he had made with them, and
what he did further purpose and intend to do, and therefore he said unto him,
Luke 22. 4^.
Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss? Thus says a reverent
Divine; It is a special cunning of the devil, and it is full of danger, to put
a smiling, and an alluring countenance upon his baits, as he does by his
temptations of profit and gain, which, like unseen bullets, wound and kill
before they are discerned; or like the viper, that, putting us to no pain,
brings us into a pleasing slumber of security, which ends in the dead sleep
of death and condemnation. For prosperity and worldly allurements hide
hostility under the pretense of friendship, and makes us love the weapons that
hurt us, and to refuse the means whereby we may be cured; and these make
conquest not only of our power and strength, but also of our hearts, wills,
and affections, and they retain us in a voluntary servitude, having no desire
to come out of this pleasing bondage, or to recover our liberty, though the
means be offered to us. This is the policy, and subtle cunning of the devil,
to beguile poor souls with such fair pretenses; for in their smiles and
fawnings he does secretly attempt their ruin and destruction.

Consider further, Mat. 10. 1, 8.
that when Jesus sent forth his twelve Disciples to preach, he gave unto them
all power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, to heal all manner of
sickness, and all manner of disease, to cleanse the lepers, and to raise the
dead; they had freely received these gifts of him, and therefore they should
freely dispense them. Judas had the same power, and received the same gifts
with the rest of the Disciples; but because his heart was not seasoned with
sanctifying grace, though he did cure others, yet he could not cure himself,
and though 1 Cor. 9. 29.
he did preach to others, yet he himself was a castaway: he had the gift of
preaching, but not the grace of preaching; he had faith to work miracles, but
not the grace of faith unto justification, and to rest and confide in Christ
for his salvation.

These gifts of the holy Ghost are sometimes given to unregenerate men, and yet
they are no whit nearer to the Kingdom of Heaven. Wherefore let no man rest
secure of his salvation, because he has such excellent gifts; for except the
holy Ghost does confer sanctifying grace with his gifts, they will not be
effectual to salvation. We may have the gift of prayer, of temperance, of
continency, of patience, and of all moral virtues; and yet if we have not the
grace of prayer, that we can pray in faith, and the grace of all other virtues,
as being the fruits of faith, they will not be acceptable to God, nor
profitable to us for the salvation of our souls. Wherefore if God has given
us the gifts of his Spirit, and the means of grace, we ought to use his gifts
to his glory, and to improve the means of grace for the sanctifying of his
gifts unto us, that we may (...) to eternal life.

Let this be our daily study, and constant care, to enrich our souls with true
saving grace, and then the devil cannot so easily undermine us, and we shall
be so watchful over our ways, that no iniquity shall cleave to our souls. For
if the devil can fasten any one sin upon us, he will soon link another sin to
that, and will draw us on from sin to sin, until they make a strong chain,
which will pull us down into the pit of destruction, unless we break every
link of this chain with true repentance.

Also, if we be thus watchful, it will keep us from security, and from
presuming upon our own strength in times or places of danger, Psa. 119. 37.
and we shall turn our eyes from beholding vanity, and refuse the false favors
which the world does promise us: for the fear of God will be always before our
eyes, and then we may be confident, Psa. 91. 11
that God will give his Angels charge over us, to keep us in all our ways,
lest at any time we dash our feet against a stone, or least we stumble at those
blocks which the devil lays in our way. Mat. 26. 41.
Christ has commanded us, to watch and pray, that we enter not into
temptation; Ephesians. 6. 13.
and he has given us spiritual armor, and weapons of defense, which we must
take unto our selves, that we may be able to resist in the evil day: Let us
learn Psa 58. 5.
the wisdom of the Serpent, by stopping our ears against their charming
persuasions, and by suspecting most their malicious attempts, when with
greatest show of love they smile and fawn upon us.

We must now consider by the example of Judas, that unless the Spirit of God
does accompany the use of all his holy Ordinances, we may outwardly partake of
them, but we shall not inwardly be edified by them, neither shall we find any
spiritual consolation in the use of them, because there is no efficacious
working of the holy Ghost in our hearts: the outward man may be affected for
the present, but the inward man cannot be edified: for there will be no
illumination wrought in the understa^ding to conceive rightly of heavenly
things, no true conformity in the will to the will of God, no holy zeal in the
heart and affections, and no pious Reformation will be wrought in the life and
conversation. 2 The (...) 2.
All men have not faith, (as says the Appostle) all men do not profit by the
means of salvation, and all men are not edified by the preaching of the Word
of God. We may join with the Congregation in hearing, in praying, in singing of
Psalms; some shall receive comfort and instruction, others shall receive no
benefit thereby: we may also partake with them in the Lords Supper, and we may
feed our bodies with the outward Elements in that Sacrament; but we shall never
feed and nourish our souls to eternal life with that spiritual Grace which is
signified by them, except our hearts are prepared to receive it through the
sanctification of the Spirit; we may eat and drink the Bread and Wine, but we
cannot eat and drink the Body and Blood of Christ, but only by faith: our
souls may languish and starve for want of heavenly food and nourishment, if the
milk of Gods word and this spiritual food be not conveyed to our hearts by
faith, as it i^ to the ear and to the hand by the Minister; also if the holy
Ghost does not give us a spiritual appetite to it, that our heart^ may
spiritually feed upon it, it will not be the sweet savor of life unto life
unto us; but rather the savor of death unto death.

If the devil can bereave us of the benefits that come by the means of
Grace, and make us lose the opportunity of it, and can keep us from the true
knowledge of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, as he did Judas; he will then
lead us on in a sinful and wicked course of life, until he does bring us to
eternal perdition. Thus by degrees he brought Judas from infidelity to
hardness of heart after he had taken possession of him, until at last he fell
into despair, and became his own executioner for his damnable treason against
his Lord and Master: for presently after he hanged himself, Act. 1. 8.
he burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out. Thus did God
give him his just reward for his horrible sin and impiety against Christ, and
yet he was one of his Disciples, and had as much means of grace as the rest
had, and also as many common and external gifts of the Spirit, as they had, and
did see the great works that Christ had done: And thus will God show his
justice and judgments upon impenitent and notorious offenders, that are so
hardened in their sins, that no means of Grace can bring them to Repentance.

Now examine thy self, thou that daily see the wonderful works of God, if
thou can look beyond nature, and see his power and wise providence in them;
if thou can discern the finger of God, when great men are brought down, and
men of low degree are exalted; also, if thou can see how God will bring to
pass his own designs against all opposition of wicked men, and that he can
discover the hellish plots and maginations of the Devil and his instruments,
Plal. 7. 15.
and will make them fall into the same pit, which they have dug for others,
Esth. 1. 10.
as he did unto wicked Haman. If thou see these and the like things come to
pass, thou must believe that it is the work of God for his own glory and the
good of his Church. Peter did see the great works of Christ, and he did believe
that they were wrought by the power of his divine nature. Judas did also see
the same works, but he could not discern the divinity of Christ in them. If thy
condition be like unto that of Peter, that thou can see a divine power in the
great works that are wrought here upon earth, and that God by his wisdom and
providence can dispose of all the troublesome chances and changes that happen
here, either in Church, or State, to his own glory, to the good of his people,
and to the confusion of his and their enemies; then thou do rightly
understand the ways of God by a spiritual illumination that is in thy heart.
But if with Judas thou can no discern Gods divine power in his works on
earth, to overruled all adversary power, Psalm. 2. 2.
though they rage in fury, and take counsel together against the Lord and
against his anointed; then thine understanding is blinded, and thou lie open
to all kind of dangers, and distractions of mind.

Search again into thine own heart, thou that live where the Gospel of Christ
is sincerely preached, and his holy Sacraments rightly and duly administered,
and examine thy self with what affections thou do come to those holy
Ordinances of God, what grace is wrought in thee, and how thy faith is
strengthened by them, how much sin is weakened, and how thy life is reformed.
Also, examine what spiritual life thou have, what fruits it does bring forth,
what care thou have to nourish it by thy profitable hearing of the Word of God,
and by thy worthy receiving of the Lords Supper: if thou can give a good
account, that thou have spent thy time profitably, and have improved the means
of grace to the best advantage; then thou art a faithful servant to thy Lord
and Master Jesus Christ, as Peter was. But if this heavenly food will not
please thy palate, it cannot nourish and comfort thy soul, because thou have
some secret corruptions, or some beloved sin that keeps the sweet influence of
grace from thy heart, and then thou will reap as little benefit by the Word of
God, and by his holy Ordinances, as wretched Judas did, though he heard Christ
himself preach to him. Surely, God does still send down this heavenly Manna
(blessed be his holy name for it) and thou may gather it for the
nourishment and comfort of thy soul, if thou will; but if thou can find no
spiritual sweetness in it, thy taste is not then spiritual, but it is dulled
with worldly cares, or sinful pleasures, which must be purged out of thy heart
by the blood of Christ, before thou can with Peter take pleasure and delight
to hear the words of Christ, John 6. 68
which are the words of eternal life, and before thou can make it the joy of
thy heart to meditate on the Statutes of God. How can thou hazard thy life
for Christ, as Peter did, and for the truth of his Gospel, if thou art not well
instructed, and a good proficient in his School? And how can thou live a
spiritual life to God, if thy heart has not sucked virtue and power from
Christ by faith, who is the fountain of this water of life, and of this
celestial food to nourish thee up to everlasting life.

Look now a little upon Peter's zeal for his Masters safety, he resisted those
that came to apprehend him, John 18. 10, 11.
and smote the high Priests servant; but Christ cured the wound, and rebuked
Peter for it, because his zeal was not well grounded: for* he did endeavor to
hinder him in the work, which God had appointed him to do concerning man's
redemption, and therefore Christ said unto him, The cup which my father has
given me shall I not drink it? This may teach us, to drink willingly any cup of
affliction that our heavenly Father shall give us: for it must needs be good
and profitable to us, if we receive it from God, as from the hand of our
Father. Also, that holy zeal, or fervency of spirit in Gods Cause is a duty
which he requires, and his servants do practice it; yet it must be regulated
according to knowledge, and to the glory of God: for blind zeal will lead us
into many errors. David's zeal was rightly regulated, Psalm. 119. 139.
My zeal, says he, has consumed me, because thine enemies have forgotten thy
words. Number. 25. 11, 12.
Such was the zeal of Phinehas in the matter of Zimri and Cozby, which turned
away the wrath of God from the children of Israel, And therefore God gave to
him and to his seed after him his covenant of peace, even the covenant of an
everlasting Priesthood. If we have this holy zeal and fervency of spirit in our
Prayers, and in all other services that we perform unto God, he will hear them,
and will graciously accept them, and return us a blessed answer in due time.
Rev. 3. 19.
When Christ had rebuked the Laodiceans for their lukewarmnesse, he does
counsel them to be zealous and to amend: for this fire of holy zeal will take
away the coldness of our affections in our Prayers, Meditations,
Thanksgivings, and in all other our holy duties to God. This is one end of our
Redemption by Christ: for Paul says, Tit. 2. 14
That Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity,
and purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. But there is
a zeal that comes from a blind devotion, which will easily mislead us. Romans
10. 2, 3.
Paul did confess that the Jews had a zeal of God, but it was not according to
knowledge: for they went about to establish their own righteousness by the
Law, because they were ignorant of the righteousness of God, which was by
Christ

Wherefore study and labor for heavenly wisdom, and spiritual understanding
to carry thy zeal the right way, and to regulate it with an holy discretion,
that it may not exceed the bounds of Christian moderation; but that it may be
steered according to the will of God and to his glory, and not according to thy
passions, or to a wrong end. If there be an holy zeal in thy prayers, they will
speedily mount up to God, and be quick messengers to return thee a gracious
answer from him; whereas cold and dull prayers ascend up heavily to God and
they will as slowly return with a blessing. So likewise, this holy zeal will
put life into all thy devotions and duties to God, to make thee perform them
with a willing mind, and a cheerful heart.

Now look once more upon the treason of Judas, and see if ever there was the
like treachery plotted, or the like horrible fact committed upon earth, and all
for base gain: it was plotted by the devil against the eternal son of God,
and acted by Judas, his accursed instrument against his most gracious Lord and
Master; his heart was so set upon covetousness, that he lost his soul for the
gain of a little money: What did Judas now g^ by his bargain? What gain did he
make by exchanging his soul with the devil for money? this was his gain, the
horror of a guilty conscience, because he betrayed innocent blood, a reprobate
mind that could not repent, and the fearful terrors of desperation, which
made him hang himself.

Consider therefore how far earthly minded men will endanger their souls for
the wealth of this world. It is true which Paul says, 1 Timothy 6. 10.
that covetousness is the root of all evil; not in regard of the things
coveted: for in themselves they are the blessings of God, which he has given
us, and has appointed them to be used to his glory; but in regard of the
immoderate desire of them, the unlawful means that is commonly used to get
them, and the wrong end for which they are so eagerly desired; but chiefly
because they steal away their hearts from God: for they set their hearts upon
them, and prize them above heavenly riches, they stick not to get them by
oppression, or fraud, and they covet them to satisfy their own lusts, and not
to honor God with them; they do not think that the guilt of their
covetousness cleaves close to their souls, and that there is a sting in their
gettings, which will sting their souls to death, as it did Judas.

God does allow us to get gain by honest means in our lawful callings, that
he may be honored thereby, that we may live comfortably to do him service, and
maintain in the charge that God has given us, and also to be able to succor
and relieve the poor.

But if we covet riches for any end that is dishonorable to God, or get them
by any unlawful means, 1 Timothy 1. 19.
we do then make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience; we trust in our
wealth, and not in God; and thus we do voluntarily suffer our covetous desires
to tyrannize over us, until they bring us to perdition. How happy then is that
heart which is not affected to it? how peaceable is that conscience which is
not infected with it? and how comfortable will our lives be to us, if we can
rest content with that portion which God has given us by our industry in our
honest callings? we shall live without carking care, which otherwise in time
will eat out our spirits, and consume our bodies; we shall sleep without
trouble of mind, and though we possess but little, yet we shall enjoy the
blessing of God with it, which will make that little far better to us, than to
possess much, and not to have his blessing therewith. Also many rich men have
great store of wealth, and yet they enjoy but little of it, because they have
not an heart to use it: but they hide it as in a napkin, like that unprofitable
servant in the Gospel; so that God has no glory, themselves have no content,
and others have no good by their great wealth.

If we bring Peter and Judas face to face, the one will appear more beautiful
and the other more deformed, and we shall the better discern the faithfulness
and piety of the one, and the infidelity and wickedness of the other; the zeal
of Peter to his beloved Lord and Master, and the damnable treachery of Judas
against him: the one sought to save his Masters life, the other to destroy it,
though both of them were brought up in the same school. When virtue is set
opposite to vice, virtue will shine forth the more clearly, and vice will be
the more ugly. Pilate gave the Jews their choice of Jesus or of Barrabas; but
they chose Barrabas the murderer, and rejected JESUS, whom they could no way
convince of any crime, which made their hatred and malice against Christ the
more odious and detestable to all posterity.

Look now with the eye of admiration upon thy gracious and blessed Savior, how
willing he was to drink that cup of trembling, which his Father gave him,
whereof he had a taste immediately before, which put him into such an Agony,
that his soul was heavy even to the death, and his sweat was like drops of
blood; but now he must drink the dregs of it for us, and in our stead: for he
knew that we were not able to bear it, Christ knew that Judas would seek him
that night in the garden to betray him, and that he would bring a band of
soldiers to apprehend him; and yet Christ would not absent himself to avoid
it, neither would he use the power of Angels for his defense, nor his own
Divine Power to keep him from their fury and rage: for though by the power of
his word they were smitten to the ground; yet he suffered them to rise again,
and he did voluntarily put himself into their hands, to lead him away whither
they would. Thus meekly did Christ submit to his Fathers will: for he was not
of Elijahs fiery spirit, 2 Kings 1*
who called for fire from heaven, which consumed two captains, and their
fifties, whom king Ahaziah sent to apprehend him. The Disciples that were at
Cesarea besought Paul with many tears, not to go up to Jerusalem, because
Agabus had Prophesied that there he should be bound, and delivered into the
hands of the Gentiles; yet Paul would not be persuaded: but l^ke a true
Disciple of Christ, he answered them thus: Acts 21. 13.
What do ye mean to weep and to break mine heart? for I am ready not to be
bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ. Look also upon the admirable mildness of Christ, who gave these
friendly and familiar words to that wicked traitor, when he came to betray him,
Mat. 26 50
Friend, Wherefore art thou come? And again he said, Luke 22. 44.
Judas, betrayest thou the Son of Man with a kiss? These mild and gracious
words might have mollified his obdurate heart, and touched his conscience with
remorse, if Romans 1. 28
God had not given him over to a reprobate mind. This is to teach us meekness
of spirit, when our supposed friends prove treacherous, and when our kindness
is spitefully rewarded: for we are commanded by Christ himself, Mat. 5 48.
to bless them that curse us, to love our enemies, to do good to them that
hate us, and to pray for them that despitefully use us, and persecute us: As
Christ gave us this in precept so likewise he gave it us by his own example.

But this Doctrine is unpleasing to our corrupted nature, and we cannot hear
it, unless Christ does endow us with his Spirit of meekness.

By the example of these two Disciples, we may examine the condition of our own
hearts, whether there is the seed of grace in us to make us faithful to our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that we can stick close to him with Peter,
whatsoever we shall suffer for his sake; or the seed of hypocrisy, which
reaches only to the profession of his Name, when there is no opposition
against it, and when it may stand with their own profit and advantage: for
troubles and persecution will make an hypocrite forsake Christ, and hope of
lucre will make him change his profession of him, as it did Judas. We may also
learn from hence, That to live in a religious family is not sufficient to make
a good servant, and to enjoy the means of grace is not sufficient to make a
faithful Disciple of Christ, except the holy Ghost does change the heart and
affections from their sinful condition to an holy conformity to the will of
God.

Wherefore let this be the Meditation of our hearts, to express the truth of
our graces by our faithfulness unto Christ in all our sufferings for him:
Also, so to live in a religious family, and so to improve the means of grace,
that some gracious operations of the holy Ghost may be seen upon our hearts and
affections by the purity of our lives and conversations.

What Christ suffered under Caiaphas.
When Christ was apprehended they brought him bound to Caiaphas the high
Priest, as if he had been a Malefactor, where he was examined, Mat. 26.
spit upon, buffeted; smitten, derided, and most spitefully used; they sought
false witnesses against him, but found none that did agree one with another:
notwithstanding he opened not his mouth to complain, or to clear his own
innocence, that this prophecy of him might be fulfilled, Isa. 53. 7.
He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers
is d^mb, so he opens not his mouth.

His own Nation the Jews did offer those blasphemous indignities to him: for
they were ever a rebellious and stiff-necked people, Ezech. 2.
which made the Lord so much, and so often to complain of them by his Prophets,
and they were still maliciously bent against them, because they rebuked them of
their sins and rebellions against God: whereby we may see how near it comes
unto God himself, when his own People, and they that profess his Name, prove
disobedient and rebellious to him.

But they could find no fault with Christ, Joh. 8. 46.
they could not convince him of any sin, there was no guile ever found in his
lips; he did miraculously feed the hungry, he cured the diseased, he cleansed
the lepers, he cast out the devils, he observed the Ceremonies of the Law, and
paid his tribute unto Caesar; and yet their rage and malice against him was
full of cruelty, because he laid open their gross hypocrisy, and condemned
their vain traditions, and because he discovered the unfaithfulness of their
hearts, and the evil of their ways. Such was the wilful blindness of their
Rabbis, that they would not know Christ, nor acknowledge him to be the Messiah
that was promised, though his doctrine was most pure and powerful, and his life
suitable thereunto, though he had wrought many great miracles among them, and
though most of their prophets had so plainly foretold of him, which was
fulfilled in their days; for they stumbled at his low condition of life, and
could not see the excellencies and great worth that was in him.

Though the wicked Jews did use opprobrious words, and blasphemous speeches
against our sweet Savior, and though they did disdainfully abuse him, and
unjustly sought matter against him by false witnesses, that they might accuse
him before the Roman Governor to put him to death; yet he did show divine
patience, and gave not the least word of offense to his enemies,
notwithstanding they did thus strongly provoke him to it. If we do well
consider this, it will teach us, by the example of our gracious Savior, how to
demean our selves, when we are under the like sufferings.

Also, it will keep us humble minded and lowly, not to be puffed up with
spiritual pride, as the high Priest was; for then we shall give the devil great
advantage against us; he will blind our understandings, that we cannot rightly
discern that which is holy and just, and he will infect our hearts with
hypocrisy, so that others shall be seduced, and beguiled by our outward show
of godliness, whereas there is no sincerity in our hearts, and at last our
feigned holiness will be discovered, 2 Timothy 3. 5
because we content our selves with a form of godliness, and regard not to have
the power of it in our lives and conversations. Who were so proud of their
outward holiness as the Scribes and Pharisees? Who were greater hypocrites, and
did deceive more with their seeming sanctity than they? And who were more
cruelly and maliciously set against Christ, Gods Anointed, than they?
Wherefore we ought to be very careful to keep down that high mindedness, which
we are prone unto, if we are in any eminent place of authority in Church or
State, or if we have any gifts or endowments of the Spirit above other men: 1
Pet. 5. 5.
for God resists the proud, and gives grace unto the humble; lest hereupon
the devil draw us into his snares, to dissemble with God, in the profession of
his Name, and also with men in our dealings with them. We ought therefore to
look well to the integrity of our hearts: Psalm. 51. 6.
for God will be well pleased, if he finds truth and sincerity in the inward
parts* though there may be weaknesses and failings in the performance of our
duties to him. Hence it was, that Christ did commend Nathanael, because there
was no guil found in him.

Now look upon thy beloved Savior for thy instruction, and behold how meekly
the Lamb of God stands among those ravenous wolves, who sought to devour him.
Does not thy conscience tell thee, that the guilt of thy sins was as fuel to
kindle their rage, and to maintain the fire of their fury against him? were not
thou some part of the occasion that he suffered such disgrace, such ignominy,
and such blasphemous reproaches as were cast upon him? If thy sins had no
relation to Christ in his sufferings, thou can have no benefit thereby: if
thou do not firmly believe that the guilt of thy sins was imputed unto
Christ, and that he suffered for thy sake, as well as for all the Elect of God,
his righteousness cannot be imputed to thee, his sufferings will profit thee
nothing, and thou can have no good assurance that thy sins are washed away in
his blood: Ezech. 18. ^.
but thou have eaten the sower grapes, and his teeth were set on edge, thou
have committed the trespass, and he has suffered the punishment, that by his
stripes thou may be healed. Wherefore thou have no means to be justified by
the righteousness of Christ, and to have the remission of thy sins by the
merit of his blood, but by faith in him, if thou can apply him to thy self;
also without faith in Christ the wrath of God cannot be turned away from thee,
and thou can not comfortably rest upon his promises for thy salvation.

Christ does here teach thee meekness of spirit, when thou art unjustly
accused, spitefully reviled, and shamefully used; he does also teach thee
patience, when thou art in trouble, or in any necessity: for he suffered far
more in thy nature to be an example to thee of meekness, and of patience, and
to sanctify all thy sorrows and sufferings to thee. Wherefore let not thy love
to him be abated, because of his troubles; but rather increase it the more,
because he suffered for thy sake, and for thy good: also, let not thy
confidence in him be weakened; because he is now going to Golgotha, which is an
uncomfortable place to flesh and blood, and be not thou disheartened if thou
must go the same way, and must follow him in the same steps, and to the same
place, for Christ is gone before to sanctify both the way and the place to
thee, and to take away the bitterness of all thy troubles and crosses; and
therefore if thou will not go up after him to Mount Calvary, thou art not
worthy to ascend up into heaven to him. Wherefor labor for Christian
fortitude, and an holy resolution, that when troubles, sorrows, or calamities
do come upon thee, thy mind may not be dismayed with fear, nor thy heart faint
with grief, if thou must drink of these bitter waters of affliction for his
sake.

Consider now, Mar. 14, 62.
that Jesus plainly told the high priest, that he was the Christ, the Son of
God, and that they should see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of
power, and coming in the clouds of heaven; whereupon the indignation of the
high priest was such, that he rent his clothhs, he accused him of blasphemy,
and judged him to be worthy of death. His proud spirit could not endure to hear
such great things of so poor and silly a man as he conceived Christ to be; but
he was transported beyond the bounds of sound judgment with a kind of blind
zeal, or rather with furious hatred against Christ: for he would not believe
his report; though he had declared himself so plainly to him; according to this
of the Prophet, Isa. 53. 1. John 12. 38
Lord, who has believed our report, and to whom has the arm of the Lord been
revealed? This Prophecy of Christ was at this very time fulfilled, for now he
was brought into such troubles, and into such danger of his life, that none
believed what the Prophets had reported of him, or what he did speak of
himself, his Divine Power was clouded from them, he was as a man not able to
help himself, and his own Disciples staggered in their faith of him at this
time. This does often shake the faith of the best of Gods servants, when they
see the rage of the wicked, the perils and dangers that do round beset them,
and no power appearing to deliver them; because God does not reveal the
strength of his arm for their help and succor.

May we not now justly admire at the incredulity that was in the high Priests
heart, and at the blindness of his understanding, who would neither believe
the words of Christ, nor understand the ancient Prophesies, which he knew were
then to be fulfil^ed concerning the Messiah that was promised, which did
exactly agree with Christ, and could agree with no other? but the saying of the
Prophet was fulfilled in him, Isa. 6 9, 10.
Go and tell this people, Hear ye indeed but understand not: and see ye indeed,
but perceive not. Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ^at. 13.
14, 15.
ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears and understand with their hearts, and convert and be healed. Zecha.
11. 13.
The Prophecy, that he should be sold for thirty pieces of silver, and that a
potters field should be bought with that money, was fulfilled before his eyes,
and yet he would not believe. Also, Isaiahs Prophecy of Christ was fulfilled
at that very time: Isa. 53. 3.
for then he was despised and rejected of men, they hid their faces from him,
and esteemed him not: and yet he would not believe. He could not be ignorant
what great works Christ had wrought, and how powerful his Preaching was, and
yet he would not believe, but rather this did increase his malice and fury
against him. The Priests and Elders expected a temporal king to deliver them
out of their subjection to the Romans, but when they saw Christ in so mean a
condition, they were offended in him and refused him, according to this of
Paul, 1 Cor. 1. 23.
that Christ crucified was a stumbling block unto the Jews and foolishness
unto the Greeks. If Caiaphas had rightly understood the Prophets, he would have
applied their Prophesies unto Christ, that he came not to deliver them from the
Romans; but to deliver them ou^ of the bondage of sin and Satan; also, he had
then understood by the words of Christ, that he was both the Son of God, and
the Son of Man, and though he stood before him in a contemptible manner, and
though his enemies did then insult over him; yet they, even they should
hereafter see him sit in his humane nature at the right hand of God, and also
coming in the clouds of heaven at the last day to judge both the quick and the
dead. But he had no spiritual eye to discern the Divininity of Christ in this
his despicable condition, and he had no believing heart to give credit to his
words, though they were the words of truth, and of eternal life; but he made
them an occasion of his death: for presently upon this he delivers him up to
Pilate the Roman Magistrate, to be put to death for a blasphemer, for the
Regal Scepter was now taken from Judah, and they had no power to put any man
to death.

Here Meditate with pious affections upon the boundless mercy and bountiful
goodness of God in offering grace to all: Christ preaches salvation even to
those that did seek his life, he reveals unto them that were his deadly foes
the greatest mystery that ever was, to wit, the incarnation of the eternal Son
of God, the exaltation of his humane nature, and his glorious triumphing over
all his enemies, both spiritual and temporal at his second coming, which will
be at the great day of judgment. 1 Timothy 3. 16.
This is the great mystery of godliness: God manifested in the flesh,
justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed
on in the world, received up into glory, But behold and see the ingratitude of
most men, who will not receive the glad tidings of salvation, though it be
brought home to their houses, except they may have it on their own conditions;
if they may still enjoy the pleasures and vanities of the world, their carnal
delights and bosom sins, they are willing to embrace it; but if they must part
with these, and must have it with crosses, troubles, persecutions and torments,
and with such like encumbrances, they are willing then to be without it. Proud
men will not receive the Gospel of peace of such as are of no esteem, or
reputation, and Caiaphas will not receive the means of grace from Christ
himself, nor learn the way to salvation of him; because he was in bands, and
his spiritual pride would not suffer him to hearken to the heavenly doctrine
of Christ, as he was now in this sad condition, because he conceived him to be
a man of no extraordinary gifts, or endowments.

But be thou, O my soul, always ready and prepared to receive the Gospel of
salvation with all humbleness of mind, meekness of spirit, and with hearty and
pure affections, whenever, or howsoever it be brought to theee from Christ:
for this heavenly liquor coming from Christ, may be as wholesome as comfortable
and as profitable, if it be brought in an earthen Pitcher as in a silver Cup,
so that it be purely tempered, and that the holy Ghost does join in the
administration of it, to bring it close home to all thy spiritual diseases,
that by faith in Christ thou may be cured. If the Gospel of Christ be
sincerely preached, thou will find it full of heavenly comfots, and of holy
directions for a pious life and conversation: 2 Timothy 3. 16.
for it is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and for
instruction in righteousness, that thou may be perfect and thoroughly
furnished unto all good works. If thou do esteem of it according to the
condition, or quality of him that brings it, and not according to its own
worth, or the honor and majesty of him that sends it, thou do then too much
undervalue it, and do dishonor God himself that sends it: For God has
wrought mighty things by weak means, 1 Cor. 1. 27.
he has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and the
weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty. Also, Jam. 2.
5.
He has chosen the poor of this world to make them rich in faith and in grace:
for grace is the true riches of the soul, and this is the wealth which is most
to be desired. When God works great things by small means, he is then most to
be glorified. Judge. 7. 2.
God brought down Gideons Army of two and thirty thousand to three hundred,
that he might have the honor of the overthrow of the Midianites, that Israel
might not vaunt themselves against him, saying, Mine own hand has saved me.
The Apostles of Christ did many mighty works by their Ministry, though most
of them were but poor Fishermen: for they did not work by their own strength,
but they had their power and abilities from Christ: 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20.
for they were his Ambassadors, and the word of Reconciliation was committed to
them.

Peter's denial of CHRIST.
COnsider now by Peter's example, how weak the de^rest of Gods Servants are, if
he does leave them to their own strength, and how unable they are to resist any
temptation, if the Devil be permitted to assault them, and if God does
withdraw his assisting Grace from them in their temptation. For though Peter
but a few hours before, did stoutly oppose a Band of Soldiers in his Masters
defense to the hazard of his own life; yet now he is surprised with sudden
fear through the subtlety of the Devil, which did greatly shake and endanger
his Faith. We may very well conceive that it was not barely the words of the
High Priests servants, that made Peter fall so fearfullie, Mat. 26. 69.
as to deny his Lord and Master three several times, and that with bitter
execrations, seeing he loved him so dearly, and did so faithfully promise,
not to forsake him, though he should die with him. But the Devil put a sting
into their words, which did strike Peter with deadly fear, that he should be
brought into the like troubles, as his Master was then in, and also into danger
of his life: without doubt the Devil did use all means to aggravate these
fears in Peter by his suggestions; to make him forget his former promise, and
to abjure his beloved Master. For doubtless he did suggest unto him, That if
Christ were the Son of God, then surely God would not suffer him to be thus
shamefullie entreated; or if Christ were able to help himself, he would not
endure such ignominy and such blasphemies to be cast upon him; and if he could
not deliver himself, then Peter would bring himself into many perils and
dangers, if he did acknowledge that he was one of his Disciples, and the
Priests and Elders would use him far worse than they did his Master: Also, if
Christ had not some way or other offended, though Peter did not know it, the
Priests and Elders would not be so cruelly bent against him. These, or the
like suggestions the Devil did probably cast into Peter's mind, to increase his
fears, to weaken his faith, and to overthrow that confidence which he had in
Christ.

Thus the sting of that old Serpent went along with the words of a silly
damosel, which Peter did not suspect, and they entered so deep into him, that
they poisoned his heart with unbelief, and made him to deny that he was a
follower of Jesus, and also he began to curse and swear that he knew him not,
Luke 22* 31; 32.
though Christ had told him, that Satan desired to sift him as wheat, and that
he should thrice deny him before the Cock did crow, which was to make him the
more watchful over his words, and the more careful of himself; yet he did
dangerously fall from his dear Lord and Master, and he had not recovered
himself, if Christ had not prayed for him, that his faith might not fail: for
he knew that Peter was not able by his own power to withstand such a strong
temptation, but would be shamefullie foiled in it, though he was so confident
of his own strength.

When Peter was in this fearful condition by his great sin through the cunning
of the Devil, Christ did graciously look back upon him, and touched his heart
with his Spirit, Mark. 14.
and made him remember the crowing of the Cock, which was the token of
remembrance that Christ gave him. Then Peter knew how heinously he had sinned,
and then also he presently went out from that wicked company to avoid further
occasions of sinning, and wept bitterly, which was a true Testimony of the
sorrow of his heart, because he had so grossly denied his dear Master.

Here we may discover the frailty of the flesh, though we be in the state of
Grace, if God does not still uphold us with the power of his Grace: For our
passions will overpower us, our sins will prevail against us, and every
temptation of the Devil will make us let go the Anchor of our Hope in God, if
we had not the benefit of Christ's prayer, that our Faith fail not in these our
spiritual conflicts. Here also we may see what deep impression sudden fear will
sometimes make in our hearts: for it will sink our Spirits, and take away all
humane Strength and Courage. Thus it was with Joseph's Brethren, when they found
their Money in their Sacks mouth: Genesis 42. 28.
for their heart failed, and they were afraid.

The Canaanites were not able to stand before the Children of Israel, Denr. 11.
25.
because the Lord did lay the fear of them, and the dread of them upon all the
Land. Sudden fear will also shake the very foundation of our faith, and of all
other spiritual Graces that are in us, as it wrought upon Peter at this time.
This is an humane Passion that all men are subject unto; but a good Conscience,
and a watchful Eye are the best preservatives against it: For as the Psalmist
says, Psalm. 53. 4, 5.
The workers of iniquity are in great fear, where no fear is; because the guilt
of their sin lies upon their Consciences.

Here also we may discover the policy of the Devil, who puts his Hook into
such plausible and harmless Baits, as do give us no occasion to suspect any
hurt or danger, whereby we are easily brought under his power, if we have not
the assistance of Gods holy Spirit to escape them. Wherefore, we have great
cause to stand continually upon our watch, and to suspect our own strength, and
to be careful what we speak, and what we hear, what we do, and what we see
done, what steps we tread, and what company we come into: for there might be
much danger, where we see no appearance of it. Let Peter's example keep us from
presuming upon our own strength; lest God does permit the Devil to winnow us as
Wheat, that we may know how weak we ^re without the power of his Grace, and to
make us afraid of falling into temptations. This fear is not slavish, but it is
an holy and a true filial fear, which will keep us from all occasions of sin,
whereby God may be dishonored, and it will bring us to an holy care, how to
walk circumspectly before God in all Piety and Godliness; it will also restrain
us from all sinful desires, and put us forward to the practice of all holy
duties.

From hence also we may draw sweet Consolation to our Souls, though the measure
of our Faith and of other Graces be but small: for the Devil can do nothing
without leave and permission from God, who will not give him power against us
above our strength, but will restrain him from effecting that; which his
malicious will does intend and purpose for our hurt. He may be permitted to
sift us with his temptations, as he did Peter, he may bring troubles and
afflictions upon us, as he did upon Job; but he shall never overthrow our
Faith, nor quite bereave us of Hope: for God will so order and dispose of our
sufferings, that they shall procure our good, either to purge us from some
corruptions that we cherish, or else to make us keep more close to our God; and
this is our great comfort, That Christ has Prayed for us, that our Faith might
hold out to the end, though the combat we fight be very difficult and
dangerous, and our strength very weak.

Afflictions and Crosses will try our patience, Scorns and Reproaches will try
the meekness of our spirits, Want and Penury, will try our trust and confidence
in the providence of God, anguish of Soul for sin will try our Faith and Hope
in Christ, want of answer to our prayers will try the fervencie and
faithfulness of them, and the fear of persecution, or torment, will try our
constancy and perseverence in the truth. If we find any Grace weak in us,
Christ will make it stronger, if we sue unto him for it by our faithful
Prayers: For the Spirit of Grace rested upon him, that Grace might plentifully
flow down to all that have interest in him by Faith: Psalm. 13. 3. 2.
Like the precious Ointment that was poured upon Aarons head, which went down
to the skirts of his garments.

If this be our Condition, that we are daily subject to diverse temptations,
which of our selves we can neither prevent, nor overcome, we must then keep
close to our gracious Savior and Redeemer, who only can keep us from them, or
preserve us in them, 1 Cor. 30. 13.
and he will not suffer us to be tempted above the strength of our Faith; but
will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear
it. Psalm. 37. 244
Though we fall, we shall not be utterly cast down: For our Lord Christ holds
us with his hand, and he will raise us up again by true repentance, as he did
Peter. If the floud-gates of sorrows are set open upon us if the fear of
troubles, or the fear of death does surprise us, Christ will stop those
sloud-gates, and will comfort us at the hour of death; or else he will give us
an eye of Faith, not to look upon them with a sad and heavy heart; but to look
up above them to that celestial happiness which he has prepared for us, which
no eye has seen, no tongue can express, and no heart can conceive, and to wait
patiently for it, until Christ our ever blessed Redeemer shall reveal it to
us, which will be but in part in this life by Faith; but fully and perfectly
in the life to come according to every man's capacity. Also, if the Devil does
aggravate our sins, and sers them before us in a multiplying Glass to the
breaking of our hearts with godly sorrow, and to the anguish of our Souls,
which will make us shed many bitter tears for them, as Peter did, then Christ
will look graciously upon us, and will give us a double measure of true
consolation by the assurance of the pardon and forgiveness of them.

We may further learn Instructions by Peter's fall, that if we give way to any
sin, the Devil will easily draw us unto higher degrees of sinning, as he did
Peter: For at the first he did but simply deny Christ, then he denied him with
an oath, Mat. 26. 74.
And at last he began to curse and to swear that he knew not the man; and
therefore we must be very careful to nip sin in the bud, lest it lay us open to
the Devils tyranny, or stop the current of grace to our hearts, whereby we
shall not be able to recover our selves; but rather we shall fall away more and
more from God. Sin is a spiritual gangrene to the soul, which will eat into
all the faculties of it, if it be not in time cut off, and killed by faith in
the death of Christ, and by true Repentance. There is so much of the
unregenerate part in the best of Gods servants, as that they sin daily, and the
Devil is ready to take advantage upon every sin; but he cannot easily fasten
his sting upon their sins; because they are not glued so fast to their hearts,
but that they may easily remove them: whereas his sting will soon take hold of
any sin that is rooted in us, either by custom, or by delight, to wound our
souls even to the death. If we slight the least sin, it will bring us on to
greater, and if we be careless of small sins, they will bring us to a custom of
sinning, which will quickly beget an habit of sin in us, which is a fit ground
for the Devil to work upon, to keep us from returning unto God, and to plunge
us deep into the gulf of sin, unless Christ in his abundant mercy does touch
our hearts with his Spirit, to let us see from whence we are fallen, and does
also give us grace to repent and return to the Lord, and then we shall keep a
more diligent watch over our selves for the time to come.

If we look upon our selves in Peter, we shall see that we also are subject to
the like delusions of the Devil; we are as ready to deny Christ, and to fall
away from God, as he was, and the fear of trouble, persecution, or danger for
Christ will prevail as much with us, as it did with him, to make us renounce
our Profession and the Truth of the Gospel, and to bring us to the brink of
perdition; but Christ will not suffer us to fall into that bottomless pit, but
will look upon us in mercy, as he did upon Peter.

The Devil did delude Peter with vain hope, that by this means he should escape
the trouble and danger that might come upon him, if it were known that he was a
Disciple of Christ: for thus he brought him into the ready way to lose the
grace and favor of his Lord and Master Jesus Christ, and into the way that
leads to eternal destruction. Thus also does the Devil delude us, if we trust
him: for he will promise all worldly wealth and earthly pleasures, and will
give to some a large portion of them in part of payment; but in the end he will
pay them with wormwood and gall, which will be more bitter to them, than Peter's
tears were unto him. When we think our selves most strong, then we are soonest
overcome; and when we presume most upon our own strength, then we give the
Devil the greatest advantage against us. In prosperity we think our selves so
strong, that we cannot be shaken, we are then secure and able to stand
unmovable against any opposition; 1 Cor. 10: 22.
but let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall: For alas, we
know not the wiles of Satan, we cannot conceive how many ways he has to
deceive us. What way shall we then take to escape these wiles and deceits,
whereof the world is full by his means? There is a deceitful tongue, against
which David thus prays, Psalm. 120. 1.
Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue. There
is also a bag of deceitful weights, which is always seconded with a false
tongue, as the Lord speaks by his Prophet, Mic. 6. 11, 12.
Shall I account them pure with the wicked balances, and with the bag of
deceitful weights? For the rich men thereof are full of violence, and the
inhabitants thereof have spoken lies and their tongu^ is deceitful in their
mouth The wise man tells us, Prove. 14. 36.
of a deceitful Witness, Prove. 23. 6.
and that the dainties at a rich man's table are deceitful meat; because they
will easily entice us to gluttony: Also, Prove. 27. 6.
that the kisses of an enemy are d^cei^ful: for they proceed from a false
heart. Who can discover the deceitfulness of his own heart? or the delusions of
his own fancy? Every sinful lust and evil concupiscence does delude us, the
world is full of deceit to beguile us, wicked men have their wiles to vex the
godly, and such as are simple in heart, Number 25. 18.
as the Midianites vexed the Children of Israel with their wiles, wh^rewith
they beguil^d them in the matter of Peor, and in the matter of C^zby. If we
will be well fenced from these delusions which come from the Devil, Ephesians. 6 11.
we must put on the whole Armor of God, and then we shall be able to stand
against them all. This holy Armor will also defend us from all the delusions
of worldly vanities, and of our own sinful lusts; howsoever the world, the
flesh, or the Devil shall tempt us: for it will preserve and keep us from the
evil of their temptation.

Consider now that God, who can bring good out of evil, and can make all things
work together for the good of his servants, made Peter's fall to be a means of
exceeding great good unto him: for thereby he did see the weakness of his
Faith, to keep him from presumption; also unsusp^cted dangers, to keep him from
security, he did see the malice and subtilty of the Devil, to make him more
careful and watchful over himself, and he was the better able by his own
experience to comfort and strengthen his brethren in their slips and falls; but
above all, it made him love Christ his dear Lord with more int^re affections,
and to stick closer unto him for the time to come, and to be more courageous in
his cause. Thus God turned the evil which the Devil intended for Peter's hurt*
and made it conduce to h^s great good: and thus also will he turn away the evil
of our sins, and of our temptations, and the evil of our sorrows and
sufferings, and will make them advance his own glory, and to be profitable to
us, if we can bath our sins in our penitential tears, as Peter did.

Now we come to consider more fully how the devil went to work to make Peter
fall so fearfully: surely the instruments, which he used, were but the high
Priests servants, the words which they spoke to Peter were of no great
consequence, they were neither threatening, nor terrifying, which in themselves
could not so much afright him: neither was it only the sudden fear of danger,
or those wicked suggestions of the devil, though they did work much upon him,
to make him doubt of the Deity of Christ, now he saw him so contemptibly used
of the Priests and Elders, that made Peter fall so dangerously: for he was in
more danger of his life but a little before, and yet he was not daunted; but
the devil knew that Peter was of an hot fiery spirit, and violent in his
passions, which would easily make him say he knew not what, and therefore he
did chiefly work upon them which would transport him beyond the bounds of his
reason and understanding, and also beyond the bounds of grace and godliness
All that went before were but as engines of war, which he fitted and prepated
for this great battery: By his suggestions he did undermine Peter's faith and
confidence in Christ, to make way that fear might take the greater hold upon
him, that so he might by degrees bring him to such an hight of passion as
should overpower, his reason, understanding, faith, and all spiritual grace
that was in him; and thus he brought him to deny, to forswear, and to abjure
his dear Savior, even with execrations, whom he knew to be now about the great
work of man's salvation. When Jesus was transfigured upon Mount Tabor, Mar. 9. 6.
Peter spoke he wist not what: for sudden fear carried him beside himself.
Also, when Jesus showed his Disciples what he should suffer at Jerusalem, Mat.
16. 21, 22, 23.
Peter began to rebuke him for it: for he was carried beyond the bounds of
modesty and sobriety with a preposterous zeal, and a secret pride, which the
devil did stir up in him. Thus was the violence of Peter's passions the
immediate cause of his downfall, because they did exceed moderation, and were
not regulated according the holy will of God.

Thus also did the devil go to work with us to bring us to perditiou; first he
will set upon us with his subtle wiles and delusions; then he will labor to
undermine our faith, and trust in God by his evil suggestions and wicked
stratagems, that we should not wait upon God for his help and succor in our
distresses, that we should not depend upon his Providence for relief and
comfort in our wants and necessiti^s, and that we should not rest upon him and
upon his mercy in Christ for our salvation

If all this will not serve his turn to bring us to confusion, then he will
assault us with fears and doubtings to disquiet the peace of our consciences,
he will frighten us with troubles and dangers for the profession of the Truth;
he will make us doubt of the Wisdom of God to direct us in all our affairs,
that we may trust to our own Wisdom with our God, he will make us doubt of his
power to deliver us, when we are in any straits, as he did Peter, to make us
trust to secondary means without God, or else to use unlawful means for our
safety; and he will make us doubt of the mercy and love of God, when we feel
the smart of his rod, or the anguish of our spirits for our sins, to make us
think that God has forsaken us, that he has cast us out of his favor, and
that there is no hope of comfort for us, that so he may bring us into despair.

How was holy Job terrified with these doubts and fears in his afflictions,
Job 7. 13, 25.
when his bed did not comfort him, his couch did not ease his complaint, and
when his soul chose strangling and death rather than his life? thus it was also
Psalm. 77.
with Asaph and others.

If all other means fail, then the devil will work upon our passions, and
personal infirmities, and he will kindle such a fire there, as will devour our
reason, and understanding, as will mislead our zeal, and the affections of our
hearts, and will carry us beside our selves, and beyond the limits of Piety and
goodness; If he meets with such men as will give way to their passions, he
will easily inflame them with fury, and rage beyond all moderation, or else he^
will drive them down into discontent and despair, which is very hardly
recovered.

But by the wisdom of the Spirit of God we shall discover and escape his
wiles and delusions; by the power of grace we shall withstand his wicked
suggestions; by virtue of a good conscience we shall stand upright in the fear
of troubles, and dangers, Romans 1. 1. 20.
and the strength of our faith in Christ will carry us on cheerfully through
all afflictions, crosses and sorrows, and it will confirm our trust and
confidence in God, so that we shall find this of David to be true, Psalm. 22. 4,
5.
They that trust in the Lord shall be delivered out of all their troubles, and
shall not be confounded. 2 Kin. 1^. 5.
Hezekiah was delivered from Senacheribs great Army, because he trusted in the
Lord. If Peter had trusted in his Lord and Master Christ Jesus, whom he knew to
be the Son of God, he had never fallen so dangerously as he did.

Faith will also bring us to the true fear of God, which will enable us to
overpower and suppress the violence of our passions, though we be naturally
inclined thereunto.

Lastly, Faith will strengthen us against all doubtings, and distrust, when
Gods corrections are upon us: Heb. 12. 6, 7.
for whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and he scourges every son whom he
receives. If we endure chastening, God deals with us as with sons, Thus
says Eliphaz to Job, Job 5. 17.
Behold, happy is the man whom God corrects; therefore despise not thou the
chastening of the Almighty. Why then should we mistrust the love and favor of
God, when we are under his visitation? Why do we not put more confidence in his
power, to defend us? more trust in his care to preserve us? and more hope in
his promises to save and deliver us from our enemies, and out of troubles and
dangers? Wherefore if we do piously meditate upon these things, it will be a
great strengthening to our Faith, and exceeding comfortable to our souls in all
our temptations, sorrows and sufferings.

Consider in the next place, that as Christ appointed the crowing of the Cock
to be Peter's remembrancer of his sin; so likewise God in much mercy has many
ways to put us also in mind of our sins, and to call us to speedy repentance
for them, which we ought with all care and diligence to mark and observe. If
God does forbear and suffer us to go long unpunished for our offenses, Romans 2.
4.
his goodness herein should lead us to repentance. But if he does give us any
check of conscience, or lays any affliction upon us, they are as so many
warnings to make us remember our sins with grief of heart, and to bring us to
repent of them, that we may escape the evil which otherwise our sins would
bring upon us. But when the holy Ghost does touch our hearts, as he did Peter's,
he will work with unresistible power to make us think upon our sins with godly
sorrow, with true contrition and compunction of spirit, with hatred and
detestation of them, he will make us confess and acknowledge them before God,
and earnestly to crave the forgiveness of them by Faith in Christ, and to have
an holy assurance of it by our true and sound repentance. But if we remember
our former sins with delight and approbation, we sin them over again, and this
remembrance is sinful, and it proceeds from our corrupted nature, and not
from grace, which will never bring us to forsake them, or to repent of them.
When Peter came to himself, and remembered his unthankfulness to his Lord and
Master, and did see from whence he was fallen, he was wounded to the very soul,
and presently went out to seek a place where he might ease the grief of his
heart with his bitter tears.

Consider now with all pious devotion, how dangerous it is, and what advantage
we give the devil, if we reiterate any sins, as namely swearing, lying,
uncleanness, drunkenness, Sabbath-breaking, or the like: for it will fasten
the guilt of that sin closer to our souls, which will not be removed without
bitter tears; but will press us down to the pit of destruction. Consider also,
that great and crying sins require loud cries, deep sighs and groans, and many
tears, which we cannot pour forth, until we do abandone all our wicked and
lewd companions, and all former occasions that did intise or provoke us
thereunto, and until Christ does look upon us, and touch our hearts with his
Spirit, to let us know that he does take notice of them. 1 Cor. 16. 13.
We should therefore watch and stand fast in the faith, that we depart not from
Christ; but support our faith with steadfast hope and assurance, that he will
stablish us with his free Spirit, never to fall away from him totally and
finally.

But thou will say as sometimes Peter did, that though thou should dye with
Christ, yet thou will never deny him, nor forsake him, but do not trust too
much to thine own strength, though thou art in the State of grace: for if
Christ does not uphold thy faith, the power of Satan's temptations will prevail
against thee, thine own heart will deceive thee, and the devil will be too
cunning for thee. Ezech. 33. 31.
Thou may honor Christ with thy, lips, and yet in heart thou may deny him:
for if the power of a Christian life goes not along with thy outward
profession, thou do then dishonor his holy Name, do forsake Him in thy
heart. If there be such unfaithfulness in thee to Christ thy Savior, and if
there be such hypocrisy hidden under a fair profession, then every rumor of
trouble, or danger for Christ, every alluring vanity, and every delightful sin
will make thee turn aside from him Psalm. 78. 57.
like a deceitful bow; because thy heart is not well seasoned with grace, to
make thee stand firm and steadfast unto Christ, and to his truth against all
opposition.

If this be thy fidelity to thy Savior, and if thou do repose so little
confidence in him, then surely he will not regard thee, though thou do howl
and call unto him day and night, when thou art in any distress or misery. The
Lord complains of his own people, Hos. 7. 14
that they had not cried unto him with their heart, when they howled upon their
beds: for they did still rebel against him.

Wherefore let there be truth and sincerity in thy heart, that thy heart and
thy tongue may go together in thy Prayers, in thy vows, and in all thy
services to God and man: let thy heart and thy hand go together in thy alms to
the poor, and in all thy works of charity: for if thy heart be not faithful to
God, thy best services and duties cannot be accepted. Also keep thy heart
closely knit to Christ by faith, and then he will cast an eye of mercy upon
thee, as he did upon Peter, if at any time through humane weakness, or upon
the violence of any passion, or strong temptation thou shall fall away from
him. Thy heart is that which Christ requires: for thus he says by Solomon, My
son give me thy heart: i Prove. 23. 26.
give not thy heart therefore to the pleasures and vanities of the world, nor
to carnal lusts and delights; but only unto God.

Now Meditate seriously upon all the circumstances of Peter's fall, and thou will find thy self likewise subject to the like provocations, and to the like
frailties and failings; and learn instruction thereby, not to be secure,
because dangers and temptations do every where attend thee, and not to presume
upon thine own strength, for that will not preserve thee; but labor to be well
rooted in the truth, and well grounded in the faith, and love of Christ, and
then no spiritual enemy shall prevail against thee, and the cunning stratagems
of the devil shall not hurt thee, no fear of perils and dangers shall make
thy faith in Christ to fail, and no afflictions or troubles shall make thee out
of hope of the love and favor of God in Christ, but thou will resolve still to
be faithful to thy Savior, and to keep thy heart sincere and upright toward
God; and then Christ will restore thee if thou fallest, he will heal thee by
repentance, as he did Peter, if thou art wounded, and whatsoever thou fear
shall not dismay thee. Christ will be thy comfort in all thy sorrows, thy
hiding place in all dangers, and he will be thy defense against all thy
spiritual enemies, that they shall not overthrow the salvation of thy soul.

Christ's sufferings under Pilate.
NOw we come to consider what Christ suffered under Pilate, and how the
immaculate Lamb of God was hurried from the wolf to the lion, and from thence
to the bear, and back again to the lion, and so to the shambles, where he must
be slain. For the more his Divine graces did shine forth in the purity of his
life and Doctrine, the more did the devil rage, and the malice of the Jews
increase against him. He is now brought before Pilate, Luk 23.
and thither did the chief Priests and Elders come with their false accusations
against him. They likewise follow him from Pilate to Herod, before whom also
they falsely accused him with much vehemence, yet they rest not there, but they
returned again to Pilate with their hearts full of envy and malice, and their
mouths full of opprobrious speeches and blasphemies against the innocent Lamb
of God, to put him to death. Thus they persecuted the Lord of glory our
gracious Redeemer, and yet these wicked dissembling Rulers did hide and cover
their gross hypocrisy, and their divilish malice under the pretense of
sanctity and holiness: Joh 18. 28
for they refused to go into Pilates judgement-hall, lest they should be
defiled; but that they might eat the Passover, for this was the preparation
day. What holiness can there be in a malicious heart? How can the heart be
prepared to serve God aright, when the conscience is stained with the guilt of
sin? and how durst they eat the Passover, when there was so much sour leaven
of hateful malice in them? but they did stand more upon the outward form of
godliness, then to perform it with pure affections, and with a good conscience.

Now we may easily see what Satan's drift is against the servants of God: for if
he did stir up all his instruments to persecute Christ Jesus our Head with
deadly hatred, he will not spare us that are his members; and he will set upon
those that are most eminent in grace with his strongest assaults. Thus he
assaulted Job with many and great afflictions, one upon the neck of another to
overthrow his patience. 1 Chro. 21. 1.
Thus he strongly tempted David to number the people, to make him trust in the
arm of flesh, and to weaken his confidence in God; 2 Cor. 12. 7.
and thus he buffeted Paul with his temptations and many sore afflictions. But
this is our comfort, that he can do no more than God does permit him, he cannot
exercise his power according to his malice: for God will not suffer him to
assault his weak servants with strong temptations; and though he does sometimes
permit him violently to set upon those that are rich in grace and strong in
faith; yet he will order and dispose his attempts for their good, and not for
their destruction, as the devil does maliciously intend. God will make them
serve for the trial and manifestation of their graces, for the preventing of
spiritual pride, and for the confirmation of their faith, and affiance in God
by that experience of his assistance and gracious deliverance, which hereby
they have gained.

From hence we may learn how to be prepared, when we come to the Lords Table to
eat of his holy Supper, how to come to the hearing of his Word, and how to
address our selves unto Prayer, and to pious meditations. If we come to these
holy Ordinances with polluted hands, and with hearts defiled with the guilt of
sin, as these Rulers did to eat the Passover, what holiness soever we pretend,
we do but dissemble with God, we delude our own souls, and God will neither
hear us nor accept us.

Wherefore we must cast out the leaven of sin, and purge our consciences from
dead works by faith in the blood of Christ, before we come into the presence of
God, that our affections may be quickened and raised up to these heavenly and
Divine Ordinances of God. But if our sins do stick close to our souls by our
delight in them, they will bind us over to judgment, and to condemnation; and
therefore we must not seek to hide them, or to color them over with fair
pretenses, as if God could not see them; but we must confess them, and lay
them open before God from a truly humbled and penitent heart, that so we may
come before him in sincerity and in truth: for Psalm. 44. 21.
God knows the secrets of our hearts. But if we will hide our sins quite out
of Gods sight, we must hide them under the righteousness of Christ: for there
is no other hiding place for sin, but under this robe.

Thus the guilt of our sins may be hidden from God, if we can apply to our
souls Christ crucified, and his righteousness by faith. Also if we have a true
assurance by our repentance, that our iniquities are forgiven, we may then, and
not before, draw near unto God with comfort, and we may partake of his holy
Ordinances with much profit: for they are appointed for us, if we are thus
prepared for them, and bestowed only upon such as have interest in Christ by
faith.

We come now to look upon the innocence of our blessed Redeemer, who was
without spot or stain of sin, both in the sight of God and in the sight of man;
otherwise he could not have saved us from our sins. Thus says God himself of
him, Luke 17. 5.
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. John 8. 46
Which of you, says Christ to the Pharisees, convinces me of sin? Pilate and
Herod did strictly examine him, and yet they could find no fault in him. Luke
23. 14.
Pilate himself did freely confess that Christ was blameless, and therefore
he sought means how to release him. Also, Mat. 27. 19
his wife sent to him saying, Have thou nothing to do with that just man: for
she was much troubled that night by some revelations concerning him. Though
Christ was accused of many things, yet nothing could be proved against him:
notwithstanding Christ was willing in obedience to his Fathers will, to suffer
the utmost that God had appointed for man's redemption: for if any part of this
great Work had been left unfinished, he could never have procured our
atonement, and reconciliation with God.

Wherefore here is matter of great comfort for our hearts to meditate upon: for
though the guilt of all our sins was imputed unto Christ, yet he was not
defiled therewith, and though he suffered for sin, yet it was not for his own,
but for the sins of all the Elect of God, which he took upon himself: for the
perfection of his purity, and of his righteousness did still remain unspotted,
and undefiled, that we might be clothed therewith, by faith, to hide our
nakedness, and the shame of our sins when we come into the presence of God to
perform any holy service unto him; but specially when we shall appear before
his dreadful Tribunal at the last day.

From hence also we may draw much consolation, when we are falsely accused,
spitefully used, or cruelly persecuted for the Profession of the truth, and for
a good conscience: for our dear Savior has suffered the like in our Nature
and for our sakes, that these and the like sufferings might be sanctified to
us, and that we should follow Christ's example of patience and meekness when we
are under them.

We need not therefore be dismayed, when we are thus unjustly dealt with: for
Christ has taken away the evil of these sufferings, and has taught us how to
demean our selves under them; and if we wait patiently upon God, he will in due
time make our innocence break forth like the Sun out of a cloud to his own
glory, and to our great comfort.

Consider now, and admire to see, how the malice and cruelty of the chief
Priests and Scribes did increase against Christ: for when they perceived that
Pilate had cleared his innocence, and was willing to release him, their rage
and fury was the more inflamed, Mat. 27. 20.
insomuch as they moved the people to desire that Barrabas might be released to
them who raised sedition in the City, and was also a Murderer, and that JESUS
might be crucified, which kind of death was most ignominious, most shameful
and accursed. Though they knew by their own Law what a crying sin in the ears
of God the shedding of innocent blood was; yet no blood could satisfy them but
innocent blood. Pilate offered them the blood of Barrabas; but that would not
content them: for they thirsted after the purest blood that ever was spilt,
even the most precious blood of the eternal Son of God; because he laid open
their corrupt doctrines, and discovered their hypocrisy to all the people. The
cruel Jews did shed the blood of the Prophets that were sent to them, and now
they do eagerly hunt after the blood of Christ, whom they could no way convince
of any sin. Thus does their divelish envy and malice carry on to the highest
degree of rebellion against God and against his Anointed.

Now let us meditate with an holy zeal and pious devotion upon the price of our
Redemption: 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.
for we were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from our
vain conversation; but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without
blemish and without spot, who was both God and Man; so that the Jews crucified
him that was 1 Cor. 2. 8.
the Lord of glory, and the blood which they spilt was the blood of that
Person, who was God as well as Man, according to this of Paul, Act. 20. 28
That God has purchased to himself a Church with his own blood.

Wherefore, 1 Cor. 6. 20
seeing we are bought with such a price, we ought to glorify God in our
bodies, and in our spirits, which are Gods, Heb. 6. 5, 6.
and not to fall away when we have tasted of the good Word of God, and of the
powers of the world to come; seeing thereby we crucify to our selves the Son
of God afresh, and put him to an open shame by our new committed sins after
repentance.

Also, we must ruminate upon the transcendent worth of the blood of our
crucified Redeemer with pure affections: for it was an infinite price to
satisfy the justice of an infinite God. We cannot conceive, much less
express the incomprehensible goodness of Christ, who of his mere love has
given up himself and his whole nature, both Divine and Humane, to purchase our
redemption with his own blood. His Deity of it self could not suffer either
hunger or thirst, pain or torment: for these and all other his sufferings did
properly belong to his humane nature; but by the personal union of his
humanity with his Deity, the Divine nature of Christ did suffer together with
his humanity by a nearer simpathy, than is between the members of the natural
body and the head, or between the members of the mystical body of Christ, and
himself, who is their Head: for these members both natural and spiritual are
but knit and united to the head by firm ligaments; but the humanity of Christ
was taken up into his Deity, and so made one Christ. Saul persecuted Christ,
when he did persecute his Church: for thus says Christ unto him, Act. 9. 4, 5
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he said, Who art thou Lord? And the
Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest: for he persecuted him in his
members, he being their Head. How much more then did the Deity of Christ suffer
throughout his whole passion by simpathizing with his humane nature, not only
as Cor. 11. 3
God is the Head of Christ, but chiefly because his humane nature was
personally united to his Deity, this is the cause why the blood of Christ, his
sufferings, and his death is of so great merit, and of such an infinite price.

If it be so, that Christ did give himself in his whole nature for us, that his
blood should be spilt, his body mangled and tortured, his soul tormented, his
Glory clouded with ignominy and shame, and that his Deity should be blasphemed
and spitefully dishonored for our redemption, and if we were bought with so
great a price; we have then as great cause as ever David had, Psalm. 103* 1, 2,
3, 4.
to bless the Lord, and to stir up all that is within us to praise his holy
Name for all the benefits of our redemption: for he forgiveth all our
iniquities, he heals all our diseases, he redeemeth our lives from
destruction, and he crowns us with loving kindness and tender mercies.

For if we can apply to our selves by a true faith, Jesus Christ, and him
crucified for us, Gal. 2. 20
as Paul did, he will fasten the guilt of our sins to his own cross, that it
shall not cleave to our souls, and he will remit the punishment that is due to
us for them; also, he will heal and cure all the spiritual diseases of our
souls by pouring clean water upon us, and by sanctifying us with his grace and
holy Spirit unto newness of life, which is a sure evidence of the pardon of
our sins, and then he will embrace us with the arms of his love, and will
crown us with everlasting peace.

Consider yet further to what height of impiety the spiteful and malicious Jews
are brought, Mat. 27, 24.
Pilate washed his hands in water before he gave sentence against Christ, in
token (as he thought) that he was innocent of the guilt of his blood, because
he knew him to be a just person; but the Jews drowned themselves in the blood
of that immaculate Lamb and said, Let his blood be on us, and on our children.
O what a burden is innocent blood to the conscience? What fearful judgments
did they pull down upon themselves, and upon their posterity hereby? David
found this to be true, when he did unjustly shed the innocent blood of Vriah: ^
2 Samuel 11.
for Psalm. 51.
this fact of his cost him many a tear, before he coul get assurance of pardon
for it.

How severe was the punishment that God laid upon Cain for killing his brother
Ab^l? and yet these wretched Jews did wish that the most precious blood of
Christ the eternal Son of God, might lie upon them and upon their children; to
which God in justice did say, Amen. That blood which was the blood of the New y
Heb 9 20
Covenant, and seals redemption to all that do apply it to themselves by
faith, is made a most heavy curse to the Jews for their unbelief, and it does
rest upon their posterity even to this day; because they did despise it, and
most maliciously trampled it under their feet: for they rejected him and would
not believe in him for their salvation; but preferred a murderer before him,
which made their sin the more odious in Gods eye.

Wherefore let the thoughts and the Meditations of our hearts be, how to
moderate and suppress our rash, and raging passions, that they break not out
to wicked wishes, or impious execrations to our own hurt, or to the hurt of
another; but specially concerning blood, lest God that hears in heaven should
say, Amen to it: for then the guilt of that sin will lie heavy upon us, and the
evil which we have unadvisedly wished will be grievous to them; except we do
speedily repent, that God in mercy may forgive us. We should therefore set a
continual watch before our lips, that we speak nothing against themselves, or
to the hurt of another: for God in his justice may bring the same evil upon us,
which we have wished either to our selves or to others; but we ought to
accustom our selves to blessing and not to cursing, to wholesome speeches that
may tend to edification, and not to mischievous words that tend to destruction,
and then God in mercy will say Amen to it.

Now observe and mark what barbarous cruelly the Gentiles did use against our
dear Savior: for as soon as he was condemed, Mar. 15. 15.
they scourged him without limitation of stripes; so that this of the Psalmists
was verified in Christ, Psalm. 129. 3.
The plowers plowed upon my back they made long their furrows: whereas the Jews
were limited by the Law of God to forty stripes. When Christ was thus b Deuteronomy.
25 3:
cruelly scourged, then Pilate delivered him to be crucified, Mat. 27.
and then the savage Gentiles did mock and deride him, they did spit upon him,
they crowned him with thorns, and smote him on the head with a read, and then
they led him away to be crucified.

This was a doleful spectacle, and able to make a deep impression of tender
compassion in any Christian heart, to see a righteous man thus miserably
tortured; but much more to see the only begotten Son of God thus dishonored,
and thus shamefully used with as much disgrace and shame as they could devise.
But such inhumanity did reign in their murdering minds, and such cruel deeds
were acted with their bloody hands, that nothing could swage their malice and
cruelty; and nothing could mollify their stony hearts, or melt them into
compassionate pity; because they were given up to a reprobate mind.

But let our hearts be touched with a true sense of our Saviors sufferings,
and with a godly sorrow and compunction for our sins, when we ruminate and
ponder in our thoughts, how unjustly our blessed Redeemer was condemned, and
how cruelly he was used for our sakes: for Gods controversy was against us,
and not against his dear Son. But because he of his tender love and compassion,
stepped in between Gods fierce wrath and us, which he knew was too heavy for us
to bear, and took upon himself the guilt of our sins, and because the desire of
his soul was to reconcile us to God his Father, he was willing that so much of
Gods severe wrath, as in justice was due to us for our transgressions, should
light upon himself, which he did meekly undergo to free us from it. If we are
thus affected when we do seriously think upon the passion of our Savior
Christ, it will make us hate our sins with a perfect hatred, it will pull down
our proud and haughty spirits; it will make us thankfully to acknowledge our
unworthiness of so great love from him, and it will bind us in a firm bond of
love and obedience to him: then Christ will commiserate and pity us in our
sorrows, and will comfort us in our sad condition.

But alas, we take no pleasure in such doleful Meditations, we are not
feelingly affected with our Saviors tedious and bitter passion, and therefore
we cannot bring it home to our selves by faith; neither can we raise up the
affections of our hearts hereunto, because we are not persuaded that he
suffered more than his humane nature could have born, if it had not been
supported by his Deity; neither do we faithfully believe, that what he suffered
was for our redemption, as it was for all the elect of God; and therefore we
can draw no spiritual comfort from thence to our souls.

These sad contemplations are not sweet to our taste, they are not delightful
to our corrupted nature, nor pleasing to our carnal desires: for we had rather
go to the house of feasting, than to the house of mourning: our love to Christ
is not so firm, and our faith in him is not so strong as to make our minds
constant in these heavenly Meditations, which are most profitable for the good
of our souls.

If we find such obduracy in our hearts, so little grace in our affections, and
that our unregenerate part is so prevailing in us, that we can take no pleasure
to Meditate on the bitter passion of Christ, as if he were not to be pitied; we
may justly condemn our selves of too much ingratitude for his great love to us,
and we cannot then expect any compassion from him in our afflictions and
miseries.

If we look upon a Kings only Son, and see him suffer all kind of rebuke and
shame by rebels and traitors, and all kind of torturings and tormentings for
no offense given, shall we not pity his miserable condition? And shall we not
think upon his miseries with sad hearts? Then much more should we be
compassionately affected when we remember what great things Christ has
suffered for us; and yet the remembrance of them should be delightful to us,
because it was the Work of our redemption, and the price which he paid for our
ransom out of that spiritual bondage wherein we were holden by sin and Satan.

Wherefore if thy Saviors sufferings have made any impression in thy heart,
show some fruits of thy thankfulness to him by thy bowels of tender
compassion, and of pity to his poor Saints that are in want and misery: for
thou may show thy love to him in them. Christ looked with the eye of mercy
upon thee, and did commiserate thy woeful and distressed condition; he poured
out the streams of his most precious blood from all parts of his body, to wash
away the filth and the stains of all thine iniquities, and have thou no sparks
of Charity for his poor distressed members? Can thou think upon his poverty,
Mat. 8. 20
who had not whereon to lay his head, and not restrain thy thoughts from pride
and ambition? Can thou see thy self in prosperity, and not pity and relieve
the servants of God that are in misery? Think upon his nakedness when he was
upon the cross for thee,?to assuage thy vainity in apparel, and to induce
thee to cloth his servants in their naked condition: remember his hunger and
thirst to make thee sober and temperate in thy diet, and to refresh his hungry
Members with something that comes from thy table, that Psalm. 69. 22.
thy table become not a snare before thee.

If thou injoyest thy liberty, think upon thy Saviors bonds, and cast an eye
of compassion upon his poor servants in the dungeon.

If thou can make this good use of thy Meditations upon the passion and
sufferings of Christ, it is a comfortable evidence, and a good assurance that
Christ suffered for thee, and that thou art of the number of those whom he has
bought with his own blood, and whom he has redeemed out of the prison of
eternal death.

CHRIST'S sufferings under the Cross.
WE come now to consider yet further, how cruelly the stony-hearted Jews, and
the barbarous people dealt with our beloved Savior: for they laid the heavy
cross upon him to bear it to Mount Calvary, whereon he was to be crucified,
though he was much weakened by his bitter Agony but a little before, and for
want of rest all that night, and though his back was rent, and torn with the
whip, his body fore with cruel blows, and faint with fasting, and with the
loss of bl^^^. But because they feared he would faint by the way, or not come
soon enough to the place where he was to dye, that they might have their fill
of cruelty against him, and because the day was now far spent, Luke 23. 16.
Mat. 27. 32.
they compelled Simon a Cyrenian to bear his cross after him.

Now we may enlarge our Meditations upon the sorrows of our sweet Savior,
which do every hour increase upon him, and his deadly foes do still add grief
to his misery, by laying his cross upon his tender back; yet he did patiently
bear it, though he was very sensible of the weight and burden of it, which was
too heavy for his humane strength, considering how much he was weakened This
wooden Cross was but the shadow of that which did most press him: for it was
the wrath of God which was now poured out upon him, that was such an
unsupportable burden that his humane nature could not bear it without the power
of his Deity to support and assist him in it. Simon could help him bear this
cross; but no creature, either man or Angel could help him bear the burden of
Gods wrath for the guilt of our sins, that was now charged upon him, which was
so great and so heavy, that it made his knees to bow, his heart to faint, and
his very soul to tremble: for he stood now before the Tribunal of Gods justice,
as guilty of all manner of sin, Original and actual, of Omission and of
Commission: for the guilt of the foulest sins of all the elect of God was
imputed to him, and he was to satisfy the justice of God for every sin, great
and small before he could be eased of his sorrows, pains and torturings, and
before he could finish the work of our redemption, which God sent him to do. In
Christ was verified this of the Prophet, Isa. 63. 3, 5
I have trodden the wine press alone, and of the people there was none with
me: and I looked and there was none to help; and I wondered that there was none
to uphold: therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me, and it upheld me.
This is he whom John saw sitting upon a c Rev. 19 11 13.
white horse, who was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood, and his name is
called the Word of God. Christ was that d Isa. 63. 1.
mighty warrier who came from Edom, who had many strong enemies to encounter
with, that did sorely wound him; but at length he got the victory over them all
by the greatness of his strength, and by the righteousness of his Words, and
therefore he was glorious in his red apparel, and mighty to save all such as
belong unto him, and do put their trust in him.

This cross is a fit resemblance of all the troubles and sorrows that we
shall meet with in this life: for it was heavy and troublesome to bear. First,
because Christ himself did bear it, he found the weight and trouble of it, and
he was a man of sorrows, he was acquainted with grief, and he did feel the
burden of our afflictions and tribulations, to make them easy to us, and
according to our strength. Secondly, because it was so heavy unto Christ, that
he was ready to faint under it; whereby he did express in himself the
weakness and frailty of our nature: for if crosses and tribulations press
hard upon us, we are ready naturally to repine, to cast off all hope, and to
sink under the burden of them; and therefore Christ knowing by his own
experience the weight of them, and our inabil^ty to bear them with a contented
patience, will comfort, support, and strengthen us under them. Thirdly, that
was a wooden cross, which was not for perpetuity, but continued only for a
time: to show that our crosses and sorrows continue not for ever: for God does
afflict us but for a short time; but his loving kindness and tender mercies to
us continue for ever. Thus says holy David, Psalm. 30. 5.
His anger endures but a moment, in his favor is life: weeping may endure for
a night, but joy comes in the morning. Christ will not suffer us to faint
under our troubles and miseries; but will ease and refresh us, as Simon eased
him, when he was under the like condition. But if it be the will and pleasure
of God that the cross shall rest upon us, and that afflictions shall follow us
until we have finished our course in this life, death will then take it quite
from us, and we shall never bear it any more, and we know not how soon that may
be; also, it will open a door to us for our entrance into perfect bliss and
happiness. 2 Cor. 4. 16 17.
Wherefore we should not faint, but though our outward man perish, yet the
inward man is renewed day by day. For our light affliction, which is but for a
moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.
Lastly, God has many ways to help and ease us, when we are under the cross:
for as he provided this stranger to bear the cross after him, because none of
his own nation had any pity on him; so likewise God will provide means for our
comfort and succor in our tribulations, beyond our expectation. When the Jews
were in great danger of destruction by Hamans wicked device, Queen Esther
thought it dangerous for her to go in unto the King to speak in the behalf of
her people, except she were called; but Mordecai sent her this word, Esth. 4.
13, 14.
Think not with thy self that thou shall escape in the Kings house mere than
all the Jew^s: for if thou altogether hold thy peace at this time, then
s^a^l there enlargement and deliverance arise to the Jews from another place,
but thou and thy fathers house shall be destroyed; and who knows whether thou
art come to the kingd^m for such a time as this? Wherefore we may rest upon God
by faith in Christ for comfort or deliverance in all our necessities and
dangers: for though our friends, or such as have relation to us, do refuse to
help us according to their abilities; yet God will raise up strangers for our
comfort, and will send us means of deliverance which we little thought on.

This should teach us to bear meekly and patiently the cross that God does lay
upon us: for thereby we do show our conformity with Christ, we follow his
example and then he will give us grace to make an holy use of the cross to the
glory of God, and to the comfort of our souls.

Also, if we wait upon God with a steadfast hope, he will then give us a
cheerful heart under the cross, and a willing mind to bear it, until he
shall be pleased in his good time to remove it from us; which will be when it
will make most for his own glory, and for our eternal good.

From hence we may draw true consolation to our souls: for though Christ had
more laid upon him than his humane strength was able to bear; yet we shall not
be overloaden with the burden of our crosses, because God has committed the
tempering of the cup of our afflictions to our Savior Christ, who will show
his tender compassion to us, though no humanity was showed to him: he best
knows what we are able to bear, and the sharpness of pain, smart, sorrow of
mind, and of any calamity whatsoever, but specially he knows that we are not
able to bear the anger and wrath of God for our sins; and therefore he has
made an atonement between God and us by the merit of his blood, and has also
changed the nature of our crosses and sufferings by that which he has suffered
for us, and has now appointed them for an holy and profitable end. For whereas
in their own nature they are simply evil, and the punishments of sin, and
destructive to us, he has sanctified them, he has taken out the sting of
evil that was in them, and has changed them into fatherly chastisements for
the reformation of our sinful lives; so that whatsoever we suffer, though it
be the due desert of our sins; yet it comes not now from Gods indignation and
fury for our destruction, but from his fatherly love to correct and chastise
us, as his children, to bring us to better obedience to his will, and that our
souls may be saved in the day of his appearing. Also if our corrections are too
sharp, Christ will ease the smart with his supplying grace: for Heb. 4. 16.
he will be a present help to us in time of need.

But if God does show us any way to escape the danger of the cross to shun
troubles, persecutions, or the like, and if he does afford us any lawful
means for our recovery out of pain or sickness, for our relief in want and
scarsity, for our support and comfort in tribulations and distresses, we are
bound by the command of Christ to go that way for our safety, and to use the
means which he has appointed for our health, for our relief, and for our
comfort in our miseries. Thus said Christ to his Disc^ples, Mat. 10. 23
When they persecute you in this city flee ye into another. When Christ himself
was in danger of his life at Nazareth, Luke 4. 29. 30.
he passed through the midst of them and went his way. At another time when
they intended to cast stones at him, Ioh. 8. 59.
he hid himself and went out of the temple, going through the midst of them,
and so passed by. If crosses do come upon us, which we might lawfully have
shuned, Goddoth not then lay the cross upon us; but we pull it upon our
selves: also if we have means for our own good, and do neglect it, we tempt
God, and despise the riches of his goodness to us. But if we use the means
that God has given us in relation to Christ by faith, he will then send a
blessing upon the means for our good. Likewise if we do not sanctify the
means which we use by Prayer to God in Christ, we can have no ground to hope
for ease, or recovery in our sicknesses, for comfort in our sorrows, or
deliverance out of our troubles, and without Prayer we cannot expect that good
success by our endeavors which we desire. This was the sin of King Asa, 2
Chr. 16^ 12.
whose disease in his feet was exceeding great; yet he sought not to the Lord,
but to the Physicians for his cure. If we suffer unjustly Christ has taught us
by his own example to bear it meekly and patiently, and to commend our cause
unto God, to rest upon him, and to wait his time for our enlargement, for God
hears the cries of the oppressed, and the prayers of them that mourn, and he
puts the tears n Psalm. 56. 8.
of the weeping widow into his bottle, and delivers poor captives out of
prison. Wherefore if we seek to Christ in our necessities, we shall obtain what
we desire or what is better for us.

But some will say thus, my passions cannot bear the cross of a reviling and
injurious tongue, the cup of affliction is bitter to me. I covet ease, delight
and pleasure; and I am ready to faint through the weakness of my strength,
under the burden of sickness, pain or trouble. But will thou give so much way
to thy passions as to dishonor God thereby? is thy mind so much set upon vain
pleasures, as if no sorrow could come upon thee* Did Christ bear his cross,
and do thou think to go free? Do thou not know, O fainting soul, how to
measure thy strength? ^f thou do measure it by the common measure of mature,
thou will find it too weak to bear thee up against those crosses, afflictions,
or temptations, which thou shall meet with in this life; but if thou do
measure it by the measure of the sanctuary, and by the grace of Christ that is
in thee, thou will then perceive what strength thou have to bear the cross:
for thy strength lies not in the wealth, or in the arm of flesh; but in thy
faith in Christ, and in the graces of his Spirit. If thou have but a little
faith, and a small measure of grace, thou have then but little strength and
courage to encounter with the assaults of the devil, with the troubles and
vexations of this world, and with the discomforts of sickness; but art easily
surprised with every temptation and sinful lust, and as easily overwhelmed
when the waves of affliction come upon thee. Wherefore when thou art upon thy
bed of sickness; or in any distress and misery, complain not of thy strength
of body, if that be weak and fails; but look to the strength of grace that is
in thee: 2 Pet. 3. 18.
for grace may grow and increase, though the strength of thy body does decay,
or is spent and grace will uphold thee from sinking, even in the bitter pangs
of death, and it will make thee to hold on constant to the end in all thy
sufferings.

Consider in the next place, that Christ has appointed his cross to be the
badge of every true Christian, which he must wear for the honor of his Lord
and Master. Thus says Christ, Mat. 16 24.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross,
and follow me. Also Paul says, Acts 14. 22.
That through much tribulation we must enter into the Kingdom of God. Christ
gives this badge to some, for the trial and the manifestation of his graces in
them, that he may be glorified thereby: to others, for their humiliation, and
to bring them to repentance for their sins; he does exercise others under the
cross, to conform them unto himself in his sufferings, and to make them bear
it contentedly. Also he gives this badge to some to keep them from security,
and to prevent their backslidings from God: for by these trials and afflictions
he does always intend the good of his servants, and not their hurt.

Where this mark is truly imprinted, there will grace appear, and the fruits of
it will break forth in their conformity to the will of God, in their faith and
patience under afflictions, and in their rejoicing in the cross of Christ.
This was the Apostles joy, Acts 5. 41
that they were counted worthy to suffer shame and rebuke for the Name of
Christ. And this was Paul's glory: Gal. 6. 1
for says he. God forbid that I should glory save in the cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. For
such is the tender and indulgent care of Christ toward those that wear his
livery, that though they are put into the fining pot of affliction, there to
have their dross and corruptions purged and refined, yet he will not suffer
them to receive any detriment thereby; but he will bring them forth purer gold
than they were before.

Wherefore learn to carry the cross of Christ in thy heart, expect it daily,
and resolve to bear it willingly, when God shall be pleased to lay it upon
thee, and then thou will not feel it so heavy as it is in its own nature; also
imprint the remembrance of his passion in thy mind, thereby to mortify all
thy worldly lusts and sinful desires, This cognizance will tell thee what
inheritance thou have in Christ, if thou do duly examine thy heart, when thou
art under the cross, how thou have glorified God by thy faith and patience,
how much thou art refined from thy corruptions, how much nearer thou art
brought unto Christ in thine affections, to love him, to confide in him, to
delight in the sweet fruition of him, and to meditate on his goodness and love
to thee. If thou can find such fruits of thy cross, and that in the midst
of thy sorrows thou can say with holy Job, Job 13. 1^.
Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him: then be confident that Christ has
set his own stamp upon thy heart, he will know thee for his own, he will hide
thee under the shadow of his wings, he will provide for thee in all thy
necessities, and upon all occasions, and all the powers of darkness shall not
be able to raise his stamp or the impression of it out of thy heart, or to
separate thee from Christ.

Mark further, and consider it well, that there were some that followed Christ
all that dolorous way to Mount Calvary, who could not refrain from tears and u
Luke 23. 27, 28.
sorrowful sobs; but bewailed him and lamented when they saw his doleful and
sad condition, and they were chiefly women, to whom Jesus turning said,
Daughters of Jerusalem weep not for me, but weep for your selves and for your
children. Whereby he did graciously instruct them, how to fix their mourning
upon the right object that their tears may proceed from a principle of grace;
not to mourn for him, because he did suffer no more than what was appointed by
his heavenly Father, and he did bear it in obedience to his will: also, he did
undertake no more than he was well able to undergo, and no more could be laid
upon him than was decreed in his Fathers counsel for the redemption of man.
But Christ would have them weep and mourn for their sins, which brought the
wrath of God upon themselves, and upon their children,: for there were grievous
judgments, which would shortly come upon them. Also Christ did intimate to
them, that their sins, and the sins of their children were a great part of the
cause why he suffered such contumelies, and so much cruelty, both by the Jews
and by the Gentiles, that they might be freed from the guilt and from the
punishment of them.

Consider now, that Christ does give them two special reasons why they should
weep and mourn for themselves and for their children. First, because of the
great desolation and final destruction that was shortly after to come upon
that famous and renowned City, and upon the whole nation of the Jews, wherein
they and their children should suffer very great calamities; therefore Christ
did tell them, Lu. 23. 29*
That the days were coming in which they should say, blessed are the barren,
and the wombes that never bare, and the paps which never gave suck Luke 19. 4^
And Christ himself wept for the misery that was to come upon Jerusalem.

Secondly Christ wills them to reserve their tears to lament and bewail
their sins, and the sins of their children; because the great and terrible day
of the general judgment was coming, when every one both high and low, great
and small, young and old must give a particular account to God of what they
have done in the flesh, either in thought word or deed, whether it be good or
evil. Isa. 2. 19. Hos. 10. Luke 23. 30
Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, fall on us, and to the hills
cover us.

Thus does Christ direct us how to glorify God with our tears, how to comfort
our soul by our mourning, and how to be prepared for any common calamity, and
also how to meet the day of judgewent with comfort, and that is by mourning for
our sins in time, and by making our peace with God by faith in Christ, with the
tears of true repentance.

Now take a view of thy tears and see from whence they flow; from an humane
principle, or from a principle of grace: if thou can mourn for the evil of
punishment, which thou suffer, and can not mourn for the evil of the sin
which thou committest, thy tears are not then spent upon the right object; or
if thou do weep and grieve for thy sins, and have no relation to Christ by
faith in thy mourning, thou will have but little assurance of pardon, and thou will find but small comfort in thy weeping. Also if thou do lament and sorrow
for thy sins, and not fully purpose and do endeavor to reform thy sinful
life, thy repentance is not sound, and thy sorrow is not unto salvation. So
likewise if nature can find tears for the loss of some dear friend, or for
any other worldly losses, and grace can find none to bewail thy self, because
the light of Gods countenance is clouded from thee, or because the Church of
God is under afflictions and troubles, thou do then waste thy tears to a
wrong end. Ezra. 10. 6.
Ezra mourned for the transgression of the people; Neh. 1. 4.
and Nehemiah mourned for the desolation of Jerusalem. Psalm. 119. 230.
Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, says David, because they keep not thy
Law. These tears proceeded from a Principle of grace, wherewith God was well
pleased. And Christ does here command us to reserve our tears for general
calamities; because then God does call for fasting, lamentation and mourning;
from those especially that are like to partake in such calamities.

If we can thus regulate our mourning, and thus employ our tears, it will make
much for the glory of God and for the comfort of our own souls.

But the consideration of the dreadful day of judgment should most of all
affect our hearts and souls with a godly sorrow for our sins, and with an holy
and earnest desire to be reconciled unto God by faith in Christ, and to have a
true assurance of the forgiveness of them by our repentance, that we may then
appear before God without any guilt of sin upon our souls, and without the
clamours and accusations of an evil conscience, and then it will be a day of
rejoicing to us, and not a day of terror. But if our souls are to appear with
the pollutions and stains of sin, and if our consciences are ready to accuse
us, and to prefer a bill of indictment against us, that day will be most
terrible and fearful to us: for when we shall look upon the Judge, we shall
see nothing in his countenance but terror and fury, and we can expect nothing
from him, but that dreadful sentence, of go ye cursed into everlasting
torments: on the contrary, if the grace of God has taught us to deny
ungodliness and c Tit. 2. 12. 13.
worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
world; we may then confidently look for that blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.

Wherefore it concerns us no less than the salvation of our souls, to make up
our account while we live here, which we must then give unto God, even to an
idle word; because we shall be judged according to our works: for after this
life is ended, there is no more faith to lay hold on Christ, no more hope of
salvation, and no repentance for sin. If our account be made up according to
our own righteousness, it will come far short of that which God requires,
and he will not accept it; but if we can make it up in the righteousness of
Christ by faith, then whatsoever is wanting in us will be made perfect by his
righteousness in the sight of God. How pitiful then and miserable will the
condition of unregenerate men be at that day? Who can make perfect their
account, seeing they have no interest in Christ? And how can they stand before
that great and dreadful Judge, seeing he will not then know them? Wherefore we
should not neglect to make up our account thus with God every day; because we
know not how soon we are bereaved of time and grace for it, and the loss of
one day may endanger our salvation. Lose no time then and no opportunity for
this great work of thy salvation, 2 Pet 1. 10.
but redeem the time which thou have lost, by doubling thy future diligence to
make thy calling and election sure.

What Christ suffered upon the Cross.
OUr gracious Redeemer, after many a weary step, is now brought to Mount
Calvary, which was without the gates of the City, where he must finish the
great work of man's Redemption by his death and resurrection, for to this end he
came down from heaven and assumed our nature; and all our iniquities were
imputed to him; because he was our surety, and did undertake to satisfy the
justice of God for them all, not only for the Jew, but also for the Gentile.
Joh 20. ^ at 27.
Now behold and see how his innocent hands and feet are nailed to his Cross,
and how he is mocked and derided in his misery, how the barbarous people insult
over him, how grievously he is tortured, and what execrable blasphemies they
belch out against him; he did now endure the bitterness of pain, and the
extremity of cold being naked upon the cross. but above all the anguish of his
soul was so great, because the fierce wrath and hot displeasure of Almighty God
was heavy upon him, that he cried out, My God, my God, Why have thou forsaken
me? for then he had little or no sense of his heavenly Fathers love, and the
bright beams of his Deity were clouded for a time from his humanity.

If it be so, that the eternal Son of God our blessed Redeemer suffered all
kind of shame and ignominy, blasphemous words and cruel torments upon the
cross, even to the pouring out of his very heart blood, to purge and cleanse
us from the guilt and from the filth of all our sins, and that he suffered
whatsoever the malice and power of the devil could inflict upon him, and also
that for the time his Divine nature did refuse to minister comfort to his
humanity in these his bitter torments; what thankfulness then do we ow to our
dear Savior for his wonderful love to us? What can be too dear for him that
did account nothing too dear for us? what duty, what reverence and fear do we
ow unto him, who has paid so great a price for our redemption? Our best
expressions of love and duty are no way answerable to that which Christ has
deserved, and which we are Sound to perform unto him; yet if they come from a
willing mind and from a sincere heart, Christ our Savior will accept them,
and out of his fullness will supply what is wanting in us, and God will be well
pleased with it for his sake.

Here is much matter of heavenly comfort for us, if our hearts can devoutly
Meditate upon it, and receive it. Our life may be full of misery, and our
hearts full of sadness, and perplexity, our faith may be so weak that we can
have no apprehension of the love and favor of God, and our spirits may be so
cast down, that we cannot raise them up toward heaven; we may be pressed with
troubles, crosses and sorrows beyond our strength, and the light of Gods
countenance may be so eclipsed, that we can see no token of his grace and
favor to sweeten the bitterness of our sufferings, and to support us under
the pressure of them; but we are ready to faint, and to cast off all hope of
relief and comfort; Psalm. 42. 11.
but for all this we need not fear our souls need not be disquieted within us:
for if we wait on God, he will be our present help, he will be our God and he
will not forsake us. The brightness of his countenance may be darkened for a
few hours, as it was with the Sun at this very same time, Mal. 4. 2.
but the Sun of righteousness will again appear to us, with healing in his
wings: then we shall see the salvation of the Lord, if we can look up with the
eye of faith to our sweet Savior, who was brought to a lower degree of
spiritual desertion in the apprehension of his humane nature, thn we can be;
and yet he found a return of the gracious aspect of his Fathers countenance
toward him: whereby he has sanctified and sweetened whatsoever can betide us to
sink our spirits, or to shake our faith and confidence in God. If our ear is
spiritually bored to hear those doleful and lamentable words which our Savior
uttered upon the cross, when he was ready to yield up his Spirit to God his
Father, and yet apply them to our selves by faith, we may then draw virtue and
power from them to strengthen our faith, and to support our hope in the
assurance of his love, that he will not bring us to so low a degree of
spiritual desertion, because our weakness will not bear so great a trial; but
will make us to hold out to the end by the Almighty power of his eternal
Spirit.

Now learn, O my sorrowful soul, so to imprint the crucifying of thy dear
Savior in thy heart by faith, that thou may draw grace and virtue from
thence to crucify all thy corruptions, and the evil concupiscence of thy
flesh, that thine affections may not be carried after worldly vanities, that
thine eyes may not delight to gaze upon obscene spectacles, that thine ears
may be dull to unsavory speeches, but swift to hear words that tend to
edification, and that thy tongue may have no motion to utter any thing that is
dishonorable to God, or hurtful to thy neighbor. Gal. 6. 14.
Thus by the power of Christ crucified, the world shall be crucified to thee,
and thou unto the world, if thou do truly believe that he was crucified for
thee; because it will dull the edge of thine affections to all earthly things,
it will work in thee an hatred and detestation of all sinful pleasures, and
thou will daily labor and Col. 3. 9. Ephesians. 4. 22.
strive to mortify the old man of sin, that has had his habitation in thy
bosom above these threescore years.

In thy first creation thou were a lovely creature, beloved of thy God, without
spot or blemish in soul, or in body, thou were beautified and adorned with all
graces and holy virtues, reverenced and obeyed of all other creatures here upon
earth, and the celestial orbs did cast no evil aspects upon thee: but now
thou art deformed with sin, thou art polluted in all the faculties of thy soul,
and in all the parts of thy body: for thou art spiritually blind, naked and
void of all goodness, thou art deaf and dumb to heavenly things, thou art lame
and impotent, and can not walk in the paths of righteousness; also thou art
so bent and bowed to the earth, that thou can not raise up thy heart toward
heaven, and so full of spiritual diseases and infirmities, that there is no
sound part in thee.

But this is thy comfort, O my soul, that the blood of thy crucified Redeemer
which was spilt upon the cross will take away all thy deformities of sin, and
will heal all thy spiritual diseases; and his righteousness will make thee
lovely in the sight of God.

If this be our condition by nature, if we are thus deformed with the guilt of
sin, that cleaves to our souls by our fall in Adam, and if we have no means
to regain our first happiness in Adams first innocence, but by Christ, and to
be cleansed from all our sins but by his blood; then our chief care must be how
to enjoy Christ, and how to have this great benefit by his blood.

If we are ingrafted into him by faith, we shall enjoy him in his whole nature,
as he is God and Man, we shall partake with him in all his excellencies and
graces, he will work a new creation in us by his Spirit, and a thorough change
in all the faculties of our souls, and in all the affections of our hearts,
that no sin shall cleave to our souls for our condemnation: for he will also
nail the the guilt of all our sins to his cross, upon which he shed his most
precious blood to make an atonement for them all. He will also take away the
stains and filth of our sins by his sanctifying grace and holy Spirit, and will
put upon us the robe of his own righteousness, which will cover all our
deformities, and will make us amiable and lovely in the sight of God. By the
merit of Christ's blood our sins shall never be laid to our charge, by the power
of his death we are made able to mortify and kill the power of sin in us, and
the virtue of his resurrection will quicken us up to newness of life, and his
righteousness will restore us to an higher degree of purity and holiness than
we had in our first creation: Gal. 3. 27.
for by faith we are baptized into Christ, and have put on Christ, Ephesians. 5. 30.
and we are now members of his body, of his flesh and of his bones, and we are
confirmed in this blessed condition by his free Spirit, so that we shall never
depart from him.

If Christ had not been crucified, and his blood poured out upon the cross,
and if he had not been made a curse for us by that kind of death; then Gods
decree had not been fulfilled, the work of our redemption had not been
finished, we had been still under the curse of the Law, the guilt of sin had
still rested upon our souls, and all the Prophesies of him had not been
fulfilled; also, we could not have had all those great benefits by his death
and by the merit of his blood. Phil. 2. 8.
But Christ did humble himself to the cursed death of the cross, and there his
heart blood was poured out, which made his sacrifice complete and perfect.

This made the faith of the penitent thief so famous; because he did embrace
Christ for his Savior when he was upon the cross. 1 Cor. 2, 2, 4.
This made Paul to prefer the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and him crucified
before all humane wisdom; because thereby the Spirit of God did make his
preaching powerful and effectual: Gal. 6. 14
and this made him glory so much in the Cross of Christ. Wherefore we need not
be ashamed of Christ, because he was crucified, and we need not refuse to bear
his Cross after him; because it is the greatest honor of a true Christian,
and that which brings the greatest comfort to our souls, to be made
conformable to Christ in his sufferings.

Now we come to consider what admirable gentleness, what great mercy and
goodness Christ did show to his persecutors and tormenters, he did practice
the same Doctrine which he taught his Disciples in the Mount, Mat. 5. 44.
Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute you. For he gave
them not a bitter word, but did patiently and meekly suffer all their barbarous
usage and cruelty against him, and when their hearts were inflamed with malice,
and their hands labored to crucify him, and when the pangs of death were upon
him, his tender heart was moved with compassion toward them, and the fountain
of his mercy was opened, that the sweet streams of his blessing might flow upon
them: for even then he did pray his heavenly Father to remit and and forgive
their great sin. Luke 23. 34.
Father, says he, forgive them, for they know not what they do: For they were
spiritually blind, and could not see who he was, and their hearts were
hardened, that they could not understand nor believe from whence he came, and
wherefore he suffered them to put him to such a shameful and cruel death.

If our dear Savior was so merciful to those that brewed their hands in his
blood, what heart can then conceive the riches of his mercy and love to his own
servants, that love serve and obey him in truth, and with upright hearts? For
mercy and tender love are essentially and naturally inherent in him, and there
is no end of his goodness to all those that be long unto him; his mercy to
them goes along in all his works: for if he does correct them, it is in mercy
for their good, he will not let the rod go out of his own hand: to some he does
but shake the rod, others feel but few stripes; and though some have many
stripes, Jer. 10. 2.
yet it shall be with judgment, not in his anger; he will not deal with them
according, to their sins, nor reward them according to their iniquities, but
his mercy will prevail, though his justice be provoked.

Wherefore let no poor afflicted soul, that is under his rod, forbear coming
unto Christ: for he can take off his visitation when he pleases, and he will
pity him, as a Father pitieth his child. Also let no poor sinner that is truly
humbled for his sins, be afraid to have recourse unto his Redeemer: for he
prayed for such, to procure their pardon, and to bring salvation to their
souls. All the riches honors and pleasures that the world affords, can give a
sinful soul no true consolation, if he be troubled and perplexed for his sins;
they are all miserable comforters, when the guilt of sin lies upon the
conscience: true comfort and fullness of joy is to be found only in Christ,
and in him crucified: for he will take away the guilt of his sins, that they
shall not molest, or trouble his conscience, he will help him bear his sorrows
with a contented patience, he will stand by him, and intercede for him, that in
his temptations and trials his faith may not fail him, Rev. 7. 17 Isa. 25. 8.
and at last he will wipe away all tears from his eyes. All this, and much
more, Christ will do for us; for he will also stand for us against all the
accusations of the devil, be they true or false; if they be true, he will
present his own merits to his Father in satisfaction for us; if they be false,
he will give the devil a shameful repulse, and will curb him that he shall not
hurt us: 1 John 2. 12.
for Christ Jesus the righteous is our Advocate with the Father, and the
propitiation for our sins, and for the sins of the whole world

Consider in the next place, that Christ did now put an end to the Ceremonial
Law, for the types and shadows did cease when he was slain, because he was the
substance of all those ceremonies and sacrifices. This was the last ceremony
which was to be fulfilled, Heb. 13. 11, 12.
that the bodies of those beasts, whose blood was to be brought into the
Sanctuary by the High Priest for sin, were burnt without the Camp. This
Ceremony Christ fulfilled, when he shed his blood without the gate, that he
might sanctify the people with his own blood. For both Jews and Gentiles were
now gathered together at Mount Calvary, where Christ died, that the people of
all Nations might be sanctified with his blood, if they come unto him by faith
to be cleansed from the guilt of their sins, and purified from their
pollutions with his sanctifying grace. Wherefore now, though we are aliens and
strangers to the house of Israel* yet nothing hinders, but that we may go
forth boldly unto him, who finished our redemption by his death without the
gate, that thereby he might sanctify the Gentiles with his blood, as he did
the Jews, and therefore he will not refuse us.

Lastly consider, that Pilate did highly honor our Lord and Savior Christ,
when he wrote this Title to be set over his head upon the Cross, Jon 2^. 10.
Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews; which was a title of great honor,
and not of shame and disgrace unto him. Their manner was to set up a
superscription to show the crimes why a malefactor was put to death; but Pilate
could find no crime, and no fault in Christ, and therefore he wrote this
superscription to clear his innocence, and to brand the Jews with perpetual
ignominy and shame to all generations, for their malice and cruelty against
him. For though Pilate did not believe that Christ was a King, and though he
was persuaded by the chief Priests, and by the people, to condemn him, and to
put him to death; yet God would not suffer him to be persuaded by them to alter
the Title, but to have it written in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, that all
Nations and Languages might know the honor of his Person, and the horrible
wickedness of the bloody Jews in killing their King, whom God had appointed
and sent to be their Savior and Redeemer; also to make their name odious to
all people, as a just judgment of God upon them, because they refused the
sweet tender of his grace and mercy, and killed his dear and only Son. Christ
was brought to the lowest degree of his humiliation, and now God does begin to
glorify him, and to publish his honor and his great Name by the highest
authority to all nations and people, and to the perpetual infamy and reproach
of all his enemies to all posterity. This honor was his due, and God would not
suffer him to loose it, and thus God will do for us also. If we are made the
scorn of men, if we suffer persecution, fire, sword, or famine in a good cause,
and if we die upon this cross, yet God will manifest the integrity of our
hearts, and will give us that honor which is due to us, as his servants and
his children: for if we drink of Christ's bitter cup of sorrows, we shall also
drink of his pleasant cup of joy and consolation.

Wherefore if thou will have the meditations of thy heart upon the passion of
thy dear and gracious Redeemer, to be comfortable and profitable to thy soul,
thou must not look upon him only in that despicable condition, as he is now
upon the cross to the outward eye; but with the eye of faith thou must look
upon him, as he is the eternal Son of God, God and man, and as he is dignified
with all his excellencies and titles of honor: for he was a Prophet, and such
a Prophet as did endow all the former Prophets with the spirit of prophecy,
whose Prophesies did chiefly concern him.

Also he was a Priest after the highest order, whose Priesthood was eternal,
according to this of the Psalmist, Psalm. 110. 4.
The Lord swear and will not repent: Thou art a Priest for ever after the order
of Melchisedeck.

So likewise, he was a spiritual King to rule his Church, and in the hearts of
all his elect, and he did subdue all his enemies under him, and he will also
subdue all the enemies of his spiritual Kingdom in us.

If thou can thus see the excellencies of Christ through his mean and
contemptible condition, and if thou can believe that he is thy Redeemer, and
all-sufficient to be thy Savior, it will inflame the affections of thy heart
with entire love to him, because he has humbled himself so low for thy sake;
it will make thee bend thine ear to his instructions; for he will teach thee
heavenly wisdom, and how to walk in the paths of godliness; he will also
present thy prayers, and all thy holy services to God his Father, and then they
shall be accepted; and this will also work a reverential fear in thee, to yield
all obedience to his commands: If thou do thus look upon Christ, though he
be upon the cross, it will give thee abundant comfort in thy sufferings,
exceeding much joy in the benefits which thou shall have by his passion, and it
will stir thee up to a thankful acknowledgement of his goodness and mercy to
thee.

Now look upon thine own unworthiness, and thou will admire the mo^^, that
Christ should so much humble himself to exalt thee, that he should suffer so
much smart, pain, and torment, to free thee from everlasting torments and
burnings in hell, and that he should loose the comfort of his Deity, and the
sense of his Fathers love, to reconcile thee unto God, and to make an
atonement for thy sins.

Who were the Agents in the Passion of CHRIST.
WE come now to consider what Agents there were in this doleful tragedy of
our Savior Christ, how every one acted for his own ends, how God did make the
designs of the devil, and of all his wicked instruments, to work for his own
glory; and how he did afterward bring their wickedness upon their, own heads.

The whole Passion of Christ, and every circumstance of it was decreed from
eternity, and the three Persons in the sacred Trinity were the first and
principal Agents in this great work of Christ's Passion: for they decreed, that
Jesus Christ the second Person in the holy Trinity should be sacrificed, and
made a propitiation for the sins of the world, which was done at Gods appointed
time. For God the Father sent him into the world for this end and purpose, and
God the Son gave himself to be a ransom for us, and assumed our nature, that
he might fulfill all righteousness, and suffer the whole penalty of the Law for
us; also God the holy Ghost did give him all fullness of grace and power to
bear the bitterness of his passion, and thereby to conquer sin, death, hell,
and the devil, and to give us power also over all the enemies of our salvation.
Though God was the principal Agent in the crucifying of Christ; yet herein he
had no evil intent or purpose, and therefore he was without sin: for he had a
gracious and merciful end in it, that his justice might be satisfied for the
sin of man, and that the redemption and salvation of all his elect might be
wrought by the precious blood, and all* sufficient sacrifice of his dear Son.

But the devil was the chief actor in the wickedness, and cruelty of this sad
tragedy, whose end and design was to hinder our salvation by destroying our
Savior, and this he did seek to bring to pass by wicked means, and of malice
to mankind; and therefore as soon as he had his permission from God, he raised
up his wicked instruments for his hellish design.

First, John 13. 27.
he entered into Judas, and took possession there, Mat. 26. 25, 16.
who out of covetousness sold his Lord and Master to the chief Priests and
Elders for thirty pieces of silver, and sought opportunity to betray him unto
them.

Then he stirred up the chief Priests and Elders against him, who out of malice
and envy did persecute him, and falsely accuse him before Herod and Pilate,
because the people did so much resort unto him.

Pilate condemned him out of fear and flattery to keep his grace and favor
with Caesar, and to please the people; for he thought he did it for Caesar's
honor. The Soldiers crucified him for a reward, and to make a spoil of his
garments.

Thus they are all the devils instruments to put the immaculate Lamb of God to
a most shameful and cruel death for their own wicked ends. But God did overrule
them all by his gracious and wise providence, and made all their purposes and
actions to serve for the furthering of his most loving and merciful end, which
was decreed from eternity.

From hence we may draw sweet meditations for our comfort upon the power and
goodness of God, who can and will overruled the power of the devil, and of all
wicked men, and will so dispose of all their plots and devices, which they
intend for the hurt of his servants, that they shall all serve for his own
glory, and for their good; he can frustrate their wicked intentions, and can
bring about his own end, to effect his own work by them; God has this
provident care of his people, that whatsoever their enemies do maliciously
intend or devise against them shall be brought to naught, or else he will make
it serve for their advantage and gain. Though our enemies be as strong as 1 Samuel ^^
Goliath was, and though we are as unfit to encounter with them, as David was to
fight with that great Giant; yet if we put our confidence in God, as David did,
and keep close unto him by faith in Christ, he will direct a stone to beat out
their brains. And though they be as cunning and as subtle 2 Samuel: 17
as Achitophel was, yet God can confound them in their own craft and policy.

Mark now and consider it well, how God in justice did revenge the treachery
and cruelty that was used in betraying and in murdering of his dear and only
Son, and how he brought their wickedness upon their own heads: for Judas was
given up to a reprobate mind, Mat. 27 5
and immediately after he hanged himself.

God did severely punish the whole nation of the Jews for this most horrible
fact, and laid the innocent blood of his Son upon them and upon their
posterity, which does still rest upon them, because they did wilfully without
cause and out of malice shed it.

Pilate also was soon after cast out of Caesar's favor, and banished into
France; and the Devil was hereby quite vanquished and overcome; so that now he
has no power to hurt the meanest of Gods Saints. Thus will the Lord deal with
all those that have their hands stained with the blood of his Anointed ones,
and with all such as are Actors in any wicked Design: They may hide their
counsels in the dark; yet nothing can be hidden from God: for he has an
All-seeing eye to discover what they go about, and he will bring the evil of
their doings upon themselves, or upon their children.

Wherefore have thou no hand in the blood of Gods servants, and partake not
with the wicked in their evil designs: for the guilt of their sins will
cleave to thee, and God will not suffer it to go unpunished: for if thou art
partaker of other men's sins, thou shall also partake with them in their
punishment: Therefore, Ephesians. 5. 6, 7.
Paul advises the Ephesians not to be partakers with wicked men, because the
wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience for their sins. God
calls his people out of Babylon, saying, 1 Rev. 18. 4
Come out of her my people that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues. But it is a blessed thing to partake with the
children of God in his holy Ordinances, in all holy duties, 2 Cor. 1. 5, 7.
and in the sufferings of Christ; Because we shall also partake with them in
the consolation that is by Christ.

Thus the servants of God should mutually join together in the worship and
service of God, that they may also mutually have the benefit, and comfort of
those services here, and also partake together with them of the glory that
afterward shall be revealed.

Of the penitent Thief.
NOw we come to consider, that Christ was crucified between two thieves,
according to this of the Prophet, Isa. 53. 12
He was numbered with the transgressors; one of them had no remorse of
conscience, nor grief of heart for his offenses; but began to rail upon Christ,
to revile him, and blasphemously to taunt him, saying, Luke 23. 39.
If thou art Christ save thy self and us. But the other was touched by the holy
Ghost with a godly sorrow, and a relenting heart for his sins, and did freely
confess that they two did justly and deservedly suffer death for their
offenses; but he did justify our beloved Savior for his blameless innocence,
and he rebuked his fellow, saying, Fear thou not God, seeing thou art in the
same condemnation? Then he turned to Christ to implore his mercy, and made this
short and sweet Prayer to him: Lord, remember me when thou shall come into thy
Kingdom. To whom Christ immediately gave this gracious Answer, Verily I say unto
thee, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise: Surely these gracious words
of Christ did much mitigate and assuage the sorrows of his perplexed mind,
and much eased the bitterness of his torments, and this blessed Promise gave
him good assurance, that after his present sufferings and pains, he should
enjoy the blessed society of Christ in the heavenly paradise. For as Faith
wrought in his heart a true contrition to Repentance, and opened his mouth to
make a good confession of his sins, and to vindicate the innocence of Christ
from the aspersions of his fellow Malefactor; and also to present his humble
request unto Christ his Lord, for some gracious rememberance of him: so no
doubt it sealed such an holy assurance of future happiness to his sorrowful
soul and wounded conscience, that he did steadfastly believe the promise, and
faithfully looked for the performance of it: whereby his fainting Spirits were
much comforted, and the cruel torturings of his body, which he suffered, were
sanctified and sweetened to him.

Here set the Meditations of thy heart upon the free love and mercy of Christ
to poor sinners, he choseth whom he will, and whom he will he refuses; his
gifts of grace are free, his love and favor is not necessitated, to any.

Genesis 25. 2^.
There were twins in Reb^ccas womb, Romans 9. 13.
God loved the one and he hated the other. Two men may be in one bed; God may
take the one, and he may leave the other: so likewise there were two thieves
crucified with e Luke 1^. 34.
Christ, and he had compassion on the one, but he rejected the other: for he
bestows his grace upon whom he will, and when he pleases. There is no person
so vile, no condition so base, and no time so late as to hinder* Christ from
showing mercy to a poor sinner that is truly sensible of his misery, and feels
the burden of his sin^, and does humbly acknowledge his miserable condition,
and his unworthiness to him, and does earnestly sue for his grace and favor
with a broken and a contrite heart, as this Malefactor did. Also, Christ will
not refuse those that renounce themselves, and their own merits, and rest only
upon his righteousness by faith for their justification, and also upon the
merit of his death for the pardon of their sins, and for the salvation of
their souls: for his promises of grace and mercy are made to such as sigh and
mourn for their transgressions.

Now examine thy condition with a faithful heart: art thou a malefactor and a
grievous sinner against God? Does the guilt of thy sins press heavy upon thee?
Do desire from thy heart to be eased of that burden? Is the remembrance of
them bitter unto thee, though it be when thou art weak and faint, and ready to
give up the ghost? Then look up to Christ with the eye of Faith, confess thy
sins unto him with a penitent heart, and if thine ear be spiritually opened,
thou will then hear a gracious and merciful answer from him to thy Petitions,
and if thou will diligently search the Scriptures, thou will find some promises
of grace which will suit with thy condition that Christ has made to such as
thou art, which thou must apply to thy fainting soul by true faith, and
steadfast hope that it belongs unto thee; then rest upon it with a firm
confidence, to comfort thee in the assurance of thy reconciliation unto God,
which will take away the evil of all thy sorrows, and the terror of death it
self; which to a natural man is most uncomfortable, and death is most fearful
and terrible to such as see the handwriting of God against them: for as they
have lived in sin without repentance; so they dye with the guilt of sin upon
their souls without forgiveness.

This Act of Christ in the conversion of this poor sinner was extraordinary,
and it was a special work of mercy to manifest his power and goodness to him,
even at the last hour, when he had no hope and no means of his salvation, and
when he was upon the Cross expecting death every moment; and also it was to
show that he is no respecter of persons, and that he is not limited to time, or
means, when or how to work repentance in the heart of a dejected sinner, or to
save any that come unto him with an upright heart, and sincere affections,
though it be immediately before they go hence, and shall be seen no more.

For it does not appear that this man had ever any knowledge of Christ, or any
opportunity to come unto him, or any means of grace before this time, or that
he did wittingly and wilfully defer the time of his salvation, or neglect the
means of grace to the last hour, or desperately reserve the hope of his
Redemption to the time of his death. But though it were late before this
Malefactor was converted, or had any true saving grace wrought in him, or
before he did believe in Christ; yet his faith was true, Luke 23. 41.
and he made a good confession of his sins, and did justify the innocence of
Christ in that instant of time when none of his friends durst speak in his
cause, and his Apostles either doubted or seemed to stagger in their faith of
his Divinity. Also, this man's conversion was at such a time, as that he could
neither be baptized, nor have further time for the amendment of his sinful
life.

Here is much matter of Spiritual comfort, if we duly consider how powerful
true faith is to prevail with Christ in all our troubles, sorrows and
necessities: for if we rest and depend upon him, and if our hope and confidence
be only in him, let our condition of life be what it will, he will not deceive
us in our hope, nor leave us without support and comfort; also, if he finds
faith and truth in our hearts, he will deny us no good thing that we crave of
him, be it never so great, or begged never so late: for this poor sinner begged
heavenly happiness at the very last hour of his life, when he had no time to
express any thankfulness for so great a blessing, and yet he had his request
granted.

But this particular Act of Christ's mercy makes no general rule for remission
of sins to those that do wilfully defer their repentance and turning to God to
the last and worst part of their lives: not that Christ is not always ready to
receive the truly humbled, and repenting sinner, but because late repentance is
seldom sound. God will not bestow this heavenly grace at their pleasure, who
do willingly neglect the means of grace, and lose the opportunity that God
has given them for it, and do rather choose to continue still in their sins,
than to leave and forsake them, and to turn to the Lord with all their heart,
and with all their soul.

We cannot but daily see what means the Lord uses to bring us unto Christ,
and to make us get an holy assurance of the pardon of our sins through him by
true repentance: his Law does show us the deformity of our sins, and what we
have justly deserved thereby, which is a forcible means to drive us unto
Christ, by him to have Redemption from the curse of the Law? the sense of our
sins, and the anguish of our Spirits for them are strong motives to make us
seek to our crucified Redeemer, that they may be washed away in his blood, which
he shed upon the cross.

Also the smart of his rod in our troubles, sorrows and afflictions are
special means which God is pleased to use to bring us to repentance; but
specially if we find by the manner of his visitation, that it is for some
particular sins which we have committed, we ought then speedily to repent of
them, and to seek after the blood of Christ, to apply it to our selves by
faith, that the guilt of such sins may not cleave to our souls and consciences,
but that those spiritual wounds which they have made in us may be quickly
healed, before they come to putrid sores and ulcers, and we may have a true
assurance: hereof by our repentance.

If repentance be truly wrought in us, there will be such an holy change in all
the faculties of our souls, in all the affections of our hearts, and in all the
parts of our bodies, that the corruptions of our Nature, and the sinful lusts
of our flesh will be mortified, and the power of sin will be killed in us, that
by the sanctifying Grace of the holy Ghost we may be raised up to newness of
life

If we did seriously consider these things, we should not keep at so far a
distance from Piety and virtue, and we should not be such strangers to a
Christian life and conversation; but we would use all means to get into nearer
society with Christ by true saving faith, and by heavenly contemplation* that
the spiritual dew of his heavenly graces may distill into our hearts to
sanctify us throughout, both in soul and in body, that in Christ we may be
made new creatures.

To this end we must endeavor to keep our faith still in action, and
continually to use it upon all occasions, and in every condition of life: for
thereby we shall draw strength and power from Christ to carry us on through all
temptations and trials, and to support and comfort us in all sorrows and
tribulations; it will purify our hearts from dead works, and suffer no sin to
continue with us without repentance, to hinder the salvation of our souls.

This rare example of the goodness and mercy of Christ to this believing
Thief, may keep us from despair, because Ezech. 18 21, 22.
there is mercy for a sinful soul, if at any time he does truly repent, and
turn to the Lord with a full intent and purpose of will to reform his evil, it
does also teach us not to be secure, or careless of our salvation: for it is
extremely dangerous to loose any opportutunity of grace that God shall give us,
or to take so much liberty to sin as to forget to make our Peace with God in
time: for we must give an account at the last day of all that we have done in
the flesh, and our condition then will be most miserable, if our reckoning be
not made perfect in the righteousness of Christ by faith while we live here
upon earth, and therefore it is the greatest punishment in this life to have no
sense of our spiritual misery, and not to fear or remember the dreadful day
of judgment. Also, this consideration should keep us from rash judgment; and
censuring of any man's condition, though he be a notorious sinner: for God can
give him grace to repent when he pleases.

As this one example of the mercy of Christ to this penitent sinner may keep us
from despair, from security and from rash judging of others; so let it keep us
from presuming upon sin in hope of pardon; we do wilfully delay our repentance
from day unto day, and so continue impenitent to the last part of our life,
because this man had all his sins forgiven even in a moment, and was received
to mercy at the last hour: for God may justly deny us mercy, if we refuse grace
when the means is offered to us. So likewise let it keep us from presuming upon
repentance, because it is not in our power to repent when we will.

This heavenly grace is the gift of God, and it is the first fruits of faith,
which the holy Ghost will work in us, if we are ready to yield obedience to his
holy inspirations, or to make the right use of such means, as he is pleased to
use, to make us willing to seek unto him for it: for if the Spirit of God does
not work it in us, we can have no hope ever to obtain it.

Now consider the strength of faith that was in this poor sinner, he gave the
highest title of honor to Christ when he we was scornfully mocked, and in a
most contemptible condition to the eye of all men; he did embrace him and
vindicate his honor when he was upon the cross, he did believe that heaven
was his Kingdom, though he were now reviled and despised of all men, and that
he had the disposing of all honors and preferments in that Kingdom which made
him pray unto him, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom; also,
his heart was touched with a sensible feeling of his sins, he made a pious
confession of them, and therefore he did pray for mercy out of a true sense of
his misery.

If we can show the faith of this penitent Thief, though our life has been as
vicious as his was, and though we turn to Christ late as he did; yet we may
have good hope of the pardon of our sins, and we may comfortably expect his
felicity, for Christ will return the like gracious answer to our Prayers, and
the like promise of future happiness.

But what faith can we show if we still dishonor Christ with our words, and
works? how can we trust in him, if we do not believe that all regal power both
in heaven and in earth is given unto him? And how can we hope for future
blessedness from him, if we are not confident that he is the disposer of all
the glorious mansions that are in heaven; what godly sorrow have we for our
sins, if we still go on in a presumptuous way of sinning? And what hope is
there of true repentance if we still cherish and foster our sins in our bosom?
if our faith and repentance be no better then thus, Christ will not hear our
Prayers, nor grant our requests.

Wherefore let not the devil delude thee with security or presumption lest he
brings thee to perdition: for many have perished with the shadow of this
deceitful hope.

Look well to the truth of thy faith, that it be well grounded upon the true
knowledge of Christ, and of those excellencies that are in him, that thou may
firmly rest upon him in all troublesome and dangerous times; but chiefly for
the redemption of thy soul.

Neglect not the means of grace, and defer not thy repentance: for God hates
such as upon confidence of repentance in their old age, do presume to sin the
mo^e freely, as if God did not know the deceit and hypocrisy that is in their
hearts.

Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20*
If thou do flatter thy self in thy wickedness, and do bless thy self in
thy heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of my
heart, to ad drankenes to thirst: then know that the Lord will not spare thee,
but then the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against thee, and
all the curses that are written in his book shall lie upon thee, and the Lord
shall blot out thy Name from under heaven.

Consider further how much this penitent sinner was humbled in the sense of his
sins, and of his unworthiness, and also how bountiful and good Christ was to
him: for he durst not presume to beg any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ;
but only some remembrance of him, when he came into his Kingdom; but Christ
did grant him a present possession of his Kingdom, Verily, I say, unto thee,
To day thou shall be with me in Paradise.

This Paradise was the place of blessedness, where all the Saints of God shall
be until the general resurrection, whereof the earthly Paradise was but a
shadow. Psalm. 16. 1. 1.
This blessed place is in the presence of God, where we shall have fulness of
joy, and it is at Gods right hand, where there are pleasures for evermore.

Exodus 34. 6.
Thus is Christ abundant in goodness and in truth, if we have but little
comfort in this short time of our life, yet when we come to the end of our
days we shall have fullness of joy in the Paradise of God together with Christ
our Savior for evermore Wherefore though this life be full of vexations and
troubles, the meditation and hope of heavenly happiness, which we shall
hereafter enjoy to all eternity, will sweeten the bitterness of all our
momentany afflictions and tribulations.

Now comfort thy self, O penitent sinner, if thou art so cast down in the
apprehension of thy sins, that thou dare not come into the presence of God in
regard of Divine justice, Luke 18. 13.
or lift up thine eyes unto heaven with the poor Publicane, to crave what thou
want or desire, because thou have justly incurred his high displeasure by
thy manifold transgressions; yet be not disheartened, faint not, but come
cheerfully to Christ with true faith, and firm confidence to be received: for
he will open a Fountain to thee from whence all Divine mercy flows, and thou will find him always ready and willing to accept of thee: make thy condition
therefore truly known unto him, put up thy prayers and supplications to him,
and though thou desire but a drop of comfort; yet he will give thee abundant
consolation in what thou suffer, and much more than thou desire.

By the example of this Malefactor, we may draw holy Meditations upon the
Divine Nature of true faith for our instruction and comfort: for it looks
beyond the eye of reason, and above the reach of nature, it makes us evidently
to apprehend that which our reason or natural capacity cannot show us, and it
will make us believe in hope, even against hope, that which is impossible to
nature, and incredible to humane reason. This miserable sinner had no reason to
believe in Christ, and to confide in him for his salvation: for we do not read
that ever he heard his preaching, or saw any of his miracles; but he saw him
now ready to dye an ignominious and cursed death upon the cross, and he heard
him thus reviled, Mat. 27. 39.
If thou be the Son of God come down from the cross. Also, he heard him mocked
in this manner by the chief Priests and Elders, He saved others himself he
cannot save: if he be the King of Israel let him come down from the cross, and
we will believe in him; He trusted in God, let him deliver him now, if he will
have him: for he said, I am the Son of God.

Though these and the like blasphemous words were spoken in derision against
him, which were sufficient in all reason to keep back this Malefactor from
trusting in him; yet the holy Ghost did so work upon his heart, that he did
faithfully believe that Christ was the Son of God, that he was the King of
Israel, that he had saved others, and therefore he could save him also, which
made him to apply himself to Christ for comfort, and for his salvation, and in
his addresses to him, he came with all modesty and humble submission, he gave
him all due honor and reverence, as much as he was then able to express, and
then he made this humble suite and supplication to him: and no sooner was his
request made but it was granted, because Christ did see truth and sincerity in
his heart, and integriry in his expressions.

We may observe from hence for our instruction and consolation, that the holy
Ghost can work the conversion of a sinner, either without means, or by
contrary means, he does* sometimes work very strangely upon the will and upon
the affections of the heart: for Christ was now preached by his deadly foes out
of scorn and mockery; Phil. 1 15
as there were some in Paul's time that did preach Christ even of envy and
strife; others of love and good will; yet the Spirit of God did so enlighten
the understanding of this sinful man, and did so work upon his will, and so
seasoned his heart with saving grace, that he received holy instruction
thereby, and what the enemies of Christ did speak in his disgrace, he did apply
it to himself, to confirm him in the truth of his Divinity, which made him
stick close to him by faith, when he was in the lowest degree of his
humiliation: his faith made him rest upon Christ and upon his promise above the
strength of nature, and contrary to all humane reason.

If he had seen the glory of Christ in his transfiguration upon Mount Tabor,
and if he had seen some of his great miracles, or had heard his Divine
Doctrine, and powerful Preaching, his faith had not seemed so great; but now he
did see him only upon Mount Calvary; nailed to his cross, as the worst of
Malefactors are, and rejected of his own nation; so that to the outward eye he
appeared nothing else, but a pitiful spectacle of woeful misery; and yet this
penitent sinner did express an admirable faith in the pangs of a cruel and
violent death, though his faults had been intolerable in his dissolute life:
for nothing but faith could move him to honor and reverence Christ; now he was
in this sad condition, and to sue unto him to be remembered in his Kingdom. By
the eye of his faith he did see in Christ more than humane meekness and
patience in his sufferings, undaunted courage above the strength of nature, to
go thorough with all constancy those torturings and torments, which with all
cruelty and malice were inflicted upon him: and he did see some glympse of
Divine mercy in him, when he heard him pray so graciously for his persecutors,
and tormentors, and for those that put him to death.

In the last place, ponder well in thy heart upon the merciful answer of
Christ to this penitent Malefactor, Verily, I say unto thee, To day thou shall
be with me in Paradise; whereby he did show his power to forgive sins upon
earth.

Thus he said to the sick of the palsy, Mar. 2. 5^ 10.
Son thy sins are forgiven thee: and hereby also he did show that he had power
to dispose of heaven at his own pleasure: Mat. 28. 18.
for all power was given to him both in heaven and in earth: therefore he did
assure this Petitioner, that though his body did now suffer the torments of a
cruel death; yet his soul should live and presently enjoy a most happy and
blessed condition in the Paradise of God, and in the mansions of heaven to all
eternity, which place John 14. 2.
Christ has prepared for his servants.

We shall meet with labor and toil, troubles and crosses in this life, which
do imbitter all our comforts here; but when we shall enjoy this heavenly
Paradise, Rev. 14. 13.
the Spirit says, that we shall rest from our labors, and we shall feel no
more sorrow: our bodies shall sleep in the dust until the general
resurrection; but our souls shall rest in joy and happiness for evermore.

Though we live a restless and uncomfortable life in this world, it will be
but for a short time; but in the world to come we shall have fullness of joy
and felicity with Christ, and with his holy Angels and blessed Saint^ in
heaven, which never shall have an end.

Consider also, that Christ did presently grant his request, and did suddenly
perform his promise: for God does sometimes answer the desires of our hearts
before we speak, and he will give what we need before we ask. When Daniel
prayed for the restoration of Jerusalem, God answered him before he had made
an end of his prayers, Dan. 9. 21
and caused his Angel Gabriel to fly swiftly to touch him, and to inform him
of the time when Jerusasalem should be restored.

But sometimes it is long before we have a return of our prayers, because God
will try our patience, and constancy in waiting his good pleasure, and by his
delays to make us more fervent in our supplications: for he loves an holy
importunity.

1 Samuel 1. 12.
Hannah continued long before the Lord in praying for a child, before she
obtained her request. Also, God does sometimes long delay the performance of
his promise to try our faith and confidence in him; as he did to Abraham for
diverse years, before he gave him a child by Sarah his wife; and also before he
delivered his people out of Egypt. Wherefore faint not in thy prayers, for what
thou desire, neither be weak in faith, if thou have a promise from God, but
rest upon it with an assured hope; for he will choose the fittest time to
answer the Prayers, and to perform his promise, which may most advance his own
glory*, and be best for thy good.

Of the Virgin Mary.
NOw did the sorrows of this blessed Virgin begin, when she saw her dearly
beloved Son in this lamentable condition upon the cross, and heard the
blasphemies and reproaches both of the Jews and Gentiles, she saw how the
barbarous people did insult over him, and what cruel tormens were inflicted
upon every part of his body, and that he was now ready in this extremity of
misery to give up the Ghost.

Luke 2. 34. 35.
Now was old Simeons Prophecy fulfilled, now did a sword pierce thorough her
soul, Isa. 8. 14.
he was now set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel, and for a sign
which shall be spoken against: If Christ had not strengthened her faith, she
had been swallowed up of too much grief and sorrow, for her tender heart could
not indu^e to see the barbarous inhumanity and savage cruelty that her dear Son
suffered, whom she knew to be innocent and just, and free from any offense. For
no doubt Christ had formerly revealed to her, Mar. 10. 33, 34.
as he did to his Disciples both by his words and by his Spirit what he should
suffer at Jerusalem; and it was so decreed by God his Father for the redemption
of man, that their faith and confidence in him might be strengthened; also, that
God sent him into the world for this very end and purpose, that he might work
the salvation of all his Elect by his death. And that the holy Virgin might be
the better armed to bear her great afflictions at this time, she knew him to be
the eternal Son of the living God, though he was clothed with her flesh; and
therefore he was able to bear whatsoewer should be inflicted upon him* and that
he should suffer no more than what was decreed in the secret Counsel of God.
She was also fully persuaded, that though they did kill him; yet he would rise
again the third day according to his own words, in conquest and triumph over
all his enemies, maugre all their power and policy to prevent i^.

The blessed Virgin did ponder these things in her mind* she laid them up in
her heart, and did faithfully believe them, which did much sweeten her
sorrows, and mitigate the anguish of her soul, and hereby she did bear her
afflictions with the more contented patience.

Thus will Christ arm his servants with Christian fortitude, and will furnish
them with spiritual abilities when they are to encounter with any hard trial,
and he will give them heavenly comforts for their encouragement, when they
suffer any sorrows or afflictions for his sake: for they are all as dear unto
him as his Mother was. Wherefore if we are in any distress, or put upon any
service which is above the strength of nature, we must look upon the Almighty
power of Christ with the eye of Faith, as he is God as well as Man, and upon
his goodness and tender love to all his servants, and also upon Gods eternal
decree and wise providence, that nothing can be imposed upon us, but what was
preordained and foreseen by God himself for his own glory, and then Christ our
blessed Redeemer will fit us for it: and if it be too hard for us to undergo,
he will direct and assist us with his Spirit in it; also, if the burden be too
heavy for our strength to bear, he will either lessen the burden, or increase
our strength, or else he will act the part of the Cyrenian, and take it off
from us in his good time.

The best of Gods servants can claim no Privilege from crosses, sorrows and
afflictions in this life: for they must pass thorough many tribulations,
before they come to their eternal rest in heaven.

God has many gracious ends in suffering his servants to be tempted, to be
tried, to be buffeted and afflicted; and whatsoever the instruments which he
uses do intend against them; yet he will frustrate their wicked designs, and
will effect his own work for his own glory, and for their good.

^ Cor. 12 ^, ^, 9.
Paul had his temptations and his buffetings by the messenger of Satan, to keep
him from spiritual pride through the abundance of revelations, and to manifest
the power of God in his weakness, and the grace and favor of Christ in
sustaining him in his sufferings. How strangely was Abraham's faith and Jobs
patience tried? How was God glorified thereby? And how were they rewarded for
their obedience and constancy? What afflictions did the Israelites suffer in
the wilderness, and yet they were but the corrections of a loving Father, to a
stiffenecked son? For thus says Moses to them: Deuteronomy. 8. 5
Thou shall also consider in thine heart, that as a man chasteneth his son, so
the Lord thy God chasteneth thee. Holy David did often feel the smart of Gods
rod, and he found much good and comfort by it. Psalm. 119. 6^.
Before I was afflicted, (says he) I went astray, but now have I kept thy
word. Also he says, Psalm. 23. 4
Thy rod and thy staff they comfort me; and then he concludes thus. Psalm. 94.
12
Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord. This exhortation the wise man
gives, Prove. 3. 11, 12.
My Son despise not the chastening of the Lord: neither beweary of his
correction, for whom the Lord loves he corrects, even as a Father the son in
whom he delights. Heb. 12. 11.
But no chastening for the present seems joyous, but grievous: nevertheless
afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness, unto them which
are exercised thereby. Wherefore we must not measure the love of God by the
outward blessings which we enjoy, nor his displeasure by the crosses which we
suffer.

Consider now, that none could ever claim greater privilege from afflictions
and sorrows, than the Virgin Mary, and none was ever more to be honored upon
earth than she: for she did bear Christ the only Son of the eternal God in her
blessed womb, who had the command of all creatures in heaven and in earth, and
who was the fountain of all true consolation, and she enjoyed the comfort of
his sacred society many years, and yet she had her cares, she had her sorrows,
her whole life was full of afflictions, wants and necessities, she was put to
great extremities when Christ was born, soon after she fled into Egypt for the
safety of her Sons life, she lost him three days at Jerusalem; and at that
time she sought him with a sorrowful heart.

But above all behold and see how her soul is now pierced thorough with grief:
for she must now lose his gracious company for ever, she now beholds him upon
the Cross, she sees how his tender body is rent and torn with the thorns,
and with the whip, how his hands and feet are nailed to the Cross, as if he
had been a notorious malefactor, and she hears the revilings and blasphemies
that were uttered against him in a most shameful and spiteful manner, which was
enough to break her sorrowful heart; but especially she did see his very heart
blood gush out of his side, which was pierced with a spear. This was the woeful
and lamentable condition of the blessed Virgin at this time; but Christ gave
her inward comfort and strength of faith answerable to the greatness of her
sorrows, which did uphold her heart from fainting, and her soul from sinking.

This may be the condition of any of Gods servants, they may be oppressed and
pressed down with temporal miseries, they may drink deep in the bitterness of
them; but yet they are freed from the curse that was upon them, and there is
nothing in them to hurt their souls; for that is taken away by these sufferings
of Christ, which makes the burden of them more easy, that they may bear it
with a willing mind.

When our afflictions are thus sanctified, we shall find the fruit and benefit
that comes thereby to be very sweet and profitable, so that we shall have good
cause to rejoice under them: for as our sorrows and sufferings do abound; so
also grace shall superabound, 2 Cor. 1. 5.
and as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also
abounds by Christ.

Consider yet further, that as the holy Virgin was continually exercised under
the Cross, and had her share in common calamities; so likewise she had her
particular cares of want and scarcity: for her condition of life was but mean,
and her livelihood was but small: therefore she was now like to be left
destitute of all comfort, relief and succor. But Christ her beloved Son takes
care of her, he provides as well for the maintenance of her body, as for the
comfort of her soul, and commends her to John his beloved Disciple. John 19.
26, 27.
Woman, says he, to his Mother, behold thy Son, and to John he said, Behold
thy Mother. And from that hour John took her unto his own home, and provided
for her during her life.

Thus was the blessed Virgin trained up in the school of affliction and sorrow,
to keep her from spiritual pride, though she were honored and blessed above
all other women; and that her mind should not be drawn away after the pomp
and vanitis of the world, but still to bear Christ in her heart, as sometimes
she did bear him in her womb. It was also to free her from all earthly cares,
that the meditations of her heart might be always heavenly, and that the
desire of her soul might be to be with Christ.

This care Christ will have to provide whatsoever is needful for all those
that belong unto him: for he best knows what is good for us, and he will not
suffer us to want, if we put our trust in him. We need not carke and care for
the transitory things of this life, which are given to the wicked as well as to
the godly: We need not distrust the wise Providence of God; but we may
confidently rest upon Christ: for he will support and comfort us in our
tribulations, and will provide for us in our wants and necessities: troubles
and sorrows may come upon us, loss of Parents, Children, or Friends will
come, and casualties may happen in our estate, which we would neither foresee
nor prevent: these and the like will imbitter all the comfort and content that
we can find in this world; but if we belong unto Christ, we shall never lose
him, neither can any thing bereave us of the sweet consolation that we shall
find in him.

This we may believe to be true, that our crosses and sufferings in this life
may be better for us then to enjoy all earthly pleasures and delights. Moses
refuses to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, chosing rather to ^ Heb.
11. 35, 25, 26.
suffer* affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season: esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the
treasures in Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompense of the reward. Heb.
12. 12
Then lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees: Let not outward
crosses or afflictions too much seize upon thee; but by faith have respect unto
the recompense of the reward, and raise up thy Meditations to Spiritual
things, set the affections of thy heart upon Christ, and him crucified, which
will make thy life comfortable here, and will bring thee to reign eternally
with him hereafter.

Now we must learn how to draw true consolation to our souls from this eternal
Fountain of comfort, when outward calamities or anguish of spirit does
overpresse us. Our worldly preferments, our natural endowments, humane
learning, or common grace cannot reach this Fountain, the well is deep, and
nothing can reach it but true Faith, which is the only bucket to draw this
water of comfort from Christ, which will refresh our souls when they are
thirsty and dry* heaven will then smile upon us, though the world frowns; the
inward man will feel comfort and consolation, though the outward man be
miserably tortured and tormented with the vexations, and miseries that are
incident to this life. Wherefore every pain and grief that we feel, and every
cross and affliction that we suffer, should make us have a greater desire to
some of this water, 2 Samuel 23. 15.
than David had to drink of the water of the well of Bethlehem, which was by
the gate. Also, if we will draw comfort to our selves from this heavenly
Fountain, we must then comfort the comfortless, Mat. 25. 35.
we must feed the hungry, visit the sick, cloth the naked, and relieve the
oppressed; then Christ will comfort us in our distresses, and he will provide
for us in our necessities. Psalm. 34. 10
The young lions may lack and suffer hunger, but we shall not want any good
thing.

Christ was Zech 13. 1
this Fountain which God promised should be opened to the house of David, and
to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness, and it was opened
when this blessed Virgin saw the blood and water gush out of his side, which
was pierced with the Spear, to take away the guilt of sin that does wound our
souls, and to wash away the filth of sin that does pollute and defile our
consciences. No darts of Satan can be so fiery against a poor sinner, but this
blood can quench them, no wound can be so deadly, or so deep in the soul, but
this blood can search it, and cure it, if it be rightly applied by Faith,
whereof we may have an holy assurance by our repentance and newness of life.

Wherefore here is much comfort for a poor languishing soul, that is doubtful
of the pardon of his sins, if his Faith can persuade him that Christ Jesus was
crucified for him, and that this Fountain was opened for his cure: for without
this holy persuasion nothing can truly comfort us in our spiritual afflictions.

Faith will give us this holy assurance, if by the virtue and power thereof we
can say with holy Paul, Gal. 6. 14
By the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ the world is crucified to me, and I
unto the world.

Hereby we have power to mortify our evil concupiscence, and all our sinful
lusts, that they may have no dominion over us, to lead us captive unto
destruction.

Lastly we may learn by the Example of our blessed Savior, that it is a pious
duty which God requires, for children to provide for their needy, or aged
parents according to their ability, both in their life and at their death; and
this is part of that thankfulness, which they ow to their parents, and which
God has commanded them to perform: for next under God we ow our selves, and
whatsoever we have unto them; we had our being, our breeding, and our education
from them; can any expression of thankfulness then be too much for them? If
God has blessed us with plenty and with increase, it was for our parents
sakes, to relieve and succor them in their age, and in their necessity; or
else it was because they were faithful to God in his worship and service, and
therefore God has poured down his blessings upon us their children, as it has
been his usual custom so to do. Wherefore if God has dealt bountifully with
us, and but sparingly with our parents, we are both bound by the Law of God,
and by the law of nature, to supply their wants according to our power.

As God has communicated some part of his own honor to our Parents, by giving
them the Title of Father, to preserve the pre-eminence which he has given them
over their children; so he has bound the children by a strict command to
honor their Parents, and to express it by their reverence, obedience and
thankfulness to them for what they have received from them which they cannot
perform as they ought, if they do withdraw any thing from their due honor, and
dignity, or their helping hand from them in their necessity. Children are not
bound thus to honor their Parents only in their minority, or so long as they
are under their tuition and government: for the Commandment of God does not
limit it to these times; but it gives the Father and the Mother this honor so
long as they have any child living; and there is a promise of a great blessing
annexed to this Commandment. Children may come to be greater in worldly
honors and preferments then their Parents; and yet they have no privilege
against this Command of God. Thus says Paul, Ephesians. 6. 1.
Children, obey your Parents in the Lord: for this is right: and then he cites
Gods Commandment which binds them to this obedience.

Luke 2. 51.
Christ himself was subject to his Parents, until his heavenly Fathers
business called him away, and now at his death he takes order for his Mothers
maintenance. Wherefore, if children do thus express their thankfulness to
their Parents, and do thus honor and obey them according to the Example of
Christ; then God will provide for them and their children, and will perform his
promise of long life, and of blessings, both temporal and eternal: on the
contrary, God will curse the children that dishonor their Parents, and are in
this kind unthankful to them, both in this life and in the life to come.

The darkning of the Sun.
NOw behold how God did show a miraculous sign of his high indsgnation against
the cruelty of the bloody Jews and barbarous Gentiles to his only Son, and how
much he did hate and abhor their abominable sin: Mar. 27. 45
For the Sun was then totally darkened at midday, and so continued for the
space of three hours, which was a far greater darkness than could be by any
eclipse, as if it had disdained to look upon, and mourned to see such an
horrible fact as was then committed in crucifying the Lord of glory.

Hereby also was signified how the glory Mal. 4. 2.
of the Sun of righteousness was then darkened: Isa. 53. 2.
There was no beauty in him, and no comeliness that we should desire him.
Christ was then in the extremity of his passion: for the floodgates of Gods
wrath were set open upon him, and the bright beams of his heavenly Fathers
countenance were clouded from him, which he could not regain until he had
fully satisfied his justice for the guilt of our sins, which he had taken upon
himself, and which did most obscure his transcendent beauty, which was
naturally in him.

All this Christ has suffered for us, that God might look favorably upon us,
and that the guilt of our sins might be done away by faith in his blood; also,
that the spots and pollutions of them might be washed away in the Laver of
Regeneration, and newness of life.

This miraculous darkning of the Sun was also an evident sign to the Jews of
their unbelief, and to show the blindness of their understanding, the
obstinacy of their will, and that they were given up to a reprobate mind, as a
just judgment of God for their unbelief, and for this their loud crying sin,
in which sad condition they continue even to this day: 2 Cor. 3. 13, 14.
for their minds were blinded, and in the reading of the Old Testament there
was a vail upon their heart; so that they could not steadfastly look to the end
of that which is abolished, which vail is not yet taken away from them. This
was typified by that vail which Moses put over his face, when he was come down
from the Mount, and from ^ Exodus 34. 33.
the Presence of God.

In the days of Samuel God did show a manifest token of his high displeasure
against his people for their great sin, 1 Samuel 12. 17.
when he sent thunder and rain in the time of wheat harvest* to let them know
that their wickedness was great in the sight of the Lord, in asking them a
King, 2 Samuel 8. 7.
because they had rejected the Lord, that he should not reign over them.

God will set his mark upon obstinate and rebellious sinners, that will not be
reclaimed, and turn to the Lord, as he did upon Cain and others, to brand them
with perpetual infamy and shame for their impenitency. God has also several
judgments for wicked men, as we may see by daily experience in these sinful
times: Some he marks for the sword, some for famine, others for the pestilence,
sudden death, or the like; upon whomsoever his mark is set, there the judgment
will fall.

God has likewise his mark of preservation, which he will set upon his own
servants in times of mortality, or of any other common calamity: Zech. 9. 4.
for when he sends forth his destroying Angel in a general calamity to
destroy thousands, he will also in much mercy send forth another Angel to mark
and seal those in their foreheads, who are to be preserved, that whatsoever the
calamity be, it may not hurt them.

Consider now how uncomfortable it is to want the light of the Sun, and what
little joy we can take in this life, if we want the light of our eyes, and then
we shall see that it is much more uncomfortable to want the spiritual light of
our understanding. Thus says Christ, Mat. 6. 22, 23.
The light of the body is the eye, if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole
body shall be full of light: But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be
full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how
great is that darkness?

Wherefore, if the Sun of righteousness does not shine upon us, to give light
to our understanding; if he does not heal the perverseness of our will, and
the sinfulness of our affections, we shall walk in darkness and in the shadow
of death: for we shall be without a guide to keep us from stumbling, and
falling dangerously into gross sins, wherein if we continue without
repentance, we may justly fear some judgment of God to fall on us, or some
manifest sign of his indignation to be showed upon us for our sins.

We should therefore learn this heavenly wisdom, to break off from our sins to
day by true repentance and turning to the Lord, lest we be marked for
destruction too morrow; and we should make our peace with God by faith in
Christ, that we may be marked with the seal of redemption, which Christ will
stamp upon every true believers heart for their preservation from evil in this
life, and for their eternal felicity in the life to come.

Consider yet further, how the Sun in the Firmament did mourn to see the King
of glory thus abased, to see the ignominy and disgrace that was cast upon him,
how cruelly he was used, and how unjustly he was put to death. This should
teach us to mourn for the calamities of the Church of God, and for the loss of
any pillar in that spiritual building. We have many examples of the servants
of God for this pious duty; Jeremiah, Ezrah, Nehemiah, and others mourned and
lamented greatly for the first desolations of Jerusalem, and of the Temple.
Luke 19. 41, 42, 43.
Christ himself wept over Jerusalem, when he beheld it, because he knew the
final destruction that should shortly after come upon it. When Elisha l 2
King. 13. 14.
the Prophet was fallen sick of the sickness whereof he dyed, Joash the King
of Israel came down unto him, and wept over his face and said, O my Father, my
Father, the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof.

This was a full expression of the grief and sorrow of his heart for the loss
of so great a Prophet, who was a strong Pillar in the house of Israel.

Consider also that if there be no mourning, and no tears for the sins of a
nation, or people, God will make the heavens to mourn, and the clouds to pour
down rivers of tears, to teach us what we should do, when the land is
overgrown with the weeds of sin.

If it be so, that the servants of God do mourn for the miseries that his
Church does suffer, and for the loss or pulling down of any polished stone in
that heavenly building; then whose servants are they, and what master do they
serve, that dismember the mystical body of Christ, that pull down any Pillar
of his Church, or pull any polished stone out of his spiritual Temple, whereby
it may be in danger of ruin, or to fall to decay? Also, they are in a sad
condition, that pollute, deface, or throw down his material temples, to the
dishonor of his Name, to the suppressing of his true worship and service, and
to bring in sects and schisms, profaneness and superstition. God will not
suffer such instruments of wickedness to go unpunished; but in his due Time he
will make them examples of his fury, if they do not sincerely repent of their
crying sins, and cursed abominations.

By this strange darkness of the Sun we may also learn how uncomfortable it is
to a child of God, to have the light of his Countenance clouded from him.
Psalm. 30. 7
David was much troubled when God did hide his Face from him.

How was Christ himself perplexed in his soul, when the light of Gods
countenance was withdrawn from him? It made him cry out in the bitterness of
his Spirit, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? As it is the greatest
blessedness to ^njoy the favor of God, so it is most uncomfortable when we
have no apprehension of it. Thus says David of himself, Psalm. 21. 6
Thou haste made him exceeding glad with thy countenance. Also, thus he
prays, Psalm. 4. 6.
Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.

It does likewise teach us what a great punishment it is when the Ministers of
God are removed from their places, and the people fit in darkness, and left to
ignorance and spiritual blindness, or else to such teachers, as cannot show
them the right way to heavenly happiness. But it is a punishment above all
other, when God will take away his Word and Gospel from a Nation, or people;
because they despise it, and will not learn instruction by it.

Christ thus threatens the Church of Ephesus. Rev. 2. 5.
Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first
works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and I will remove thy candlestick
out of his place, except thou repent. Darkness of understanding was one of the
curses which God threatened to bring upon his people, if they would not obey his
Law. Deuteronomy. 28. 28, 26.
The Lord shall smite thee with blindness, and thou shall grope at noondayes,
as the blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shall not prosper in thy ways.

Among the sins of the Jews which the Prophet reckons up, this was one, Isa.
59. 7, 9, 10.
that they made haste to shed innocent blood; Therefore (says he) is judgment
far from us, neither does justice overtake us: We wait for light, but behold
obscurity; for brightness, but we walk in darkness. We grope for the wall
like the blind; and we grope as if we had no eyes: We stumble at noonday, as
in the night, we are in desolate places as dead men.

All this was truly verified in the Jews at this time, when they shed the
innocent blood of our Savior Christ upon the Cross.

It is therefore a fearful judgment, when God does bereave us of the means of
knowledge and understanding of his will. Hear what the Lord threatens by his
Prophet. Amos 11, 12.
Behold the days come, says the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the
land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words
of the Lord. And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the North even to
the East, they shall run to and fro to seek the Word of the Lord, and shall not
find it.

Miserable are the people that are in such a case: for they have no means to
come to the knowledge of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, by whom they must be
saved.

Now let us Meditate with faithful hearts on the wonderful goodness of God,
who has continued still unto us the light of his Gospel, and his Word of
truth, to be a Lanthorn to our feet, and a light unto our paths, and to guide
us into the way of true peace and heavenly felicity, whereas our sins have
justly deserved that he should remove our Candlestick from us. Let us also
study all thankfulness to him for so great a blessing, and labor to improve
it to the glory of God, and to the edification of our souls to eternal life. 1 Samuel 3. 1
In the days of the Judges until Samuels time the Word of the Lord was
precious; there was no open vision. Wherefore, while we do enjoy it we should
highly prize it, and embrace it with pure affections, as the means which God
has appointed for our salvation.

In the last place consider, that as it was the good pleasure of God to humble
his only Son so low before he had finished the work of our redemption, as that
the Sun seemed to mourn at the sight of it: so likewise God is sometimes
pleased to bring his dearest servants from the highest degree of honor to the
lowest condition of men for some end and purpose, which he in his secret wisdom
does intend, either for his own glory, or for their good. It may be our case to
be brought from plenty to penury, from pleasure to pain, from health to
sickness, from credit and honor to shame and disgrace; but we need not repine
at Gods Providence herein: for as he can advance his own glory by our
condition, how mean soever it be; so he can and will sanctify our condition to
our comfort, and for our good, though it be among the lowest degrees of men, if
we do meekly submit to his will and pleasure. We cannot be brought so low as
our gracious Savior was, we cannot suffer so much of Gods fury as he did: for
he drank a full draught, and the very dregs of the cup of trembling at Gods
hand; but we have a very small portion measured out to us, and the bitterness
of it will soon be out of our taste: Psalm. 30. 5.
for the anger of Godendureth but a moment, in his favor is life; we^ping may
endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. Our cup of affliction is
tempered and measured out by Christ according to our strength, and it is
sweetened with many comforts, that we may willingly take it, and be able to bear
it.

Christ has had full experience of our sorrows, and he will compassionate us
in our miseries. If we are oppressed under the cross, he will ease it in his
good time; if we are perplexed for our sins, he will present our condition to
his Father, and the merit of his blood to procure our atonement with God, that
the bright beams of his grace and favor may again shine upon us.

If we do seriously meditate on these things, we may* faithfully believe, that
Christ the Sun of righteousness will at length come with healing in his wings,
and dispell the black cloud of afflictions, which has long overshadowed us.

Of the Death of our SAVIOR CHRIST.
COnsider now with all pious devotion, to what weakness both of spirit and
body our dear and precious Savior was brought, when he was upon the Cross:
for his blood was wasted, his Spirits were spent, the moisture of his body was
dried up, and the time of his dissolution was now at hand.

Now was fulfilled that of the Prophet, Zech. 13. 7
Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow,
says the Lord of hosts: smite the shepherd and the sheep shall be scattered.
When Christ was in this extremity of weakness a little before his death, Joh.
19. 28.
he said, I thirst, by all which he did show the truth of his humanity. This
thirst was not so much for wine, or water to refresh his fainting spirits, as
it was to have our redemption finished, that God might be glorified in the
salvation of mankind. Then the barbarous people that had no humanity in them,
gave him Vinegar in a sponge to drink, which they did out of malice to increase
his pain and misery; but the Lord did so order it, that it was to fulfill this
saying of the Psalmist, Psalm. 69. 21.
They gave me also gall for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me Vinegar to d
Joh. 19. 30
drink. When Christ had tasted it, he said, It is finished; because all the
Prophesies were then fulfilled that were spoken of him in his life. Luke 23. 46.
Then he commended his Spirit into the hands of his Father, and gave up the
Ghost: As this Lamb of God lived in perfect innocence, so he dyed in perfect
meekness.

Then presently after Joh. 19. 34
one of the soldiers pierced his side with a spear to his very heart, and
forthwith come thereout blood and water; that the Scripture might be fulfilled,
Zech. 12 10.
They shall look on him whom they pierced.

This was also done that we might faithfully believe the truth of his death.
This is a special Article of our Faith, which we must steadfastly believe, if
we will have comfort in the assurance of our redemption: for if Christ had not
truly dyed, the justice of God had not been fully satisfied for our sins, we
could have had no power to dye unto sin, or to mortify our corruptions and
sinful lusts, and death would be most bitter, fearful and terrible to us. If
Christ had not dyed and rose again, how could death have been destroyed? How
could the sting of death be taken out? Who should have sanctified death unto
us? And how could we be willing to embrace it? Wherefore if we do truly believe
the death of Christ, and that he dyed for us, it will minister much matter of
exceeding great consolation to our souls at the hour of our dissolution.

From the former considerations we may draw much comfortable matter for our
hearts to meditate upon.

First it does evidently appear that our Savior Christ did assume to his Deity
our whole nature, soul and body, which did still retain all the properties of
humane nature, unconfounded with his Deity: Heb. 2. 17
He was like unto us in all things, Heb 4. 25.
sin only excepted. His soul was sensible of grief and sorrow; his body did
feel the smart of pain, he was subject to all our natural passions and
infirmities, which may be without sin; he was sensible of hunger, thirst,
weariness and the like: he was also subject to mortality, though not to
corruption: for, Psalm. 16. 10
God would not suffer his holy One to see corruption; because he had no spot*
or stain of sin in him, and there was a true dissolution of his soul from his
body when he dyed.

If Christ had not assumed our whole nature, he could not have perfectly saved
and redeemed us, soul and body, and then the work, which God sent him to do,
had not been finished, but we had still remained in our sins.

Heb. 10. 10
But the whole work of our Redemption was fully wrought by that which he
suffered, both in his soul and in his body, to give us an holy assurance that
we are freed from the guilt of sin here, and saved from the condemning power of
sin hereafter.

Secondly, we may learn from thence this instruction, so to regulate our
thirsty desires, that they may be for the glory of God, and not for own sinful
ends. If we thirst after the things of this world for any other end, than for
the honor of God; our thirst is sinful, and it will be satisfied with vinegar,
or gal; and if we thirst after blood, rapine or revenge, the end of these and
the like thirsty desires will be the death of our souls. But if our thirst be
holy and heavenly, we shall then have thirsty desires and holy endeavors Isal.
613.
how to enjoy God, and to do his will, how to preserve our neighbors safety,
and how to keep our selves undefiled; and if we can say as David did, Psalm.
143. 6.
My soul thirsts after thee, O Lord, as a thirsty land: then our thirst shall
be quenched, and our souls shall be refreshed with the sweet comforts of God.
Also, if we thirst after Christ Jesus, who is the chief honor of a Christian,
and after grace and godliness, which are the true riches of the soul; then
Christ will be a fountain of living water to us, which only can quench our
spiritual o Joh. 4. 10.
thirst, and refresh our panting souls, and it shall spring up in us to
everlasting life. Christ calls every one to drink of this water. John 7. 37
Is any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink: Thus says the Prophet,
Isa. 55. 1.
Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and ye that have no
silver, come, buy and eat; come, I say, buy wine and milk without silver and
without money.

Here Christ offers himself and his graces freely: But to whom? It is only
to such as have a spiritual thirst after him. Wherefore if this be the thirst
of our souls to enjoy Christ, and him crucified, we shall see such a Fountain
of water of life flow out of his blessed fide, as will purify our hearts from
all sin, and cleanse our consciences from all iniquity, whereby our thirsty
souls will be more comforted and refreshed, than our bodies can be by any
Fountain of Water in our natural thirst. Psalm. 42.
This holy thirst made David's soul pant more after God, than the Heart pants
after the waterbrooks.

Thirdly, from this consideration that Christ had vinegar given him in a
sponge, we may learn this profitable Doctrine, that there is no content nor
stability in any earthly thing, for though we should enjoy all the contentment
that the world can give us; yet it will not satisfy our desires, something
will be wanting, and we shall still thirst after more, and we shall find
soureness and bitterness in the best of earthly things. Also, that which we do
possess, we have it but in a sponge, a sudden casualty by fire, or water, a
word spoken against King, or State will wring it out, a little pain or sickness
a little trouble or sorrow will soon blaste the comfort of of it, and make it
like vinegar to our taste. If we should meet with nothing to imbitter, or blast
our earthly joys, yet in their own nature they are transitory and unstable,
Eccl. 12. 1.
and when old age comes, we shall take no pleasure in them, and death will
quite bereave us of them all. Now then if we put our trust in these vain things
they will deceive, and will give us no solid comfort, except we do enjoy them
in Christ: for without him the best of all earthly blessings are but vanity and
vexation of Spirit. Wherefore let this be our greatest care, our chiefest joy,
and the desire of our souls to enjoy Christ, to be joined unto him with the
bond of faith and love; and then whatsoever our estate or condition be. we
shall find comfort in it, we shall enjoy it with a good conscience, we shall
glorify God with it, and if we do casually lose it, we shall lose nothing by
it: for we shall still enjoy Christ, who will abundantly recompense our earthly
losses with spiritual comforts here, and with an eternal inheritance
hereafter,

Fourthly, when death comes near to us, we have most need of the best comforts,
both for soul and body that we may the more strongly encounter with this
terrible enemy in the dissolution of our souls from our bodies; but Christ at
this time had sour vinegar given him, which could no way comfort him; but
rather aggravate his pains and sorrows, when he was every way in great
extremity.

This does fitly resemble the case of many of Gods dear servants: for they are
often troubled and perplexed with many fears, doubtings, temptations, and evil
sugestions of the devil, when they are to enter into a single combat with
death it self: for then he will lay their sins before them with all the
aggravations that may be, and he will labor to hide the mercies of God in
Christ from them, that they might have no hope, or comfort to support them in
this great conflict, which does put them into trouble of mind, grief of heart,
and anguish of spirit, and it is more uncomfortable and unpleasing to their
spiritual taste, than any vinegar can be to the palate. Then is the time* when
the Devil is most maliciously bent against them, then does he bestirre
himself, to trouble the Peace of their consciences, to disquiet the
tranquillity of their minds, and to keep them from the assurance of the love
and favor of God to them in Christ, that they should not comfortably resign up
their souls unto God: he will affright them with the fear of death, with the
greatness of their sins, with the hypocrisy of their hearts, with their
infidelity and unbelief, he will labor to keep the gracious promises of God
from them, or else to persuade them that they belong not unto them, that so
they should have no comfortable assurance of the pardon of their sins. Also he
will terrify them with the fear of Gods justice, and with the terror of the
dreadful day of judgment, if it were possible, to drive them into despair.

But here is comfort for a poor sinner, that it is thus assaulted by the Devil,
when he is near his departure out of this life, or at any other time; that
Christ has sanctified all these sorrows and conflicts to him, and he will
confirm his faith, and stablish his hope upon his true humiliation for his
sins; and then those fears and doubtings will vanish away; for he knows that
we are not able to resist such temptations, and the weakness of our spirits,
and of body is such, that we cannot withstand such strong assaults, and
therefore Christ will give most strength to our inward man, when the outward
man is most weak, and he will most weaken the power of the Devil, when his
malice is strongest to do us hurt. And though we may be dangerously foiled in
these spiritual combats; yet Christ will uphold our faith, he will give us
spiritual consolation, and will speak peace to our souls and consciences, when
through weakness of body we cannot express the joy and comfort of it.

Fifthly, before we can willingly leave this world, we must be well persuaded
that we shall enjoy a better habitation in the world to come, which holy
persuasion that we may have, we must seriously consider how we have done the
works which God has appointed us, how we have improved the talent that he has
lent us, how we have glorified God in our calling, and what good we have done
to our neighbor, according to the means, and ability that God has given us:
for we must give an account of all these things before the Tribunal Seat of
God, and we shall be judged according to our works.

Wherefore if we can truly say that we have done Gods works to the best of our
power, and with an upright heart, and that we have well improved our time, and
our talent to the glory of God, then we may say with Christ, It is finished,
and with Paul, 2 Timothy 7. 8
I have finished my course and have kept the faith; henceforth is laid up for
me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me
at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his
appearing. And though our work has been very imperfectly done by us; yet
Christ our Savior will make it perfect by that which he has done for us in
our nature, and God will accept it for his sake: then we shall cheerfully
resign up our souls to God at the hour of our dissolution.

Sixthly, Christ does here teach us to commend our souls into the hands of God;
we received them immediately from God, and therefore we ought to resign them up
again unto him, he breathed into us the breath of life, which is our chiefest
and most precious Jewel, and therefore we ought to keep it holy and undefiled
for him, that when he is pleased to call for it, we may be sure to deliver it
up to himself: for the Devil will be ready watching for it, as soon as it is
separated from the body, and none can keep it from him but only God. Wherefore
we must keep our souls so pure and clean, that God may accept them, and take
them into his charge: for if we present unto him a filthy soul, polluted with
the guilt of sin, we have no ground to believe that God will take care of it,
and keep it unto the general resurrection.

Wherefore, we should study and labor to keep our souls clean from sin, by
washing them daily in the blood of Christ by faith: if they be stained with the
sins of the day, we should thus cleanse them at night before we sleep, and if
they are defiled with the pollutions of the night ^ we must not forget to wash
them with the tears, sighs and groans, that flow from a sorrowful and
contrite heart in the morning, before we set about our necessary occasions in
our calling, that we may comfortably believe that God will bless and prosper
our handy work.

If this be our daily and constant practice, the blessing of God will go along
with us in all our actions, sin cannot then cleave to our souls to make death
fearful to us, death cannot then come suddenly upon us, neither will the
remembrance of it be terrible; but we shall cheerfully commend our souls to
God; because we may confidently believe that he will keep them in his heavenly
mansions, until they shall be again united to our bodies with an unseparable
union, and made glorious bodies fit to live and reign with Christ for ever.

But natural men know not the worth of their souls, nor the great price
wherewith they are redeemed, if they belong unto Christ, they suppose that the
soul comes from a Principle of nature, as the body does; whereas it is an
immortal spirit, which proceeds not from any mortal principle, but is
breathed into us by the holy Ghost, as soon as the body is framed in the womb,
and made capable to receive this breath of life. Though the soul be thus highly
to be prized, and far excels the body in worth and dignity; yet natural men
will pamper and garnish out the body, which is every day subject to corruption
and change; but they suffer their souls to starve for want of spiritual food,
and to go naked for want of spiritual clothing; whereby they are exposed to
the venomous darts of the Devil, and to the scorching heat of their sinful
lusts. Their souls have no spiritual light to foresee dangers and to shun
them, they have no heavenly grace to resist the temptations and allurements of
the world, the flesh and the Devil; but what the eye or the ear lets in, is
willingly received. Thus their souls are polluted and unclean, and death does
snatch them away; because they cannot willingly deliver them up: for they have
no faith to believe, and no assurance to persuade them, that God will receive
their souls, when they are parted from their bodies.

This is the condition of our souls by nature, and so long as they are in this
condition God will not receive them, and then they must needs be a prey to the
Devil. Psalm. 103* 4.
But Christ has redeemed our souls from destruction, 1 Cor. 6. 20.
he has bought us with a great price, he has shed his most precious blood
upon the cross, to take away the guilt and filth of our sins.

Wherefore, God may justly claim our whole man, both soul and body as his due
by a treble right; by the right of creation, of donation, and of purchase: Act.
17. 28
for in him we live and move and have our being; 1 Cor. 4. 7
What have we that we did not receive from God? What shall we bequeath unto him
in thankfulness for all his benefits to us? We can do no less than devote our
selves, souls and bodies to him, and to his service while we live here; and
when this life shall be ended, to bequeath our precious souls unto him,
purified and cleansed from all sin in the blood of Christ by faith, for nothing
can be too pure that is presented to him, and nothing can be too dear and
precious for him

If we bequeath this precious legacy to God in our lifetime, then he will
require it, as of right belonging unto him, and he will receive it from us at
our death: This will sweeten the bitterness of death to us, which will put an
end to all our sorrows, and this will make us willing to leave this world, and
desire with Paul to be dissolved; because we do steadfastly believe that we
shall be with Christ.

But if we give our selves to worldly vanities, to lewd and licencious living,
and not to the true worship and service of God; we shall then be unwilling to
part with this life, or to look upon death when it comes, because we know not
to whom it will deliver our poor souls: for we cannot comfortably commend them
to God when we dye, with any hope or good assurance that he will receive them;
seeing they did God no service while we lived. What thankfulness is it then to
commend our souls unto God, when we can keep them no longer for the world, or
for our sinful delights? And what comfort can we have at our death, if we have
no faith to believe that we shall enjoy all happiness with Christ, but rather
just cause to fear that the sinfulness of our life will bring us to
everlasting torments after death.

It may sometimes fall out that we shall neither have time nor ability to
dispose of our souls when we dye, as we desire and as we ought: for if death
comes suddenly upon us by any casualty or otherwise; we have then no time to
commit our souls unto Gods protection: or if we are taken away by some violent
or malignant disease, which does distemper our senses, and weaken our
understanding and reason, that we are unfit for this great work, we have then
no ability to resign up our spirits unto God in an holy way.

What shall we do then? Where is our comfort in death? This need not trouble
our thoughts, if we have formerly in our life had any holy assurance of our
union with Christ, of our justification by his righteousness, of our
redemption by the merit of his blood, and of his death, and of his
sanctification by the holy Ghost; and that we have lived virtuously and piously
in the fear of God, and have served the Lord our God with a perfect and upright
heart in the time of our life: for then death cannot come suddenly upon us, and
no extremity of sickness or pain can separate us from Christ, nor take away
our comfort from our souls at our death; because God will receive them up into
his holy habitation, to abide and dwell with Christ for ever, though we have
neither time nor ability to commend them unto him.

Lastly, let us zealously meditate for our great comfort upon the blood and
water that gushed out from our Saviors heart after he was dead, when his side
was pierced with the spear. There was blood to take away the guilt of sin for
our justification, and there was water to wash away the stains of sin for our
sanctification. For as our sins were imputed to him as our surety; so* by faith
his righteousness is imputed to us, and God does account us just* and
righteous in his sight for the sake of Christ: so likewise by grace we are*
renewed daily and sanctified in our lives and conversations.

Wherefore, we should raise up our thoughts, and the affections of our hearts
to this sanctifying water, when we think upon our Baptism, or see that
Sacrament celebrated, that our hearts may be sprinkled with it by faith, to
purify our souls from the leprosy and spots of our sins. Also we must set the
cogitations of our hearts upon this sacred blood, when we feed at the Lords
Table, that by faith we may be persuaded that Christ did shed his blood and was
crucified for us.

Consider also, that though the body of our blessed Redeemer was miserably rent
and torn by the cruelty of his enemies, yet God would not suffer them to break
a bone of him, according to this of David, Psalm. 34. 20
He keeps all his bones, not one of them is broken: and though they brake the
bones of the two malefactors that were crucified with him; yet they brake not a
bone of him, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, Number. 9. 12.
that not a bone of him should be broken.

God so restrained his bloody enemies, that they could do no more than what was
decreed, and what Christ was willing to suffer: for he did not yield to their
malice and cruelty, but only in obedience to his Fathers will: for a word of
his mouth had been sufficient to confound all his tormentours; but how then
should our redemption be wrought? How should the will of God be fulfilled? And
how should he have learned by his own experience what we suffer when we are
under the cross, that he might pity us?

This may teach us to bear patiently whatsoever God does lay upon us, though
the instruments that he uses be our deadly foes; because it is his will and
pleasure to have it so. 2 Samuel 16. 1^.
Thus did David meekly bear the cursing of Shim^i, and would not suffer Abishai
to kill him, because it was the Lords will it should be so.

This Meditation will greatly comfort our fainting spirits, when we are under
any strong temptation, or worldly misery, that no enemy, be he never so
powerful, or his heart never so malicious, can imagine more against us in his
wicked thoughts, or act more with his cruel hands, than Divine Providence has
appointed. Also, no calamity, pain or sickness can afflict us without his
will, no peril or danger can come near us without his permission, and we shall
suffer no more under any cross, than God in his wisdom knows to to be
profitable for us.

If we are thus persuaded, it will greatly comfort us in all our sufferings,
and keep us from murmuring and repining when GODS visitation is upon us.

Wherefore, let no fear of danger cast down our hope, let no storm of
persecution shake the foundation of our faith, and let no waves of affliction
quench the flame of our love, or abate the zeal of our affections to our dear
Savior, who spared not his own life for us, but poured out his very heart
blood for our justification and salvation. If the strength of grace that is in
us be not answerable to what we suffer, or to the power of our corruptions,
Christ will either take off some part of our burden, or give us more strength
to bear it; and he will also make us able by degrees to overcome our
corruptions, that we may live a sanctified life to the Lord; and then let death
come how, or when it will, we shall dye in the Lord, which will be great gain
and advantage to us.

Now let the Meditations of thy heart be fixed upon the death of thy precious
Savior, that from thence thou may draw virtue and power by faith to mortify
and kill the body of sin, that by nature, is in thee, and also to have a firm
assurance that he has reconciled thee to God by the merit of his blood. Why
then do thou cherish any sin to crucify thy Redeemer afresh? What is this
that thou do when thou delightest in swearing, in uncleanness, in
drunkenness, and the like? Why do thou delay thy turning unto God? Why do
thou thus endanger the salvation of thy soul? Oh think upon the iniquity of thy
sin with hatred and detestation, which has put to death thy gracious Redeemer,
think upon thy sin with godly sorrow and true compunction of heart, which did
so separate thee from thy God, that nothing could restore thee into his grace
and favor, but the death of his eternal Son.

Wherefore seek earnestly by faithful Prayer to thy sweet Savior, that thou
may find the virtue, and power of his death in the crucifying of all the
several members of this body of sin, that by nature is inherent in thee, that
so thy corruptions may be weakened, and thou may be daily renewed by the
strength of that sanctifying grace, which the Holy Ghost has wrought in thee.

Consider now in the last place, how rigorously God did deal with his only Son
throughout his whole passion; he gave him no intermission in his suffering; but
as soon as one sorrow was past, another presently came in the place, when one
pain was over, a greater was ready to supply the room: Psalm. 102. 4.
his heart was smitten and withered like grass, so that he forgot to eat his
bread: his torturings came so fast upon him, that he had no time to refresh
himself with bread or water; but above all Gods fury was upon him in all his
sufferings, which made his passion beyond the strength of nature. God never
dealt thus with any of his servants; but still they had some intermission in
their afflictions, some comfort in their sorrows, and some heavenly
consolation to uphold their spirits, or else a joyful deliverance out of them.

Joseph had his afflictions, and yet at length God advanced him to great
honor. Jobs afflictions came upon him as fast as one messenger could follow
another, at last misery seized upon his own body: but in the end God gave him
double as much as he took from him. So likewise David and many more have
suffered very great afflictions and torments, but none like unto Christ, whose
passion continued to his heath. 2 Cor. 11.
Paul was above measure afflicted persecuted and tormented for the Name of
Christ, and at last he dyed by the sword: but all this while he had Christ to
support him with many spiritual consolations. Wherefore, howsoever God is
pleased to deal with us in this life, it will be in mercy and in judgment for
our good, and not in fury, or in the rigor of his justice for our confusion,
and he will bountifully reward us in the life to come, if we hold out constant
to the end.

What happened at CHRIST'S Death.
When the soul of our blessed Redeemer was dissolved, and separated from his
breathless body, Mat. 27. 51.
The vail of the Temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom, the
earth did quake, the rocks rent, the graves were opened, and many bodies of the
Saints which slept arose, and came out of their graves after his resurrection.

God did show these strange signs and wonders at the death of his Son, as
forerunners of the fearful judgments, that soon after should come upon that
renowned City, and upon the whole nation of the Jews, and so strike terror
into their hearts for their odious and detestable sin, in crucifying the Lord
of glory, if by any means they could be made sensible of their sins, that they
might repent and turn to the Lord, that so God might turn away his judgments,
and have mercy on them.

This has been Gods usual course, to give warning before he strikes, to
threaten before the judgment comes, and nothing but repentance can stay Gods
hand. 1 Kin. 21. 29.
Ahabs outward form of humiliation kept off the judgment from himself, that
God has denounced against his house by his Prophet. The Ninivites repen^ed at
the Preaching of Jouah, and therefore God brought not the evil upon them,
which he threatened against that great City. But the house of Juda would not
repent, though God sent his Prophets to them early and late; and therefore they
were carried away captives into Babylon. Thus does God in great mercy give
warning before he does visit a nation, or a people in his wrath, that they
should prevent the judgment, by their repentance.

First, God did show by the renting of the vail of the Temple, that the
partition wall was now broken down, which was between the Jew and the Gentile,
and that Christ was as freely given to the one as the other, and the merit of
his blood was as effectual for the salvation of the Gentile, as it was for the
Jew, if he were truly received by faith. The vail being now rent, the Gentile
has free access to the Mercy-seat, which did typifie the Throne of grace by
Christ. Long before this God did choose some to be the first fruits of the
Gentiles, as namely Eliez^r of Damascus in Abraham's family, Rahab of Jericho,
Ruth the Moabitesse, and Naaman the Syrian with many more.

Secondly, God did hereby show, that now there was an end put to the sacrifices
of the Ceremonial Law; because the true Paschall Lamb was slain, of whom
these sacrifices were but types and shadows, and that the Ceremonial Law was
now abrogated, Joh. 4. 22, 23.
and the true worship and service of God was not confined to Jerusalem, or to
the Temple; but now God might be worshipped in any other place, so that it be
in spirit and in truth.

Thirdly, we may see the free mercy and goodness of God to the Jew, and also
to the Gentile: Acts 15. 10.
for by the death of his Son he has cased the Jew of the great burden of
Ceremonies, which neither they nor their fathers were able to bear, by putting
an end to the Ceremonial Law; and he has brought the Gentile within the
Covenant of grace, and has admitted him into the most holy place: for the vail
of the Temple, which before kept him out, is now rent asunder. God has also
sanctified every place where he is truly worshipped and served with a pure and
upright heart, and has given us as great Privileges in Christ, as he gave to
his ancient people the Jews.

Fourthly, by these miraculous signs and wonders God did convince his people
of the hardness of their hearts, and of their wilful blindness, who would
not see the fulfilling of their ancient Prophesies in Christ, nor believe that
he was that Messiah which was promised, though they could object nothing
against it. Wherefore their hearts did not relent for their great impiety; but
the earth and the stony rocks were more sensible than they.

If we are thus hardened in our sins, and thus blinded in our understandings, it
is a fearful sign that we are given up to a reprobate mind.

Fifthly, we may hereby see how God made the senseless creatures to honor his
Son at his death, though both Jew and Gentile did most spitefully dishonor him
in his life. Christ honored his Father while he was living, and his Father
honors him now he is dead by these great wonders, and by the Testimony of
the Centurion, and others, who seeing what came to pass, said, Mat. 27. 54.
Truly this was the Son of God. Thus will God honor those that honor him by a
virtuous and godly life, or by their sufferings in his cause: for he will make
their innocence to appear, and will manifest the truth of their Profession to
the honor of his own Name, and he will give them immortal glory in the life
to come.

Wherefore if thou art in place of authority, honor God by executing judgment
and justice without exception of persons; if thou art rich, honor him in the
right use of them, and with works of mercy to the poor and needy; if thou art
poor be content with thy condition. If thou have children, honor God in their
good education, teach them the fear of the Lord, and let thy verteous life and
good conversation be an example of piety to them. Also if thou have a family,
command thy children and servants to keep the way of the Lord, to walk in his
Statutes, and to do righteously, that the Lord may bring a blessing upon thee,
and upon thy house.

If thou art under the cross, honor God with thy patience, hope, and
confidence in him whatsoever thy condition be, honor him with thy
thankfulness.

Sixthly, God does give us to understand by the trembling of the earth, and by
the renting of the rocks, how powerfully the holy Ghost does sometimes work
upon our hearts at our first conversion, to bring us to repentance, Acts 9.
as he did at the conversion of Paul, Acts 16.
and at the conversion of the Jailor, and of diverse others, for though our
hearts be naturally as stupid and dull to any thing that is spiritual and
heavenly as a lump of earth; yet when the holy Ghost works upon them with his
Almighty power, he will make* them quake and tremble, and he will put a new
Principle of grace into them, whereby they shall be changed into a gracious
condition, and their natural dull and stupid properties shall be made active
and ready for every holy duty. And though our hearts are by nature as hard as
any stone, and no way capable of any gracious and heavenly impression; yet the
Spitit of God will break them in pieces, and will mollify and soften every
piece, to make it tender and flexible to the will and pleasure of God.

Wherefore if thou do find this dullness in thine understanding, this earthly
mindedness, and this stupidity in thine affections, that thou have no will to
serve thy God; also, if there be such obduracy in thy heart that thou can not
lament, and mourn for thy sins, and thy heart cannot melt into sighing and
tears for thy transgressions, and if there be such unbelief in thee, that thou
can not apply any promise of mercy to thy self, and can have no hope nor
assurance of the pardon and forgiveness of thy sins upon thy repentance and
turning unto God; then make thy condition known to thy Savior Christ in all
meekness of spirit, and he will put an holy light into thy understanding by
his Spirit, he will sanctify thine affections, and season them with grace, he
will take away thy hard heart of unbelief, and will make it more sensible of
thy miserable condition, and will fit and prepare it for a deeper impression of
grace.

Lastly, God does show by the opening of the graves that there shall be a
general resurrection of every man's body at the last day, when they must appear
before the judgment seat of God, to give an account of whatsoever they have
done in the flesh. Though our bodies are locked up in the grave for thousands of
years, and though their dust and ashes are scattered abroad with the wind to
the utmost parts of the earth, yet at the last every grave shall be opened, and
shall deliver up her dead, and every grain of dust shall be gathered together,
that every man may have his own body, to deliver up his account before the
great and dreadful Judge of heaven and earth, to receive the just reward of
their works: the wicked to be thrust down with the devils into everlasting
burnings for their evil deeds, and for their unbelief; but such as belong unto
Christ shall be received up to eternal glory: The Saints that then arose out
of their graves were forerunners of this general resurrection.

This was a dreadful sign to the cruel Jews who had imbrewed their hands in
the blood of Christ: for the same Jesus, whom they crucified, shall be the
Supreme Judge at that day, before whom they must appear, to answer for this
their bloody fact. It may also be a terrible warning to all wicked men, that
are defiled with innocent blood, and that live in profaneness and sensuality,
fulfilling their sinful lusts without any remorse of conscience, or holy
desire to be reclaimed from their wicked ways, and without any care to make
their peace with God by faith in Christ, and by true repentance: for a time
will come when they must answer the rigor of Gods justice for all their crying
sins, and heinous abominations.

Wherefore, enter into a serious consideration with thy self, how thou art
prepared and fitted for thy grave. If thou have lived to the world, to the
flesh, to the devil, or to thy self, thou art in a sad and lamentable
condition: for the grave cannot keep thee from judgment, but must open her
mouth, Jona. 2 10
like Jonahs Whale, at the sound of the last Trumpet, and it will deliver thee
up even as it sound thee. If thy grave receive thee an hypocrite, a blasphemer,
a swearer, an unclean person, or the like; it will deliver thee up to judgment
all polluted with the guilt and filth of the same sins. Job 20. 11
If thy bones are full of the sins of thy youth, they will lie down with thee
in the dust, and they will cleave fast to thee, when thou shall rise again. How
can thou then stand before the Tribunal seat of God, and before all his
glorious Angels and blessed Saints, if thou art in this sinful condition? And
how can thou endure the rigor of his justice, and the severity of his
judgment?

If this consideration were well imprinted in thy heart, it would make thee
afraid to go on in a way of sin without repentance.

But such as have lived to the Lord shall dye in the Lord, and shall sleep
quietly in their graves as in their beds, Mal. 3. 17.
for they are the Lords Jewels, and he keeps them in these cabinets, until the
day that he shall make up his Jewels.

Wherefore, if we have any interest in Christ by faith, his blood will cleanse
us from all our sins, his righteousness will make us accepted in the sight of
God, and he will account us as his jewels, and then Christ will sanctify the
grave to us. Isa. 57. ^.
We shall enter into Peace, we shall rest in our beds, walking in his
righteousness. Thus comfortably shall we enter into the grave, if we have an
holy assurance by the witness of his Spirit to our spirits, that we dye in the
Lord, and then our resurrection will be with unspeakable joy and comfort to us.

Of the Burial of Christ.
THough Christ dyed a most shameful and ignominious death; yet he had
honorable burial according to the manner of the Jews: John 19. 40, 41.
For Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus, two honorable men among the Jews,
begged leave of Pilate, and took down his body from the Cross, and wrapped it
in linen clothes with spices, and laid it in a new sepulcher, which was hewn
out in a rock* wherein was never man yet laid, and they rolled a great stone to
the door of the sepulcher. But the chief Priests and Pharisees thought him not
safe enough, and therefore to prevent his resurrection (as they thought) Mat.
27. 64, 65.
they got leave of Pilate to make the Sepulcher sure; Then they sealed the
stone and set a watch about the Sepulcher: yet notwithstanding at Gods
appointed time, he did rise again from the dead by the power of his Deity,
which was not separated from his humane nature, though he were now dead: Psalm.
16. 10.
for, God would not suffer his holy One to see corruption; 1 Cor. 15. 44.
and his natural body was raised up a spiritual and glorified body.

But what comfort can we draw from Christ now he is dead? Can we have any
benefit by him as he is now buried? It is true which Christ said, John 6. 63
It is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing.

Though we can draw no comfort from the body of Christ as it is now in the
grave; yet by his eternal Spirit which ever lives, we may receive great
benefit and much spiritual consolation by the death and burial of our Savior
Christ. For by faith we may draw virtue and power from thence to kill that body
of sin, which by nature is in us, and to bury it with Christ, that the new man
of holiness and righteousness may be quickened and raised up in us: for it is
not enough to mort^fie and kill this body of sin; but we must also bury it, and
every member of it with Christ, that no sin, though it be never so profitable
or pleasing to our nature, may gather strength to overpower us, or to bring us
again into subjection, that ^very base lust should reign over us, to make us
slaves unto sin. It is true that sin will still dwell in us; but the Spirit of
Christ will make us able by the virtue of his death so to kill the power of it,
that it shall not have dominion over us* Grace works our sanctification by
degrees, and we cannot expect perfection of holiness, until we come into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Now if we will bury our sins in the Sepulcher of our blessed Savior, we must
not only forbear the actual committing of sin; but we must quite loose the
delightful remembrance of it: for if we do still retain with approbation a
sinful remembrance of our former sins, we do then keep them above ground and
unburied, and they will be odious in the sight of God, though the act of sin be
mortified in us. Romans 6. 3, 4, 5.
If we are baptized into Jesus Christ, we are baptized into his death, and
therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into death, that the body of sin
might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin, but should walk in
newness of life.

If we be thus buried with Christ, then the sweet perfume and precious odours
of his merits will take away the stench and noisomnesse of our sins from the
Lord our God. Wherefore, by faith we shall draw a new principle of grace from
Christ, to be crucified with him, to live and dye in him, to be buried with
him, both in the act and in the delight of sin, Col. 3. 1.
and to rise again with him in an holy and sanctified life, and we shall be
continually with him, to have our communion and fellowship with him: for every
member of his mystical body will be where he is in a spiritual manner;
because Christ will draw him to himself by his Spirit.

Thus is Christ also present with us by his grace, and holy Spirit, to assist
and support us, to teach and instruct us in what condition soever we be.

There is the same relation by faith between Christ and us, as is between the
head and the members; and we shall enjoy the comfort of this blessed relation
by our heavenly Meditations of him: for then by his Spirit he is present with
us to teach us some heavenly instructions for our edification, which we ought
carefully to practice that he may be honored thereby.

There is no time, or place but we may take occasion to Meditate something on
Christ for the good and comfort of our souls; either as he is our Mediator and
Redeemer, or as he is our Prophet to teach and instruct us, our high Priest to
present our Prayers and oblations to God, or our King to rule and govern us by
his Spirit. If we Meditate upon his passion, upon his death and burial, he
will show us how low he did humble himself to advance us, and it will much
comfort us in our afflictions and sorrows, and also it will fit and prepare us
for death and for the grave, that we may as willingly lie down in the grave,
where we shall rest in peace, as we take our rest and sleep in our beds. By
these and the like Meditations of Christ, we shall enjoy his sacred society by
his Spirit, and he will make us feel true consolation thereby. But if we
Meditate upon the Exhortation of Christ, we must raise our affections up to the
highest heavens: for there he sits at the right hand of God above all
principalities and powers* and then he will show us how victoriously he
triumphs over all his enemies, and that he has subdued all the enemies of
our salvation, to teach us to fear and reverence his sacred Majesty, to perform
all dutiful obedience to his Commands, and to submit to his rule and
government. And because he is our Advocate with the Father, we may come boldly
to him in all our wants, troubles and necessities.

Also, faithful Prayer is another special means to enjoy the comfort of this
happy relation and Communion, which we have with our Savior Christ in all
conditions of life, and upon all occasions whatsoever, to give us comfort in
all our distresses, strength of grace against temptations, protection in all
dangers, and deliverance out of all troubles.

If our Prayers proceed from a faithful heart, they cannot return without a
blessing: for they will open Christ's rich treasury, and whatsoever is there, we
shall have so much of it as is good for us. This kind of prayer will yet reach
higher: for it will so prevail with Christ, that he will open his heart to us,
and conceal nothing from us that may conduce to an holy and sanctified life
here, and to the enjoyment of eternal blessedness hereafter.

If we daily converse thus with Christ in our Meditations and Prayers, we shall
have our conversation with him in heaven, though we live in a vale of misery
here upon earth.

Now then examine thy self what communion thou have had with thy dear Savior;
has he walked with thee in the field, as he did with Isaac in his
Meditations? Has he traveled with thee in the way, as he did with the two
Disciples as they went to Emmaus? Went he into a strange land as he did with
Joseph into Egypt? or was he in prison with thee, as he was with him and with
the Apostles? Have thou had his company in thy bedchamber, or in thy closet as
David had? Was he in the dungeon with thee as he was with Jeremiah? Have thou
had his company when thou have been among spoilers, as Daniel had among the
Lions, and as Paul had when he was in the Lions mouth? And has he been with
thee upon thy sickbed, as he was with Hezekiah? Then surely thou have received
some blessing from him, then thou have learned holy instructions of him; how to
bear thy cross without murmuring, and how to endure thy sufferings with
meekness of spirit. Then also thou have learned how to pray zealously, how to
live piously, how to fix thy trust and confidence on him, and how to set thine
affections upon him, by the plentiful experience which thou have had of his
goodness to thee; that so thou may dye in his love and favor.

Examine thy self also what sin thou have killed, and buried: for if thou do
leave thy sins, because thou have not ability to continue still in them,, thy
sins do leave thee, but thou do not leave them, and they are not buried with
Christ in his Sepulcher: for thou retainest still the remembrance of them with
delight and approbation; and if thou had ability and opportunity, thou
would be as vicious still as ever thou were before. For unless faith had
sealed thy union with Christ, thou can have no power from his death to
mortify thy corruptions, or to bury thy sins with him; neither can thou live
unto righteousness and true holiness.

Consider in the last place what subtle policy was used to make the Sepulcher
sure, that the body of Christ might not be stolen away, and to prevent his
resurrection from the dead: for, they sealed the Stone, and set a watch about
the Sepulcher.

But God did hereby make the truth of his resurrection the more evident, to the
great comfort of his children, and servants; but to the perpetual shame and
confusion of his enemies, and of such as will not believe it. For Gods Decree
must stand, and nothing can prevail to frustrate his determinate Council:
Whatsoever wicked men do vainly imagine, or contrive, God will bring to pass
what he has decreed for his own glory. This is great comfort to the servants
of God, that are under tyrannical pressures, and can see no means how to be
delivered out of their slavery: for God will bring about his own purposes, and
will be honored in their deliverance to the shame and rebuke of all their
enemies.

Consider also, that those malicious Jews could not but be convinced in their
consciences, that Christ was the Son of God, by those strange wonders which
they saw at his death; and yet they still spit out their blasphemies, against
him, though he were dead, and in the presence of Pilate they term him a
deceiver.

Thus it is with wicked men when they are given up to a reprobate mind: for
there is no end of their wickedness against God, and no end of their malicious
and mischievous practices against his servants, and against all that profess
his Name.

A brief Sum of the Humiliation of CHRIST.
CHRIST was in the bosom of the Father from eternity, where he was clothed
with fullness of Majesty and Glory in the highest heavens, and had the Dominion
and power over all things both in heaven and in earth: but when he was to
undertake the Work of our Redemption, which was determined by all the three
Persons in the holy Trinity, before the world was, he laid aside his Glory, and
humbled himself for that great Work, which was decreed in the secret Counsel of
God, and to be wrought at his appointed time. The first degree of Christ's
Humiliation was, that he gave away the manifestation of glory of his Deity,
which he had with the Father in heaven, which was his due from his first
incarnation; the bright beams whereof were clouded with his humanity: for he
took upon himself our flesh, and was clothed with our weak and frail nature,
and was subject to such humane passions and infirmities as might be without
sin. This was a great degree of Humiliation for the eternal King of glory to
leave his glorious mansions in heaven, and to come down and be with us men here
upon earth, and to take up his habitation in an earthly tabernacle, which was
subject to hunger, thirst, and heat and cold, to pain, torment and death it
self.

The second Degree of his Humiliation was, that he took upon himself the guilt
of our sins, and did undertake to fulfill the whole righteousness of the Law
for us* and to satisfy the justice of God for all the sins of his Elect: not
that his humane nature was polluted or stained with any sin: For the holy Ghost
did so sanctify the Virgins womb, that he was conceived and born without
Original sin, and he lived without any actual transgression; but our sins
were imputed to him, and therefore as the Apostle says, Gal. 3. 13
He was made a curse for us. Also, Tit. 2. 14.
Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. He gave his body
and all the parts of it to the persecutors and tormentors, he gave his blood to
be spilt, and his life for the redemption of man* he gave his soul to suffer
anguish and sorrow, ^sa. 53. 10.
and to be a^ of fering for sin: also, in some sort he gave his Deity, by
suffering most horrible blasphemies, that were cast upon him, Acts 20. 28.
and God purchased to himself a Church with his own blood.

This was a very low abasement of Christ, when he left all his glory in heaven,
and came down to live here upon earth, not in the nature of Angels; but he
clothed himself with our flesh, which was all stained and defiled with the
guilt of our sins: Isa. 53. 6.
for God laid on him the iniquity of us all.

The third degreee of Christ's Humiliation was, that he was content with a mean
condition of life here upon earth; his birth and education was very mean, he
was exposed to wants and necessities, to perils and dangers even from his
infancy; and after he began his Ministry he had no abiding place, Mat. 8. 20.
he had not where to lay his head, and he did the office of a servant to his
own Disciple, John 13. 5
when he washed their feet: for as the Apostle says, Ph^l. 2. 7.
He made himself of n^ reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant.
Christ continually traveled from place to place to teach the people, to heal
the sick, to cleanse the lepers, and to cast out Devils; he was often wearied,
often hungry, and often thirsty.

Thus was his whole life full of sorrows and full of afflictions, and thus low
did the eternal Son of God humble and abase himself, to advance us and to
perfect the work of our redemption.

Lastly, in his passion he was made a scorn to the most abject of all the
people, and a derision both to Jew and Gentile; he suffered both in his soul
and in his body, as much anguish pain and torment, as the power of the devil
and the malice of wicked men was able to inflict upon him. And as if all this
was not sufficient to humble him enough, God himself did fiercely assault him:
for he kept all comfort from him, when he was in his greatest extremity, and
his wrath went along with all his other sufferings.

When Christ had suffered to the full, so much as the justice of God required
in satisfaction for all our sins, and that the work of our Redemption was
perfectly finished, then he commended his soul unto God, and dyed upon the
Cross, according to this of the Apostle, Phil. 2* 8.
He humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
cross: this kind of death was most painful, shameful, and accursed.

Here is a short view of the humiliation of Christ: for our weak understandings
cannot reach to the depth of that which Christ suffered for us, much less can
we reach to the honor and dignity of his Person in his Divine nature, which
does make his sufferings, and his Humiliation far the greater. If we do
seriously meditate upon it with pious affections, it will teach us to adore his
sacred Majesty with reverence and godly fear, to love him with a perfect love,
to serve and obey him with a pure and upright heart, and to suffer any thing
for his sake with a cheerful mind. Also, if we have gained any grace by the
death and passion of Christ, it will teach us meekness of spirit, and humility
of mind, though we have places of pre-eminence and authority above other men.

If God shall bring us down from an high degree to a mean condition of life, we
shall bear it contentedly; because God is the sole disposer of all things, and
he can raise us to an higher degree, if he pleases. If what we have be too
little for us, and that we can improve more to the best advantage of Gods
glory, he will then in his good time bestow more upon us.

If our life be full of troubles and sorrows, the Humiliation of Christ will
teach us, 1 Pet. 5. 6, 7
to humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt us in due
time. We may safely cast our care upon him, for he cares for us, Psalm. 18. 35
His right hand will hold us up. Psalm. 17. 5
He will hold up our goings in his paths, that our footsteps slip not. Cant. 2.
6.
Christ also will put his left hand under our heads, and with his right hand he
will embrace us.

Wherefore* if we have this gracious humility of spirit, it will produce these
and many more blessed fruits, to give us comfort in a troublesome and painful
life. And when death comes, it will be favorable to a meek and humble spirit,
and well-come to a good conscience: if we be thus qualified it will bring us to
our graves in peace, and then we shall have a joyful and a blessed
resurrection.

Christ did willingly humble himself to the death for us; why should we be
unwilling to resign up our life unto him? do we know no other happiness, or do
we hope for no greater felicity, than what we now enjoy? We h^ve no abiding
place here, but we are subject to changes every moment, and upon every small
occasion. 1 Chro. 29* 15.
We are strangers and sojourners here, our days on earth are as a shadow* and
there is none abiding, our mansion house where we must dwell for ever, is in
heaven, which Christ our Savior has prepared for us, to draw our minds from
all earthly delights, which are fading and transitory, and always mixed and
imbittered with some sorrows and vexations, that our hearts and affections may
be inflamed to enjoy that celestial happiness, where we shall be stablished
and confirmed in perfect holiness for ever, and where we shall enjoy the
perfection of all blessedness for evermore

Wherefore, Heb. 12. 2.
look unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was
set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the
right hand of the Throne of God. 2 Timothy 2. i2
If we suffer with Christ, we shall also reign with him; if we dye with him, we
shall also live with him, if we are buried with him, we shall rise with him,
and if we partake with him in his humiliation, we shall also partake with him
in his exaltation: for the members must be made conformable to the Head.

Of the Resurrection of CHRIST.
WE come now to the Exaltation of our blessed Redeemer: for though he suffered
his enemies to tyrannize over him at their pleasure, and to put him to a most
cruel and shameful death upon the cross, because it was his heavenly Fathers
will it should be so, yet he rose again the third day by the Almighty Power of
his Deity, and clothed himself with the glorious robes of immortality,
triumphing over all his enemies, both spiritual and temporal. The truth of
his Resurrection a Luke 24.
did first appear by the testimony of two Angels to the Woman that came the
third day to his Sepulcher to imbalm his body: John 20.
then he appeard to Mary and to his Disciples at several times: also to five
hundred brethren at once, and he conversed with his Disciples forty days upon
earth, before he ascended up into heaven.

Many Saints that slept were raised out of their graves with him, who also
appeared to many in the holy City, and probably ascended up with him into
heaven; so that we may safely build our faith upon the truth of his
Resurrection, which is an Article of faith that we must believe for the well
grounding of our hope, that our bodies shall also rise again from the dead with
songs of rejoicing and triumph.

Here is matter of exceeding great comfort to our souls for our hearts to
Meditate upon, if we do steadfastly believe that Jesus Christ our blessed
Savior is risen from the dead.

First, we may be truly persuaded hereby, that he has fully satisfied the
justice of God for all our sins, and that the guilt of sin is taken away from
our souls, and nailed to his Cross, so that if God looks upon our sins there,
he will also see the precious blood of his dear Son that was spilt for them.

Secondly, we may firmly believe, that Christ by his Resurrection, has gotten
the victory and conquest over sin, death, hell and the Devil: John 10. 18
for as he had power to lay down his life, so he had power to take it up again.
Christ has likewise taken away the strength of sin, and has pulled out the
sting of death, in that he has fulfilled all righteousness, and fully
satisfied the penalty of the Law: 1 Cor. 15. 56.
for, the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law. Wherefore
we may now draw virtue and grace from Christ* to overpower all the corruptions
of our nature, Ephesians. 2. 1.
and though we are dead in trespasses and sins, yet by the power of his
Resurrection he will quicken us, and raise us up out of the grave of sin, and
will give us a spiritual life to live the life of grace to him here, that we
may live the life of glory with him hereafter for ever.

Why then should we fear death that has no sting to wound us? Why should we
not smile upon it, seeing Christ has sanctified it to us? Why should we fear
the Devil with a servile fear, seeing Christ has redeemed us out of his
bondage? His malice may molest and trouble us, if we be not well armed with
faith; but Christ has weakened his power below our strength. When our
bodieslye in the dust, our souls will be out of the devils reach: for Christ
will take them up to himself into the Paradise of God, where the devil cannot
come, for he is cast down into utter darkness; he may be permitted to tempt or
afflict us while we are in the flesh; but Christ, whom we serve, will not
suffer him to prevail against us.

Thirdly, seeing Christ our head is risen from the dead, we also that are his
members must rise again at the last day: for the Head will draw all the members
of the body with it.

Christ has redeemed our bodies from the grave, as well as our souls from
death: if therefore we be not raised again out of the grave, our redemption is
not perfectly wrought. Also, if there shall be no resurrection of our bodies,
and if death has power to keep them still in the grave, then our union with
Christ is not firm, and our faith is not able to keep us close unto him, and
our hope is not steadfast; but death has not this power, the graves will open
and deliver up their dead, and our bodies shall rise again to enjoy that
unconceivable happiness with our souls of the beatificall vision of God, and
to be for ever with Christ our Redeemer; because Christ our Head is risen.

Lastly, our chief comfort depends upon our resurrection to glory, for in
this life we find nothing but labor and travel, sorrow and trouble,
vexation, and anguish of spirit: our hope of future rest and peace, of joy and
comfort, happiness and glory, does sweeten all our afflictions here, and makes
us bear them contentedly and cheerfully, for as David says, Psalm. 58. 11.
Verily, there is a reward for the righteous, and this reward is in heaven. Now
if there be no resurrection from the dead, our hope is vain, our comfort will
deceive us, and our life is most miserable of all men, according to this of
Paul: 1 Cor. 15. 15.
If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable; for we shall never enjoy this reward which God has promised; but
our faith is grounded upon the sure promises of God, which cannot deceive us
concerning the resurrection of our bodies unto glory, which will yield us
unspeakable consolation, when we seriously Meditate upon it.

Wherefore now, raise up thy spirit thou fainting soul, for Christ has
redeemed thy body from the grave, and thy soul from death by his Resurrection,
he has conquered all the enemies of thy salvation; sin has no condemning
power over thee, death is advantage to thee, hell is locked up from thee, and
the Devil himself cannot go beyond his commission for thy hurt. Though the
world does frown upon thee, Joh. 16. 33
and thou find tribulation here; yet be of good cheer, and lift up thy head:
for Christ has overcome the world, and he will sanctify all thy tribulations
to thee. Thou live here subject to shame and reproach, to diseases of body
and sorrow of spirit, and to all miseries and calamities; but death will put an
end to all thy labor and travel, the grave will refine thy body from all
imperfections and diseases, and thy resurrection will bring thee to thy reward,
which is laid up for thee in heaven.

If the powers of darkness set themselves in array against thee, if the
terrors of death assault thee, fear not, but keep close to the Resurrection of
thy Savior by faith, he has overcome them all, and will also subdue them unto
thee. Ephesians ^ 30.
If thou art a member of his body, of his flesh and of his bones, thou must be
made conformable to him, as to thy head, as well in his glory as in his shame,
as well in his resurrection as in his death and burial.

If the cross must try thy strength, he will not tire thee with a greater
burden than thou art well able to bear. If pain or sickness brings thee near
unto death, the faithful hope of a joyful resurrection will greatly refresh
and comfort thy soul: for though thy soul must be parted from thy body; yet
neither thy soul nor thy body shall be parted fuom Christ; but thou shall rise
again out of the dust with a spiritual and immortal body to be joined unto
Christ thy head for ever.

Now think on these things with holy affections, and they will minister
heavenly comfort to thy soul, when thou art in any perplexity of mind or body.

Consider now to whom Christ appeared after his Resurrection, it was first to
holy Women, who in their pious devotion and love to him came to imbalm his body
with spices and sweet odours: then he appeared to his Disciples at sundry
times, and also to many Brethren, that they all might be well confirmed in the
truth of his Resurrection, and of his Deity, to comfort them in their sorrows,
to uphold them in their sufferings, to strenthen their faith against all
persecutions and bloody trials: and to be able to strengthen others in the
Doctrine of the Resurrection. Thus did the holy Apostles testfiie that they had
seen the Lord Jesus after he was risen, to confirm their Doctrine of his
Resurrection. But Christ did not appear to any wicked or ungodly men: for they
could neither believe it nor understand it, nor receive any comfort or benefit
by it, because they have no spiritual eye to discern his glorified body, but
chiefly because they have no relation to him as their Savior.

Christ does appear to us at this day by his Spirit when he does manifest to us
the truth of his Resurrection by his Word, and does give us grace to apply it
to our selves, for the confirmation of our faith in the Resurrection of our
bodies at the last day. But chiefly Christ does appear to us when by faith we
draw virtue and power from his Resurrection, to rise from the death of sin to
the life of grace* when we can raise up the affections of our hearts from
earthly and worldly cares to heavenly contemplations, and when we can with the
wings of faith mount up above the sinful delights and pleasures of this life,
and above all the calamities and tribulations that we shall meet with here upon
earth, to have our conversation in heaven, and can draw comfort to our selves
in all our sorrows and miseries from the hope of our resurrection.

There will also be a day of resurrection to the wicked, which will be most
sad, woeful and miserable to them: for they shall not rise with purified and
glorified bodies; but with filthy, ugly, and unclean bodies, all besmeared with
the guilt of sin which will make them odious to look upon, and they have no
covering to hide their sins, but only the Devils liverey, which is a guilty
conscience, that they may be known to whom they belong: For there is no place,
and no inheritance in heaven for such unclean monsters; but they shall be
thrust down into the lowest hell, to partake with the devil and his angels in
their everlasting torments, which is the reward of all wicked men for their
evil works.

Of CHRIST'S Ascension up into Heaven.
When Christ had fully instructed his Apostles after his Resurrection, in
those things which concerned the Kingdom of Heaven, and had taught them how to
plant his Church here upon earth, he was taken up in the sight and view of them
all, and ascended up into heaven where he sits at the right hand of God in
fullness of Majesty and glory, until he shall come again to judge both the
quick and the dead; whereby Christ is now become our eternal Advocate with the
Father, to make intercession for us, and he is also our eternal high Priest,
to present our Prayers and oblations to God.

At his Ascension he carried up our humane nature with him into heaven, and
has advanced it above the Angels, and above all Principalities and powers:
also Christ has taken possession of that heavenly Inheritance, which we shall
hereafter enjoy: for he keeps it for us.

Wherefore now, let the thoughts of our hearts be raised up in our holy
Meditations to contemplate the transcendent glory of Christ, now he is at the
right hand of the Father, that we may firmly confide in him, and have a longing
desire to be with him, to enjoy that place of true blessedness, John 14. 2
which he has prepared for us in his Fathers house. Also let all our Prayers
and sacrifices proceed from an upright and a believing heart, that they may be
such as Christ will present to his Father for us; and then we may confidently
believe that God will graciously receive them.

Here is also great comfort for us, that though we sin daily through humane
frailty, or through the corruption of our nature, 1 John 2. 1, 2.
that we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous; and he is
the propitiation for our sins, who will intercede for us, and will present the
merit of his blood unto him in full satisfaction for all our sins, whereof we
may have an holy assurance by faith and true repentance.

If we do faithfully believe that we have such an high Priest, and such an
Advocate in heaven, why do we give our selves liberty in sin to displease him?
Why do we cherish any darling sin in our affections? Why are our prayers, our
praises, and our thanksgivings so few and so seldom sent up to him? Why are
they so cold and so dull that they cannot mount up to him? And why are our
spiritual oblations so full of unbelief? Do we think that Christ will
intercede for us, if we sin wittingly and willingly against God? Will he
procure our pardon, if there be any accursed thing hidden in our hearts? Will
Christ present our Prayers to God if they proceed out of feigned lips? And will
he present our duties and services to God, if they are performed with
unbelieving and deceitful hearts? If we thus conceive of the intercession of
Christ, we delude our selves and endanger our souls to utter perdition.

If we did truly believe, that Christ has taken possession of that heavenly
inheritance, which is prepared for us, our souls would be ravished with an holy
desire to enjoy it, we would contemn the vanities of this world in comparison
of that, and our affections would not be carried after sinful pleasures;
afflictions and crosses would not cast down and deject our spirits, but we
would live cheerfully in the midst of all troubles, and sorrows, because by
faith in Christ we are made heirs of the kingdom of Heaven.

If that place be so perfectly pure, that no unclean thing can enter there, we
should study to live piously and virtuously to the glory of God, while we live
in the flesh, that we may have a sure hope to enjoy it hereafter. If a Kings
Son that is heir apparent but to an earthly Crown, should live like a base
peasant, and delight in the company of such as are of mean and low degree, we
will be ready to say, that he is unworthy of such an Inheritance. Let us make
this our own case, and consider to what honor and dignity we are born by our
adoption in Christ, that we may not live in subjection to every base and
sinful lust, as unworthy of that Inheritance, which Christ has prepared for
us in the Kingdom of heaven.

Though our condition ^e mean in this world, and our calling such as that we
must converse with ungodly people, as to the outward man; yet the conversation
of the inward man may be spiritual and holy: Joh. 17. 15
for Christ has prayed his Father to keep us from the evil that is in the
world, that we may imitate here upon earth the blessed Angels and Saints in
heaven by glorifying God, and by our readiness to fulfill his will and
pleasure. Thus says the Apostle, Col. 3. 1, 2
If we be risen with Christ, we should seek those things which are above, where
Christ sits on the right hand of God; and there should our affections be
set, and not on things on the earth.

Thus we may have our conversation in heaven, thus we may live a spiritual
life upon earth, and thus we may enjoy the sweet communion of the blessed
Trinity, even in this life: for God the Father will be gracious and loving to
us in Christ, as a Father is to his children. God the Son will be
righteousness, sanctification and Redemption to us, according to the nature of
a Savior to his elect people: and God the holy Ghost will abide with us for
ever in all difficulties and dangers, according to the nature of a true
Comforter.

A brief sum of the Exaltation of CHRIST.
IF we look now upon our beloved Savior, we may contemplate his great
Exaltation with much joy, and gladness of heart, Ephesians. 4. 8.
for he is ascended up on high, and has led captivity captive. Rev. 19. 11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
John does describe him sitting upon a white horse, because he does judge in
righteousness, his eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many
crowns; he was clothed with a vestare dipped in blood, and his name is called
the Word of God: and the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white
horses: and out of his mouth goes a sharp sword, that with it he should smite
the nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of iron, and he treads the
wine press of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God, and he has on his
vesture and on his thigh a name written, King of kings and Lord of lords. 1 Timothy 6. 15, 16.
He is the blessed and only Potentate, who only has immortality, dwelling in
the light which no man can approach unto, whom no man has seen, or can see.

Phil. 2. 9, 10.
God has highly exalted him, and given him a Name, which is above every name;
that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth: Romans 9. 5.
for he is over all, God blessed for ever.

Psalm. 2. 6, 8
God has now made Christ a King, and set him upon his holy hill of Sion, he
has given him the heathen for his inheriritance, and the uttermost parts of
the earth for his possession. Also, the Apostle says, Col. 2. 9, 10.
In Christ dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily; and we are complete
in him which is the head of all principality and power.

We may yet consider further, how God has exalted Christ: Ephesians. 5. 23.
For he has made him the head of his Church, Ephesians. 1. 22.
and has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all
things to the Church. Also, Psalm. 118. 12.
Christ is become the head stone of the corner in this spiritual building, and
he does so firmly bind every stone of this building to himself, that they
shall never depart from him. Thus God is pleased to reveal in some measure how
highly he has exalted our dear Savior after his great sufferings in his
bitter passion; but as we are not able to conceive what he suffered; so our
weak capacity cannot reach to that transcendent glory and Majesty, which he now
has in the same nature, as he was our Redeemer, God and Man.

If God has so highly exalted our glorified Redeeemer, then we must study and
Meditate with an holy zeal and pious devotion, how to exalt him in our hearts,
how to prize him in our affections according to his excellencies and dignities,
how to have a reverent esteem of his worth, how to honor and reverence him for
his greatness, and Hos. 3. 5.
how to fear and love him for his goodness. Also, we must have a diligent care
to obey his rule and government, as he reigns and rules in our hearts by his
Spirit, that we may withstand and resist the temptations of the devil, that
the alluring vanities of the world may not ensnare us, and that no evil
concupiscence may overpower us, to make us dishonor our God, or disobey the
will of our dear Savior.

If Christ be truly advanced in our minds and thoughts according to the glory
and honor wherewith God has crowned him, then our souls will feel a
comfortable influence of grace from his glorious Exaltation, to give us an holy
assurance that he has led captive all our spiritual enemies, and has so
weakened their power, that they have no ability to hurt our souls: also, that
in his due Time he will take revenge upon all the Enemies of his Church. And as
he is crowned with the highest titles of honor; so likewise he will crown the
meanest of his Saints with honor and dignity far above the greatest Potentate
upon earth. This does also give us assurance that we may receive from the
fullness of Christ sufficient grace for the mortifying of our sins, for the
sanctifying of our lives, and for our comfort in all tribulations, he will
support us in all our spiritual weaknesses, he will cure all the wounds that
sin has made in our souls, and he will keep us from despair; because he does
bind us with the bond of faith so close to himself, that we shall not totally
and finally fall away from him, and he will so protect and defend us, that no
adversary power shall be able to take us out of his hands.

But if we conceive of these high honors and dignities of Christ according to
our humane capacity, and not according to the reach of faith, as it is grounded
upon the Word of God, we shall too much undervalue his highness, and
disrespect his sacred Majesty: we cannot confide in his power to defend us
against all our spiritual adversaries, neither can we rest and depend upon his
goodness to supply all our wants, to minister relief in all our necessities,
to heal all our infirmities, and to be all in all unto us upon all occasions:
our frail nature will be full of doubtings and fears to weaken our faith and
confidence in him: for according to our esteem of him in our hearts, such is
our faith, such is our hope and trust in him; if we have no spiritual eye to
discern these essential honors and excellencies of Christ, we cannot then
reach them with that reverence, and fear, with that duty and obedience as we
ought, and our best worship and service will come far short of that which his
great and dreadful Name requires.

Now then examine thine own heart and see what good, evidence thou have that
Christ is dear and precious unto thee, and that thou do honor him with thy
heart and soul, what experience have thou had of his goodness and power? How
have thou performed thy duty and service to him? What awful reverence and
filial fear have thou had of his sacred Majesty, when thou have been in his
presence, and about his business? If thy conscience can tell thee, that Christ
is the joy of thy heart, that he is thy Lord God, thy King and Governor; then
he has set up his Scepter of righteousness in thee, and rules in thy heart,
and that hereafter he will bring thee to his eternal kingdom of glory.

If the holy Ghost has thus wrought in thy heart, thou will find a conformity
of will to the will of Christ, thine affections will be squared to the glory of
God, to love that which he loves, and to hate that which he hates; thy sinful
desires will be restrained: for the fear and dread of his great Name will be
always before thine eyes, and the love of him will constrain thee to
obedience. Also, the hardness of the heart will be taken away, Ezekiel. 36. 26,
27.
and it will be made tender, and flexible, fit to receive any heavenly
impression of grace.

Our Advantage and gain by CHRIST in this life.
EVery true believer has a peculiar Advantage, and Gain by Christ, more than
unregenerate men, in whatsoever they possess: though these have more of
earthly blessings and of common graces, than many of Gods servants; yet it is
with a great deal of difference; for by Christ they are sanctified to the one,
and not the other. But there is a spiritual Gain by Christ which is only
proper and peculiar to the children of God, whereof unregenerate men are not
capable, until faith be wrought in them by the holy Ghost to unite them unto
Christ.

First, we have this Advantage by Christ above unregenerate men, Genesis 3. 17.
that the curse which God laid upon the creatures for the sin of man is taken
away, and he has given to every true believer in Christ the free use of them
all for his comfort, and to glorify God in their right use, and by their
thankfulness for them: for Christ has sanctified them, and made them
blessings to them. But unregenerate men have no right to what they enjoy;
because they have no interest in Christ, and the curse still cleaves to
whatsoever they possess: for Christ has not taken it away, nor sanctified
their estate unto them for their good.

Secondly, this is our peculiar Gain by Christ, that he has taken away the
guilt of sin that by nature was upon our souls, and has fastened it to his own
cross; whereas natural men have the guilt of their sins still cleaving to
their souls, so long as they are in that condition. This is a great advantage
to us that are in Christ, if we do well consider it; for now we may appear with
boldness in the presence of God, we need not fear the accusations of the
Devil, our conscience can witness nothing against us, because we have no
guilt of sin, and the Law cannot condemn us. Romans 8. 1.
There* is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who
walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit. Isa. 53. 5, 6
For Christ was wounded for our transgressions, as says the Prophet, he was
bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and
with his stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray, we have
turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of
us all. Thus are our sins imputed unto Christ; because be has taken them upon
himself; and his righteousness is imputed unto us, that we might appear
without sin in the sight of God.

Thirdly, This is a special Gain that we have by Christ above all other men,
that he has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3. 13.
being made a curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs
on a tree: Christ in our nature, and for us, has fulfilled the whole
righteousness of the Law, by his active obedience to it, and he has suffered
the penalty of it by his passive obedience, even to the death of the Cross,
that the justice of God might be satisfied for all our sins* so that now we are
not under the curse of the Law, nor under the condemning power of sin, but we
are under grace; because he has reconciled us to God, and brought us again
into his grace and favor, that the sanctifying graces of his holy Spirit may
season our hearts and affections to walk before him in holiness and pureness
of living all our days.

Wherefore now, our afflictions and troubles, which are part of this curse, are
sanctified to us, and made salubrious and wholesome for our good, and the evil
of punishment, which we suffer, is taken away by the merit of his sufferings,
and the nature of them is changed into fatherly chastisements, to correct us
for our sins, that we may walk more obediently before God; or else they are to
try the truth of our graces for the honor of God that gave them.

Fourthly, this is another great Advantage and Gain that we have by Christ,
which unregenerate men cannot find, that he has also freed us from the
dominion of sin: for though sin will dwell with us so long as we live in the
flesh; yet the strength and power of sin is weakened and killed by the virtue
and power of that grace which Christ has given us by his death.

The best of Gods servants do often complain how the unregenerate part in them
does sometimes prevail against the Spirit, which makes them groan under the
burden of their corruptions, as holy David and others have done. Paul also
found this to be true: for thus he says, Romans 7. 18, 19.
I know that in me (that is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing: for to will
is present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I find not: for the
good that I would, I do not; but the evil which I would not, that I do. And he
had no power but only from Christ to be freed from this dominion of sin, and
therefore he cries out, saying, Rom 7. 24, 25.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? I
thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord; for he found this Benefit and Gain by
Christ, for says he, Phil. 1. 21.
To me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain; or else we may read it thus. For
Christ is to me both in life and in death advantage.

This is not the gain which natural men look for, they seek after the gain of
riches, the gain of honors, and the gain of worldly preferments; they look not
after spiritual gain, they do not esteem of virtue and godliness; piety toward
God is out of request with them, though it be the true gain and most to be
desired.

Fifthly, that we may get this spiritual gain of Godliness; which is the
advantage only of a true Believer, Christ does wash us in the Laver of his
righteousness, and therefore he bestows all sanctifying and saving graces
upon us, to purify us from the silth and pollutions of our sins. For Christ
does unite us unto himself by Faith, whereby we are clothed with his
righteousness, and have all the benefits that come by the merit of his blood:
then faith draws in with it all other sanctifying graces, to make us complete
and perfect in Christ, to beautify and adorn our souls, that we may lead a
virtuous and pious life in the right way of true holiness, 1 Pet. 2. 2
Christ does also give us an holy desire to the sincere milk of the word, that
thereby we may grow in 2 Pet. 3. 18.
grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ: by whom we are brought
into the favor of God; Romans 3. 24
by whose grace and love we are freely justified through the Redemption that is
in Jesus Christ: Ephesians. 2. 8.
by whose free grace also we are saved through faith in Christ. Saving grace
was one of the special gifts that Christ gave after his Ascension, according to
this of Paul, Ephesians. 4. 7.
But unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift
of Christ. Heb. 13 9.
Wherefore, if our hearts are stablished with grace, we shall not be carried
about with diverse and strange doctrines; but we shall stand firm in the Faith,
and in the truth of our Profession, and our hearts will be purged from dead
works.

Sixthly, we have this great Advantage by Christ above all other men, Gal. 4.
5, 6, 7.
that by him we receive the adoption of sons, and thereby we enjoy all the
Privileges that belong to sons: for God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son
into our hearts, crying, Abba Father; and we are made heirs of God through
Christ. Wherefore, Heb. 4. 16.
in him we may come boldly unto the throne of grace by Prayer, that we may
obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. For God will have a
fatherly care of us to protect us in all dangers, to provide whatsoever is good
for us, and to comfort us in all our sorrows and distresses.

Psalm. 9. 9. Isa. 25. 4.
Thus was God a refuge and a shield of defense to David, and to other holy men
in their troubles and afflictions.

If his rod of correction be upon us, it will be in love, Heb. 12. 6.
as a father chasteneth his son, that he may receive us as his sons: and though
we feel his visitation sharp; Lam. 3. 31
yet he will not cast us off for ever,: for Ephesians. 4, 30.
we are sealed unto the day of Redemption, Heb. 6. 12.
that we may through faith and patience inherit the promises, 1 Pet. 1, 4.
as heirs to an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in heaven for us.

Lastly, Christ has sealed the Covenant of grace to us with his own blood,
whereby we are freed from the strict keeping of the legal Covenant of Works;
and Christ will perfect with his own righteousness whatsoever is wanting in us
to the fulfilling of the Law, if we endeavor the best we can with an upright
heart to do the will of God; and then God in mercy will accept of our imperfect
obedience for his sake.

This new Covenant, which Christ has procured for us; will admit of the
obedience of Christ for us, and also of our true repentance for our sins, which
the legal Covenant would not; because it required perfect and personal
obedience to every tittle of the Law, both in thought in word, and in deed.

By virtue of this new Covenant, Jer. 31. 33, 34.
God is our God, and he will forgive all our iniquities, and will remember our
sins no more: upon condition that we believe in Christ, Heb. 12. 24.
who is the Mediator of this Covenant, and that with our faith we join piety
and new obedience.

Christ has also given us his Sacraments, whereby this Covenant is sealed to
us, if we do worthily partake of them: but of this Covenant, and also of the
Sacraments: I have written more fully in another Treatise.

Now Meditate with an holy devotion upon all these Advantages, which every true
believer has by Christ in this life above all other men, that have no interest
in him by faith, and examine thy self hereby what thou have gained by him. If
thou have used the blessings of God and his good creatures soberly and
temperately to his glory and not to pamper or cherish any sin to dishonor him
thereby, and do return thanks unto God for them with a sincere heart;
because he is the sole giver of all things that thou injoyest: then Christ has
taken away the curse that was upon them, and has made them blessings to thee,
which thou may freely use to thy comfort; otherwise thou can find little
comfort in them. Also, if thou do truly believe that thy sins were imputed
unto Christ, and have an holy assurance hereof by the daily renewing of thy
repentance for thy daily sins; then thou may be fully persuaded, that the
guilt of sin, which was a burden to thy conscience, and did cleave close to thy
soul, is taken away, and that Christ has nailed it to his cross, whereby thou
art freed from the curse of the Law, and from the condemnation of sin. This
consideration will much comfort thee, when thou art under the cross: for the
evil of punishment that was in thine afflictions is taken away, it being part
of the curse, and thou art but chastised for thy good, and not punished for thy
hurt.

Examine thy self yet further what thou have gained by Christ: for if thou
can overpower thy corruptions by the strength of grace, and can leave thy
sins before they leave thee, and that the remembrance of them is bitter to thy
soul, and do daily strive with a true purpose of heart to newness of life;
then thou have an evident sign, that Christ has taken away the dominion of sin
in thee, Ezekiel. 36. 25.
and has poured clean water upon thy soul, to purify and cleanse thee from
all thy filthiness. Also, if thou do find the fruits of the Spirit of
sanctification, that thou have an holy desire to the means of grace, and a
faithful endeavor to grow stronger in grace, that thy heart may be stablished
in the truth, and thy Faith firm to uphold thee in thy sufferings and trials;
then thou have gotten great gain and much Advantage by Christ. But if thou art
persuaded of thine Adoption by Faith in him, thou can not conceive how great
thy gain will be: for whatsoever a child can desire of a loving Father, thou
may expect much more from God: nothing shall be too dear for thee, nothing
shall be hurtful to thee, and nothing shall be concealed from thee, that may
be profitable and advantageous to the salvation of thy soul.

Let us consider now, that our hearts may ruminate well upon it for our great
comfort, what honor we have by being made the sons of God. 1 Samuel 18. 23.
When Saul's servants came to persuade David to be the Kings son in law, he gave
them this answer, Seems it to you a light thing to be a Kings son in law,
seeing that I am a poor man and lightly esteemed? How great then is the honor,
and how highly to be esteemed, for a poor wretched captive to be made the Son
of the eternal and everliving God? to have such a Father to come to in all our
necessities, such a Refuge in all our distresses, such a Protector against all
our enemies, and to be heir to such an Inheritance as is incorruptible and
eternal, which Christ has reserved for us in heaven.

Wherefore we should be holy and undefiled in our conversations, as becomes
the sons of such a Father, we should not walk stubbornly before him, but in
filial fear and reverence, obeying his holy will and commands with filial love,
and submitting to his rod and corrections, as a child ought to submit to his
Father: If our services are thus performed to God, he will then be a tender and
a gracious Father to us.

If we have this Gain by Christ in this life, what is the gain of the whole
world to it? What is all earthly honor to the honor of a true Christian? and
yet most men covet and desire that gain, and that honor, and they neglect the
true Gain, and the true honor of a Christian, which is chiefly to be desired.
Mat. 16. 26
What is a man profited, says Christ, if be shall gain the whole world, and
lose his own soul?

If we enjoy Christ, we have a rich Patrimony, we can want no comfort,
whatsoever shall betide us in soul, or in body, in goods, or good name; he will
repair all our losses in Adam with his abundant righteousness, he will also
repair all our losses in children, servants, or estate, either in this life,
Job. 42 10
as he did unto Job, or else in the life to come in a more plentiful manner.
Christ will likewise furnish us with all spiritual abilities to encounter with
the enemies of our salvation, to stand firmly for the truth, and for a good
conscience, and to endure the trial of our faith, love, hope and patience, and
he will make perfect whatsoever is wanting, or imperfect in us: 2 Cor. 12. 9
for his grace is sufficient for us, and his strength is made perfect in
weakness: his love and his care of us does most shine forth, when we do most a
base and humble our selves, and when we do acknowledge our unworthiness of it.

In the last place we should Meditate with all thankfulness upon the great
benefit that we have by the Covenant of grace, which Christ has sealed for us
with his blood: for we may faithfully believe, and comfortably expect, that God
will perform his condition expressed therein to us, though we cannot perfectly
perform our conditions to him; also, that he will purify and cleanse us from
all our filthiness, Jer. 32. 40.
and will put his fear in our hearts that we shall not depart from him,
Wherefore, let not the failings and frailties of the flesh discomfort us, nor
weaken our faith and confidence in the goodness of God to us in Christ: for
the flesh will rebel against the spirit, and the corruptions of the
unregenerate part will sometimes break out upon us, to dash and hinder our
comfort in this gracious Covenant. Therefore Christ has ordained the two
Sacraments to seal this Covenant to our souls, for the better confirmation of
our Faith: Gal. 3. 26, 27.
For if we are baptized into Christ by Faith, we have put on Christ, we are
members of his Church, and this Covenant is sealed to us; 1 John. 1. 7
and the blood of Christ has cleansed us from all sin. If age, or sickness,
or any thing else beside sanctifying grace, does keep us from sinning against
God, this is not the true purging away of sin, nor the regeneration and
renewing of the holy Ghost, because the evil concupisence of the flesh, and
the sinful desires of the mind will remain strong, and will still reign in us,
though we cannot actually commit sin. So likewise if we do spiritually feed
upon the body and blood of Christ at the Lords Table, we do then seal this
Covenant of grace to our souls, and we shall find the comfort of all those
promises, that are contained in it.

This spiritual food was the fruit that the Spouse did feed upon, Cant. 2. 3.
which was so sweet to her taste; and we shall also find the same sweetness
in that blessed fruit. But if we come to that holy Supper with minds full of
worldly cares, or sinful lusts, and with hearts full of hypocrisy and
unbelief, we do eat and drink damnation to our selves.

We need not now envy at the prosperity of ungodly men; their wealth is their
snare to bring them into the paths of perdition, their gain is their loss,
their pleasure will be their pain, and their sweetness will be bitterness to
them in the end: so that what gain soever they make of this world, if they do
not also gain Christ with it, they will find no Advantage nor true comfort by
it.

It is a shame for rich men, and a dishonor for such as are in eminent places
of authority, if they are not truly virtuous and religious. This heavenly gain
is peculiar only to the Children of God, which they have only by Christ, and
they seek it no where but of him.

Our Advantage and Gain by CHRIST in Death.
AS Christ is our spiritual gain in this life, so he is no less our advantage
and Gain in our death, for he has so conquered death, that it shall neither
sting us, nor hurt us, though we must at Gods appointed time yield and submit
unto it. Death of it self is a terrible enemy, and destructive to our whole
nature, and it is the greatest part of the curse for the breach of the Law; but
Christ has made it our friend, and has taken the curse from it, so that if we
live an holy and pious life in Christ, we shall also dye a comfortable and a
Christian death in him. Romans 5. 12
By the fall of Adam sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned: Heb. 9. 2^.
Therefore it is appointed unto all men once to dye, and after this is the
judgment.

Thus says the Psalmist, Psalm. 89. 48
What man is be that lives, and shall not see death? Shall he deliver his soul
from the hand of the grave? Paul says, 2 Cor. 4. 7
that our bodies are but earthen vessels, which are soon broken, or 2 Cor. 5. 1.
earthly houses, which are soon dissolved.

The wise man has no privilege from death more than the fool, one event
happens to them both. Eccl. 2. 14, 16
How dies the wise man? As the fool, says the Preacher Eccl. 3. 20
All go unto one place, both high and low, rich and poor, all are of the dust,
and all turn to dust again: For we must be conformed to Christ in his death, if
we desire to be conformed to him in his resurrection.

This is the way that every man must go, before he can h Romans 3. 23.
come to eternal life: for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of
God, Rom, 6. 23*
and the wages of sin is death.

If it be so, that none can escape the stroke of death, but that it will seize
upon all flesh with an unresistible power, we ought then to be always well
prepared, that death may not come suddenly upon us, to take us away in our
sins, before we have made our peace with God by faith in Christ, and before we
have got a modest and sober assurance of the pardon of our sins by true
repentance, that we may willingly part with this world, and comfortably resign
up our souls to God in full hope, that we shall enjoy a better life hereafters
for evermore; and this preparation for Death is only by Christ.

Consider, now, that Christ will fit and prepare us for Death, and will also
fit a Death for us, which shall make most for the glory of God, and be most
advantageous to us; and he will so sanctify it to us, that our gain thereby
shall be far greater, than our loss.

If we dye in the Lord, or for the Lord, death may part our souls from our
bodies; but it cannot part our souls from Christ: the soul may be parted for a
time from a crazy, diseased and corruptible body, which is but an earthly
Tabernacle; but we shall receive the same bodies again, in full strength, in
perfect beauty, and incorruptible, free from aches, or diseases, from decay or
corruption.

Death may take our souls out of a world of miseries and calamities, of
sorrows, troubles and vexations; but it will presently convey them into an
haven of rest, and into an heaven of happiness, where there is no labor nor
toil, no troubles, nor sorrow; but perfect peace and fullness of joy for ever,
and our bodies shall be raised up to enjoy the same blessedness with our
souls. 2 Cor. 5. 1.
Death may dissolve the earthly house of our tabernacle, but we have a building
of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.

What if we lose our lands and possessions, whereunto we are but tenants at
will? ^ Pet. 1. 3, 4
We have a lively hope by Christ to enjoy an inheritance incorruptible and
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for us. Death may take
us from our earthly friends; but it will bring us into the society of the
glorious Angels, and blessed Saints in heaven; and to be wedded to Christ our
Beloved for ever, to whom in this life we are but espoused.

Consider in the next place for our further comfort, that we have this
Advantage by Christ above other men, when we are to dye, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56.
that death has nothing to hurt us, sin has no power to condemn us, and
therefore death cannot bind us over unto judgment.

Thus says the Lord by his Prophet, Isa. 42* ^5
I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and
will not remember thy sins. How can death then be any way hurtful to us? As
Christ has taken away the guilt of our sins, so he will also fasten all our
good works and pious duties to our souls, which will go with us to the grave,
Rev. 14. 13
and will follow us to the day of judgment, to be had in remembrance then
before God. This is a blessed Advantage that we have by Christ in death above
other men that have no interest in Christ. For their evil works cleave so close
to their souls, that they will follow them unto judgment, to increase their
torments in their condemnation. Thus says Paul, 1 Timothy 5. 24.
Some men's sins are open before hand, going before to judgment, and some men's
follow after. Zophar also says thus of the wicked, Job. 20. 11
His bones are full of the sin of his youth, which shall lie down with him in
the dust.

Consider also, that Christ through his own death has destroyed the Devil,
Heb. 2. 14
that had the power of death; so that now the Devil is most weak against the
servants of God at the time of their death: whereas to the wicked he is a
strong enemy, and will not be beaten from their beds-feet, until he has gotten
their souls, which are given him for a prey Luke 10. 22
But God has appointed his holy Angels to attend upon his children, when they
depart out of this life, and to receive their souls from the hand of death, to
carry them up into Abraham's bosom

This is a great comfort and benefit to them, when they are to leave this
world, and it is such a Gain, as no natural and unregenerate man can expect.

Wherefore, 2 Pet. 1. 10
we ought to use all care and diligence to make our calling and election sure,
and to make sure our union with Christ by faith, that so we may live a
sanctified life to the Lord, and then let Death come how or when it will, we
shall undoubtedly dye in the Lord, for death may come in an hour, or in a
moment, when we look not for it; it may break in upon us like a thief in the
night, and take away our souls at unawares; but this need not trouble us: for
if our life has been holy and upright toward God, our death cannot be but
sanctified to us in Christ, who will keep our souls out of the power of the
devil. For if we have no other power to preserve them from destruction, but
what nature or common grace can afford us, we are not able to encounter with
death, to make any advantage by it: for the strength of nature will decay in
us, and common grace can give us no antidote against the sting of death: it is
only faith in Christ which is the true Antidote against the terrors of death,
and against the power of the Devil: nature can give us no balm to heal the
wounds, and putrid sores that sin has made in our souls, which must be cured
before we go hence, or else death will deliver them up in such a loathsome
condition, as that God will not accept them. Jer. 46. 11
But if we go up to Mount Gilead, we shall find balm there, which will cure
us of all our spiritual diseases. For in vain we shall use many medicines, if
we neglect this balm, which is the blood of Christ. Jer. ^. 22.
There is balm in Gilead, there is a Physician, even Jesus Christ our blessed
Redeemer, that can recover the health of our souls, and can rescue them out of
the jaws of death, and from the power of the Devil.

Now let the Meditations of thy heart be continually how to enjoy Christ in thy
life, that thy soul may enjoy him at thy death, and how to make the true gain
of thy time here, that when death shall bereave thee of all time, Christ may be
then thy gain for ever.

If thou will have any hope of a comfortable death, thou must labor to live an
holy life unto God: for a vicious and sinful life can give thee no assurance
of a blessed death; and if Christ be not thy Redeemer in thy life, he will not
be thy Savior at thy death, to save thy soul from destruction, and to bring it
to eternal bliss. Also, if thou desire to enjoy heavenly felicity with the
Saints of God, thou must so live in the true fear of God, that thou may dye
in his favor, and then death will open the door, and give thy soul free
passage to enjoy it.

All the good that Christ has procured for us by his death cannot be fully
enjoyed in this life; but is reserved for us in heaven, which we must come to
possess by death; and therefore Christ will so prepare us for it with his
sanctifying grace, and will also prepare death for us, that it shall not hinder
us of these great benefits; but be a special means to bring us to the full
possession of them.

If we do well consider and faithfully believe, that we shall have this gain by
Christ in our death, how will it strengthen us against the fears and terrors
of death? How will it confirm us in a steadfast hope of a joyful resurrection?
How will it stir up our hearts and affections to live as becomes the children
of God, that death may deliver up our souls unto him? and how willingly shall
we part with this world, if we have an holy assurance to enjoy a far better
Inheritance in the world to come.

But Christ is no gain to unregenerate men in their death: for as they would
not know him in their life, so he will not know them when they dye, but will
leave them to the power of death, to bind them over unto judgment. Death will
bereave them of all their wealth and possessions, it will strip them of all
their rich jewels, and precious ornaments, it will lay their honors in the
dust, it will take away all their beauty, strength and comeliness, which was
their pride, and it will leave them nothing but their winding sheet, neither
will it give them any recompense for all their losses, but shame and confusion,
pain and torment, which never shall have end. Luke 16.
Thus it was with the rich man in the Gospel, for death took him away from all
that he had, and left him not so much as a little water to cool his tongue,
when he was in the tormenting flames; and thus it is with all rich men, if they
are not rich in faith and in grace.

But some are not willing to dye through humane frailty and weakness, though
they be in the state of grace: Mat. 26. 41.
for the spirit may be ready, though the flesh be weak. Others have no
assurance of a better life, and therefore they would willingly keep this which
they now enjoy. Some again have their hearts and affections so glewed to
earthly things, that the very thoughts of death is bitter to them. Others also
are loath to dye because they cannot provide for wife and children, and they
have none to take care of them. Though God requires this Christian care of
them; yet we must not distrust the goodness of God, whose eye of providence is
upon all his creatures; then much more upon those that belong unto him.

But when we have done our best endeavor in an honest calling to provide for
them, and yet must leave them scant of means for their subsistence; then God
will have a special care of such Widows and fatherles children, and therefore
he has given many strict commands concerning them, and he has made many
promises of protection, help and comfort to them. Psalm. 68. 5
A father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows is God in his holy
habitation. Also, God will bless the children if their fathers have lived in
the true fear of God, and he will provide for them if death takes away their
parents, and they are left destitute of food and raiment: But this may be an
advantage even to such children; because then they are immediately commended to
the care and providence of God, who best knows how to make provision for
them, and he will neither be wanting in the trust that is committed to him,
neither will he frustrate the hope of those that rest and depend upon him for
succor in time of need.

Consider in the last place what the Son of Sirach says, Eccl. 41. 1, 2.
That as the remembrance of death is bitter to a man that lives at rest in his
possessions, unto the man that has nothing to vex him, and that has
prosperity in all things; yea, unto him that is yet able to receive meat: so
the sentence of death is acceptable unto the needy, and unto him whose strength
fails, that is now in the last age, and is vexed with all things, and to him
that despaireth, and has lost patience.

But none can be truly willing to dye, but only a true Christian, that is
ingrafted into Christ, and has an holy assurance that he dies in the love and
favor of God, and does faithfully hope for that Crown of righteousness, and
that heavenly Inheritance which the righteous Judge has reserved for him.

If we have this assurance by our union with Christ, and also a steadfast hope
of salvation, well grounded upon the promises of God, we shall not be afraid to
look death in the face, nor unwilling to resign up our souls unto God, before
death does violently or suddenly take them from us. For Christ has taken away
the evil that is in death, and has so weakened the power of it, that it
cannot bereave our souls of that spiritual comfort and gain which we have by
him, though sometimes we cannot feel it in a sudden or violent death, neither
can it bind us over unto judgment: For nothing can dissolve the union that is
between Christ and our souls by faith. Though God should take us away when we
are young, or in our middle age, as he did that good King Josiah; yet it shall
be for our great Advantage, that we should not see the evil that is to come,
and the sooner to enjoy our eternal rest and happiness with Christ.

Our Advantage and gain by CHRIST after death.
BUt the chiefest gain that a true Believer has by Christ is after death: for
whatsoever he gained by him in life, or in death, was to fit him for the
enjoyment of this great gain, and to give him some assurance of it: and some
taste how great and how comfortable it is. We have this heavenly advantage by
Christ in this life, but in hope, and we cannot come to the full fruition of it
until after death, and then we shall find it to be so great, that no tongue can
express it, and no heart can conceive it; but if we duly consider from what
evils and miseries we shall be then freed, and what glory and blessedness we
shall then enjoy, we may conceive something of this unspeakable gain.

First, we shall be freed from all the temptations and suggestions of the
devil: Rev. 12. 9.
for he is cast out into the earth, and all his wicked Angels are cast out with
him: They never had any place in heaven since their fall; though they fly in
the air, or mount up to the first or second region of heaven, yet they cannot
come into the heaven of happiness, where the Saints and Angels of God have
their habitation; for heaven is not a place for such unclean spirits.

Also in heaven we shall be freed from all worldly temptations, from all carnal
delights and earthly vanities, that may entice us to sin: Rev. 21. 27
For there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles, nor
whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie: for as the place is most pure,
so they that come there must be pure and holy.

Secondly, in heaven we shall be freed from the issues of temptation, and that
is sin: for thus says the Prophet, Jer. 3. 17.
When the Nations shall be gathered unto the Throne of the Lord, they shall
walk no more after the imaginations of their evil heart. In this life the soul
is purged and purified from the guilt of sin by the blood of Christ, and all
the spots and stains of sin are taken away by the laver of regeneration; the
body also is purified and refined in the grave, by the virtue of Christ's death
and burial; and therefore, 1 Cor. 15. 41.
though it be sown in corruption, in dishonor, and in weakness, yet it is
raised in incorruption, in glory, and in power; it is sown a natural body,
but it is raised a spiritual body, which is subject to no sin, corruption, or
infirmity, which are the fruits of sin, and it is endowed with perfect
abilities to glorify God, together with the Saints and Angels in heaven. So
long as we live in the flesh we cannot but sin against God; but when this
mortal shall put on immortality, there will be then no more place for sin, but
our whole nature shall be made spiritural and heavenly. This consideration
should make us desire with Paul, Phil. 1. 23.
To be dissolved, and to be with Christ, that we might no more sin against our
God, nor offend him with our pollutions; but always to sing praises and
Hallelujahs unto him, as the Saints and Angels do in heaven.

Thirdly, we shall then be freed from all troubles and sorrows, from all pain
and diseases of body, from all anguish of spirit and grief of hears: Rev. 25. 4.
For God will wipe away all tears from our eyes, and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for
the former things are passed away. Thus are the servants of God freed from all
temptations unto sin, from all sin, and from all misery and sorrow after death,
by the merit of Christ's death and passion; but carnal and unregenerate men
carry their sins with them to the grave, and death opens the gate to their
eternal torments in hell: for it binds them over to the great and terrible
day of judgment, when the fierceness of Gods wrath shall be poured out upon
them to their utter confusion.

We come now to consider what great honor, and what joy and comfort the
servants of God shall have by Christ after death: for though their life here be
full of sorrows, yet after death they shall be freed from them all, and they
shall also have the fullness of all true comfort and consolation.

First, we shall enjoy God himself, 2 Cor. 1. 3.
who is the God of all comfort: for thus he says by his Prophet, Isa. 51. 11,
12.
The redeemed of the Lord shall return and come with singing unto Zion, and
everlasting joy shall be upon their heads; they shall obtain gladn^sse and joy,
and mourning shall flee away; I even I am he that comfort you. What comfort
can we then want if God be our Comforter?

Secondly, if we delight in pleasures, heaven will afford us more than our
hearts can desire: Psalm. 36. 8, 9.
There we shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of Gods house: and he
will make us drink of the river of his pleasures, for with him is the fountain
of life, in his light shall we see light Also, the Psalmist says thus, Psalm.
16. 11
God will show us the path of life, in his presence is fullness of joy, at his
right hand there are pleasures for evermore: For heaven is the place of all
peace and comfort, of all joy and happiness, and of all glory and immortality.

Thirdly, heaven is the place of all security, as Abraham said to Dives. Lu.
16. 26
Between us and you there is a great gulf sixed, so that they which would pass
from hence to you cannot, neither can they ^asse to us that would come from
thence. Also, th^^ says Christ, Mat. 25. 10.
When the Brid^groom comes, and they that are ready are gone in with him to
the marriage the door will be shut, and the^ none can go in, and none can come
out Mat. 6. 20
^n heaven we may safely keep our spiritual ^reasure from the moth and rust and
from that arch theif the devil. If this precious jewel, which is our ^ou^, be
laid up in heaven, it will be safely kept there, for nothing can corrupt it,
and no theif can steal it away*

Lastly, that which makes up the fullness of our joy and happiness in the
Kingdom of heaven, is the eternity of it: for if we should enjoy it but for a
time, it would greatly lessen the comfort of our felicity; there shall be an
end of time, but there will be no end of our blessed condition in heaven. For
thus says the Lord, Isa. 65. 17, 18.
Behold I create new heavens, and a new earth; and the former shall not be
remembered, nor come into mind.

But be you glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create: for behold, I
create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy. And again he says by the
same Prophet, Isa. 66 22
For as the new heavens and the new earth which I will make, shall remain
before me, so shall your seed, and your Name remain. Thus says John, Rev. 2 2.
5.
The servants of the lamb shall be in this city of God, and they shall reign
for ever and ever. Paul speaking of the resurrection, says thus. 1 These. 4. 17
Then we which are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together with them in
the clouds to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we ever be with the Lord.

Daniel also says thus, Dan. 7. 18.
And the Saints of the most high God shall take the Kingdom, and possess it
for ever, even for ever and ever. Holy David says, Psalm. 37. 18
that the inheritance of the upright shall be for ever. Thus it is evident how
great our gain shall be by Christ after death, and that there shall be no end
of our happiness.

Consider now, that whatsoever we suffer in this life is but for a short time,
and that the bitterness of our sorrows is sweetened with some comforts; also
that our joy and felicity in heaven is for eternity, and that it is no way
imbittered with any troubles or vexations; that we may patiently and meekly
bear whatsoever God shall lay upon us, and earnestly desire to be uncloathed of
this corruptible body, that we may put on the glorious robes of immortality for
ever.

Thus says Paul, ^ Cor. 4. 17
Our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

So likewise, if we consider and believe, that we have this Gain and advantage
only by Christ, it will make us study and labor by all means to enjoy him,
and when we have gotten some interest in him, to stick close to him by Faith,
to love him with entire affections, and to be obedient to his will and commands.

Wherefore now, if thou have any holy desire to be freed from all temptations,
from all sin, and from all sorrow, vexation and calamity; then set the
Meditations of thy heart upon the fruition of the Kingdom of Heaven, where thou
shall be freed from all these evils, though here upon earth they will rush in
upon thee. Also, if thou desire to enjoy all the happiness that heaven can
afford thee, and to enjoy God himself for ever; then look up unto Christ thy
Savior with the eye of faith, who has purchased heaven for thee with his own
blood, and has made thee the Son of God by adoption, that he might bestow all
this upon thee; whereof he has given thee some taste in this life, but thou
can not be made perfect in it, until this life is ended. 2 Pet. 1. 10.
Give all diligence therefore, as Peter says, to make thy calling and election
sure by a lively faith in Christ, and get the seal of the new Covenant, which
is the blood of Christ, to be stamped upon thy heart, that thou may carry it
to thy grave, and then death will give thy soul free passage into the mansions
of heaven, where this perfect freedom is to be obtained, and where this gain
of eternal blessedness is to be gotten. Wherefore walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit, live not as a citizen of this world, but live here as a
free denizen of the heavenly Jerusalem, having thy mind, and the affections of
thy heart set upon the holiness and righteousness thereof, that thy life and
conversation may be pure and holy here upon earth, and then thy soul shall
live, and eternally possess it, after it is dissolved from thy body.

How CHRIST is our Spiritual life.
MAn in his first creation had a spiritual life, which was free from any spot
or stain of sin; but he soon lost it by his transgression, and defaced this
lively image of God, that was stamped upon his soul, and then in himself he had
no ability to recover his lost happiness. This leprosy of sin has infected
all his posterity that proceed from him by natural propagation, which has
brought upon them a spiritual death, and lays them open to eternal death
hereafter.

Though this be our condition by nature; yet Ephesians. 2. 4, 5, 6, 7.
God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love where with he loved us, even
when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together in with Christ, and has
raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ
Jesus; that he might show the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness
toward us through Christ Jesus.

Ephesians. 4. 23*
This renovation in the spirit of our mind is wrought in us by the holy Ghost
through Christ: for he was anointed with the holy Ghost for this end and
purpose, that by him we might be raised up from the death of sin to a
spiritual life of grace, according to the signification of his Name: for as he
is Christ, he is Anointed of God, and as he is Jesus, he is the Savior of the
world, to save us from our sins, and to work salvation for us, whereof we are
not capable, until we have a spiritual life wrought in us.

Thus says the Spouse of Christ, Cant. 1. 3.
Thy Name is as ointment po^red forth. A precious Ointment has many excellent
virtues: Psalm. 104. 15.
for it makes a cheerful countenance, it comfort and strengthens all the
parts of the body, it heals all diseases, and it sends forth a sweet
savor, when it is poured out, which refreshes and comfort all the senses.
Thus is Christ to every true believers soul, he is the Anointed of God, as
says the Psalmist of him, Psalm. 45. 7.
Thou love righteousness, and hate wickedness, therefore God thy God has
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows: Act. 10. 38
for he was anointed with the holy Ghost, and with power.

First, by the power of his holy unction, Christ does put a spiritual light
into our understanding by his Spirit, that we may see how to walk in the paths
of godliness and truth, according to this of old Simeon, Lu. 2. 31, 32.
that God had prepared him to be a light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the
glory of his people Israel. Psalm. 97. 11
Light is sown for the righteous, and the comfort and gladness of it for the
upright in heart.

This Prophecy was fulfilled in Christ. Isa. 2. 9.
The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light; they that dwell
in the land of the shadow of death, upon them has the light shined. Ephesians. 5. 14
Wherefore, awake thou that sleep in fin, and arise from the dead, and
Christ shall give thee light.

If we want this heavenly light we must needs wander and go astray from God,
and we have no means to obtain such a light, but by Christ. It is sin that has
brought this darkness and this spiritual death upon our souls, and none but
Christ can take it away. This is the beginning of our spiritual life, when we
have some light to discern the spiritual things of God, for the good of our
souls.

Secondly, Christ is the food and nourishment of our souls, to preserve this
spiritual life in us, whose flesh we must spiritually eat, and whose blood we
must spiritually drink, by faith in the hearing of his Word preached, and
Sacramentally, when we come to his holy Table; or else we have not this
spiritual life in us. John 6. 48, 53.
I am that bread of life, says Christ, which came down from heaven, who so
eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him
up at the last day: for my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.
Wherefore, if our souls do hunger and thirst after this heavenly food, and do
earnestly desire to be refreshed and fully satisfied therewith, it is an
evident sign that there is a spiritual life in us: for Christ does freely offer
himself to every empty soul that can feed upon him by Faith in his Word, or in
his Sacraments.

But if our desires and the affections of our hearts are taken up with the love
of this world, and of earthly vanities; its no marvel if we have no hunger,
nor thirst after Christ, and that we feel so little want, and need of him.

Thirdly, the blood of Christ is the true balm to heal, and cure all the
diseases and wounds that sin has made in our souls: it is like Lu 10. 34
the good Samaritans wine and oil; for it has a cleansing and an healing
virtue. There can be no wound so deep in the soul, and no ulcer so festered,
but this precious Ointment will cleanse and heal it, if it be rightly applied
by faith and true repentance: for repentance lays open the wound by true
confession, and faith applies the remedy to it, and then repentance gives us
an holy assurance that we shall be cured.

This is the way, and the means of recovery, when our souls are sick of any
spiritual disease, and also to preserve that spiritual life which is in us.

Lastly, when the heavenly graces that flow from Christ are poured out upon our
souls, they will greatly refresh and comfort our spirits in all sadness of
heart, and they will so persume all our actions and services which we perform
unto God, that their sweet savor shall ascend up unto him, that he may smell
it, and graciously accept of us, and of our offerings. Genesis 8. 21.
When Noah offered burnt offerings to the Lord after the flood, the Lord
smelled a sweet savor, and accepted his sacrifice, and blessed him
exceedingly. Wherefore, if our souls are perfumed with grace, they will so
perfume all our holy oblations which we offer up to God, that he will in mercy
accept them for his Sons sake. I rev. 5. 8.
But the sacrifices of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord, and they
stink in his nostrils, because they proceed from a corrupt and unclean heart,
which is not perfumed with grace; how much ^ Eccl. 10. 1
more when he brings them with a wicked mind. ^o, 21. 27
Sin is like dead flies in the ointment of the Apothecary, which causes it to
stink: for sin makes us odious in the sight of God.

Wherefore take heed with what heart thou come into the presence of God, and
that thou bring no oblation to him with a wicked mind; but first purify thy
heart from sin by faith in the blood of Christ, and see that thy soul be
perfumed with sanctifying grace, and then come and offer thy gift, and God will
accept it. But if there be any sin in thy bosom unrepented of, or any iniquity
in thy heart, which thou seek to hide from God, then he cannot smell a sweet
savor of thy prayers, of thy praises and thanksgivings, or of any duty which
thou performest to him, to make it accepted, because thy heart is not upright
before God.

Now we must examine our selves what spiritual life we have by Christ, and we
must know how he is our spiritual life, if we will have any comfort thereby.

First. 1 John 2. 20
If we have this holy unction from Christ, which was poured upon him above
measure, that it might run down to every member of his mystical body, which was
typified by Psalm. 133. 2.
that p^ecious ointment which was poured upon Aarons head, and ran down to the
skirts of his garments; so that we have a spiritual light, to discern the
things that belong to our peace: then Christ has wrought this life in us by
his holy Spirit; for in the state of nature we were dead to any thing that is
heavenly; 1 Cor. 2. 14
and we could not receive the things of the Spirit of God, because they are
spiritually discerned.

Secondly, if our souls can feed upon heavenly food, and if we can express
all other actions of a spiritual life, as to walk in the paths of holiness, to
speak the pure Language of Canaan, and to have our conversation in heaven,
while we live here upon earth; we may then be fully persuaded; that there is a
spiritual life in us: for so long as sin reigns in our mortal bodies, and
until there be a new creation wrought in us, we are spiritually dead to every
good work, and we can express no actions of a sanctified life.

Thirdly, if our souls are cleansed from the guilt of sin in the blood of
Christ, and if the filth and stains of our sins are washed away in the Laver of
Regeneration by his sanctifying grace, and covered under his righteousness,
that they appear not to the dishonor of God, or to the hurt of our neighbor,
and that we delight not in any sin; but do study and endeavor to serve and
please God with a sincere heart and pure affections; it is a sure evidence that
Christ has quickened, and raised us up from the death of sin to the life of
grace.

Lastly, if our duties and services to God proceed from a clean, and a purified
heart, which is sanctified and perfumed with the graces and merits of Christ,
then God will smell the perfume of them to accept of our persons and of our
holy offerings, because the Spirit of Christ is in us.

Thus we may know to our great comfort, if we narrowly look into our condition,
what spiritual life we have, and that we have it only from Christ, and by him.

Wherefore, now if thou desire to live spiritually by Christ, thou must
faithfully believe that he has taken away that spiritual death, which by
nature was upon thee for thy sins, and that he only can give thee this
spiritual life: for as he has vanquished and overcome the power of death,
both spiritual and temporal; so he can give a spiritual life, as well as a
temporal, to whom and when he pleases.

This spiritual life thou must have from him, if thou can make a particular
application of him to thy self by faith, that he is thy Savior, and thy
Redeemer: for he has then breathed into thee the Spirit of grace, which has
wrought this spiritual life in thee, though at the first thou can feel no
power of it: without this application of Christ to thy self, thou can draw no
comfort from him, and he will profit thee nothing. It did much comfort Job in
his greatest misery, when he did thus apply Christ to himself. Job 19. 25, 27.
I know, says he, that my Redeemer lives, whom I shall see for my self. If
thou can bring thy heart to close thus with Christ, he will give light to
thine eyes, food to thy soul, balm for thy diseases, and comfortable refreshing
for thy languishing spirits. But if thou art still dead in thy sins, and have
no spiritual life in Christ, thou can then feel no comfort by him: for what
good can light do to a dead man? What benefit can he have by the daintiest
food? What can the best medicine profit him? And what sense has he of the
best perfume? But if thou do live in Christ, and he in thee, thou shall
partake with him in his fullness of all spiritual graces: Col. 1. 19
for it pleased the Father, that in him should all fulness dwell. John 1. 16
And of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace.

Now consider further, that Christ is the meritorious cause of this spiritual
life: Tit. 2. 14
for he gave himself freely and voluntarily to be an oblation and a sacrifice
for us, to redeem us from all iniquity, and from whatsoever we are liable unto
by reason of sin, to wit, from the guilt of sin, from the dominion of sin, from
the curse of the Law, from the bondage of Satan, from the terrors of death,
and from eternal condemnation. Also, by the power of his resurrection he has
subdued and overcome death, hell, and the grave, that we might be raised out of
the grave of sin to live a spiritual life to God in Christ: Christ has wrought
our redemption by his active and passive obedience to the will of God, whereby
we are justified in his sight: for he has taken our life out of the hand of
Gods justice, where we had no hope to enjoy it, and has put it into the hand
of his mercy, where we are sure through Christ to have the comfort of it here,
and the happiness of it hereafter.

Though we must pass by the gates of hell before we can enjoy the sweet
consolation of this spiritual life, and though we must bring our selves so low
in our humiliation, and in mortifying of our sins and corruptions, as if we
were ready to be thrust down into hell; yet God will then give us a spiritual
life in Christ to support us, he will then raise us up to newness of life by
the sanctifying grace of his Spirit, that our spiritual life may appear, and
that we may be made fit to enjoy Christ for ever in the Kingdom of heaven.

This is the first main end of the passion of Christ, that we may be redeemed
by the merit of his blood.

Secondly, Christ is the efficient cause of our spiritual life: for as we have
our justification by the merit of his blood, so we have our sanctification by
the same blood, and these two cannot be separated, but must go together; for we
have no sure evidence that we are justified in the sight of God, but by the
sanctification of our lives. The Act of our justification is wrought at once,
as soon as we are ingrafted into Christ by Faith; but our sanctification must
be a continued Act, so long as we live in the flesh: for the best of Gods
servants have so many spots, and stains of sin in them, that they have daily
need to pray to be every day purified and cleansed with the blood of Christ,
and to be daily renewed with the graces of his Spirit.

This is the second main end why Christ gave himself to be an oblation for us,
that he might purify us to be a peculiar people to himself, according to this
of Paul, Tit. 2. 14
Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

This purification Christ works in us ministerially by the Preaching of his
Word: for thus says Paul, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26.
Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and
cleanse it with the washing of water, by the Word. Also, he does wash and
cleanse us Sacramentally from our sins by Baptism: Gal. 3. 27.
For if we have been baptized into Christ, we have put on Christ, and then we
are clothed with his righteousness, and with his holiness, which are the
garments of a spiritual life: for we must be holy as well as just; Heb* 12. 14
without which no man shall see the Lord. So likewise, Acts 15. 9
faith does instrumentally purify our hearts as it has relation to Christ.

But Christ does most effectually purify our hearts from sin and from
uncleanness by the holy Ghost, and by him does convey this spiritual life of
grace into us, without whose gracious concurrence no other means can be
effectual to us unto salvation.

Thus does Christ bring us to a spiritual life, that our conversation may be
holy and blameless in the sight of God. Isa 35. 8, 9
The Prophet speaks of a way of holiness, which is not for the lion, or for
any ravenous beast, but for the Redeemed of the Lord, they only shall walk
there. This is the privilege only of those, Heb 9. 14.
whose consciences are purged in the blood of Christ from dead works to serve
the living God. If Christ does not thus wash and purify us, we have no part in
him, John 13. 8, 9.
as he said unto Peter, when he refused to let him wash his feet. When we are
thus cleansed from our sins, and have this spiritual life by grace in Christ
wrought in us, then we are a peculiar people to him, separate from sinners, and
from the vanities of this world; and wholely devoted to serve him; then we
shall with Peter desire more washing and cleansing; Lord, not my feet only,
but my head and my hands: and then we shall have an holy zeal to do such works
as God has commanded, and we shall do them by faith in Christ, and to the
honor and glory of God, that the truth of our sanctification may appear.

Thirdly, Christ is the exemplary cause of our spiritual life: for he has
recorded his own life in the Gospel, 1 Pet. 2. 21
to be a perfect pattern of holiness to us, and an example thereby to learn
how to follow his steps. If we desire to live according to the rule of Christ's
life, we must be holy, and righteous in all our ways, humble and lowly toward
all men, meek and patient in our sufferings, sober and temperate in all things,
charitable to the poor, doing good to all, frequent and fervent in Prayer, and
always seeking the glory of God.

This was Christ's whole life, and thus ought we to regulate our lives, that the
fruits of a spiritual life may shine forth in the integrity of our
conversation. Christ did show the purity of his Ministry by the holiness of
his life, and what he did Preach to others, he did practice himself. Mat. 11.
29.
Learn of me, says he, for I am meek and lowly in heart.

Though we cannot attain to perfection of holiness in this life; Phil. 3. 14.
yet we must press toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God
in Christ Jesus.

But this is the work of grace and not of nature to follow Christ in his steps,
and the servants of God have their graces according to their measure: for some
have more, some have less* yet all have grace sufficient to fit them for the
kingdom of heaven, and according to their measure of grace, so is the purity of
their lives and conversations. Abraham excelled all others in Faith, and
therefore Romans 4. 11
he is called the Father of all them that believe. Moses excelled all men in
meekness: for the holy Ghost gives this Testimony of him, Number. 12. 3
that he was very meek above all the men that were upon the face of the earth.
Job was renowned for his patience. Thus says James of him: Jam. 5. 15
Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord. Holy
David, Daniel, and others excelled in Prayer and devout Meditations. These and
all other the servants of God had their several graces from Christ, and the
streams of his fullness do still plentifully flow down to all that belong to
the election of grace, for the sanctification of their lives.

Lastly, Christ is the final cause of our spiritual life, which is, that God
may be glorified thereby: to this end we were born, to this end should tend all
our words and actions, and Christ took upon him our nature, that God might be
glorified by our salvation. Christ did always seek the glory of God, both in
his Ministry and in his miracles, both in his life, and at his death. Thus he
says of his Ministry, John 12. 49, 50.
I have not spoken of my self; but the Father which sent me, he gave me a
commandment what I should say, and what I should speak: whatsoever therefore I
speak, ev^n as the Father said unto me, so I speak.

Thus also Christ glorified God by his Miracles; Joh. 5. 19, 36.
for he ascribes the cure of the impotent man at the pool of Bethesda to his
heavenly Father, that he might have the glory of it, because he sent him to
finish all those works which he did.

God is very jealous of his glory, Isa. 48. 11, 12.
he will not have his great Name to he polluted; and he will not give his glory
to another. His hand has laid the foundation of the earth, and his right hand
has spanned the heavens: when he calls unto them they stand up together.

To what end did God make the great Fabric of the Heavens and the earth, but
for his own glory? Why does God execute his justice upon the wicked, but to get
himself honor by their destruction? Exodus 14. 17.
as he did upon Pharaoh and his host, when he drowned them in the red sea. Why
does God bestow his mercies and his blessings upon his servants, but to be
honored for and by them? And why does Christ put into us a spiritual life* but
to honor and glorify God thereby? Lu. 5. 25.
If the man that Christ cured of the palsy glorified God for his cure, then
much more ought we so to do, because Christ has cured us of all our spiritual
diseases. Lu. 18.
If the man that received his sight followed Jesus, glorifying God, then ought
we to follow Christ, and to glorify God for that spiritual light, which he
has put into our understanding and for that spiritual life which he has put
into our souls. Acts 3. 8.
If the creeple, whom Peter and John cured, leaped and praised God; then we
have much more cause to praise and glorify God with joyful hearts; because
Christ has cured us of our spiritual lamenesse, and of all other spiritual
infirmities. Also, Mat. 27. 54.
if the Centurion, when he saw the earthquake, and what was done at Christ's
death, glorified God, saying, Truly this was the Son of God: then ought we to
glorify God for our regeneration, and for our Spiritual life, and to say,
Truly this was the work of the Son of God.

We may daily see the wonderful works of God, which he does for his own glory,
to give us daily occasions to honor and glorify him; and therefore this
should be our continual practice, to magnify the Name of God, according to
this of Paul* Cor. 10. 31.
Whether ye ear, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. It
is the continual work of the Saints and Angels in heaven to sing Hosanna to the
highest, and it should be our constant care here upon earth to glorify God,
and to magnify him for all his benefits, mercies and goodness to us.

Thus we may come to have an holy assurance, that we have a spiritual life in
Christ, if we do truly believe that he has redeemed us by the merit of his
blood from all our iniquities; and from all the issues of sin; also, that he
has sanctified us, and made us an holy people to himself, not to serve the
world, the flesh, or the devil; but to serve the living God with a clean heart,
and pure affections. So likewise, if we find a new principle of grace planted
in our hearts, whereby we are able in some measure to walk in the paths of
godliness, and so to steer all our actions, that they may tend to the honor
and glory of God, the Peace of our consciences, and the eternal comfort of our
souls.

How to enjoy true Happiness.
ALL men desire to be happy; but few seek it where it is to be found: some seek
it in moral virtues, and natural endowments, some in moral virtues, and
natural endowments, some in worldly pleasures, and profits; others think to
find it in riches and honors; but all come far short of the glory of true
happiness, though they do obtain their desire in all earthly things: for all
that this world does afford, cannot make a man truly happy, so much as in this
life, much less can it procure his happiness in the life to come: for there
will still be something wanting, or else something to imbitter their
contentment in these things here below. If we have honor or authority to day,
we may be in ignominy and disgrace to morrow; if we have riches and plenty to
day, we may be exposed to want and penury to morrow; sickness or pain will
blast all our earthly contentments; but when death comes, it will bereave us of
them all. It is in vain therefore to seek our happiness in these vain things,
or to put our confidence in them: for our felicity does not consist in
uncertain riches, or in transitory honors and pleasures, which in themselves
are nothing else but vanity and vexation of spirit.

But true happiness is from above, and it consists in the sweet fruition of
God: this happiness we had in the state of innocence; but we lost it by the
fall of our first Parents, and we have no means to recover it, but only by
Christ Jesus our blessed Redeemer. Wherefore, Romans 8. 32.
God took pity on our miserable condition, and of his infinite mercy and love
has not spared his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, to work our
redemption by his death and passion, and to bring us again into the favor of
God. And as John says, Joh. 3. 16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish; but have everlasting life; so that we
cannot have this true blessedness, but only by Christ, which is every where
set forth in this Treatise. Thus does the boundless mercy and unlimited
goodness of God appear, in offering his dear Son to all that will come and
embrace him: but some cannot come, because they live not where the Gospel of
Christ is preached, which does reveal him, and must instruct them in the right
way how to find him; some will not come, but make excuses, Lu. 14. 1^, 19.
like those in the Gospel, that were bidden to the great Supper: for they are
hindered by their worldly occasions; others are wholly taken up with carnal
delights and pleasures, which keeps them from coming to Christ, though they may
enjoy this true happiness by him.

Consider now, that riches honors, and lawful pleasures are not in themselves
simply evil: for they are Gods good creatures and his blessings; neither do
they keep us from coming unto Christ; but we may enjoy Christ together with
them, if we do not immoderately covet them, and use no unjust means to get
them, or put our trust and confidence in them to derogate from the honor of
God. If we enjoy Christ with them, he will sanctify them to us for our
comfort, and will make them the first fruits of our happiness, whereby we may
glorify God, and do much good to our neighbor: otherwise they are but the
shadow of happiness, and not the true substance of it, which in the end will
be bitterness, when we must give a strict account unto God how we have used
them. Many a poor man that injoyeth Christ is more happy in his poverty, than
they that abound in wealth and honor, if they are without Christ; for they
enjoy a contented mind, peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost, and
they have an holy assurance that their joy and happiness shall be made perfect
in the life to come. Wherefore he that has Christ, has the Fountain of all
true happiness, and some streams thereof will flow to him even in this life.

But this is true which Christ says, Joh. 6. 44
No man can come unto me, except the Father, which has sent me, draw him: and
we can have no part in Christ, nor happiness by him, except we do truly
believe in him. This is the way that God himself has taught us, Whosoever
believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life. Also, this is the
same way which Christ taught his Disciples, Joh. 14. 1
Ye believe in God, believe also in me. Our faith must be as firm, as strong,
and as well grounded upon Christ, as he is our Redeemer, God and Man, as it is
upon God alone, or else we cannot enjoy him, and all that happiness which
flows from him. Though we dare not approach near unto God in regard of his
divine justice; yet through the mediation of Christ our gracious Redeemer, we
may have free access unto our God, and we shall find him sitting upon his
Throne of mercy ready to receive us.

If our faith does reach no further than to the knowledge of Christ, what he is
in his divine nature, and what he is by incarnation; or to his glorious
excellencies and dignities, as he is the Mediator of the new Covenant; or to
the work of man's redemption, as he is the Redeemer of the world; it is but the
bare notion of faith, which is not effectual enough to bring us to eternal
happiness. Unregenerate men may know and believe thus much of Christ by the
letter of the Gospel, and yet never be brought into the state of grace by
Christ, because they have not the grace of faith in their hearts, to apply
these things to themselves. The devils did know who Christ was, they knew the
purity of his nature, and what power he had over them, and yet they continued
devils still. Wherefore we must not rest in the bare notion of faith, but if we
will believe unto salvation, we must then, John 13. 8, 9.
As Paul and Silas said to the Jailer, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, we
must rest upon him, and put our whole confidence in him for our salvation:
also, we must apply him, and all his excellent dignities to our selves, that we
may be well persuaded of our redemption by him, and that we are invested into
the Covenant of grace by our union with him, and that we shall hereafter enjoy
the perfection of true happiness.

If our Faith can reach thus high, and lay such hold upon Christ by their
particular application of him, then let our condition be what it will, we shall
be happy while we live, more happy when we dye, and most happy after death: for
no afflictions or sorrows of life, and no violence, or extremity of sickness
in death shall be able to take this happiness from us, and after death we
shall be out of the reach of all our enemies: for Christ, by whom we have this
happiness, will not suffer us to loose it; but by the grace and power of faith
we shall still draw all spiritual comfort from Christ to our souls, to make us
truly happy in this life, and everlastingly happy in the life to come.

This is the grace and power of true faith, to apply particularly to our selves
whole Christ, God and Man, and as he is our Prophet, our high Priest, our King,
our Mediator and Redeemer, and then how mean soever our condition be, he will
make us happy in it, and will crown us with everlasting happiness hereafter:
for where this Faith is wrought, there the holy Ghost will abide for ever, and
that soul must needs be happy, that intertaineth him. Ephesians. 1. 13.
For after that we have believed in Christ, we are sealed with that holy Spirit
of Primise unto the day of Redemption; this Spirit of promise is the earnest of
our inheritance, which Christ have purchased for us.

Consider further, that by this means we are nearly joined unto Christ: Ephesians. 3.
17.
For Christ dwells in our hearts by Faith. This spiritual union with Christ
is more firm and close, than the union of the members of the natural body is
with the head, or the union of the branches is with the vine: for nothing can
separate us from Christ, but he will keep us by his Almighty power unto
salvation.

If we be in this blessed condition, nothing can hurt the well-being of our
souls, but all things shall work together for our good. What comfort and what
happiness can we want, if we enjoy Christ? His grace will carry us on
cheerfully through all the discomforts that we shall meet with in this life his
blessings will be upon all that we enjoy, and he will give us the fullness of
happiness in the life to come.

Though we be in Christ, yet we shall meet with many sorrows, troubles and
vexations in this life, which will cloud the sense of this our f^licity: for we
have here but the beginnings of that blessed and happy condition, which in the
life to come shall be perfected and confirmed to us for ever in Christ.

Wherefore, we ought seriously to meditate and study how to enjoy Christ, who
is the true happiness of our souls; and though we have but a taste of this
heavenly consolation; yet it will sweeten the bitterness of all misery, and as
we daily grow in grace, so we shall daily find more comfort by our assurance
of the fruition of our future felicity in heaven. Also, the more we grow in
grace, the more we shall grow out of love with this world; because we shall the
better see the vanities of it, and the more we shall grow in love with virtue
and true piety, which will bring us to this happiness, and to enjoy it to all
eternity.

Concerning our Justification.
THe true knowledge of this high Principle of Religion, what it is to be
justified in the sight of God, and how it is wrought in us by the holy Ghost,
is of great concernment to every true Christian, and it does minister exceeding
much comfort to him in the assurance of the pardon of his sins, and in the hope
of his salvation.

Now we are justified, not for any inherent righteousness that is in us, nor
for any foreseen works we are able to do, nor for any grace that is wrought in
us; but as God does elect us of his own free grace and love; so he does also
freely justify us.

First, 2 Cor. 5. 19.
by not imputing our sins and iniquities to us.

Secondly, by not inflicting the condemnation of sin upon us.

Thirdly, by imputing the righteousness of Christ to us by faith.

Fourthly, by pronouncing and declaring us to be just in the Court of heaven,
and by witnessing the same to our consciences by his holy Spirit; and lastly by
his gracious acceptance of us.

This is our Justification, and thus we may be persuaded of it: for God has
set up his seat of Judgment in every man's conscience; so that, when we
remember our sins, if our conscience does absolve us by our faith in the
righteousness of Christ, and in the merit of his blood: it is a sure evidence
of our justification in the sight of God: but if it does condemn us, then it
will bind us over to answer for our selves at the last and general judgment,
when it will bring bitter accusations against us, and witness terrible things
against our poor souls: for conscience is the highest witness next under God.

The ground of our justification is Gods free grace to us by Faith in Christ,
who has taken upon himself the guilt of our sins. whereby they are imputed to
him, and his righteousness is imputed to us; so that now God does account us
just and righteous, because we have no guilt of sin* and are clothed with the
righteousness of Christ, and therefore he will absolve us from all our sins,
and from the punishment that is due to us for them, and he will pronounce us
perfect and just against all the accusations of the devil, and clamours of our
own consciences; he will also accept of our persons, not for any grace that is
wrought in us, nor for the merit of any work that is done by us; but only for
the sake of Christ, whom we do embrace by faith, upon whom we rest and depend,
and under whose righteousness all our sins are hidden and covered out of Gods
sight. Holy David says, Ps. 23. 1, 2
that the man is blessed whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity.

Though we are justified only by Faith, without the works of the Law; yet it
is not by any property, virtue or power that Faith has in it self to justify;
but as it has relation unto Christ, it being the sole instrument to unite and
knit us unto him with an unseparable union, to be made one with him, and to be
made pa^takers of his righteousness, and of all the benefits of his death. If
we believe that Christ was crucified, and died for us, Romans 4, 5, 6, 7.
and that his righteousness is made ours by imputation, we have then right and
interest in all his excellencies, and in all the merits of his blood, and God
in mercy will accept of our works and services, though they are performed by us
in much weakness. We may be well persuaded of our justification; Phil 3. 9.
because God has given us a lively hope through Christ, that distrusting our
own righteousness, which is of works, we may cast our selves upon the
righteousness which is of God through faith in Christ for our justification.

Though works are necessary to salvation, and to manifest the truth of our
faith, if they are done for the glory of God, and in obedience to his command;
yet they conduce nothing to our justification, neither can they merit the
pardon of the least sin: Lu* 17. 10
for when we have done all that we can, we have done but our duty, and yet not
so much as God requires; and therefore we are st^ll unprofitable servants*
also, our best works as they are wrought by us, though we be in the state of
grace, are defiled and imperfect in the sight of God, by reason of the
corruption of sin that cleaves to them. Notwithstanding God does require them
of us: Ephesians. 2. 10
for we were created in Christ Jesus unto good works. We can express no
actions of a spiritual^ life, and no fruits of our sanctification and
regeneration in Christ, but by our good works, Jam. 2. 17
and our faith is but a dead faith if it be alone without works.

What life is in our faith, if it be barren and fruitless? How shall we
manifest our thankfulness to God for all his benefits, but by doing that which
he commands with a thankful heart? Can dead works glorify God? Can they
declare our regeneration in Christ, or the sanctification of the Spirit? And
how shall we strengthen our hope of salvation, if we are not fruitful in good
works? Hereby we do edify the brethren, according to this of our Savior
Christ, Mat. 5. 16.
Let your light so shine before m^n, that they may see your good works, and
glorifi your father which is in heaven. Tit. 2. 10
Hereby also, we do honor and adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all
things. So likewise, we shall stop the mouths of the adversaries, 1 Pet. 2. 12
that they may by our good works which they shall behold, glorify God in the
day of visitation: 2 Cor. 3. 5.
But we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves,
much less to do any thing that is good, but our sufficiency is of God. For as
Paul says, Phil. 2. 13*
It is God which works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure.

Wherefore we can ascribe nothing to our selves for any good that we do; but
all the glory and praise of our works must be given to God, that he may be
honored and magnified by them. But how our works may be good and acceptable to
God, is set down in the next Chapter.

Now let us study and meditate with pure affections, how to rest upon the
righteousness of Christ for our justification, and not upon our works: for if
we trust to our works, or glory in them, they will deceive us. Thus says Paul,
Gal. 2. 1^
By the works of the Law can no flesh be justified. Also, if we make our works
copartners with the righteousness of Christ in our justification, then Christ
will profit us nothing; for our works do conduce much to our sanctification;
but they have no place in our justification.

If we are not persuaded that we are justified in the sight of God, we can feel
no comfort in Christ, no assurance of the pardon of our sins, and no steadfast
hope of salvation. If the righteousness of Christ be not imputed to us, our
hearts cannot be seasoned with grace, there can be no purity nor holiness of
life, and we can do nothing that will please God. So likewise if the guilt of
our sins be not imputed unto Christ, that he may take it from us, it will still
rest upon our souls, it will afflict and terrify our consciences, it will
follow us unto judgment, and at last be a means to sink us down into eternal
destruction.

But here is singular comfort for a poor distressed soul, that is under the
buffetings of Satan, against all his fears and doubtings; that if he has
interest in Christ by faith, he may say with Paul, Romans ^. 33, 34.
It is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died,
yea, rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also
makes intercession for us? who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Thus
every true believer may comfort himself in the assurance of his justification,
though his faith be strongly assaulted to make him cast off all hope of
salvation: for nothing shall be able to separate him from the love of God,
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

The benefits and comforts of true Faith.
THis faith is such an excellent grace, that we may draw from it many singular
benefits and comforts, if we make use of it upon all occasions, and it does
also make us capable by Christ of eternal life hereafter. For in the first
place, it is the sole instrument which the holy Ghost uses to unite us unto
Christ, that we may partake with him in his righteousness and holiness, and
in all heavenly and spiritual endowments of grace, whereby we are made new
creatures in Christ. When God sees us in this gracious condition with Christ,
then he is pleased to lay no guilt of sin to our charge for our condemnation,
but to impute the iniquity of our sins unto Christ our Savior, and of his
free grace to account us just by the imputation of his righteousness to us
through faith. So likewise hereby we have the adoption of sons, and all the
privileges that do belong unto sons. These are such benefits and such
comforts* as none can conceive, but such as do enjoy them, and none can enjoy
them but by Christ, and there is no way to have them by Christ, but only by a
true and a lively faith in him.

Secondly, by faith we are invested into the Covenant of grace, and all the
gracious promises that are contained in it do belong unto us; also by faith we
have great comfort and hope in all other the promises of God, whether they
concern this life, or the life to come: for we believe the truth of his word,
and his ready will to perform what he has promised; and though his promises
are sometimes impossible to nature, and above humane reason; yet faith gives us
ability to rest upon them, because we believe that he is faithful that has
promised* and able to perform his word. Thus says Solomon, Blessed ^ 1 Kings ^
50.
be the Lord that has given rest unto his people Israel, according to all that
he has promised: there has not failed one word of all his good promises which
he promised by the hand of Moses his Servant. The promises of God are limited
to the condition of faith and obedience, and though they are above our
capacity, yet we may confide in them, for he will perform them in his due time.
Romans 4, 18* 19, 20.
God made a promise to Abraham, that his seed should be as numerous as the
stars in the firmament, when he was about an hundred years old, and yet
bet^g not weak in faith* he staggered not at the promise of God through
unbelief, but against hope he believed in hope, that he might become the father
of many Nations, and he was fully persuaded, that what God had promised he was
able also to perform. Heb. 11. 11
Sarah through faith received strength to conceive seed, though she were barren
and past age, and she was delivered of a child, because she judged him faithful
who had promised. If we do thus rest upon the promises God in all conditions of
life, and in all the chances and changes that can happen to us, it will fit and
prepare us to receive them contentedly at Gods hands.

But the special servants of God may be so over-pressed with the extremity of
afflictions, that they are ready to distrust the truth of Gods Word, and to
waver in their assiance and confidence in him, if he delayeth to perform his
promise, and to help them. This was Asaphs case, who thus complained, Psalm. 74.
8 10.
Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? But he
does presently check himself, and acknowledge that it was his infirmity thus to
distrust the goodness of God: Thus says Peter, 2 Pet. 3. 9.
The Lord is not slack concerning his promise: for he will remember to perform
it, when his time is come, that it will make most for his glory, and for our
good. Wherefore Heb. 6. 12.
we must wait patiently upon God, and then we shall inherit the promises: Ephesians.
1. 13.
for by faith we are sealed with that holy Spirit of promise, that we may
confidently rest upon God, and upon the truth of his Word.

Wherefore if we are well acquainted with the Scriptures, we shall find many
promises of grace to strengthen our faith when we are under any temptation, to
comfort our souls when we are in any anguish of spirit, or under the pressure
of any cross or calamity. And when we have found a promise that will suit with
our present condition, then to make use of our faith to lay hold upon it, to
apply it to our selves, and to rest firmly upon it, though it be above hope:
for God can and will assuredly perform it to our great consolation.

If God does defer the performance of it longer than we expect, yet we must
patiently wait upon him: for when he has wrought his own work in us for his
own glory and our good, he will not then delay to perform it a moment longer.

Thirdly, by faith we shall receive much profit and comfort by Gods holy
Ordinances, without which our services to God cannot be performed according to
his will. The preparation of the heart to the profitable ^earing of the sacred
Word of God, is by faith; Act. 15. 9.
because hereby our hearts are purified and cleansed from all sin in the blood
of Christ, that no guilt of sin may cleave to our souls and consciences, to
stop the current of grace to our hearts, and to hinder the free working of the
Spirit of God upon our affections by the ministry of his word, that it cannot
take root in us for our edification and instruction, to convince us of our
errors, to reprove us for our sins, and to comfort us in all sorrows and
sadness of heart. It is faith that makes our hearts good ground, fit to
receive the seed of Gods Word, that it may take deep root in us, to fructify
and bring forth much fruit to the glory of God. What comfort can we have by the
Word of God, if we do not hear it with hearts purified from our corruptions by
faith? how can it profit us, if there be not an holy preparation to receive it,
that the holy Ghost may imprint it in our hearts, to be a word of power in us
unto salvation, and to be the Savor of life unto eternal life? and how can it
be fruitful in us to the reformation of our lives, if our hearts are not
seasoned with faith? Romans 10. 17.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, and then it is a
special means which the spirit of God uses to convey spiritual knowledge to
the understanding, holy desires to the will, to study and endeavor to a godly
life, and also true consolation to the soul.

So likewise our hearts are prepared by faith to the worthy receiving of the
Lords Supper; for as we do refresh our bodies with the Bread and Wine; so our
souls are refreshed and comforted by our spiritual feeding on the body and
blood of Christ by faith. Also, faith will put an holy zeal into our prayers,
to make them fervent and effectual to prevail with God, to send us a gracious
answer in his good time. Thus says our Savior Christ, Mar. 11. 24.
What things soever ye desire when ye pray; believe that ye receive them, and
ye shall have them. O what comfort might we find in our prayers, when we are
in want, sorrow, or in any necessity, if we did pray with zealous affections,
and did faithfully believe that our petitions are granted before we receive
them; then we would wait upon God, until he is pleased to satisfy our desires:
for our faith will give us as certain assurance to obtain what we pray for, as
if we did already enjoy it. We have no hope of succor in our distresses but by
prayer, and no prayer is prevailing with God, but that which comes from a
believing heart. The gift of prayer may move the affections for the present,
but it is the grace of prayer that is powerful with God: the gift of prayer is
but a common gift of the holy Ghost, which may be without faith, and
consequently without any acceptance: Heb. 11. 6.
For without faith it is impossible to please God; but faith does always go
along with the grace of prayer, and God will not deny such a prayer, though it
be made in weak expressions; for the heart may sigh out a faithful prayer, and
groan out our desires, which the tongue cannot utter nor express.

Now then look well to the purity of thine affections, and to the faithfulness
of thy heart, when thou art in the presence of God to hear his word, that thy
mind be not then about thy worldly affairs, or thy thoughts set upon vain
things, if thou desire to receive good thereby: For if thou do hear it
with an unbelieving heart, or full of worldly cares, then thy heart is like
barren ground, where briars and thorns grow, which cannot receive such
spiritual seed to bring forth fruit unto salvation.

Also, in thy holy meditations on spiritual things, thy heart must be first
purified by faith, or else thy meditations will not be comfortable to thy soul,
because thou have not faith, which is the instrument to draw true consolation
from Christ.

So likewise, when thou come to the Lords Table, see there be faith in thine
eyes to discern the Lords body in those outward elements, that thou may
spiritually feed on him, to nourish thy soul to eternal life.

When thou make thy supplications to God, believe faithfully that thou shall
receive what thou beggest, and then thy prayers will not return empty without a
blessing. In like manner, if thy humiliation for thy sins be not a fruit of
faith, but only in outward show, and not in the sincerity of thy heart, with
true contrition and godly sorrow for them, thy humiliation is no better 1 Kin.
21. 27.
than that of Ahab, which produced no reformation of life.

Also, if thou do confess thy sins when any sore affliction is upon thee,
and do not faithfully purpose to forsake them and turn to the Lord, thou
do dissemble with God in thy heart, and can not believe that God will
forgive them; for thy confession is no better Exodus 9. 27, 28.
then that of Pharaoh, and thou can have no comfort in such repentance,
because it is not a fruit of faith: for it is only faith that does perfect all
thy services to God in their righteousness of Christ.

Fourthly, we have no defense against the temptations and wicked suggestions of
the devil, and against the rage of our spiritual enemies, but the shield of
faith; his fiery darts will wound our souls even to the death, Ephesians. 6. 16.
if we do not quench them in the blood of Christ by faith; his temptations
will pierce us to the heart, if we do not beat them back with this
impenitrable shield.

Also, he lays his snares every where so cunningly in our way, that we can
hardly take a step but we shall step into a snare, Psalm. 26. 11, 12.
if we do not walk in our integriy by faith, that our feet may stand in an
even place. There is no place secure, and no condition of life is free from the
snares of the devil: he lays them in our calling, upon our table, in our
chambers and closets, and under our feet; so that every step we take out of the
way of godliness is an occasion to bring us into his snares, and we have no
means to escape them, but to walk in the light of the Spirit of God, which we
cannot have but by faith in Christ.

If we walk thus by the direction of his Spirit, then, as the wise man says,
Prove. 28. 18, 26.
we walk uprightly, and we shall be saved: we walk wisely, and we shall be
delivered. But if we have not this spiritual light to guide us, we walk in
darkness, Job 18. 8, 9, 10.
we are cast into a net by our own feet, and we walk upon a snare. The grin
shall take us by the heel, and the robber shall prevail against us. The snare
is laid for us in the ground, and a trap for us in the way.

Now then, Isa. 50. 11.
if we walk in the light of our own fire, and in the sparks that we have
kindled, this we shall have of Gods hand, we shall lie down in sorrow.

Thus do spiritual dangers continually attend us, which of our selves we
cannot escape; but if we trust in the Name of the Lord, and rest our selves
upon God by faith, Psalm. 91. 3
he will deliver us from the snare of the fowler, he will direct us in all our
ways, and will guide our feet into the way of peace: Jer 10. 23
For the way of man is not in himself, as says the Prophet, it is not in man
that walks to direct his steps. If we are taken in any of these snares that
the devil lays for us, we have no means of recovery but by faith and true
repentance: for faith in Christ will break the snare, and repentance will draw
us out of the pit which did threaten our destruction.

Consider again, that the devil labors to ensnare us with the alluring baits
of pleasure and profit, thereby to draw away our hearts and affections from
God; this is a cunning way to deceive us: for we suspect no danger and no evil
in those things unto which we are naturally inclined; so that we may easily be
deceived with these gilded baits: for without a spiritual light we cannot see
the hook that is in them, which will pull us into the pit of perdition.

2 Cor. 11. 14.
Thus the devil can transform himself into an Angel of light, Mat. 24. 24.
to deceive, if it were possible, the very elect. The devil has so many ways
to entrap us, that we cannot pass thorough this dangerous ocean without
shipwreck, except Christ be our Pilot by faith to steer our hearts and
affections, and all the faculties of our souls with his Spirit; and then we
shall escape all these rocks and quicksands which do continually threaten the
ruin and destruction of our poor souls. We cannot mount above this black
cloud of deadly snares and dangers without the wings of faith, and we cannot
break the cords of sin without the strength of faith in the death of Christ,
neither can we get out of the dominion of sin, without the power of the same
faith in Christ.

Such is the goodness of our blessed Savior to us, that he has not only
given us the shield of faith for our defense against these spiritual enemies,
Ephesians. 6.
but has also furnished us with the whole armor of God, which we must put on,
and buckle close to us with the girdle of verity apprehended by faith, that we
may be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, and be able to stand
against the wiles of the devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood,
but against principalities and powers, against the rulers of the darkness of
this world, and against spiritual wickedness in high places. Also, Christ has
given us the wisdom of his Spirit, so to use every piece of this spiritual
armor, that neither by force nor by fraud the devil shall be able to hurt us,
or to hinder the salvation of our souls. For Christ knew how violently we
should be assaulted, and the weakness of our own strength to resist, and how
cunningly our enemies would plot to undermine us; and therefore we should need
this spiritual armor to defend our selves, and to offend our adversaries, and
likewise his Spirit of wisdom, and his almighty power to use that armor as we
ought.

Fifthly, Faith does much support and comfort us in all the sorrows and
troubles of this life; for so long as we live in the flesh we are subject to
many tribulations and extremities, which we cannot patiently bear without the
help of faith. Princes have their cares, the great men of the world are not
free from troubles; there is no condition of life that can challenge a
privilege from worldly encumbrances and miseries; against all which, faith
does comfort the servants of God in his promises, to uphold them from sinking
under their afflictions, by that virtue and power which they draw thereby from
the sufferings of Christ.

Wherefore, if we do confide in the promises of God, and rest upom them by
faith, as made unto us; so that we can wait without murmuring Gods own time for
the performance of them, they will then sweeten our sorrows, ease us in our
troubles, comfort us in the afflictions of our souls, and give us an assured
hope of deliverance out of our distresses.

The good Kings of Juda, and the valient men of Israel, obtained many great
victories beyond humane expectation, because they believed and rested upon the
word of promise which they had from the Lord. Josh. 11. 6, 8.
When Joshua saw diverse Kings come against him he was afraid, but God did
strengthen him with the promise of victory, which he rested upon, and God made
his word good unto him. Judge. 4. 7.
Baruch had the like promise against Sisera, which the Lord did faithfully
perform. 1 King. 20
Ahab had two great victories over the Syrians, though he were a wicked King,
because he rested upon the promise of God. 1 Chronicles. 14. 10.
David overcame the Philistims because he believed the word of God. 1 Samuel 30.
8.
Also he recovered all the spoil that the Amalekites had taken out of Ziglag,
because he trusted to the word of promise which he had from God. David did find
by manifold experience, how faithful God was in the performance of his
promises, which made him so much delight in the Word of God, and so often to
meditate on his promises, which did exceedingly strengthen him in all his
afflictions and troubles. Psa. 34. 19
Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of
them all. Psa. 50. 15
Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. Psa. 42. 11
Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope
thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance,
and my God. Thus may a poor soul cheer up his drouping spirits, when his mind
is perplexed, or when troubles and sorrows compass him about on every side, if
he has a word of promise from God to rest upon.

When God does visit us with afflictions, he has then some work to do in us
for his own glory and for our good, and we must then make use of our faith,
which will help us much to join with him in his own work, because he intends
our good thereby, and then he will the sooner remove his rod of correction from
us. We may understand what Gods purpose is, when his rod is upon us, if we mark
and observe in what manner he does visit us; and also if we do truly examine
our steps, how we walk before God from day to day; for then we shall discover
what good we have omitted, and what evil we have committed, and we shall find
some sweet motions of his Sprit to direct us what we ought to do for the more
speedy effecting of his work in us. If our conscience does tell us of some
particular sins that have provoked God against us, then he will punish us
according to the nature of those sins.

If we are too much addicted to the world he will visit us with crosses,
losses, and troubles in our estate; if we are in danger of spiritual pride, he
will pull us down with a thorn in the flesh, or send a Messenger of Satan to
buffet us, 2 Cor. 1^. 7.
as he did Paul. If we are too fond and indulgent to our children, he will
either take them away, or visit us with sorrows and grief of heart in them, as
it was with David. If we have any darling sin, as Sampson had his Dalilah, God
will make that very sin to be bitterness to us in the end, if by faith in
Christ we have not a sweeter taste of the love and goodness of God to us. If
God sees us secure, or presuming upon our own strength, he will withdraw his
assisting grace, and suffer us to fall into many temptations, and into gross
sins, as he did Peter, to make us more watchful over our ways, and to depend
more upon him.

Thus we may find what God intends when we are under his visitation: for then
God calls for true humiliation and repentance for that very sin, which he has
discovered to us, and a true turning from it unto God, with a faithful
endeavor to better obedience; and then he will forgive our sin, and heal our
disease by faith in the blood of Christ.

But if our conscience does clear us, and yet Gods visitation is upon us, it is
then to exercise us under the cross, to be made conformable unto Christ our
head in his sufferings, or to try our faith, our patience, our hope and
affiance in God, and what constancy we have to continue faithful to the end,
though God should delay to remove the cross from us, all which do tend to the
glory of God and to our own good. John 9. 3
The man in the Gospel was blind from his birth, and yet neither he nor his
parents had sinned, but it was, that the works of God should be made manifest
in him.

Lastly, God does sometimes visit us with afflictions, to stir us up to more
frequency and fervency of prayer, until we are delivered out of our troubles.
Howsoever; or to what end soever God does visit us, our faith in Christ will
stand us in great stead, to support us in our sufferings and trials, and to
make the right use of all Gods dealings with us, that our souls may receive
profit and comfort thereby.

If we did live in sad and mournful times, when we could scarcely see any thing
but oppression, injustice, rapine and wrong, Ps 82. 2, 3
when the Judges judge unjustly, as the Psalmist says, and accept the persons
of the wicked, and do not defend the poor and fatherless, nor do justice to
the afflicted and needy: when the Church of God is under affliction, and torn
in pieces by persecutors and spoilers, with sects and scismes, and the sincere
Word of God corrupted with humane inventions, or else trodden down by the
authority of unjust men: then were the time to live by faith, and to strengthen
our faith with firm hope, that God will arise, as the same Psalmist says, and
judge the earth, and will send deliverance to his Church in his good time, and
that he will awake, as a Giant out of sleep, to avenge the desolations thereof,
and the oppressions of his people. In the mean time we should remember those
that suffer in our prayers, and comfort our selves with faith in the promises
of God, waiting with patience for the salvation of God, when he will visit his
people in mercy, and remember what his Church has suffered, and by whom, to
render to every man according to his works.

Among many calamities that God does sometimes bring upon a nation, or a
people, to humble them for their sins, to rouse them up out of security, to
pull down their pride, and to break their stubborn hearts, this is one of the
greatest, when he does take away the pillars of his Church, and does suffer it
to be underpropt with weak means: for though it may stand for some short time,
yet it cannot continue long; for if the winds do blow, or the billows of the
sea rise against it, they will shake it, and much endanger the fall of it. This
was David's request unto God in the like case, Psalm. 12. 1.
Help Lord, for the godly man cease, for the faithful fall from among the
children of men. When we see these things come to pass we had need cry
mightily to the God of our salvation for his help, for they are forerunners of
great calamities. But we trust that God will not bring such visitations upon
us, but that he will pity us, as a father pittieth his child upon his
submission to his will, though by reason of our sins and rebellions against
his sacred Majesty, we have deserved no pity.

Now then, if these things be well considered, thou will find, that whatsoever
thy condition of life be, that sorrows and troubles will daily attend thee,
that the corruptions of thy nature will break out upon thee, to make thee fail
of thy duty to God, to make thee yield to sinful motions, and to fall sometimes
into gross sins, and so to loose the sense of Gods grace and favor, which
does more perplex the soul of a true Christian, than to suffer the greatest
miseries; but here is thy comfort, that if thou have faith in Christ, thou will
rest upon him; for he will support thee in all thy sorrows, he will free thee
from all thy sins, and will procure thy pardon upon thy true repentance, and
he will bring thee again into the favor of God by the merit of his blood.
Nothing can make thee so unhappy, and so comfortless, but that true faith well
grounded upon Christ, and upon the promises of God, will take away the
apprehension of thy unhappiness, and will give thee true consolation in the
assurance of the love and favor of God to thee in Christ.

Sixthly, Faith will give us comfort in all the pious actions of our life: for
by our union with Christ, God will accept for his sake both of our persons and
of our works, whether they be works of piety to God, or works of charity to our
neighbor.

That our works may be such as God requires, first, the Word of God must be
our rule to teach us to frame our actions according to the will of God, and not
according to the conceit of our own fancy.

Secondly, Our works must be such as come within the compass of our calling,
either public or private, otherwise we have no ground to believe that God will
accept them. ^ Sam. 6. 7
Vzzah was stricken dead for staying the Ark when it was shaken in the cart,
because he had no calling for it. God requires that we should teach, instruct,
and admonish our children and servants in the ways of godliness, but if we
presume to execute the office and function of the Minister without a lawful
calling thereunto, God may set his mark upon us for our presumption, 2 Chro. 26.
as he did upon King Vzziah, for going in to the Temple of the LORD to burn
incense upon the Altar which pertained not unto him to do.

Thirdly, we must take the time and opportunity that God gives us for any good
action, and not to put it off with delays: for that is the time which he will
accept. God has set a part one day in seven for his peculiar service, and for
good works, which is the Lords Day, and that day must be wholely sanctified to
him.

Fourthly, our Adoption by Faith in Christ will strongly move us to perform
good works and holy duties out of a filial love to God, and not out of a
slavish fear, to do them willingly in obedience to Gods command, and not upon
constraint; also, with an holy zeal, and not with a blind devotion, Acts 17.
24.
like the Athenians, who worshipped an unknown God. 1 Chro. 18. 9.
David did counsel his son Solomon to worship God with a willing mind, for God
accepts free will offerings. But if we are forced to the service of God like
slaves for fear of punishment, our service will not be well accepted.

Fifthly, Faith will make us do all our religious duties with cheerful hearts
and pure affections to the glory of God: Psalm. 35. 15.
for the Lord considers all our works. Thus God says by Solomon, Prove. 23.
26.
My son give me thy heart. And thus says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 9. 7.
God loves a cheerful giver.

Lastly, Faith will make us constant in well-doing, which will crown all our
good actions with gracious acceptance; so that we have respect, Psalm. 119. 6.
as holy David had to all Gods Commandments; then if we do our best endeavor
in Gods service, though we fail of our duty, or fall through frailty and
infirmity; Hos. 14. 4.
God in mercy will heal our backslidings, and will accept of our imperfect
performances, because we have relation un to Christ by Faith.

Now then if we will strictly examine the actions of our lives by those former
directions, we shall easily find whether our works and services to God have
been such as he requires, and performed according to his will, that we may
have peace of conscience in them here, and eternal comfort by them hereafter.
If we can find by this inquiry, that our works have been the fruits of Faith,
and that we have done our duty to the best of our power with a faithful heart
to the honor of God; and not out of pride or vainglory, to get the praise of
men, as the hypocrites do, or to any other by-end, then our Faith will shine
forth in our works, and God will graciously accept them.

But if the actions of our life have been evil, they will follow us for evil,
when we lie down, and when we rise up, and whithersoever we go. If we sleep or
wake, they will molest and trouble us, they will aggravate our sorrows in our
afflictions, and our pains in sickness, they will imbitter all the comforts of
our life, and increase the fear and terror of death, for they will come into
our remembrance, when we ly upon our deathbeds, to vex and terrify our very
souls, and to make us incapable of any heavenly consolation, until the guilt
of sin that cleaves to them be taken away by Faith in the blood of Christ.

Also, Rev. 14. 13
our evil works will follow us unto judgment, to accuse us before the great
and dreadful Judge, Rev. 20. 13
and then God will judge us according to them: if they be found wicked and
sinful, we cannot but expect the dreadful sentence of condemnation to be
pronounced against us. Also, after judgment they will increase our torments in
hell, if we do not prevent it in time by our true repentance while we live here
in this life.

Lastly, Faith will fit and prepare us for a blessed and a comfortable death:
for by it we shall steer the whole course of our lives to the honor of Col. 1.
10.
God, and it will make us fruitful in every good work, that they may be
rightly done, both for the matter, and for the manner, and also to the right
end, as God has appointed them: we cannot then but live virtuously and piously
in the true fear of God, and he will reward us of his free bounty and
goodness, though not of merit. God will remember our works if they are done in
sincerity, and in truth; to comfort us in the sadness of our hearts, to ease
us in the extremity of pain, and sickness, and to give us a peaceable and a
quiet conscience in the assurance of the pardon of our sins, and of his grace
and favor, before the hour of our dissolution shall come upon us. Such good
works will adorn our profession, and make our lives comfortable to us, and our
conversation suitable to our profession, and they will follow us for our good
whithersoever we go: for there is no guilt of sin that cleaves to them, because
Christ has taken it a way; whereof we are fully persuaded by Faith. Neh. 13.
14.
If we can with good Nehemiah, put God in remembrance of our good deeds, how
will it strengthen our hope and trust in God, for his protection in all
dangers, for his help and succor in all our distresses, and for his assistance
when we undertake any special business? what sweet consolation will it be to
us, when we are upon our deathbeds, if with a clear conscience we can put God
in mind, Isa. 38. 3.
as King Hezekiah did, that we have walked before him in truth, and with a
perfect heart, and have done that which was good in his sight? If we thus live,
and thus dye, we may then say with Paul, Romans 14 8.
Whether we live, we live unto the Lord, and whether we dye we dye unto the
Lord: whether we live therefore or dye we are the Lords. Rev. 14. 13.
John heard a voice from heaven saying unto him, Blessed are the dead which dye
in the Lord, from henceforth; yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from
their labors, and their works do follow them.

We may confidently believe that their condition is most blessed; because it is
the voice of the spirit of truth that does affirm it.

We have also great encouragement to be fruitful in good works; because they
will go with us even to the Tribunal seat of God: for Christ has fastened them
to our souls, that God may then look upon them, and remember them for the
increase of our joy and happiness hereafter.

If we do now ruminate well upon all these several excellent benefits and
comforts that come by a true and lively faith in our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, we may draw sweet and heavenly Meditations from thence for the comfort
of our souls against the power of the devil, the rigor of the Law, the
dominion of sin, the fear of death, and against eternal condemnation. For we
shall find, that hereby we are ingrafted into Christ, who has redeemed us
from all iniquity, and from whatsoever our sins have made us liable unto, and
has cleansed us from all the pollutions and defilements of sin, he has made
us the adopted sons of God, and has given us all the privileges that do
belong unto Sons. Also, we shall find, that by Christ we are invested into the
Covenant of grace, and have right to all the gracious promises of God, which
will sweetly refresh our souls in all fears and doubtings, in all difficulties
and dangers, in all extremities and distresses, if we can apply them to our
souls by Faith, and rest upon them with steadfast hope.

Wherefore let this be the Meditation of our hearts, and the desire of our
souls, to have a near communion with Christ, that we may say with the Spouse,
Cant. 2. 16
My beloved is mine, and I am his; or to say thus with Paul, Gal. 2. 20.
I am crucified with Christ; Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives
in me; and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the Faith of the
Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.

This particular application of Christ to our selves will draw from him the
richest Jewels that are in his Treasury; the richest robe, and the best
garments that are in his Wardrope, and his very heart-blood for our redemption.

If we look a little lower, and fix our Meditations upon the holy Ordinances of
God, we shall find that which will sweetly comfort and delight our hearts, if
we have Faith to understand and believe what the holy Ghost says to us in them
for our instruction and consolation.

It was David's delight to Meditate on the Law of God, because he found great
sweetness in it. Psalm. 119. 163.
How sweet, says he, are thy words unto my taste? Yea, sweeter than honey to my
mouth

If we had David's spiritual palate, Isa. 58. 13.
we should delight in the Lords Sabbath, as he says by his Prophet, we should
delight to hear his Word, to come to his holy Table, to meditate on his Law,
and to practice all holy duties to the honor and glory of his Name. Also, if
we do set our selves to Meditate on the strength and power of his grace, we
shall find that Faith will give us sufficient power against all our spiritual
enemies; hope will uphold our Faith in the promises of God, when it is weak;
patience will make us bear our afflictions and trials with a willing mind;
holy zeal will make our Prayers effectual to prevail with God to grant what we
desire, or what is better for us; and constancy will make us continue in
well-doing unto the end, that we may receive that recompense of reward, which
God of his infinite goodness has promised. As Faith is the Mother of all
other spiritual graces, so it will always go along with every particular
grace, to make it the more effectual and powerful to help us in time of need.

Now we know the quickness of our spiritual taste by our delight in holy
duties, and in the Ordinances of God; and we may know the strength of grace by
the fruits and effects of it, according to the nature of every particular
grace; also the truth of every grace that is in us will appear, and that it is
a fruit of Faith, if the power of Faith goes along with it.

How to increase Faith.
EVery man has not alike measure of Faith, he that i^ weakest in Faith, may be
made stronger, and he that is strong in Faith may yet have more; for it is a
spiritual and heavenly grace which will grow and increase, if it be spiritually
watered by the holy Ghost. Christ did find a great Faith in the Woman of
Canaan, and in some others. Mat. 15. 28.
O woman, says he to her, great is thy faith. but he did often reprove his
Disciples for the weakness of their Faith; and thus he said in particular unto
Peter, Mat. 14. 31
O thou of little faith; wherefoer did thou doubt? Peter's doubting made him
ready to sink, as he walked upon the waters unto Christ, and it did discover
the weakness of his Faith and confidence in Christ, as if he could not give
him power to walk upon the waters as he did.

This is the condition of many of Gods dear servants, that when they see
perils and dangers ready to fall upon them, and no means either to escape
them, or to be delivered from them; then fears and doubtings will rise in their
minds, to discover the weakness of their Faith, and to make them distrust the
providence of God, to doubt of his Fatherly care of them, and of his Almighty
Power to save them. For sometimes their Faith may be so weak, that it cannot
mount above their humane capacity, and they cannot see the wisdom, and power of
God to be far above the reach of their reason and understanding. When God sees
such weakness in our Faith, he will tenderly visit us, and will give us hope
by some manifest signs to strengthen our faith against all our fears and
doubtings.

Though our faith be weak, yet if it be true, it is saving, it is growing, and
it is lasting, Faith is saving, because it does unite us unto Christ with an
unseparable union, who is the rock of our salvation, and by whom only we must
be saved. Act. 4. 11, 12.
Christ is that stone which was set at naught of the builders, which is bec^me
the head of the corner: Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is
none other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved. Also, we
may grow in faith.

First, 1 Pet. 2. 2.
if we desire the sincere milk of the Word, as new born babes desire the milk
of the breast, that we may thereby grow in the knowledge of God, and of his Son
Jesus Christ. If the word of God be purely Preached without the mixture of
erroneous doctrine, it is the seed of grace, which God sows in our hearts by
his Ministers, and he will water it with his Spirit, to make it increase and
fructify, that we may grow in grace, until we come to a full stature in
Christ, if we do hear i^ with sanctified hearts, and pure affections.

Secondly, we may greatly increase our faith in Christ, if we do spiritually
feed upon his body and blood, when we come to the Lords Table, which is the
true food of our souls, and the heavenly nourishment of that spiritual life,
which we have in Christ by Faith; and the oftener we do thus feed at the Lords
Table, the more we cherish this spiritual life, and the more we increase our
Faith, and make all other saving graces the stronger in us.

Thirdly, prayer is a special means for the increase of our Faith, for we
have the beginnings of Faith from God, the increase of it also, and the
stablishment of it is from God, and we must beg it of him by our Prayers and
supplications, or else we cannot obtain it. Thus said the Apostles unto Christ,
Lu. 17. 5.
Lord increase our Faith. Also, thus said the Father of the dumb child unto
Christ, Mar. 9. 24
Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief. God is ready to hear the Prayers of
his servants; but specially when they make such petitions as he is willing to
grant, which are such as do make most for his own glory; and nothing can
advance the glory of God more than when they crave the increase of their Faith,
without which they can glorify God in no services which they perform unto him:
for without faith it is impossible to please God, and so consequently to honor
him in any holy duty which he commands.

Fourthly, Faith will grow and increase by our daily Meditation on the Truth of
Gods Word, how faithfully he has performed all his Promises, how ready and how
able he is still to perform them, if we can rest and depend upon them by Faith.
If we consider that God is immutable and omnipotent in his own Essence, that he
is Truth it self, that he will not alter whatsoever he has decreed in his
secret Counsel, and that he will perform all that he has promised in his Word,
it will greatly strengthen our Faith, and uphold our trust and confidence in
God, when any difficulties or dangers press hard upon us, which otherwise
would shake the foundation of our faith.

Fifthly the daily experience which we have of the power of God, and of his
goodness to us in all conditions of life, whether we be in prosperity or in
adversity, in health, or in sickness, under the cross, or under the
buffetings of Satan; this will much increase our Faith, and confirm our hope
and confidence in God. 1 Samuel 17. 37.
This consideration made David bold to encounter with Goliath that great Giant,
because God had formerly delivered him from the paw of the Lion, and from the
paw of the Bear, and therefore he would now deliver him from that uncircumcised
Philistine. We should make the same use of the former experience that we have
any way had of the goodness and mercy of God to us, to strengthen our faith
and affiance in God, when we are in any distress, and can see no means to give
us any hope of safety or of deliverance.

Sixthly, if we be of low esteem in our own eyes, and poor in spirit, to walk
humbly before God in a true sight and sense of our unworthiness, and of our
emptiness of grace and goodness; then God will give us more grace, more holy
zeal, and he will make us rich in faith, 1 Pet. 5. 5.
for God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. Thus we may have
more strength of Faith from God; because he will deal like a tender father with
these that know their own weakness, to supply their wants with a gracious
increase of their Faith: Isa. 42. 3.
for, he will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, neither
will he require of the weak so much as of these that are strong in Faith, and
whatsoever he requires of them, he will give such abilities of grace, as shall
make them able to perform it.

Lastly, if we desire to have our Faith increased, we must take heed that we
give no liberty to sin: for that will weaken our Faith, it will stop the
influence of grace to our hearts, and hinder the free operations of the holy
Ghost in us. How can we confide and trust in Gods mercy and goodness, when we
have deserved his wrath and displeasure for some sin that does over* power us
without repentance? How can grace be strong in us; if sin does still reign in
our mortal bodies? There can be no increase of Faith, if sin be strong in us.
If God is pleased to try our faith, or any other grace that is in us, as he did
Abraha^s Faith, Joseph's chastity, and Jobs patience, we shall be found very
weak, if our conscience can accuse us of any sin that is not mortified and
subdued in us.

Wherefore now, if thou art conscious of the weakness of thy Faith, by thine
inability to resist any temptation, or provocation unto sin, by thy wavering
and doubting in the true performance of Gods Promises, if they are above thy
capacity, and by thy perplexed fears, when troubles or dangers are ready to
seize upon thee; thou must not look upon thine own deservings, except i^ be for
thy humiliation: for thou must know that God did not make his gracious promises
for thy sake, though they were made for thy good; but God made them to thee for
the sake of Christ, in whom was the perfection of all merit, 2 Cor, 1. 20
and in whom all the Promises of God are, yea, and Amen; so that if thou art in
Christ, thou have no cause to question the performance of any of Gods promises.
Also, for the increase of thy Faith meditate piously upon those former
directions, and then have recourse by Prayer to thy blessed Savior, and he
will uphold thy Faith against all adversary power that shall oppose it. But if
thou art not in Christ, no promise of grace belongs unto thee, and thou can
find no comfort therein.

How to esteem of Faith.
THough it be sufficient highly to prize and esteem of true justifying Faith,
if we do duly weigh and consider those excellent benefits and comforts of Faith
formerly set down to make us happy here in this life, and eternally blessed in
the life to come; yet the great worth and esteem of it will further appear by
these following considerations, which the holy Ghost has set down in the
sacred Scriptures.

First, the holy Ghost has set several high commendations on it, as a thing
of great price: 2 Pet. 1. 20
for, by Peter he calls it precious Faith; because it is grounded upon the
righteousness of our God and Savior Jesus Christ, and because we do enjoy
Christ himself by it. We must needs therefore esteem it as a most precious
Jewel; because God will bestow it upon none but such as are his dear children,
and elected unto salvation. Holy David was a great King, renowned for his
honor, riches and valor, he was victorious in all his battles, and he
prospered in all his enterprises; yet his faith and hope was in none of these:
Psalm 7. 1.
but his trust was in the Lord. He did slight all his earthly greatness, and
did count himself happy only by his faith in God, for thus he says, Psalm. 40.
4
Bl^ssed is that man that makes the Lord his trust. But some have no regard to
fix their faith on God; for they put their confidence in the arm of flesh; in
the multitude of their Host, and in the strength of their Chariots and
Horsemen; these have no ground for their faith to rest upon, but what this
world can afford them, which they will find to be vain, and like a broken
reed, no way able to save them. Hadadezer trusted in his Chariots and Horsemen;
2 Samuel 8. 4
but David smote him with a very great slaughter, and took from him a thousand
chariots, because he trusted in the Lord.

2 Chro. 14. 9.
Zerah the Ethiopian put his trust in his numerous Army, which was a thousand
thousand, but the Lord overthrew them before King Asa. The faith that worldly
men have in their riches, and in their greatness, is not this faith which is
so precious, and so much to be esteemed: for their faith is grounded upon
worldly strength, and it reaches no further than humane reason can carry it;
no marvel then if it do deceive them in the end.

But the Faith of a true Christian is fixed upon Christ, and upon no other
object, who is a sure rock to rest upon, and it reaches up to heaven, even to
God himself, and it will fetch down help and succor, comfort and consolation
from him upon all occasions when we need it. Jude calls it Jude 2^.
most holy faith; because it makes us holy in the sight of God, by putting
upon us the righteousness of Christ, and because by it, as it has relation
unto Christ, our Prayers and all other our services to God are holy and
acceptable to him.

Wherefore seeing Faith is so precious, that God will bestow it upon none but
upon his own children, and so holy that it makes all our services to God to be
holy, we ought to esteem it as a pearl of great price, and to keep it as a most
precious Jewel.

Secondly, we should highly prize our Faith, because it is the principal grace
that the holy Ghost works in our hearts, and it makes all other graces
profitable, and effectual to us according to their several natures. Our
repentance is not sound and true, if it be not a fruit of Faith: for we cannot
truly humble our selves before God, and freely confess our sins unto him with
a contrite heart, if we do not look upon him as our merciful Father, by Faith
in Christ, that we may have good hope of the pardon of our sins; neither can we
show any fruits of repentance by mortifying the corruptions of our nature but
by the virtue and power of Christ's death, which we must draw to our selves by
Faith, and also by our regeneration to newness of life, but by the power of
his resurrection, which we must also have by faith. Our repentance can give us
no holy assurance of the remission of our sins, if we do not believe that
Christ has fully satisfied the justice of God for them all by the merit of his
death. Lu. 21. 19
We cannot possess our souls in patience when we suffer afflictions and
tribulations, and when we are under the cross, if we do not belive that Christ
has sanctified our sufferings to make them work for our good, and that Act.
14. 22
through much tribulation we must enter into the Kingdom of heaven. We cannot
love God with true filial love, nor obey him with filial reverence and fear,
if we are not persuaded of our adoption in Christ by Faith. Mat. 10. 42
Our works of charity will not be accepted, unless they are done in Faith, as
to the Disciples of Christ, and then we shall not lose our reward.

Thus does Faith put life and vigor into all other graces to make them
effectual and powerful for our sanctification, and for the spiritual comfort
of our souls, which is a special consideration to make us account of our faith
as a principal Grace, without which we can have no hope of salvation.

Thirdly, Mat. 13. 46
Faith is that Pearl of great price, which the Merchant man in the Gospel
found, and sold all that he had to buy it: for no humane learning, no abilities
of nature, no wealth, or riches can purchase; we must renounce our trust in all
these before we can buy this rich pearl: for it is above the strength of nature
to attain unto it, and no power of men or Angels can procure it; but we must
have it of the holy Ghost, he keeps it in his own power, and we may have it of
him without money and without price, if in the true humiliation of our spirits
we beg it of him. But if we seek to buy this pearl of the world, we shall pay
dear for it, and yet not have the right Pearl; the luster of these pearls can
reach no further than to the object of the eye; but the luster of this true
Oriental Pearl will shine in all dark places of woe and misery, and it will
pierce the very heavens to the eye of God himself. Notwithstanding we do so
highly value the pearls that nature or this world does afford us, that we will
take any pains, or be at any cost to gain some of them, though they are of no
worth to rest upon, when we are in any spiritual misery whatsoever; but as for
this precious Pearl we are loath to part with any thing for it, that by nature
is near, or dear to us, or wherein we take pleasure and delight. Thus we delude
our selves with vain hopes, and we rest upon that which cannot help; because we
know not the worth of true Faith, to make it the instrument of our trust and
confidence in God through Christ.

Let this consideration also advance the estimation of Faith in our hearts and
affections; because by it we gain Christ with all his excellencies, and in
Christ we gain the enjoyment of the grace and favor of God, and the assurance
of eternal salvation.

Wherefore if this be the transcendent worth of true Faith, we should then with
all care and diligence seek out where it is to be had, and labor by all means
to obtain it. If God sees this holy desire in us, he will then give us to
understand by his Spirit, that this rich pearl is no where to be found but in
his own Cabinet; also, he will prepare our hearts and our will for it, he will
anoint our eyes with spiritual eye salve to find it, and he will direct us to
the means how we may obtain it.

First, therefore we must know, Ephesians 2. 8. 8.
that Faith is only the gift of God, which he bestows upon whom be pleases,
Ephesians. 1. 19
and he works it in us by his mighty power.

Secondly, God will give us hearts to seek it of him by fervent Prayer, which
is a powerful means to obtain any thing of God.

Thirdly, his Spirit will go along with the Preaching of his Word, that if we
hear it with sincere affections, it may work Faith in us: Romans 10. 17.
for, faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.

Lastly, when we have found this precious Pearl in his Word, God will make us
willing to buy it, though we give for it our souls, and all the faculties
thereof, our hearts, our affections, and all the parts of our bodies; all which
must be given up to the Lord, or else we cannot enjoy true faith: and yet this
is not all; for we must empty our selves of all conceit of our own worth, and
quite renounce all confidence in worldly things, all sinful pleasures, and
every sin that presses us down, or that cleaves close to us, or else we
cannot obtain this precious Pearl of God.

Fourthly, we may conceive that Faith is of great estimation; because it is so
rarely found upon earth. Thus says our Savior Christ concerning Faith; Lu.
18. 8.
When the Son of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? It is such a
rare Jewel as is scarcely to be found, few do enjoy it, and none can rightly
esteem of it, but only such as have it. Rev. 2. 17.
Christ promises to give a white stone to him that overcomes, and in this
stone a new name is written, which no man knows saving he that receives it.
We cannot obtain this white stone of purity, righteousness and true holiness
but by Faith; whereby we are clothed with the righteousness of Christ, which
is this white stone; also, we shall know this new name that is written in it:
for by Faith we shall put on Christ; and shall be made new creatures, to live
as becomes new Christians in newness of life, and in uprightness of
conversation.

It is true which Paul says, 2 These. 3. 2.
that all men have not faith, for there is so much wickedness, fraud, deceit,
and unbelief among men, that true faith can hardly be found; is it is written,
Romans 3. 10, 11.
There is none righteous, no not one: there is none that understands, there
is none that seeks after God, there is none that does good, no not one. Most
men fix their ^aith upon wrong objects, which will deceive them in the end:
some upon false gods, as upon Ashteroth, Chemosh, Dagon, Beelzebub: and the
like, others put their confidence and trust in the arm of flesh, in strong
towers, or in the creature, as Senacherib, Nebuchadnezzar, and others: some
again ground their faith upon their works; all which delude themselves with
vain hopes, thinking to find help and comfort in these false objects, where
none can be expected. But the true object of this Divine grace is God himself,
upon whom only we must fix our Faith: for if we trust in him we shall not be
confounded. Many have the notion of Faith in their brain, but not the grace of
Faith in their hearts, and many have the outward profession of Faith, but not
the virtue and power of it to lay hold upon Christ, and to make him their only
trust and confidence. The Soldiers Faith is in his valor: for he believes
not that Ps. 144. 1.
God teaches his hands to war, and his fingers to fight, and that he gives
victory to whom and when he pleases. If the Magistrate did believe Romans 13. ^
that he had his power and authority from God, to use it in justice and in
truth, to whom he must give an account, how he has relieved the oppressed, and
how he has judged the cause of the fatherless and Widow, he would not then
strain the Laws beyond their true meaning, nor pervert judgment for anjust
ends. The rich man's confidence is in his wealth and goods, not believing, Lu.
12. 20
that this night they may be taken from him, or he from them. All these and
many more come short of true justifying faith, and therefore they know not the
singular worth and esteem of it.

Wherefore, it is evident that this heavenly grace is peculiar only to the
Elect of God, such as are true Christians, and such as are poor in spirit and
humble minded, that know the worth of this precious Jewel, that do earnestly
seek for it, and use the right means to obtain it: these only are willing and
ready to apply themselves unto God by prayer and supplication, that he will be
pleased to work it in their hearts by his Spirit, that it may be firmly
grounded upon Christ, that only he may be the Object of their Faith, in whom
dwells all fullness, and who only is able to support, help and comfort them
in all their necessities, both spiritual and temporal; and as he is able, so
he is as willing to do it. Wherefore they do renounce all other confidence, and
they stick close unto Christ, they rest and depend upon him, using the means
which he has appointed to make their lives comfortable here, and eternally
blessed in the world to come.

Lastly, the great estimation that we ought to have of Faith will appear by
this consideration, that the devil does most oppose it, and seeks by all
means to hinder the working, and the growth of it in our hearts; because it is
the only instrument of our salvation by Christ. We cannot conceive what
stratagem^ he will cunningly use to deceive us, and if it were possible to
overthrow our faith. First, he will assault us with temptations and evil
suggestions, as he did David, when he numbered the people, to make him trust
more in his own strength, than in God. Secondly, he will labor by his subtle
persuasions to keep us still in unbelief, or else to make us presume of
salvation by the mercies of God without Faith in Christ. Thirdly, he will
delude us with a temporary faith, which will not bear us out in strong trials
and temptations, and so to lose the time, and opportunity that God does give us
for the obtaining of true saving Faith. Fourthly, he ^oth bewitch us with the
sinful delights and vanities of this world, to steal away our hearts from God,
and to keep us from a firm trust and confidence in him; or else to keep us
under the slavery and bondage of some sin, which will nip the fruits of our
faith, and keep it from increase. Lastly to further his wicked design, he will
labor to hold us in ignorance and blindness, that we should not see our own
miserable condition, nor know how to get out of it.

Thus the Devil does set himself against Faith; because upon it depends our
hope of salvation, and because it is the chief piece of our spiritual armor,
to resist and conquer him, and it is a shield so strong, that his fiery darts
cannot pierce it, to wound or hurt our souls. Wherefore we must look well to
our Faith, that the devil do not undermine it: for then he will rob us of these
blessed fruits that come thereby. But our hope is in the promises of God, and
in the intercession of Christ, as a sure Anchor to uphold and strengthen our
Faith, that it fail not, though it be assaulted with much malice and violence.

In all ages the Devil has had his wicked instruments, which have turned many
away from the Faith, and have opposed the Prophets and Ministers of God, and
have persecuted those that did profess the Name of Christ, to make them
forsake the Faith. Genesis 3.
Thus he made the Serpent his instrument to deceive Eve. 1 Kin. 22.
Thus he made Z^d^kiah to withstand good Michaiah, and to seduce King, Ahab
from following the word of the Lord. Acts 13. 8, 10.
Thus also Elimas the forcerer withstood Paul and Barnabas, seeking to turn
away Sergius Paulus the Deputy from the Faith, to whom Paul said, O full of all
subtilty and all mischief, thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all
righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord?
Thus also the devil does sometimes prevail against the servants of God. 1 Kin.
13.
He made the old Prophet to seduce the man of God that was sent to Bethel, and
to transgress the Commandment of God.

This should teach us the more highly to love and prize Faith; because the
devil so much hates it, and to stick the closer to it; because he does so much
oppose it. This should also teach us to love those that wicked men hate, and to
hate those that they love: if we observe what they do most delight in, we
should hate their vice, and love the contrary virtue. If they delight in
gluttony or riot, we should hate that, and love temperance and sobriety: if
they take pleasure in uncleanness, then we should love chastity. If they
delight in pride, we should delight in humility, and lowliness of Spirit: they
have so much of the devils nature in them, that they cannot truly love any
thing that is pious and holy, because it is that which God loves; neither can
they hate any thing that is wicked and sinful; because it is so agreeable to
their nature, and they have no grace to check their corrupted nature for loving
that which God hates, and has forbidden: whereas a regenerate man will find
that the Spirit of grace which is in him, will give him a secret check, if his
unregenerate part does take pleasure and delight in any thing that is sinful:
for he must not conform himself to the fashion of the world.

The sense of faith may be lost.
BY faith in Christ we enjoy the light of Gods countenance, and his assisting
Grace, which is our greatest comfort in all misery and distress: and so long
as we do enjoy that, we are sensible of our faith, and we feel the comfort of
it: but when God does hide his face from us, and withdraw his assisting grace,
it is the greatest trouble that can betide us, it takes away the comfort of
faith from our souls, and leaves us in a sad and sorrowful condition in our
apprehension; because the support of our Faith is clouded from us. God does
sometimes withdraw himself from his dear servants, and does suffer them to
loose the sense of their Faith for a time, to make them prize it the more, and
to be the more careful of it, this God will also do by laying his rod of
correction heavy upon us, if he sees that we watch not carefully over our
Faith, that we are careless in the use and exercise of it, that we sleep in
security, or lie dead in our sins without repentance, or if we abuse his love
and goodness to us: for then he will leave us to our selves, to let us see our
own weakness without his assisting grace. Upon these and the like occasions
the devil will be ready to take his advantage, to assault us with his
temptations, to make us doubt of the love and favor of God, when afflictions
press sore upon us; also to aggravate our sins, or else to hide them out of
our sight, as he did David's sin of adultery, if by any means he can, to keep
us in unbelief, or without repentance, that we may not recover the sense and
comfort of our Faith: for his main drift is, at last to drive us into despair.

It is a cunning policy of the devil, and full of danger, if he can keep us
from the sight and sense of our sins, that we should not confess them, and lay
them open before God with a truly humbled and penitent heart, that so by ou^
repentance we may have an holy assurance of the pa^don of them: For then will
our Faith break forth as the Sun out of a cloud, to warm and refresh our souls
with spiritual consolation: for we cannot lose the habit of Faith, though the
sense of it may be taken from us for a time. Sometimes God himself will sift
and winnow us as wheat, to cleanse us from our chafe, to keep us from
spiritual pride, and to humble us for our sins. Thus he sifted the house of
Israel, as he says by his Prophet. Am^s 9 9
For lo, I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel among the nations
like as corn is sifted in a five yet shall not the least grain fall upon the
earth.

Though God does sometimes deal thus rigorously with us, and does leave us no
hope to support our Faith; yet not the least grain of his corn shall fall upon
the earth, but our Faith shall recover her strength again.

It is only sin that makes a separation between God and us, according to this
of the Prophet, Isai. 59. 2.
But your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins
have hid his face from you, that he will not hear.

Cant. 5.
It was sin that caused Christ withdraw himself from his Spouse; because she
would not open to him when he knocked; but when he was gone and past, she was
in a woeful and comfortless condition. Nothing can so much afflict us as the
loss of our heavenly Fathers love, and nothing can shake our Faith so much, as
when our souls are perplexed, because in our own apprehension, God is either
become our enemy; or else he has quite forsaken us. How did Job complain in
his great afflictions? Job 30. 27, 28.
My bowels boiled and rested not, I went mourning without the Sun: My skin is
black upon me, and my bones are burnt with heat; my harp also is turned to
mourning, and my Organ into the voice of them that weep.

Holy David's Faith was brought to so low a degree by the sense of the burden of
his sin, and by the apprehension of the displeasure of God for it, that he
cried to the Lord, saying, Psalm. 38. 4, 6, 21, 23.
Forsake me not, O Lord: O my God, be not far from me: make haste to help me, O
Lord, my salvation. And again he thus cries unto God in the bitterness of his
soul; Psalm. 143.
Hear me speedily, O Lord: my spirit fails, hide not thy face from me, lest I
be like unto them that go down into the pit. Psalm. 13. ^, 2.
How long will thou forget me, O Lord, for ever? How long will thou hide thy
face from me? How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my
heart daily? How long shall mine enemies be exalted over me?

Surely David had at this time little or no^ sense of Faith to trust and depend
upon God. These and the like are the doleful complaints of Gods children when
they are overwhelmed with sorrows, or feel any spiritual desertions; in so
much as they cannot receive comfort, until the holy Ghost, who is the true
Comforter, does give them some assurance of the grace and favor of God.

Wherefore it is evident, that our Faith may be so strongly assaulted with
sorrows and grief of heart, that we are not able to hold out, but are ready to
sink under the pressure of our misery, because it will take away the sense of
our faith, which must uphold us; but specially when the guilt of sin lies upon
the conscience; for that will bring us to such an apprehension of a spiritual
desertion, that we can feel no comfort in God for the time: for it will stop
the current of all true consolation to our afflicted spirits, which we cannot
have but by Faith in Christ, and nothing will take impression in us to comfort
us, so long as we are under the guilt of sin; but these or the like
uncomfortable complaints will be ready to be uttered, that God has quite
forsaken us, that there is no hope for us in Christ, and we cannot believe that
there is any salvation for us, because our sins are so many and so grievous.

If we are thus afflicted and perplexed in mind, that fears and doubtings of
salvation trouble us, because our Faith is so weak that we cannot discern it;
this will give us great satisfaction and comfort, if we consider that our
salvation depends, not upon the strength of our Faith, but upon the truth of
it: for the weakest Faith, if it be true, is effectual to salvation, as well as
the strongest.

Also, if we consider that faith is a grace which is grounded upon a sure rock,
even upon Christ Jesus, against whom no created power can prevail; and that the
strength of our Faith does not consist in our hold upon Christ: for then every
temptation, or gust of affliction, would make us let go our hold, and so lose
it, but it consists in that firm and strong hold that Christ has of us, who
will not suffer any to pluck us out of his hand, according to this of the
Psalmist, ^^ 23, 23. ^^^.
I am continually with thee; thou have h^lden me by my right hand, thou shall
guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory. Wherefore though
we are brought to so low an ^bb, that we have lost the sense of our Faith, yet
it is a sure evidence, that once we did enjoy it, and that there has been a
spiritual life in us, which cannot be but by ^aith, and this spiritual life is
not quite extinct in us; because we have still a spiritual sense, though it be
of loss

The sense of a temporal loss is a manifest sign of a temporal life: for a
dead man has no sense, either of loss or of gain; so likewise the sense of a
spiritual loss of that which formerly we did truly enjoy, is as well an
evident sign of a spiritual life, as is the sense of a spiritual gain.

From hence a poor languishing soul may draw much comfort, if he does fear a
spiritual desertion; because he has no comfortable sense of his faith: for his
faith is but clouded, the habit of it still remains, though he cannot discern
it.

As the herbs in winter are hidden under ground for a time, because they are
nipt in with the cold frosts, and the warmth of the Sun is gone from them; but
the Sun will return again in his strength, and will disperse the cold, and
bring them again out of the earth by the virtue and strength of his comfortable
beams, to make them flourish, and to be as fruitful as before. So it is with
Faith, it may be kept out of sight for a time, if it be nipt with the cold
frosts of affliction, or if the Sun of righteousness has withdrawn his
comfortable beams from it; but here is our hope and comfort, Mal 4. 2.
that the Sun of righteousness will return again with healing in his wings, to
dispel all afflictions and sorrows, to heal all our spiritual wounds, and
bakslidings from God, and to stablish us in the assurance of the love and
favor of God.

The Stability of true Faith.
WE are come now in the last place, through the assistance of Gods good
Spirit, to the stability of faith, which will satisfy and comfort every
distressed soul that is doubtful of his salvation, weak in faith, and afraid of
death, and of the last judgment, through the wicked suggestions of the devil,
and by the aggravation of their sins. Though the apprehension of Gods anger
will cloud the sense of our faith, though afflictions will sift it, and winnow
it as wheat, though sin will wound it, and the devil sometimes foil it, yet
nothing can kill it, and nothing shall be able to overthrow it; not the least
grain of Gods corn shall fall upon the earth; the habit of faith cannot be
lost, though we may loose the comfort of it for a time: for God has given the
gift of perseverance to this faith, and to no other.

So long as we live in the flesh we are subject to many temptations and
backslidings from God, we are ready to fall into many gross and dangerous
sins, which will bereave us of all spiritual comfort for the time* yet our
faith in Christ will appear again, and the Sun of righteousness will shine
upon us, for Christ will not suffer us totally and finally to fall away from
him; for our faith is built upon a sure foundation, against which no violence
of temptations, and no storms of persecution can prevail. Lu. 6. 48.
Christ does compare a righteous man to him that built an house, and dug
deep, and laid the foundation on a rock, and when the flood arose, the stream
beat vehemently upon that house and could not shake it, for it was founded on a
rock. Christ is the foundation of our faith, he is the rock of our salvation,
Pro. 10. 30
and therefore, as the wise man says, we shall never be removed. Thus David
shows the stability of the faithful. Psalm. 34. 22
The Lord redeemeth the soul of his servants, and none of them that trust in
him shall be desolate. Also thus says the Psalmist, Psa. 125. 1
They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Zion, which cannot be removed,
but abides for ever. And to make this truth undeniable, thus says Christ
himself, John 3. 16
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish* but have everlasting life. Why then should
we faint under any temptation? Why should we let go the anchor of our hope? If
we hold fast to our faith, it will not deceive us, Christ wll not suffer us to
depart from him for ever. If we sin God will chastise us, and he will hide his
face from us; but if we repent, amend, and turn unto him, he will have mercy on
us, he will pity us, he will heal the bones which he has broken, and will
restore us again to the joy of his salvation.

There are diverse sound reasons to prove the stability of faith in those that
belong unto Christ, that they shall never totally and finally fall away from
grace; but they shall be raised up again by repentance, though they do
sometimes fall into fearful and dangerous sins.

The first reason is taken from Gods free election, which ever remains sure
and unchangeable; for what he has decreed in his secret Counsel must stand
firm, and cannot be altered. Thus says the Apostle, Romans 8. 29 33, 34.
God did foreknow some from eternity, whom he did elect and predestinate to be
conformed to the image of his Son, whom also he did effectually call, and them
he justified in the righteousness of Christ, and those are sure to be
glorified: for who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect, whom he
has justified? who is he that condemns? seeing Christ died for us, and is
risen again, and is now at the right hand of God, and makes intercession for
us: therefore he concludes, that nothing can separate us from the love of God
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Also the same Apostle says in another
place, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
That the foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows
them that are his.

The second reason is drawn from the virtue and strength of the Covenant of
Grace. A Covenant between man and man is an engagement of great force, and the
servants of God did always exactly keep it how strong then is that Covenant,
which God himself has made with us, which his own dear Son has sealed with
his blood, and which God has made of his own free grace and favor to us poor
miserable sinners, which Christ has procured for us? G^^. 9.
God made a Covenant with Noah and he has kept it to this day. Also God made
diverse Covenants with Abraham, and he performed them all. Genesis 21
Abraham made a Covenant with Abimelech, and did precisely keep it. This new
Covenant is for ever, and it is so strongly confirmed, that we cannot question
the performance of it on Gods part, whom in his own Esence is immutable and
unchangeable; and though we cannot perform our conditions to God, yet Christ
has performed them for us, and will also stablish us in the fear of God, that
we shall never depart from him. Thus says the Lord by his Prophet, Jer. 33, 34.
I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and
will be their God, and they shall be my people: and they shall teach no more
every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord: for
they shall all know me, from the least of them, even unto the greatest of them,
says the Lord, for I will forgive their iniquity, and will remember their sin
no more. And again, thus says the Lord, Jer. 32. 40
And I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away
from them to do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they
shall not depart from me.

Wherefore, seeing we have this Covenant of grace from God, and thus confirmed
with the seal of Christ's blood, we may rest confident, that if we are ingrafted
into Christ by a true and lively Faith, we are then invested into this New
Covenant, and every condition and Promise therein contained shall be performed
to the uttermost, which does give us an holy assurance, that we shall never
totally and finally fall away from God.

The third Reason for the stability of the Faithful is grounded upon the power
of God; for as Peter says, 1 Pet. 1. 5.
We are kept by the power of God, through Faith unto salvation. The Lord
Jehovah is our keeper, the Lord is our defense, all power is from him, and no
created power can take us out of his hand. Christ is also our good Shepherd,
and we are his sheep, though we go astray and wander out of the way in the
Wilderness of this world; yet Christ will not loose us. but will see^ us up,
and bring us again unto his fold. John 10. 28, 29.
Christ knows his sheep, and will give unto them eternal life, and they
shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of his hand. My father
says he, which gave them me is greater then all, and no man is able to pluck
them out of my Fathers hand Wherefore, if there be any confidence to be put in
the Almighty power of God, if any trust in the care of Christ over his flock,
or any truth in his promises to his sheep, we need not doubt of our
perseve^ance in grace, and in the truth, we need not fear the malice, the
cunning, or the power of the Devil, that he can overthrow our Faith, or destroy
the habit of it that is planted in our hearts by the holy Ghost.

Fourthly, the stability of our Faith is firmly grounded upon the faithfulness
of God, according to this of Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23, 24.
And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God, your whole
spirit, and soul, and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ: Faithful is he that calls you who also will do it. Also thus
he says, 1 Cor. 1. 8, 9.
God shall also confirm you unto the end* that ye may he blameless in the day
of our Lord Jesus Christ. God is faithful, by whom ye were called unto the
fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Thus says Moses to the children
of Israel, Deuteronomy* 7. 9.
Know therefore, that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God, which
keeps Covenant and mercy with them that love him, and keep his Commandments
to a thousand generations. Holy David had great experience of Gods
faithfulness to him and therefore he says, Psalm. 36 5.
that the faithfulness of God reaches to the clouds. And again he says,
Psalm. 119. 90.
Thy faithfulness is unto all generations; thou have established the earth,
and it abides.

We may therefore rest upon the faithfulness of God, as well as upon his
power, for the keeping of his Covenant, for the performing of his Promises, for
his aid and assisting grace in all our temptations: 1 Cor. 10. 13.
for God is faithful, who will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are
able: but will with the temptation also make away to escape, that we may be
able to bear it. Also, in all our afflictions, miseries and calamities that we
suffer in a good Cause, God will keep and preserve our souls from hurt, and
therefore thus says Peter, 1 Pet 4. 19
Let them that suffer according to the will of God commit the keeping of their
souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

Thus says the Lord unto his People, Hos. 2. 19, 20.
I will betroth thee unto me forever; yea, I will betroth thee unto me in
righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies, I
will even betroth thee unto me in faithfuln^sse, and thou shall know the Lord.

If we are thus betrothed unto God in faithfulness, in judgment and in
righteousness, then we cannot be quite separated from him, and our Faith in
Christ which, is the instrument of our betrothing, cannot be quite lost.

The fifth reason why the Faithful cannot finally fall away from God, is taken
from the love of God: John 13. ^
for those whom he loves, God loves to the end. Love is essential in God,
and he can as well deny his own Being, as deny his love to those that are
united unto Christ by Faith, and his love to them endures for ever: Romans 8 39*
For nothing can separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

Thus says John the beloved Disciple of Christ, 1 John 4. 10, 16.
Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son
to be the propitiation for our sins. Again he says thus, And we have known and
believed the love that God has to us. God is love, and he that dwells in
love dwells in God, and God in him. Wherefore by our love to our neighbor we
may know what love dwells in us, how we love God, and whether God dwells in
us. If we be in this gracious condition, that God has set his love upon us, we
cannot then lose this principal grace of Faith, which is the bond of Gods love
to us; and we cannot fall quite away from God; because Ephesians. 4. 30
we are sealed with the Spirit of God into the day of Redemption.

The sixth reason is grounded upon the merits and intercession of Christ. This
is a strong reason so to stablish our Faith, that it shall never be overthrown,
for by the merit of his blood we are redeemed out of the captivity of sin and
Satan; this was an infinite price which Christ paid for our redemption; whereby
also we are freed from the curse of the Law, and from the condemning power of
sin, because we are made one with Christ by Faith. If therefore we can be
brought again under the same bondage and slavery, or under the same curse or
condemnation of sin, which we shall be if our union with Christ can be broken,
then we shall have but little benefit by our redemption, and Christ has paid
that great price for us to little purpose; also we are not then perfectly made
free, but are still the servants of sin. But Christ has finished the whole
work of our Redemption, the eternal son of God has made us free, sin has
therefore no more power over us, and the Devil cannot prevail against us to
break that union which is between Christ and us by Faith.

Wherefore this consideration will much strengthen our Faith against all
opposition and adversary power, that if we are redeemed by Christ, and made
free by him, our state and condition is firm and sure, it cannot be removed,
for Christ will loose none of those whom he has bought with so great a price,
and made free by his own power, and for whom he has made intercession to his
Father.

If our Faith should fail, then Christ's intercession for us must fail, we shall
then lose Christ and all the benefits that come by him* we shall lose all true
comfort in this life, and eternal blessedness in the life to come. If we
conceive thus meanly of the merits and intercession of Christ, it is blasphemy
in the highest degree.

The seventh reason for the stability of Faith, is drawn from the nature of
saving grace, which is in corrupt^ble seed and planted in our hearts by the
Holy Ghost, whereby there is a new creation wrought in us: for Peter says, 1
Pet. 1. 23
that we are born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible by the
Word of God, which lives and abides for ever.

Our first birth is of corruptible seed, which is mortal and fades away like
the flower of the field; but our Regeneration, or second birth comes from an
immortal principle, which cannot decay but continues for ever. This Birth is
wrought by the Spirit of God, and it has a spiritual life by Faith in Christ,
which can never dye, though it may lie gasping for a time through some violent
temptation, or sore trial: For if God begins to work a Work of Grace in us, he
will not leave it, until it be finished.

From hence we may draw great consolation to our selves in the apprehension
that we are weak in grace, for though we find but the beginnings of our
Regeneration wrought in us, God will not leave his own Work imperfect. Though
we cannot perform our duties and services to God as we ought; yet God will
accept the will for the deed in Christ, if it proceeds from a faithful heart:
and though we find but some parts of true repentance wrought in us, as to our
own apprehension, God will go on in his Work of Reformation, until there be a
through change wrought both in soul and body, to newness of life. If Faith, or
any other spiritual grace be weak in us, it will grow stronger, it will
increase and continue; because the Holy Ghost will water his own seed which he
has planted, with his spiritual dewes from above.

The last reason for the confirmation of our Faith is this, because the holy
Ghost does dwell in our hearts by faith, and where he does settle his
habitation, there he will abide for ever. If our hearts are purified by Faith
in the blood of Christ, then we are the spiritual Temple of God, and the Holy
Ghost will dwell there, according to this of Paul, 1 Cor. 3. 16
Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells
in you? Thus says John, 1 John. 4 15.
Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him,
and he in God.

The holy Ghost is that true Comforter, whom Christ has sent from the Father
to be with every Member of his Church, to dwell with them, to be in them, and
to abide with them for ever; and where he is, there no grace can be wanting.

If we enjoy his comfortable society he will then lead us into all truth; for
he is the Spirit of Truth: no erroneous Doctrine shall infect our souls, but we
shall rightly understand the ways of God, and be able in some measure to walk
in them: He will protect us in all dangers, he will comfort us in all our
sorrows, he will uphold our faith against all assaults and temptations, and
will give us strength of grace to hold out and persevere in all our trials
unto the end.

Wherefore grieve not this holy Spirit, by whom we have so much comfort in all
conditions of life, and by whom we are sealed unto the day of redemption, who
will confirm and stablish us in the Faith of Christ, that we may continue
steadfast, until we shall come to live and reign with our blessed Savior Jesus
Christ for ever in heaven

The Conclusion of this Treatise.
NOw for the Conclusion of this Work, I do earnestly request every Christian
Reader to enter into a serious consideration with himself which way the
thoughts of his mind are chiefly bent, and upon what he does set the
Meditations of his heart, that he may know whether his way be steered toward
heaven or not: for they do ne^rest affect his soul, and plainly show what is
his chiefest joy and delight.

If his thoughts are too much set upon the vanities of the world, then his
heart cannot be Faithful toward God, and there will be no place in his soul
to receive that true comfort which otherwise he might have in the sweet
fruition of God by his pious and devout Meditations.

Also, if he delights to ruminate upon his carnal pleasures, or upon any
other evil concupiscence, or to call to remembrance with approbation his
former iniquities, he does sin over again those former sins, and does defile
his precious soul with uncleanness and pollutions; whereas both his soul and
his body ought to be kept clean, and undefiled, that the holy Ghost may delight
to dwell therein, and that his heart and affections may be always fit for
heavenly contemplations. So likewise if his chiefest study and care be to adorn
his Profession of godliness only with a specious form and fair outside of
purity and holiness, and does not faithfully strive to show the power of it in
his life and conversation he deludeth his own soul, and does feed it with the
mere shadow of consolation, and not with the substance of sound comfort which
is only found in the power of godliness.

If these or the like be the meditations of our hearts, and if our affections
keep at so far a distance from God, and from all true goodness, that we have
scarcely any thoughts tending that way; it is then no marvel if we miss the
comfort which our souls desire, when we are in any anguish of Spirit, or under
the buffetings of Satan, and it is no wonder if we are sad and cast down, and
go mourning all the day long, when the times are dangerous and full of
troubles, and we can hear nothing but complaining in our streets: for hereby we
have no support for our Faith, no Anchor for our hope, and no sure rock to rest
upon, that our souls may be truly comforted in the day of visitation. Well may
our spirits droup when we are peached with pain, or sickness, with wants,
troubles, or afflictions, if we ^rust only to earthly means and comforts: for
we can find nothing in them, but vanity and vexation of spirit, which will
sooner increase our sorrows, than comfort and support us under them.

Wherefore if we will refresh our soul with true comfott, when they are pressed
with any sadness, or sorrow, we must fetch our comfort from above, our delight
must be to Meditate on heavenly things, our hearts and affections must be taken
off from these things here below, and raised up to contemplate those things
which concern the Kingdom of Heaven. Christ and him crucified must be the
subject of our Meditations, if we will have any spiritual consolation, and the
holy Ghost is the only means to convey this comfort to our hearts from Christ:
for he does work all sanctifying graces in us, which are as so many pipes
wherein this heavenly liquor does swiftly run down from Christ to us, and Faith
does fasten these golden pipes unto Christ, who is the Fountain of all true
consolation. Our repentance can give us no assurance of the Pardon of our sins,
unless Faith does fasten it unto Christ, our hope can give us no comfort in
the Promises of God, if Faith does not fasten it unto Christ: our patience can
give us no comfort in our afflictions and tribulations, except Faith does
fasten it unto Christ, who has sanctified all our afflictions by his own
sufferings.

Thus Faith does make these and all other saving graces effectual and
comfortable to us, because it does bring them home unto Christ.

Wherefore if thou have any care of thy soul, to comfort it when it is sad and
heavy, to feed it when it is hungry, to refresh it when it is thirsty; ruminate
well upon these things, and if thou have any holy desire to be weaned from the
love of this world, and to be familiarly acquainted with God, and with his Son
Jesus Christ, and to enjoy the Communion of the holy Ghost to direct thee in
the way to eternal happiness; thou must then daily exercise and practice this
holy and Religious duty of zealous and devout Meditation in heavenly and
spiritual things.

FINIS.

