AN ANSWER To the chief, or material Heads and Passages in the late
Declaration, Called, The DECLARATION of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND: AND ANSWER
OF THE COMMISSIONERS TO BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT, UPON The new PROPOSITIONS of
Peace, and the four Bills.

Imprimatur,

Gilb. Mabbot.

LONDON, Printed for Robert White, Ian. 4. 1648.

AN ANSWER To the chief, or material Heads and Passages in the late
Declaration, called, The DECLARATION of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND, etc.
THey say they have patiently indevored, according to Covenant, to settle
Religion and happy peace: by pressing the sending Propositions.

Their patience was seen, when after they had fastened themselves in England,
they concurred not to subdue the power under his Majesty's command, nor take
his Towns, (obvious to every common understanding) and which they persisted in
to the last, and by that means prejudiced this Kingdom millions.

According to Covenant: here is their limitation.

The Covenant, as Scriptures, usually is expounded as the opinions of men are:
But why that should not be overmuch stood upon, or kept over close unto,
Consider: First, it was made in Scotland, when the Parliaments power was very
low through the treachery of the Hothams, revolt of Lords and Commons to the
King, and the absurd managing of the Parliaments war; wherein the Scots
Commanders had the chief stroke, who knew how to make a little work go a great
way, insomuch, as Hurr^y, then but an ordinary man, cride shame of it.

Secondly, it was that which our Commissioners would by no means have brought,
but could get no better.

Thirdly, it is ambiguous and hard to be understood, nay never yet ageeed as to
the meaning: an eminent Lawyer being asked whether he understood it, when he
took it, answered, no; it being replied, why then did he take it? why said he,
they would have undone me else.

Fourthly, it was forced upon men, (a way professed against in Scotland) to the
ruining of many hundreds, who other way were without exceptions, both
Ministers, and Laymen. Experience proved it crooked, Conscientious men, men of
parts, and great learning refusing it.

Fifthly, its conceived absurd and hypocritical; to swear the preservation of
the Kings person as a man, when at same time a war is engaged in against him,
and he known to be in the field, subject to death by the bullet and sword.

Sixthly, it never made man friend to the Parliament, that was not so before.

Seventhly, humane, and so alterable.

Eigthly, how has it been observed by the founders, except for their own ends:
with many more.

By sending Propositions.

That is as they like, and such as made for the good of Scotland, and Scots-men
in England, and for ruin and extirpation of those whom they hate; who are
just, honest, wise, and pious men, only differing in judgment and life from
them, and who have merited better then they in subduing the enemy, the best way
to a good and happy peace, let what will be pretended; otherways why agree they
not to the Propositions now sent, against which they have no exception, but
that they are not for the Scotch Interest: which is to continue, to reap the
sweetness of England.

They offer the best way for a peace, a Treaty at London. And why at London?
because there are many discontented persons, who will, when his Majesty comes
to London, join to force the Parliament, as they did lately, and had done
more, had not the Army prevented. The words of Mr. Hollis are considerable, it
never repented the King and his party that they fought against the Parl. but
that they fought against London after the wars between King and Subject, and
King, and he that put in to be King (take the words of the story) the overcomer
never thought himself safe until he was master of London; and if he had
London, he cared not for his enemies: wirnesse Henry the seventh, and many
others; so that it cannot be otherway in reason concluded, but that they that
are for his Majesty's coming to London to treat, are so far from a good and
happy peace, that they are for a new war; for if they intend peace, they will
avoid differences, and reason will take place as well at Southhampton as
London. The Reason why a personal Treaty is best, because first other means
have been ineffectuall. I have gone several times in a rational way about a
business, but it has not succeeded: therefore I will now go in an
irrational. But admit a Treaty, sure its not meant that his Majesty and the
Parliament argue the business; for then they will (being so many) be too hard
for one; if some of his, and some of Parliament, then it has been before.

Secondly, the Kings removal from Parliament has been acknowledged the cause
of the war. The Kings removal, as a good King, was not; for Kings have
frequently been absent from Parliament; the Kings coming as a good King,
intending peace, cannot hurt; but what appears that his Majesty is other,
then when he went hence? has he not the same Counsel, friends, and takes he
not the same ways? he ever said he was sorry for the miseries of his Subjects,
he says no more now.

Thirdly, but Commissioners on both sides may give Reasons. Proper
Commissioners that can give Reasons no where but at London, nor no where, but
where, and when his Majesty is at London, or present.

Fourthly, the King may have just desires to move for the Crown. And God forbid
but they should be considered, and granted; but when all that has been done by
his influence in England and Scotland, since his Reign, shall be waied in the
scales of Justice, it will be little that will fall in for the Crown in away
of Justice, said the Scots in general, when at beginning of their troubles
they were for deposing him and his, had not the next heir stuck with them, and
yet it cannot be denied that what the Kings of England had formerly, setting
aside the calling, dissolving, and peremptory negative voice in Parliaments,
there was nothing but would stand well with a Kingly, or Monarchical
government, and without prejudice to the people.

Fifthly, It will beget mutual confidence. If the ends be the same, otherway
not: after agreement it may, not before; love is from similitude; those that
differ, are best asunder. It cannot be expected his Majesty will grant whatever
is sent him, without discourse of, or exception against. Therefore the
Parliament are willing to a personal Treaty for most things. The Parliament
will not give full power to their Commissionesr. Nor will the Kingdom of
Scotland to you, nor have you any such: nor is it fit you or theirs should.
Must all the Kings and Princes in Christendom meet at Munster, because their
Ambassadors have not power to determine, without first sending the Agreement to
them as its made head by head? excellent Scots reason.

But his presence will do hurt at London, and make divisions, its objected: and
they answer, it cannot be, for he has no Army.

It did upon the Scots at Newcastle, and before: Or how come they to be his
chief pleaders, that were first fighters against him? And had not that
apprehension frighted, he had gone into Scotland, and not come this way when he
was at Newcastle.

If they were esteemed enemies that drew him from Parliament? What are they
that hinder his return?

They that drew him away were occasions of a war, therefore enemies, and for
that end did it. The Parliament to prevent a war, are not willing he come
until all is agreed: and what is that coming to London? What if there were no
London, cannot the King and Parliament agree? Have Kings been so in love with
London and Parliaments in times of peace? King James counted the one his hell,
the other his purgatory. But the new Propositions, the foundation of Peace,
which concern Religion the interest of the Crown, the Union and
Joynt-concernment of both Kingdoms, are not so well stated as in the old. For
first, The Covenant is left out, which is a solemn vow by creatures made to God.
The Covenant was entered into, to bring a good peace, now to stand upon it, is
to bring an ill War, for the reasons before: and because there is a general
adversnesse to the taking it, more then against the matter of it. Its the
opinion of learned Perkins, that Jeptha did not sacrifice his daughter, but did
that which was equivolent, and better; so may the Parliament.

The parts of which Covenant are in preservation, and reformation of Religion.
Not the Scots Religion, farther then against the common enemy, and let any
disturb them for it, or go about to destroy it, England will hazard life and
estate for them, and their best blood. No better quarrel to fight, then when
any will destroy others, because not of their Religion. For Reformation, it is
to be according to the word of God, and best reformed Churches: for the word of
God, that must be, as the Parliament conceive; for best reformed Churches, what
have you against that in the Netherlands, where many different professions are
tolerated?

Happiness of the King. As he is King of England, sure the Parliament of
England are as fit judges, as the Parliament of Scotland is, as he is King of
Scotland, and therefore may make their laws for his happiness, as well as
they in Scotland; and so no need England be in ward to Scotland. Peace and
safety of the three Kingdoms: The best way for that, is to destroy and keep
under the Common enemy to all, and they that consider how the Scots prosecute
the war in Ireland, now, and long since too much favoring the Rebels, and at
this time upon treaty with them, to deliver what they there hold, the
transactors on the Rebels side being Romish Clergy, as by credible Intelligence
is certified, never having for years marched one foot, or made one shot against
them: and how active with small help the English have been, and victorious:
insomuch that had the Scots done what they could, Ireland had in all likelihood
ben conquered by this time; which had they as much mind unto, as to subdue
their enemies in Scotland, would have appeared by the like activity, and to
pretend supplies from England, is idle, they having all necessaries about them,
and growing rich: As for England, the third kingd. how forward they have been
al know, and is mentioned before.

The King is adverse to the Covenant, is our objection: and why then take we so
much liberty in other matters of God? We take that liberty that in our
judgment is according to the mind of God, and dare maintain by Argument and
Scripture, that it is Consonant to both, against whomsoever.

But the Covenant must be kept unto, let the King be as adverse as he will,
because good for King and Kingdoms; That is, He must not be King of England,
Scotland, or Ireland, as to government, unless he will take the Covenant: and
where is his reason, or what he can say, or his Commissioners, in a personal
Treaty allowed him, in this? Let an Angel come from heaven and say he must not
take it, yet unless he will, he must not govern; when they will, reason must
take place; and when they will not, then it must not: So that what is good for
Kingdoms, in the opinion of Scotland, may be stood upon, though his Majesty,
and England, Ireland have never so much reason against it. But this must not be
understood that his Majesty be kept in prison, or wronged; Truly for a King to
be at liberty, and not to govern, can be no great content; to see a man's wife,
and not to enjoy her; to be hungry, and see good food, and not permitted to eat
it, is an unhappiness rather then an happiness: the King, undoubtedly, were
it put to him, would rather choose to end his days in the Isle of Wight, then
to live in any outward contents in London, or any of his houses, divested of
his Government.

Or that Armies should be kept on foot after the enemy is overcome: to burden
the Kingdom, or force the King to grant what they please.

Why keep you an Army on foot in Scotland, having no enemy in field? can there
be no need of an Army to prevent an enemies rising? how many discontents are in
England and Scotland? what tampering is there between the Crown of France and
Scotland at this time? how are the people disposed unto insurrection,
occasioned by their present and future suffering? the latter you cannot wash
your hands off, nor well of the present; let England have assurance Scotland
will not stir up, nor act new troubles, the Parliament will undertake to
reduce to as small a number as you shall in Scotland. As for the Armies forcing
the King to grant what they please, its clear, (his Majesty being Judge) the
Army has made as pleasing overtures for him, as the Parliament of England or
Scotland: and for the burden of England; what is it to any other that the
owner carried his cow; besides, you know England can bear to maintain an Army,
as well and as long as Scotland. But you expected that when you departed, the
Army in England should be disbanded. You mean the Independent part of it: for
sure you have not forgot, that before the 11 Members went away long, an Army of
many thousand horse and foot was voted to be a standing Army for this Kingdom,
and Colonels named, Governors of Towns appointed, and had they been of your
party, no doubt you would have stood for their continuance, and excused the
burden, and imposing upon his Majesty, which now you cry out of: but is it in
any of the Treaties, great or small, or in the Covenant, that England shall not
keep an Army on foot without the approbation of the Commissioners, or Kingdom
of Scotland? And not have taken the King away contrary to his will. That he
never yet said, but if true, the Parliament are proper Judges of that offense.

To whom the Parliament of both Kingdoms were to make addresses,

And Scotland yet may, but not of what they please: Ambassadors sent from
foreign States, may be denied Audience, and have by King Charles, when their
Ambassie may be prejudicial: yea, if a King be King of two kingdoms, there is
little of reason, that the one Kingdom shall have liberty to make addresses,
which in their opinion are destructive to them.

Suppose King Charles should offer to add to the Kingdom of Scotland, the
Counties of Northumberland, Durham, Cumberland, and Westmerland, as some of
their own say he did: Is it fit the Parliament permit such a transaction?

And had they not received assurance from the Parliament of the contrary, all
the allurements of the world, and threatenings could not have made them part
with the King, until all Armies had been disbanded.

For the Parliaments assurance, certainly they never made any of this kind, it
being not in their power: nor should they have put the King in prison, and laid
him in chains: nor could you have made good yours, had you so done, which was
not agreed at his coming, but the contrary. You see his Majesty when he
pleases, can escape guards; and for that way of allurements and threatenings,
sure none were made by Parliament, nor does it appear they were so zealous to
have him, but that it was as much your, as their desire: as for his return
until all was disbanded, its probable the Parliament would not have much stood
upon that, nor would they, were his Majesty with you.

And this they assert (against all calumnies) that their loyalty is more to
them then all.

Loyalty is of a large extent, admits of various interpretations, a volume may
be written in definition of it. Scotland is famous for Loyalty, and as famous
for contending, destroying, dis-throning of their Kings: what has been
foolishly said, it had been better to have past by with scorn, the Parliament
never letting fall the least word to the contrary of your Loyalty.

But the Ordinance leaves out the sitting of the Assembly.

Not of Scotland, but England: What of that? they have sat long: An Army, or a
Kingdom of strange opinions indeed is brought forth not at all to their
credit, who have not laid any of them upon their backs by Argument, nay
declining it, a way which was judged best, in most times and places, to make
all men of a mind in matters of Religion; and had their debates been more
public, and admitted of objections, no doubt the fruit had been better. But
must they sit always there? peoples souls cry aloud for their return, and
truly lines of communication are down, and they may pass, that is, all that
have not got better livings within.

The Proposition of settling Religion in England and Ireland, according to
Covenant, is not done, but instead thereof, a mere shadow of Presbyterian
government, without life or power.

The Covenant runs, Setle Religion according to the word of God, and best
Reformed Churches, this is expounded the Scots Presbytery, which indeed was the
word of God, and best Reformed Churches in their drift; the great stick is,
because there is not a coercive power to kill, burn, destroy, imprison, and
ruin in life and estate all that are contrary minded, or will not conform
thereto. Because no power to compel, therefore no life or power: the Ministers
profession and pains is dead, unless he have a power to compel to
conformity, which never went with life and power since the beginning of the
world.

But instead thereof, Liberty is granted for all ways of Worship, and for
exercise of any opinion that men shall have, which opens a door to all
blasphemy, and contrary to Covenant. It is not true that liberty is granted to
all opinions, nor does granting some liberty open a way to blasphemy; for you
proffer to yield in some things. What is Blasphemy and Idolatry punishable, is
disputable; the Scripture seems to make them both to be a casting off the
worship of the true God, and worshipping an Idol: and sure the Parliament takes
care to prevent that, or will do. As for its being contrary to agreement, or
Covenant, its not so conceived by Parliament, but agreeable thereunto: and sure
there are none more fit to expound their Covenant then themselves, as to
themselves.

And this is true, because its Ordained that none shall be forced to the
stablishment: And is this grievous? consider seriously, Would you in Scotland
have been content, to have been forced to the Common Prayer Book, when sent
unto you by the King? Would the French Protestants think well, if they should
be forced to Popery which is established by their supreme? Judge all the world,
whether there be much of reason or piety, that a Prince may compel his people
to be of his Religion, or what he sets up; and so its possible, either by the
mind of the Prince, or by deaths, three or four Alterations may be in twelve
years, as was in the days of Henry the eighth, Edward the sixth, Queen Mary
and Queen Elizabeth: But ours is the true Religion, therefore all are to be
compelled unto it; prove that it was given you immediately from God and spare
not; but if it were hammered out of the heads of an Assembly of Scots or
English Divines, there is no reason that compulsion should be used where
infallability cannot be made good. The Jews, Christ, his Apostles never
compelled. And whatever is pretended, liberty, is only intended: To judge of
intention, is proper to God. I the Lord try the heart: this cannot be meant of
a Scotch lord.

Presbytery is limited for a time: The Parliament when they make Laws, know
not oftentimes how they will prove, and therefore for trial, set a time, not
out of dislike, or intent to alter, but to prevent inconvenience, which
possible may fall by the experiment, or perpetuating a Law at first. Pardon
England, if they take not Presbytery upon the bare recommendation of Scotland;
its possible we may therein (as to persecution) be out of the Fryingpan into
the fire.

The Ministers are to exclude none from Saerament, but what the houses think
fit, though against their consciences. Why! What a turning about is here? now
men must have liberty of conscience, and must act in judgment and
righteousness: And is this allowed Presbyterian Ministers only? show us a
place of Scripture, or a good reason for this, viz. That you should have
liberty, and others compelled.

The Parliament allows not in the Church the use of all Ordinances. All that
they think are Jure Divine, and for other its not good to put overmuch power
into their hands, until they see how they will employ a less tallent; which,
if experience shows well, its like they will have more: men newly raised in
nower, grow so proud, that no ground can hold them.

The Parliament^ (...), allows many Sects that have been cast out informer
time. Look the History of the Churches, and you will find sometimes a Counsel
threw out, the next put in, and the next after put out: and if persecution or
throwing out be a mark, sure its of truth rather then error.

The Parliament gives tolleration, for Sects to set up in any place convenient.
This is but for trial, to see whether they be consistent with the Civil Peace,
which if not, they will suppress them: besides, would not the Presbyters have
that liberty? Then as you would that men should do to you, so do you to others.

And not liable to any penalty. That Is the business. The sword of the spirit
is nothing without the fleshly sword. That phrase, Sir, you shall be of this
Religion, Will you, Nill you, and none other, not shall you worship any other
way, but the States way, if you do, to Lollords Tower you go: Jesus Christ and
his Apostles tested, or rather drank deep of this Cup of mercy, from Jews and
others.

Though it seems that this extends not to tolerate the worst, yet men may
write, and discourse of all whatsoever.

For writing, no doubt care will be taken that none shall, so as to do hurt. As
to opinions, you know in all parts, in Latin men have taken liberty: the main
care is, in not writing to disturb the civil Peace; and truly, all that can be
written in seven years, cannot strike deeper to set a kingdom in a fire of
difference and a new War, then this very Declaration of yours, Printed in
England without any Authority, yea, in defiance of Parl. yet is there not one
word in any of the Treaties or Covenant, that Mr. John Cheesly shall have power
to Print in England, no, nor any of the Commissioners. For discouse, you know
disputations were allowed in the Universities, and the best Scholars ever
studied to maintain that which was contrary to received truths, as the best
way to find out truth. It were a sad fruit of all our troubles and
suffering, if we might notdiscourse without imprisonment and banishment, and
upon any subject, Argument never did truth hurt.

They would have the Parliament call to mind, former sayings, and doings, and
consider that Divines have sat four years, framing a Directory for Doctrine
and Worship, and at last are laid aside.

Either the Divines have done their part, or they have not; if they have not,
let them end it, give it to the Houses, publish it to the kingdom, and away to
their charges, there is nothing on their part required, as to establishing of
it; if it be done, why are they yet here? they were called but to advise and
present.

The Houses Ordained a Fast for extirpation of Heresies and Schisms.

Are Heresies and Schisms so, because contrary to the word of God? Then every
man has his liberty to judge, and to there may be danger; for if the
generality of the people of England, shall think Presbytery a Sect or a
Schism, then the Covenant svvears them to root it out; and fasting puts an
edge to this oath: if they be only so that the State declares; so then, when
they have made a civil Law, declaring what shall not be, and what shall,
the subject ought to, and no doubt will, give active or passive obedience
thereto.

The Covenant binds to observe the authority of the supreme Magistrate,
privilege of Parliaments, and firm Peace between the Kingdoms.

The Parliament offers the return of his Majesty, upon such terms as they
conceive safe and good; and truly if the King be to be resident among them,
there is need of other manner of terms in England, and for England, then in,
or for Scotland: A Scepter bruiseth not at distance, as it does at hand.
Privilege of Parliaments, How many of Scotlands privileges have England, or
its Parliament violated? It were well if Scotlands Commissioners could wash
their hands as well of breaking the privileges of Englands Parliament. As for
a firm peace between the Kingdoms, the Parliament and kingdom of England sure
have not hitherto been wanting, when it shall be considered what they have
suffered, and yet do suffer, and what they have parted with to Scotland. Its
confessed, and has been acknowledged in word and deed, that England was
beholding to Scotland very much, and truly if they kick not down that soop of
milk, it will never be forgotten by this Nation: But this may be said, their
own interest and safety was involved; And England have sundry times done as
much, and more for them, when thoy were trampled upon, and brought to misery by
their Princes; many sheets close written will not contain the favors England
has showed to Scotland in their distress, and this over and above at Englands
own charge: And sure its a good prayer, That God would confound those who shall
be isntrumental in a War between the kingdoms, or shall not assist each other
against a common enemy; but on the other side, let not Scotland think, because
of intercourse of favors and kindnesses to each other, that therefore England
must become Ward to Scotland, no more then they would have Scotland be in Ward
to England, for like, and gretter favors.

Yet it is evident that many Sectaries with their adherents and abetters, do by
their Doctrine and actions, offer violence to the King, his Person, and
Authority.

For their Doctrine, its possible other men may Preach as vvildly as many
Presbyters, who have in all times, but chiefly of late, in their Pulpits,
Preached up this or that faction, rather then Jesus Christ's Doctrine; and as
the party increases or decreases, so they do in their zeal. Show such an
example of four Sectaries, as that delivered in by four Divines to the Common
Counsel, (whose names shall be omitted, because men of good life certainly)
where they say, they had done what they could to stir up the people in the
late tumult and force upon the Parliament: For their actions, if it be
examined, it will be found they have rather gone the contrary way; and when
it was apprehended they would be isntrumental to restore the King, How
were they hugged by the royal party, and hated by the Presbyters? for the
Kings Authority, where is it? Is it not agreed he have none until he do so
and so?

And against Rites, and Privileges of Parliament, so that there is not any one
Article of Covenant, which is not in high degree violated by them.

When the Parliament of England shall intreatyour help, to repair them, for the
Sectaries breaking of Privileges of Parliament, you shall do well to give
your help, according to Covenant. But why speak you not of the late force done
upon the Parliament, where the Lords and Commons were kept prisoners, until
they had voted what the Presbyters and Royalists would have, and after the
Lords had said what they would have them, yet were kept up, not being suffered
to depart, and the Members of Parliament fored from London, and a war
commenced, arms raised, and upon those extorted Votes? what say you, will you
according to Covenant right the Parliament in this Privilege, if they desire
you? No, no, you will halt then, as when you were to follow the Kings forces to
Worcester, go quite another way. As for the violation of every Article of the
Covenant by the Sectaries, show where they have violated that, which says they
will amend their lives, or that, which says they will bring Delinquents to
condign punishment, or that, where its said, they will maintain the Doctrine,
and Discipline of Scotland, against the common enemy, nay indeed, show that
they have violated any of the Articles of the Covenant.

Dividing between the King and his people, or making factions against the
Covenant, and taking to them the name of Saints, yet are to be accounted
Mulignants, Intendiaries, evil, instruments. What is casier then to charge?
what harder then to prove? no worse character, then to be apt to charge, and
unable to prove. Have the Sectaries divided between the King and his people?
What said the Propliec to the King are the Presbyters in England only the Kings
people? what shall become of the Episcopal party? are the Presbyters and they
the Kings people? why a Cavalier, more then a Sectary? and how do these
divide? by seeing farther into the plots of those, that would make fruitless
all our blood and sufferings, then others, that would feign patch up an unfound
peace. Take here two expressions, the first of Mr. Sir Jo: Chees: Well said he,
talk what you will, and do what you will with the King, now you have him at
Holdenby; if ever he agree, or do any thing by way of compliance, or
condescension, then never trust Scotland, who have tried him over and over. The
other of an honest, and wise Presbyterian Minister, now in North hamptonshire,
who used these words: If else Independints bad not seen farther into King
Charles, then the Presbyters, we had been the miserablest people in the world
by this time: and this was said upon occasion of discourse of the Battle at
Nusehy.

The name of Saints is justly given to holy men; sanctity is sanctification;
the good living shows the saint; not a swearer, a drunkard, a whore master, a
flet, a thief, a plunderer; but he that prays, medirates, hears the word
preached, does no hurt to his neighbor, is a saint. Now if all be saints, that
are thus, affirmative and negative, what a poor company of Saints are in
England, and Scotland? and how many Sectaries will be found Saints? For Saint
must not be confind to such a mind, or judgment, then what will become of all
men that differ, though but in circumstances, if only one sort be Saints? they
were mighty in Scripture, and holy, no doubt, who had not heard that there was
a holy Ghost. They are to be accounted Malignants, Incendiaries, and evil
Instruments, that hinder a good peace, and foment an evil war; but to put that
upon them, that differ from you in Judgment, and therefore, and conclude your
selves contrary, because Covenanters, or of another Judgment is ridiculous:
give an instance and prove it, and you say, and do something, but to say it
only may be in like kind retorted upon you, and if it were necessary, proved it
may be. And in show, take this Argument. They that do most conform to, and
comply with those that have been the principal cause of all the miseries that
have of late been, in these three Kingdoms, are most malignant: but in writing
Declarations, overtures, and attempts, the Scots Commissioners, if not, the
Kingdom of Scotland have; Ergo. they that will read, and consider, may prove
the assumtion.

That pious and peaceable men should be troubled, because that in all things,
they cannot conform to presbyterian Government, and may stand with public
peace, and is not destructive to Order, and Government of the Church, is not
your desire.

Bellarmin writ twelve books to prove Justification by works, and toward the
end says, the best and surest way is, to be justifid by the merits of Christ
alone. You have done the same in this for sure, there cannot be found a man
this day in England, that would have any man, or opinion tolerated, that is
not accompanied with piety and peace; and will stand with, and is not
destructive to the Order, and Government of the Church, that shall be, or is
crected, and if the one be, its fit he be rooted out, as an one my to the peace
of the kingdom.

Yet, they do from their hearts, and fowls, abhor such a vast and general
Tolleration, as is inconsistent with the Covenant, and will see all in
confusion: But, what if it may stand with public peace, and not destructive to
the Order, and Government of the Church, which should have been the assumtion,
and not the Covenant; for that was never understood, nor is ever like to be:
but the civil peace, and Government of the Church being undermined, or
destroyed, will behavious: when a toleration has so done, then complaint; the
Parliament is the proper Judge what will make for Englands p^^ce if they allow
it, let others be patient until they see contrary and then no doubt the
Parliament will hear, and reform.

Therefore they obtest the Parliament by the Covenant, and what ever they have
said or done to induce the Kingdom of Scotland to join with them, that they do
not establish such impious tolleration.

The Parliament, what ever they have said, or done to induce the kingdom of
Scotland to join, met with a reciprocal inclination, and for the Covenant,
they do not violate it in their own judgments, in satisfying tender
consciences. If it be such as will stand with the peace of the kingdom, and not
destructive to the Government erected, you allow it, and you will not allow
that which is impious; have patience, and see whether this tolleration be so:
If you say impious in your Judgment, that will be but your Judgment; the
Parliament would be loath to be thought the tolleraters of any thing that is
impious, do not charge them, unless you are able to prove it, which yet
appears not.

The second Difference is the Interest and Power of the Crown, and so by
Covenant bound to support the Kings Just Power and Greatness.

That is answered before But thus much, if the Kingdom of Scotland will say,
the King notwithstanding what has been past by his instruments in His Name, to
the hurt of both Kingdoms, ought to be restored in His Just Power and
Greatness, that is, (for so they must say) whatever de jure was His formerly,
must again be His, what then needs any Personal Treaties, any new Bills, or any
more but an humble Petition to His Majesty, to come and govern again without
any Conditions at all? But if any restriction may be, how comes it, or what is
meant by this, Just Rights of the Crown?

This consists, they say, in consenting to Laws: And who denies it? Is the
Parliament about to restore the King, and not Laws upon Him without His
consent? Wherefore then do they send them to Him? nay, sure they will not deny
Him his Reasons, they did not in the Petition of Right, when He stuck at some
part of it, it was argued on both sides by a Committee of Parliament, and
learned Council of the Kings, and upon Debate, the Kings Council yielded, and
the King consented, Bills or Acts of Parliament do not hinder His Majesty of
making his exceptions.

These words His Majesty will advise.

These and many other you bring to prove His Majesty's Negative ought to be
allowed Him: But do you mean that He shall say so, and that is sufficient; for
shame do not urge it so, for if after a Parliament has been long in making
Laws, it may be for the support of the Being of the Kingdom, and to prevent
immediate Ruin and Destruction, and while these Laws were making, have spent
the Kingdom many thousands, shall His Majesty by the Advice of a Favorite,
dissolve the Parliament, and say, He will advise; to what end are Parliaments?
they were as good never sit or Debate, when such an answer shall blast all: Its
one thing to give Reasons against, and another thing to blast good endeavors by
saying, I will, but do nothing: And in this case, if the Kingdom stand in
eminent and real need, no doubt the Parliament may declare a Law; and so Keeper
Littleton said this Parliament, That an Ordinance was good, if His Majesty
refused, with I will advise, and not do so.

And in protecting and defending His Subjects.

Sure the Parliament will not deal with His Majesty, as the Egyptians did with
the Israelites; if they entreat Him to take again the Protection of them, they
will give Him wherewith: Yet remember, that Kings of England in their fullest
Power; could not raise Men or Money to defend themselves or Subjects without
Parliament: And all know, that these two wanting, its a poor defense that can
be made. And though Kings who usually studied the weal of their People, were
permitted to make War and Peace as they saw cause, yet it cannot be proved, nor
seems it reasonable, the premises considered, that de Jure the Militia was so
in the King, or Power of War and Peace, as that he could do it without consent
of the Parliament, but that the People whom it chiefly concerned, and who were
like to undergo the miseries or good incident to them, were asked, and yet His
Majesty in as full Power as any of the Kings of England. Many a time it has
been said in Parliaments before this, That the King could not go to War without
consent of His Subjects; and how often did Kings, when they saw a necessity of
War, call Parliaments, and communicate their desires, and had consent from
Parliament.

Which are the Essence and Being of all Kings, and the chief part of their Duty
and Function.

The main Conditions at the Coronation, its confessed, is to (...), but they are
both according to Law.

(...) the Militia you are content it be settled so as it may not (...) agreed,
but you would have His Majesty have it, as to Foraig^ States, and His Posterity
after Him, which to deny, roots up the foundation of Monarchy.

If His Majesty have it, as to any Affair, how is it consistent with the
Parliaments having it? and may not a Power intended to one place, be converted
to another; how often has it? and so presently a new Wat: As for His Majesty,
no doubt the Parliament, when they see Him so moved, as that He is cordial for
the Liberty of the Subject, The Interest of Religion, as agreed, no doubt they
will be apt again to repose in him; and until he has taken the Covenant (if
you remember the Negotiation with the Queen) you are neither willing he have
the Militia, or any thing else: For His Posterity, you know how the Heir
apparent has acted; where he is, how he there acts and moves, what assurance
he has given of acting better then his Father; and is not the Parliament wise
in being shie how they entrust their Life and Death, and into whose Hands they
put that Power. As for rooting up the foundation of Monarchy, its but
restricting it, thereby to bring it to be consistent with the Peoples Liberty;
the stick that is crooked must be set for a time the contrary way, or it will
never be strait.

Yet you would not have Monarchy as high as Tyranny. The Father would not have
the Son take evil courses, but yet gives way that he have the same allowance,
company, place, opportunity, as before.

And you by no means can agree to an Armies being up in England, now there is no
Enemy, when some Garrisons and the Train bands may do it, and not an Army to
inslave King and Subject.

Has the Parliament of England taken any notice of what you in Scotland
continue or disband? you would fain have us naked once more, that we might
either be surprised by our Adversaries, or need again your help: For the
Trained bands, we have had experience of them, and seen the miserable
inconvenience in London and Country, of taking housekeepers from Trade, Wives,
Children and Servants; and how many thousand have been thereby undone? and how
the Kingdom has thereby been impoverished! You are not ignorant, that in other
parts of the world, the Plow and Trade pays the Soldier, and that those who are
not fallen upon that fight; but were these Trained bands Sectaries, then by no
means Trained bands would not do well. As for the Armies inslaving King and
Subject, its not so; they are kept on foot that England may not be slave to
King and Scotland. When your Army returned into Scotland, it was expected the
Parliament disband this in England: Was it? sure it was not imagined England
was so much fool; somewhat has been said to that before: Farther thus, Were
there not an Army in England, what think you would become of Presbytery, let
any reasonable man judge if it would stand a month, and not be rooted out, and
the preachers and professors of it: Do not think to deceive the world with
words, England in general loves Episcopacy better, and Popery as well as
Presbytery; for in time of Episcopacy, they had all things in plenty and good
fellowship to boot: who shall expect to enjoy Bishops Lands in lieu of their
money you had, if no Army? when will the Parliaments debts be paid without an
Army? how will money be had to reduce Ireland without an Army? You see an Army
can hardly do these things, but in spite of Parliament and Army, Common Prayer
book, and whatever is Episcopal, enters openly, and men refuse to pay any kind
of Taxes.

Therefore you declare, that Propositions go for disbanding.

That is Sectaries, that so an Army of Presbyters may come in the room; and if
you put it not so, its not as the Eleven Members would have, nor according to
the Compact with them and their Party: And truly, could Presbyters have been
kept from being tampering with Royalists, to patch up an unsound Accord, its
probable Sectaries had never been used so much; and could such be had, its like
They might be with content dismissed: And yet take this, That an Army of
Presbyters will not have that Antipothy, and so not so secure for Presbyterian
Government; for if a little opposition should come, our new Presbyters would
choose to read the Common Prayer book, and so assure themselves of the hearts
of their Parishioners, the force whereof will be full Tithes, Oblations, and
good Cheer, rather then want these.

Armies were raised, For defense of the Kings Person, Authority, Religion, and
Privileges of Parliament.

Are any of these so secure, as there needs no power to defend them; how many
days is it since wrong has been offered to all these.

And though other nations have need to continue Soldiers, yet the sea is
Englands and Scotlands bulwarks.

But there is no sea about the Presbyterian pulpit, the Royalists discontents
and sufferings, nor between England and Scotland, though His Majesty be in an
Island; and beside, there are ships to go between England and Scotland, and
France: and Robert Write says, There are passengers come in them, who frequent
St. Germans and Fountain-blew.

And if we study Peace and Unity between the Kingdoms, under the Government of
the King, we need not fear Enemies abroad.

The way to it is not to offer to His Majesty a dissent, in the name of the
Kingdom of Scotland from what the PARLIAMENT of England thinks necessary for
their safety, and a good and lasting Peace.

Its a custom in other nations, to keep Soldiers to raise money, but the people
of England and Scotland are a free people, and why then should War be made a
Trade among them?

Be assured of it as a truth, the Army is so far from continuing only to raise
money, that if the Parliament can be without them, they will be willing to
disband, with reasonabler Arrears then you went out of England with; and for
the Kingdoms being free, it will appear at last, the Parliament and Army of
England will be no inslavers, at least of this, to their credit and others
shame: as for war being made a trade, it has not been the custom of this
nation, nor of yours; its true, as a trade abroad you know how well Scotland
has driven it; and truly to bend both Powers to restore Allies, there is no
doubt England will hearken to as readily as Scotland, and yet take care to
reduce rebellious Ireland besides.

For a Proposition of Pay of Arrears, and disband all in one.

Why you should so much affect Englands weal therein, appears not, because you
are so opposite to their designs tending to an Accord; besides, if you mean
after an agreement, would you have His Majesty restored, and forthwith His, and
His parties words taken, that they will conform to all that is agreed, and the
Parliament have only the name of a Militia.

Titles of Honor you desire the King may not be hindered from bestowing or
conferring, it being a chief flower of the Crown.

But how shall the Parliament, and so England, be assured, that none shall be
honored who have not wherewith to maintain it, but must put his Majesty upon
unjust grounds to maintain that honor? and whether his Majesty will not confer
honors to the prejudice of the ancient Nobility of England, and make so many
Lords as may bring honor into disesteem, That the Lords house may not be
founded, so as it will be King-trod against its own and the Kingdoms good? For
honors in Scotland, let him give as many as he will, so he gives not (as
formerly) the wealth of England to maintain them. And now thus much has been
said, it will be no great digression to say, That there seems to be reason that
there should be no more Scotchmen about His Majesty, as servants, or preferred
in England to any thing that expends the Revenue of England, then there are
English in Scotland; and though there be a necessity that Scotchmen attend His
Majesty, as in relation to the affairs of Scotland, yet there is no reason that
Englands Revenue maintain them, nor that English honor be bestowed upon them,
but that they wait what falls in Scotland.

All expressions of Joint Interest in these Propositions are left out.

If the Parliament make them good, they do well, if nor, God will be angry with
them; for to act against the true Interest of Kingdoms ever proves fatal, and
has been the alone cause of the present condition of His Majesty, Children
and Party.

But there is left out of the Proposition, that which jointly concerns both,
and that contrary to agreement; viz. That peace should not be made with the
King, without the consent of Scotland.

That there is a necessity of treating or debating Jointly, because an
agreement, is, That no Peace shall be concluded, but by mutual consent, does
not follow. The Princes of Christendom have had a long time, you know, a Treaty
at Munster, wherein each have treated apart, yea, and without the privity of
other; And those who have been in confederacy, not to agree to Peace, but by
Joint consent; for have not each their several business distinct from the
other, as the French, Dutch, Sweads, Hassians, and others, all in confederacy:
Now the Joint Interest is of several natures, and will take his proper place,
and you have the exceptions as any of the forementioned have; but that the
Parliament may not treat for their own particulars, and forbear the other,
there is no question: all the question is, how far a Joint Interest obliges, for
they are alterable as you know well, but in regard it is only charged upon the
Parliament, to have left it out, it may be after assumed.

The Parliament is obliged, as they have declared to Ambassadors, to set aside
Episcopacy in England, and hinder its coming again into Scotland.

And if they do not, woe be to them, for if they shall forget what slaves they
were to the Lordly power of Prelates, and what by that way they suffered, and
resetle any such like thing, it were pity but they should be bored through the
ears, and so marked for eternal slaves. And sure the rooting out of Episcopacy
in England, is enough alone to make good the Interest, increase Union, and
perpetuate Amity.

The next blame is laid upon the Army, for meddling with the matter of Peace,
and proposals so much disliked and declared against by Parliament.

As for the Armies meddling, it was but to put the great wheels off the Scots
Axeltrees; and having, as they conceive, fixed them upon English, they intend to
let them alone, hoping the Pins will keep them there; but if they should go
back, its like they will make bold with them again, only with this
distinction, as Subjects, not as Soldiers. If the master has got a cup too
much of Scots ale, the servant is not to be blamed if he takes him by the arm
and leads him until he be recovered again, and in his right mind; yea, though
it be with giving a frown or two, to those that made him to drink too much.

As for proposals, remember what Letter was sent to the Parliament, after the
battle at Marston-moor by the Generals.

Which you conceive to be the cause of the alterations: A terrible disgrace to
the Parliament, as if the Parliament were moved in the least, by the London
Remonstrance dressed at Worcester house.

This you say might have been prevented, if the Parliament at first, framing
the new Model, had hearkened to the advice of taking the covenant, etc. It Is
true, then there had been an Army that would not have subdued Englands enemies,
probably in one and twenty years: and the Kingdom must have been subject all
this while to plunder, and men's wives and daughters subject to the same
condition as they were in the North.

But the Proposition for London is left out, in which formeerly it was ordained
that they have their Militia in their own hands, also the Tower, and that their
Militia go not out of the City, but by their consent, also an Act of
Parliament; for confirming their Charters, Customs, Liberties, etc. And an Act
that all Bylaws, be as firm as an Act of Parliament, with power to repeal them
as they please, and for good service done by Parliament.

For London, these times give it overgreat to be ruled, either by King or
Parliament; and so reason bids no addition: The people that govern in it, in
regard their skill is chiefly in getting money, have little understanding in
any thing else: especially the Ancients, in whom rule is, and therefore subject
to run several ways in a week, therefore very unfit to manage weapons, and most
unfit to have charge of the Tower where all weapons are; For Charter,
Privileges, etc, they have often been confirmed, and if now forfeited, as sure
not, the Act of oblivion puts in old State.

As for their Bylaws, being as good as an Act of Parliament; if it were
granted, London would be undone: for example, all Acts done in Common Counsel
relating to London, are Bylaws, no Acts of Parliament: Put case they give
Fifty Subsidies to Parliament. To repair of Paul's. To make a new Line of
Communication. And then give as much more to pull it down; should they agree
that their Militia, that is, the Train Bands or Housekeepers go to Newcastle,
or farther in arms, and all these binding, a man had better be a slave in
Turkey, then a free Citizen of London: A hundred other instances might be
given. As for power of repealing, there is no danger, if the making bind not:
Let it be considered what a brave City London would be, if a company of
Shoe-makers, Tailors, Chandlers, Bricklayers, Plaisterers, and such like men,
who generally can neither write nor read, shall be able to make Laws, as good
as if by King, Lords and Commons agreed unto; what will become of London, and
where is His Majesty's Negative voice, or the Lords and Commons; a Cobbler of
London is a brave man indeed.

As to the Court of Wards; there seems to be no difference, His Majesty is
willing to part with it upon consideration, and the Parliament is willing to
give it.

For Deans and Chapters, Lands intended for augmentation of means for
ministers, you wish it so.

To settle One hundred pounds a year and no more for every Minister, and
dividing the Parishes as equal as possible, will do well; but why the Ox should
eat of any man's corn, but his he treads out, seems irregular.

There is one thing more, that is, The Bill for the Militia sent to the King,
gives power to put Soldiers into the Town of Barwick, contrary to the large
Treaty.

The words are no more but these, That His Majesty consent that the Militia of
the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, and Town of Barwick, also the
Island of Garnsey and Jersey, be in the hands of Parliament; the reason of the
naming Barwick, being not for putting Soldiers in, but because that Town is
reckoned a part of Scotland, and so named, being not comprehended in England,
as is not Wales, Garnsey and Jersey: whence see how easy it is for discontent
to find fault where none is.

Somewhat might be added, as to the late Dissent presented to His Majesty,
whose fore-goer was a Trumpet: Truly your love is kindly taken, and sure will
be by England; but the Trumpet cannot be terrible: Your Dissent in matters of
Religion is allowed you by Instructions; but for the glory of the King. you are
required an endeavor and no more. But to allow you the Dissent: Consider
whether this has not been a means to keep His Majesty from consent; and indeed
it appears by His Majesty's Answer, that He is turned about thereby: For
whereas in one of His Messages He desires to give the Scots content apart, now
His main Objection putting Him upon refusal, is your dissent; and so you may be
said to be the hinderers of a good Peace. For let it be observed, His Majesty
gives no Reasons against the Bills, only in general they divest the Crown,
which for former failings, in former Messages He was content to yield unto; And
so whereas His Majesty and the Commissioners of Scotland press that Argument or
Reason may take place, they now fly to, they cannot agree, or they dissent;
and there is an end.

If any one had pleased to take this pains, a little to undeceive the people,
this should have been willingly spared; In that which the Parliament are to
give in answer, you will have things full and clear to all, though it may be
you may stay sometime; in the mean time, if this prove but a peparative, to
keep the minds of men from being too much carried away with one story, until
they hear another, it is all that is aimed at.

FINIS.

