AN Anti-Brekekekex-Coax-Coax. OR A THROAT-HAPSE FOR THE FROGS AND TOADES
That lately Crept abroad, Croaking against the Common Prayer Book AND
EPISCOPACY. AND The Copy of a LETTER from a very Reverend CHURCHMAN, in
Answer to a young man, who desired his Judgment upon this Case, viz. Whether
every Minister of the CHURCH of ENGLAND be bound in Conscience to read the
Common Prayer? With Another LETTER from a Convinced Associatour, that a while
boggled at the Common Prayer, to a Brother of the same Association, not yet
convinced; together with the abovesaid Reverend Person's Brief and candid
Censure thereupon; with some Uses of Application by the Publisher.

LONDON, Printed, in hopes to do good to the Public, or at least to give some
check to the Impudent Slanders of some Malicious Non-Conformists, who by the
same Artifice, as they did in the Year 1642, go about to re-inflame these
Nations by their Libellous Pamphlets. 1660.

Monday September 24. 1660.
THis night about eleven of the clock, was a very violent fire in Fleet Street,
which began at the Red Lion, in a short time consumed many houses, and did in a
manner surround the dwelling house of the Reverend Doctor Wild, now Bishop of
London Derry in Ireland, did fiercely blaze against the walls thereof, being
but of a thin Flemmish building, and even into the very windows of sundry
rooms: And yet God was pleased miraculously to preserve the said house, and
there to give a stop to the fire, as he had done some years since at the same
Doctor's house; which is a sufficient confutation, if there were no other, of
that scandalous and Phanatick Pamphlet lately set forth, as a little Theater of
God's judgments against such as have been forward to Revive the use of the
Common Prayer book. It Is well known that the said Doctor Wild, all along these
horrid confusions, and even in the height of Oliver's Tyranny, did constantly
uphold and practice, as became a true Confessor of the Church of England, the
Liturgy of the said Church. And who can tell (though it be indeed an high
presumption for any to be too determinate in judging of God's providence, and
prying into his cabinet counsels) yet I say, who can tell, but that even for a
Testimony to these Nations, and this great City especially, of God's gracious
acceptance of the appointed Liturgies and Letanies of our poor persecuted
Mother the Church of England, God has been pleased twice so remarkably to
preserve that house and family, where his worship has been so regularly
observed. And if one would be a little industrious to muster the disasters of
those that have been adversaries to Episcopacy, and the established discipline
and Liturgy, it were no great task, nor altogether unseasonable for these
giddy times.

As for example.
The sudden taking off Mr. Gower of Dorchester, within few days after his
coming up to London, with the Petition of many associated non-conformists,
intruders, etc. of those parts.

Of the sudden and dangerous rupture of body that not long since befell Mr.
Bampfield of Sherborn Dorset, and the various mischiefs that have fallen upon
him, and his assistant forsooth (for Curate is grown too low a title) viz. The
ejection of the latter out of his usurped fellowship in Saint Magdalen's
College, Oxford.

The sudden death of both of their horses, on which they were wont to ride to
associations, unlawful fasts and ordinations; caused as is shrewdly suspected
by three or four of their own Disciples, that pretended to be great Converts of
their making, but are now under suspicion and legal restraint for witches.

Of so many scores of intruders, that for recovery of their Hypochondriack
maladies, or else to wash off, if it were possible by water-drinking, the
stains of their consciences, for the coveting and violent possessing of their
neighbors, nay their own Mother's sons houses and lands, at the late famous
waters at Woodbury hill, Dorset: Their own Mother's sons, I say, and Fathers
two, unless they be bastards, which it is to be feared too many of them be; and
the worst of bastards, an incestuous brood, being generated, not by any Father
or Bishop of the Church; but in the heat of a schismatic lust, by their own
brother Presbyters.

Of the great infirmity of body and mind which Mr. Newton of Taunton has been
subject to, ever since he was present and accessory to the plundring of
Sherborn-school and Alms house.

Of the exceeding great weakness of Mr. Forde of Excester, since his recanting
his recantation, and declaiming so vehemenly against Bishops and common prayer.

Of the grievous affliction, Mr. Nichols of Excester has had, with his eldest
daughter, who was first mazed with his over-austere looks, his thundering
doctrines of absolute predestination and reprobation, and his extravagant zeal,
or choler rather, against the old Episcopacy and Liturgy; and continues a
great affliction to him; God of his mercy look upon her, and in her conversion
convert her Father and her other relations, to a due obedience to the Laws of
God, of the King, and the Church.

Of Mr. Chetwyn of Wells his sad distemper, since his being so great a
Phanatick and Stickler for Extempore prayers, and against the old orders of the
Church.

Of the ill successes of all the intruding fellows of Saint Magdalens College
Oxon. Since their division of the Aurum Tolosanum, the good founder's gold, by
their little less then sacrilegious avarice, and their rending of the Church by
their Chapel chat, and Saint Marie's Sermons.

Of Mr. Ben of Dorchesters monstrous chin-cough, which would make any that
hears him, doubt there is a shrewd core at his conscience, for his subscribing to
the Kings trial, and outing Mr. Newt at Tiverton, to make room for his son and
daughter Polewheel, and other heinous crimes, besides his great slip at Oxford,
that all his Hah-hings cannot remove.

Of young Mr. Tomlins of Newbury, who was in arms against Bishops and Common
prayer, and sadly cut his own throat.

Of the impure daughter of that old factious Puritan, Gervase of Andover, who
first got a great belly among her holy brethren, as they call them, and then to
hide the shame of the ungodlike godly, ungratiously hanged her self in her
Father's barn, and yet was buried in those sanctified times in the Churchyard,
as if she had dyed a Christian death, whereas yet neither King nor Church are
satisfied for her Felo de se out of that estate she dyed possessed of.

Of two of Captain Doweys soldiers that likewise hanged themselves in
Dorsetshire, rather then they would live to hear or say, Almighty and most
merciful Father, we have erred and straied.

Of the famous Mr. Obadiah Sedgewick of Covent Garden. that after his excessive
venery, now and anon two, turned mere Sot.

Of Mr. Ball of Northampton, that turned worse then Sot; which may serve to put
in the scales against that base slander of the ingenious Mr. John Ball late
fellow of Wadham College, that, in the book of the Toades, is said to have
been suddenly struck for his having acted a part in a Comedy, in derision of an
old puritan; whereas the said Comedy was only to represent the extravagancies
of love, and was performed chiefly to gratify the honorable and hopeful
Baronet Sir Wiliima Portman, who with all that were present, God be thanked,
are yet in perfect health save only Mr. Ball, who in a journey afterward in
the exceeding hot vveather, took a surfeit by eating Pork and Caul, and thereof
dyed: and to give him his due now he is gone, it is fit to be known that he was
the Son of a very great Presbyterian and Nonconformist, and so are most of his
relations; and in that way and those schismatic principles he was bred: yet
being a very good scholar, and after his coming to Oxford, reading
indifferently the books of both sides, and seriously weighing their scriptures,
Antiquities and reasons, forsook the Presbyterians, and freely and cheerfully
came over to the Episcopal judgment, even in those times when there was not
the least glimps of hope of his advantaging but rather blasting his preferments
by so doing.

And of sundry the like notorious afflictions upon diverse Ministers and other
Non-conformists, in sundry Counties.

It would make up a far larger book then that wherein the Army of the Toads is
so ridiculously set forth, and that not so much to show the judgments of God
against the revivers of Common prayer, as of Quakers and other such Phanaticks
and sectaries, as any but mere dolts may observe, in diverse particulars of
that book: however the title page lays all on the Common prayers score.
According to the old ones Maxim, calumniare fortiter, aliquid haerebit, cast
dirt enough, and some of it will stick on the smoothest and purest wall or
garment.

Perhaps some will say, Doctor Brownrig, who was for Episcopacy and Common
prayer, died of a sudden extreme fit of the stone, the scholars or hard
students disease; but Hugh Peter's who is against both, is hanged, drawn and
quarterd according to Law, pray which is the greater judgment, the Duke of
Gloucester who was for both, died of the small pox, for which some vile wretches
have kept a thanksgiving day, with words to this purpose, Lord, as thou have
cut off one of the limbs of that wicked family, to go on to destroy it root and
branch, till there be not one of that wicked race left; but Henry Martine, who
was against both, either is already dead, or like to die of the great,
otherwise called the French or Gallick Pox, to save the hangman a labor, I
pray, which is the greater judgment?

Thus you see how easy it is to accumulate undeniable Paradigmes, more then a
good many, of such as are, or have been Adversaries of the good old government
of the Church of England, and the Liturgy thereof, and have felt god's scourge
heavy upon them; and thereby to stifle the noise of the Croaking Toads, that
of late have been creeping abroad to the disparagement of the good old way of
God's worship. But the truth is, by all these things it is hard to judge of god
or evil, it is Turkish or Cromwellian divinity to judge of the right of a
Religion, by the lives or events of those that profess it; let Holy writ, as it
is interpreted by the ancient Church, and Fathers, who were nearest the
Fountain be our guide, and never go to the Episkies of Enthusiasmes, and
mis-applyed providence, which must needs mis-lead us.

The true Copy of a Letter from a very Reverend Churchman, in answer to a
young man, who desired his judgment, without delay, upon this Case, viz.
Whether every Minister of the Church of England be bound in conscience to read
the Common Prayer?
SIR,
I Received your Letter in folio, with others enclosed, which I have returned.
The Books you write of, I have not received; yet I thank you for your good
intentions, I am sorry the paper is printed by it self; it will be the less
public, sooner die, and will make the Author the more enquired after, which
may prove prejudicial.

Your Case, you sent me, must be put thus; whether a Minister, that is, every
Minister of the Church of England, (All indefinites in materiaa necessaria are
equivalent to universals) be bound in conscience to use the Common prayer.

The Case thus put, there seem many things to be said to the contrary, E. G.

1. No Minister is bound in conscience to do any thing, which will be more
hurtful, then profitable to God's Church; but we think this will be so,
Ergo, etc. 2. No Minister is bound in conscience to that which will offend any
godly men: but this will do so, Ergo, etc. 3. No man is bound in conscience to
any thing forbidden by lavvfull Authority: But the Common Prayer was forbidden
by Lords and Commons, Ergo, etc. 4. That which has been disused, and so is
antiquated, does not bind without an Act of Reviver: The Common Prayer has
been thus disused; and there is no such Act, etc. Ergo, etc. 5. Nothing can
thus bind, which is not of faith; for what is not of faith is sin: But thus to
do, is not of faith to some, Ergo, etc. 6. The Minister is not bound in
conscience to any thing, which will cause him to be suspected of lightness; and
so bring him and his Ministry into contempt with the people: But this will do
so, Ergo, etc. 7. He is not bound in his conscience to do that, against which
he has shevved his dislike, either by preaching, or conference with his
people: But some Ministers have done so; Therefore not lawful for them; or at
least they are not bound in conscience, etc. Ergo, etc 8. No man is bound in
conscience to any Act of imprudence, which may make him ridiculous to others:
But this may be such; if there should come from supreme authority, either a
prohibition or alteration of that service; But, etc. Ergo, etc. 9. No man is
bound in conscience to that, from which he has a dispensation from his lawful
Superior: But some have been so dispensed with, etc. Ergo, etc. 10. None are
bound to this, who was ordained without Oaths and Subscriptions: But some
Ministers have been so ordained, etc. Ergo, etc.
This is all you have in your paper, and all I think can be said by others
(which question not the thing in it self, as did the old Puritans, as
unlawful) for the Negative.

For the Affirmative, it is said, 1. Every man is bound to that which the Law
of the land still in force require of him: But the Law of the land still in
force requires the reading of the Common Prayer, Ergo, etc. 2. Every Minister
is bound to what the Law of the Church by her Canons and Constitutions requires
of him: But, etc. Ergo, etc. 3. Every Minister is bound in conscience to use
that kind of public worship (supposing neither restraint nor danger) which is
best for the peoples edification, and for God's glory: But this is incomparably
best for both these ends: except they will magnify their own prayers, before
and after Sermon, to be better; a fancy easily to be refelled, Ergo, etc. 4.
Every Minister is bound in conscience, and, by all lawful means to root out
the memory of the late rebellion in the State, and confusion in the Church: But
the using of the Common prayer does both these. 1. Against the Presbyterians,
who in Scotland began the War, because the Common Prayer was there used. 2.
Against the Brownist, Anabaptist, Quaker, etc. at home, whose greatest hope
was, by destroying both the doctrine and discipline of our Church, to bring in
their own distractions, etc. Ergo, etc.
5. Every Minister is bound in conscience to declare his innocence, i.e. That
he is not involved in the guilt of our former sin against God, the King, the
Church, the people of this Land, committed in the late troubles: But there is
scarce any better way for him thus to clear himself, then by the using the
Common Prayer, etc. Ergo, etc. 6. Every Minister is bound in conscience to that
which may best conduce to the Re-settlement of the Kingdom in peace: But the
use of the Common Prayer, supposing it lawful and good in it self, is such a
way of settlement, etc. Ergo, etc. 7. Every man is bound in Practical duties,
which are good and lawful services of God, to conform himself to the judgment
and practice of the supreme Magistrate, of the best learned in the Laws, of the
best-able and most Divines, of the greater and more intelligent part of the
Nobility, Gentry and people of the Nation, where he lives; else he cannot avoid
the note either of peevish singularity, or pride and schism: But the
Common Prayer is the practice of the King in his Court, of the Inns of Court,
the Univerfities, the best and ablest Divines in the Country, etc Ergo, etc.
8. Every Minister is bound in conscience to free himself, from all just
suspicion of Hypocrisy and dissimulation, when he declares his judgment to be
Episcopal: But the best or only way to prove his sincerity in this, is to use
Common Prayer: for he that declares for the one, i.e. Episcopacy, and will not
declare for, i.e. use the other, declares in a manner contradictions. He cannot
be English-Episcopall, that is not English-Liturgicall. 9. Every Minister is
bound in conscience to give his people all those Holy things, which God and the
Laws of the land, Civil and Ecclesiastical, make their due; and in such
manner, as is by both or either prescribed; especially when either the Whole,
or the Majour, or any considerable part of them shall require them at his hand,
else he is a defrauder, nay, sacrilegious: But the Commonprayer is an Holy
thing of God, by Law both divine and humane, made the peoples due; therefore,
supposing they require it, he is bound in conscience to give it them. 10. The
Minister is bound in conscience to go before the people in his congregation in
public worship: But without the Common Prayer, there is no public worship, in
the congregation: For reading of Scripture (which is very little in use amongst
them, they will not allow for worship; The singing of a Psalm out of the Book,
is accepted little better; the Sermon is not worship; the Minister's prayer is
his own, not the People's; and many times such, as few, or none, can say Amen
to. But in the Common Prayer, all sorts of worship are given to the Godhead;
and to every person singly and distinct; and such as the people know, and
wherein they can join, and whereunto they can, without scruple, say, Amen, etc.
Ergo, etc.


For the better understanding of the Truth, in this case, we must distinguish,
what we mean by Ministers: For though the word be plain of it self, yet these
times have made it equivocall.

1 Some are so only in Title, among the people where they live, but were never
ordained; these be Thieves, that came not in by the Door, mere Intruders, worse
then the Mendicant Friars amongst the Papists: for these, though they are not
ordained, have license from the Pope, who confirmed their orders.

2 Some were ordained by Presbytery: these also are no Ministers by the
Account of the Church of England, and must take their Ordination again from the
Bishops, if they mean to be accepted Ministers in this Church. Not that we
deny Ordination in Foreign parts, especially, in France, where no Bishops are,
nor can be, with the allowance of the Supreme Magistrate; but because our
Laws require, and have established that Ordination only. Therefore neither of
these two sorts of Ministers are concerned in the Case: but it is only of
Ministers legally Ordained.

2 We must remember, how the conscience is bound, and what is here meant
thereby.

The conscience is bound two manner of ways.

1 Primarily, Immediately, Directly, from God himself, and that either by some
Natural Law, written in the heart, or some Positive Law, written in the
Scripture; We understand it not in this sense; the Minister is not so bound.

2. The Conscience is bound, but Mediately, and Indirectly, when the Magistrate
commands any thing which is lawful: For the Subject's Conscience is bound to
the Law, though that Law do not bind it, being merely Humane.

It will not be amiss to add a third Obligation which may lie upon the
Conscience, by way of consequence. As when great Benefits have been received,
we are by them bound in Conscience. i.e. Equity and Reason to return thanks,
obedience, requitalls; and so some Expound Romans 13. Not only for fear, but
Conscience sake. It is taken in these two last senses in the Present case.

The third thing to be observed is, what is meant by reading the Common Prayer?
whether it be meant in whole, or in part, always, never missing, or sometimes
according to discretion, and occurring circumstances? And it is in this last
construction that here we take it: For it was in my memory once moved in
convocation, and answer was given, That the Church intended not to make it a
Drudgerie: If he that has no Assistant, should first read the first service
wholely, and afterward Preach, and then again read the second Service, it were
an heavy burden for the strongest Lungs.

The conclusion therefore is, that every Minister, legally Ordained, is bound
in conscience both mediately, and by way also of consequence, to read the
Common Prayer, at Discretion, if there be a Sermon; at other times wholly, as
it is prescribed: And the arguments to the contrary do not conclude.

To the first, Neither Proposition is true: Not the first; For the Minister,
and every good man, is bound to do what is his duty, whatsoever the event may
be to others. I must preach the Word, though it prove to some the savor of
death. I must Administer the Sacrament, though some Receiver may eat his own
Damnation. I must worship God in Public, as the Magistrate commands me,
though some receive hurt thereby. Good ought not to be overcome of Evil.

The second Proposition is not true, nor is it so set down, but with a Putamus.
We perhaps think otherwise. Besides, if it do more harm then good, it is per
Accidens; The hurt is not from any fault in the thing, but from the fault of
those that receive hurt by it. So Wine may be hurtful; and the Sunshine,
because of vapors and noisome weeds, exhaled by it from the earth, By the
Church also in this Argument, is meant Some, i.e. a party in the Church, and so
we have it in the second Argument, which invalidates the force of them.

To the second Argument we say, That a Minister is bound in conscience to do
that which may offend some godly men, if it be an offense taken, not given. If
a good thing be drawn by evil construction to be made a stumbling block, if the
thing be a public Duty, not a private Action, if thereupon some be offended at
the doing; Others, and they much to be preferred, for Number, Wisdom,
Authority, be offended at the not doing; if a Reason be rendered to take off the
offense, it cease to be Scandalum Pusillorum, and is become Scandalum
Pharisaeorum, and then our Savior's Rule takes place, Let them be offended.

To the third, It was never forbidden by lawful Authority. The Houses made an
Ordinance, that is no law. Ordinances of Parliament are of force, but sedente
Parlamento. Those that think otherwise of that Ordinance, and conclude it
presumption to go against it, are poor Ignaro's, and ought not to be humoured:
For it is a part of the inflaming the Nation to obey Ordinances as Laws: He
that humors them herein, is, if a knowing man, more guilty then they.

To the fourth: the Proposition is untrue. For though Time eats thorough all
things, yet not Laws; unless by a very long disusing. It Is not so here.
Besides, the disuse was by reason of force, or fear; such disuse does not
Antiquate Laws, but only a voluntary laying them aside.

To the Fifth: Faith in that of the Apostle, is nothing but a knowledge of the
thing I do, to be lawful: But to read the Common Prayers to be lawful,
appears 1 Because we have proved it to be a necessary duty. 2 Because it is not
inexpedient, in regard of the Minister, or People; but most expedient for both;
as the Arguments do show.


To the Sixth. The Minister does incur thereby no suspicion of Levitie; but
rather, he does Proclaim his Constancy, to the Law, to the Church, to his
first Principles. If a Woman ravished from her lawful Husband, for twelve
years, should take the first opportunity to run from the Ravisher, to her
first Husband, were she to be judged light? So, etc. They rather are to be
condemned of lightness, which have been carried from their first Principles,
by every wind, and now are ashamed to return.

To the seventh. The Proposition is so false, that the contrary is most true:
For Retractations of Errors, publicly broached, or privately instilled, are
as necessary to a Minister, as Repentance and Restitution are for Sinners: Else
the Minister pretends to Lord it over God's People, as if he had the Pope's
spirit of Infallibility. The Minister's humility, and sincerity, should make
him do in this; what the Pope's pride, and self ends, suffer him not to do.

To the Eighth. If a Prohibition, or Alteration of the Service, should come
from Authority: He were imprudent, and ridiculous, that should afterward use
it: But to use it now, whilst the law, binding thereto, is in force, were no
more ridiculous (supposing such Prohibition, or Alteration to be so, then to
observe, at present, any Law of the Land) which the State may think fit to
disanull. It would not be ridiculous; but only to men that are ridiculous.

To the Nineth. No lawful Superior has dispensed with any Minister; as is
pretended. I am sure, the King and Parliament have not: I am sure, a Bishop
cannot: He can only Connive, which is not to Dispense: Besides, is that Bishop
in being? Is he your Bishop? Will he own it? Personal Acts of this nature die,
and become Null with the Person. This is two thin a Fig-leafe.

To the Tenth. That ever Bishop S. ordained any Minister, without the Oaths of
Allegiance, and Supremacy, and that of Canonical Obedience; without
subscribing likewise to the Doctrine, and Discipline of the Church, Credat
Judaeus. If they please, the Bishop shall answer for himself: I will procure it.

You see how willing I am to serve you; and howmuch I rely upon your wisdom,
and fidelity, to betray these things into your hands. I pray remember, they
are not to be communicated by tran-scribed Copies. You know they must needs be
almost Extemporary Conceptions. I should be unwilling to father such Scribbles,
yet they were ever my destiny. Odi puerum, you say, and I, Scriptum praecocis
ingenii. Make what use you please of the thing, (if it be useful) but not of
my Name. There is little hope of prevailing, with those that are contrary
minded; unless Authority stip in: And there is as little in it, to confirm
you in your practice of going to another Church. This is another Case, viz.
Whether my own Minister, refusing to do his duty, as he ought, by Law, to do,
I may forsake him, and the Congregation? Is not this also against the Law of
the Church, and State? Is it not to countenance the Schismatics in their
Separating? May it not seem to disturb be Churches peace? What then is to be
done?

1. Treat with him in all gentleness, and meekness, in private: for rebuke
openly belongs to Authority.

2. If this succeed not, then according to Christ's rule, take others with you.
If that fail, Dic Ecclesiae. If this may not at present be had, desire his
leave to be of another Congregation, till a settlement, by order, be obtained.

I must have this Copy again; for I have no other. It Is fit I should have a
counterpart of all my deeds. But I hope, you will not think it worth your
keeping. I believe, you will prove a bad Conjurer, All your spells will not
send me to London, till the Convocation; if then: Against which, as to my own
particular, I will as heartily pray, as I do now resist your exerciseness.
Thanks be to God, there be store of my betters, much abler Penns, and Tongues;
and those also personally concerned. I am tired with this long Scribble; Read
it as well as you can, and Command to Love, and Serve you.

Yours

IN Answer to that part of this Letter, where the Reverend man caveats the
young man that consulted him, for going to another Church, where Common Prayer
was, from his own Parish Church, where it was not, The young man made this
Reply, That though indeed, by the Laws of the Realm, and the Church, neither
he, nor any man, seem to be bound to go out of their own Parish to Church, but
may, if they please, serve God in their own Families; yet any man, as he
conceived, might lawfully, and if with convenience he could, should do well, as
well for good example. as that he might the more regularly worship God in
public, to resort to some other Church, where lavvful Divine Service was.
And so much the Act for Uniformitie seems to exhort, if not, enjoyne, viz. That
every man, unless he has a lavvful Excuse, ought to be at his own
Parish Church, or at some other, where the Common prayer is.

He likewise certified, That he had treated with the Reputed Minister of his
own Parish, with all gentleness, and meekness, in private; and yet that he
thought, that Rebuke openly, by way of Fraternal Correption, and not as in an
Authoritative way, might belong to any private Christian: Only he must be
sure, to look well to it, That the Person he rebuked, were manifestly, and
notoriously, a Breaker of some Law, as he conceived, the Minister of the
Church of England, that did refuse to use the Common Prayer, to be. As for
example, any private Christian may rebuke one, that he sees filching a yard of
Ribbon or Tape, of a Rob-orchard; or in a thing more indifferent, for not
standing bare, or shevving due Reverence to the King, or any other of his
Superiors, and consequently, may, nay, ought much more to rebuke openly, with
the abovesaid Restriction, Him, that by his contempt or neglect of his
Sovereigns Injunctions, by Law, for the good and peace of the Church, should
merit it. He moreover represented to the Reverend man, that He, according to
Christ's Rule, before this intimation, had offered, nay pressed for a conference
with his Reputed pastor, with, and before two other Ministers; which was very
hardly yielded to, because one of them, though both learned and Pious, had been
a sequestered man, yet such were the unavoidable occasions of the said two
Ministers, that in diverse weeks, yea, some months together, they could not be
both at home at the same time, and so that conference as yet Uncompassed. For
the Dic Ecclesiae, that then in the most received sense, being then not to be
had, the young man did desire his Reputed Pastour's leave to be of another
congregation; at which he was silent, and that the young man took for consent,
and accordingly joined himself to another congregation about half a mile off;
though thither he could not pass in quiet without base reproaches, from the
Disciples of Him that would not perform Divine service, according to Law. So
that to such a sad pass were things brought, notwithstanding his Majesty's
return to the exercise of his Regal office amongst us, That those that would
serve God regularly, and according to the established Laws of the Church, and
Kingdom, were fain to sneak to it like Quakers, as if they only were the
Phanaticks, that obeyed authority, and those, The only or the best Christians
in most places, that did least conform themselves thereto.

The Copy of a Letter sent from an Associatour in the West, who, for a while,
boggled at the Common Prayer, but after was convinced of his Error, to another
of the same Association, not yet so convinced.
M. B.
UNderstanding, that as yet you do forbear to use the Common Prayer, and
presuming that you have not appeared against it, I have taken the boldness to
offer you these Reasons, why deferring any longer, that Work will not be
expedient for our Church, as the Case now stands.

1. The restraint being taken off, that hindered the exercise of that Service;
that it is expected we should obey the Law in force, appears by the Examples
both of the King and Parliament, and the new printing of the Service-books,
against the last Thanksgiving day, with some Prayers added for that season;
which I have seen.

2. Your Example retards others; which perhaps is discerned by others better
then by your self, they having therefore a greater esteem of you, because they
judge you vile in their own eyes.

3. The people do generally forsake those Churches where it is not used; and the
far greater part of the Nation are for it; which (supposing the lawfulness of
the thing) is reason enough. For if there be a necessity of offending one side,
in Licitis, the Rule is, we must respect the greater part in the first place;
but then, if those Licita, be also commanded by a Law in force, I see no Plea
can be made against them

4. It Is time, after all our high flights, to stoop to the weakness of the
people; the generality are so dull, that they cannot follow their Leaders, who
are too nimble for them. Therefore, the sheep do choose rather to follow the
lame Shepherd, whose pace is most suitable to their slowness, and apply
themselves to the plainest, and most homely prayers, as most agreeable to their
Capacities.

5. Stronger Christians, as they abound in gifts and parts, so they should with
charity, and for the weak brother's sake, to be content therewith.

6. We cannot well answer the Objection of Schism from the Papists, if we
depart from them, where there is no necessity: much less, if we renounce the
Common Prayer, because, as some allege, taken out of theirs. This Sophisme
used to make the people hate it, is indeed a solid reason to make men of
understanding love it, as Gold refined from dross: and implying a charitable
desire of Communion with them, wherein we may.

7. Since the laying aside of the Liturgy, and our Discipline, Popery has
gotten much ground; and many went over to the Romans, seeing our disagreement
in every thing, Creed, Prayers, Baptism, Catechism, Eucharist, Marriage,
Burial, Visitation of the sick, etc. All which is solved by the old way, and
Discipline: and while every one pursued his own way, Unavoidable was the
scandal.

8. Wise men have thought it the best way to preserve a State, to reduce it to
it is principles, by which it grew great (as Mr Herbert notes concerning
Catechism:) and this is that which is now doing in the Civil body,
proportionably so should it be in the Church, (for the Vine thrives and grows
with the Elm.) How shall all these Extravagancies be cured? but by resuming
that way, wherein we may (those things being removed that are justly offensive)
walk orderly, unanimously and soberly, and if the matter be well examined, more
profitably to the common Interest of the Church, in charity and union; and
though knowledge and gifts may have increased more by the new way, yet these
also are not hindered by the old.

9. Equity; and Reason, and the Law of Nations, do favor that in Being, till
orderly judgment of Decision be given against it: Are we not bound then to
suspend our Reasons, inducing us to think hardly of the Liturgy, specially if
not demonstrative: Or else we trouble the Church without necessity: But it is
objected, that it has been condemned already by the most godly and zealous,
etc. Ans. It was never condemned in an orderly way. A Bias of Partiality was
apparent, in that they never admitted them to consultation who stood for it.

10. All exceptions against our Liturgy, must either be against a Set-form in
general, or against This form. To the first, I answer, The special sacerdotal
Benediction, and decimal profession, were delivered, in an express form; and
the Psalms of David, of which St. Jerome has observed four to be entitled
prayers, were standing parts of the Jewish Liturgy. The 70. Disciples were all
to use one short Benediction, when sent to preach the Gospel. Luke the 10. And
Peter concludes almost all his Epistles with one setforme. Justine Martyr, one
of the eldest Sons of the Church, mentions (...) And the same we have in
Tertullian, who has left us heads of prayer for their Emperors, vitam
prolixam, domum tutam, senatum fidelem, etc. And Constantine had his (...),
composed with study. (...), says Eusebius. which is, as I conceive, He duly said
his Set and Appointed prayers with his household.

As for this form, that our Church uses, our Hooker has long since at large
asserted it, with such arguments, as may be enough to caution a moderate and
peaceable man, to be very tender, and wary, how he opposes his Private, to the
Public judgment of the Church, though he be not fully satisfied in every
particular: Add to this, that our Liturgy, had the approbation of Calvin,
whose judgment in other things is of very great weight with us: Worthy Sir,
presuming on your goodness, I have made bold to offer these Reasons to you,
which if they prevail not with you, yet may be a Testimony of my observance,
and respects to you.

July the 20. 1660. Your unworthy fellow laborer in the Ministry. C M.
To this Letter, the over-grave Gentleman gave only this Answer, to the
Endighter of it, though, no whit inferior to him in age, degree, or standing
in University, but his superior in all those respects, but very magisterially
thus, or very near to this purpose, and in as fevv words. Sir, I thank you for
your Letter, but there were some mistakes in it. But where, or how, his
seraphicalnesse would not vouchsafe to show.



Upon the Communicating the abovesaid Letter, and some other Papers to that
Reverend Person, who stated the Case before recited, was returned this brief
Answer following.
Sir,
YOu must not be offended, if I answer your Folio in this Decimo sexto. I have
perused your Chartar, your counsels, opinion, your Scholars gloss upon it; my
judgment is in brief; Go on, and prosper. To me the Chartar is express, the
counsels opinion clear for you; and many cases in the printed Book come home:
and I observe all the Decisions are more then ordinarily favorable to your
pious use. I cannot believe (whatsoever is pretended to the contrary) but that
your Governors will be found to stand in a double capacity. 1. As Governors.
2. As Feoffees, and so questionable, otherwise they might without fear, either
keep all to themselves, or sell the Lands to others, without control.

I thank you for your Letter news, though nothing in them comes up to my
expectation. Bishops, Deans, Prebends, are settled, but no Vote for Church
Lands. Will they leave them to the Law? When they did not the King. And will
not, as it seems by Coll. Kings Petition, leave to the Law, those that have
sequestered Ministers; nor do sequestered Gentlemen return to their Estates by
Law. I cannot reconcile this

That Dr. W. should be a Bishop, is not beyond my expectation, nor that he
gives you so fair an invitation: only I think that a good Parsonage in
England, is better then a Deanery in Ireland. I am glad to hear that Dr. H. is
of Sarum; but stand at gaze to hear that my ancient Friend Dr. Sb. shall be of
Canterbury. I attribute it to Dr. St. They were ex Intimis. I am glad Mr. M.
comes off, and labors to draw after him Arietem gregis; but, I believe, in
vain: For the man, I believe, is now dyed in grain, and thinks the whole
service unlawful; though he pretend disuse, dispensation, offense, etc. Mr. M.
does court him handsomely, with high flights, and stooping, etc. But I hope, he
means, Ironically. All their high flights being like those of the Swallows in
foggy weather, which are as low as the Earth it self, when they hunt for flies.
I wish he had managed his Argument of Schisms in another way. He says from
the Church of Rome, against which perhaps Mr. B. thinks it impossible to be a
Schismatic. But I would have said, from the Church of England. Nor do I
commend his argument from the growing of Popery; which, I believe, was not
from the disuse of the Service, but from abolishing Bishops and the Discipline,
and a world of learned men with them. And to conclude, notvvithstanding all
your Magical malice, I am sure to be safe till October: In the while, if you
think any thing considerable, write to

Your affectionate Friend
Your Papers are in your Chartar.



TO Conclude these Discourses, 'tvvill not be amiss to add one seasonable
Exhortation, to all such as are ill-affected to the old Government of the
Church, by Bishops, and the Public Divine Service, by the Liturgy, that are
not contented to worship God, and hear his holy Writ, read, expounded, or
preached, at the Canonical hours in Churches; and to pray, and read the Bible
at due times in their own Families, besides their Closet or private Devotions,
and occasional good Conferences, that they may find opportunities for, as they
ride, or walk, or otherwise regularly converse with others, as they be going
about their other lawful occasions, but must needs have, and by no Prohibition
of the Laws of the Realm, and the Church, will forbear their riotous meetings,
unlawful Assemblies and Conventicles, in and by which principally, the late
horrid Rebellion was hatched.

Let them but seriously reflect upon the past troubles and the first Rise of
them; and make impartial inquiry, whether or no all those, and only those,
that were for such Conventicles, and Despisers of the Church Government and
Liturgy, were not those that made up the first Army, that Rebelled against
the King, Robbed Churches, Seized on other men's estates, and out of whom are
spawned all the Phanaticks of latter days.

They seriously considered, and found true, which will easily be, if in every
Town or Parish a slight kenne be taken, one would think it sufficient to make
every sober minded person to repent heartily, if he be guilty in this kind, and
after so much mercy from so gracious a Prince, to beware how he be found
faulty, by countenancing or frequenting such unlawful Assemblies, or
Conventicles: After so much mercy, I say, of so gracious a Prince, who, as a
Rank Phancie did express it the other day, has in some sense been more
merciful, then God Almighty has ever given us hope he will be, toward those
that trespass against him. For God never did, nor ever will forgive any that
repent not, and make no restitution. But his Majesty has forgiven hundreds,
nay, thousands, I doubt, millions, that never truly repented of their trespass
against Him, and his Father, of blessed memory; and for ought that yet appears,
intend no restitution. 'T were to be wished they would consult their beloved Mr.
Calvin, Mr. Perkins etc. and then answer this Question, viz. Whether they be
not bound in Conscience to make Restitution to those they have wronged, to
their utmost ability, if ever they hope for Heaven, notwithstanding the Kings
Act of Oblivion, which absolves them only in Foro Humano, not in Foro
Conscientiae.

But it is too too Apparent, how far from any such Act as this, nay, how
Diabolically malicious some Non-conformists and Phanaticks be, if they cannot
compass their irregular designs, by a late Horrid slander, that an unworthy,
more then Treble Turn-coat wretch, the other day forged against the Reverend
Father in God, the Bishop of Bath and Wells; not sticking to brand him, in the
Audience of one of the most eminent persons in the Nation, for an old Leacher
or Goat, as the vile foul-mouth expressed it, affirming, That the good old
Father, who is now in his fourscorth year, and even bowed together with age,
was a most insatiate effeminate person, and had lately married a young wench of
one or two and twenty, and yet was not satisfied with her, but neighed after
other women. Now all this Hellish Aspersion was raised upon no other ground,
but because the said vile wretch, a vertiginous Colonel forsooth, of the worst
stamp; could not wrest out of the said Reverend Bishops hands, one of the best
Manors, belonging to the Sea of Bath and Wells. But the Bishop being, as was
said, now in his eightieth year; and his second wife, whom he married about
four or five years since, for a Nurse and Comfort in his disconsolate
condition, being a very grave Matron of sixty years of Age; what spark of
Probability, or ground for such a base slander there could be, let all candid
Christians judge, to whom the Reverend Father does appeal; and the same Father
is ready to take an Oath, with such an Awful Execration, for his purgation in
that particular, that his slanderers dare not follow him therein. Yet what if
an Ancient Bishop or Churchman had indeed taken a young Abishag in the way of
Matrimony, to comfort and cherish him in his old age; as David did, without it,
had it been such an abominable thing? The truth is, too many of our English
Nobility and Gentry, as well as the Commonaltie, do speak too vilely of Gods
Ordinance, Matrimony, especially in the Clergy, as if they did more then
incline to Popery in that point; And some coy Ladies, that think it a fine
thing to have a spruce Chaplain to vvait upon them, in a little higher Sphere
then a Serving-man, do even vomit to hear of the marriage of a bavvdy Priest,
as they most unchristianly speak, as if they honored neither God, nor his
Christ, so much as Ethnicks honored their false gods, and their Priests for
their sakes. How frequent is it with the most, to make a scorn in all
companies of a Minister of the Gospel, by calling him Parson, Parson, at every
turn, not in Respect, but in base contempt. Which word has too long, and yet
does continue, to be in as great derision, as of late the name of King, Duke,
Earl, Lord, or Bishop. And what mocks and flouts are daily, and hourly, cast
at the Regular Clergy, as they pass in the streets, and even in some of the
most Eminent Noble Families in and about London, it is a shame to hear and see.
And if his Majesty, and other Noble Personages, do not speedily declare in
their Families, and elsewhere, their detestation of such scorns, and give open
countenance to those that are set apart for God's Service, as well as to that
Worship by Common prayer, established by Law, it is to be feared, that all our
old Animosities will ferment to that height, that 'twill be too late to
suppress them.

'Twas some few days ago spoken in no less a family, then the Lord
Generall's, by a Majors wife, who may be supposed to speak the sense of her
husband, and of diverse others of that gang, that the Kings Quire, were no
better then a company of Fiddlers, and that she hoped to live to see all such
superstitious fooleries, pulled down with a vengeance, and to have those that
love to go in long Garments, and yet were indeed Wolves in Sheeps clothing, to
bestript of their formalities, and that she knew there were thousands, nay,
millions in the three Nations of her mind. The reason why this is here
inserted, is, that if possible, some notice of such seditious spirits may come
to his Majesty's, and the Lord General's ears, and be speedily checked.

That slander lately raised against the Bishop of Bath and Wells, is much like
that other of old forged, and in all Pulpits of the Non-conformists most
impudently, as gross a lie as it is, proclaimed, to make him, and that whole
order odious, viz. That he should say, that he thanked God, he had left never a
Lecturer in his whole Diocese. Whereas there is not a Person of any
Intelligence, that lived in that Diocese, but knows, that there were
continually, as learned Lectures of Reverend men, with the approbation of the
said Bishop, in the said Diocese, as in any other. Indeed that prudent
Governor of the Church, was, and is, somewhat of Sir Henry Wootton's, or
rather of Lipsius his opinion, that not only Disputandi, but also Praedicandi
pruritus fit Ecclesiae scabies; and therefore did his endeavor to suppress,
and hinder the placing of single Lecturers in Cities, Towns, and Villages, by
any faction of the people, without, and against the good liking of the lawful
Rector, or Incumbent. And how many are there, that were the greatest followers,
and admirers, of such single factious Lecturers, that are now convinced, that
they were the bellows, that blew up the flame, that has so long wasted both
Church, and State. And indeed such is imprudence, and passion, of many
Preachers, that wise men conceive Sir Francis Bacon's proposal, not without
very good reason; and that it would tend more to the Churches peace, and the
good of souls, if there were one complete body of wholesome Homilies, or
Sermons, one, or two, for every Lord's day, and other Festivalls thorowout the
whole year; composed, or collected, by the most learned, and pious of our
Church, and set out by Authority to be read to the people, in stead of so many
Crude Rhapsodies; as are many times through haste, or want of learning, and
prudence, obtruded on them. And that only some few that are known to be
prudent, and of a right sober, and peaceable temper, upon very special
occasions, or emergencies, should be allowed to compose Prayers, or Sermons, of
their own; and those likewise to be well scanned by some in Authority, before
they be pronounced in public. The very Poets, and Orators, among the ancient
Ethnicks, took this care, before they did dare to commit any thing to public
view, or audience, not only for the propriety, and purity of the words, and
phrase, but also for the soliditie, and pertinencie's sake, of what they
penned, as the Illustrious Lipsius, and since him, the learned Vossius show in
their treatises de Recitatione veterum. And shall Heathens be more tender of
their credits, then we Christians of the peace of the Church, and of Charity?

I know nothing has conduced so much to the bringing us into those late horrid
confusions, and so likely to hurry us back again into them, as that overweening
Enthusiasticall opinion, which the common people have got among them, viz. That
when a man is got up into the Pulpit, especially, if he make use of no Notes,
he has a special, extraordinary inspiration, not much short of, if not the
very same, with that of the old Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles; and that
God puts even the words, and phrases, into his mind, and mouth, and that what
he there prays, and preaches, as they call it, is the very word of God, far
transcending that which is read in the Pew below. The occasion, or cause rather
of this opinion among people, is, that this, and the like prefaces, are
ordinarily recited in the Pulpit, never in the Pew, viz. Hearken to the word of
God, as you shall find it written, etc. Or, hearken to the good word of God,
as it shall be delivered to you, upon these words, etc. Or, give good heed, or
attention, to the whole mind of God, as it shall be exhibited from these
words, etc. Whereas alas, too too often, to the great grief of sober minded
Christians, some are so far from giving the mind of God, that they do not
understand the mind of learned men, upon those places they undertake to handle.

What if a man should say, that since the death of the Prophets, Evangelists,
and Apostles, there is no preaching at all, properly, and strictly so called?
For they were the only proper (...) i.e. Heralds, Proclaimers, Predicatours,
or, Ambassadors, that brought the sacred Messages to us immediately from God;
and the Ministers of the Gospel now are bound up to their Canon, may not add
or diminish one Iota; and therefore are rather Expositours, then Preachers,
unless it be in a very large, and improper sense.

What if a man should say, that the expounding of any place of Scripture, must
be done in the same way, and by the same helps, that a Master, or Usher in a
School, uses in the exposition of Isocrates his Paraenesis, or Tullie's
Offices, or any other Classical Author.

What if a man should say, that public praying, or preaching in a large sense,
ex tempore, if any be so profanely rash and sinful, as so to do, (for some
that are thought by the Deluded people so to do, do nothing less; but do make
as many wry mouths and close-stool faces in private, to prepare those
crudities, as they do in squeezing them out in public) is no more then for a
schoolboy to make a rude Theme, Oration, or Verse ex tempore. It Is true
indeed, that praying and preaching, still I mean in the larger sense, are Acts
conversant about sacred things, and yet are no more properly gifts, then any of
the liberal sciences. God's good blessing no doubt does go along with them,
where they are soberly and Regularly used, in their kind; and so it does with
a christian scholar or student in his other learning, in it is kind: And any
one in the Pulpit, if he has not read much, and studied hard before hand, may
as soon mistake the true sense of a place of Scripture, or faulter in his
prayer, as a schoolmaster or scholar at the Desk or Table, if they be not
circumspect, in expounding, construing, or parsing an Author, or composing and
pronouncing, Theme, Verse or Oration.

And this I take to be correspondent to the mind of that Illustrious light of
our Church, Doctor Hammond, in his preface to his precious Annotations upon the
New Testament, and of all the most pious and learned Churchmen of our Nation:
who are content with that Honor which God has given them, by an ordinary
call, and his ordinary Assistance, without desiring to boy upthemselves in the
esteem of the Vulgar, by a Pretense to such Mountebank Enthusiasmes, as others
boast of.

And for the Specialties or particular Bills, that are put up in some of our
Churches, it were well if they were a little better considered of, and whither
they tend. As for example, if a Lace-maker, or Button-seller, has occasion to
go to a Fair or Market, at thirty o forty miles distance, or to place a Boy
to School, or an Apprentice, the Prayers of the greatest Congregations are
olemnly desired for a blessing upon the Journey and Under taking. It Is true,
God's Providence is over the meanest thing, and the lowest Actions of men, as
over the very Sparrows, and the very hairs of our heads; and yet if a Sparrow,
that one loves, should be sick, or ones hair begin to fall off, were it fit to
put up a particular, public, solemn prayer in a Church for them.

What will wise men say to this Bill, viz. A Servant that is fallen into a
profane Family, desires the Prayers of this Congregation, that God would be
peased in mercy, by his Providence, to find out a way to remove him out of
that Family. Whither, I pray, tends this, but to faction and sedition in
Families, as well as in the Church and State? One would have thought, if it had
been fit at all, that such a thing should be put up in a Bill for public
Prayer, it should rather have been thus, viz. A Servant that is fallen into a
profane Family, desires the prayers of this Congregation, that God would give
him patience to continue there, and be a blessing to that Family, as Joseph
was to Potiphar's, and Instrumental for God's glory, by his good example.

But should we tell of all the strange Extravagancies of some men, in their
praying, preaching, thanksgivings and fastings, as how one desires God to make
the King truly a Defender of the Faith; as if it were not his legal Title, and
an Injunction of both Houses, that he should be prayed for as Defender of the
Faith, truly Ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic, and in all Causes, and over
all Persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, in his Majesty's Realms and
Dominions, Supreme Head and Governor. But some men fondly think, if his
Majesty be not for Presbytery or Independencie, against Bishops and
Common Prayer, he cannot be truly a Defender of the Faith. Another appoints a
public Fast of his private phancie; and prays, that God would humble the
Nation for not sticking close to the Covenant, for starting aside from the
Covenant, for not Adhering to the Covenant, in it is principal and main ends and
intentions. Another begs God to undermine and pull down the great ones in the
Nation, that are combining against God and Jesus Christ, and the Power of
Godliness in the Nation, and that he would set up his Zerubbabels again in the
Nation. Another preaches, that a true Minister of the Gospel must use
Distraction in his preaching, and not such a kind of general preaching, as was
now coming up in the Nation, which would break no bones, and convert no souls.
Has his Majesty been so gracious, as to forgive so much; and to declare for a
warning his Resolvednesse to use all rigor, and severity, for the future,
against all such, as by word, or deed, shall do any thing contrary to the
Government, which comprehends as well that in the Church, as that in the State;
and yet dare these Audacious Incendiaries still go on, under a pretense of zeal
for God's glory, to blow the Trumpet of Sedition, and another Rebellion? Let
them take heed, that the hand of God, and Justice do not overtake them, e're
they be aware, as it has some of their wicked crew.

The Reader is desired to take notice, that whereas there is a scandalous story
grassant in dishonor to the Reverend Bishops, and Doctors of our Church, viz.
That when the first news of the Parliament's due submission to, and close with
his Majesty's Gracious declaration, was brought to the Hague; His Majesty
should call upon a Bishop or Doctor then present, in these, or such like
words. Come Doctor, since it has pleased God, to be so Gracious to me, and my
people, let Us immediately give God solemn thanks here, while the Commissioners
be present. At which the Bishop, or Doctor, was much abashed, as the story
runs, and making shift for a Common Prayer Book, did tumble it, and fumble it a
long time, for some form, or forms, to serve the particular occasion; but
after long ado, his Majesty, with some passion said, Why, cannot you give God
thanks upon such an eminent occasion, without your Book? To which the Bishop,
or Doctor replied, may it please your Majesty, I desire not to be wiser then
the Church At which, His Majesty hastily snatched the Book from him, laid it
under his own Arms, and gave God thanks ex tempore, in an admirable manner.
This is the story; but upon good inquiry, and discourse with sundry Persons
then present, it appears to be indeed but a story; and if it be otherwise, let
any of that gang disprove it, if he can, in the next Pamphlet, or Journall.
Doctor Earl, and Doctor George Hall, are Persons fide digni, and were
present, all the while the Commissioners were delivering their Message to the
King; and they have been talked with, and averr the contrary. And no question,
His Majesty, if he be humbly asked, will make good what they averr.

Well fare Mr. Faireclough of Wells in Somersett, who has the Knack of
praying Ex tempore, as well as the best of them, and has gone for a
Presbyterian, that at a friendly Conference with some Divines in Dorsetshire;
ingenuously confessed, That he never prayed so heartily in his life, as at
Cambridge by the Common Prayer. And that rather then there should be another
such a Confusion in Church or State, he could wish all the Presbyterians and
Independents in England banished.

FINIS.

