AN ANSWER TO THE NEW MOTIONS: OR, A serious and brief Discussion of certain
MOTIONS now in question.

printer's device of Robert Bostock, featuring a boy with wings on one wrist,
and in the other hand a weight (McKerrow 393) MOLLIA CVM DVRIS


LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostook, 1641.

AN ANSWER TO THE New Motions.
The first Demand.
Whether the Lord Jesus Christ has by his last Will and Testament, given unto,
and set in his Church sufficient Ordinary Offices, with their Calling, Works,
and Maintenance, for the Administration of his holy things; and for the
sufficient ordinary instruction, guidance, and service of his Church, unto the
end of the World, or no?

Answer.
I Had rather have answered your Reasons, than these your bare Interrogatories;
yet, because you have so proposed them, I thought good thus briefly to run
over them, hoping that if you have the spirit of humility, you will submit to
the truth. To this first, therefore I answer, That the Lord Jesus Christ has
in his New Testament, instituted perpetual Offices in his Church, and all
their Callings, works, and Maintenance: that is, The substance of all these,
is there appointed perpetual: but the appendant Circumstances are variable, as
time and persons (in the Churches judgment) may best require. For the Tree
does stand when the leaves do change; and a man is the same, though his
apparel be varied. These outward fashions are so variable, that herein
National Churches may differ one from another: yea, the Apostles altered
diverse such things themselves: For first, They distributed the goods of the
Church to the poor; and when land was sold, the money was brought to their
feet, and they distributed to every man according to his necessity, Act. 4.35.
Yet afterward, upon occasion, it fell out that they laid this charge from
themselves upon Deacons, Act. 6. For so the poor be cared for, it is not so
material by whom it is done. Again, They instituted the Love Feasts to be
used with the Lords Supper, Act. 2.46. Yet S. Paul did again abrogate them at
Corinth. 1 Cor. 11. And for that which is in the beginning of that Chapter,
that women shall come and pray in public, is perpetual; but that they should
come veiled, which the Apostle there urges as then fitting, is now no where
thought necessary. Now then, the substance of Calling, Offices, Works, and
Maintenance, of the Ministry remaining; the outward manner of these things may
vary, so that, according to the Apostles rule, All things be done decently and
in order.

The second Demand.
Whether the Offices of Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons, and Helpers, be
those very Offices appointed by Christ in his Testament as aforesaid; Or,
Whether the present Ecclesiastical Offices of Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes,
Sub-deanes, Prebendaries, Chancellours, Priests, Deacons (or halfe-Priests)
Archdeacons, Commissaries, Officialls, Registers, Proctors, Apparitors,
Parsons, Vicars, Curats, Stipendiaries, Vagrant-Preachers, Chaplains or
House-Priests, Canons, Petty Canons, Chanters, Quoristers, Organists,
Churchwardens, Sides-men, and the rest, now had in these Cathedral and
Parochial Assemblies, be those Offices appointed by Christ in his Testament,
or not?

Answer.
IT being granted, That Christ has instituted perpetual Offices; then you
ask, whether your fivefold Orders of Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons, and
Helpers; or our Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, etc. be those?

For yours first, I say, that Pastors and Teachers are indeed instituted by
Christ in his Church perpetual; but they are no more yours than ours, we have
them as well as you; for, to teach and feed the flock, is the work of our
Ministers, and the end of their Calling. Herein you differ from us, that you
make a necessary and perpetual difference of these two, as though they were
distinct Offices; whereas the Apostle Epes. 4. reckons them only as Gifts, he
has given gifts unto men; and couples those two together, not dis-junctively
as the rest; Some Pastors and Teachers. One Minister may and ought to do both
these, Exhort and Teach, as is used in our Church. And the practice of the
Apostles was so, as appears in all their Sermons written in the Acts. Indeed
where the Auditory does only require instruction, there exhorting may be
omitted; as use the Divinity Lectures in Schools: and such an one was Origin.
But otherwise the same Minister is to do both by the very Apostles practice.
And were it not to make up your Ruling-Presbytery with variety, you your selves
would have no more.

And for your third Office of Elders, if rightly understood, it was founded in
the Scriptures; but not as you take it: for, you make it a third degree and
office from the former, and that it should signify a Lay-Governour, who should
not meddle with the Word or Sacraments, but only sit among the Pastors and
Doctors to Govern; Such an one has no foundation in the Word of God: But
rightly understood, it has; and is the name of a Minister of Jesus Christ, in
the New Testament. For he is called a Pastor and Teacher, for the duties of his
Ministry; and (...) for his dignity in the Church; We translate it Elders,
for difference sake, because in English Aaron and his Stock are translated,
Priests; Otherwise Priest is the fittest Translation for (...), according to
the very letters, which Latin, Italian, French, and others have imitated.

Show us now then any where Lay-Priests founded in the New Testament, as we can
show your Presbyters, Priests, Elders (call them what you will, for they all
speak the same order) being every where taken for the Ministers of the Word.
Act. 10. Such Priests or Elders, S. Paul sent for, and tells them of their
charge which the Holy Ghost had set them to, to feed the slock; such he
teaches Titus to ordain Chap. 2. and calls them there also by another name:
Such does S. Peter admonish, 1. Pet. 5.1. The Prosbyters or Elders amongst you,
I exhort, which am a Co-Presbyter, etc. We may not make so many Offices of the
Ministers, as he has several Names; for then shall we make more than you
have or would make; seeing he is named not only Pastor, Doctor, Elder or
Priest, but also Bishop, Overseer, Steward, Messenger, Ambassador, Deacon, and
such like.

Thus hitherto you have not found three distinct Offices of Pastor, Doctor,
Eldor, but three Names of one and the same Office, which is the Minister of the
Word.

For Deacons, their office of distributing to the poor, is not so necessary
for all times (for which only use you would have them perpetual) for as much
as they were wanting in the time of Christ, for then Judas, one of the twelve,
bare the bag, and gave to the poor. Afterward the Apostles themselves did
this, when those that sold their lands for the poores releife, brought it to
their feet, and they distributed as every one had need, Acts 4.35. But when the
labors of preaching, and the multitude of poor increased, the Apostles laid
that care upon seven chosen men, Act. 6. So did they also ordain in other
Churches, for yet the Magistrate was enemy to the faith, and would not either
help the Minister, or succor the poor, because they were Christians.
Therefore during the time of persecution, there was especial need of those
men: such an one was S. Laurence the broild Martyr at Rome by the Heathen
Persecutors: But when the Magistrate changed, and by good laws provided for
the Ministers Maintenance, and the releife of the poor, then was there no need
at all of this office; no more than there is of Widows, who were likewise then
in use, but now are ceased in all Churches; albeit there be rules for their
election in the Scriptures, as there is for Deacons, 1 Timothy 5.9, 10. And
therefore this is no perpetual Office.

Your Helpers, the last office that you reckon up, can help you but little.
They are but once named in the Scriptures (as I take it) 2 Cor. 12.28. and
there not called Helpers, but Helpings, Opitulationes: But if (by Metonimy)
that be all one, yet cannot they be several from the former, and perpetual;
for if they helped per Dona sanationum, by gift of healing, then they are
ceased: or if by distribution, then were they Widows or Deacons, and no
several Offices.

And thus of your five Officers; the three first are but one Office of the
Minister; and the two later Temporary: so far are you short of your five
distinct and perpetual Offices.

The second part of your Interrogatory is concerning the Ecclesiastical State
of Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Sub-deanes, etc.

In this enumeration you study to be exact, and to reckon up every thread; by
which curious diligence you have thrust in a number that are no Ecclesiastical
Callings at all; and again, reckoned up some who are rather yours than ours,
Stipendiaries, Vagrant-Preachers, House-Priests, and the like.

But to answer to that which is material in your Catalogue; I say, that in the
new Testament is founded a Ministry, which may differ in their Degrees, and
may differ in their Maintenance; to which two places may be referred all the
Titles here set down which are Ecclesiastical.

For the first, though the Ministry it self be one, yet may it admit diverse
degrees. In the old Testament, Aaron and his succession was above the other
Priests; and the Priests above the Levites: Among the Prophets some ruled, as
Samuel; some obeyed, as the Children of the Prophets; and the moral hereof of
Ruling and Obeying is not Ceremonial. In the New Testament, Christ made some
Apostles, as the Twelve; some Disciples, as the seaventy two. And the Apostle
S. Paul teaches us, that Christ his Church must be like a Natural Body,
wherein some are Eyes, some Hands, some Feet.

The Degrees that I mean are Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.

For Priests or Elders you can make no question, they are in terminis frequent
in the Text. For Deacons no doubt those seven Act. 6. did with the other
charge assume also the Ministry from the Apostles Ordination. For first they
had the imposition of the Apostles hands with prayer. Secondly, Stephen, one of
them, preached and did miracles. Thirdly, Philip preached, and (that which is
Ministerial) baptized. Fourthly, the Apostle wills that the Deacons hold
Mysterium fidei, the mystery of faith, 1 Timothy 3.9. which signifies the
substance of the Gospel preached, in S. Paul's manner of speaking. Fifthly, the
Apostle adds, that he that discharges his Deaconship well, gets to himself
a good degree. And what can be more reasonable, than that there should be an
orderly Initiation or Probatiorship into the Ministry. Elisha held water to
Elias his hands before he was Prophet in his stead. The Apostles were witnesses
of Christ's Temptations before they were sent. S. Paul had Barnabas, and S. John
had Mark, for their Minister, Act. 13.5. even to the work. Such were those
Brethren or some of them that went with S. Peter to Cornelius, to whom he
commanded, that they should be baptized, Act. 10. Such attended on S. Paul to
Corinth, and baptized, for he himself baptized but one household, 1 Cor. 1.
these you scornefully term halfe-Priests.

For the superiority of Bishops, not only the Apostles had it, but they also
whom they constituted Bishops, as Timothy at Ephesus, and Titus in Creet, to
redress things amiss, and to ordain Ministers. Yea still this Authority was
propagated and continued in the Churches, Apoc. 1. and 3. to the Angel of the
Churches. There were many Elders or Ministers in every Church; Antipas,
Nicholas, and those who hated and preached against his doctrine; yet one is the
Angel there still: As more largely it appears at Ephesus, where surely was
more than one that were Ministers, yet but one Angel. Yea S. Paul allows
Timothy a Court Ecclesiastical, (viz.) to receive accusations, and examine
Witnesses; for thus he says, 1 Timothy 5.19. Receive no accusation against an
Elder, under two or three witnesses. The like to Titus, 3.19. Avoid an
heritique (out of the Church) after once or twice solemn admonition.

Now then can you deny to Superiors and Governors their necessary Deputies,
servants, and substitutes? nay these are necessary even to the meanest, though
they be no Ecclesiastical persons, nor have to do in the Ministry. For you
know the Gibeonites served for some necessary use in the Tabernacle, to draw
water, and to cleave wood, Jos. 9.23. But if any of these play Gehazi, it is
Elisha's charge to mark him with Leaprosie. All antiquity speaks of these three
degrees of the Ministry; the Canons called the Apostles, the Ancient Fathers,
and the best Counsels do declare and justify them.

The other part, the inequality of Maintenance is a sequel of the former; for
greater degree requires greater supportance. And the Scripture says the same
thing. S. Paul 1 Cor. 9.7. resembles the Ministers Maintenance to the stipend
of Warfare, where every man has wages according to his place. And verse 13. to
those that wrought about the Altar, where some had prerogative above the rest.
Yea the same Apostle does tell Timothy so much, 1 Timothy 5.17. The Elders that
rule well, are worthy of double honor. Where he means by double honor,
larger Maintenance, as (besides the consent of the best Interpreters) the
Apostle himself explaines it to be meant of Maintenance, bringing the same
place which before 1 Cor. 9. he cited for the Ministers Maintenance, out of
Moses saying, Thou shall not muzzle the Ox that treads out the Corn. And
which Christ to the same purpose proverbially used in the Gospel, namely, the
Labourer is worthy of his hire. All which is plain, that double honor is
interpreted double Maintenance, by the Illative, for the Scripture says. Thus
then you may see that our Ecclesiastical State, in diversity of Degrees and
Maintenance, is more consonant to Gods word, than your device of sundry names,
without persons or Perpetuities.

The third Demand.
Whether the calling and entrance into these Ecclesiastical Offices last
aforesaid, their Administration and Maintenance now had, and retained in the
Church of England, be the manner of Calling, Administration, and Maintenance
which Christ has appointed for the Offices of his Church above named?

Answer.
IN this Third you demand, whether our Calling into the Ministry, etc. be
those which Christ appointed. It is easy to demand much; you should rather
have showed your particular dislikes.

But I answer, that they are. Our Calling has that Ordination which the
Apostles used, and S. Paul appointed Timothy and Titus to use, viz. by the
imposition of the Bishops hands, and of the other Ministers that are present at
that action; for they also lay on their hands juxta manum Episcopi, by the
Bishops hand, according to the ancient Canons. And before this, we have the
election and approbation of the people, or of the chief of them, whereby we
are commended to the Bishop, as you may know by the Law of Patrons, and of
Justices, and of Neighbour-Ministers, whose commendations are necessary before
any be made Minister, or admitted to any place in the Church.

For our Administration, it is of Gods Word, and of the two holy Sacraments,
and of public Prayer; all which the Minister ought to do. Other
Administration have we none, unless you mean Marrying and Burying, which
perhaps you mislike that the Minister should do them; but why I know not. For
Marrying, God himself first acted it, and brought Eve to Adam, Genesis 2. And
Christ said after of all Marriages, Quos Deus conjunxit, etc. Those whom God
has joined together, etc. Who then fitter to do this in the place of God, and
in his name, than he that is his Messenger, and in his stead?

For Burial, it is the field and Seminary of the Resurrection, and who fitter
for sowing than he that is Gods Sower?

And for our Maintenance, it is by Tithes better than yours by Alms: for it
was so before the Law, and under the Law, and under the Gospel, as soon as the
Magistrate was Christian. And your Alms only used in time of Persecution,
when no better could be had. For where the Ministry shall have no Maintenance,
but what must be at the mercy of his Auditory, how apt is he to smooth,
humor, and subscribe to such (and wave their darling and pleasing sins) in
whose power it is to deny him sustenance? were there no other reason for the
independency of his Maintenance.

The fourth Demand.
Whether the Sacraments, being Seals of righteousness, which is by Faith, may
be administered to any other than to the faithful and their seed; or in any
other manner and ministry, than is prescribed by Jesus Christ? And whether
they be not otherwise administered in the Cathedral and Parochial Assemblies
at this day in England, or no?

Answer.
THe Sacraments, the Seals of righteousness, are only to be given to the
faithful and to their seed, (or to such as seem to be faithful, as Judas,
Simon Magus, Demas, and such like) and to no other are they given in the Church
of England; for if any be profane, un-holy, or notoriously wicked, the
Minister is by Law to repel them. Neither are they given with us in any other
Ministry, than Christ has appointed; unless you you mean the Baptizing by
Midwives, which in our Church is not approved, nor now any where practiced.

Neither are they given in any other manner, unless you mean hereby external
and variable circumstances, as kneeling at the Eucharist, and such like, as I
think you do. And then I answer you, to receive it kneeling, is most fitting
and decent; seeing it is an Action of more humility and devotion, than standing
or sitting is. At the first they received it sitting, or rather lying and
leaning, for Saint John then leaned on Jesus breast, as their manner was then
to eat: But this is no more perpetual or necessary, than to receive it at
night, or after Supper, for these were then used according to the present
occasion. Even as many circumstances were used in the Passover, at the first
institution in Egypt, which should not be perpetual, as the sprinkling the
door with blood, their not going out of their houses that night, their eating
of it standing, with loins girt and staves in their hands, all which as
mutable ceased in the land of promise.

The fifth Demand.
Whether the Book of Common Prayer with the Feasts, Fasts, and Holy Days,
stinted Prayers, and Lyturgie prescribed therein and used in these Assemblies,
be the true worship of God commanded in his word, or the device and invention
of man for Gods worship and service, or no?

Answer.
YOu ask, whether the Book of Common Prayer be Gods worship, or the Invention
of man. It was thus composed by men, godly and learned men, and many of them
Martyrs of Christ.

The doctrine thereof, is according to Gods Word; a book as fit, and full of
edification, in the Prayers and Administration of Sacraments, as possibly can
be devised or made. The things that you here dislike in it, are Feasts, Fasts,
and Holy Days, stinted Prayers, and Lyturgie.

In our Feasts and Holy Days, first observe that we have none to Legend
Saints, but Christ, his Apostles, the blessed Virgin, and Saint John Baptist.

Secondly, that we worship no Saints in those days, but praise God for them,
who made them profitable to his Church.

Thirdly, it is lawful for the Church to appoint such days to glorify God
in. For in time of the Macchabees, the Church appointed an Anniversary Feast of
Dedication of the Altar, after they had rid the Temple from Antiochus his
profanation, 1. Mac. 4.59. And our Savior Christ himself observed it, John
10.11.

Fourthly, that the observation of such times is very ancient and general; for
in the first General Council of Nice, there was great question about the day
whereon Easter should be kept, but not a man, either in the Latin or Greek
Church, but then thought it meet to be kept: so far was the Church then from
your nicety.

In the Prayers and Lyturgie, you here find no other fault, but that they are
stinted and set Prayers; for you would have no Book at all, nor any form of
celebrating Holy things; nor any set Prayers, but all voluntary, at every
Pastors discretion. If this fancy should take place, not only every Minister
would vary from himself, but one would agree with another, like Germans Lips.
Nothing is more needful in holy things than conformity, so the form be good.
But to speak only of stinted and set Prayers (which fault you find.)

First, in the Temple, the book of Psalms was their Psalter, or set Prayers;
for they were appointed to be used continually, and are set to certain orders
of Priests, and to certain times and instruments, for daily use, as the Hebrew
Inscriptions of all the Psalms do testify.

Secondly, the Priests had a solemn set form of Prayer which they used when
they solemnly blessed the people; the words are prescribed, Number. 6.23, 24, 25.
The Lord bless thee, and keep thee, the Lord, etc.

Thirdly, they had a set form of Prayer in the wilderness, which they used
when the Tabernacle removed, Exurgat Deus, Let God arise, etc. And another when
the Tabernacle was pitched, Let God return, etc. Number. 10.35.

Fourthly, they had Psalms to sing at the Passover, the 113, 114, 115, 116,
117, 118. accounted together to be a great grace unto the Passover, which our
Savior Christ observed and sung with his disciples, Matthew. 26.30.

Fifthly, to conclude, prayers are not worse because they are stinted and in
set words, for Christ prayed thrice in one night, using the same words, Matthew.
26.44. And taught his Disciples the set form called the Lords Prayer; saying,
Say thus.

For any exceptions, you now take or take up against any material passages or
Prayers in the book it self, they are such as have often been answered by D.
Boys, Hutton, and others, long since.

The sixth Demand.
Whether all Churches and people (without exception) be not bound in religion
to receive and submit unto that Ministry, Worship, and Order, which Christ, as
Lord and King, has given and appointed to his Church: and whether any may
receive, and join to any other, devised by man, to the service of God: and
consequently, whether they that join to the present Ecclesiastical Ministry,
Worship, and Order of these Cathedral and Parishionall Assemblies, can be
assured by the Word of God, that they join to the former, ordained by Christ,
and not to the later, invented by man, for the worship and service of God.

Answer.
YOu ask, Whether people must submit to those things only, which are
instituted by Christ; or, whether they may submit to the inventions of men. In
matters of substance and worship of God, I say, only to Christ's institution;
but in outward circumstances, the Magistrate has authority to ordain for
comeliness; and herein not to obey him is the sin of disobedience: As to
appoint with what action we shall receive the Eucharist, in what kind of
bread, in what kind of wine, at what time of the year, and how often, in what
apparel it should be ministered, or such like: But he may not alter matters
substantial; and if he should, therein we ought not to submit to any such
command, but we ought rather to undergo the penalty inflicted on the denial:
as to adore the bread, with as much worship as we do Christ; to communicate in
one kind only, and such like, which Papists have divised. Now then
consequently seeing we keep the substance of Gods true worship according to
his Word, and in all outward things are a great deal nearer the rules of
comely order and decency, than you are: They that join themselves to us, may
be assured that they join to a Church, founded after Gods Word, and so can
they not be, that join themselves to you; seeing you set up unto your selves a
new Synagogue: And thus your Demands are satisfied.

Now then, to come to a final issue in this controversy; If any of these
faults be in our Church, or more of them than you can prove (for I would yield
you an Epha, where you cannot prove an Omer) yet have you no just cause of your
separation from our Congregations, so unnaturally to despise the womb that
bare you, and the paps that gave you suck: yea to separate from all the
Churches in Christendom, to a new handful at Amsterdam: witnesses against you
are all those who dislike many things, as you do, and yet communicate with us.
Who albeit by their rash dislikings, they have been accessory to your fall, yet
herein they forsake you, their consciences will not suffer them to fall utterly
from the Church: wherein both you and they have confessed that our doctrine is
true, and according to Gods word. And herein I will convince you by as many
arguments, as you have proposed Demands.

1 First, the Jewish Church in the time of the Prophets was more corrupt than
you can affirm of ours: of which the Prophets do affirm, that there was no
whole part from the bead to the feet; that the faithful City was become an
harlot; that they were princes of Sodom, and people of Gomorra; yet the same
Prophets never forlook the fellowship of the Church, but still reproving their
faults, did communicate with them in the Temple sacrifices and prayers; as
witness the history and writings of the same Prophets.

2 The Church in our Savior Christ's time was worse than that, possessed and
ruled by Scribes, Pharisees, and Saducees, of which Christ said, that the blind
led the blind, that they taught for doctrines the precepts of men, that they
made the word of God of no effect by their traditions, that they made the house
of Prayer a den of thieves, that they justified themselves in their own
righteousness, that they devoured widows houses under pretense of long
prayers; and therefore many Woes were pronounced against them, Mat. 23.
Notwithstanding all this, our Savior Christ, before he took upon him his
publick-Ministery, was presented in this Temple, before these Priests, and
there many offered their oblation before them, Luke 2.22. There, and before
them, and amongst this people did Christ appear with his Parents when he was
twelve years old, at the Feast of the Passover; then in the Temple he
associated with the Doctors, bearing them, and asking them questions, and
affording them his answers Luke 2.4.42.

3 After that he took upon him his public Ministry, he usually repaired to
the Temple, at every of these three solemn Feasts, and there taught daily, and
openly in the Temple, Ioh. 2.13. Ioh. 18.22. he usually taught and healed in
the Jews Sinagogue amongst the people, Luke 4.15.16. he ever sought to purge
Gods house, but not to leave it, for the zeal of Gods house had eaten him up,
Ioh. 2.17. but the hatred of Gods Church and house does drive you from it.

4 And as he used himself to communicate with the visible Church, so he taught
his to do, Mat. 23. says he, The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair,
therefore hear them, and do as they bid you, but after their works do not,
for they say and do not: and when he purged Leapers, as Mat. 8.4. he sent them
to show themselves to these Priests, to be judged by them, and there with them
to offer the gift which Moses commanded for a testimony unto them; he taught
his how they should offer the legal offerings aright, before these Priests,
Mat. 5.23, 24. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that
thy brother has ought against thee, leave there thine offering before the
Altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come
offer thy gift.

5 And (lest you should say, that this was till Christ had finished all things,
and abrogated the Law) as Christ did himself, and taught others to do, so did
his Apostles after the Passion and Resurrection, for Act. 2.46. They continued
daily with one accord in the Temple: and Acts 3.1. Peter and John went up
together into the Temple, at the ninth hour of Prayer (that is, at our three
of the clock after noone) which was the time of the Evening Sacrifice: and Acts
3.20. As they were bidden of God, they entered into the Temple, and this they
did daily, Acts 5.42. Yea, Saint Paul more particularly in the Temple purified
himself with other brethren, and they prepared their offerings, to be offered
for every one of them before the Priests, Acts 21.26.

6 Yea (lest you should say, the Jewish Church had any prerogative) the
Apostles accounted those Christian Churches holy, and to be communicated
withal, which yet were unperfect, defective, and reproveable in many things:
Saint Paul highly commended the Church of Corinth, 1. Cor. 1. and yet reproved
them in that Epistle of many faults, both in doctrine, and manners, as carnal
and schismatic; some holding of Paul, some of Cephas, some of Apollo, Chap.
3. For suffering the incestuous man amongst them, Chap. 5. For going to Law one
against another under the infidels: and for accounting fornication small or no
sin, Chap. 6. For eating (with offense to to the weak) things offered to
Idols, Chap. 8.9, 10. For abusing the public Assemblies, and the Lords Supper,
Chap. 11. For abusing the spiritual gifts to oftentation, not to edifying,
Chap. 12, 13, 14. For denying the Resurrection, Chap. 15. For some of them said
there was no Resurrection, verse. 12. And yet notwithstanding, before all these
were amended, yea, before they were by him reproved; in the first words of that
Epistle, he gives them the Title of Gods Church, of Saints by Calling, and
such as were called to the fellowship of Christ: to teach us how to think of
Militant Churches upon Earth. The like may be observed of the Church of
Galatia, and diverse others.

7 Lastly, the doctrine of the Apostles is, That the Church indeed, is the
Pillar and ground of truth, because God will lead it into all necessary truth;
but yet that it may err in matters of lesser weight; as it is exemplified by
Churches, to which they wrose their Epistles. That the Church is spotted in her
self, but without spot or wrinkle by acceptance in Christ: Ephesians. 5. and see
every particular man and member of the Church, that he is partly flesh, and
partly spirit, unperfect in himself, but perfect by the Grace and merits of
Christ: So Saint John in the Apocalypse, sees the seven Churches of Asia in
Christ's presence, as seven golden Candlesticks, and the seven Angels thereof in
Christ's right hand as seven Stars, chap. 1. yet against every one of them,
both Churches and Angels, he has somewhat in the Epistles, which he wrote unto
them, Chap. 2.3. to teach us to esteem men and Churches, not by their own
imperfections, but according to that grace, and estate which they have obtained
by the mercy of Christ.

Wherefore I wish you beware in time, take heed lest the Serpent which seduced
Eve, do also deceive you; even whilst you think with her to become like Gods:
consider that this your Covenant of Separation may be a sin of presumption:
Remember Abraham your Father, and Satah that bare you, so that with better
consideration, you may return to your Mother the Church again, and keep with
her the unity of the Spirit, in the bond of peace; which God grant for Christ
his sake, Amen.

FINIS.

