THE ANTIQUITY OF REFORMATION: OR, AN OBSERVATION Proving the Great TURK a
Triangle, and the rest of the world ROUNDHEADS.

Wherein is showed, a difference between the Government of the WORD of GOD, and
best Reformed CHURCHES.

C R
printer's or publisher's device

London Printed by B. Alsop, and R. Harper, at the Bible and Harp in
Smithfield. 1647.

THE ANTIQVITY Of Reformations: or, an observation, proving the Turk a
Triangle, and the rest of the world Roundheads. etc.
SOme Reformations have bin from Heaven, the first in Heaven it self, where
according unto Dyonisius the Areopagite, Disciple of St. Paul, is an Hierarchy
or order of Angels; some whereof uncontented with their state, for ambition
were cast out. Secondly, because Adam and Eve had eaten the forbiden friute,
were extruded Paradise. Thirdly, for that all flesh was grown corrupt, their
thoughts evil continualy, did take by violence one from another, the world was
drowned except righteous Noah, and his family; who found favor of God.
Fourthly at the Tower of Babell, where men did endeavor to rely on their own
wisdoms, and so resist God, who sent a confusion of language and opinions, one
to pull down the pride of another, which continues to this day; for at Rome are
360. different opinions, among Priests in Religion, where few know Religion but
Priests, according to Cardinal Bellarmines discovery; which is at large set
forth by Bishop Hall 1609, In England were about 15 different opinions in
Religion, among Protestants, where Religion is in their own language, but
among Lawyers the more where few know the Law, but Lawyers, according to King
James in a speech to the Parliament 1609; published by authority.

The Turk he uncomplyeth with the last Reformation from heaven, by the advice
of the Jew Abdala and the Monk Sergius a Christian, (Authors both English and
Scotch affirm) to obtain the Majorality of all the world, which he has
attained unto, from being a Merchants man: for Maximus is God himself, the
Turk Major, having in possesion in these days, Babylon in Astia, gran Cairo
in Africa; Constantinople in Europe; and all the Land within that Triangle, by
following the policy of the sacred Trinity, the rest of Asia, the rest of
Africa, and the rest of Europe are round about him, and therefore called
Roundheads; because they follow false Tradition of policy, from heathens which
knew not God.

The policy which the Sacred Trinity teaches, is manifest in the sacred
Scripture; first, God the Father he advises to increase and multiply to fill
up the earth, God says save the men, and kill the vices, to fill up the
mansions in heaven, which he would go to prepare, God the Holy Ghost writes,
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; that is suffer no
controversy of Law of Religion, but decide them in 3 days, and he does that
who does soonest. The Merchant therefore of Arabia, which was Mahomet the
Turk, took from the whore of Babell diversity of wives and Concubines to
increase and multiply to fill up the earth rather then mar men, which
diversity of opinions causes because of two evils the least is to be chosen;
saves his men, and kills the vices, rather then let them kill one another, by
association, fortification, and garrison and enlarged his confines with
superflurty of generation, suffers no controversue of Law or Religion, but
decides them in 3 days, and so keeps the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace, making it his main aim, to have a care of the maine, to be Lord Major
of the world, as a Merchant of a City, is commonly ambitious, to be Lord Major
of a City, Docter Sibbs in his Sermon called the spiritual man's aim, stirs
up al Christians to make it their maine aim, to have a care of the maine, to
reign with Christ in Heaven; as the Turk does to reign on earth: the way
thereunto, is by a connection of the tradition of policy from the Sacred
Trinity, to the tradition of Divinity from the same; for the avoiding, plunder,
and murder, forbiden by the Law of Moses, which is into der to preparation, for
the fulfilling of the Prophet Dannells prophecy of latter times; (pointed at
by the fingere of our Savior) that they that turn many unto righteousness,
shall shine like stars in the firmament for ever and ever, and so become
Children of light, and not of darkness; as By. Andrews, who bears the name
of the titular Angel of Scotland writes, So perfect a thing is the light, as
God himself is said to be ight; 1 John, 1.5. his Son our Savior to be the
light of lights, His Spirit light, the light of his holy Spirit. The Angels
that be good, be Angels of Light, yea whatsoever here on earth is perfect; the
King is called the light of Israel, the Apostles called Lucis Mundi, and the
Saints of God where ever they be in the world, shine as lights in it, heirs to
the Father of light, per modum naturae, as the children from the Father; per
modum emanationis as beams from the Sun, god is light and in him is no
darkness at all, ascribe it not to Pater luminum but to Princeps Tenebrarum;
to the Prince of Darkness, not to the Father of light, but ascribe all good
from the small left spark, to the greatest beam, from the least good giving
to the best and most perfect gift of all, to him, to the Father of lights.

Qu monet vt facias, quod cum facis, ille momendo
Laudat; and hortatu comprobat acta suo.
Witness the League and Covenant, which does endeavor a conformity unto the
government of best reformed Churches, where the Law is as plain e as the
Gospel an end of controversy in all causes and courts, in three months by
Statute and so the government in provision will agree, with the Monarchall,
Cardinal, Episcopal, and Mercantall; but the Marcantall is in the superlative
degree, because in possession of more then the other three, by following the
policy of the sacred Scripture, taught him by the Jew and Christian aiming more
at wisdom then wit but in Christendom at more wit then wisdom, by
following diversity of opinions which is contrary to nature, Corruptionis
incrementum, reformationis necessitatem facit, Ergo. our Savior promised to
hasten his coming for the elects sake, else no man would be sved, because the
adversary of mandkind, striveth to make all men as bad as himself. And as
Britain has bin reformed 4 times, by Romans, Saxons, Danes, and Normans; so
now a days it happens by the good will of God that the Scots do endeavor to
prepare Englishmen, for the 5 reformation from heaven, foretold by SS to be
according unto righteousness and true holiness, that Christ may reign in his
Ordinances, the summum bonum of policy and eternal felicity, like Orpheus a
primitive Poet, who did endeavor to reduce men from barbarism, to humanity
and civillity; so they from heathenisme, to Christianity in policy, to be
Christians by policy as well as Religion, to save the men and kill the vices
rather then one another, and enlarge his confines with superfluity of
generations. For to plunder men as fast as rich, kill as fast as populous,
acording to the fourth Reformation by the Norman, is an abomination of
desolation spoken of by Daniell the Prophet whose derivation was from Rome, as
the learned french historian Philip de Comines a Roman Catholic observes By
this fifth Reformation herewritten, many men think is meant, no destruction to
any but to comply with Scots and Par. because they have the major voice, and
then no man can deny, but that to the Word of God men will their words and acts
apply, and not be perjured But govern according to best reformed Churches, and
controversy in 3 months, shun murder, fraud, plundering, and lurches.

Imprimatur

John Downame.

FINIS.

