AN APOLOGETICK FOR THE SEQUESTERED CLERGY OF THE Church of England.
Disclaiming and detesting the late Unnatural, Presumptuous, Unparalled and
Antichristian Proceedings, against the Honor and Life of the Best of Kings, Our
most Dear and Dread Sovereign Lord and King, St CHARLES the MARTYR. Communicated
in a Letter to a Religious and Loial Gentleman, his Honored Friend.

The Crown is fallen from our head: Woe unto us that we have sinned.

Lament. 5.16. O my Soul, com not thou into their secret: unto their ASSEMBLY
mine Honor be not thou united.

Genesis 49.6. In reos Majestatis and publicos hosts omnis homo miles est.

Tertull. Apol. parag. 2. Printed at New-Munster in the year of Confusion.

AN APOLOGETICK FOR THE SEQUESTERED CLERGY OF THE Church of England.
SIR,
THe late unparalled, presumptuous, unnatural and Antichristian Proceedings
against the Honor and Life of the Best of Kings, our most Dear and Gracious
Sovereign, by a Pretended-Legal Trial, Sentence and Execution of Him, by
incompetent, interessed, and armed Judges, without either Precedent, Law,
Reason or Conscience, at which the ears of every one that bears it do
tingle, have not unjustly begot your indignation against, and detestation of,
so high and insolent a villainy, as was never acted before by the worst of men,
nor infused by the Prince of Devils.

The transcendencie of this horrid work of darkness, this Masterpiece of Hell,
if we except the Murder of the Son of God, (which was so nearly paralleled by
this, that we could not but, with a just reflection on it, admire the
disposition of the Divine Providence, which ordered the Crucifixion of our
Blessed Savior recorded by Saint Matthew for the Proper Lesson of that fatal
Day of the Martyrdom of our Just and Pious Prince) has so far out-gon the
Tragic phancies of the most ingenious wits in Cruelty and Malice; and
withal, so far Eclipsed the Glory of our Israel, heretofore famous and
renowned among the Nations, admired by our Friends, and envied by our Enemies;
but now the just derision of the World, and outcast of the People; that we
cannot but look upon this Kingdom, or rather this Aceldama, with the saddest
eye of compassionate affection and sorrow, as once our Blessed Lord and Master
did upon his sometime Darling Jerusalem. Nor, indeed, will grief allow us to
speak out, what horrid consequences have, in the anguish of our souls deeply
afflicted with the contemplation of the eternal ruin of our Name, our Place,
and our Religion, been sadly represented to our thoughts. So true is that
common saying, Ingentes stupent, that we can scarce find breath enough to
say with the Prophet Jeremie, O that our head were waters, and our eyes
fountains of tears! But are forced to break off with our Blessed Savior
(beholding and weeping over Jerusalem) in His most pathetical expostulation
and expressions, O, if thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day,
the things which belong unto thy peace!

SIR! We are confident, your detestation and abhorrence of this impious
Parricide (beyond the worst of Nero's cruelties) has not so far surprised and
invaded your Charity, (though it has the bowels of the Nighbour-Nations) as
to impute so great a guilt to all the Kingdom; wherein the Righteous Judge of
all the earth and that is our highest comfort) well knows how to distinguish,
and to lay this cursed Brat at the true Father's door. And you may believ it,
Sir, the characters of Humanity are not so defaced, nor the impressions of
Christianity so blotted out among us, but that you are seconded by Thousands,
who have not worshipped the Golden Calvs, nor bowed their knees to Baal, in
your just Anathema upon the cursed Authors of this Tragedy, the Heirs apparent
of Damnation.

But somewhat more you think required of us, of men of our Profession, then an
implicit silent Detestation. And our Calling seems to urge an absolute
necessity upon us (lest silence be interpreted Consent) to clear our Credit,
Conscience and Religion (the three great interests of all Christians, and
specially Divines) by some Public Declaration of our Judgment concerning the
late barbarous and unheard of Practices against our most Pious, Constant,
Christian King; the Light of our Israel, the Breath of our Nostrils, the
Anointed of the Lord.

And indeed, SIR, if we had not that to say by way of Plea and Vindication
of our Silence, which we hope will be esteemed rational and just by all
intelligent and Loial souls (for we are not very careful to pleas others) we
should not dare to look for mercy, either from God or Man; but very willingly
expose our selves as fit objects to the rage and malice of our most implacable
and bitter enemies.

Sir, We cannot but with all thankfulness and devotion acknowledge the many
great and transcendent blessings we enjoi'd, among, if not above, the other
Subjects under the happy Reign of his most glorious Majesty. We cannot but
confess His high merits of us; whom not only the common Obligations of the
Oath of God, and our Natural Allegiance, but the due consideration of His
undeserved respects and honors bestowed upon our particular Profession and
Priestlie Function must eternally indear unto us. And we had been the most
unworthie creatures upon Earth, had we prooved Desertores Fidei, had we
faltered in our Faith and Loialtie to Him, whom the Church must ever honor as
her most glorious Patron and Protector: and, which is the highest elevation of
His Love, (so near was his to God's upon the Cross) beyond all Constantine's,
Theodosius's, or Valentinian's, the most in. vincible Champion and Martyr for
Her. Who, when He saw all ways of doing good, of improoving His affectionate
Piety to Her, barred up and utterly precluded by a religious Sacrilege,
willingly laid down His Life for Her redemption; And, in imitation of the
blessed JESUS, acted what He said, If you seek Me, let these go their way.

The contemplation of the glorious excesses of His triumphant Charity and
Devotion (for, He loved our Nation, and the Zeal of God's House had eaten him
up) not only gives new Arguments for our designed Apologetick, for clearing
up the mists now cast upon us, by reason of our Silence in this Cause, but also
supplieth us with rich grounds and materials for a Panegyric, to the eternal
honor of His most precious Memory: But here we are oppressed with so much
light, and such transcendent beauties of perfection in all the passages of His
blessed Life and glorious Martyrdom, that all we can conceiv or say of Him
would com as short of His incomparable merits, as does a Peeble of a Diamond, a
Candle of the glories of the Sun, or our unworthie pen of His victorious and
Seraphick quil. We cannot add a grain of honor to His glories, of which He is
as full, as the eternity of Heaven, in the fruition of Christ and God can make
Him. Where He has exchanged His Crown of Thorns for one far more illustrious
of Stars; and where His Charity, which was kindled here to very high and
extraordinary proportions, has now attein'd her ultimate perfection, and
burns with ever-living flames.

The influence whereof, we cannot doubt, will dissipate the Clouds of black
constructions, which threaten a storm to our Reputation and our Conscience; The
One assaulted with the engine of Falsehood, that we dare not now in Persecution
own the Truth of that Doctrine, which, according to the example of the
Primitive Christians and Catholic Clergy, we professed in our Prosperity:
The Other undermined with the bitter Reproaches of our insulting Enemies, who
triumph over us with cruel Quaere's; Where are the great Pretenders for the
King? where is the Roial Party? (we take it for Their scorn, but it is Our
glory) where they for whom He ventured Life and Crown? Not one that durst
appear, or show his head in vindication of Him: Not one stood in the gap to
make up the breach, to mantein His Honor, Crown, or Life.

-- Pudet haec opprobria nobie
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
We cannot but deplore our sad condition, thus loaded with unjust aspersions.
These make such deep impressions on our souls, that we cannot but look upon
them as an intolerable addition to our many Sufferings; which, being
aggravated to the highest pitch by these foul mouths, discover too much
acquaintance and familiarity with Hell, to be believed by any who have
thoughts of Heaven. And, if we may obtein a little patience of pious and
judicious Christians, we doubt not, we shall give such satisfaction as shall
wipe off the deepest stains of Calumny; and give in most clear evidence to all
the world (whose Charity we beg not to impute so great a guilt to our Tribe
and Profession) that, as we can, in the integrity of our souls, wash our
hands from having any agencie in any Scene of this accursed Tragedy, so we
do abominate and detest the fatal Close and Epilogue thereof; as being a most
destructive Principle and foundation, which must necessarily conclude (without
the interposition of God's infinite and miraculous mercy) in the inevitable
period and ruin of our Religion, Monarchy, Honor, Law, Liberty, Life, and
whatsoever is most sacred and dear to God and Man. All which, as it were the
highest ingratitude not to acknowledge them to be concentred and bound up in
Him, to have been manteined and propagated by His gracious hand, and to have
lived with Him, so we cannot but now look upon as dead with Him, and buried in
an eternal grave of infamy and destruction.

Which grave as it was not dug by us by any actual concurrence or unworthie
compliances, nor otherwise then as we are involved and concluded in the
community of a finful people, now white unto the harvest, and ripe for the
fickle of Divine Vengeance; so the prevention of it being endeavored by us, as
far as lawfully we might in our vocation, we are confident the blame and
guilt of the succeeding miseries and mischiefs cannot be justly charged upon
us; who, though we live among them, are not of them, but, like the righteous
Lot, through the necessity of our cohabitation in this Sodom, are grieved with
the presumptuous conversation of these Heaven-daring miscreants.

Who, that they might securely, uncontrol'd, walk on in the forbidden paths of
highest Treason, against the Lord Himself, and His Anointed, took order for
the stopping of our mouths, who could not speak the Language of the Beast, nor
frame our tongues to their new Shibboleth of Holy Leagues, of Vows and
Covenants. Haec Lerna malorum. This was the fountain of our miseries, whence
all those bitter streams have issued, with which the Loial Clergy of this
Church, for seven years past, have mingled both their drink and tears. This the
occasion of that cursed Deluge, which, in flat opposition to that other sent by
God for the drowning of a sinful World, has overwhelmed Noah, and the Ark, and
saved the posterity of Cain. This was that Trojan Horse, which ushered in those
armed cruelties, which, under the specious shows of Reformation, and setting up
the Kingdom of Christ, have given the greatest blow to His Religion, undermined
the Foundations of Christianity, and levelled the Throne of Imperial Majesty
with the plough-shares and the mattocks of the earth.

Thus, SIR, we have at last discoursed our selves up to the bitter springs of
Meribah; the source of all our sorrows; the Mother or the Nurse of these
confusions; and, in a word, the Sin and Punishment of this late flourishing,
now miserably ruined Church and Kingdom.

Our utter detestation whereof, for we cannot cast our eyes upon it, but as
upon some blazing Star, or prodigious Comet, portending dire effects of blood
and death to us and Christian Religion, (which never owned the Principles on
foot against the Highest Powers for any Articles of Her Faith) give's clear
light and demonstration of our Innocence, which has not only been protested
by many of our Brethen, in their Public Declarations of the Church's
judgment in the points of Non-Resistance and Allegiance, but also sealed with
the Blood of some, and with the Sufferings of all.

These two, 1 The Protestations of our Judgment, and 2 The many Sufferings
endured by us, in the righteous prosecution of This Cause, had been enough to
have convinced any of our Uprightness and Integrity; if either they had
learned but so much Charity, as the Principles of Christian Religion dictate
to as or but so much Humanity as is taught them by the dimmer Light of Nature.

But truly, SIR, the importunate aspersions of our Enemies force us to a
seeming neglect of all Humility, and a forgetfulness of Modesty. And we
must, by way of just Apology, but without all arrogance and self-conceipt,
say with St Paul, If we are fools in glorying, they have compelled us, 2 Cor.
12.11.

And here we are encompassed with a Cloud of Witnesses: and the eminent
Examples of the Saints, the Forerunners of our Faith, will not only excuse
but patronize this our just Defense, and now necessitated boasting: Looking
unto JESUS, the Author and Finisher of our Faith; who, for the glory that was
set before Him, endured the Cross, and despised the Shame.

Quot vulnera tot ora: Our constant course of sufferings proclaims at once our
Judgment and our Innocence. It Is true, indeed, we have not attained to that
high Heroic pitch of the Primitive Martyrs; of whom Saint Paul (by way of
Prophecy, with respect to them that were to follow after, no less then of
History, referring unto them that went before) speaks those glorious
excesses of Faith, and Charity, and Zeal. They stopped the mouths of Lions. So
did these: For we know the old word was, Christianes ad Leonem. Some were
tortured, not accepting deliverance: It was a crime with them to be but
Libellatici: and they contemned their lives that they might preserv their soul
and honor, free from the guilt of sin, nay from misprision. Others had trials,
of cruel mockings and scourgings: yea moreover of stripes and imprisonment. Not
was this much to them, who well remembered that it behoved them to follow the
High Priest of our Profession, who was thus consecrated by sufferings. They
were 1 Stoned, they were 2 Sawn asunder, were 3 Tempted, were 4 Slain with the
Sword. So was the Proto-martyr 1. St Stephan, the Prophet 2. Isaiah, the
Patriarch 3. Job, and 4. Zachariah the Priest, the Father of the Baptist. They
wandered about in sheepskins, and goat skins: being destitute, afflicted,
tormented. Their glories were within, their garments mean and suitable to their
habitations, For they wandered in deserts and in mountains and in dens and in
caves of the earth. Of whom the world was not worthy. And wherefore this, quo
oculo? For they had a respect unto the recompense of the reward: that they
might receiv a glorious Resurrection. And are these the prizes of our
Sufferings? These were enough to sweeten bitterness it self: to make them
welcome Death, to hug the Cross, to embrace the Flames. Indeed, we have not
drunk so deep as they in the bitter Cup of Gall and Vinegar. We dare not say,
Our Sufferings equal Theirs, in the degrees or quality of torments. They were
more noble and exceeded us; triumphing in their Chariots of Fire; dallying with
Lions and the cruel beasts, less cruel then their persecuting Masters; singing
upon the Gridirons and Racks of exquisite and new-invented Tortures; tiring the
malice of inhumane Butchers with an undanted Christian resolution, with a
victorious Faith and Patience; spitting defiance in the face of Cruelty,
pregnant with Heathen wit, and armed with power. These were the great excesses
of those Worthies, who knew no other Arms but these (besides their Prayers and
Tears) to fight with and to conquer a world of Tyrants and of Infidels. These
things did those mighty men. Did: so we said; for sure they were not counted
Sufferings, which were thus courted and embraced by them. Such were the Leaders
in the glorious Army of the Martyrs. Nor have they wanted honorable followers
in all the Ages of the Christian Church. Who, though they did not wade so deep
in the Red Sea of Blood, yet marched after in their Liveries of Stripes, of
Bonds and Persecutions; the lesser marks of the Lord JESUS, the Captain both of
Suffering and Salvation. The difference of whose glorious reward, accidental
perhaps, but not substantial, an Aureola to one, to one a Crown, will be
abundantly made up and reconciled in the blessed fellowship of Saints and
Angels, and the eternal fruition of Christ and God; to the full completing of
the greatest Hope, and the assurance given by S. Paul That the light
afflictions which are but for a moment shall work, (...) (an Hyperbolical
expression for an Hyperbolical reward) a far more exceeding and eternal weight
of glory. Indeed, we dare not compare our selves to these, nor make our selves
of their member who were the glory of their times. It will be joie enough for
us, if we can say

-- Sequimur Patres, -- though we be forced to add

-- non passibue aequit. She did what she could, was, to our comfort, compead
a good Plea by Christ, and justified in Marie Magdalen. We dare not, nay we
need not plead the rigor and intensness of our Sufferings: for, be they more
or less, by Sword or Fire; by Death, or by being but Undon; We are accepted
according to that which we have, not that which we have not. But, if any
question the Justness of our Cause (a righteous Cause if ever any) or doubt of
the Intention and Preparation of our Souls, Quocunque Dens, to follow whither
God shall pleas to call us, We speak foolishly, but we speak it with S. Paul,
Whereinsoever any dare be bold, we dare be hold also. Are they Christians?
even so are we. Are they true Sons of the Church of England? even so are we.
Have they suffered for righteousness sake? even so have we. Are they the
Ministers of Christ? (we speak as fools) we are more. In Labers more
abundant; in stripes above measure; in Prisons more froquent; in deaths often. If
we must needs glory, we will glory in the things which concern our
afflictions. The Plunderings, Sequestrations, Imprisonment, Banishment, Death
of thousands, endured by us with so much Patience, Meekness, and Heroic
Courage; Our Constancy and Perseverance in this fiery Trial; still holding
our Integrity, and blessing God, in the loss of all, save Faith and a good
Conscience, are evidence enough to God and Man, that we cannot but detest such
high impiety, which, striking so immediately at the Sacred Person of the King,
God's Vicar upon Earth, will mediately be found, (...), to strike at God
Himself.

But, because the foulest Fiend sometime put's on the fairest Vizard; and the
Prince of Darkness has been often known to transform himself into an Angel of
Light; the furious Donatists cried out of Persecution, and, in a frantic Zeal
and mad Devotion, ventured upon swords and flames, pretending the Religion of a
Holy Cause, (as here their younger Brethren did and do) to warrant their
unjustifiable Actions; Groundless suspicions may be raised of us; our
Innocence may be counted a Malefactor; and our very Sufferings may suffer.
But, if Causa non Paena facit Martyrem be a truth and ever taken so to be by
men of all Persuasions and Professions, we shall not doubt to own our
Sufferings, and justify Our selves and Them by the prescription of a Righteous
Cause. Indeed, we cannot see by their New Lights, which seem to us more black
then the Egyptian Darkness. Their Revelations are Obscurities: and their
Apocalypse, Apocrypha. We dare not give our Faith to their Pretensions; we
dare not trust their Spirit without Trial; since we have found it, to the
woeful disturbance of Christendom, run cross and contradictorie to the Holy
Faith, which was consigned to the Catholic Church in the undoubted Records,
and infallible volumes of the Sacred Scripture; which, upon better and more
certain grounds then the Laws of the Medes and Persians, have the highest
privilege and honor, as dictated by the Spirit of Truth, to be unalterable.
We know, ndeed, that God spoke in them: as for these men we know not whence
they are. It is another Spirit they pretend: It is another JESUS, whom they
Preach: It is another GOD, whom they Adore. The Holy Spirit we know: JESUS
we know: and GOD we know: But who are these? If we may pass a judgment by
their works, (and Christ will warrant us by His, Ex fructibus, You shall know
them by their fruits) They are not Sheep, but Wolvs; not Doves, but Vultures;
not what they call themselves, the Meek, the Saints: They speak their Father and
his works they do, who was a Serpent; is a roaring Lion: who, having managed
the highest Treason against his supreme Lord and Sovereign, the King of Heaven
and Earth, not only engaged many of his fellow subjects in that grand
Rebellion, but has ever since made it his work to disturb all Kingdoms but his
own, (for there he will endure nec priorem, nec parem) to set the world on
fire, to raise up Seditions, and to shake the very foundations of Government
and Order.

But we have not so learned Christ: nor can the Principles of Christian
Doctrine consist with such Unchristian Practices. We spoke openly to the
world; we ever taught in the Temple, whither the people always resort, and in
secret have we said nothing. Ask not of us; Ask them that heard us, what we
have said unto them; Behold, they know not what we said, S. Job. 18.20, 21.
First, we appeal to God, and next, to them who knew the manner of our Life,
and Doctrine, if they would testify, that after that way which they call
Malignancie (for so they mis-call the Doctrine and Practice of our Christian
brethren) so worship we the God of our Fathers; so have we been taught, as
the truth is in JESUS, to Fear GOD and the KING, and not to meddle with them
that are given to Change; being assured by the Spirit of Truth, who cannot
lie, That their destruction shall arise suddenly; and who kneweth the ruin of
them both?

Knowing therefore this Truth and terror of the Lord, lest we should incur the
just reward of partaking in the sins of other men (which we have labored to
prevent and hinder both by our Example and Discourses) We do, in the Name of
God, ad liberandas animas nostras, to clear our souls of the Innocent blood of
our Just and Righteous PRINCE, Declare the late presumptuous Proceedings
against his Life and Honor to be Jesuitical and Antichristian; contrary to
the Faith once delivered to the Saints, and ever professed by the Catholic
Church of Christ, and, in special, by the Church of England. We acknowledge and
declare to all the world, that the KING is solo Deo minor, as in the old
Divinity of Tertullian. That Sub- or Co-ordination destroy the eternal
Mishpat, the righteous Law of God, planted in Nature, and consigned in the
Holy Scriptures, for the absolute, independent, and Supreme Dominon of God's
Vicegerent, the Sacred Majesty of His Anointed. That He is not, by any Law
of God or Man, accomptable to his Subjects; no, not in the supposed case of
maladministration: satis erit ut Deum exspectet ultorem, was thought by the
old Christians a sufficient thunderbolt to keep Him in good order. That He
has no Superior upon Earth to exercise Jurisdiction over Him. That [Against
Thee only have I sinned] could not be truly said by King David, upon any
other consideration, but His unquestionable Exemption from all Humane
Judicatories. That He is a King by Him alone, by whom He is a man: without
all Papal or Popular dependence. And that the Cursing of the King, but in our
Thought; much more the slandering and reviling with our Tongue; much more the
Deposition and Dethroning; but, above all, the Taking of His Life is a Crime of
deepest stain, and the highest breach of all the Laws of God and Men.

These, SIR, are no new received opinions of Yesterdaie, or of this later Age;
They antedate the Era of Christianity, and are contemporarie with Nature: and
it were easy work to fill whole volumes with the glorious Names of our Fathers
who lived and died in the promulgation and mantenance of this Faith, which, now
suffering under the odious Name of Malignancie, Court-Divinitie, and flattering
of Princes, was the chief quarrel of the world against us, to the dishereson of
us in our temporal fortunes; and, which was far more grievous, to the eternal
ruin of those precious souls for which Christ died; whom, by the stopping of
our mouths, and the perverting of the Truth by the mouths of Ababs Prophets,
substituted unduly and intruded, against all Law and Conscience, into our
Cures, it lay not in the power of our Christian Charity to save from the deep
engagement of the wrath of God upon them, here; nor, which is worse, the
entailing of an eternal curse upon their Memory, and (without Repentance) upon
their Souls.

And now, SIR, what need of farther witnesses of our Integrity and Innocence?
what Reason can object or lay on us the imputation of so great a guilt? what
could we hope might possily prevail, when the engagement of our Fortunes,
Lives and Souls, the best and dearest pledges we could stake, could not
procure that credit unto us, or mercy to themselves, as to divert them from
those horrid ways, which know no end but Hell and desperation.

And with these only we could very well have satisfied our selves in point of
Conscience, and have offered them to God for His acceptance. But more we have
to say by way of Plea, which like pack-thred and paper we shall cast into
the bargain. And that upon this double consideration. 1. Of the seeming
Improbabilitie of the Attempting an Action of so extravagant a nature. 2. Of
the Impossibility of good Success, in case we had appeared.

1. For the first: what wise and honest man could rationally imagine, that such
unnatural, unheard of Thoughts could probably possess the hearts of any, who
had not first cast off Humanity and Reason, not to speak of Conscience and
Religion? What Hazael would not startle at the motion of so horrid, so
unparalled impiety? and utter his detestation of it in his language, Am I a
Dog? We presumed the Actors in that fatal Tragedy would not be so injurious
to themselves as to take that for a fault in Us, Our Dis-beleeving of so
prodigious an Intention, the Believing of which to have been deliberated by
any, who had respect to Conscience or Honor, was conceived by us too great a
breach of Christian Charity; which we our selves, though present on the Stage,
were loath to suffer to be so far invaded, notwithstanding all that terrible
pomp, and such extravagant Preparations. We hoped better things from them who
had assumed the Name of Reforming-Christians, and of Saints: Nor durst we,
while we labored to be innocent, by questioning or prejudging their
innocence, endanger ours. But, indeed, beside our Charity, which, if S. Paul
be right, Thinks no evil, which cannot be it self if but suspicious, had
we not Reason too? Can Christians be induced to believ that Oaths and Vows
and Protestations could be no stronger ties upon the Saints, then Cords or
Withs were in the hand of Sampson? Or else that Regicide, a crying sin, would
be a just satisfaction to an incensed God, for all our former faults and
villainies? Or that the breaking of the Fifth, the Crown Command, could make
atonement for the breach of Nine? (...); O Sorcerie, how have thou broke forth
to the supplanting of Christianity and Reason! Rebellion is as the sin of
Witchcraft, we often heard before, we see it now.

2. But the second, the Impossibility of good success, in ease we had
appeared, which was strongly confirmed to us, whether we reflected on 1 Our
selves, 2 The Managers of the Design, or 3 Others, both of their own Ministers,
and of the Loial, and Legal Clergy, was an effectual argument to us, and a
sufficient ground for our eternal silence.

1. Reflecting on Our selves. For, supposing the Legal Clergy could have met,
(...), with one mouth, with one mind, and prepared an uniform Protest, and
backed it with all the Arguments that Scripture, Reason, Law, or Conscience
could have suggested to us (which yet they took an order to prevent and
actually effected by the hottest persecution that was ever set on foot by any
against their Brother-Christians; witness the general (...), the dispersion,
banishment and retirement of most, (...), Few or none remaining, but such as
either do precario vivere, subsist by the charity and alms of pious,
well-affected Christians; or else, not standing, forsooth, recti in curia, dare
scarce be known to be in being) Might we not justly fear the Cause would
suffer by the very interposing of such Advocates? Away with such fellows from
the earth; it is mercy, too great mercy that they live: These fellows are but
permitted to sojourn here, and they will needs be Lords. Could Prudence prompt
them to be Mediators, whose very interest carries a denial in the forehead?
We would be loath to have our Reason questioned, while we would improve our
Christianity. Good Causes we have often known miscarrie for want of fitting
Instruments to manage them. Nor could we wish our Enemy a greater mischief,
then for the obteining of his purpose to use unwelcom Mediators. There Is as much
truth in This, He teaches to deny that asks amiss, as is in That, That asks
but faintly. And, in good sadness, could we hope for better, by whatsoever we
could say or do? Is not the very Name of Roial Party an inexpiable crime? Is
not the very word Malignant a rub and prejudice to the justest suit? And is not
this our case? or do we stand on any better terms? We feared the least
appearance of our Name might be interpreted some grand Design; and, instead of
findeing the success we sought, seal up the sentence of His condemnation.
Beside; would it not entrench upon our Prudence, to irritate the spirit of an
adversary, by the ill choice of Intercessors? Nor have we yet so far forgot
our Reason, as to attempt the quenching of a Flame by the suffusion of Oil. The
unacceptableness of our persons and Condition with the great Statists and
Grandees, whose (...) and respect of persons discover's they have not much to
do with God, give's the first Impossibility of good success, and consequently
a Reason of our Non-appearing.

2. But, secondly, when we reflect and cast our eyes upon the Managers of the
late and present Agitations, we think that Argument enough to stop our mouths,
and patronize our Silence. We would not willingly incur the censure of
speaking to no purpose, to men resolved and inflexible: to men whose Principles
are to them as true, as they are falls in themselves: to men who presume upon
their own Dictats as infallible Oracles: who rear huge buildings upon sandy
grounds, and raise Conclusions on none or most deceiving Premises^: who, in the
very Principles they sometime pretend to own (for ask their Presbyterian
Brethren whether they could ever get them to stand to any) are as slipperie as
Eels, as variable as the Moon, and constant only in inconstancy. Have they
not justjfied their excentrick motions and highest irregularities with the
decried Principles of special Providence and Impulses of the Spirit? Have they
not owned and practiced the Assertion, that Faith is not to be kept with
Enemies? And, on that score, abused the wisest Head in Christendom? Not keeping
faith with any, God or Man? Have they not perverted Holy Scripture, and the
heroic actions of some Saints, assisted by immediate inspiration, to authorize
the highest villainies? And are we still to learn the fetches of Satan? or can
we be ignorant of their devices? Quo teneam nodo? If we could yet but guess
what lock to have them at, what weapon to fight with, perhaps they would not
seem so wise, not so invincible. But, indeed, it is no matter for the Means,
they are resolved on the End, per fas, per nefus; and, rather then miscarrie or
come short of their purposed Defigns, run madly upon the pretended unpardonable
crimes of those truly Honorable and worthy Patriots, who formerly sat at the
helm, and managed the great affairs in Church and State: And, (that we may
thoroughly know the meaning of their Canting-language, Pro REGE, Pro
Parliamento, Pro Religione, and I know not what) nothing now conducing to their
Ends, though never so much decried by themselves and spoke against in others,
must be omitted for the punishment of a foolish people flattered into misery;
and for the establishment of an Absolute, Independent and Arbitrarie Dominion,
over the Fortunes, Lives and Consciences of their late fellow subjects, now
their vassals; who, of the most Free people in the world, under a pretense of
Liberty are cheated into Slaverie, far worse then the Egyptian Brick-kilns, or
the Galleys of Argire.

And having such as these to deal withal, Quibus non persuadebis etiamsi
persuaseris, had not our Application been in vain, much like the washing of an
Aethiop? Can a Leopard change his spots, or a Black-More his skin? Then, says
the infallible Oracle that cannot lie, may they that are accustomed to do evil
learn to do well. Believ it, SIR, the grasping at a Crown was not to be
dissvaded by our arguments; and that destructive Principle alone which drive's
them on (Of a pretended special Call from heaven) outvies with them the highest
Demonstrations of Reason, Law, or Religion. To which if we shall add (what we
conceiv the Truth, and the ground of these Presumptions) the Real, not
Imaginary Fears and Jealousies, which, questionless, lie heavy on their
souls, and egg them on, Scelera sceleribus tueri, to fortify and mantein what
they have don; as doubting of the issue of their former sins, but by attempting
greater; you will be soon induced to believ, that, as their resolution was to
stop their ears against the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely;
so, all our words and arguments had been no better then Sibyllae folia, the
sport of the winds, or the barking of a dog against the Moon.

3. In which opinion we have the greater cause to be confirmed, when we call
to mind the fruitlesness and non-success of those many Applications, which
have been made to these great Masters of the world, not only by some of the
Ancient, Orthodox and Legal Clergy, but also by many of the Presbyterian
persuasion; who, though we cannot excuse their too great activitie in promoting
these unnatural distempers by their compliance and encouragement, have yet,
though like very ill Logicians, after such Premises as they laid themselves,
which were necessarily productive of these horrid consequences, utterly denied
the Conclusion, and flung the dirt of this detestable action in the face of
their sometime Brethren, now cruel persecuting Enemies.

We have read indeed, SIR, the Vindications, which have com forth from some
particular Members, and from some Bodies (or, as they love to speak, some
Classes) of them. We cannot but approve and say Amen to their abhorrence of
so traitorous an Attempt. But when we weigh the grounds they go upon; their
voluntary Oaths and Covenants, of which we may well ask, Quis requisivit?
What Law of God or Man required them? When we remember not a word or argument
urged by them from their former Legal Oath of Allegiance to their Undoubted
Sovereign; as if there had been no tie or obligation upon their Souls, till
that accursed thing, the Covenant, came out to the disturbance of Three
Kingdoms: When we consider that their chiefest Motives are drawn from their
Implicit Faith of the pretended (so they now appear) Professions,
Protestations, and Declarations of the Gentlemen at Westminster, to be very
tender of the Rights, Honor, and Life of their Sovereign, and to make Him a
Glorious King; and so indeed they have, by Suffering: when we reflect upon the
Rise and grounds first laid and still persted in by them, which infallibly
begat that fatal stroke, which was given immediately, indeed, by other hands,
but consequentially by theirs: (For, if it be resolved in point of Law, that
there are no Accessories, but all are Principals in high Treason, no question
they have as much to answer for, that bound the Hands, as they that cut off the
Head of His Sacred Majesty) When we consider these and many more, which
highly aggravate their guilt, we cannot think them so innocent and free from
participation in that horrid crime of shedding the precious blood of our
Blessed Sovereign, but that they are insinitely beholden to the Pardon and
Prayers of the highest Charity, That God would not impute His blood to them
further then to convince them, what need they have of Christ's blood, to wash
their souls from the guilt of shedding His. In confidence of the efficacy of
which prayer, as we hope they will at last perceive their Error, and upon
sight thereof be pricked at the hearts, and bring forth the worthy fruits of
Penance, so we shall with a willing mind imitate the Father of the Prodigal,
be ready to entertein them with the embraces of peace, and to salute them
with the holy kiss of Charity.

In the interim, the cold or no-reception of them, who had gone so far along
with these Usurpers, was such a cooling-card, so poor an encouragement to us,
who are looked upon as altogether (...), and wholly opposite to their
destructive Grounds, Way, and End, that we thought it wisdom to sit down and
weep by these waters of Babylon, as despairing of any suitable entertainment, or
probability of good success.

Especially, when, being lately warned that the charitable service offered in
the Humble Address of our Reverend and Learned Brother was either not accepted
or not regarded, we had too great reason to conclude, that the light of Nature
being wholly extinguished, and the Bowels of Christian Charity (as their
Brother Judas's) gushed out, all further Counsels or ghostly admonitions would
be but giving Holy things to Dogs, or casting Pearls to Swine.

Thus, SIR, we have at last discharged our thoughts into your charitable
bosom: and hope that one or all of these will set us right in the good opinion
of all Judicious honest men. Yet as we cannot but acknowledge with all
thankfulness your great favor and tender respect in the communication of your
fears, lest our honor or Conscience should be thought to lie too open to the
unreasonable descants of censorious and ill-affected men, so we must ever think
our selves bound to your goodness, as for your own charitable construction of
us, so for giving us this opportunity of discovering our sense and judgment:
which as we have hitherto, cum bono Deo, attested by our Sufferings, and still
shall, God assisting us, with our Lives, and, which is dearer to us, with our
Souls, so we trust this free and public Declaration will for the future
preclude and stop up the way of all uncharitable surmises, and confront the
least suspicions of our approbation and compliance; and confirm in you a fair
construction not only of our Profession but of our Sufferings; which, we
beseech you to believ, we are so far from thinking much of, or repining at,
that, on the contrary, we cannot but rejoice and triumph in them as our
greatest honor and our Crown; esteeming the reproaches of Christ greater riches
then the threasures of this world; and glorying with the Apostles that we were
counted worthy to suffer for His Name, in the Profession of our Faith, Duty
and Allegiance to the Best of Kings, our late most Dear and glorious Sovereign,
St CHARLES the MARTYR.

Nomen Ejus in benedictionibus.
Usque quo, Domine, usque quo!
TERTULLIANUS.
CHristianus nullius est hostis, nedum Imperatoris: quem sciens a Deo suo
constitui, necesse est ut and ipsum diligat and revereatur and honoret and
salvum velit. -- Colimus ergo Imperatorem sic, quomodo and nobis licet, and
ipsi expedit, ut hominem a Deo secundum; and quicquid est, a Deo consecutum,
and solo Deo minorem. Hoc and Ipse volet. Sic enim omnibus major est, dum solo
vero Deo minor est. Sic and ipsis Diis major est, dum and ipsi in potestate
sunt Ejus. Itaque and sacrificamus pro salute Imperatoris, sed Deo nostro and
Ipsius; sed quomodo praecepit Deus, pura prece. ad Scapulam, parag. 2.

Nos pro salute Imperatoris Deum invocamus aeternum, Deum verum, Deum vivum;
quem and Ipsi Imperatores propitium sibi praeter caeteros malunt: sciunt quis
Illis dederit Imperium; sciunt qua homines, quis and animam. Sentiunt eum esse
Deum solum, in cujus solius potestate sunt; a quo sunt secundi, post quem
primi, ante omnes and super omnes Deos. -- Illius and Ipse, cujus and coelum
and omnis creatura. Inde est Imperator, unde and homo ante quam Imperator: inde
potestas Illi, unde and spiritus. Illuc suspicientes Christiani, manibus
expansis, quia innocuis; capite nudo, quia non erubescimus; denique sine
monitore, quia de pectore, oramus pro omnibus Imperatoribus, vitam Illis
prolixam, Imperium securum, Domum tutam, Exercitus fortes, Senatum fidelem,
Populum probum, Orbem quietum, and quaecunque hominis and Caesaris vota sunt.

Hoc agite boni Praesides, extorquete animam Deo supplicantem pro Imperatore.

Apol. parag. 30. FINIS.

