May the 14. 1642. A True RELATION OF THE Chief Passages IN IRELAND, From the
25th of April to this present.

As the Retaking of the Newry from the Rebels, by the Lord Conway, and Munroe
the Scotch Commander.

Likewise the taking of the Town and Castle of Carlingford, by a Ship that
came from Knockfergus, with ten or twelve of the chief Commanders.

Also the taking of Narrow-Water Castle, in which were found the old Countess
of Evagh, Daughter of the old Arch Rebel Hugh, Earl of Tyrone. Sir Edward
Trever, Sir Charles Poynes, Captain Henry Smith, and diverse others.

With diverse other passages of Note, which for want of room we cannot here
specify.

By T. A. and P. G.

London, Printed for Ed. Blackmore, at the Angel in Paul's Churchyard, 1642.

A True RELATION OF THE Chief Passages IN IRELAND, From the 25th of April, to
this present.
SIR,
I Thank you for your intelligence, which to repay, I have sent you the
truest, and certain'st of ours, for which we have great cause to glorify God.
As soon as more forces come over, I am again the third time to march forth
with the Army.

Aprile the 25. THE Lord More with one hundred and fifty Troopers, and a
hundred Dragooners, went toward the Nauan, burnt the Rebels quarters round
about it, came within Musket shot of the Town; took my Lord Gormastownes best
horse, with saddle and furniture, and his man as he was scouting abroad.

The 26. Captain Murrow in coming from, and returning unto Tradarth, killed
forty Rebels.

The 27. Sir Henry Titchburn sallied out of Dundalk with two hundred
Musquettiers, and a hundred horse, besides Pikemen, came to a little Wood,
called Babes Wood; and perceiving some Rebels to be therein, encompast it with
his horse and Pikes, and sent in the Musquettiers, who killed many of them in
the Wood; some like Blackbirds got up into trees, were there shot and killed,
the rest that fled out were most of them killed by the horse: They killed
within and without the Wood above a hundred and fifty.

The 28. Forty Troopers and threescore Dragooners sallied out of Tradarth into
the County of Lowth, and about a place called Clonmore, they killed above forty
Rebels. The same day they pillaged Barnwell of Rabescuts house, whence they
brought abundance of good pillage.

The 29. Markham the Vintner, and Hill his Kinsman, and about ten Troopers
more, with twenty Carrs went abroad to get pillage hay; and betwixt Rickhenhore
and Kilsouhan, which is some 7 miles hence, were suddenly set upon by Dudly
Bern, who had at least threescore horse and a hundred foot; they killed
Markham, and his man, and Kinsman, and four or five Troopers, besides ten or
twelve Carmen.

The 30. About one a clock in the morning, Lieutenant Colonel Gibson with his
Regiment went to Bullock and Bray, killed some, and brought into the City
eighteen Rogues, who are committed to Prison. The same day three or four
hundred Rebels came before Mellifont, three or four miles from Tradarth, where
Lord More had left on Tuesday before a Garrison of fourscore foot, and about
thirty horse; the Rebels played hotly upon them until the horse were ready
within; but as soon as the horse were in readiness, they with the foot
sallied out, and killed about thirty of the Rebels.

The same day also six or seven of our Soldiers went from their Garrison of
Dunsohla Castle, about four miles hence, abroad pillaging; entering into a
protected house; the woman of the house gave intelligence thereof to some
Rogues near hand; who came suddenly upon them, killed three, left one for
dead, the rest escaped.

April the twenty seventh, being Wednesday, my Lord Lile, Lord Digby, Lord
Folliot, Sir Charles Coot, Sir Richard Grinfield, Sir George Wentworth, and
other Captains, went with four hundred Troopers, and a hundred and twenty
Musquettiers, and fourscore Dragooners, and thirty Firelocks, on horseback,
under Lieutenant Coal, marched forth; and on Friday following releeved Castle
Jordan; on Saturday they burned Phillipstowne, and took the Fort, killed some,
and hanged four and twenty Rogues.

May the first. The day following being Sunday, they releeved Castle Geshil
with Victuals and Ammunition: Here they found no resistance, they returned back
the same day to Phillipstowne, and from thence to Castle Jordan, where they lay
that night.

May the second. The next day they marched to Trim, a town of great
importance, on the River of Boyne, which place they suddenly surprised with the
loss of one Firelocke, and some six or seven common Soldiers wounded. Of the
Rebels were slain about threescore. The Lord Lile, Sir Charles Coot, and the
rest of the Captains stay still in Trim, having yesternight sent a Convoy of
fifty horse with Letters to the Lords Justices, desiring some forces to be sent
unto them, to leave there in Garrison.

From Munster we hear that Rathgogan Castle which has been a long while
besieged, is lately relieved by Captain William Iephson, and Lieutenant
Downing; at their return Sir Edward Fitz-Harris intended to have intercepted
them with five hundred of the Lord Roches Tatterdemallions, but Captain
Iephson drew them from their strong fastnesses into the plain champion, where
he killed their Captain, and two hundred and forty common soldiers, and took
the Lieutenant and Ancient prisoners.

The fifth of May News came from Dundalk to the Lords Justices by Captain
Cadogan (who came thence through Maday with ten Horsemen only) that the Newry
was not only retaken by the Lord Conway, and Munroe the Scots Commander, from
the Rebels, but also that the Town and Castle of Carlingford was taken by a
Ship that came from Knockfergus, their policy was to put up the Spanish
colors, which the Rebels discerning, sent a fisherboate with ten or twelve of
their Commanders to go aboard the Ship, supposing that some Ammunition was
come unto them; but the Captain of the Ship instead of showing them any such
Commodities, clapped them up under decks, and so landing his Musketeers, they
took the Town, which they of the Castle soon perceiving, fled away, and left
both unto our forces.

The Narrow-water Castle was likewise soon after taken, in which they found
the old Viscountesse of Evagh, daughter of the old Arch Rebel Hugh Earl of
Tirone, Sir Edward Trever, Sir Charles Poynes, Captain Henry Smith, and
several others that were taken prisoners at the beginning of this
insurrection, and close kept in the Castle of the Newry, were all relieved, and
are now going at their liberty.

Victuals grow very scarce and excessive dear, which has forced us to send
the greatest part of our forces into the Country to garrison, until we are
enabled to march forth; for the enemy is yet very strong, especially toward
Wexford, Waterford, and Kilkenny, which Towns he fortifieth, and means to
defend to the utmost of his power.

FINIS.

