AN ANSWER TO THE Case of Roger Price, Esquire AND TO The REASONS offered for
Settling his Wife a Jointure out of the Manor of Westbury, in the County of
Bucks Humbly offered to the Consideration of the PARLIAMENT, by Mr. George
Price, the Second Son, Mr. Edward Price, Mrs. Ann Price, and Mrs. Rebecca
Brandreth, the Sons and Daughters of Roger Price, Esquire Deceased.
BY a Settlement of Marriage made the 25th of June, 1658. upon Roger Price Esquire
the Father, he had not power to make a Jointure to his Son's Wife out of the
Manor of Westbury, nor any part thereto belonging.

Roger Price, the Father, could not by his Indenture dated the 8th of August.
1676, nor by his Will, dated 26th of August. 1676, settle the Manor of
Westbury, or any part thereto belonging, to be a Jointure to his Son's Wife, by
reason of the aforesaid Marriage-Settlement. Besides, he frequently declared to
several persons, That he had taken all the Care imaginable in his Settlements,
and Will, that Westbury might not be a Jointure to any Wife. And in the said
Will he took particular care of his Heir, that not any of his younger Sons
should have his Portion, until he attained the Age of Twenty five years, nor
Daughter till Twenty two, and if any of them dyed before he or she attained
such age, his or her Portion to go to the Eldest Son.

One of the Brothers Charles Price is since dead, and his Portion fell to the
eldest Brother.

Mr. Price the Father, upon making his Will in August 1676,
granted Nine Annuities (whereof Four are in being) out of Westbury, which if
their Rights be given from them, will be the utter ruin of the Widows.

Mr. Price the Father left Roger his Son 310 l. per annum at Westminster, with
power to make a Wife a Jointure thereof, which together with Roger the Sons
Wife's Portion (which is also now in Lands) amounts to near 700 l. per annum,
which is or may be settled as Jointure for his Wife, and afterward as he
pleases, for provision for his younger Children.

Roger the Father settled 1500 l. per annum in Houses in London, for the raising
of his younger Childrens Portions out of the Profits of the Estate, it is eleven
Years since his Death, so that the Sum of 16500 l. is, or might have been
raised, out of which 7500 l. has been paid for the Portions of younger
Children; and it is presumed the overplus is applied as a Provision for Roger
the Son's younger Children, he having near 900 l. per annum in Lands at
present, besides his Wife's Fortune to live upon.

Roger the Son has cut down Timber near to the value of 1500 l. in the Manor
of Westbury, within this five Years: Whereas by his Father's Will he should
have cut but 100 pounds worth yearly.

This is the third time that Roger the Son has attempted to obtain an Act of
Parliament for the making of a Jointure out of Westbury; but the Bill has been
twice rejected. All the younger Brothers and Sisters of the now Roger Price,
not so much regarding there Right in Remaindership to Westbury, as the Right of
the Son and Heir of the said Roger Price; this Westbury being all the Lands the
Heir is like to have. Therefore they do humbly represent the Right of the Heir,
and Widows, and Fatherless to this Honorable Parliament; and pray the Bill for
settling a Jointure out of Westbury may be rejected.


