An Account of the Principal Officers, Civil and Military, of ENGLAND, in the
Year 1699.
The Lords Justices of England. 1 THe Ld. Arch-Bp. of Canterb. 2 John Ld.
Summers, Ld. Chan. 3. The E. of Pembroke, Lord President of the Council. 4.
John Visc. Lonsdale, Ld. Privy Seal. 5. William Duke of Devon. Ld. Steward of
the King's Housho'd. 6 John E. of Bridgwater, 1st. Commis. of the Admiralty. 7
John E. of Marleborough, Governor to the Duke of Gloucester. 8 Edward E. of
Jersey, Secret. of State. 9 Charles Mountague Esquire; 1st. Commissioner of the
Treasury.
The Right Honorable the Lords and others of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council. HIs Royal Highness Prince George of Denmark. Thomas Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury. John Lord Summers, Lord High Chancellor of England.
Thomas Earl of Pembrok, Ld President. John Visc. Lonsdale, Ld. Privy Seal.
Henry Duke of Norfolk, Earl-Marshal of England. William Duke of Devonshire,
Lord Steward of the Household. James Duke of Ormond. Charles Duke of Bolton.
Maynard Duke of Schonberg. Charles Duke of Shrewsbury. William Duke of Bedford.
Charles Duke of Bolton. Robert Earl of Lindsey Lord Great Chamberlain of
England. Aubrey Earl of Oxford. Charles Earl of Dorset and Middlesex. John Earl
of Bridgwater. Charles Earl of Manchester. Thomas Earl of Stamford. Robert Earl
of Sunderland. John Earl of Bath. Charles Earl of Berkeley. Laurence Earl of
Rochester. William Earl of Portland. Thomas Earl of Falconberg. Ralph Earl of
Mountague. John Earl of Marlborough. Richard Earl of Scarborough. Francis Earl
of Bradford. Henry Earl of Rumney. Ford Earl of Tankerville. Edward Earl of
Orford. Edward E. of Jersey, Secretary of State. Richard Earl of Ranelaugh.
John Viscount Lonsdale. Henry Lord Bishop of London. Thomas Lord Wharton.
Robert Lord Lexington. Sidney Lord Godolphin. Thomas Lord Coningsby. Peregrine
Bertie Esquire; Vice-chamberlain. James Vernon Esquire; Secretary of State. John Smith
Esquire; Chancellor of the Exchequer. Sir John Holt, Knight, Lord Chief Justice of
the King's Bench. Sir John Trevor Knight. Master of the Rolls. Sir Henry Goodrick
Knight. Sir Joseph Williamson Knight. Hugh Boscowen Esquire;
Clerks of the Council. Sir John Nicholas, Knight of the Bath. William Blath
warte Esquire; Robert Southell Esquire; John Povey Esquire;
The Principal Officers of His Majesty's Household. Board of Green-Cloth.
William Duke of Devonshire, Lord Steward of His Majesty's Household. Francis
Earl of Bradford, Treasurer and Cofferer. Thomas Lord Wharton Comptroller. Sir
Thomas Felton Bar. Master of the Household. Sir William Forrester Knight. Clerk of
the Green-cloth. Sir James Forbes Knight. Clerk of the Green-cloth. Sir Charles
Isaac Knight. Clerk Comptrollers of the Green-cloth. Anthony Row Esquire; Clerk
Comptrollers of the Green-cloth.
The Office of Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household is vacant,
Vice-Chamberlain, the Right Honorable Peregrine Bertie Esquire; Gentlemen of His
Majesty's Bedchamber. Groom of the Stole, Vacant. Charles Earl of Arran. Henry
Earl of Rumney. Richard Earl of Scarborough. James Duke of Queensborough.
Charles Earl of Selkirk. Algernon Earl of Essex. Charles Duke of St. Albans.
Marquess of Monpouillon. Robert Lord Lexington. Charles Earl of Burlington.
Grooms of the Bedchamber, under the Command of the Groom of the Stole. The
Honorable Coll. Stanley, John Sayers Esquire; Hatton Compton Esquire; Lord Tho.
Windsor. Emanuel Scroop How Esquire; -- Chalmondley Esquire; Monsieur Gildermert Esquire;
-- Jenings, Esquire; Gentleman-usher of the Black-Rod, Sir David Mitchell Knt.
Gentlemen-ushers Day-Waiters, Francis Aston Esquire; Jeremiah Chaplain Esquire; Thomas
as Earl Esquire; Capt. Saunders, Assist. Gent. Usher. Keeper of the King's Closet.
Randolph du Keine, Esquire; Master of the Robes. Arnold Earl of Albemarle. Master
of the Great Wardrobe. Ralph Earl of Mountague. His Deputy Charles Bland Esquire;
Keeper of the Privy-Purse, is Vacant. Treasurer of the Chamber. Lord Edward
Russell. His Deputy Roger Syzer Esquire; Comperoller of the Chamber. Hugh Chudleigh
Esquire; His Majesty's Principal Secretary of State. Edward Earl of Jersey. Chief
Secretary of that Office. Robert Yard Esquire; His Majesty's other Principal
Secretary of State. James Vernon Esquire; Chief Secretary under him. William Ellis
Esquire; Ecclesiastical Officers in His Majesty's Chapel Royal. Dean of the
Chapel. Henry Lord Bishop of London. Sub-Dean. Dr. Ralph Battle. Lord Almoner.
William Lord Bishop of Worcester. Sub-Almoner. Mr. Barnes. Clerk of the Closet.
Dr. Oliver Mounta^^ue. Master of the Horse. Henry de Nassau St. ^^neur
D'auverquerque. Gentleman of the Horse. Henry Ireton Esquire; Avener and
Clerk-Marshal. John Latten Esquire; Earl Marshal of England. Henry Duke of Norfolk.
Knight Marshal. Edward Earl of Jersey. Master of the Ceremonies. Sir Charles
Cotterell Knight. Master of the Jewel-House. Colonel Charles Godfrey. Master
Falconer. Charles Duke of St. Albans. Master of the Revels. Henry Killigrew
Esquire;
Lord Chief Justice, and Justice in Air, of all His Majesty's Forests, etc. on
the South side of Trent. Thomas Lord Wharton. Lord Chief Justice, and Justice
in Air, of all His Majesty's Forests, etc. on the North side of Trent. William
Duke of Devonshire. Ranger of Windsor Forest, Henry Duke of Norfolk. Ranger of
Waltham Forest, Robert Earl of Lindsey. Ranger of Hyde-Park, Edward Earl of
Jersey. Ranger of St. James 's-Park, John Earl of Bath. Ranger of the Windsor
Great Park, William Earl of Portland. Lord Warden of the Stannaries, John Earl
of Bath. Groom-Porter, Thomas Neal Esquire Serjeant-Porter, (...) Hubert Esquire
Surveyor General, Samuel Travers Esquire; Surveyor General of the Works, -- Taubman
Esquire; Comptroller of the Works, William Tallman Esquire; Play Master, Thomas Lloyd
Esquire; Three Kings of Arms. Sir Thomas St. George Knight. Garter Principal King of
Arms. Sir Henry St. George Knight. Clarenceux. Sir John Dugdale Knight. Norroy. There
are six Heralds of Arms, and four Pursuivants. Knight Harbinger, Sir Lambert
Blackwell Knight. Officers of the Band of Gentlemen Peationers. His Grace Charles
Duke of St. Alban's, Captain. Henry Heveningham Esquire; Lieutenant. Charles Fane
Esquire; Standard Bearer. Robert Manly Esquire; Clerk of the Checque. Officers of the
Yeomen of the Guard of His Majesty's Body. Charles Earl of Manchester Captain.
Thomas Maule Esquire; Lieutenant. Robert Sayer Esquire; Ensign. Charles Harborough Esquire;
Clerk of the Checque. Richard Vphill Esquire; Corporal. John Biggs Esquire; Corporal.
George Davenant Esquire; Corporal. Ambrose Meers Esquire; Corporal.
Lords Commissioners of the Treasury. John Smith Esquire; Chancellor and under
Treasurer of the Exchequer. Sir Stephen Fox Knight. Ford Earl of ^^nkerville.
Charles Monta^^ Esquire; Henry Boil Esquire; Their Secretary, William Loundes Esquire;
Officers of the Exchequer, which relates to the disposing of His Majesty's
Revenue. John Smith Esquire;; Chancellor and Under Treasurer.
Chamberlains of the Exchequer. Sir Nicholas Steward Bar. Charles Cole Esquire;
Auditor of the Receipts. Christopher Mountague Esquire; Clerk of the Pells. Henry
Pelham Esquire; The Four Tellers. Thomas Howard Esquire; -- Godolphin Esquire; The Right
Honorable John Viscount Fitzharding of the Kingd. of Ireland. Guy Palms Esquire;
Comptrollers of the Tellers. Peter Hume Esquire; Cremour Esquire;
Commissioners of the Customs. Samuel Clerk Esquire; Charles Godolphin Esquire; Sir
Walter Young Bar. Benjamin Overton Esquire; Henry Henley Esquire; Sir William St.
Quinten, Their Secretary, John Sanson Esquire;
Commissioners of Excise. Sir William Ashurst Knight. Christopher Mountague Esquire;
John Smith Esquire; William Carr Esquire; Edward Clerk Esquire; Foot Onslow Esquire; William
Fleming Esquire; Philip Medows Esquire; Thomas Everard Esquire;
Commissioners of Appeal. Sir William Honywood Bar. Richard Beak Esquire; George
Doddington Esquire; Edmund Chaloner Esquire; John Lock Esquire;
Commissioners of Wine-Licenses. Sir Stephen Evance Knight. Nicholas Fenn Esquire;
William Young Esquire; Thomas Lake Esquire;
Commissioners of the Stamp-Offices. Edward Lloyd Esquire; Henry Harris Esquire; James
Isaacson Esquire; John Stanley Esquire; Henry Cornish Esquire; Jacob Vanderish Esquire; Coll.
Farringdon.
Commissioners for Hackney-Coaches. William Congreve Esquire; Daniel Blake Esquire;
Charnock Herne Esquire; Secretary and Receiver, Mr. Anthony Meck.
Commissioners of the Glass-Wares, etc. Walter Whitfield Esquire; Dalby Thomas Esquire;
John Boles Esquire; James Missune Esquire;
Secretary and Receiver. Mr. James Deanes.
Governors of the General Post Office. Sir Robert Cotton Knight. Sir Thomas
Franklin Knight. Isaac Manly Esquire; Comptroller of the English Office. Ashburnham
Froude. Comptroller of the Foreign Office. Commissioners of the Prize-Office
bro^ Agents to Receive Arrears. John Parkhurst Esquire; John Paschall Esquire;
Lord Privy Seal, John Viscount Lonsdale.
Clerks of the Privy Seal, H. Ludlow Esquire; John Baron Esquire; Thomas Goslin Esquire;
Sir George Peirs Bar.
Clerks of the Signet. Sir John Nicholas, Knight of the Bath. Nicholas Morris
Esquire; Sir William Trumball Knight. John Gauntlet Esquire;
Lords of the Admiralty. The Right Honorable John Earl of Bridgwater. John
Lord Haversham. Sir Robert Rich Bar. Sir George Rooke Knight. Sir David Mitchell Knight.
Secretary to their Lordships. Josias Burchet Esquire.
Treasurer of the Navy. Sir Thomas Littleton Bar. Comptroller, Sir Richard
Haddock Knight. Surveyor, Edmund Dummer Esquire; Clerk of the Acts, Charles Sergison
Esquire;
Commissioners of the Navy. Sir Richard Haddock Knight. Edward Dummer Esquire; Charles
Sergison Esquire; Samuel Pett Esquire; Dennis Lyddal Esquire; Thomas Wilshaw Esquire; Sir
Cloudesly Shovell Knight. Matthew Ailmer Esquire; James Southern Esquire; Sir Edward
Gregory Knight. George St. Lo Esquire; Henry Greenhill Esquire;
Commissioners of the Victualling-Office. Thomas Papillion Esquire; Simon Main Esquire;
John Ager Esquire; Receiver, Philip Papilion Esquire;
Commissioners for Registring Seamen. John Hill Esquire; Matthew Ailmer Esquire; John
Tinewell Esquire; (...) Beng Esquire; Thomas Baker Esquire;
Commissioners of the Sick and Wounded. Dr. James Welwood. Thomas Addison Esquire;
Anthony Shepherd Esquire; Roger Kirby Esquire; David Elder Esquire; Receiver, Thomas Povey
Esquire;
Commissioners of Trade. Robert Earl of Lexington. Thomas Earl of Stamford. Sir
Philip Meadows. William Blathwait Esquire; John Pollexfen Esquire; John Lock Esquire;
Abraham Hill Esquire; George Stepney Esquire; Their Secretary, William Popple Esquire;
The High Court of Chancery. John Lord Summers, Lord High Chancellor of England.
Master of the Rolls, Sir John Trevor, Knight.
The Twelve Masters in Chancery. Sir John Trevor Knight. Sir Lacon William Child
Knight. Sir John Hoskins Knight. Sir John Franklin Knight. Sir Robert Le Guard Knight. Dr. John
Edisbury. Roger Meredith Esquire; John Methwyn Esquire; Samuel Keck Esquire; Sir Richard
Holford Knight. Thomas Pit Esquire; Henry Newton, L.L.D.
The six Clerks. Shem Bridges Esquire; Littleton Powell Esquire; Basil Herne Esquire; John
Suffeild Esquire; John Trevor Esquire; John Highlord Esquire; Clerk of the Crown, Thomas
Chute Esquire; Prothonotary of the Court, Jonathan Gostlow Snow Esquire; Clerk of
Hanaper, Henry Seamor Esquire; Warden of the Fleet. Mr. William Weedon Ford.
Two Examiners. William Emmerton Esquire; Ralph Hough Esquire; Master of the
Subpoena-Office. Sir Henry Vane Knight.
Clerk of the Patents, Charles Cox Esquire; Register, Henry Lord Dover. Master of
the Affidavit-Office, Samuel Poynter Esquire;
Commissioners of the Alienation-Office. Peregrine Bertie Esquire; James Sanderson
Esquire; William Glanvile Esquire;
The Judges of the Court of King 's-Bench, etc. Sir John Holt Knight. Lord Chief
Justice. Sir Thomas Rokeby Knight. Sir John Turton Knight. Sir Henry Gold Knight.
Prothonotaries. Rowland Holt Esquire; Robert Coleman Gent.
Crown-Office. Clerk of the Crown, Sir Samuel Astrey Knight. His Secondary, Simon
Harcourt Esquire;
The Judges of the Court of Common Pleas. Sir George Treby Knight. Lord Chief
Justice. Sir Edward Nevill Knight. Sir John Powell Knight. Sir John Blencoe Knight. Chief
Prothonotary, John Cook Esquire; Second Prothon. Thomas Winford Esquire; Third Prothon.
William Tempest Esquire; Custos Brevium Office. This Office belongs to the Lady
Ashborne, Master, William Thursby Esquire; Chirographers Office. Francis Lane Esquire;
in Trust for Drake Esquire; Register, John Drake Esquire; Clerk of the King's
Silver-Office. Sold.
The Barons of the Exchequer, etc. Sir Edward Ward Knight. Ld Chief Baron. Sir
Nicholas Lechmere Knight. Sir Littleton Powis Knight. Sir Henry Hatsell Knight. Sir William
Sympson Knight. Cursitor Baron.
The King's Remembrancers Office. The King's Remembrancer, Charles Viscount
Fanshaw. His Deputy, Henry Ayloffe Esquire; The Lord Treasurer's Remembrancer,
Leonard Thomas Esquire; First Secondary and Philazer, George Blackwell Esquire; Second
Secondary, John Taylour Esquire; The Pipe-Office. The Right Honorable Robert Lord
Russel, Clerk of the Pipe. His Deputy, William Whitaker Esquire; Auditors the
Impressed. Brook Bridges Esquire; Thomas Done Esquire; Auditors (...) Revenue. Will.
Aldworth Esquire; Anthony Parsons Esquire; John Shales Esquire; Auditor of the P^^^ipality
of Wales. Mr. Methwin. Auditor of the ^^^hy of Cornwall. The Honourabl^ Philip
Bertie Esquire;
Attorn^^ General, Sir Thomas Trevo^^ Sollici^ General, Sir John Hawles The
King's ^^^ints at Law, Sir George Hutchi^^^ Knight. Sir William Wog^^^ Knight. Sir
Nathaniel Bon^^. Sir Ambrose Philip Knight. Sir Salathiel Lo^^ Knight. Recorder of
London. Sir John Darnell. Sir Nathan Wrigh Knight. The King's Lea^ed Council at
Law, William Farrer Se^ior Esquire; John Conyers Esquire; William Cooper Esquire; John
Aglionby Esquire; -- Clarke Esquire;
Duchy of Lancaster. Chancellor, (...) of Stamford. Vice-chancell. ^^ Joseph
Tilly. Attorney-Gener. ^dward Northey Esquire; Clerk of the Dus^^y, Cheek Gerrard
Esquire; Receiver General Sir John Elwaies Knight. Auditor of the North, John Fanshaw
Esquire; Audit. of the South, John Van Burgh Esquire; Register, Mr. John Baker.
Judges of the Civil-Law, etc. Dr. George Oxenda Dean and Official Principal of
the Arches Court of Canterbury, and Vicar General to the Most Rev^^end Father
in God Thomas Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. Sir Charles Hedges Knight. Judge of
the High Court of Admiralty. Sir Richard Raines Knight. Judge of the Prerogative
Co^^ of Canterbury. His Majesty's A^^ccate-General, Sir Thomas Pinfold Knight. His
Majesty's Adversites in the High Court of Admiralty, Dr. Henry Newton. Dr.
Stephen Waller. Register of the High Court of Delegates, Richard Crawley Esquire;
Register of the Arche^ Court of Canterbury, Lewis Mai^^^ell Esquire; Register of
the High Court of Admiralty, Sir Orlando Gee Knight.
Of the City of London, viz. The Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, and Chief
Officers. Sir Francis Child Knight. Lord Mayor. Sir Robert Clayton Knight. Aldermen
above the Chair. Sir John Moore Knight. Aldermen above the Chair. Sir William
Prichard Knight. Aldermen above the Chair. Sir Robert Jeffries Knight. Aldermen above
the Chair. Sir Thomas Stamp Knight. Aldermen above the Chair. Sir John Fleet Knight.
Aldermen above the Chair. Sir William Ashurst Knight. Aldermen above the Chair. Sir
Thomas Lane Knight. Aldermen above the Chair. Sir John Houblon Knight. Aldermen above
the Chair. Sir Edward Clark Knight. Aldermen above the Chair. Sir Humphry Edwin Knight.
Aldermen above the Chair. Sir Salathiel Lovell Knight. Recorder. Sir Peter Daniel
Knight. Aldermen below the Chair. Sir John Parsons Knight. Aldermen below the Chair.
Sir Richard Levitt Knight. Aldermen below the Chair. Sir William Gore Knight. Aldermen
below the Chair. Sir Thomas Cook Knight. Aldermen below the Chair. Sir James
Houblon Knight. Aldermen below the Chair. Sir Thomas Abney Knight. Aldermen below the
Chair. Sir William Hedges Knight. Aldermen below the Chair. Sir Joseph Smart Knight.
Aldermen below the Chair. Sir Owen Buckingham Knight. Aldermen below the Chair. Sir
Thomas Rawlinson Knight. Aldermen below the Chair. Sir Robert Bedingfield Knight.
Aldermen below the Chair. -- Withers, Esquire; Aldermen below the Chair. Sheriffs.
Sir William Gore Knight. Sir Joseph Smart Knight. Chamberlain, Sir Thomas Cuddon Knight.
Common Sergeant, Henry Crispe Esquire; Town Clerk, John Goodfellow Esquire; Comptroller
of the Chamber, Nicholas Wilmot Esquire; Judges of the Sheriffs-Court, James Monday
Esquire; Duncan Dee Esquire; Secondaries, Edward Trotman Esquire; Zachary Foxhall Esquire;
Officers of the Tower of London. The Right Honorable Robert Lord Lucas,
Governor. Colonel John Farewell Lieutenant-Governour.
Officers of the Ordnance. Master-General of the Ordnance, The Right Honorable
Henry Earl of Rumney. Lieutenant General of the Ordnance, Sir Henry Goodrick
Knight. John Charlton, Surveyor-General. Christopher Musgrave Esquire; Clerk of the
Ordnance. Keeper of His Majesty's Stores, William Mecsters Esquire; Clerk of the
Deliveries, James Louther Esquire; Treasurer and Paymaster, The Honorable Henry
Mordant Esquire; Chief Engineer, Sir Martin Beckman. Officers of the Mint. Isaac
Newton Esquire; Warden. Thomas Neal Esquire; Master Worker. Thomas Hall, Assistant to
the Master Worker. Comptrollers of the Mint, Thomas Mollineux Esquire; Charles
Mason Esquire; Assay Master, Daniel Brattle Esquire; Keeper of the Records within the
T'ower, William Petit Esquire; Keeper of the Records of State, Sir Joseph
Williamson Knight.
A List of the Lords Lieutenants of the several Counties of England. Bedford
and Cambridge, William Duke of Bedford. Berks, Norfolk, Surrey, and City of
Norwich, Henry Duke of Norfolk. Bucks, John Earl of Bridgwater. Cheshire, and
City of Chester, Richard Earl of Rivers. Warden of the Cinque Ports, Henry Earl
of Rumney. Cornwall, Charles Earl of Radnor. Cumberland and Westmorland, Charles
Earl of Carlisle. Devonshire, and City of Exon, Thomas Earl of Stamford. Derby,
William Duke of Devonshire, Lord Steward of His Majesty's Household. Dorset,
Charles Duke of Bolton. Durham and Northumberland, Richard Earl of Scarborough.
Essex, Awbrey Earl of Oxford. South Wales, viz. Pembroke; Carmarthen, Cardigan,
Brecknock, Glamorgan, Radnor, Haverford and Monmouth shire, Thomas Earl of
Pembroke. North Wales, viz. Anglesey, Carnarvan, Denbigh, Flint, Merioneth,
Montgomery, Charles Earl of Macclesfield. Gloucester and Bristol, Charles Earl
of Berkley. Herefordshire, Charles Duke of Shrewsbury. Huntingtonshire, Charles
Earl of Manchester. Kent and City of Canterbury, Henry Earl of Rumney.
Lancaster, Charles Earl of Macclesfield. Leicestershire, John Earl of Rutland.
Lincolnshire and City of Lincoln, Robert Earl of Lindsey. Middlesex, William
Duke of Bedford, in the Minority of the Marquess of Tavistock.
Northamptonshire, Charles Earl of Peterborough and Monmouth. Nottinghamshire,
John Duke of Newcastle. Oxon, Thomas Lord Wharton. Portland, Benn^t Lord
Sherrara. Salop, Francis Earl of Bradford. Somersetshire, James Duke of Ormond.
Hampshire and Town of Southampton, Charles Duke of Bolton. Staffordshire,
William Lord Paget. Suffolk, Charles Lord Cornwallis. Sussex, Charles Earl of
Dorset and Middlesex. Tower and Hamlets, Robert Lord Lucas. Warwick, George
Earl of Northampton Wilts, Thomas Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery.
Worcestershire and City of Worcester, Charles Duke of Shrewsbury. All Yorkshire
and City of York. Thomas Duke of Leeds.
Constables and Governors of Castles and Garrisoned Places. Berwick,
Baumorice-Castle, Richard Lord Buckley, Constable. Canarvan-Castle, Charles
Earl of Radnor, Constable. Carlisle, Charles Earl of Carlisle. Chester,
Colonel Roger Kerby. Dover and Cinque Ports, Henry Earl of Rumney. Gravesend
and Tilbury, Colonel William Selwin. Guernsey, Christopher Viscount Hatton.
Holy-Island, Vacant by the Death of Major General Levison, Governor.
Harleigh-Castle, Charles Nicolas Air, Esquire; Constable. Hull and Block-house,
Thomas Duke of Leeds. Hurst-Castle, Samuel Pitman Esquire; Jersey Island, Lord
Jermin. Landguard-Fort, Colonel Jones. St. Maws-Castle, Hugh Boscawen Esquire;
Pendennis-Castle, Sir Bevill Granville. Plymouth and St. Nicholas-Island,
Charles Trelawny Esquire; Portsmouth, Major General Earl. Sandgate-Castle, Coll.
Hen. Oxenden. Sandon-Castle, Colonel Tho. Marsh. Sheerness, Robert Crauford
Esquire; Scilly-Island, -- Godolphin Esquire; Tinmouth-Castle, Henry Villers Esquire;
Tilbury, Brigadier Selwin. Tower of London, Robert Lord Lucas Upnor-Castle,
Colonel Rouss. Walmore-Castle, Sir Abrah. Jacob, Gov. Isle of Wight, John Lord
Cutts. Windsor-Castle, Henry Duke of Nofolk, Constable. Calshot-Castle, William
Knaston Esquire; Deal-Castle, Admiral Aylmer.
Governors of his Majesty's Territories in America. New England, New York, and
New Hampshire, Richard Earl of Bellomont. Virginia, Sir Edmond Andros.
Maryland, Coll. Francis Nicholson. Barbados, the Honorable Ralph Gray Esquire;
Jamaica, Sir William Beeston. Leward Islands, Col. Christ. Coddrington
Bermudas, Samuel Day, Esquire; Hudson's-Bay, Capt. James Knight.
MILITARY. Horse-Guards, First-Troop. 181. The Earl of Albermarle Col. and
Capt. Lieutenant-Collonel Staples. Lieutenant-Collonel Ogleby. Major Morgan.
Vere Earl of Westmorland. The Second Troop. 181. Duke of Ormond Colonel and
Capt. Sir Tho. Smith Lieutenant-Collonel. Lieutenant-Collonel Poultny. Major
Boil. Major Joslyn. Third Troop. 181. Earl Rivers Colonel and Captain.
Lieutenant-Collonel Compton. Lieutenant-Collonel Baynes. Majors Belkew, and --
Lord Paston. The Names of the Field-Officers of the Army in England. The Earl
of Oxford's Royal Regiment of Horse, 9. Troops, 36 in a Troop, 390. Sir Fr.
Compton Lieutenant-Collonel. Major Bode. Queen's Regiment, 9 Troops 36 each,
390 Major General Lumly Col. and Capt. Lieutenant-Col. Palmer. Major Crowder.
Brigadier Windham's Regiment, 6 Troops, 34 each, 248. Lieutenant-Collonel
Palms. Major Davenport. Earl of Arran's Regiment, 6 Troops, 34 each, 248.
Lieutenant-Collonel Pope. Major Kellum. Colonel Wood's Regiment 6 Troops, 34
each, 248. Lieutenant-Collonel Moreton, Major Fetherstone. Duke of Schomberg's
Regiment, 6 Troops, 34 each, 248. Lieutenant-Collonel Coot. Major Sibourg. Earl
of Macklesfield's Regiment, 6 Troops, 34 each, 248. Lieutenant-Collonel
Wharton. Count d' Paulin Major. Brigadier Chomley's Troop of Granadiers, 176.
Lieutenant Coll. Ireton, Major Guy. Dragoons. Lord Raby's Royal Regiment, 6
Troops, 38 each, 283. Lieutenant-Collonel Killegrew. Major (...) Queen's
Regiment, Colonel Lloyd, 6 Troops, 38 each, 283. Lieutenant-Collonel Gore.
Major Kelly. Earl of Essex's Regiment, 8 Troops, 38 each, 283. Lieutenant
Colonel Hawker, Major Holdgace.
FOOT. First Regiment of Guards, 28 Companies, 40 each, in all 1383. Earl of
Rumney Colonel. Coll. Withiers Lieutenant-Collonel. Coll. Shrimton Major.
Coldstream Regiment of Guards, 14 Companies, 40 each, 694. Lord Cutts Colonel.
Coll. Matthews Lieutenant-Collonel. Coll. Matthews Major. Royal Regiment 26
Companies, 40 each, 1040 Brigadier Selwyn's Regiment, 10 Companies, 36 each,
445. Lieutenant-Collonel Billing. Major Dove. Major General Churchill's the
same. Lieutenant-Collonel Peyton. Major Negus. Bregadier Trelawny's Regim. the
same. Lieutenant-Collonel Rook. Major Caryll,


Price 3 d.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, at the Black Boy, over against St. Dunstan's
Church, in Fleet Street, 1699.


