ROYAL PSALMS, OR, SOLILOQUIES OF D. ANTHONY, KING OF PORTINGALL. Wherein the
Sinner confesses his Sins, and imploreth the Grace of GOD.

Translated into French By P. DURIER.

Into English by Baldwin St George, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Prince's Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

A Tres-Haute et Tres Illustre PRINCESS Francois de Lorraine, Duchess DE
VENDOSME.
MADAM,
IL me semble que ces Pseames, qui sont sortis d'une main Royale, ne pouvient
r'entrer en de plus illustres mains que les vostres, Ils ont este Composez par
un Roy, and Je les present a une Princess, don't la virtue n'est pas moins
estimable que les sceptres and les Courronnes. Je scaybien que n'ayant pas
cet'esprit de piete qui est si necessaire pour fair valoir les ouvrages de
cette nature, Je n'ay pu aussy leur donner cette ardeur salutaire qui touch
les pecheurs, and que leur premier autheur leur a si utilement donnee, mais
c'est Assez que l'on scache que vostre Grandeur ne les a pas ded'aigne pour
croire qu'ils seront profitables. Ainsi, Madame, je les ay seulement comencez,
en leur donnant des paroles pour les fair entendre en nostre Langue and
j'espere que vous les acheverez par vostre approbation, Je ne chercheray point
icy d'artifice pour obliger vostre Grandeur de les recevoir favorablement, Je
suis assure, Madame, que vous n'y verrez rien qui ne vous plaise, puis que vous
n'y verrez rien qui ne rejouisse les Anges Mesmes. C'est un pecheur qui se
repent de ses fautes qui implore la miserecorde de son dieu, and qui fait de sa
conversion, la plus grande felicite qu'il puisse trouver sur la terre. Il ne
parle pas de langage de la cour, parce qu'il scait bien que ce n'est pas le
langage de dieu. Il aim mieux concevoir de bons desirs, que de prononcer de
belles paroles; and pour-veu qu'il puisse dire qu'a pecche, ill croit estre
assez eloquent, Je m'imagine done,

Madame, que vouz aimerez le pecheur en ce glorieux estat and que vous vous
divertirez quelquesfois a luy voir repandre des larmes, don't le repentir est la
source. C'est un divertisement, qui n'est jamais desagreable aux ames
vertueuses and saints, and y est en cette occasion qu'on peut legitiment
souhaiter de voir souspirer son pro chain. Jesuis

Madame, De vostre Grandeur le tres-humble, tres-obeissant, and tres-fidelle
Serviteur, DURYER.

To the truly HONORABLE, Noble, and most virtuous Lady, The Lady ANNE INGOLDSBY.
MADAM,
MY apprehensive quil drewin its bashful Ink, at the presumption to
frontispiece so mean a present, as a Translation, with an Inscription to a
Person of so much Honor, so much worth, so thronged an Inventory, and so
complete a Synopsis, of all Perfections. But emboldned, first, by the Precedent
of the French Translator; secondly, encouraged by the Piety of the Subject;
moved thirdly, by the Nobleness of the Author: It has distilled some obliged
drops toward this Dedication to your Ladyship of a French treatise, done into
the English dialect, to an unparalled Mistress in both, of a Pious subject to
a pious Patroness, of a Noble Author to a Noble Lady. Madam, you shall here
behold a Royal Convert: The Angels rejoice at the Conversion of a sinner; and,
as your virtues entitle you to their Fellowship, and something above mortal in
your beauty to their resemblance, you must necessarily partake of their Joy,
and fill up the quire of that Celestial Hierarchy with your Allelujah's. And
seeing nothing but a little Clay (which although in reference to your
Ladyship's amiable Symmetry, is stamped with a preparative Angelical Impresse)
detaineth you from the present enjoyment of their blessed Society; you cannot
nevertheless but be alike moved with them, and will (I hope) afford the
Gracious Influence of your Protecting beams to the unworthy Interpreter of
these welcome Tidings, and crown him (which is the highest aim his ambition
levells at) with a Crown, studded and enammell'd with your smiles. As this
Consideration seemed to extenuate my boldness; So, the Universal engaging
sweetness of your disposition, the obliging Prodigallity of your favors to me
in particular, and the deep sense of gratitude to your noble family and
relations, Warranted the Inscription, and Commands the Subscription of

Madam, Your Ladiship's most humble and vowed Servant. B. St. George.

ROYAL PSALMS: OR, SOLILOQUIES OF D. ANTHONY, KING OF PORTVGALL.
Wherein the Sinner confesses his Sins, and imploreth the Grace of GOD.
WHence shall I exhale tears enough to pay a deluge for the strayings and
disorders of my soul? When I throw my Considerations on the pasttrod paths of
my life, and cast a speculative optic on the passages of my youth, horror and
sadness arrests my survey. This reflection on my self reverberates to my soul
nothing but trembling, nothing but condemnation, nothing but despair, nothing
but confusion. I know what I have bin, I have known what I ought to have bin, I
know not now what I am. I apprehend what I shall be: And the less my sorrow
is for offending God, the more the apprehensions of it, is enlarged.

Why cannot I repent more, that I may fear less? Alas! I have bin long under
thy scourge (O Lord) and the heaviness of thy hand makes me feel the weight of
my transgressions; yet cannot I fix a repentant kiss to that Rod. Long have
thou lured me, yet I remain still unreclaimed; long have thou raised and
played thy Batteries to force a passage to my heart; yet I, so much my own
enemy, deny an amicable Interveiw to one who brings and offers life. A thousand
evils cast up their trenches round about me, death threateneth me in the van,
flank, and rear; and although I am stormed with all sorts of calamities and
afflictions, yet my soul has not one hostage-teare to ransom my salvation.
These ills have not only ataqued mine age; my life and sufferings comenced
together, from my youth I am a man of sorrow: In fine, I may on the counters of
my dysasters, cast up the single moments of my life; and now I suffer, because
suffering taught me not repentance for my faults. O the admirable prudence of
the heavenly and great Physician! O the immense goodness of the King of kings
the Sovereign of heaven and earth! O the bountiful opennesse of that hand that
stroweth about its favors! O my God, thou underbladders't me with greifs, that
I may not sink in pleasures, that I may learn to rejoice, without making my
Joys criminal, thou delegates sorrows finite, to atone for sorrows
Infinite; thou dismantles my body of comforts, to cloathe my soul with
salvation. The wounds that thou inflicts, are but to open an easier expedient
to my cure; and thou endangerest not my present life, but as a preservative to
a life more happy, more glorious, more triumphant. But alas! what is necessary
for me, falls so little under my cognizance, that I check at the physic of thy
merciful prescripts, I dread those afflictions, whose rigorous violence ought
to instruct, and ought to be received as effects rather of mercy then of
choler: so that I fail in distinguishing the counter-poysons thou tenderest:
and how shall I distinguish them, being not to be cured but by affliction? yet
I desire to be freed from an affliction so wholesome. To conclude, can there bud
any hopes of a cure but from griefs? Seeing sickness and disseases are the
fruits of pleasure, let me suffer them, (O Lord my God) but to the end that my
sorrows may be converted into Joys, and I rejoice with thee; teach me how my
sufferings may meet with thy divine pleasure and my own salvation.

PSALM II.
TIme with a swift current tides away years and days, yet my unhappiness
still fixes my condition; I am still a sinner, still call down the vial of
my God's Indignation. Having been constantly wracked on the wheel of so many
afflictions, so many miseries; they have not forced from me so much as one good
thought, one sensible detestation of my sins, the sole Axletree whereon my
misfortunes turn. I regard not how I lend an advantageous foot to each days
sinful trips, but have not regard to recover my foyls; I still patch up my old
iniquities with new offenses, and step from petty trespasses to capital; how
shall I entertain the stroke of my last hour? how shall I fly? where shall I
conceal my guilty head, when Judgment summons to an appearance, and I am cited
to bring in my audit for my manifold receipts? at what a blush will my
inexcusable sloth and negligence, tonguetied stand, when I shall behold the
awe of thy enthroned Majesty, and must pass a strict scrutiny for the least
peccadilloes in my behavior and concernments? I will reply then, my God, I am
overcharged, O let thy mercy be an advocate in my cause: who am I and where
shall I find eloquence to make my tongue fertile with a rejoinder to thy
Justice? but what shall I do if thou urge a plea? I must with a trembling
bashfullnesse wrap my face in confusion and acknowledge I have not improved the
stock wherewith I was entrusted, I must confess I have misdisbursed it in
vanities, and that it has served as an exchequer to maintain my lusts, and
that I have lavished it in living sinfully. Alas? did I say [in living]? it is
not an expression fit to cloth that condition; I should rather say in dying. I
imagined I lived in the days of my voluptuousness, but now a
thorough-conviction lies upon my soul I was dead, because I lived without Thee,
the only true life. How should I live when my memory affords not one instance
that I have lived with thee: In fine, (O my God) since the life of a sinner is
death; I may truly conclude, my death anticipated my life; as yet I am not
acquainted with life, but still remain in an empty channel cut off from my God
the head and fountain of life. My corrupt inclinations still. impregnated my
tender age with occasions of offending thee, I was scarce enfranchised from the
womb, when I sell into the bondage of sin: At my nativity, my cheeks were
bedewed with tears for sins I was conceived in and knew not. And I had scarce
dried up the tears for the sins of another, but I began to commit sins my self
which I did know, yet have not lent them one tear. I have delighted my self
in the sins of my infancy, and with my impurities profaned the innocence of
that age which nature intended the Sanctuary and sacred treasury of all the
purity of this life. I have breathed nothing but concupiscence, I have been the
shameful triumph of my base and sinful affections, and a web so thick has
spread it self over the eye of my understanding, that I could not discern
between light and darkness, between the smooth calmness of the mind, and the
tempestuous Billows of sensuallity. In an age so ignorant and so little
studious of good, I have given a quicker care to the world then to heaven, I
have bin driven down the swift torrent of a deceitful voluptuous stream; and,
as if I had been carried away more with the love of torments then rewards, I
have acted here on Earth whatsoever might further my inevitable precipice into
hell. From a corrupted infancy I have proceeded to a debauched puberty; my sins
have shooted up with my years and have grown whilst I grew. My vain and
vicious loves, put on me the shape of a madman or barbarian; and at the same
time I was philtred and enchanted, by their lushious witchcrafts. I became mine
own enemy, and willingly ran into the fatal embraces of my own ruin. The
days of my puberty were graduates in the schools of sin. Through the course
of sinning I passed to the degree of my Youth, which has left behind it no
other tracts but the soyls and sullyings of vice; every moment that adds to my
age adds to my sins. I have bin young, I have attained the viril consistency of
a man, and disseising vice has always held the signiory of my Soul which owed
allegiance unto virtue. Age has swan-plum'd my elder head, yet it so little
maturates my judgment, that I tread not in the paths of thy heavenly
directions; and as if I were a child, at a double Jubilee of years, old and
crasie as I am, yet do I the actions of a Child. What time has bin so unprivy
to my faults that it may encourage the least plea of Innocence? Alas! my God if
thou should gratify me, to expect until I picked out one moment of
Innocence in my whole life, to move in arrest of Judgment; what advantage
could I take of that favor, since my life affords not one minute but laden
with a sin? Thou art Just (my God,) thy Judgments are Justice it self; thy
decisions match the merits of the cause. When I seek for appeasing inducements,
I find in me nothing but provoking motives. All my accounts carry the justice
of a merrited fear, And I cannot reckon them without summing up my
transgressions. I have bin always active in iniquity, I have constantly footed
the dances of the wicked, their instructions have been always my charming
music. I have wallowed in vices like a swine in the mire, whose repast is
ordure and filth; nor have I fancied my self, in other than in things vain,
detractious, and blasphemous; whatsoever was wholesome became nauseous; and
that only had the gust to tickle my wanton palate which was mortiferous, my
Bosome-councell were the wicked. I had no enjoyment but in the society of the
reprobate; my ambition was to aim at the wretched grandeur of an eminent
sinner. I was dextrous in excusing, slow in accusing my self. To steel; and
harden my heart, was the butt of my bended endeavors; and the notacknowledging
my self a sinner, the more aggravation it heaped on my sins, the less
minorations is left my excuses, I was negligent in procuring Balsome for my
wounded soul, slighted all recipe's, and grew enraged against those beyond the
limits of all reason and respect who forced a seasonable Chirurgy. I have knit
my fists at the instructor, and opened my arms to the flatterer; my ears have
not admitted-in thy peace-propounding-trumpets, but given audience to those
that came without thy orders. In fine, (my God,) the vanity of the world has
been the whole course of my studies. All my discourses were lies, in the
addresses of all my affairs, I have courted darkness before light. See here
the landscape of my actions, see the card of my whole life! Where is there any
thing to be found but provocatives of thy just indignation? So that I will
answer thy interrogatories with nothing but humble confessions; and since thou
have taught me, selfe-accusation proves the most acceptable excuse, I will sue
out my Justification with the bare acknowledgment of my crimes; raze out from
thy memory the disorders of my youth, and indite me not at the Bar of thy
Justice. It is impossible for man to be justified before thee: but, if I must
pass thorough thy judgments, turn me over (O God) to the Bench of thy Mercy,
and remember I am the workmanship of thy own hands, although a sinner. If my
sins provoke, let thy mercy appease; let its intercession merit the repentance
of him that adores thee; let it bound thy justly-incensed wrath; In fine, let
it snatch me out of the fiery embraces of hell, to the end my soul may echo
forth thy praises, and trump, throughout all the corners of the earth, the
effects of thy clemency.

PSALM III.
WHat an aggravated unhappiness is it, to have incensed the author of
happiness, to have offended the purchaser of Salvation, and to have despised so
superciliously his precepts? I have willingly quitted the paths of felicity,
and like a stray sheep wandered and straggled within the shot and command of all
occasions, that might gape after and design my destruction; I have roved every
where, and every where been assailed by troops of sorrows, griefs, and
misfortunes. I have been wildred in the Meanders of perdition and iniquity. I
have left no place unbeaten, that I might spring to my self repose and
consolation; but I retriv'd them not, because I minded not Thee, my God.
Without enquiring after the territories of peace, I have traveled through a
Barren land, the demeansns of death and sin, where horror and pain encamp,
and where the Soul lies sentenced to the Marshalsey of everlasting torments.
Whilst I glittered in pomp and dignity, I was dasl'd with their coruscancy; and
as if I had been Nabucadonoser'd into a beast, Woods and Caves were my
shelters. Whilst I was mired in pleasures, I was plunged in troubles, my couche
was prepared on a precipice; at the same instant both sleep and ruin crept
upon me; such a mist interposed the beams of my reason, that I expected
anchorage in the midst of so many storms, and so many perils. What course
shall I steer, in what creek shall I secure my self, being beaten on a
lee-shore, amidst the shelves and shoales of encompassing dangers? The hopes
that convoyed my youth are dispersed and vanished, and I am become like to one
shipwracked, who having lost his vessel sends a watery eye after his floating
treasures: scourged hither and thither by the tyrannous winds and no less
imperious waves, I am far from harbors, can kenne no land that gives hopes of
escape, I let my self be driven on the rocks where I must most miserably
perish. The Enemy has planted his Ambuscadoes and I never mistrusted, I have
walked without fear or suspicion over the pit-falls he has covered for me;
and, as if I were accessory to my own perdition, I have clapped an
extinguisher on the light that should guide to their discovery. I have soothed
my self in my sins, nor could I fasten in my Imagination the least opinion of
homage due from my youth to the Signiorie of death. Thus my Soul being
overreached by the vanity of that false position, gave entertainment to all
extravagant appetites. I held forth a willing arm to ushering sensuality, and
was carried wheresoever her policy and tyranny led me. Why, said I, (disputing
with my self) should I dream of death? why should I fix my thoughts on the end
before the middle has taken up my considerations; life enough is left unspunne
to meditate a recollection, a sudden conversion waits on my will at all
seasons. Thus have I grown old in my impieties, thus are my ill customs become
habitual, and thus as a Gally-slave to sin, chained to its oar, I must
obey. I am like unto a lunatique that hates both life and body, and arms his
fury against the one and the other, until his totally sopited and besotted
reason leaves to command his actions. But alas, the bent of my hate is of a
nature more strange, more pernicious! The lunatic fastens on his body, bends
but his fist and blows against clay: but my obdurateness in sin makes me
fasten on my Soul, and conclude its wounds in murder. Having thus climbed by
degrees to the top of Iniquity, day after day I irritate my God, and my
obstinacy calls upon the justice of his fury and my perdition. I have been
often forced to smoother the inveterate and wicked flames that prey upon me.
But it is impossible to secure my heart from them; their fuel is in me, they
are lodged in my bones. O my God, spread thy gracious wings over me! I am not
able to quench this destroying fire, but with the saving fire of thy divine
love. I have not strength enough to cast off the yoke of sin: thy assistance
must work my dis-ingagement, and thy succors must prove the reserves to my
weaker forces. My deserts (I must confess) dare not move for these favors;
but, since thy goodness causes the sun to comfort the good and bad with the
radiancy of an equal Influence; and that thou layest thy obligations on the
unworthy, and on those that beg them not at thy hands; I cannot conceive thou will be so thrifty of thy spiritual riches toward one that begs with the
vehemence of so Intent an ardour, and with the deep sense of so much sorrow for
his offenses. Move thy compassion toward me, give ear to the humble suit of a
poor wretch, thou that art rich in mercies thou that gloriest in the facility
of pardoning, thou that washest away the evil habits of the will, thou that
hearkens to the complaints of the captives, thou that breakest the Netts we
pitch for our selves, thou that buyest our liberty when we sell our selves to
slavery, and employ the false liberty (men think they enjoy without thee)
against thee: stretch forth thy hands that the work of thy hands may not
perrish, that I may not fall into the bottomless pit that affords not one
drop of watter to quench the everlasting flames that tortures sinners: deliver
me from the Jaws of the roaring Lion who searches me for his prey, and will
not leave off his bloodthirsting scent: thou, who art my Protector, and in
whose mercy all my hopes cast anchor, let the effects of thy mercies answer
the hopes of them; because I have hoped in thee my God, I shall not be
confounded; and having in the conclusion tasted the returns of my prayers, I
will bear a part to thy glory with the heavenly Quires of Angels and
blessed Spirits.

PSALM IV.
MY nightly couch has been curtain'd about with melancholy; fear and terror
have given their unwelcome attendance to my fancy, my conscience makes mortal
and re-iterated thrusts, nor am I dexterous enough to ward its passes; and the
least wound I receive, is from the tuck of an Enemy. I cannot allay my
disquieting thoughts; hovering Illusions interrupt my sleeps, instead of
affording its natural repose, it ministers to my inquietude. It is an
impossibility, sleep should attaque my eyelids; if a weariness stroke my
temples with the hopes of a slumber, a restlesnesse in me frustrates its
blanditions. I feel a late, what devouring fire creeps through my entrails
which receivs recruits from my watchings. The food disrelisheth that relished
before. I mingle tears with my Beverage, my forehead is bound about with
confusion, shame spreds it self over my face. When I ruminate on my offenses
toward my God, and in how many sundry ways I have abused my own abilityes
and his favors. The study of vanity has Engrossed the sum of my days, I grow
pale with cares opposite to my good, permitting my self to be carried away
with the extravagancy of my conceits and the Injustice of my desires: my loss
is become Irreparable, I have let slip the time destined for the working forth
of my salvation, I fed my Imagination with dreams, my eyes seemed to
entertain nothing but realities, and they proved mere delusions. In fine, I
have deceived my self; my vanities and ravings have conspired my ruin, my
aims reached heaven, and the depth of Hell received me; and since my veterane
sins teeme new offenses, and one abyss draws another Abyss, my soul
enervated by vice is become feeble, and I am now as rottenness in the
Nosthrills of men. My wishes catch at impossibilities, and the imaginary
possession of them renders me not unlike to one, who dreaming golden dreams,
at his awaking is seized with a regretfull corrosive for his vanished treasure.
I am but a worm, (my God) yet such a stranger to my self I have had an
aspiring boldness rearedme over the tops of others heads; all my discourses
have been tipped with fastuous affectation, I conceived the elixar of wisdom
to consist in that pride. I became intolerable to those resembled me, a
fantastique groundless choler has often hurried me on to be injurious. This
cruel passion was so innate, my soul itself nursed it without the least
encouragement of a provocation: so long as it reigned in me, not only my self,
servants, and relations, but I my self participated the fury of its tyranny.
And, without consideration how God upraided me not with the Immensity of his
favors, I hit my friends in the teeth with scarce obliging civilities. I have
murmured under the pressure of my misfortunes, I have placed my hopes in man,
and waved my confidence in God. I entertained truth with deafness, wholesome
documents with offense, the instructor with anger, the pilots of salvation with
dislike; my genius has bin abusive. I have courted vengeance for the least
affront or punctillio, and anticipated the prerogative of God, whose
prerogative it is to revenge. I have bin disrespectfull to the Maintainers of a
good cause. Retorts, although seasoned with sweetness and humility, moved my
choler: what was good in the good squared not with my humor, Brawls and
contentions made up my divertisements, I was a skillful pioneer in undermining
the friendship of Brethren, and in manuing discord and hatred amongst them to
the best advantage: good instructions have touched my theory, but were never
welcomed by my practice; they have knocked at my ears, but were not admitted
into my heart. I have carressed evil counselors, whose endeavors were to
please, they have filled a choice place in my savor. But I fancied not a
tell-troth, nor those that with a wholesome freedom both hinted at my
imperfections and persued them with a pious correction. I have not stretched
forth my hand to those in distress, and who snatched at my needful assistance.
I have not shared my morsells with the poor, whom death had beleagured with
famine and necessity. I have turned mine eyes from the beggar and the sick,
lest a sensible compassion should triumph over my avarice and engage an Alms.
I have had no care to discharge my debts, nor to restore the depositums to
those who confided in me; with the greater facility. To answer my unlimitted
desires, I have bankrup't my neighbor by borrowing what I never restored: I
groped after wealth, but as an easier expedient to sin. I have appeared rich
upon a vain and sinful account, but always poor upon a charitable one. I
wanted nothing to entertain my concupiscence, I wanted every thing to treat
piety. I have banished moderation from my trencher, and with horrid excesses
overcharged nature that is satisfied with a little, and is the very
schoolemistris of temperance. I have paid a strange Idolatry to my Belly, I
have built my glory upon an earthly foundation, which could threaten nothing
but destruction. The most exquisite rarities have been searched for to furnish
out my table, I have feigned inconveniences to excuse my nicities; necessity
has been often urged as a pretext for my gluttony: my complacency has bin
with addultresses, I have loved the conversation of the incontinent. My
impurities have arived to such a pitch that I have not confidence to express
what I have had confidence to commit. I have bound out my ears and tongue
apprentices to vanity; with a favorable attention I have sucked in flatteries;
and when in my opinion my praises came short, I have made them up with them of
my own mintage. When an occasion of applause has bin offered, I have bin
tickled with applauding my self and with the applause of others. In
terrestrial delicacies I have forfeited the cates of heaven; if at any time
the apprehensive horror of death and Judgment dreweth me sorth of that pit
which the entregues of worldly pleasures has sunck for us, at the same instant
I slip back again, I am like to a dog that returns to his vomit. I am dead as
to good works, I still live in sins, and although a near borderer on the
frontiers of death, nevertheless undismaied with the terror and
dreadfullnesse of its approaches, I run upon it, But (O my God) let thy great
compassion antevert that great day, that fearful day, that day of tears and
groans; prepare me by death to the commencement of life, that I may fill the
whole creation with encomiums of thy mercy. Behold (O Lord,) behold the posture
of my soul, behold the streights my concupiscence has brought it in, behold
the stripes of that Fury; preserve me from the power of an enemy that will
prove inconquerable, unless thy auxiliary forces intervene. Knock off the
shackles and bolts of death, (O my God) that I may chain my self to thee, who
alone art the true life; and that having cast away the care of all things, I
may follow thee, who art more considerable then all things. Lord my God, God of
mercy and salvation, whisper to my soul, I am thy safeguard, thy prayers are
accepted, let it be done unto thee according to thy petition; let such a voice
(my God) draw my attention, that following thee I may encounter thee,
encountering thee I may never depart from thee until thou returns me whole. For
where shall I find physic for my greifs, if I repair not to thee my God; and
who can prove a more expert physician for my infirmities than he who has
stooped from heaven for the reparation of mankin'd, and to apply remedies to
his maladies? who can better bestow life than he, in whose hands is both life
and death? who can be a better pledge for my salvation amongst the gulphs and
precipices of this world, than my God and my Savior? Save me then, enlighten
me then, thou art both the author of salvation and life, to those repose their
trust in thee. And as thy power (my God) had no alpha, let thy glory have no
omega; that we may magnify thee, that we may adore thee, that we may erect
immortal trophics to thy honor and render everlasting thanks to thee, who art
the eternal fountain of mercyes. I have bin estranged from thee, and although
my estrangenesse was an act of my own will, thou have not failed to answer the
beginning of my invocations with a timely assistance: The quick applications of
thy remedies have even prevented my complaints, the very will to be cured
perfects the cure, and to will life is a motive sufficient to thy goodness
that we receive it; the extent of thy bounty is so large, thy graces commonly
anticipate the prayers of a repenting sinner. I will confess, my God, and that
will be a satisfactory allay to thy indignation, how that I am conscious of my
Iniquities, how that I am acquainted with my evil doings, and do will a present
cure. Yea, my God, it is necessary I know them, that the horror I have may be
implanted in my bones, and that my soul may be affrighted at the terrible Image
my memory copieth forth. I discover to thy Divine Majesty my imperfections and
my sins, to the end thy Mercy may raze and pumice them forth, and thou may
enlighten the dark capacity of my soul that misleads me to a rebellion
against thee. As thou will not the Iniquity, so thou desires not the death of a
sinner, but that he be converted and live: the dead shall not praise thee (my
God) none but thee living, none but we shall be thy Panegyriks, Quiresters, and
Trump, through all ages, the fulness of thy mercies and the tenor of thy
bounties.

PSALM, V.
BEfore thee (my God) have I summed up my miseries, not for thy information,
not to make known the Condition wherein I stand, nor the paths I trace in the
world; because already they are fallen under thy eternal prescience, and from
eternity thou have numbered my footsteps. Thou piercest through the obscurity
of darkness, thou disclosest all clossets, there is nothing can withdraw it
self from thy sight, to thee are all things present, thou dive'st into the
Cabinet-counsells of our hearts, our most secret thoughts to thee are patent. I
will therefore lay open my miseries that thou may uncover thy mercy, and
spread over me thy protecting wing: I will reveal my secrets that thou may
conceal them, that thou may be satisfied with the humility and brokennesse
of my heart, that by a sacrifice so propitiatory, I may invite a plenary
expiation of my offenses. I have hitherto cast up an audit of things horrible,
yet the reckoning falls short of what I have committed. My conscience allarums
me with continual assaults, continually represents the horrid Ideas of my
trespasses, and ingenders in my soul a worm that bites and corrodes without
intermission, but why may not the knawing corrosive of this worm consume all
impurities, and in consuming them consume it self? My God, let it not so feed
that it may live eternally, let it feed that it may dye, and that, by feeding,
by degrees it may leave to feed. But alas! how deplorable is my case. I
believed the latitude of my confession had circumscribed my sins, but I must
confess it admits of larger bounds, my memory still affords fresh instances of
a deserved fear from thy Justice; and as it swells with the whole iniquity of
my life, it is no sooner delivered of one particular, but it grows big with
particulars more heinous, more criminal. Were the sand of the sea multiplied
into figures it were an arithmetic too skant to cast up my transgressions.
Were my tongue centupled it were still impossible to count one of a million: so
that my grief is the more intense by reason all my impurities come not within
the compass of my memory, because the wedgery of new offenses drive and peg
out the old ones. But (my God) those I will not wrap up in silence my
remembrance has bundled up, I will remove my affection from them, that I may
the more firmly settle it on Thee, that thou weighing the humility of my soul
and an eye floating in tears, thy severity may be abated, and thy tender
sweetness encouraged. Thou who art the real sweetness, the sweetness that
entraps not, the blessed sweetness, the sweetness most assured and permanent.
I have entertained kindness with envy and malice, charity with disrespect.
Kings Princes and the ministers of the Gospel have been under the lash of my
tongue, with outrageous murmurings I have scandalized them; encomiums of the
good received reproof, the actions of the wicked approbation; if at any time
the just were justly applauded, at the same time my endeavors were to sully
their reputations with impostures. I have sifted out their most hidden
failings. I have bin so censoriously rigid toward them, into grand crimes have
I aggravated their petty trespasses: on the contrary, if the wicked received
their due salary of a just infamy, and consequently fell into disrespute and
discredit with the world, I have immediately backed them, I have extolled their
imaginary virtues, and preferred them before the just; and perhaps have proved
the ultimate cause to their perdition. I have combined with the thief in
purloyning my neighbor's goods; and that nothing may be wanting to complete my
iniquity, I have fathered the scandal on the son of my mother; my friends and
relations could not secure themselves from my frauds, nor shelter themselves
from my calumnies. What inundations of miseries and misfortunes was possible to
break in upon mortals, my malicious wishes poured on my neighbor's head. In
his death have I often laid the foundation of my hopes. I have not spread a
protecting wing over the innocent; and as if the dysasters of the unfortunate
were a pleasing harmony to me, with inhumane reproaches I have tuned their
afflictions, to the highest key.

The greatest part in the world has suffered in the rashness of my judgment, I
have condemned for sins things without the evidence of the least suspicion, I
have perceived the moate in my brothers eye without seeing the beam in my
own, I have bin lulled in sloth and Idleness, shunned honest labors and
virtuous exercises, I have drowned my time in a voluntary lethargy. My God, my
thoughts were never busied about thankful returns for thy favors; nor has
thy laws and thy power taken up my meditations. Thou know (O God) how sleep
has often quitted its nightly quarters on my eylids, and my mind that
entertained the thought of every thing else, was only unhospitable to the
thought of thee. It has flown every where, but never perched on thee. I have
prepared for bed, I have settled my self to sleep, I have awaked without
dreaming of thee. I have been always without thee because I dwelt so much with
my self; nor persued I any thing but dark passions which constantly widned the
distance from thee. If at any time ejaculatory thoughts soared toward thee and
pried into the wonders thou have perpetrated for mankind, before they were yet
flegg I smoothered them. I have permitted my self to be philtred by the svveet
poison of the world's vanity The endeavors I use to teach my speculations thy
grandeurs, are not unlike the endeavors used tovvard that of sleep, which
when the enchanting flattery of it once overcomes, there ensues none more
sound. I have voted often the settlement of my conscience, but still adjourned
it till the morrow; the hopes to amend one day has cut off all hopes of
amendment. I have placed my felicity on a tottering and deceitful basis, I
leaned on a reed, a broken staff, when I thought my footing most sure, I
miserably dropped into the fire; and nothing but my fall could convince me of
the seeblenesse of my support. My ambition has snatched at unlawful honors,
I burnt with an imoderate desire of hoarding up riches and squeezing profit
out of every thing. These uncurb'd lusts have bogued me in sinful plunges and
troubles. I have shaken hands with all the wicked, with all the unrighteous,
and all those whose lives were irregular and disorderly. I have dishonored
friendship, that sacred tie, that ought to obleige to none but the virtuous:
yes (my God) I have disgraced it with concupiscences, and have profaned its
sanctity with the impurity of my affections, I have fancied my self in
pastimes wherein lodged the cause of my perdition, and the fuel to that fire
which consumed me; and instead of blocking up the passages to obstruct the
inroades of death, I have opened him fresh avenues. All my members have been so
many portalls to receive him into my soul. When I have been sullied with new
offenses, I have not bin cleansed from my old iniquities: on the contrary they
have rather bin the seeds of so many crimes which estranged me from thy face.
That is the reason I have been deprived of the consolation, thy presence
affords, and that I wander like a desparado, a stranger to his own paths. But
alas! what will betide me if I depart from thee? who will throw his eyes on me
if thou avert thine, and as a reprobate deny me the favor of thy aspect? No
doubt I shall prove odious to men, both a subject of scorn and derision, when
they shall demand of me, Where is thy God? why has he eclipsed his face from
thee? What shall I do when outlawed from thy Protection? whither shall I go
hemmed in on all sides and deserted of thee? With tears and sobbes will I
search thee out, I will implore thy mercy, I will beseech thee not to abandon
me, and that thy just indignation may not move thee to draw off thy looks from
the guard of thy servant; because my enemies pursue me, as if I fled before
them, they pursue me (My God) to inslave me and to carrouse my blood. It
behoofs me therefore to take covert under thee, to fly to thy Protection from
whom I have so long fled. Thou art my strength (O God) my refuge, my assurance.
It is thy power alone can countenance me, thy consolation which can cheer me
in the day of my miseries and afflictions. As there is no God but thee, there
is no Savior but thee, Thou my God to whom my miseries and infirmities are
patent, before whom Hypocrisy is unvailed, forget both my old and my new
offenses; let thy mercies divert the pursuites of my enemies; file off the
bolts I have so cruelly been shackled with: there is none my God can do it but
thee, who crowns with salvation those that put their trust in thee, and
renders the poor and weak triumphant over the proud; and the mighty shade not
the divine radiancy of thy looks from me. Disdain me not (O God) be unto me a
salvation and assurance, a redeemer. I am poor and miserable, thou art
accustomed to glad the poor and the miserable with the splendour of thy rays.
If thy justice hunt to unkennell me, let thy mercy earth me; defend me through
thy goodness that makes thee patient and me penitent. Thou art meek, thou art
patient, thy mercy overpoiseth thy wrath, there is nothing more proper to thee,
than to compassionate the miserable, to pardon sinners: the whole world has
tasted of thy loving kindness because thou art omnipotent, thou connives at
the transgressions of mortals that thou may be pleased with their
repentance, thou forgives because thou loves the world because it is the
architecture of thy own hands. Dart thy saving glances on me, that I may turn
toward thee, disingage my afflicted soul from the desperate extremities it is
reduced to, that my lips may overflow with thy praises, and that I may break
forth and say, Blessed be the Lord, who has not permitted me to fall into the
hands of my enemies: they had destroyed me, had not thy timely succor
prevented; my soul was like to a bird entangled in the snares of the fowler.
The nets are broken, and I am delivered.

PSALM VI.
WHat shall I do, a miserable and unfortunate object? The monster, sin, spawn
of the bottomless pit, has stained his jaws with the slaughter of my soul. I
have bin led a sad spectacle of my enemie's triumph. My God! he has stripped me
of all those habiliments, wherewith thou did cloth me; I am now abashed to
lay open my nakedness before thee, I issued out of thy hands, accomplished
with all the graces and riches might furnish out a complete happiness; and
without seriously weighing the sle^derness of my guard to secure them, I have
picquered with all occasions, that might dismount me, and cast me into
perdition. The Blazon of my soul is char-cole-sable, it has forfeited the
livery color of innocence, and has bartered for poison, celestial viands.
That I might habit my self in the mode of a sinner, I have cast off thy
precious equipage and accoutrements. I have bin to my self both a defacement
and a destruction; methinks I am molded into the absolute portraiture of the
first man's disobedience. In fine, (my God) sin has so miserably metamorphosed
my condition, thou will scarce discern in me the stamp of thy creating
impression: Is it not justice then, like a rotten sheep, to exclude me the
flock? If an awful trembling creep through the heavens at thy sight, what
confidence can lead me into thy presence, who am nothing but impurity? If from
sinfulness I am lapsed to brutishness, what impudence can brazen me, to
discover my face amongst the Elect? I will nevertheless return to thee,
although fear and shame struggle within me; I will lay hold on that fatherly
bounty wherewith thou embraces all men, as a guide to conduct me into thy
bosom, as the affection of a parent persues his runaway child, and metes with
usury his submissive return: So I hope (my God) as thy love was abundant in my
flight, my reclaiming will give it increase. But alas! want of force and
ability lameth the will I have to return; I feel the resistance of a cruel
power, that stays me. I feel not the interruption of chains and cords; but the
interruption of my own will, wherewith my enemy has forged fetters impossible
to be knocked a sunder. My shelter is far from thee, because thy Salvation is
far from sinners. I shall expire in this so wild a bondage, unless thy
heavenly supplies sally forth, and my God have an eye over me; I am plunged in
the mire and have no strength to recover my self; a Harricane of temptations
does no less wrack my soul then the foaming waves of an enraged sea buffets a
miserable Bottom. All hope of disingagement from these encompassing dangers
fades, if the hopes of thy protection blossoms not. Alas! the more I essay to
preserve my self from Shipwreck, the more I strike upon the rocks and flats.
Both within and without to my self, I am my own fatal foe: domestique
enemies are every where embattailed against me; I throw me eyes on every side,
and discover not one in whom to repose a trust: a Lacquey, Fear, waits at my
heels; and wheresoever I go, not one faithful friend answers the diligent
scrutiny of my search: but how should I find faith? why should I challenge it
from men, when I have forfeited mine to God? In my miseries and afflictions, I
have appealed to every one for comfort, I have found none amongst those that
filled the van in my affliction, that would lend me any consolation. I have
never been happy in a true friend, such have been numerous that were nothing
but air, and smoaked forth volleys of vain promises; they have been rather
dumb (my God), because they vented nothing concerning thee, and because their
words were so many sins. I have met with men void of charity, who swelled my
faults with aggravations that I might burst into despair, who outragiously
loaded me with detractions and endeavored that my soul might sink under their
malice as well as my reputation; the impious swam in my favors: and declining
the right paths, I have been a proselyte to their profaneness. I am by little
and little arrived to that pitch of irregularity, that although through the
interposition of thy grace, I have not bid farewell to religion, yet have I
taxed many things in it, as frivolous and worthy of disdain. In fine, my God I
cannot borrow an excuse from any Consideration, I have known thee in truth, but
worshipped thee neither in truth nor in spirit, on the contrary I have turned
truth into lies, I have obeyed the creature before the creator, I have fished
for delight in things deceitful and transitory, instead of diving for it in
truth eternal. But (O my God) since thou have informed my knowledge with thy
true religion, shake off that drowsinesse, my iniquities has hung upon me: so
guard my eyes that it may resist the sleep of death, which invades my soul,
enlighten my eyes draw them up toward thee, to the end that through thy light
they may behold thee who art the light eternal, which is never deficient,
never extinguished; which comprehends whatsoever can be imagined sweet and
delectable, that they may greedily feast themselves on the vision of thee, that
they may run-over with joy, that they may wish for nothing but thee, that they
may be convinced thou alone art truly amiable. Thou art the true light that
conveyes light to all that come into the world. Dart one of thy rays, that it
may dissipate the gloomy darkness is gathered about me; work in me a
disposition to come under thy wholesome laws, to the end that my soul, enflamed
with the fire of thy love, may languish after none but thee, and seek for no
pleasures, but what thou reaches to her O Lord. I say, my soul let me say,
Thine, thine it is by creation, mine only by gift and donation; preserve a
creature thou have framed according to thine own image, of whom thou were
pleased to become both the moulder and the model. Let not the precious gift
wherewith thou have endowed me, wherewith thou have honored me with precedence
above all the works of thy hands miserably perish, and become a prey to the
mouth of Hell. Stigmatize me in every part, let corroding ulcers and
putrefactions creep through my flesh, let worms and noisome vermin consume me;
do but thou pardon my soul, and stretch not forth thy hand toward it armed
with tempests; conduct me into thy paths before our Hemispheare do leave off
the departing sunn, who (being now upon his last complement) add force to thy
call and compells me to thee: force me (o God) with all the Artillery of
violence, that I may surrender my self to thee and not perish. Supplant my
heart of marble with a heart of flesh, let thy spirit wield the scepter there,
that thy precepts may oblige my footsteps and thy commands my observance: let
not anything in me (my God) be the motive of these savours, whose unworthiness
in the abuse of so many mercyes has wholly incapacitated, but thy holy and
venerable name alone. I must acknowledge the tardinesse of my arrival at thee,
and to me it is punishment enough it was no timelier. But, my God, I am
satisfied thou streightens not the time and limits it to those would come and
find thee out; with an equal acceptancy thou receives the tardy and the early.
Although sin be an object of thy hatred, it overskips the sinner; nor do thou
rejoice at his perdition. Although the delay be tedious, yet thou expects with
patience. (My God) sweet and taking is that expression, wherewith thou revives
the already drooping hopes of my soul. Although (say thou) thy other loves
have merited my jealous indignation, return yet unto me, and I will enfold in
mine arms. What a pleasing charm is couched in that saying which influenceth
the sinner with an encouragement, although the weakness of his forces bring
diffidence and despair? If the wicked do penance, he shall induce the
acquittall of his transgressions; he shall live and not die. Can it be imagined
then (say thou) that the death of a sinner is the effect of thy will? It
fills me with consolation to hear thee parabolize how the Shepherd finding his
lost sheep with joy, heaved it on his shoulders; and how the woman who had
found her piece of silver which she had lost, prepared a congratulatory
Gossoping for her neighbors. When I turn over thy holy Writ, an inundation of
joyful tears breaks forth; when I encounter the story of the father and the
prodigal son, strike the organs of my ears with that sound which rouzeth
souls from their dead slumbers. Let it not only find a receptacle in mine
ear; but enlighten me also with those divine Rays, which convey to men's
understanding, the horror of their sins, and at the same time overpovver the
darkness of them, let thy voice alvvaies echo in my heart, say unto my
drowsy soul, How long vvilt thou permit the lethargy of death to sit pale
upon thy temples? how long shall those cruel bonds retain thee captive? It is
time that thou arise, that thou tread better paths, that thou return to me who
has ransomed thee. Return, return, Shunamite, return that I may have a
respect for thee. Return, cut of all delays, pluck off all remora's and
hasten to me, because I am thy Lord, I am thy God, who calls thee, who wipeth
away sins, and wraps in oblivion things past. My God, when my ears are solaced
with this divine rhetoric, with assurance I will conclude and say, let thy
hopes my soul warrant repose, because thy Lord load's thee with his bounties,
lay aside all fear and go in quest of him, and although the weariness of so
many evil journeys hang on thee, nevertheless hasten thy steps as thou
intends to accelerate thy content, let not the sense of thy sins discourage
thee. When thou shall be as scarlet, thou shall become as white as snow, thy
sins shall be crossed out, they shall vanish as a small cloud, startle not at
the censure of Bold and Presumtuous, seeing thou falls rather under the praise
of Obedience. My soul, dispatch, go to him, he comes not to call the just but
the sinful. The God offended by thee, the same will be thy saving God, the God
that will cause thee to triumph over sins thy mortal enemies. Why trembles
thou to set forward? It is not a severe judge cites thee before him but a
merciful father that beckens, who would give thee a test of his kindness: Go,
go freely whither mercy calls, lest one day a court of justice summon thee. In
thee, I now cast anchor, my Savior and my God, to thee I will confess my sins
without the least bashful tincture of a Blush, because the committing of them
before men and the rebelling against thee never covered my face with a just
confusion. Let the grumbling pharisee murmur, Who can pardon sins but God
alone. This is the voice of my God, the effects of whose breath is never
abortive. This God that calls me overflowes with gracious sweetness, his wrath
dams not up the current of his mercy; My Savior! relying on thy promises it
shall not be a fained return to thee. Thou art my Anchorage, and I hope thou will prove my Inheritance in the land of the living. Prostrate before thy
majesty, I will leave to fear, because thou have pleased to call me: but lest
thy eyes should nauseate my impurities, I will buck them in my tears, they
shall flow continually, my couch shall bear a watery testimony of my sorrows;
and that I may render me acceptable to thee, I will be less acceptable to my
self. In conclusion, my God, I will endeavor not to abuse the graces thou have
lavished on me with so prodigal a liberality; and since I feel thy motions
working in me I will repent my self of my sins to the end that purified by
repentance from a refined and cleansed heart I may sing thy praises, and say
with thy prophet, Who is like to thee? How glorious shall thy praises hang on
the lips of a sinner, and of him who having sown in tears shall reap in Joy.

PSALM. VII.
I Am moldy with afflictions, cankred with troubles, rustyed with miseries
unexpressible: Gild me (my God) with the Beams of thy Compassion. The Torrents
of iniquity rise upon me, they have over-flowed the confines of my Soul, like
the proud streams of a swelling current. My sins, banked up by
dissimulation, not unsluced by confession, nor laved forth by amendment, are
grown to such a height, they have usurped over my head, they have bowed my
understanding and my will to the dominion of concupisence, or rather to the
servitude of the Devil. Alas! on every side, are mortal sally-ports to my
Soul, from the bottom of my foot to the top of my head there is nothing which
is not overspread with serping ulcers; my enemy has tripp'd up my heels, and
like a barbarous Incensed Tyrant he has sequestered me of all things, but my
understanding; to the end that the consciousnesse of my evil and ruin, might
hang more weight on my sorrows. It had been an act of favor to have divested
me of all the functions of my Soul; but alas he has spoiled me of them as to
good, and left me them as to evil. He has rocked my Soul into so deep a
slumber; although its wounds fall under its discovery, they fall not under so
much sense as to wish a cure and urge a remedy. When what was necessary called
upon mine ears, then a deafness choked them up. I locked out the revelations
of thy Truth; but when a necessary unattention should shut out things
unprofitable, and the sollies of the World; then my ears gaped and sucked them
in, with a greedy thirst. The taste of things celestial was unsavory, with a
loathing Antipathy I nauseated whatsoever might nourish virtue in my Soul,
nothing slid more deliciously off my palate then Terrestrial Gusto's. I have
not made the works of my God the prospect of contemplations, upon this Account
I have shared more of the beast then of the man: on the contrary, the vanities
of the earth, have dallied my Speculations with pleasure; with a lust
unsatiable I have been enamoured to them. The old Enemy of mankind has not
only surprised the five Ports of my senses, to cut off the passages of
Salvation; but likewise secured to himself all the members of my body. He has
so well placed his ambuscado's, it was impossible to decline them. When I was
most Industrious to disappoint him, I have miserably dropped into his clutches:
my Seeing has bin criminal and my not-seeing; my understanding, and my
not-understanding; my discourse and my silence; my standing and my sitting, my
sleeping and my waking, my walking and my reposing. In fine, (my God) I have
perverted the use of my senses and all my members to actions shameful and
destructive; unchaste desires scortched me up; there was neither law natural,
divine, or humane that I have not been a trepasser against, I have only
observed the law of sin. Alas, would I could not say I had observed it, but
that I would observe it no longer: but because I am the very same, and feel no
alteration, I pursue worse principles and tread in paths more perilous: my will
shakes a Scepter over me, my Soul is gangreen'd with corruption, and is it
self the cause and core of its own evil. I often quarrel with my self, that
it should be irksome to me to live, but not to sin; my understanding is privy
to my folly, which adds the more to my confession, and in my own censure justly
casts me, Thou who embraces pleasures with such a pathetick dotage, why wallows
thou so long in the mire, wherein thy concupisences have bogg'd thee? Why do
the affairs of the world goad thee with such pricking cares? Why hunt'st thou
with such a ravenous sent after things transitory and perishing? Why miscalls
thou those things good thou purchases with so much pain; yea often at the
price of thy salvation, things which with fear thou possessest and must quit
with sorrow. Why (my soul) do thou forget thy race and the nobility of thy
extraction, why art thou not ashamed, with so much cowardice and pusillanimity
to submit to the power of thy body and senses, which were placed under the
Legiance. Why give thou entertainment to the charms of the deceitful
promises of the world's witchcraft? How art thou ignorant that the emblem of
the greatest good is but an exhaled meteor that radiates for a while and
instantly vanishes. Blush, blush then miserable sinner because thou have
declined the Creator to divert to the creature; that in the end, with a
judgment rectified, thou may discern the delusions that abuse thee. Behold
how thou wearyes thy self in the persuit of a false good, and like to the
Issue of a metamorphosed Arachne, who spins her own entrails and weaves them
into subtle nets only to mesh flies in; so toylest thou with many labors and
troubles in the search of a small prey, not considerable in any thing but in
its train of torments, wherein it will engage thee. Once more blush that thou
have plowed that, whence thou could reap no profit. Deplore the time thou
have mis-husbanded, to the end that out of the very shame of it, thou may at
least gleane some harvest. Pay thy heart to God, and thou discharges a due
debt. Verily when I ruminate these discourses my indignation is kindled against
my self, that I should not bequeath that to heaven which I so freely bestow on
earth. I am offended with my self when the reproaches of my conscience allarum
my considerations, when I compare the loss of so great riches with the little
advantage of so small gains. The knowledge of good lead's me not to it, but
the light of evil allures me. My enemy has schooled my will, and adapting me
to his desires, he has rendered me almost as detestable as himself. He loads
me with Irons, and committs me to the black Rod of sin. But, my God, since
thou art the God of might and of power, and holds jurisdiction over my life,
dislodge not thy auxiliary bands far from me. Draw them forth in my aid,
shade me under the umbrella of thy wings, that my adversaryes may not have the
view of my ruin; and that my enemy, proud of my destruction, may not have
cause to boast, he has triumphed over me. Break the cords that spansel me and
hinder my pace toward thee. Knock a-sunder the chains of sin I am so
strongly fettered in, give my enemy a taste of thy might, let me have cause to
make thy altars smoke with the sacrifices of joy, and sing with thy saints,
What expression is large enough to cloathe the power of the Lord? Who is
capable of the praises of God, who has plucked my soul out of the nets and
gins of death, who has elbowed me for falling, and preserved me out of the
throat of the lion in my miseries. At whose ears shall my Invocations knock,
if not at thine (my God,) whom our forefathers Invocations have so profitably
moved? if not at thine ears (my God,) who never frustrated the hopes built
upon thee? Take me then under thy protection and let the whole world combat
me, nothing shall dismay me; I will fling a scornful eye on the assaults and
approaches of my enemies, as long as thou embraces my quarrel and stands by
me. Sift my heart, sift my affections, and winnow out all that is conrary to
thee. Cast my soul in a new mould, create in me a second faith, to engraft thy
graces, that they come not within the possibility of withering; so that, having
bid adieu to the vanities of the world, and its deceiving pleasures, even the
sinner himself may be allowed praise for the purity of his desires. My wishes
aiming only at thee (my God), let my petitions and supplications find audience.
Then will I say with assurance, My soul, o Lord, is in travail with no desires
but what thou father'st. I am convinced, we cannot pray unless thou quicken
our prayers with wholesome inspirations, we cannot ascend to thee without thou
lend a pulley. Draw me then (O Lord) enlighten my Theory, that it may mend my
Practice, that beginning well I may end well: draw me, my God, before my old
Inveterate habits smother my new resolutions; and my perverted will and
confirmed in evil, overmaster this days designs for my good: Seeing I
purpose what is just, let me not relapse into my former Injustices. Capacitate
thee for thy grace and my salvation, spread thy rays over me, dispell thy
darkness which envellopes me. Invest me in those precious garments which make
me acceptable to thy eyes, dismantle me of those fatal robes wherein sin has
clothed me. In conclusion, (my God) burden not thy remembrance with my
transgressions. Work an universal change in me, that becoming a new man I may
bring to thy service a new soul, new fervours; and that constantly persuing
thee I may have relish in nothing but in Jesus my Savior and my Master. Laus
Deo.

FINIS.

