An Answer to Mercurius Aulicus: OR, His Communicated Intelligence from The
Court to the rest of the Kingdom: Faithfully trased through, to undisceiue
those who love the truth.
The forty ninth week, ending December. 9.
MErcurius, To make us take him for a Courtier, styles himself Aulicus, that
is of the Court, but his Actions prooves him an Auleticus, that is, Good for
nothing but to make a Pipe on, So that we have his name but by a figure, and in
stoad of a Message (which Office he professes) by his lies, (Piper like) he
makes himself only a spot, to deceive the Kingdom by his alluring tongue.

But he forgets, or is ashamed to tell us why he lies in a sheet and a half
this cold weather: But if your Mistress want clothes, give her the the other half
too (Auleticus) the Plunderers know very well that you kill more in your sheet,
than they do in the Field.

Auleticus tells us that his Majesty according to his wonted goodness, did set
out a Proclamation December. 1. That if any were found to rob or take away any
horse or Cattle, or other goods whatsoever without Authority, or that they
cannot produce any Authentic pass under the hand and Seal of the Colonel
etc. they should be apprehended, and tried by a Counsel of War; why
Auleticus, for his Majesty's wonted goodness, we are very sorry that the bloody
Cavaliers should abuse it, an^ keep his Majesty from us; And the very same day
that this Proclamation came out, the Soldiers of your Army were much
offended, and would not be appeased until by another Proclamation (which was
granted the very same day) it was certified, that the Counties of Oxford,
Berks, and Wilts, were content rather to pay weekly sums, than (as they have
done hitherto) endure the robberies, and insolent cruelties of their plundring.

He calls the two Houses of Parliament pretended Houses of Lords and Commons,
whose sitting is confirmed by an Act from his Majesty under the great Seal.
Auleticus do you think that we are so mad to disert them to adhere to your
Counsels of Priests, Friars, and Jesuits? what though you think these to be a
jure Divino, we hold the sitting of the Parliament to be according to Law.

He tells us of differences between the two Houses, and that the House of
Commons would not consent to the House of Lords for Treating with the French
Ambassador; But the Piping Mercury plays a false tune, both Houses are very
ready and willing to Treat with him in a Legal and Honorable way, and
accordingly have proceeded. It was your factious Lords at Oxford that have
hitherto labored to hinder the Treaty for Peace, that was so violent to tear
the first Propositions for fear that his Majesty and the Parliament should
agree. The Ambassador was very angry when he rouzed up Cottington out of the
Embers of the Spanish fire.

He tells us that Colonel Long deserves to be Register of the Chancery,
because he has been a Rebel; But Auleticus you are mistaken, for though you
was made Register to the Prelates at Oxford because you broke out of the Jail
at London; yet the reason why Colonel Long is respected, is, for that he is a
good Protestant, and an honest man.

He tells us a story of the gold Oar that came in the Ginney ship that was
taken, and enquiry to be made after some malignants that were owners thereof,
why let me tell you (goodman piper) this is but dull music at Oxford but test
your self, satised we shall employ it to better purpose, then Captain Cr^spe
employed his tresury. But Colonel Massey had like to have called him to
account, for if his mistress had not showed him a private way to fly out at
Cicitcr. Now in one thing to (give the Piper his due) Auleticus speaks truth,
That the Earl of Warickae deserves to have his Commission enlarged, because he
is so good and loyal. But he tells us that the seeking of Reformation has
brought us to visible wants, and that a dearth is at hand. Just as Dudly the
great Cavalier, a comman highway man said of his linen at his Inn, at Saint
Albones, which he had taken to wrap his stolen plate in, O says he to his
fellow thieves, If that be washed we are all undone, we are all dead men, and
such a terror does Reformation strike into the hearts of the lawless Caualeers.

He tells us a large story of some difference between the Earl of Denbigh, and
Colonel Barker, and Colonel Purfey: But let me tell you Auleticus, you are
much deceived in your news: For the Earl of Denbigh, and Colonel Barker are
unanimously agreed to join with Colonel Purfey. And if Prince Rubert march
that way, they may chance make him leap over as many hedges as he did before
to make an escape. Indeed we heard from Oxford, that when the Lord Lowden was
called for, some said it was illegal to use a messenger so, as he has been,
which had like to have caused a mutiny to the purpose: and therefore he was
sent away to Bristoll, where he remains close prisoner.

He tells us that his Excellency, and Sir William Waller strive for speedy pay,
and puts us in mind of Newbery and Basing-House. Auleticus, His Excellency,
and Sir William Waller do both scorn to rob the poor Country people for
want of pay; as the Caualeers do: or your Ladies pay in the Camp with the P
--. But honestly, godlily and legally, And it is upon account what the
Caualeers received from his Excellency at Newbery: who paid them so well, that
they reported at Oxford, they thought they had fought against devils by reason
of the fury of his Excellencies valiant Soldiers, and had the Westminster men
stood to it at Basing, Sir William Waller would have paid himself out of the
house. And he can give an account of the Lord Salt an and others, besides the
Amazonians, concerning what design: besides what has happened since,
concerning which; Because (Auleticus) you say we had some great exspectation of
Sir William Wallers future success, concerning which we can give you an
account already of forty prisoners taken at Farnham fight: where you and your
dead, the most of them were kept from our knowledge: but the pretended Lord
Hopton was in such a fright; that he fled for it, and his Army after him; for
which he has since received a check from Oxford, nay more then this, there is
between 7. and 800. with their Colonels, Captains, Ensigns, and other
Officers all save the Lord Craford, and some few, that narrowly escaped, all
taken at Alton by Sir william, besides 40. slain there of the Best soldiers
Hopton has, oh Auleticus, your Organist at Oxford will play this tune very
base.

He tells us that the people are very backward to be pressed in Essex, Surrey,
and Kent; But this is an impudent lie, for in all places they have raised great
strength to keep the Cavaliers out of those parts. And yet Auleticus is so
audacious as to say, that they do kill and hang those that will not go along
with them; Indeed your own field Martial, Hopton, sent out such a Warrant
which cost some of the poor men their lives, which for that purpose were
driven before them to Arundell house.

He tells us of some disagreement about the Recru^ing of his Excellencies Army;
Auleticus, his Excellency intends to leave a Garrison at Newport Pannell, and
to secure those parts where he is with sufficient strength, and you are like to
hear from him before the Lord Craford in the West, or the Earl of Newcastle
in the North, or your bloody General Prince Rupert be Recruted; whose dead
pay, and plunder have conveyed away too much plate and Jewels beyond Sea. A
strange way to Recrute the Palatinate.

On Thursday morning the first of all, falls a railing against Captain
Terrell, Master Greenevill, Captain Phips, and Captain Pollerd in
Buckinghamshire, and to no purpose at all; but like the Prelates in their
private Conventicle at Oxford resolve upon the Business that it must of
necessity be taught in all pulpits; that the Parliament and all good
Protestants must be rayled against by reproaches, or else Popery will never be
established. And for the Excise you tell us of (Auleticus) you see what a just
and equal way the Parliament take for money.

He tells us that the Chilterne parts have raised Forces to defend the Country
from both parts: He means the Papists and Prelates; For when Prince Rupert
sent privately into that Country, he had an answer to the purpose; and the very
women, and maids being sensible of their wickedness in places where they come,
will rather fight themselves to the last drop of blood in their body, than to
expose themselves to be Ravished and spoiled by the Cavaliers.

And (Auleticus) relates as very a piece of nonsense for News as ever was
written; That some of the Earl of Essex Forces, all or most part of them Dutch
Walloones and French in Hartfordshire are a scourge to those parts; Well
Auleticus, we grant there is Foreigners in his Excellencies Army, but they are
Protestants; there is no Taffes, nor Oneales, nor La Vives, nor Seignior Corges
that bring their Commission from Rome with them, with a promise to be Canonized
for Saints by acting for the continuing of these wars, as one writ from
beyond Sea to the Lord Digby, that if the King hearkened to a peace, all their
pl^^^ were spoiled.

He tells us that about Chesham they are very weary of the Earl of Essex,
because they are forced to bring his Soldiers in so much provision; No
Auleticus you play false music, they have sent the Army a Letter of thanks
for preserving them from being plundered by Prince Rupert, and are very
desirous that his Excellency would not leave them without sufficient Garrisons
to keep out the Cavaliers; and whereas you tell us that the trained bands are
ready to leave Sir William Waller; you are much deceived, for they have given a
testimony to the contrary at Alton, where their valor deserves a Trophy of
perpetual praise, and other Trained Bands are ready to relieve them, as
themselves to be refresht; but I doubt not but Sir Edward Deering has told his
tale at Oxford by this, and how much the Cavaliers under Hopton are out of
heart.

Auleticus makes himself music with the fancy of a great Victory at Howarden
Castle in Cheshire, which is a place where Sir William Brereton had been with
some of his Army, but since so many came out of Ireland, he left it as nothing
at all advantageous unto him, and Colonel Earnley has since possessed
himself of it; yet Auleticus tells us they took 2 Drakes, sure it was some
Duckes swimming in the pond, and he says the Cavaliers took 100 Arms, he
means 100 Irish women in their arms, he speaks much by figures, especially
the middle to be sub intelligitur. And then he tells us of more coming from
Ireland, the more is the pity, for by this means the Protestants there are
used with the more cruelty, the Papists increase in strength, and that the
Kingdom is in the more danger to be surprised by the Spaniard, and further we
are in England from peace. He tells us a story of an house that was fired at
Kingstone in Surry Auleticus, you might have held your tongue there for shame,
for whereas there was a Parry in these parts, which were absolute Caueleeres
that lay gaping for some rebels, to raise them an head, but saw little hopes
to find it, because the country was raising of forces to keep out the
Cavaleers, and seeing themselves in some danger, began to muteny rob and
plunder, endeavored to have fired the Town, and so to fly away, but some of
them are taken and in Prison: and the rest I fled to Oxford.

Saturday he begins with lamentation, for Prince Maurice his loss at Plymouth
yet to daub up the matter he reckons up many slain, amongst which 3.
Commanders, but they were beaten off that they could not know what execution
they had done, Auleticus you will tell a pretty tale a non, Colonel Gold you
say, is shot through the arm: and keeps his bed, why what a bundle of Bulls
his here Auleticus, indeed you tell us you have threescore Oxen and Kine, and
as many sheep, and they are all Bulls, you tell us you took a Genteleman and a
Colonel prisoners: and carried your Prisoners a way, and left them in Plymouth:
that is you would have had them to have given themselves up to have been your
prisoners, and they would not: but stayed still in Plymouth, But you tell us
that Prince Maurice was not in the siedge, where was he think you? in Limbo
Patrem, or Infantum: if he be dead tell us plainly, that we may talk no more
of him, and yet now I think of it, you are charged to the ^^ntrary, and must
be the Court Mercury no more if you say so.

He tells us of Maistet Pims death, as remarkable news, and how he was
impeached of Treason, and that he died of the Herodian visitation, and that he
was a most loathsome and foul Carcass: Auleticus, M. Pim is dead, but his
fame lives: and will in despite of thee, and all the Caualeers, and Papists of
the Kingdom: he is ascended too high for thee to hurt him, and for that
scandalous aspertion which thou have laid upon him, many hundreds, who were eye
witnesses, do testify that he was a very clear and unspotted Corpse, having
nothing loathsome upon his body, from head to foot, but as fair a Course as
the beholders ever saw: It is only our loss, that he is dead: and yet the
Lord has left us many more Pims, many more godly Patriots, to stand for God
and his Cause: And whereas you tell us of the death of the Lord Brooks and
Master Hampden, they died in their appointed time, full of the Holy Ghost,
with God in their mouths, and Christ in their hearts, Freely pouring our their
souls to God: Not like the Earl of Northampton and other Caualeers, cursing
and swearing, with their last breath: Thesr indeed are fearful things, and to
be considered. And for Sire John Hotham and his Son, and Colonel Fines,
leave them to their Trial: they will find Law with us, though you have neither
Law nor Gospel, save only your Ladies Oracles.

In the last place he falls a railing agianst the Parliament, and calls them
the Rebels of Westminster, and would traduce the City to have an hard opinion
of the Scots; Auleticus I would advise thee to come to Bedlam, and let thy
pipes be new mended least thou grow stark mad and incurable through the
extremity of thy distracted brain, the more thou raylest against the
Parliament, the more thou bewrayest thine own impudency; and the more hateful
thou art in the eyes of all Protestants; And for the coming of the Scots, you
have just piped a lesson of the devils own making; First to make the people
you have seduced to presume they would not come, and now to bring them to a
desperate opinion against them to expect nothing but ruin: whereas it is most
apparent, that you and your popish Lords, Priests, Friars and Jesuits, and the
advancement of your persons in your Ladies Favors, to the undermining of the
(...), and the ruin of King and People, and have been the cause of all our
misery; But for all your malice we doubt not but that this happy Union will be
confirmed and (...) between us and our brethren of ^^^^land to perpetual
Generations.

Printed for W. W.

FINIS.

