An ANS'WER to the Wealthy GRASIER; OR, An Account of the pleasant Passages on
the WEDDING DAY.
Though she was mean, yet like a Queen,
she did appear most Gay;
Her Uncle Gold, she did behold,
upon her Wedding Day.
Tune of, Ladies of London,
This may be Printed. R. P.





DID you not hear of a Wedding of late?
a Grasier there is none more compleater,
Being a Man of a worthy Estate,
and she a most Beautiful Creature:
Though some declared her Portion was small,
in her he had fixed his pleasure,
He never inquired for any at all,
he prized her more dra^^r than treasure.
Therefore there needed no more to be sed,
the Match was made up very fairly;
^ay, and that morning they were to be W^d,
he came to his Bride very early:
Likewise his Friends came with him also,
their kindness to her they did render,
And as they passed it was a rare show,
the Bride she appeared in splendour.
Then bring Married to both their content,
while Death never to be divided;
Home to her Father and Mother they went,
where was a rich Dinner p^ovided:
Plenty of all things there did a^ound,
both Beer, Ale, and likewise Canary,
And as the Glass it went merrily round,
they all was most heartily merry.
She had an Uncle, a Wealthy rich Man,
who was at the Wedding and Dinner,
Cosen, said he, I will do what I can,
since thou had the fortune to win her:
Something this day with her I will give,
and therefore I prithee come hither,
See that you Love her as long as you live,
that Heavens may bless you together.
She shall never be no bad bargain behold,
as long as her Uncle is able;
Then did he pull out whole handful's of Gold
and tendered it down on the Table:
Here is two hundred Guinneas, said he,
be careful and do your endeavor,
And then hereafter I will be more free,
it is not the most I can give her.
Take up this Money, I do you entreat,
I freely do give it, as knowing,
When Love and Money together does meet,
their comforts will always be flawing
This I protest is something above
what some had who once did refuse her,
But you that Marry her merely for Love,
in this you shall never be a looser.
I being single, I therefore declare,
as long as I live I Will not Marry,
Therefore make have now and get me an Heir,
a Boy, and his name shall be Harry;
To whom my Land and Houses I Will give,
when Life from this Body shall sever,
Not only you and your Son shall receive,
but likewise his Children for ever.
Now the old Dad was as great as a King,
as he was relating his Story,
Music and Dancing and Bells they did Ring,
the Bride she was all in her Glory:
Likewise her Friends in midst of this joy;
was merry and laughed out of measure,
Saying be sure that you think of this Boy,
and that we may have a young Grasier.
Printed for J. Deacon, at the Angel in Guilt-spur-street, without Newgate.


