THE ANTI-COVENANT, Or a sad COMPLAINT Concerning The new Oath or Covenant:
Presented in a Letter to a dear and intimate Friend, with earnest request for
his advice and Prayers.

By a true loyal Subject, and lover of the Parliament.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lychfield, Printer to the University, 1643.

The Anti-Covenant, Or, A sad complaint concerning the new Oath, etc.
Dear Friend and Brother, it is not unknown to the world, as well as to those
sober and pious Christians, that are of our society and acquaintance, what an
honorable and reverend esteem the very name of Parliament has always carried
with us two, and how observant we have been of their commands, without
disputing their power or integrity. When the Protestation was enjoined, we
willingly and cheerfully took it, hoping thereby to give sufficient testimony
both to the King and Parliament, and to all others that should otherwise
scruple it, of our love and zeal to the true established Protestant Religion,
of our loyalty and obedience to our gracious Sovereigne, of our honor and
esteem of both Houses of Parliament, and their just power and privileges, and
of our sense and care of the rights and liberties of the subject: and this
solemn Oath we have endeavored to observe and keep. When the Poll-money and
great Subsidy were granted, both by King and Parliament, we most readily paid
both. When the distressed condition of Ireland was recommended to us, we
cheerfully contributed: Nay, when the Propositions were made to us, for plate,
money and horse, to fetch our good King from his evil Counselors, (it being
declared to us by some of the Members of the House of Commons, and others of
their Commissioners, that his Majesty was desirous to come from them, and that
those about him would fly from him upon the appearance of the Parliaments
forces, without striking one stroke) we were persuaded to lend liberally upon
the Public Faith toward that service. And since that, upon several new
suggestions, we have given such credit to some Members of both Houses speeches,
and to some Preachers, (whom they have countenanced, if not sent amongst us)
that we have not withheld from the Parliament what we have been able to
spare. Neither did we stop here (though our speed was by this time well taken
off) but often and often since, partly out of fear, and partly out of hope,
fear of being (after all this) reputed Malignants (a name more odious then
Turk, Pagan, or Papist) and hope at last of an Accommodation, (a mercy too
great for this sinful Nation as yet to partake of) we have by our wives,
kindred, or friends, more then once subministred to the pressing necessities of
the Parliaments forces. But now (dear Brother) what shall we do? When all
that we have done hitherto, will keep neither our houses from plundering, nor
our persons from imprisonment, nor our names from being Malignant, nor our
wives and children from beggary and misery, unless we will wound our
consciences, and hazard our souls by horrid and palpable perjury. Oh, that we
had but foreseen this imposing upon our souls and consciences, when first the
opening of our purses was called for; but it was Gods just judgment upon us
for our sins: first, to blind us so long, till we had made a rod for our
selves, and then to awe us with that rod, till our severe masters have brought
u^ to that undoubted trial, whether we fear God or them, whether we love our
souls, or our estates and liberties most. But what is the matter? Why read,
and the Lord give you understanding.

Whereas the Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament have declared, That
there has been, and now is, a Popish and traitorous plot, etc. as it
follows in the Introduction and Covenant to be taken by the Armies and
Kingdom.

(With one clause more added in the Lords and Commons Oath, for their not
laying down Arms.) This is the new vow and covenant taken by the Lords and
Commons now assembled in Parliament, and voted by them to be taken by the
Armies and Kingdom, together with the Introduction, declaring the grounds and
reasons inducing them thereunto.

I know it is not fit for private men to be too inquisitive into, much less
censorious of the decrees and ordinances of public States, unless it be where
such decrees and ordinances concern the souls and consciences of men, and
there every man is bound both diligently to examine, and discreetly to judge
whatsoever is enjoined him, before he submit himself thereunto; as also to
counsel and advise his brethren. Be pleased then, dear Brother (for so I have
ever called and esteemed you) to give me leave to acquaint you with my
thoughts, both of this Oath and its Introduction: and wherein I err (as who is
infallible? not the Composers themselves, much less any private man, and least
of all my self, the weakest of ten thousand) I beseech you be my gentle
corrector, and friendly instructor. And first I begin with the Introduction.

The reasons and grounds of imposing and taking this new Oath, here alleged,
are principally these three:

1. For that the Lords and Commons have declared, that there has been, and
now is, a Popish and traitorous plot for the subversion of the true Protestant
Reformed Religion; and the liberty of the Subject, and that in pursuance
thereof, a Popish army has been raised, and is now on foot in diverse parts of
this Kingdom.

2. That the Lords and Commons have further in a solemn manner declared, vowed,
and covenanted, That in order to the security and preservation of the true
Protestant Religion, and liberty of the Subject, they will not consent to the
laying down of Arms, so long as the Papists, now in open war against the
Parliament, shall by force of arms be protected against the justice thereof.

3. For that the Lords and Commons have declared that there has been a
traitorous and horrid design lately discovered by the great blessing and
especial providence of God, of diverse persons to join themselves with the
Armies raised by the King, and to destroy the Forces raised by the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, to surprise the Cities of London and Westminster, with
the Suburbs, and by Arms to force the Parliament; all which reasons are
amplified with an assertion. That the said Lords and Commons do find by
constant experience, That many ways of force and treachery are continually
attempted to bring to utter ruin and destruction the Parliament and Kingdom,
and that which is dearest, the true Protestant Religion. And then follows the
inference or conclusion, that for the preventing and withstanding the same,
they have thought fit, that all etc. should bind themselves each to other in a
sacred Vow and Covenant, in manner and form as follows, I A.B. In humility
and reverence, etc.

The grounds and reasons in their order.

First, we are told, That the Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament
have declared, that there has been, and now is a popish and traitorous plot
for the subversion of the true Protestant Religion, and the Liberty of the
Subject. And that in pursuance thereof, etc. This is the first Credendum, set
forth to usher in our Jurandum: this we must believe, therefore thus and thus
we must swear. But why must we believe this? because the Lords and Common have
Declared it. I ow the Lords and Commons my obedience in a subordinate way, next
and immediately under my King: but I do not yet know that I owe them my Faith,
in that supreme way as to believe whatsoever they declare. Nay, I know the
contrary; and therefore I will be bold to examine the truth of this credendum,
so far as I am able, before I give up my faith unto it.

That there has been in this Kingdom a Popish and traiterous plot, for the
subversion of the true Protestant Reformed Religion, is recorded to us, and to
our posterities, with an Act of Parliament for an Anniversary commemoration of
our deliverance from the same. And I doubt not but there have been many other
plots since, to the same purpose, by the same faction, though God of his mercy
has disappointed them ere they came to any visible maturity: Neither will I
altogether free the late potent Faction from intending some such mischief. Nay
further, I am not very slow of heart to believe, that there is now at this
present in this Kingdom a traitorous plot for the same purpose, which may as
well be called a Popish, as an Anabaptisticall, Brownisticall, or
Separatisticall plot, the Papists as well as the Anabaptists, Brownists, and
other Separatists, contriving and contributing what they can thereunto, and all
meeting and consenting in the same positions and doctrines for the effecting
thereof. For what Luther said of the Anabaptists and Papists, we find by woeful
experience true of them all, Fratres sunt, and caudis conjuncta sunt, vulpes,
sed capitibus diversa: singunt sese foris magnos hosts esse, cum tamen intus
vere idem sentiant, deceant, ac defendant, they are all brethren, and they are
crafty foxes linked together by the tales, though their heads look diverse
ways, they outwardly feign themselves to be great enemies each to other, but
inwardly they do verily think, teach, and maintain one and the same thing.
And all these though they pretend too much the liberty of the Subject, yet the
truth i^ they intend only to enlarge their own liberty and licentiousness,
and to destroy the just liberty and property as well as the duty and loyalty of
all Subjects whatsoever. Thus far it is no difficult matter to believe that
there has been and now is a plot for the subversion of the true reformed
Protestant Religion, and the liberty of the Subject, and to the lawful defense
of the same thus plotted against, I conceive my self already sufficiently
bound, not only by my duty, as I am a Protestant and a Subject, but also by my
late Oath or Protestation, as I am thereby a new sworn Protestant and Subject.
And therefore if that be the true cause why I should take an oath, I have very
lately for the same cause already taken one; and I humbly conceive that having
made the former oath so lately, for their satisfaction who require this, they
ought to rest satisfied with the former, without urging any other; it being a
ruled case in Law, Date jurejarund^ non aliud quaritur quam, an juratum sit,
remissa quastiom an debentur, quast fatis probatum sit jurejurand^: when once
an oath is given, no further question is to be made then whether the oath be
taken or not, all other questions of the proof of what is controverted, are to
be remitted as being proved sufficiently by the very making oath thereof; and
you well know what the Apostles rule in that case is, Heb. 6.16. an oath for
confirmation is (at least ought to be) to them (to those who require the oath)
an end of all strife. And the multiplying of oaths is perilous as well to the
imposers, as to the takers.

But to go on with the first reason, That in pursuance of such o^ such a
Popish plot, etc. a Popish army has been raised, and is now on foot in diverse
parts of this Kingdom; here my faith so staggers that I cannot possibly keep
it up to this assertion, and that for these Reasons:

First, because that an Army cannot truly be called a Popish Army, wherein not
five of an hundred are Papists, unless we take Papists in that latitude as to
involve all those that embrace, adhere to, and maintain the established
Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England. And if five of an hundred in
an Army being Papists may give the name of Popish to that Army, what name can
we think of for that Army, wherein there are (besides Papists) Anabaptists,
Brownists, Familists, and other Sectaries an hundred for five true Reformed
Protestants? It Is not denied but that there are now in the Kings Army too many
that are Papists, and yet there are no more Papists in that army, then ought to
be there; for being Subjects as well as Papists, they are bound both by the
Laws of God and of this Nation, to assist their King in his wars, both
against foreign enemies, and against native rebels and usurpers: and the King
is bound to protect them against spoil, rapine, and other oppression, as well
as his other Subjects. It is, (I solemnly profess) a sore greefee to my soul
(and so I am confident it is to all really religious Protestant souls besides)
that ever our King, who has been so long, and still is, so eminent a Defender
of the true Protestant Religion, should need the assistance of Papists, to
defend his Royal person, honor, and estate; as it is a shame to our Religion it
self, that Papists should show their Loyalty and Allegiance to their King in
such a defense, when so many, that would be reputed the only true Protestants,
either take up or maintain the taking up arms against him. This scandal to
the Protestant Religion would scarce ever be wiped of, were there not (blessed
be God for it) forty Protestants to one Papist, that cheerfully and valiantly
assist the King in these present wars, with their lives and estates.
Secondly, if the army raised by his Majesty, and now on foot in diverse parts of
this Kingdom, be a popish army, it were worth the knowing, when it became so,
or when at least it became to be so reputed, For that magnanimous and royal
army which has ever attended his sacred person, I find several. Declarations
of both Houses of Parliament, wherein they who levied those forces, and they
that were levied, have been called ill affected persons; Cavaleers,
Delinquents, Malignants, and the like; but scarce the name of Papists was for a
long time mentioned in any of them. Since that, I find Papists, a Jesuiticall
faction, prelaticall Clergy, and discontented persons added to the former; and
all called Assistants in and to the Forces prepared; but as yet they were not
called a Popish Army; and it seems there was not the least cause why they
should be so styled; for that no sooner was the Name of Papists or Jesuiticall
faction, mentioned by them, as having ought to do in that service for the
King, but presently his Sacred. Majesty caused a Proclamation to issue forth,
given at his Court at York August 10. 1642. expressly commanding, that no
person or persons whatsoever, being Popish Recusants, should come to His Court,
contrary to the Law in that case provided, or take any office or place, or list
himself as a soldier in His Service. And though the King at the time of that
terrible bat^ell at Edgehill had admitted some few Papists of eminent abilities
in command and conduct into His Service; yet He is graciously pleased to yield
such a fair and reasonable account thereof in His Declaration to all His
loving Subjects after His late victory against the Rebels on Sunday 23 of
October 1642. as must needs be to all that will credit the word of a King, most
abundantly satisfactory. And since that battle, (that mask of fighting for
the King being then blown off with their own priming powder) it is not to be
endured in point of Honor by any Protestant that regards the honor of his
Religion, that any should say, the Papists have so outstript the Protestants in
loyalty, as to win the denomination of the Kings Army to be Popish from their
super increasing therein: And (blessed be the Lord for it) they have not the
least cause so to brag, for what cause soever others have been pleased so to
declare. Then for the Kings Army in the West so long under the command of that
valiant and successful, religious and pious Sir Ralph Hopton, I do not
remember that amongst all the lies and slanders, all the calumnies and
reproaches, that have been preached or printed, any have yet been so wickedly
impudent as to call that Popish, or to affirm that any known Papists are
listed in it. I am sure both Houses of Parliament in their Ordinances made
against Sir Ralph, and his Forces ( viz. that in June 27. 1642. for the
prevention of a most horrid, wicked and unnatural design pursued by Sir Ralph
Hopton, and his adherents etc. and that made the same day for the assessing of
Malignants in the Coun^y of Sommerset, etc.) never call any of those that have
assisted him or joined with him Papists, but only Rebels and Traitors. So that
we are forced to look into the Northern parts to find out this Popish Army:
and for the Army in those parts, though I find some Diurnals, and other such
like lying and slanderous pamphlets, wherein that Army was called Popish, even
at its first advancing into Yorkshire; yet I observed that the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament did not themselves style it so, no not in their
Declaration for the suppressing of diverse Papists, and other malignant persons
in the Counties of York, Northumberland, Westmerland, Cumberland, Lancashire,
Cheshire, etc. November. 23. 1642. They therein declare that the Papists, and
other malignants, and ill affected persons in those Counties had entered into an
association, and caused great Forces both of horse and foot to be raised to aid
and assist the Popish and malignant party in those parts; but for all this they
do not yet brand them with the name of a popish Army, afterward indeed when
they had found that the name of popish army spread abroad (as I but now said)
by Diurnalls and other lying and scandalous pamphlets (the constant pressures
to prepare the way for more au^hentick Declarations) had somewhat startled and
amazed the poor Country people: then we hear the style of an Army of Papists
under the command of the Earl of New Castle, made use of, as in that
Declaration of the House of Commons December. 15. 1642. the Declaration of the
Lords and Commons still retaining their former style. But pass by the
original of that army: Did that army as yet ever merit the name of Popish?
That there were, and are more Papists in that army, then in all the Kings
armies throughout the Kingdom I do verily believe; those Counties out of which
it was raised abounding with Papists more then other counties by far. And yet
we have been assured from such as deserve our credit, that all the Papists in
that army are not a handful in comparison of the whole body, not above one of
fifty, and in all not so many as to make up two Regiments. But why five times
so many Papists? (if there were so many in this Kingdom) should not be
admitted to take up arms for the defense of their Sovereigne, and rights and
liberty of the Subject, I never yet heard any argument worth answering; nay
how the papists, or any for them, could answer their not taking up arms in
such a case without incurring the guilt of high Treason, is past my resolving.
And for the Protestant Religion, which they so much hate, and the power and
privilege of Parliament, which they so much malign; whereas it is objected
that it cannot be thought, that they should fight for the defense of either of
them: I do conceive that if they might be let alone quiet, and secure without
intermedling, their love to either is not so great as to inflame their spirits
to such a hazard of their lives for their sakes; but the pressing necessities
of the present times engaging them in a War, and they finding the quarrel to
be betwixt the safety of the Kings person, honor and estate, and the
ambitious, seditious and rebellious designs and attempts of some of His
Subjects, betwixt Protestants, and some Anabaptists, Brownists and other
Sectaries, betwixt the enjoying the just power and privileges of Parliament,
together with their own lives, goods and estates, and the being spoiled,
robbed and deprived of all, or the most of these by the arbitrary power and
privileges of a few Lords and Commons; it is no wonder to see them to offer
themselves willingly to defend and maintain the former, rather then to endure
and suffer the latter. Besides when the Protestants in a Kingdom are imbroyled
in a civil war amongst themselves, or with any factious and schismatic
persons, it would not be wisdom in them to suffer the papists to sit quiet and
still if they should desire it, lest when they have weakened each other the
papists prove too strong for both. But for further satisfaction in this point,
I refer you to the Earl of New Castle his excellent Declaration to that
purpose, and to that witty and solid lettter of a Worthy (whosoever it was) to
his friend in Leceistershire.

Now these things premised, thus cleared, I cannot but wonder what is meant by
the popish army which has been raised, and is now on foot in diverse parts of
this Kingdom: had we been told that there is such an army flying in diverse
parts of this Kingdom, if we could not have seen it, it might happily have
been imputed to the dullness and weakness of our ey-sight, or to our want of
that light, whereby some are able to discover things that never were, but to
say there is such an army on foot, and yet no more footsteps of it to be found,
is to tell us little less then a miracle, and but of little more credit then
those late miracles which some of our new apostles have boasted of. Well but
let us indulge them that name, seeing they who can call any things or persons
what they please, are pleased so to phrase it. The army in the North whereof
not above four or five of an hundred are papists, is a popish army. But why
then must it be believed that there is a popish army raised and on foot in
diverse parts of this Kingdom? Is it because there are diverse parts of the
North wherein that army is, as York, Taacaster, Pomfret, Wakefield, etc. and
all these are parts of this Kingdom; an excellent topicall argument to puzle a
Fresh-man with; or is it because they would have the poor long deceived people
to believe, that forasmuch as the one part of the Kings army in the North is
somewhat Popish, therefore all the Kings army that is now in several parts of
this Kingdom, as Oxfordshire, Dorsetshire, Sommersetshire, Devonshire,
Cornwell, Staffordshire and Worcestershire, etc. consists most of Papists?
certainly it is in this latter sense that they desire the phrase Popish army
may be understood, or else it would prove but of very little force to persuade
the common people (who blessed be God do generally abominate Popery) either to
conceive so much evil of the Kings army, as they would possess them withal,
or else to believe that there is from them any cause of fearing the subversion
of the true reformed Protestant Religion, and so of entering into an oath or
covenant to do such and such things as the new Oath requires. And by this time
I hope you will excuse me if I do not believe that there is a popish army
raised, and on foot in diverse parts of this Kingdom. Thirdly, I abhor to let
it enter into my thoughts, that any army is raised by the King (as is affirmed)
for the subversion of the true Protestant Religion. The Preacher commands me in
Gods name (whatsoever some preachers teach their people in their own and their
Masters) not to curse the King, no not in my thoughts, Eccles. 10.20. but
should I think that the King intends by His Army now on foot, or by any other
way or means, to subvert the true Protestant Reformed Religion; though I
should not for all that curse Him no not in my thoughts, yet I must needs think
Him the most accursed King that ever breathed, He having made so many solemn
oaths, vows and protestations, with most deep imprecations annexed both to live
and dye in the true Reformed Protestant Religion himself, and to maintain and
defend it in His Subjects. I will mind you only of that one in the head of His
Army, Septem. 19. 164^. I promise in the presence of Almighty God, and as I
hope for his blessing and protection, that I will to the utmost of my power
defend and maintain the true Reformed Protestant Religion established in the
Church of England, and by the Grace of God in the same will live and dye, etc.
And for the liberty of the Subject, together with the just privileges and
freedom of parliament, He did both at that time, and sundry other with the
like solemnly vow and swear their defense and maintenance (...) Now can it
be thought by any (but such whose thoughts are thoughts of iniquity, Esaias
59.7.) that such a constant and faithful Defender of the true Protestant
Religion for so many years against so many plots and attempts, intimated by
this very Declaration, and after so many and so solemn oaths, vows and
protestations, should now raise an Army to subvert that Religion, and when it
was raised to promise again in the very head of that Army His best and utmost
defense of the same, calling God to witness with Him, and desiring neither
blessing nor protection from Him, but according as He resolved to make good
that promise and protestation; doubtless there is very nigh as much faith in
Infidels, and as much charity in the damned spirits as there is in these men
that can believe such a slander, or entertain such a suspicion.

In the Declaration of the Lords and Commons to the Kingdom, and to the World,
October. 22. 1642. they account the professing of any thing in the sight of God,
the strongest obligation that any Christian, and the most solemn public faith
that any such state as a Parliament can give. They then that will not credit
the like profession made by a King, must neither think him a Christian, nor
esteem him a King. Besides, were there any so wickedly uncharitable and
disloyal, as to imagine that the King had an intention to subvert the true
Reformed Protestant Religion. Yet how can they think both him, and his evil
counselors, together with the Popish party about him (as every pamphlet takes
the liberty, most traitorously, to pourtray him and his royal attendants) to
be all so weak and simple, as to raise an army for the pursuance of that
intent, just at that time, when greater forces of Protestants (as they would be
thought) were either actually raised, or ready to rise, then he or they could
by the eye of flesh see any possibility of levying; and when he wanted both
money and arms for those few, that he might hope to levy: without doubt, if
there had been any such purpose, that time of all other would not have been
chosen for the opportunity. These reasons are of such force with me, that the
first reason alleged for the taking this Oath seems to me, (to say the
least of it) altogther unreasonable.

Proceed we on to the second, it may be that is more engaging. The Lords and
Commons have further in a solemn manner, declared, vowed, and covenanted, that
in order to the security and preservation of the true Protestant Religion, and
liberty of the Subject, they will not consent to the laying down arms, so
long as the Papists now in open war against the Parliament, shall by force of
arms be protected from the justice thereof.

Before this reason will down with me for a persuading reason to the taking
this Oath, I must be satisfied, if possible, in these Quaeres.

1. Quaer. What do the Lords and Commons mean by that clause. In order to the
security and preservation of the true Protestant Religion, etc. Do they mean
that they will never consent to the laying down arms, etc. No, not for the
security and preservation of the true Protestant Religion: or that because they
conceive that the true Protestant Religion cannot be secured and preserved, so
long as the Papists now in open war shall, etc. That therefore they will not
consent to the laying down arms, so long etc. Or is this, In order to, etc.
used here for some evading reservation, as the Jesuits have constantly used
their, In ordine ad spiritualia, (they being the only men, that I can recall to
mind for the present, that ever used this kind of restriction, or, rather
indeed, this fast and loose knot of an oath) that so they may evade some oaths
formerly taken, or the power of this, in case they can get a fair gloss to
be made upon these terms: charity and reverence command me to take the best
interpretation: but an oath should be framed in such plain clear terms, as
might be understood by all the takers thereof, without much difficulty of
exposition: but to leave that to themselves.

2. Quar. Whom do the Lords and Commons understand by Papists now in open
war against the Parliament? whether legally convicted Papists only, or all
Papists at large? If all Papists at large, (as I conceive they mean no less,)
my

3. Quaere is: Whether only known professed Papists, properly so called? or
also all supposed, suspected Papists, commonly, so termed? If the former

4. Quaer. Whether they have proceeded against all such that are now in the
Kings army, according to the established Law of this Kingdom, and requiring
justice to be done upon them, they have been by force of arms protected from
the execution thereof?

5. Quar. How or where does it appear that there have been or are, any such so
protected, especially to such a number, as that the protecting of them ought to
move the great Actors and Contrivers for the Kingdoms peace, for that cause to
vow and covenant to continue this unchristian, unnatural war, till they be
delivered up to their justice.

6. Quaer. Whether the Queens Majesty her self, be not one of those
protected Papists chiefly aimed at?

7. Quar. If by Papists they mean all that are supposed, suspected, and by
diverse termed Papists: whether all those that are called Malignants, or
Delinquents, or disaffected persons, and so all that are either of the Kings
army, or have been ayding and assisting to them, are not by them reckoned in
that number? So that if the King would deliver up to their justice, all that
are Papists indeed, (even to his dear Queen) within all his armies, yet if
he will not with them deliver up also all his whole armies themselves, or at
least as many of them as they shall require, they will not still think
themselves bound by this vow and covenant, not to lay down their arms, or to
give their consent thereto?

8. Quar. Whether the King be not bound in conscience, by the Laws of God, and
of this Kingdom, by his own solemn vows and protestations, and by the common
law of Nature (too much pleaded by some in these days, even against the law of
Grace it self) to defend and protect, and that by force of arms, need so
requiring, not only his own dear Queen, but all his faithful and loyal
Subjects, both Papists and others, such especially as repair to him for his
sacred persons defense and safety, as well as for their own protection, and
the preservation of their rights and liberties?

9. Quaer. Whether the King on the one part being so bound to defend and
protect both his Queen and the rest now named; and the Lords and Commons now
assembled in Parliament, having on the other part, taken up Arms, to force all
those persons from the Kings defense and protection, and bound themselves by a
solemn new oath, never to lay down their arms again, so long as any such
persons are so protected, whether, I say, can there be possibly, any hope
conceived of peace and accommodation, either by way of Treaty, or any other way
whatsoever, without the effusion of infinite streams of blood, so much as will
make any Christians heart to bleed, but to think on it, and his very joints to
loose, and his knees to knock one against another, to have any hand in it,
knowing what the hand of God has written against bloodshed?

10. Quaer. This being the true case of this Kingdom at this present, whether
is not this second reason of the Lords and Commons making such a new covenant,
as will, (if seconded by ours) cost the expense of so much of our own, and
fellow-brethrens blood, rather a strong reason, why we should abhor this new
oath, by whomsoever it is taken, then any the least inducement to persuade us
to take it.

Before I part from this reason, suffer me, I beseech you, to be sprinkle a few
tears on it, and to pant forth a few broken ejaculations concerning those that
allege it: Mourn on my soul. Oh, that my head were waters, and mine eyes a
fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the
daughter of my people. Jer. 9 1. How are thy mighty men, O England, fallen in
the midst of the battle? 2. Sam. 1.25. Yea, how are they slain from one end
of the Land to the other? How have the carkases of thy people been made as
dung upon the open field? Oh thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere
thou be quiet? put up thy self into thy scabbard, rest, and be still. But how
can thou be quiet, seeing the Lord has given thee a charge against this
Land? O God of mercies, as well as Lord of Hosts, we acknowledge that we have
deserved it, and we see to our terror, that they, whom we too much relied on
for the settling our peace, have sworn themselves, and would swear us into a
perpetual war; but we hope thou have not yet passed such a decree against
us. Spare us therefore, we humbly beseech thee, oh spare thy people, whom thou
have redeemed with thy precious blood, and let not the sword be made drunk
with blood any longer, nor let drunkenness of spirit, we entreat thee, sease
upon our Princes and our wise men, our Captains and our Rulers, and our mighty
men, to cause them to sleep a perpetual sleep; but Lord do thou awaken both
them and us, that we may yet at last in this our day of visitation, see and
seek those things that concern our peace.

And now I go on to the third reason or ground. The Lords and Commons have
declared, that there has been a treacherous and horrid design lately
discovered, by the great blessing and especial providence of God, of diverse
persons to join themselves with the armies raised by the King, and to destroy
the forces raised by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, to surprise the
Cities of London and Westminster, with the Suburbs, and by arms to force the
Parliament.

If there has been a treacherous and horrid design lately discovered by the
great blessing and especial providence of God, we are all bound upon the
knowledge thereof, to magnify Gods mercy and goodness, and to extol his
power and providence for it, and that man shall not want for a curse that shall
slight or undervalue so great a blessing: but I see no reason why we should
thereupon, or for that cause, rush presently into a vow or covenant, and run our
Souls into a far greater hazard then our Bodies were delivered from. But, it
may be, it was such a treacherous and horrid design, as may require a vow and
covenant forthwith to be made by us: It Is fit we should thoroughly examine
whether it be or not, lest otherwise we be guilty of taking Gods name in vain
in the highest degree. All that is made known to us concerning this
treacherous and horrid design by the Introduction to this oath (from which the
takers thereof are to receive their surest information, and by which
principally they are to be induced to take it) is only this. There was a
design of diverse persons for these four ends: 1. To join themselves with the
armies raised by the King. 2. To destroy the forces raised by the Lords and
Commons in Parliament. 3. To surprise the Cities of London and Westminster,
with the Suburbs. 4. To force the Parliament by arms. Now let us look upon
this design a while, with a single, clear, open eye, neither squint nor
blood-shot, neither with a magnifying, nor with a formidable-fals^-rendring
glass, and discover if we can, wherein the treacherousnesse and horridness of
it lies. For the first intent of the design. The joining of diverse persons
with the armies raised by the King, it is so far from treachery and horridness,
that he that is an English man, can scarce avoid the being a Traitor, and so
most horrid, that does not so join himself with those Armies in some way or
other, wherein he is best able to do his Sovereigne service; and for the
discovery thereof it is well known not to be so lately as is pretended, the
Lords and Commons themselves having declared it often and often, and that long
since in sundry Declarations. But that either those persons, or those armies
with whom they join, do aim at, or intend the destroying the forces raised
by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, or the surprising the Cities
of London and Westminster, with the Suburbs, or the forcing the Parliament by
arms (though they have all three been a long time spoken of, and two of them
again and again insisted upon by the Lords and Commons in their Orders and
Ordinances) has never to this day been prooved, but on the contrary, so deeply
and solemnly have all these aims been protested and sworn against by the King
himself, and are ready (if that would give any satisfaction) to be disclaimed
and renounced upon the oaths of those armies, and the persons joining with
them; that were all other real, but concealed, jealousies and fears as easy
to be removed, as those three now pretended, all such forces on both sides
would be soon disbanded, and these unnatural and unchristian wars speedily
ended. This indeed is to be expected, and cannot well be avoyued, if after so
many and so gracious overtures of peace, pardon, and all sweet accommodation
made by his Sacred Majesty, the forces raised by the Lords and Commons shall
not only refuse to lay down their arms, but use them (as hitherto they have)
to the subversion both of the Discipline and Order, as also of the Doctrine and
Worship of God established in our Church, to indangering the Kings person, the
consumption of his treasure and estate, and to the damage and ruin of his
whole Kingdom: and if the Cities of London and Westminster, with the Suburbs
thereof, shall, as formerly they have, join with them, and aid and assist
them, both with men, money, arms, and other warlike provision, and if some of
the Members of either or both Houses of Parliament, shall countenance,
encourage, justify and maintain all these ungodly actions, against his
Majesty's Royal Person, Crown, and Dignity, Who can blame either those armies
raised by the King, or those persons that join with them, if they shall do
their utmost, to subdue or destroy those forces, to surprise or bring into
subjection those Cities, and to force or some other way to reduce those Members
to their duty and allegiance? Nay, what Christian or Heathen Subjects would not
in such a case cry out against them now, and rise up in judgment against them
hereafter, if they should do otherwise? And therefore if this be the Design
so much talked of, as for my part I believe it is, what loyal subject can say,
he had no hand in it? and who but he that has had no hand in it, dare say, it
was either treacherous or horrid? Oh, but Mr. Pym has declared it so to be, in
his speech at a Common Hall in London, June 8. 1643. wherein he shows the
intentions of that Design to be no less then these.

1. To take into their custody the Kings Children, that are in or about London.

2. To lay hold on all those that they thought could stand in their way, as the
Lord Say, and the Lord Wharton, of the House of Lords; and of the House of
Commons, (besides the Lord Major) Sir Philip Stapleton, Mr. Hampden, Mr.
Strode, and (which he acknowledges to be an honor to him to be named) Mr. Pym.

3. To seize on the Committee of the Militia, and the Magazines within London
and Westminster.

4. To release all the prisoners committed by the Parliament.

5. To make a Declaration to satisfy the people.

Blessed be the Lord for it, here is no intention discovered of murdering or
butchering any of the Kings children, or of any of the Citizens, or of any of
the Members of either Houses of Parliament; no not of the persons named;
neither is there here any resolution intimated of blowing up any part of
London or Westminster, or of firing any house therein, but only of taking the
Kings Children into their custody, of laying hold on certain Lords and
Commons, and of seizing the Militia, etc. and this, it seems, in the sense of
the contrivers of this Oath, is to destroy the forces raised by the Lords and
Commons, to surprise the Cities of London and Westminster, and by arms to
force the Parliament, and all this a treacherous and horrid Design. But how is
that made good? Surely the taking of the Kings Children into their custody, (if
it were any part of the Design) is not thought by the Lords and Commons
themselves, to have much treachery or horridnes in it, howsoever Mr. Pym (to
show his superabundant care of those hopeful branches, for their Royal
Stemmes sake) was pleased to make that the first branch of that treacherous and
horrid Design: neither can the releasing of the prisoners committed by the
Parliament, (if any such justice were purposed) be well judged to have much
treachery or horridness in it: for alas, poor unarmed men all, (men abhorring
treachery and all horrid designs so much, that the greatest cause of most of
their imprisonment, is their declaming against, and not contributing or
consenting unto that Design, which they know to be both traiterous and horrid)
what could they have done, had they been released? It would be safest for
them, if there should be any combustion or mutiny in the City or Suburbs (which
God forbid) not to come forth of their prisons though they were entreated.
Perhaps indeed the making of a Declaration to satisfy the people, might have
advanced the Design not a little; for, it seems by Mr. Pyms speech, it was
some notable, fair, well-compos'd piece, carrying a most specious show of much
intended goodness: viz. The preservation of Religion, the preservation of the
Kings Prerogative, and the preservation of the Liberties of the Subject, and
the privileges of Parliament; and the composers thereof were very confident
(as Mr. Pym intimates) of the peoples crediting and believing it: for that a
thousand of them were to be printed, and they to be set upon Posts and Gates in
the most considerable places of the City, and to be dispersed, as much as they
could, against the time that the Design should be put in execution, as if that
would clear all their intentions, and convince the people of their integrity
in undertaking that business. And to tell you my judgment of it, for so much
as I can collect from Mr. Pym, it was such a piece of a treacherous Design,
that Mr. Pym was afraid, that it would have gone near to have betrayed the
people into their wits again; perhaps into their Religion and loyalty, if not
into some of their Estates and Liberties: and therefore he lets it not pass
without passing this most observable Sentence on it, ratified from his own
practice and experience. There be no designs be they never so ill, but they
do put on a mask of some good; for that which is absolutely and apparently
evil, has no congruity with the will of man, and therefore the worst of
evils are undertaken under a show and shadow of goodness: sound doctrine, and
an excellent caution, I confess: would to God the people had been better
instructed in it, and more mindful of it in these times: but yet with
reverence to that great Speaker be it spoken, If that intended Declaration
which he speaks of, were worthy of no other blame, but its appearing so
extraordinary fair and specious (as were there any other real exception
against it, doubtless that quick-sighted Gentleman would not have balked it) I
see no reason, why because by often and late experience it has been found,
that some Declarations full of Treachery and Mischief, have appeared fair in
show, therefore this Declaration full of loyalty and goodness, should be
thought treacherous and mischievous, only because it was fair in appearance.
But then for the other two parts of the design, viz. the laying hold on those
persons named, and the seizing upon the Militia and Magazines of London and
Westminster, together with those that now are the prime managers and disposers
thereof; that these were the ready way to destroy the forces raised by the
Parliament, to surprise those Cities, and to force the Parliament, seems
clearly to be demonstrated by the forenamed City Orator. Take only the extract
of his Arguments in the case. The seizing upon the Militia of London and
Westminster, must needs be a surprising of those Cities themselves: the
surprising of those Cities, is a destroying of the forces raised by the Lords
and Commons in Parliament, if not by force, yet by want of supply and
maintenance, (observe by the way, what manner of destruction intended against
the Parliaments forces, is here acknowledged:) and if the forces raised by the
Parliament, were once destroyed, (that is, wanted supply and maintenance) and
then (which is the most terrible) if those named Members of both Houses, and
some few others of their temper and spirit, together with their fast friends
and sworn slaves of the City, were once laid hold on, the rest of both those
Honorable Houses, being but the carkase and shadow of a Parliament, (as Mr.
Pym in his Common Hall speech, does not only call, but labor to prove them)
alas, what would they do? certainly that carkase would move in no other
motion; then according as the returning soul, (the known Laws of the Land,
and the just privileges of Parliament) would steer it, and not according as
every furious and factious spirit should think to hurry it: and questionless,
that shadow would not follow any other, then its own full, complete,
representative Body; not a close Committee, or a few seditious, rebellious
Citizens. And then it is likely, there would be a sweet correspondence betwixt
the King and them, the King yielding to them as much, as they would in due
observance be willing to propound to him, and they granting to the King as much
as he could with honor desire of them. And here truly would be such a forcing
of the Parliament, as this Kingdom has not known these many years: and yet
all this is far enough from a treacherous and horrid design. Only thus much
(we humbly thank him for it) Mr. Pyms discovery renders visible to every eye,
that will not shut it self against the light. That were but the Militia of the
Cities of London and Westminster, with their Magazines in some men's hands, with
whom, (as has been at large declared by able and sound Lawyers) the King may
of right entrust it; and were but the maintenance and supply which those two
Cities subminister to the Parliaments army, withheld or stopped, and then (which
would follow of it self, unless they made the more haste to fly from it)
were but some few Members of both Houses, together with some busy Citizens,
laid hold on, and laid up in hold, (as there are prisons enough, and to spare,
ready provided, in and about London) till they could be brought to a legal
trial for that Treason, whereof by Proclamation they stand charged by the
King, our Land would soon enjoy her glorious rest and peace again: nay,
happily if the last were but acted, we should speedily see the last Act of this
bloody Tragedy (wherein this miserable Kingdom is engaged) hist off, and
beaten off the Stage, by its greatest Applauders. And therefore were those few
persons, at whom the late strange, treacherous, horrid design aimed, men of
that piety toward God, and of that tender compassion and bowels toward their
bleeding and perishing Country that they pretend to be, they would, Jonah-like,
(now they see the Church and State, wherein they are imbarqued, ready to be
overwhelmed or split, by the boisterous waves and tempestuous winds of these
raging times, and principally for their sakes) deliver themselves up to be cast
forth, or otherwise exposed, even to death it self, that there might be a
calm: and likewise they that have hitherto rowed them, (now they have shown
their love and affection to them, in rowing so hard to set them safe on shore,
and see that they cannot, the sea working and growing more and more tempestuous
against them, by the mighty coworking of him that commands both sea and wind,
and they obey him) me thinks they should, (after prayers and cries to God, to
keep t^^m from the guilt of their blood) not take them up, and cast them forth
into the sea, but shut them up, and keep them safe, till they see whether a
just and legal trial, (so often demanded) will judge them worthy to be cast
forth or not: and if it appear they so deserve, I hope it is neither traitorous
nor horrid to say, it were better that milstones were hanged about their necks,
and they cast into the bottom of the sea, then that the whole Kingdom for
their sakes should be cast away and perish.

And thus we have viewed the three maine pillars upon which the structure of
this new oath is built. Now fearing lest all three might prove too weak to
raise such a weighty building upon, there is a buttresse or by-arch joined to
them all for their better underpropping plaistred over with these words. And
the said Lords and Commons finding by constant experience, that many ways of
force and treachery are continually attempted to bring to utter ruin and
destruction the Parliament and Kingdom, and that which is dearest the true
Protestant Religion.

This Arch is made up of the same materials with the three maine pillars, and
so it is not material whether any other examination be made of it or not, for
they stand and fall together, only we may observe, if you please, that whereas
we were told but of one Popish and traitorous plot that has been and now is
for the subversion of the true Protestant Reformed Religion, etc. as also but
of one treacherous and horrid design, and that lately discovered to destroy
etc. here we are invited (if not commanded) to believe that many ways of force
and treachery are continually attempted for the same ends. It seems these many
ways of force and treachery that have been found by constant experience to be
continually attempted to bring to utter ruin and destruction the Parliament
and Kingdom, and the true Protestant Religion, were such, as were not worthy
of the name of plots or designs, at least not Popish plots or horrid designs;
or else they were very unworthy, who having found them out, would not to this
day discover what they were; for besides the bringing up of the Northern Army,
and the King going once more then ordinarily attended to surprise the five
Members (which must needs be included in the Popish and traitorous plot first
mentioned, and has been again and again answered by His sacred Majesty) we
never heard (till now this traitorous and horrid design was discovered) of any
one way of force or treachery, that ever was assayed to compass any of the
ends here declared: But something must be said to scare the people (fit be
possible) quite out of their wits, loyalty, Religion and all, or else this
grand plot of plots, and design of designs, the taking of this new Oath will
hardly take effect.

These premises being laid, this conclusion is enforced, That for the
preventing and withstanding the same, they have thought fit, that all, who are
true hearted, and lovers of their Country should bind themselves each to other
in a sacred Vow and Covenant, etc.

Now although (as you know) the premises being false, the conclusion always
falls of it self; yet because there is more crowded into this conclusion, then
can be inferred from the premises, and we are like to be forced to hold to the
conclusion whatsoever the premises are, it will not be amiss to speak a word
or two of that also.

First, it is declared that for the preventing, etc. The Lords and Commons have
thought fit, etc.

Here are very gentle terms, is though the Contrivers of this oath desired
only to intimate their opinion of the convenience of taking it, and would
compel none to it, but leave it to the liberty of every conscience whether
they would take it or not; when as it is to be feared, a few days experience
will assu^e^u^, that it is ^^te^ded is the Shibboleth of this Nation, and
either take this oath, and be perjured, (if not worse) or take it not, and be
plundered, imprisoned, if not banished from house and County, will be all the
liberty our oppressed consciences shall obtain. But not to prejudge or
prophecy. Take the expression as it is, They have thought fit such a Vow or
Covenant should be made by all that are, etc. and it is not fit that any that are
such should scruple it. Well, but if the taking this solemn oath, or making
this sacred Vow and Cov^nant, be but a thing fitting and convenient, and not of
ex^rao^dinary, much less of extreme necessity: it has ever been a ruled case
in Divinity, that a solemn oath, sacred vow or covenant ought not in such a
case to be required or made. Besides, (which I must again and again put you
in mind of) if all, that is declared in the introduction to this oath were
true, and known to us all so to ^e: We have lately so solemnly protested and
sworn in that protestation or oath recommended unto us from the House of
Commons, That to our power, and as far as lawfully we may, we will oppose, and
by all good ways and means endeavor to bring to condign punishment all
such, as shall either by force, plots, conspiracies or otherwise, do any thing
contrary to the true reformed Protestant Religion established, (so far
especially as that is opposite to Popery, or Popish innovations) or against His
Majesty's royal Person, Honor, and Estate, or against the power and
privileges of Parliament, or against the lawful rights and liberties of the
Subject, or against any person that made that protestation in whatsoever he
should do in the lawful pursuance of the same; that if there be no more aimed
at in the imposing this oath, then what is lawful, just, and fair, in any or
all those pretended grounds or reasons alleged in the introduction for that
purpose, we have already as deeply and firmly engaged and bound our selves
thereunto as any Christian can possibly require us. They have but little
charity, who after an oath made of such and such things so lately, shall now
again require another oath to be taken for the confirmation of the same
things. Furthermore, when the King in his going against the Scots, did at York
cause an oath to be tendered to the Lords and others then attending His sacred
Person, it was answered by the Lords, and that answer accepted and rested in by
His Majesty, that they humbly conceived, that no oath ought to be tendered
either to them, or to any other His Majesty's Subjects, but what Himself and
the Lords and Commons assembled in Parlia. had first consented unto. And (which
cannot be so soon forgotten) at the beginning of this Parliament, that unhappy
oath composed by that unfortunate Convocation, and assented unto by the King,
was by the House of Commons (and by the House of Lords too, if I much mistake
not) utterly damned, (as the expression then was) and the Members of the
Convocation judged guilty of little less then a praemunire, for that it was by
them decreed to be tendered to the Subject without any act passed in Parliament
for the same. We beseech them therefore, that that which was thought reason and
Law then, may not be so soon not only thought none, but the flat contrary
thought fit, and practiced by the same persons.

It follows in the inference, That all that are true hearted and lovers of
their Country should bind themselves, etc,

These are conjuring words to the Country people, and of very large compass;
had they declared, that all that are true hearted; and lovers of the true
Protestant Reformed Religion, should bind themselves, etc. it might have made
Papists, Anabaptists, Brownists, and such like to have startled at it; whereas
this calling upon all that are true hearted and lovers of their Country, may
chance to fetch them and all in; and the truth is, let each part of this oath
be thoroughly scanned, there will be very little or nothing found in it, but
what all Papists, Anabaptists, and Brownists, that think themselves in their
own sense true hearted and lovers of their Country, and have not taken the
oath of Allegiance, Supremancy, and the last Protestation, may more safely
swear, vow, or covenant, then they that are true hearted Protestants, and
real lovers of the Reformed Protestant Religion established in the Church of
England. All that I can see which may cause them to scruple it, is this: They
must swear that they do in their consciences believe, That the forces raised
and continued by the two Houses of Parliament, are raised and continued for the
defense of the true Protestant Religion, etc. and that they will assist those
forces against the forces raised by the King. And I beseech you, why may not
Papists, Anabaptists and Brownists, both believe this in their consciences, and
yield this assistance, as well, or better then any true hearted Protestant,
that loves the true Reformed Protestant Religion established. And it must needs
be thought very fit, that such a sacred vow and covenant be made and taken by
us true hearted Subjects and lovers of the true Protestant Religion, for the
defense of our Religion and Liberties, which such professed enemies to our
Religion and Liberties, may with more safety of conscience make or take then we.

But not to dwell any longer upon the Introduction. In the last place, it will
not be amiss to observe, under what Names this new Oath is recommended unto
us: viz Under the names of a sacred vow and covenant. I do not use to boggle
at Names; but these are the times of Jealousies and Fears, and it cannot be
expected but some will be fearful and jealous of the Declarations and Actions
of the Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament, as well as they have
been, and still are of others; and therefore, I trust, it is a pardonable
sin, (if any) to say, I like this Oath somewhat the worse, for its appearing
to us, under that borrowed name of sacred vow and covenant, and not under its
own proper name, An Oath. I ever suspected the shifting of Names; and I would
feign know some reason (if it might be imparted to such a one as I am) why it
should not (being an attestation, or calling God to witness for the confirmation
of what is asserted or promised, which is as full, complete, and formal an
Oath, as can be taken) be tendered unto us under the name of an oath, rather
then under the name of a sacred vow and covenant? Is it to facilitate the
taking of it? there being many thousands of the ordinary sort of people, that
fear the taking of an oath, especially a solemn, public oath, having been
often taught the peril of it; who will never startle at the making a vow or
covenant, being less instructed, if not altogether ignorant of the nature of
it. Or are not these borrowed names used, to hold the people more fully and
firmly to this oath, when it is once taken? So that, if the people after this
oath taken, should begin to doubt, whether it be not flatly contrary to their
oath of Allegiance, to their oath of Supremacy, and to their late Protestation,
(as without doubt it is) and thereupon either think this oath absolutely void,
or question whether this or the former oaths were the more obliging, it would
be an advantage which the Time-serving-Preachers would not let slip, to tell
the people, That this their last oath is to be held to, before all their
former: because it is not only an oath, as they were, but also a sacred vow and
covenant, I am sure less advantages have been made use of by those new
Teachers. But no more of the Name, wishing from my soul that it had never
been named amongst Christians.

Come we to the Oath it self. Concerning which, for the satisfying of my own
conscience, and the consciences of as many as you shall please to acquaint
therewith, I desire that one rule for the right taking of an oath may be
thoroughly considered, and each part of this present Oath, examined according to
that Rule. The Rule is that of Gods own prescribing, by his Prophet Jeremiah,
4.2. Thou shall swear, The Lord lives, in Truth, in Judgment, and in
Righteousness: that is, in few words: Thou shall swear to nothing, calling
God, who lives for ever, as a witness thereunto, but what is True, and what
thou know and art sure of, and what is just and righteous. These three
qualifications ought to be the boundaries and limits of every oath; and he
sins highly against the express Command of God, and so hazards his Soul in
a most perilous manner, that fails in any one of these. According unto these
then, let us in the Name of God examine the several parts of this new Oath.

First, every man that takes this Oath is required to declare, and that in
reverence and humility to the Divine Majesty, and (as it is in the close of the
oath) in the presence of Almighty God the searcher of all hearts, as he will
answer at the great day when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, his
hearty sorrow for his own sins, and the sins of this Nation, etc. and that
his true intention is by Gods grace to endeavor the amendment of his own
ways. Concerning which I propound these two Quaeres.

1. Quaer. How thousands and ten thousands in this Nation can swear this in
Truth, when as, poor souls, if all should take this oath that are by this
Ordinance required, it is to be feared there would be no fewer, whose very hearts
would give their mouths the lie, and whose very immediate actions would
testify against them to the contrary: for, alas, how few are there who attain
to that height of grace and goodness, as to be heartily sorry either for their
own sins, or the sins of the Nation? Oh that there were such an heart in
them (said God once of Israel, when they all promised that they would hear
whatsoever God spoke to Moses and do it) that they would fear me, and keep
all my commandments always, that it might be well with them, and with their
children for ever: and, oh, that there were now such an heart in us all of this
Nation, will all good men wish, that we would all in earnest be heartily sorry
for our own sins, and the sins of this Nation; and that we did really
intend an amendment of our own ways: for then, to be sure, it would be well
with us, and with our children after us. But for so many thousands, nay the
most of us, to declare, and swear this in the presence of Almighty God, the
searcher of all hearts, when both God that searches our hearts, and our own
hearts themselves know, that it is not so: what will this do, but infinitely
add to our sins, and provoke God to add to our calamities and judgments
both personal and National? How many foul, abominable, crying sins are
there, whereof you and I know multitudes, (I would we could exempt the Imposers
of this new Oath) to be deeply guilty, which the most of them will not
acknowledge to be sins, but justify themselves in them, so far as they are
from being heartily sorry for them, or intending any amendment of them. As for
instance, uncharitablenes, lying, slandering, rapine, oppression, disobedience,
blooshed, and rebellion; and yet they that are most conscious of such crimes
will, (it is likely) with the first declare or swear in the presence of Almighty
God, and as they will answer it at the great day, etc. that they are heartily
sorry for their own sins, etc. and intend amendment. Thus whilst we profess
to enter into a sacred covenant, and by that to bind our selves to bewail and
forsake our sins, (the acknowledged causes of our present calamities and
judgments) we do but mock God, speaking words and swearing falsely in making
a covenant, which makes our judgments to grow the more, springing up like
hemlocke in furrows of the field, Hosen 10.4. Let us then pray, and that
earnestly, that God would be pleased, according to his promise Jerem. 31. to
make a new covenant with us, and to put his law in our inward parts, and write
it in our hearts, or (as the Prophet Ezekiel expresses that covenant Ezekiel. 11.
19.20.) that he would give us one heart, and put a new spirit within us, and
take the stony heart out of our flesh, and give us an heart of flesh, that we
may walk in his statutes, etc. But let us take heed how we swear or declare
in the presence of God, that our stony heart is taken from us, and that an
heart of flesh, that is, a softened, mollifyed penitent heart is given us, when
our hearts assure us, that there is no such work wrought in us, as also that
we intend an amendment of our ways, for the future, when we intend nothing
less.

2. Quaer. What sins are to be accounted the sins of the Nation? that so we
may swear in judgment, knowing what we swear And to this purpose it may be
questioned, whether the late superstitious practices and innovations, against
which there have been so many Declamations, are to be reputed sins of this
Nation? and how many are or will be heartily sorry for them, though they have
been no little cause of our present sorrows? as also whether Anabaptisticall,
Brownisticall, and other Separatisticall practices and positions, connived at,
if not countenanced, by those who ought to suppress and punish the Authors and
Fautors thereof, and to be esteemed sins of the Nation; and how many will
declare their sorrow for them, though our present sorrows are fomented and
continued by them? as further, whether plundering, robbing, and spoiling,
whether speaking evil of Dignities, and slandering both the footsteps and
person of the Lords Anointed; whether false swearing and perjury, whereof our
oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, and late Protestation are pregnant witnesses;
are to be numbered amongst the sins of this Nation? and how many will declare
their hearty sorrow for them, though like to increase our sorrows to our being
overwhelmed by them? Or whether only those sins not long since Declared by
public Order of the Lords and Commons, Feb. 15. 1642. and appointed to be
read in all Churches and Chapels, etc. be the sins of this Nation? viz. The
high contempt of Gods holy Ordinances, etc. Multitudes of oaths, and
blasphemies, etc. envy, contentions, and unnatural divisions, oppression,
fraud and violence, as also whether the blood shed in the days of Queen Mary,
and Idolatry then and since, are to be adjudged the sins of this Nation, and
our sorrows to be terminated in lamenting them? This I humbly conceive were
fit to be declared before we swear or declare in the presence of God, and as
we will answer at the great day, etc. that we are heartily sorry for the sins
of this Nation. What we do declare our hearty sorrow for in private, every
man's own conscience regulates him in: but when we make a public, solemn
declaration of our sorrow for the whole Nations sins, and enter into a sacred
covenant with God, not to commit the like sins again, it is but reason, that
as many sins of the Nation as can be thought on, at least the most notorious,
should be publicly named; that so the people may know what sins in special
they profess themselves sorry for, and promise amendment of; This has been
observed in making covenants, which were sacred indeed, concerning National
sins: as, in that covenant which Joshua called upon the people to make, Josh.
24. that appointed by Asa, 2. Chr. 15. that appointed by Josiah, 2. Chr. 34.
and that appointed by Ezra, Ezr. 10. In all which covenants you shall find the
principal National sins, of which, they declared their detestation, and
promised amendment, particularly Named. But indeed every one of those covenants
were entered into by the command and authority of the supreme Governor; and it
is not to be found in sacred Writ, where ever there was any sacred National
Covenant enjoined by any, save by the King, or supreme of that Nation; or by
the express authority derived from Him. But no more of this first part of the
Covenant, it being as I verily believe, the least part intended by the
Contrivers of it; only it is set in the first place, that looking upon that,
our eyes may be so dazzled with the glorious specious religiousnesse of it, as
not to be able to discover the foul, abominable iniquity of the rest.

The second thing required in this oath, is, That we swear or declare in the
presence of Almighty God, that we do abhor and detest the said wicked and
treacherous design lately discovered, and that we never gave, nor will give
our assent to the execution thereof, but will according to our power and
vocations oppose and resist the same, and all other of the like nature:
concerning which, I make these four Quaeres.

1. Quaer. How is it possible for the most of men to swear this in judgment,
according to the second necessary condition of a lawful oath, seeing it is no
where declared by the Lords and Commons, what that wicked and treacherous
design was, further then in the general (and generals are no sufficient
ground for the abjuring any particular) only Mr. Pym has collected some
particulars of it in his speech before mentioned: but how shall thousands reach
that collection? And when they have it, what proofs and testimonies does he
bring to convince any reasonable man of the undoubted truth of what he says?
It seems by that very speech, that himself and the rest of the House of
Commons, who know most of it, do not know it thoroughly, or at least doubt
whether they do or not, for that pardon is offered by him in their names to
any (except those who are taken or fled) that shall within 15. days discover
what he knows of this conspiracy. And will any man that knows what God is,
call him to witness, that he abhorres and detests that which he does not
certainly know. It Is to be feared God will abhor that man as an extreme vain
foolish man, that shall so vainly and foolishly profane his great name; and
^uch a man may easily be induced to swear an abhorment and detestation of what
God most likes and loves, he knowing as little of that, as of this.

But suppose the design be sufficiently declared, though not so fully as some
desire it might be; yet Mr. Pym himself has withal declared that of it in
his fore cited speech, that would move any loyal Subject to make a second
Quaere.

2. Quaer. Whether any such can swear justly and righteously, that the design
discovered is such a wicked and treacherous design as ought to be abhorred and
detested by him, for besides the intentions or aims of it (whereof you heard
in the introduction) he tells us, that for the principles of it, it did rise
from the ashes of another design that failed, namely, that mutinous Petition
for Peace (as he is pleased to honor it by his quiet Epithet) contrived in
the City, and how that was to be abhorred and detested, let every true lover of
peace judge: Then for the steps of it, he assures us, that it came to that
high step at the last, how they might procure power and countenance to the
action by authority from His Majesty in the way of Commission, and this, says
he afterward, they did procure, and this does not render it very horrible and
detestable, unless to those that abhor to obey any Commission that His Majesty
grants: So for the Actors or Agents in it, he is pleased to cloud some in their
general qualifications or relations, and some few he clothes with their own
names. In the general, he tells us, that some Members of the City had a hand
in this design, whereof there were diverse (they are his words) and some
Members of both Houses, and of the Lords House (and if Mr. Waller were to be
credited) of the ablest, of the best, and of the greatest; in particular, he
names two Gentlemen, Mr. Waller, (as though Mr. Waller an eminent Parliament
man were not worthy to be reckoned amongst the Parliament Members) and his
brother in law Mr. Tomkins, (I wonder he forgot Mrs. Tomkins, who was also
apprehended and committed; but chaste man he minds not women, especially
others men's wives) and the Lord Faulkland one of the Secretaries of State. And
how the design should deserve to be abhorred and detested from such men's being
the prime actors in it, is beyond my skill: I should rather think the better,
then the worse of a design for such actors sake: besides (because Mr. Pym
should have lost his old wont, if he had made any speech (especially to the
Citizens) without throwing some dirt in the Kings face) we are further let know
from the same mouth, that this matter was prosecuted in part, and agitated and
promoted by those which were sent from His Majesty, and seemed to be Messengers
of Peace; and (for fear any should think he aimed only at the Kings
Messengers, and not at the King Himself) in the same breath he falls foul and
heavy (like himself) upon the Kings gracious Message of Peace, and would fain
insinuate that those Messages sent by His Majesty were but to amuse the people
with pretenses of peace, whilst this villainous project was a working, and so
the King is made one and (perhaps Mr. Pym will allow Him in this so much of His
royal Title) the chief of this conspiracy, and what true hearted Subject will
be easily induced to say, much less to swear that he abhorres and detests as
wicked and treacherous that design, whereof his Sovereigne is not only
thoroughly informed, but is (with reverence to His Sacred Majesty be those
terms used) the chief Complotter and Abettor?

3. Quar. Whether the swearing that I never gave my assent to that design, be
not to all those that had any finger therein (and they are voiced to be many
thousands) as sore an oath, and as much betraying either of their souls to the
hazard of hell, or of their bodies and estates to the probability of utter
ruin, as ever the oath ex officio was, so much cried out upon in the world?
This I am sure of, upon the discovery of all the wicked, treacherous, horrid,
detestable designs that have been in this Kingdom since the Reformation,
whether powder treason, or what other soever, there was never the like course
of soul-cruelty taken, for the insnaring of so many souls: the Lord in His
mercy look upon them, and deliver them.

4. Quaer. Whether the adding of these words, Nor will give my assent to the
execution thereof, but will according to my power and vocation oppose and
resist the same, and all other of the like nature, etc. do not argue strongly
that the design was of that nature, that if it should appear in its own
colors, it would appear so fair, that multitudes would yet assent to the
putting it into execution? and therefore is not so horrid and detestable as
some would make us believe; for certainly if it were so, the whole Kingdom
need not to be sworn never to assent to the execution of it after it is once
discovered, but to their power to oppose and resist the same, and all other of
the like nature; every man would of his own accord set himself against it
with all his might and power.

The third thing tendered in this oath is, That in case any other design shall
hereafter come to our knowledge, we will make such timely discovery as we shall
conceive may best conduce to the preventing thereof. Concerning which, I shall
only start these two questions, 1. What is to be accounted for a design. 2.
Whether every man that takes this oath, be not truly bound to make such timely
discovery of whatsoever he knows plotted, projected, contrived or purposed to
the prejudice either of the King, Church or State, or any member thereof, that
it may be prevented? Or whether the obligation of this oath be not restrained
only to the discovery of designs against the two Houses of Parliament, and
especially against those Members of each House against whom the late discovered
design is said to be intended. And I would you durst resolve me freely and
fully whether this particular oath be not such a design, as every man that
knows of the contriving thereof be not bound in conscience to discover what he
can of it, to the preventing of the ruining of so many thousand poor souls as
are like to be hazarded thereby.

But to come to the main things aimed at in the imposing this oath, those
indeed unto which all the preceding parts of the oath, are but a preparative,
and have been themselves prepared in a readiness, and resolved upon by some to
be gotten confirmed by an oath, long before the forenamed wicked and
treacherous design, now made so advantageous to set of this oath withal, was
ever heard of, insomuch that many sober judicious men do verily suspect, that
rather that design is declared to be so wicked, treacherous, horrid and
detestable, to draw on the taking the following part of this oath, then that
any part of this oath, much less the whole oath it self, was resolved upon,
as occasioned by the wickedness, treachery, horridness, and detestablenesse
of that design, as some would persuade us.

We are required in the fourth place to swear or declare in the presence of
Almighty God, That We do in our consciences believe, that the forces raised by
the two Houses of Parliament, are raised and continued for their just defense,
and for the defense of the true Protestant Religion, and Liberties of the
Subject, against the forces raised by the King. Where I entreat satisfaction in
these Quaeres.

1. Quaer. Why is the defense of the King, here left quite out, when as it
has been so often professed and declared, by the Lords and Commons, in their
several Declarations and Ordinances, that they raised their forces for his
defense in the first place? It seems they are afraid to swear that, though
they have often and often declared it: and why then should we make their
declarations so firm a ground of our faith, as thereupon to swear, that we do
in our consciences believe, that the forces raised by them, were raised and are
continued for such and such ends, when they themselves will not swear that
they were raised for that end, which they have so many times declared?

2. Quaer. How dare any man swear or declare in the presence of Almighty God,
etc. that he does in his conscience believe, that the forces raised by the two
Houses of Parliament, are raised and continued for their just defense, when the
King has made them so many gracious overtures of peace, and they have refused
them, as appears by sundry Messages and Declarations, with the Answers and
Replies, that have passed betwixt them: nay, when the King has woed and
entreated them, with such sweetness of temper, and lownes of condescension, as
never any Prince used toward Subjects, that they would both name the persons,
and appoint the place for a Treaty, betwixt him and them, for settling the peace
of the Kingdom, and ending and quieting all differences between them: yet
still his offers have been utterly rejected, unless he would first take down
his Standard, and call in what Proclamations and Declarations he had made
against some of the Members of both Houses, and their proceedings (both which
his Majesty yielded to do, so that they would revoke their Declarations against
all persons that assisted him) as also leave his forces, and withdraw his
protection both from such persons, as were by both Houses voted Delinquents,
and from all such as should afterward be so voted, as you may see more at
large in his Majesty's gracious Message to both Houses of Parliament, sent from
Nottingham, August 25. 1642. The Answer of the Lords and Commons to that
Message. His Majesty's reply to that answer. Their answer and their Declaration
to that reply, and the former Message. And can it be believed that the
defensive part of this war (be it just or unjust) was on their side, when the
King was thus the offerer and suer for peace, and they the refusers requiring
Him to yield to those things, which could not possibly stand with His own
Honor and Safety, or with the safety of those that are His most faithful and
loyal Subjects, called to His assistance by His Summons, and their Allegiance.
Or can that be believed to be a defensive War, much less a War for a just
defense, when many of the forces raised by them, were raised, and the Kings
Goods, Arms, Towns, Shipping, and whole Militia were taken from Him, and made
use of, and held against him, before any the least warlike offense was offered
them by any Forces raised by the King; as has been sufficiently cleared, both
by His Majesty's Declarations, and upon our sad and chargeable experience.
Besides, we were told from several Pulpits, about the time of the first
Proposi ions for Horse, Plate, or Money, June 10. 1642. and often times since,
that the Forces then in raising, and since raised by the Parliament, were to
fetch the King from His evil Counselors, and to remove them from Him; and
this was afterward again promised to have been done within such and such a
time, if we would contribute but the other odd forty or fifty thousand pounds;
and I assure you we believed it then, or else we had not parted with our monyes
so freely. And therefore I cannot but wonder that we, who at the first raising
of Forces by the Parliament, and some good time since, did verily believe, that
those forces were raised to catch away the King from His evil Counselors,
and to take away, or drive away His evil Counselors from Him, promising our
selves such hopes of accomplishing our desires with so much ease and speed,
should now swear that we do in our consciences believe, that the same forces
were raised for the just defense of the Parliament, as though the King had been
then fetching them from their evil Counselors, or their evil Counselors
from them. If only fears and jealousies of the Kings intention to raise and
leavy war against His Parliament were a just cause or ground for His
Parliament to leavy forces against Him, (which to grant would be of most
dangerous consequence both to King and Kingdom) perhaps some might think that
the present Parliament now assembled, did fear, and were jealous of some such
thing, and so had cause to provide such a defense: but how can we be persuaded
in our consciences that those fears and jealousies were just, when upon the
Kings first knowing that such fears and jealousies did possess them, He did
not only declare the contrary, but did solemnly disavow all such intentions,
professing before God and the World, that he always had, and then did abhor
all such designs? And for the further clearing of His intentions in that
particular, He desired all His Nobility and Council, then attending Him, to
witness with Him, whether they did see any color of preparations or
counsels, that might reasonably beget a belief of any such design, and
whether they were not fully persuaded to the contrary, etc, whereupon the
Nobility and Council then present at york, being in number above forty, made
a Declaration and Profession in these words: We whose names are under written,
in obedience to His Majesty's desire, and out of the duty which we owe to His
Majesty's Honor, and to truth, being here upon the place, and witnesses of His
Majesty's frequent and earnest Declarations and Professions of His abhorring
all designs of making war upon His Parliament, and not seeing any color of
preparations or counsels, that might reasonably beget the belief of any such
design; Do profess before God, and testify to all the world, that we are
fully persuaded that His Majesty has no such intention, but that all His
endeavors tend to the firm and constant setlement of the true Protestant
Religion, the just privileges of Parliament, the liberty of the Subject, the
Law, Peace, and Prosperity of this Kingdom. This solemn Profession was made
by the King, and attested by His Nobility and Council, June 15. 1642. which
was five days after that the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament had
made certain propositions and orders for the bringing in of Money, Plate, or
Horse, etc. for the maintaining an Army for their defense. So that (as I said
before) if fears and jealousies of the Kings intentions of raising and
leavying War against His Parliament, were a just cause or ground for his
Parliament actually to raise or leavy forces against him; and if we could also
in our consciences believe, that such fears and jealousies did really and
truly possess both Houses; yet when it appears by such evidence (as greater
and better could not be given) that those fears and jealousies were not just:
it is strange to think what conscience or faith, (I might add what hope or
charity) that man has, that can answer or declare in the presence of Almighty
God, that he believes in his conscience that the forces raised by the
Parliament upon that unjust ground or cause, were raised for their just defense.

3. Quar. How can any man swear in Judgment and in Truth, that he does in his
conscience believe, that the forces raised by the two Houses of Parliament,
were raised, and are continued for the defense of the true Protestant Religion;
when as first, if by the true Protestant Religion be meant that Protestant
Religion, which is now established (so far as ought can be said to be
established) in the Church of England (as that must be meant, or otherwise we
know not what the true Protestant Religion is, and so cannot take this oath in
judgment) it has been found by lamentable experience, that the true
Protestant Religion has been more invaded, impugned and blasphemed by the
forces raised by the two Houses of Parliament) and their assistants and
adherents, in those parts where they have had the power, then ever it was since
Queen Mary's days, witness the many uncivil, unhumane, unchristian
attempts, assaults and outrages that have been committed by Anabaptists,
Brownists, and other Sectaries upon our established Doctrine, upon our
established worship and service of God, upon Gods holy Ordinances, and upon
those sacred places wherein all these were wont to meet, and present themselves
to us in such beauty and excellency to our unspeakable benefit and comfort. I
must not forget, how the most pious, painful, and orthodoxall Protestant
Divines (they that in former times, when the Protestant Religion suffered most
by another faction, bare the heat and burden of the opposition, and stood in
the gap against Arminianisme, and other innovations) have been since the
raising of forces by the Parliament, and by the power thereof, abused,
imprisoned, and cruelly handled, when others that then deserted their stations,
have been magnified and extolled, nay, when drunken, debauched, innovating
drones, that have contributed toward the maintenance of the Parliaments
forces, have been connived at and favored, and if by chance apprehended,
speedily dismissed, and set at liberty. He must have a strong faith, and a
stretching conscience, that can believe in his conscience, that these are
marks or signs of defending the true Protestant Religion. If this be their
defending of it, God send us our old Defendor thereof once again restablished
in His Throne, and let these new defenders defend themselves. Secondly, the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament did, no longer since then in March
last, declare, and publish to the world in that Ordinance of theirs, for the
speedy raising and leavying of money for the maintenance of the Army raised by
the Parliament, that the only Causes for which they had raised, and did then
continue an Army and Forces, were, first, for the necessary defense of
themselves (which may be somewhat more easily believed then for their just
defense.) Seconly, for the necessary defense of this Kingdom from foreign
invasions, a defense not now mentioned. And thirdly, for the bringing of
notorious offenders to condign punishment, a thing also (as was before hinted)
altogether forgotten in this new oath. And if the Lords and Commons themselves
have so lately declared and acknowleded, that these were the only causes, for
which they raised, and then continued their army and forces, they have no cause
to take offense at any that shall not believe, that the same forces were raised
and continued, for the defense of the true Protestant Religion. I praise God I
have no such Moon-faith.

4. Quar. How can any man swear in truth, That he does in his conscience
believe, that the forces raised by the two Houses are raised and continued for
the defense of the liberties of the Subject, when by the raising and continuing
of these Forces, first, the liberty of enjoying their own goods, chattells, or
lands. Secondly, the liberty of their trading and traffiquing. Thirdly, the
liberty of their persons. Fourthly, the liberty their consciences toward God,
their King, and their fellow-brethren. Fifthly, the liberty of their very
lives, is daily and hourly either taken or endeavored to be taken from the
best of Subjects, and all these contrary to the liberty of the established
known Laws of this Land. Indeed, to Bankrupts and Spendthrifts, to Rogues,
Thieves, Murderers, and such like, there is such politic liberty of spoiling,
robbing, plundering, and killing yielded, to Anabaptists, Brownists, and other
Sectaries, such Ecclesiastical liberty of Conventicle, prating and printing
permitted, and to all sorts of factious, seditious, rebellious Miscreants, such
liberty of lying, railing, and blaspheming indulged, as the like was never
heard of, much less tolerated and countenanced in any Christian
Commonwealth. And though we had such faith as that we could believe that the
forces raised by the two Houses of Parliament were raised for the defense of
the liberties of the Subject, yet when we poor oppressed, spoiled, and almost
ruined Subjects, see, feel, and complain, that the fruits and effects thereof
are so destructively contrary thereunto; we cannot possibly believe, that they
are still continued for the defense of our liberties; and therefore it is but
just to desire, that they, and only they be required to sweat they do believe
this, who have hitherto enjoyed their liberties.

5. Quar. How can any man swear in Judgment and Truth, that he does in his
conscience believe, that the forces raised by the two Houses, etc. were raised,
and are continued for the just defense of these three things named in this
oath, when that which should justify the defense of them, or any of them (if
ought could possibly justify it in those ways practiced by them) I mean the
known established Law of this Land, is not only violated and justled out of
place and power, but also quite left out of all defense and protection; now
they come to swear or declare before the Lord, that those things are, which
they intend to defend. What may be the reason think you, why in former
Declarations and Ordinances of the Lords and Commons, it has been often
professed, that one maine end of their raising forces was for the defense of
the Laws of this Land, and yet now in this new oath, when they reckon up the
main ends of raising and continuing the very same forces, the Laws of the Land
are not once named. Certainly we might as safely swear, that we do in our
consciences believe, that the said forces were raised, and are continued for
the defense of the Laws of the Land, (notwithstanding that the whole Land
knows that by those forces, the Laws of the Land have been and are quite
silenced and nulled) as we can swear that we do in our consciences believe,
that they were raised and are continued for the just defense of the Parliament,
and are for the defense of the true Protestant Religion, and liberties of the
Subject. Only the Laws of the Land are likely to bring in such an heavy
accusation and sore judgment against those that have taken up Arms in this
cause on the Parliament side, notwithstanding all the specious pretenses of
fair seeming ends, and are so Diametrically, or point blank to all Arbitrary
power, that the believing that those forces raised by the Parliament, were
raised, and are continued for the defense of those Laws might well be spared.

6. Quar. How can any man swear either in Judgment or in Righteousness or in
Truth, That he does in his conscience believe that the forces raised by the two
Houses, etc. were raised, and are continued for their own just defense, and
for the defense of the true Protestant Religion, and liberties of the Subject,
against the forces raised by the King; when the King has not only often and
often professed and declared, but at sundry times most solemnly and deeply
vowed, protested and sworn (his Nobility and Council, in number above forty,
and in estate, honor, and worth not to be paralled throughout the Kingdom,
attesting and professing the same, as you heard before) that he ever intended
the safety and preservation of all three, and when he did raise any forces,
that he raised them to make good those intentions, and (and to Gods glory, His
Majesty's honor, and his Subjects comfort and benefit, be it published) has
to his utmost made them all good, in all places where his forces have been
quartered since the first raising them to this present, as both his Armies, and
many thousands more are ready to depose it if that would satisfy. For my part,
I ascribe so much to the word of a King, and in particular to the word of
pious, Religious King Charles, that what he declares in point of Truth,
especially concerning his Royal Intentions, I think my self bound in
conscience to believe, before all the Declarations of all others in the world;
how much more, when so pious and religious a King as he is, has so often vowed
and sworn such and such things, ought all His Subjects (especially having all
sworn to maintain His Honor against all that shall do ought to the
prejudice thereof,) so to honor Him, as to credit and believe his Vow and
Oath, before the Declaration of a few of His Subjects, who have strained (to
say the least, and with the most modesty and reverence) their former oaths made
to their Sovereigne, both by raising forces against Him, and by entering into
this present vow and covenant against Him, and the forces raised by Him, as
will be further demonstrated by and by. It is well known to all knowing and
understanding men, that a King is not capable of having those by aims and ends
in making or taking an Oath, or of those many temptations of breaking or
violating an oath when it is made or taken, that some of His Subjects may have.
And though it should be granted by all (as we know it is not) that the Lords
and Commons remaining in the two Houses of Parliament, are the representative
Body of the Kingdom, to do for them, as well as to consult; yet certainly no
sober man will grant that every body in the Kingdom is bound to act and do
whatsoever they injoyne, be it good or evil, much less that they ought to
swear, that they do in their consciences believe whatsoever they do declare or
swear: and although it were acknowledged that they are the representative Body
of the Kingdom, and so representative, that the whole Kingdom were bound,
either to do, or suffer for not doing, whatsoever they enjoyne (as it is known
we are not unless our Head did consent, and join with them) yet, still I
hope, none think them the representative Soul of the Kingdom, so that,
whatsoever they believe, or swear they believe, our souls are bound to believe
the same. Nay further, had the Lords and Commons sworn expressly and
punctually, that the forces raised by the two Houses, etc. were raised and
continued for those three forementioned ends, yet still for the reasons before
alleged, I cannot see why we should swear that we do believe the same: But
when the Lords and Commons themselves, that were the raisers of those forces,
swear only, that they do in their consciences believe that those forces were
raised, and are continued for those ends (as being it seems fully persuaded so,
either by the close Committee, or by some others that knew the certainty
thereof.) One would think it were an act of charity and faith sufficient, for
others to be their compurgators so far, as to swear, that they do believe that
those Lords and Commons do believe so; and that it is too great a presumption,
to swear that they do in their consciences believe that it was, and is so
indeed. Believe me in any other case, if any other persons, whose truth and
integrity is best known to us, had acknowledged that they themselves had done
this or that, and being suspected, that they had done it for some evil intent
or purpose, should swear only that they do in their consciences believe, that
they did it for such, or such an end, most fair and just, their very swearing
so would cause more suspicion of them, then if they had held their peace, and
said nothing.

7. Quaer. How dare any man swear or declare in the presence of Almighty God,
etc. that he does in his conscience believe, that the forces raised by the two
Houses of Parliament, are raised and continued for their just defense, and for
the defense of the true Protestant Religion, and liberties of the Subject,
against the forces raised by the King; when so to swear or declare, is to
swear and declare in Gods presence that he does in his conscience believe,
that the forces raised by the King are raised and continued for the subversion
and ruin, at least for the extreme damage and detriment of all the same
things? And what a hard case is it, that a man must be put to such an oath, as
to swear not only that he does believe well of both Houses of Parliamen, but
also that he does believe so much evil of a good King? as were He the worst of
Kings, worse could not be thought of Him, all things considered? Why perhaps
there may be some of so loyal and just thoughts toward their Sovereigne, and
yet withal of so charitable and reverentiall thoughts toward both Houses of
Parliament, as to think that the forces on each part were raised and continued
for the same ends, and they (those three mentioned) only most unhappily differd
in the means and ways of accomplishing those ends. And what shall these poor
souls do, when they cannot satisfy the Parliament by taking this oath, but
they must thereby abandon all loyal thoughts of their King? Lord be thou their
Directour.

It follows in the oath, as an inference enforced from the last thing
believed and sworn, I do here in the presence of Almighty God declare, vow,
and covenant, that I will according to my power and vocation assist the forces
raised and continued by both Houses of Parliament against the forces raised by
the King, without their consent. Concerning which part of the oath, that I may
still keep withing the prescribed bounds of a lawful oath, I desire these
Quaeries may be cleared.

1. Quaer. What is here meant by Vocation, that so we may swear in judgment
knowing what we swear? whether are we to understand by Vocation, that ordinary
course of life, or external profession, whereunto God does ordinarily call
men, and where he does externally place them? as when some are called to be
Pastors and Teachers in the Church, others to be fed and taught; some are
called to be Masters, others to be Servants; some are called to be Husbandmen,
others are called to be Tradesmen, etc. or whether by Vocation here, may not be
understood some extraordinary calling by secret inspiration, divine revelation
or the like; as certainly some such calling must be presupposed, or else I
cannot see what warrant they can pretend for the assi^ting any forces against
their Sovereigne. This Quare I could not baulke, because the using of this
expression, According to my Vocation, is not any where to be found, that I know
of any oath that has been taken in this Nation, though the other limitation,
According to my power, has been usual in most or all our promissorie oaths;
which makes me to think that some Divine or other was the framer and contriver
of this new oath, or at least had a great hand in it (howsoever it was
pretended to have been suddenly framed by some Members of the House of Commons
upon the discovery of the great design) and being called to that calling, his
conscience minded him somewhat of the unlawfulness and unseemlinesse for a
Minister of the Gospel of peace to be an assistant in war, especially in such a
war; or else rather he thought, that the adding of this limitation, According
to my vocation, would excuse him both from contributing much money to the
war, as also from hazarding his own person in it (as some of their furious
brethren to their shame and confusion have done) so that he did but in his
preaching, and by his praying, those two glorious, but now profaned and
blasphemed Ordinances, entice and stir up others thereunto: But then I cannot
but still wonder why the Lords should each of them swear, According to my
vocation, etc. I believe if one should ask any of their Lordships what
vocation he is of, he would not take it well; though for the House of Commons,
we know diverse of them are of several vocations, and so this limitation might
become them well enough.

2. Quaer. How any man that professes himself to be either of the same
judgment with the Church of England, and with the glorious Martyrs, and
renowned Divines, and other learned Worthies, that have since the Reformation
lived in this Church, or of the same judgment with any other of the reformed
Churches, and the most renowned Members thereof, can swear in Judgment, that
he will assist any forces raised by Subjects, against the forces raised by
their Sovereign, when it has been so fully and amply declared by all those
Churches, and by their chief Worthies successively in all times, that it is
altogether unlawful for any Subjects to take up Arms against their
Sovereigne, though a Tyrant, though a persecuter of the Gospel, though never so
wicked and ungodly, as is to be seen in our own Homilies against Rebellion, in
the Acts and Monuments of our Martyrs, in the Harmony of Confessions of the
reformed Churches, in Luther, Calvin, O^^lampadius, Z^^inglius, Buder, Peter
Martyr, Capit^, Bullinger, and many other foreign Divines, as also in
multitudes of our most famous and pious. English Divines, whose testimonies,
with the testimonies of many others, I am credibly informed had been long
since, for the satisfaction of those that question it, faithfully published by
an orthodox Divine (now a prisoner in Ely House) had not some of the House of
Commons prevented him by seizing upon his book w^ilst it was in the Press, as
fearing all such information of the people.

3. Quaer. How any man that has taken either the oath of Supremacy, or the
oath of Allegiance, or the late Protestation, can without perjury ipso facto
swear, that he will according to his power assist the forces raised and
continued by both Houses of Parliament against the forces raised by the King,
seeing all those three oaths are so flatly and fully contrary to this part of
this oath, of all the rest; as first in the oath of Supremacy we swear, That
we did testify, and declare in our consciences, that the Kings Highness is
the only supreme Governor of this Realm, etc. and as well in all spiritual or
Ecclesiastical things or causes, as temporal; and if so, the just power of
raising forces, and other power of the sword does only belong to Him, and none
ought to raise any forces, or exercise any other power of the sword, without
His consent, and without express authority derived from Him; the power of the
sword being that which principally makes and maintains the Supremacy, and
therefore ascribed by the Apostle to the supreme power only, Romans 13.4. He
bears not the sword in vain, for he is the Minister of God, a revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil: and to grant the Parliament a just
power of raising forces without the Kings consent (much more to grant them
power of raising Arms contrary to His Proclamation, and other express
Commands, and they against the forces raised by the King) is to set up two
supreme Powers in one Kingdom, and so two swords one against another, and both
to the ruin of the whole Kingdom.

Again, we swear in the same oath, That we would bear faith and true
Allegiance to the Kings Highness his Heirs, etc. and that we would to our
power assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences, and
Authorities granted or belonging to the Kings Highness, his heirs, etc. or
united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of the Realm. As also in the oath of
Allegiance we swear, That we would bear faith and Allegiance to His Majesty,
His Heirs, etc. and that we would defend Him and them to the utmost of our
power against all conspiracies and attempt whatsoever, which should be made
against his or their persons, their Crown and dignity, either by reason of any
Sentence or Declaration of the Pope or otherwise; and that we would do our
best endeavor to disclose and make known unto his Majesty, his Heirs, etc.
all treasons, and traitorous conspiracies, which we should know or hear of, to
be against him or any of them. And lastly, in our late Protestation, we swear
to maintain and defend with our lives and powers and estates according to the
duty of our Allegiance, His Majesty's royal Person, Honor, and Estate; and to
our power, and as far as lawfully we may, to oppose, and by all good means to
endeavor to bring to condign punishment all such as should either by force,
plots, conspiracies, or otherwise do any thing to the contrary. Now whether the
assisting of forces raised by some of the Kings Subjects against the forces
raised by the King, be not expressly and fully contrary to all these particulars
promised and sworn in all these oaths, let any indifferent man judge; as (to
name some contrarieties for many) 1. Whether it be not usurpation or
incroachment upon the Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences or Authority
granted or belonging to the Kings Highness, and united and annexed to the
Imperial Crown, and so flatly contrary to the oath of Supremacy. 2. Whether
it be not an attempt, if not a conspiracy, made against either the Kings
Person, or his Crown and Dignity, and so fully contrary to the oath of
Allegiance. 3. Whether it be not hazardous to the Kings person, scandalous to
His Honor, and detrimentall to His Estate, and so directly contrary to the
late Protestation. Lastly, whether it be not a breach of that faith, duty, and
loyal subjection, which both by the bond of Allegiance, and by the
commandment of Almighty God (as the Statute acknowledges 7. Jac. cap. 6) we
ought to bear to His Majesty, and so contrary to all three oaths, and to his
express command, who is called to witness both in them and this. For my part,
I appeal only to that which is most concerned, and in most peril, I mean the
conscience of every one that has taken the former oaths, and is required to
this, wishing that every one that has forgotten whether he ever took the
oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance or not (as I fear there are not a few such)
that he would consult with himself, and the Statutes which enjoyne those
oaths, viz. 1. Elizab. cap. 1. and 5. Elizab c. 1. and 3. Jacob. c. 4 and 7.
Jacob. c. 6. the comparing of this new oath with those former oaths would
occasion a multitude of Quaeres had some men the liberty of starting them; I
shall be bold only to point at one which in order to the preceding Quaeres upon
this part of this oath makes the fourth.

4. Quaer. Whether the taking of a new oath, and recommending and tendering it
to others, which is contrary to the oath of allegiance, as this new oath is, do
not render the persons so doing, guilty of the breach, and liable to the
penalty of that branch in that statute 3. Jacob. cap. 4. expressed in these
words: And further be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any
person or persons at any time, after the tenth of June, shall either upon the
seas, or in any other place, within the Dominions of the Kings Majesty, his
heirs, or successors, put in practice to absolve, persuade, or withdraw any of
the Subjects of the Kings Majesty, or of his heirs, or successors of this
Realm of England, from their natural obedience to his Majesty, his heirs, or
successors, or to reconcile them to the Pope or See of Rome, or to move them or
any of them, to promise obedience to any pretended authority of the Sea of
Rome, or to any other Prince, State, or Potentate, That then every such person,
their procurers, counselors, ayders and maintainers, knowing the same, shall
be to all intents adjudged Traitors, and being thereof lawfully convicted,
shall have judgment, suffer and forfeyt, as in cases of high Treason.

And if any such person, as aforesaid, etc. shall be willingly absolved, or
withdrawn as aforesaid, or willingly reconciled, or promise obedience to any
such pretended authority, Prince, State, or Potentate, as aforesaid, That every
such person or persons, their procurers, counselors, ayders, and maintainers,
knowing the same, shall be to all intents adjudged Traitors, and being thereof
lawfully convicted, shall have judgment, suffer, and forfeyt, as in case of
high treason. See the like stat. 23. Eliz. cap. 1.

I could wish, that you would propound this Quaere privately to some honest,
able, faithful Lawyer, and let me know his resolution, it being of great and
high concernment.

5. Quar. Whether the swearing, that we will according to our power and
vocation, assist the forces raised and continued by both Houses of Parliament,
against the forces raised by the King, does not swear us up to do that, which
will bring us within compass of high Treason, declared by that statute of 25.
Edw. 3. cap. 2. wherein it is declared by the King at the request of the Lords
and Commons in that Parliament assembled, That it is high Treason to compass
or imagine the death of our Lord the King, or of our Lady his Queen, or of
their eldest son and heir: or if a man do levy war against our Lord the
King in his Realm, or be adherent to the Kings enemies in his Realm, giving
to them aid and comfort in the Realm or elsewhere, and thereof be probably
attainted of open deed by people of their condition, I believe, when the
established Law of this Land comes to be in force again, it will puzzle all
the Lawyers of this Kingdom to assoile us of that guilt, by the subtillest
interpretations they can invent? And truly I do not yet value either soul or
body at so low a rate, as to venture either upon such an hazard.

But suppose that it should not be found high treason, yet I have another
Quaere to put concerning this oath, that will make many look, before they leap
into it, lest they thereby leap out of a great part of their estates, and that
is this.

6. Quar. Whether the taking this part of this oath and practicing accordingly,
do not expose as many as have Offices, Fees, Annuities, Honors, Lordships,
Castles, Manors, Lands, Tenements, and other possessions and hereditaments of
the Kings gifts and grants, (which are throughout this Kingdom a considerable
number) to an inavoydable forfeiture thereof, whenas by those two statutes,
viz. 11. Hen. 7. cap. 18. and 19. Hen. 7. cap. 1. it is enacted, That every
person or persons within the Realm of England or Wales, that have any such
offices, fees, annuities, etc. and does not in person attend upon the King
being in person in wars against his enemies, and rebels within the same
Realm or without, for repressing and subduing of them and their mischievovs
purpose, shall forfeit all his offices, fees, annuities, etc, and that all the
Kings gifts, grants, and letters patents, whereby they enjoy them, shall be
utterly annulled, void, of none effect, and at the Kings pleasure: unless it
be such, as have special license under the Kings sign manual or signet, or
else have such unseigned sickness, letting, or disease, that he may not in
his person come to do that attendance.

The same Statutes, as they require such attendance upon the Kings person in
his wars more especially, from such men as have any promotion from the King,
so they declare also, that every Subject by the duty of his Allegiance is
bounden to serve and assist his Prince and sovereigne Lord at all seasons when
need shall require, and what he shall be adjudged worthy to forfeit or suffer,
that shall fail of that duty, any knowing Lawyer will soon inform you.

7. Quaer. How can any man swear in Righteousness, that he will assist the
forces raised and continued by both Houses of Parliament against the forces
raised by the King; when by the Laws of the Land it is enacted, that no manner
of person or persons, whatsoever he or they be that attend upon the King and
sovereigne Lord of this Land for the time being in his person, etc. or be in
other places by his commandment in his wars within this Land or without,
shall for the same be either convict or attaint of high Treason, or any other
offenses, either by act of Parliament or otherwise by any process of Law,
whereby to suffer any loss or damage, but for that deed and service to be
utterly discharged for any vexation, trouble or loss, and if any act or acts,
or other process after the time of that act shall happen to be made contrary
to that act, that then that act or acts, or other process of the Law
whatsoever shall stand and be utterly void, 11. Hen. 7. cap. 1.

It is no wonder then, if in this new covenant, when we swear to assist the
forces raised and continued by the two Houses of Parliament against the forces
raised by the King, that necessary restriction or limitation (so carefully
inserted in the late Protestation,) viz. As far as lawfully I may, be here in
this oath wholly omitted; when as the established Laws of the Land are in so
many things so fully contrary to all such assistance, that if we had sworn
only to assist the Parliaments forces against the Kings forces, as far as
lawfully we may, we had sworn not to assist them at all, but to our utmost to
resist and repress them.

And whereas it is further intimated in this part of this oath, and in that which
follows, by way of aggravation against the Kings forces, that they were
raised without the consent of both Houses of Parliament: I would willingly bend
an ear either to Pri^ himself (that great pretender to Law and Parliaments,
though a Traitor to both as well as to his King) or to any other that shall
please to tell me of any one act of Parliament, of any other established Law of
this Land, that does allow the two Houses of Parliament in any case whatsoever
to raise any forces without the consent of the King, much less against the
Kings consent, and against the Kings forces; or (which is a bold challenge of
one that is no Lawyer) that does expressly bind the King in no case whatsoever
(no not for His own safety and preservation, nor for the safety and
preservation of His Kingdom, of the true Religion, of the Laws of the Land,
and liberties of the Subject, etc.) to raise any forces without the consent of
the two Houses of Parliament. And if in any case the King may raise forces
without the consent of the two Houses of Parliament, then surely much more in
the present case, when not only all possibility of consent from the two Houses
was impossibilitated, but the two Houses themselves had actually raised forces
without the Kings consent, and had seized upon the Kings Castles and Arms, and
held them against Him. But I have stayed too long amongst Acts and Statutes,
the proper Authenticks of Lawyers: I return to the Divine, of whom I desire to
favor most; and with his leave and likeing, I pass to the next clause of the
oath; and that is yet more desperate, if more desperate can be, for having
sworn only in this last clause, That we will according to our power, etc.
assist the public open forces raised and continued by the two Houses of
Parliament against the forces raised by the King, we are required in the next
clause to swear; That we will according to our power also assist all private
and close conspirators in whatsoever they shall attempt or do, either against
the Kings forces, or against the King Himself, His Queen, the Prince, or any
other, so that what they attempt or do, be but for the advantage of both
Houses, and their forces now on foot; the words import no less, he that runs
may read it.

And will likewise assist all other persons that shall take this oath in what
they shall do in pursuance thereof, etc.

This is a hard saying, who can bear it? nay that is too too gentle a saying
for it? This is a most terrible saying, what Christian but will tremble at it?

For first, What if the Turk, Pope, or Spaniard shall by their agents or
instruments, do ought in the pursuance of this business (as I verily believe
some of them have done too much) if those agents or instruments will but take
this oath (as certainly they may with no small advantage to their Masters) must
I vow and covenant to assist them?

2. What if any Jesuits, or Jesuited Papists shall join in the pursuance of
the Cause? Must I swear to assist them? Why then is there in the Introduction
to this oath such a loud complaint made of a Popish Army now on foot etc. It
seems, that it is not their being Popish that troubles them, but their being an
Army against their design, for it appears by this clause of this oath, That if
an army of Papists would assist them against the Kings Forces, and take but
this oath, they should have their oaths, and the oaths of as many as they can
prevail with to swear that they will assist them in whatsoever they shall do
in that way. I will not question their assisting of Anabaptists, Brownists, and
other Sectaries, they are so deep in their protection and assistance already,
that there needs no swearing to assist them.

But what think you in the third place, what if Monopolizers, Patentees,
Projectors, scandalous Ministers, etc. which not long since were rendered the
very bane of the Kingdom, and unworthy to live, nay what if notorious Rogues,
Thieves, Plunderers, Robbers, Murderers, incestuous persons, perjured persons,
Traitors and Assasinates shall to former impieties add the taking of this
oath? am I not likewise required by this clause to swear to assist them, and
every of them? to leave persons, and come to things; perhaps the things wherein
I must swear to assist all persons that shall take this oath, will prove such,
as that I may lawfully swear to assist any persons in, be they otherwise never
so lewd and wicked. Well, suppose that, (though as God abhorres wicked men's
sacrifices, so where I know them to be such, I like not to be their assistants
or companions in their most specious undertakings) yet let us examine what
things they are that we must swear to assist them in; why the oath it self
tells us plainly, and without any limitation, that we must assist them in what
they shall do in the pursuance thereof, that is (as far as I am able to
construe it) in whatsoever they shall do for the assistance or advantage of
the forces raised by the two Horses, against the forces raised by the King: and
here arises a fourth Quaere, (quiet it that can) What if any person or persons
shall in the pursuance of this business, rob, spoil, or plunder any of the
Kings Subjects? What if he, or they shall betray, abuse, or murder their own
fathers, brothers, masters or friends? What if they shall preach or print
horrid lies and bla^^hemies, besides old rotten ends of long since condemned
Heresies mixed with new Sedition, Treason, and Rebellion? Nay what if any person
of persons shall in that pursuance mentioned, attempt the deposing of our
Sovereigne Lord the King, or (which is somewhat more to be trembled at in the
very naming) the killing of Him. His royal Consort, and all His hopeful
Children? Do not as many as take this oath, swear to assist them, and every
of them that shall commit these and all these detestable execrable
wickednesses, when they swear that they will assist every one that shall take
this oath, without exception, in whatsoever he shall do in the pursuance of
that their Cause, without restriction? Yes doubtless, unless they swear with
some mental reservation, which is Jesuiticall, or with some reservation orall
(as it is said some of the Lords took the whole oath) which in effect made it no
oath, but a mock-oath. And therefore that forenamed limitation, As far as
lawfully I may, might well have been here also inserted, had it seemed good to
the Contrivers of this oath. But it is likely they have some cause to the
contrary; or whether they did or not, I am sure we have just cause from hence
to suspect, that this oath aims at more then yet the Contrivers of it dare
discover. And let them now ascend never so high, or dig never so deep, be it to
dare Heaven with an attempt, or to ransacke Hell for one, this clause of this
oath once taken, will assure them of companions.

There is but one piece more of this new oath, besides the close and seal of
all, that remains to be opened, viz. And will directly or indirectly adhere
unto, nor shall willingly assist the forces raised by the King, without the
consent of both Houses of Parliament, and that has been already examined in
the unveyling the preceding parts thereof. All therefore that I shall superadde
concerning it shall be wrapped up in this one Question.

Quest. What if God in his infinite mercy to this Nation, shall please so to
open the eyes of the blinded misled people thereof, or so to ^^^lop their dull
and heavy ears, and so to molisie and humble their hard rebellious hearts, that
yet once again they shall see with their eyes, hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts those things that belong to their peace and
happiness? and to that purpose, both see and hear and understand, that their
Sovereign Lord the King is in the right, and the Lords and Commons in
Parliament are in an error? that it is he that has raised forces (or rather God
most miraculously by Him) for the safety of His own Person, and for the
defense of the true Protestant Religion, the Laws of the Land, the just
privileges of Parliament, and the liberties of the Subject, when others raised
tumults, commotions and rebellion, to the inexpressible peril of the utter
ruining and subverting of all those our Nations greatest blessings? what I say,
if God of his unspeakable mercy to this Nation, and just vindication of Truth,
shall make us to see and acknowledge this? Shall we before hand so swear our
selves out of all mercy, by this last clause of this oath, that either we will
not dare to acknowledge it when God shall manifest it; or if we do acknowledge
it, we cannot either directly or indirectly make peace with, or subminister
help and assistance unto those forces of our most gracious King, raised up by
God for his own Glory, our Sovereignes safety, and our own, and our
posterities preservation and comfort, without being perjured? Lord keep thou
our feet out of this snare.

Thus have I at last gotten through each part of this Covenant, except only
that which I but now called the seal thereof, in these words: And this vow and
covenant I make in the presence of God the searcher of all hearts, with a true
intention to perform the same, as I shall answer it at the great day when the
secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed. Had this vow and covenant been made
only of such things as are true and just, and known so to be unto all that are
required to enter into it, the setting of this Seal had been requisite and
necessary; but the Vow and Covenant it self being such (as it appears to be by
the searching into it) that no one entire clause of it can be taken (at least
not of the promissory part, without transgressing foully against one or more of
those three inseparable conditions of a justifiable oath; in my apprehension,
the requiring us to set to this Seal should be enough to terrify all men
(that know what the affixing to such a seal means) from daring to enter into
the place where this Covenant is token, much more from entering into this
Covenant it self, and setting this soul-scarring Seal thereunto. For how
shall I (may every such man say) how shall I make such a Covenant as this in
the presence of Almighty God the searcher of all hearts? when he that searches
my heart knows that some parts of it I understand not what they mean, some
parts I doubt of whether they be true, some parts I know to be illegal and
unjust; and to some parts I have already once, twice or oftener sworn the just
contrary, calling the same Almighty God the searcher of all hearts to witness
thereunto, and to be avenged on me if I made it not good? And how shall I pawn
all the mercy which I hope for at that great and terrible day of the Lord to
all the wrath and judgment that shall be revealed upon the truth of my
intention of performing this Covenant? when either my heart already tells me,
or may soon tell me, that I intend no such thing, or to be sure it will be
told me in that day when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed that no
such thing ought to have been so much as intended, much less sworn by me?

Thus have you (most intimate of friends) both my judgment of this new Oath,
and my earnest request for yours, seconded with your prayers. If you should
chance to have rashly taken this oath your self, ere these Quares come to your
hands, (as who in these tempting, turning times, can be confident of any man's
constancy?) yet I hope, through Gods blessing upon them, they may so work upon
you, as to cause you to reflect upon what you have done with sorrow, and to
resolve against the doing what you have thereby inconsiderately promised, with
spirit and courage; knowing that it is a resolved case in point of conscience,
That in rash and unlawful Oaths, Qui non mutat, dupliciter peccat, and quia
injuste juravit, and quia facit quid non debet: He that alters not his
resolution, doubleth his sin, because he both swears unjustly, and then
does that which he ought not to do. And holy David did exceedingly bless
both God, the advice of a woman, and the woman her self that gave it, for
keeping him off from performing a rash and unjust Vow that he had made, 1. Sam.
25. You have seen my fidelity, let me see yours; and whatsoever answer you
return, direct it to my Brother of Christ Church, who is as I my self am,

Your faithful friend and Brother in the Lord Christ.


