AN ANSWER TO THE Scots Declaration.

OR, A SURVEY OF A PAPER presented to the Parliament of ENGLAND, with the Title
of seven DEMANDS, From the ESTATES of Scotland.

Ad generum Cereris sine caede and sanguine pauci
Descendunt Reges and sicca morte Tyranni.
Published by Authority.

Imprinted at London by T. B. 1648.

AN ANSWER TO THE SCOTS DECLARATION.
THere is none I suppose so little acquainted with the affairs of men, that can
be ignorant how great a difference there often happens between Commonwealths,
although of one Clime, one mold nay, the same customs; for there is a Genious
of every people, which elevates or depresses them in despite of all
blandisments or frowns of fortune, and renders them by that (perhaps) solely
distinguishable from their neighbors, with whom situation, time and
government had rendered them absolutely conformable.

Some there are (nor want there either ancient Histories) or more
modernexamples, that at the least discomfiture let fall their spirits, and can
never reinforce them again, although courted by the fairest opportunities:
others there are that grow by their losses, and by a noble disdain gain courage
by overthrowes, and trample over fortune in the midst of their oppositions:
some there are that learn insolence of victory, and then grow highest in their
Demands, when they think they are most safe: others, that bravely standing on
their own base, continue the same, and scorn to be elevated by that they cannot
call their own: some, that taking advantage of their present distress with whom
they have to deal, grow at that instant peremptory, whereof before they durst
not have muttered others, that meeting with such petulant boldnesses, conceive
their notice till it appear in revenge.

For the two former cases, as they have been largely shown here anong our
selves. The resolution, constancy and gallantry of the Parliament (who have
rescued what our Ancestors never could) being never to be forgotten, so is
there not wanting a very pertinent example to their case in our Neighbors the
Scots, a people (it cannot be denied) very stirring, active and worthy (if
there had not been such a strong concurrence of their own interests) as
coefficient causes of this great work, to be ever celebrated; but yet of such a
strange distemper, that it was not enough for them to do their work with the
expense of our blood and treasure, but they must also insinuate into our
businesses, impose on us their Laws, and make their Religion (such as it is)
ours; sit at the helm of this Republic, make our affairs managed by their
conduct: nay, which is more (I know not whether I should laugh or blush at such
ridiculous insolence) send Propositions, with the title of Demands, and that by
an impeacht messenger to the Parliament of England.

I remember there is set down by Livy, how they of Caput seeing the Romans
broken by their adverse success at Cannae, dispatch Ambassadors unto them, to
tell them, that unless they would choose one Consul from among them, and admit
them to equality of privileges, they might expect a revolt to Hannibal: this
the Romans, according to their accustomed height, answered no otherwise then by
the immediate expulsion of such indiscreet Messengers, and afterward with a
speedy destruction.

It is my wish (Scottish Nation) that this Parliament of England acted the part
of the one, as sure as you have done the madness of the other: For I beseech
you inform me how you came to write Laws to us of England? or by what
Scripture or Statute we owe you obedience? you were late our hirelings, and we
paid you for acquiring your own Liberties, and suffered you to impoverish the
fattest pieces of the Land, without doing any action of moment, while our
selves spent our dearest blood in acquiring that, which had we not gained, you
had lost all the happy freedoms ye had already obtained, and perhaps at this
time (if the power of the King had been as great as his malice to you) been not
a people.

Or if ye claim this by some old title, its fit it were known, yet are
accounted a wise people (and indeed your necessities make you partly be so, and
our distractions make you seem more then you are) and it is not to be thought
you would lose your tale in the telling: besides, what needed you for so long a
time to endeavor to mingle all your interests with ours, and by creeping into
places of trust by degrees engraft your selves into the Nation, and possess
that by one title; which you could not do by another.

But I suppose your madness is not yet so high, and your selves will be
content to walk on the left hand of us, and then you are fit to parley with,
and in that capacity, I shall only say thus much unto you.

That first, I conceive these Articles are neither the sense of all, nor the
better part of your Nation, but of a prevalent malignant party, who have caused
you: secondly, to break the Covenant which the English have hitherto preserved;
thirdly, that these demands are such as cannot be granted without overthrowing
your interest: nay, such as are in themselves contradictory; and fourthly, that
the Parliament are in such a condition, as they need not fear ye, in case you
should so far both forget your selves and them.

For the first, if they be of all, here comes such an abhorrency of your Clergy
in general, and your best Patriots; How comes these sad whisperings among ye?
those fears of the best hearts, that now you are a returning to old
abominations? how comes the old model the instrument by which your greatest
things have been hitherto done to stand in the gap, and defy? yet we are not
ignorant of the prevalency of the Malignant, and the great stickling, and men
notoriously disaffected, those strange speeches given out, your open harbor,
and encouragements given to our English fugitives, sundry those among them who
are good men, cannot but feel and sigh at those things; and if that spirit be
yet in the Nation, which has a few years last past enabled them to overcome so
many difficulteis, if the people yet hear their Ministers, and have not
absolutely forgot their security, this cannot want opposition.

The second, where your selves will prove the most faulty, you allege against
us, as the cause of the breach. Good Sirs consider, how solicitous have the
Parliament been both in observing and urging the Covenant; have they not pressed
it so here, that their enemies object it against them, as greatest piece of
their tyranny, and the greatest weight can be laid on them? can you tax them
with any substantial breach of it? (little litterall misapplications we
forgive ye) Nay, have they nor rather receded from their own rights, the
better to demonstrat the integrity of their intentions? else what need they
dismantle Berwick? a place so considerable and strong, and in a manner a key to
the Kingdom; why have they called and maintained the Assembly so long, the
better to settle Religion, in the pursuance of it, whilst you pretend ever and
anon breaches and discontent, harbor fugitives, and deny to surrender them,
though demanded by our Commissionens, and at last connive at their fur prize of
Berwick, give out rumors of an invasion; and to that purpose, hold and list
Forces, and all this for fear of shadows, and pursuance of Chymexaes.

The third is not better demonstrable then by viewing of particulars, which we
shall do as speedily as we can possible, it being neither necessary to the
truth, nor agreeing to our leizure to dilate much.

I shall make this assertion by the way, that I suppose it had been very easy
in so swarming a Kingdom as Scotland to have found a person of more quality and
honor, then such a fellow as Marshall; one under their command, and threatened
to be impeached for some high misdemeanors, and that with such a peremptory
limitation of it, as if like Pepilius, he brought them the choice of Peace and
War. But to come to the first.

That the King may come to London, or some of his Houses near the City, and
there to remain in honor, freedomo and safety. Was he not at Hampton Court, I
wonder who sent him to the Iste of Wight? I wonder how much honor, freedom,
or safety he then wanted? Your own Commissioners were then contented; and if
counsel would have staid (and either not have believed suggestions, or else
engaged himself in new Designs) he had for ought I know, been there at this
day. Besides, how willing, nay, how desitous have the Parliament been to win
him to a compliance? how have they lessened their demands, that he might the
better meet them half way, whilst he continues obstinate, and will not one jot
recede from his own Principles? How fraudulent and serpentine are his Answers?
What cunning Reservations are there in them, ever for his own advantage. Not
to mention his frequent breach of Promises and Protestations. And would you
have his power put in his hand before you know how he will use it? To what end
have you fought and opposed all this while? or do you (Scots) suppose he will
forget your Misdemeanors, as he interprets? Nay, he is a man that has graves
and diuturnas Iras: and that Maxim of the Poet holds generally true, --
regnabit sauguine multo
Ad Regnum quisquis venit ab ex illis.


Consider, what a madness it were to put the sword in his hand again, which
you have with so much ado wrested from him, till ye know how he will use it;
let him give some assurance (by passing of some Bills) that he will be limited
and restrained by Laws, and preserve our Liberties; and then it shall be our
Motion: in the other case, your selves may repent ye of your forwardness. How
glad would the Parliament have been to have called him from the Isle of wight,
would he have but passed the four Bills? But he was so far from it, as with a
New Elench he would make a breach between the two Nations, and oblige the Lord
Fairfax Army unto himself: Ye^ yes, could he by any means dissolve the
everlasting Parliament (as the Queen waspishly calls it) then you would soon
see him appear in his own colors, and perhaps loose that little Reputation
he has gotten of Clemency. Sirs, hear, It Is not taking away of blood that only
makes and denominates a Tyrant, there is a greater cruelty in oppression and
sacrificing a People to ones own ends the one may fall upon one Individual
(and that commonly provoked by insolence or Indiscretion) and perhaps make a
bad cause of good: but the other, like a quick Contagion spreads universally,
and Injures not only them alive, but Posterity, children unborn, nay, cancels
all Obligations that are owing to the sweat and industly of our noble
Ancestors; and in this acception of a Tyrant (which surely is the truest) it is
not hard to find one worse then Richard the third, although he were as bad as
our common Chroniclers make him.

Nor indeed is the Nation so insensible of this inestimable Jewel, seeing he
that looks seriously through our Story, or will be content to take it in brief
from N. Bacon, shall find, how much their spirits have boiled, how much they
labored about that, which God preserved for the valorous Counsels of
Parliament to accomplish. But I go unto.

The second: in this I believe you understand not well enough what you would
have; must they be made to you or the King? if to you, why do you expect it? or
what authority have you to call us to an account? if to the King, though I
cannot say he connived at it, yet his Lawyer Jenkins (that troublesome man,
that spend his last breath in sowing debates, which he ought to do in his
devotions) did openly justify it, (I warrant ye not without a wink from
Authority) and slackt not (in a manner) to call them Saviors of the King and
State; how did he elevate them, and affront the Houses with comparisons, and
was not wanting with some pretext or other, to vindicate them, till that he saw
they would not be nuzled by any Court-blandisments, but would in despite of
temptations, continue firm to their duties? but these things are past: and it
was ye that extorted the memoration of them from me: But for matter of fact;
did the Parliament ever justify what was done there, did they not declare
against it, and enquire all the Delinquents; what could they have done more?
but if they be such a people as need to be advised by you, or ought to be
commanded, it is another case.

To the third, you have a great desire to make us worship your Diana of
Ephesus; for God's sake, what reason can you desire to obtrude a Government
disconsonant to the spirit and Genius of our Nation, (unless ye be like maids
in the green sickness, that think all ought to eat chalk as well as your
selves.) Why Sits the Synod? we are in as fair a way as we can; If you be our
Bishops or Visitors, ye may make us go faster: who gives you a superintendency
of our consciences? or why cannot we demean our selves without your tuition?
though to answer in point of Covenant, it is the Government the Parliament was
only encouraged and countenanced hitherto, any it is in many places settled; and
have they not lately passed an Ordinance against Sects and Schisms? the thorns
ye pretend struck so deep in your eyes.

Although consider, whether ever man that dissents from you in that particular
Discipline deserve such a name, the Conscience is a thing inviolable, and
cannot be forced; and he that either stifles the dictates of it within himself,
or would violently overthrow the motions of it within another, does no better
then denounce War against Heaven, and fights against God; who lets not all men
know all things, but makes the weaknesses and ignorance of some the way to
manifest their obedience unto him. But I return to

The fourth; What Is the business with our Army, a sort of people illustrious
by God's particular favor and mercies, and who being but an handful of a
divided people, have done more then the united force of all your Nation: if ye
fear them, it supposes guilt in ye; if it be your tenderness that they should
not be a burden to us, you are to busy; your cares superfluous; we know what
to do, and you would write those conditions to others, ye list not to obey your
selves, and say they have nothing to do: pray what had ye to do those many
months when ye lay idely in your two expeditions to England, when you had the
foreheads to demand pay of full Regiments for cropen broken squadrons of an
hundred and fifty, when (to my knowledge) you made falls musters, and took of
poor people (to whom you had more need have given somewhat) pay for eighty men,
when you had not scarce twenty; we are not served so with our Army, and if it
were so, what business have you with the disbanding of them.

Fifthly, that the City of London have all her Privileges made good unto her:
Do we ever meddle with your business at Edinburgh, or do we send you
prescription how to govern your ( barles there? or does the City of London want
any thing which they ought to have? they must surely acknowledge themselves
Subjects, and think there is a wiser body in this Kingdom then the
Common-counsell: and how careful (to speak freely) nay how tenden has the
Parliament been in preserving them all their just rights, and preventing of
tumults? how ready were they to restore them their chains, which themselves had
desired to be pulled down? how ready were they to remove the Lord Fairfax his
Regiments from white hall? what could they have done more, unless they would
make them Lords paramounts? and surely if your Street of Edinburgh should
demand any other terms of you, you would be very unwilling that such a rabble
as they are (who differ as much from them at London, as your Flesh-shambles at
Edinburgh from the Old-exchange) should be your Governors; whereas they now
are patiently contented with their large measures of meat; and perhaps at
solemnity; a Calves head boiled, and divided between two or three families.

For the fixed, That the Covenant be enjoined: I told you of the Parliaments
care already above; I add now, that we see not how they can proceed any
further, nor massacre consciences by the imposition of it, it being (as we also
touched above) an affront of heaven.

For the seventh, that the Members of Parliament who have faithfully served, be
restored. This Proposition is very indistinct; for with what qualification
shall chose who have either deserted, or have been expelled the Parliament be
said to have served faithfully? if it be those that deserted it at Ox^ord, your
own National Council have hitherto disclaimed them: If those which for
misdemeanors have been expelled, surely our own wisdom at home is so
sufficient, as we need not fetch Oracles from you: Was here ever such a demand
made of a Forreigner to the Parliament of England, who has been so tender in
defending their own, and the represented peoples privileges, that they have
endured these long troubles, and with an unparalelled patience triumphed in
them? And how I appeal to you, whether you be not a fraudulent people, and a
people that endeavor to supplant us? whether these Demand be not rash and
contradictory? as if God at your with drawing from his service, withdrew his
spirit from you, and gave you over to that madness, which makes falling
Nations the cause of their own ruins.

For the fourth and last point, consider with whom you are so bold, it is the
Parliament of England, those who have an absolute command of a better Kingdom
then your own, and numerous Disciplined Army in the field, and the goodness of
Cause to boot, which only, although the other two were awanting, has sufficed
in the midst of all their hazards and straits, to render them formidably
victorious: and believe it, God who has hitherto blasted the counsels of those
with whom ye join, will also bring to naught yours, and make you partakers of
their judgments, as well as ye have been of their crimes. Consider this, there
may be a time when this council may be too late, and not by any tears or
industry to be rendered opportune: Think, I say, what it is to revolt from your
best Patriots, oppose your Clergy; and, which is most horrible, desert the
Cause of God, to which you have made such glorious pretenses. For my part I am
one neither known for any separatist from the Church, nor any malecontent of
the State wherein I live, one absolutely disengaged, and therefore deserving
perhaps to be the better heard: Nor do I speak to you out of spleen, but love,
and with that spirit wherewith I should addesse my self to Father, Brother, nay
to my self. I wish you all good and National prosperity, and could wish your
Country a Canaan, and not a Wilderness, that you might not need to long after
this Land that flows with Milk and Honey. But since Providence has disposed
of you to a Clime and Soil not so absolutely happy, you would do well to
contain your selves in it, and no doubt if you would, retain your children, and
not to void them out as excrements to truble other Nations, you might presently
grow so numerous (your Bodies and Region so conspiring) that you might like
torrents, burst out in shoales, and like the Goths and Vandals your
Predecessors, overflow the richest and fattest piecees of the habitable earth.

FINIS.

