AN ANSWER TO A scandalous Paper, lately sent to the right Honorable the Lord
Mayor,

Touching a late Dispute intended by the Anabaptists with the Presbyterians.

AS ALSO A brief Discovery of the gross mistakes and confused puslements of
Anabaptisticall spirits in the point of Rebaptising, according to Mr.
Saltmarsh, in somelate exceptions here recited.

WITH A Reply to the main Arguments of F.C. the great Anabaptisticall Champion,
by a well willer and daily desierer of a happy settlement of Truth and Peace.

LONDON, Printed for T.B. 1646.

A Reply to the Anabaptisticall Letter sent to the Lord Mayor by a namelesse
Author.
FIrst, the Accusation therein is false, his Lordship broke not his Promise
concerning the Disputation; For his Lordship promised, by the Accusers own
confession, nothing but what the Honorable Houses should condescend unto, and
since his Lordship was not sought unto in the first place before the private
Disputation which was appointed, but by the multitude prevented, which they so
much thronged to hear, having more puslement, then practice in it, certainly
his Lordship upon mature deliberation, well considered the many ill
conveniences, which might ensue, upon such a thronged desirable Disputation on
your part.

Secondly, Your spreading of your hopes to get the day of your desire, which
was spread as you say, 30. or 40. mile, might upon the same ground as the
former was, have prevented you if the multitude of City and Country could do
it, and happy were it for both City and Country if there was not so much
needless dispute and so little practice, which questionless his Lordship well
perceives.

Thirdly, Concerning his Lordships publishing an adjournment of the Disputation
to a convenient time, his Lordship declared sufficiently that it was but until
he should receive the pleasure of both Houses about the same.

Fourthly, Your taxing of his Lordship to turn your enemy by approving of the
Remonstrance: for answer unto which though something therein may be excepted
against, yet it was done doubtless upon a mature an advice and to as good
purpose as your disputation might have proved: And if so many thousand eyes
look upon his Lordship only as the furtherer of such a Disputation, though the
same eyes look another way, his Lordship need not much to weigh that matter.

Fifthly, Whereas you conclude that the Clergy and his Lordship having debated
the matter suspect the truth of their cause and their own ability as not
daring to show their faces in the open field, I am persuaded rather the
needlesnesse of the Dispute and those far fetched pretenses of yours, diving
more into a circumstance then a substance, prevents the same, your own Weapons
abroad sufficiently discover your skill to be no such Master Fencers as you
pretend, and though seven Churches can join in one for a Confession, it is
most certain all the seven are not able to establish one of those seven, though
the least Congregation, into a practice of what they could all join in one to
confess.

In the sixth place whereas you remember his Lordship to be termed one of the
builders of Sion, questioning whether it be Gods Sion or the Synagogue of
Scotland, and as you say plainly, that it is out of question that the rule of
Gods word should be all our rule for Practice.

Stand to your word (Practice) and then what practice do you mean, if by
Practice you intend Baptism of whom you please to bestow it upon, you must
either prove Baptism to be of more account then Paul makes it, or else lay by
this your mention of Practice.

Lastly, to sum up all your persuasions, insinuations and invectives, expecting
to obtain your desire in a public Disputation, rebaptising being found of no
concernment to a Christian life, and so plain disagreeing to circumsission for
person, time and place, does sufficiently satisfy those that are not so much
taken up with circumstantiall disputes as real practice in Life and
Conversation, which in many by this means is much abated and eclipsed to that
once they were, and if yet you stand in need of more work, clear those
exceptions which Mr. Saltmarsh has laid down, and there you shall find work
enough to settle some that more nearly concern you, and not thus to look
abroad for such a public Disputation.

And thus leaving that Letter of false accusation, I shall give you in the
exceptions of Mr. Saltmarsh against Rebaptising in his smoke in the Temple,
page 10. etc. some of which I have here inserted ^ith little alteration.

1. That Anabaptisticall Disciples cannot so baptize as the first did, because
they are not so gifted and qualified as the Disciples of Christ and the
Apostles were.

2. That there was nver any one Disciple in all the new Testament, that did
baptize by way of Authority, but he was able to make out the truth of his
calling and dispensation, either by Miracles, or Gifts.

3. Those ought not now to Rebaptise that take it thus upon them, unless they
could give out the Holy Ghost with it, which they cannot do.

4. That the Churches where Rebaptising is used where they pretend most full
and pure practice of ordinances, yet have no greater gists then other Churches.
But more particularly now to the main Arguments of one of the chief of their
Champions.

1. He argues thus: That which God has joined together no man ought to
separate, But faith or dipping according to the original no man ought to
separate.

1. Reply, Though the major be true, yet the minor and the Argument are both
false, for faith and baptism are not inseparably joined together, though the
Apostles were sent to preach and baptize all Nations, Math. 28.19. yet many
afterward fell and perished in unbelief; And on the contrary many have gone to
Heaven that were never baptized, for we are all the Children of God by faith in
Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.26. and Baptism is not here annexed, and although a man be
baptized or dipped, if he believe not he shall be damned: All Christians or
Saints are not made so by Baptism, but by another work.

2. Reply, By this Argument none now should be baptized until they were able
to work signs which Christ said should follow those that did believe, Mark.
16.17. And if you will grant signs or miracles are ceast, so also is the
spirit of deserning who are believers.

But in the next place he cites the decree of Pope Inocentius the third, and
the decree of Gregory to prove baptism Antichristian.

To which for answer, know that we have a far better ground, 1. because they
belong to the Covenant, Genesis 17.7. Secondly, they are called holy, 1 Cor. 7.14.
Thirdly, which is most of all, they are redeemed by the blood of Christ, Jo.
11.52. And lastly, The Apostles practice sufficiently settles us, who baptized
whole Households, Acts 16.33. and yet none can affirm that all were believers
in the household, nor prove no Children to be there. And upon this practice of
the Apostles it is, that so many of latter as well as former godly Divines have
practiced this.

And as for the Covenant in respect of the seals of Circumcission and
Baptism, you and the rest which would make it but an outward seal, are much
mistaken, for it is an everlasting covenant, Genesis 17.13. and though
Circumcission be taken away because Christ is come, yet as Calvin says, the
grace of God which is the inward seal, and Baptism is a supply thereof.

Your second Reason is, that there was a prefixed day for Circumcission, to wit,
the 8. day, Genesis 17.12. but no day appointed for dipping or sprinckling.

For answer whereof, know that although the eighth day be mentioned, yet the
command was not absolute for the 8. day, and this will appear plainly in the
example of the Children of Israel borne in the Wilderness, by the way coming
out of Aegipt, that were not circumcised till afterward, Josua 5.5. upon
necessity circumsission might be deferred, as the eating of the Passover might
be put off, Numb. 9.10.

Your third Reason is, that there was a precept for Circumcission to enjoin it
from God himself, Genesis 17.11. and an example, Genesis 24.4, But say you neither
precept nor example in Scripture to baptize Infants.

For answer, there is a precept where both young and old are to be baptized, in
Acts. 2.38, 39. Be baptized every one of you (says Peter there) and to
encourage all he is most express, and tells them the promise is made to them
and to their seed, and to those whose children were afar of even to as many as
the Lord our God shall call: And there is also an example Acts 2. in the
Infancy of the Church, where in one day three thousand souls were added,
which received the outward seal of Baptism, verse 41. and the Children could
not but partake of the same outward Privileges with them.

But to proceed, Argument 2. you argue thus; That which is not of faith is sin
to the Church, or that person that does it: But the Baptism of Infants is not
of Faith, Ergo a sin.

For answer whereof, to prove Baptism to Infants that are believers children
to be of faith, against you thus;

In the 19 of the Acts Paul tells the Disciples at Ephesus, That John babtised,
saying; that the people should believe and repent on him that should come after
him, verse 4. this was a command which he gave to those that were very
ignorant, and had not learned whether there were a Holy Ghost or not, verse 2.
though afterward Paul laid his hands on them to declare that they were
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, and they received the Holy Ghost, and
thus these children of those believing Parents being of the holy seed have
right to Baptism, Acts 16.33. But to answer your Reasons as you call them.

1. Say you, but Baptism puts Infants of believing Parents, into a state of
grace and Remission of sin before calling.

By which reason your own Testimony is fully against you, proving formerly
that Baptism has no such Prerogative.

Because it is only the Election of Gods own purpose and grace, before the
world began, that puts us into this state of grace, which is manifested unto,
and conferred upon some before Baptism, Acts 8.36, 37. and upon others after
Baptism, Acts 19.4. Baptism being only the outward Seal of the Church, and
the work of grace upon the spirit, the inward seal as is formerly proved.

2. Baptism constitutes the Infants of believing Parents members of a visible
Church, for if believing husbands do not keep out unbelieving Wives, then are
not their Children unclean, in such a sense as to be deprived of entrance into
the Congregation. 1. Cor. 7.14.

3. Your next reason in substance is answered already concerning the Covenant
of grace to be the inward seal of Gods Elect, and Baptism only the outward
seal of the Visible Church, whose Members not being elected cannot be saved,
but must needs fall away and make a mock at Christ, Heb. 6.6. and only those
that have the inward seal they being baptized into Christ, whether Jew or
Gentile are heirs of Heaven, according to the promise, Gal. 3.27, 28, 29.

4. Your Reason is not sound, for none is so unwise to think grace is entailed
to generation, but to regeneration, for it neither does nor can follow that all
that are baptized shall be saved, the contrary being already proved, and God is
as well able to give Infants an habit of faith, so far to make them capeable of
Ascending to Heaven, if they die in Infancy as well as men and women, and
therefore is it that to such belongs the Kingdom of God.

5. The further you go the more you err, where you draw false conclusions.

First, That all baptized persons are saved.

Or secondly, That some being in the state of grace may fall away afterward,
and thus by your diving into an obscure nicety, you race the foundation of
Religion.

6. But now you undertake to prove, that baptising of Infants opposes the
Kingly office of Christ in faith and order, for proof whereof you cite Math.
15.16. wherein Christ requires every one that is baptized to be a believer,
unto which I answer it is most certain, and in the sight and account of God
none have a right to Baptism but believers, yet this is not in the power of
men to distinguish believers from unbelievers, and therefore according to that
of Matthew 28.29. where you read the place, go teach and make Disciples, and
that this must be done by baptising, and then teaching, so that Baptism in the
first order is not opposed.

But to your third Argument, wherein you argue thus; that consequence which is
upheld by the tradition of men is destructive to the institution of Christ;
wherein you abuse the Practice of those whose sufficient warrant from Scripture
though you all carpe at never so long, yet can never clear, your endeavor
being to make the privileges of the Gospel to the Children of believers, so
far short of what the Israelites under the Law did enjoy.

And thus forgetting the settlement of peace in the Kingdom, you make the
breach very wide, opposing and interrupting a Reformation covenanted for and so
much endeavored after by all those who desire to live in a conscionable
obedience to the plain discovery of Gods holy will, clearly laid down in his
holy and sacred Word: whose desires and bent, are set to further that work
which the wise master builders now have in hand, daily importuning the throne
of grace, that the work may be so carried on, that all those that desire to
live a holy life in all godliness and honesty, may obtain the desire of their
souls, and the great endeavor of those whom they have entrusted to carry on
that work; who have managed all things so in Church and State, as none can have
cause to say or gainsay their wisdom, in an all mighty power assisting them,
and the great God of Heaven and Earth perfect his work and praise in this our
Sion, so that at the last we may have cause to say, blessed is he that
prospered his own work, and thus gloriously perfected the same, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

