AN ACCOUNT OF THE Proceeding to Sentence AGAINST MILES PRANCE, FOR Wilful
Perjury; Who was Sentenced in the COURT of King's Bench, Westminster: UPON A
Conviction, by his Own Confession, on the 15th. of June, 1686. In Wilfully
Forswearing Himself at the TRIALS of Robert Green, Lawrence Hill, and Henry
Berry, etc In Relation to the MURDER of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey.
MILES PRANCE, a Silver-Smith, having been the last Easter Term, Arraigned upon
an Information of Wilful Perjury, Exhibited against him in the Court of
King's Bench; for Wilfully Forswearing himself, against Robert Green, Lawrence
Hill, and Henry Berry, etc. In Relation to their Murdering Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey, and for which, upon his Oath, etc. they were Executed for the said
Murder at Tyburn; and he, Confessing himself Guilty of the Perjury, specified
in the said Information, was, on Tuesday the 15th of this Instant June, again
brought to the Court of King's Bench, to receive his Sentence. The Court, having
a while considered the heinousness of the Crime, and putting him in mind of it,
told him it was well he was so sensible of his Offense, it being so great a one
as to extend to the taking away the Lives of Innocent Persons, which did
agravate it; though One that had before him been found Guilty of two notorious
Perjuries in that Court continued obstinate to the last; and, for ought
appears, has not hitherto shown any remorse. Yet seeing he (meaning the
Prisoner) was sensible of his Crime, and had Confessed it, the Court had
considered his Condition, and would have some Compassion on a true Penitent.

The Sentence of the Court was,

That he should pay a Fine of One hundred Pound to the King.

That he should appear before each Court in Westminster Hall, etc. with a Paper
upon his Forehead, expressing his Crime.

That on Monday next he should stand at Westminster in the Pillory, between the
Hours of Eleven and One, for the space of an Hour. On Wednesday, the like,
before the Exchange; and, on the following Monday, at Charing Cross.

And, he was likewise Sentenced, to be Whipped from Newgate to Tyburn. And he
to continue in Prison till all was performed.

Prance, upon the aformentioned Exhortation Declared, That his last Confession
was the Truth; and that he was very sensible of, and sorry for what he had
done; upon which the Court desired God to continue him so.

The Sentence past, the Keeper of the Gate House was ordered to take back his
Prisoner, which he accordingly did, conveying him to the Gate House Prison,
where he now remains in Custody.

FINIS.
This may be Printed,

R. P.
June 25. 1686.
London, Printed for A. M. 1686.


