Anti-Quakerism, or, A Character of the Quakers Spirit, from its Original and
first cause.
Written by a pious Gentleman that has been thirteen years amongst the
Separatists to make Observations, and is now returned home with a full intent
to lay open the whole Mystery of iniquity, in unvailing the Whore, that men may
no longer drink of the wine of her Fornications; he has vowed a single life,
and given himself up wholly to the exercises of the mind. And here he has
described the spirit of Quakerism. 1. Being a precise Puritan. 2. An
Anabaptist. 3. A Seeker. 4. A Ranter. 5. A Quaker, and indeed what not, all
things, and nothing. By which Character every Man may in some measure see the
deceitfulness of his own imagination and be careful, and watch himself
accordinly.

I Have been in the valley of Siddim
There I met with a Ranter, a Seeker, a Quaker, a Puritan,
And he told me from the light within
All things that ever I did was sin.
He said also by the same light,
God dwelled with him by his spirit,
From these two premises I resume
These are the Spirits that do presume.
And now since they presumptious be,
I Will take the same Authority;
For Reason wills that I defend
My Life and Soul, being my own friend.
And this without all fear I say,
They liars are, that every way,
There is nothing that they say is true,
As I will demonstrate to you.
And first I Will them Anatomize,
In diverse shapes of their own guize;
Then to their Conscience I will go,
To see if this be true or no.
And first he was a Puritan,
Wareing short hair and little band;
Then I thy Conscience did extol,
Till thou would ware no Band at all.
Then thou foundst fault with singing Psalms,
And said they were as black as charms;
But now in singing you delight;
Songs of your own made by the spirit
Thy custom was to fast and pray,
Honor thou did the Sabbath Day;
But now thou have got a better light
Opening thy shop that day for spite.
Sermons at length thou would not hear,
Because the Minister would swear;
But now you swear and curse downright
Is this the effects of your spirit.
At length you had a Call come out,
I will be your Father without doubt;
Then could not you no longer stay,
But left the Church without delay.
Then he turned Anabaptist.

Then you together took in hand,
To build Christ house upon the Sand,
And still you want the Corner stone,
I mean Jesus that is Christ alone.
His word you know you did promise,
And there you found the word baptize,
You said the meaning often must be
Needs meant of water, Baptism.
Then did you muse and cast your care
All for an Administraetor,
But here in England none was seen,
That used ought but sprinkling.
At length you heard men say,
That there was Saints in Silesia,
Who ever since the Apostles time
Had kept this Ordinance pure, divine.
Thither alas you sent in haste,
And thus you did some treasure w^ste,
But when your mess^ngers came there,
They were deceived as we are here.
But this they told you in good deed,
That they of baptism stood in need,
And for a present remedy,
With prayers they to Heaven did cry.
Then did they with a joint consent
Do that o^ which you now repent,
Authorize one them to bap^iz^,
Thus this fine cheat they did devise.
The Original of the Anabaptists.

They said that you should thus do,
And God would own it they did know,
And you their council simply took,
Because Baptize was writ in Book.
He turned Seeker and Ranter.

And thus at length you your selves baptized,
Tell you another sect devised;
You will say now Ord na^ces are low,
God does not own them you do know.
Then you Assemblies quite forsook,
Having learned your lessons without book,
And for a time you ^orment were,
Till you discerned the morning star.
He turned Quaker, and nothing.

Which as a light in you did shine,
Which light you said was Christ divine,
And now you say he dwells in you,
Whatsoever you say I know is true.
Thus have you traced and run division,
In your confused mad religion;
A great deal more I could you show,
But this is en^ugh for once to know.
And now you see our trade is gone,
Is it long of God, or long of Man,
Hos. 13.9.
If caused by m^n'tis thee and I,
Let us repent then speedily.
And do thou do what I have done,
If future evils, thou will shun,
Return to Church again, I say,
There thou may learn to sing and pray.
Return to Church again with speed,
Lest obstinacy does thy torment breed,
For if-that Faction have his head,
Blood in our streets must needs be shed.
It is good Reasoning, Inter argumenta hominum, amongst the Arguments of Men,
to draw Conclusions from such premises which the Respondant or Adversaries that
are to answer do own.

THe Puritan Spirit was the Spirit of Quakerism, in the first degree, which
thing wise men knew full well, which made them so much i^de^vour the
suppressing of them, though howbeit they took not the right way, or else the
Spirit was too strong, and had gotten too much hold both in the Magistrates and
vulgar, by reason whereof it brake into these extremes, the men of those times
were too precise, critical, and exact, which is an infallible sign of relig^ous
dotage, or melancholy: See Burton on Religious Melancholy, They took offense
without cause; and I think now the Devil, is in them, for they will not be
pleased with amends, though they have got all, for their desires are as deep
and as large as Hell.

They sing spiritual Songs and Hymns of their own devising, and force their
brethren to sing with them, under penalty of their censure, which in their
opinion is little less then damnation.

They bitterly curse and banne all that any way differ from their opinion, and
say, they have Authority from God to open their Shops on the Lords day, even
that day of which they had once so high an esteem. They apply that Text worthy
of all Consideration, which is by Saint Paul meant of universal sin unto
themselves, with opposition to others, Cor. 6.17. and make as if they only
were the alone people of God.

The word Jesus, signifies a Savior, Christ, a King, so that Christ Jesus is
such a King that does save; but their Christ within leads all into destruction,
and hurries them upon impossibilities contrary to Law and Reason, witness their
new Catalogue of Martyrs, printed in red Letters like blood, because by the
simple they would forsooth be understood as Martyrs.

The word Baptism is an Ambiguous term, take heed how you understand it, or
make any particular application thereof.

They sent up and down the world for a Man to baptize them, but they found
none, but such as had baptized themselves.

In England there was some in the practice of sprinckling, but those the
D^ppers, to my knowledge, did reject from Communion with them on this very
ground. They forsook Assemblies, and lay dormant, and so imagined a new Gospel,
and a new Christ within them, the Devil take him for me, for I am too much
under his power; then they went to work afresh to get Disciples, and I think
they have hit it; for I know, Countrymen, what I say, that three parts of you
that are religiously affected at this day, are possessed with that humor which
will make you Quakers, if you take not great heed.

The Quakers did preach, that it was a sin to wear Bands or Band-strings.

And now my Christian friends, and Countrymen, for the Lords sake take heed to
your selves, be wise and warned by my harms; for Faction, I thank God, has
undone me, as to my outward Estate, in my outward Man; But I have seen the
bottom of their bottomless pit; and beseech you take unto you the whole Armor
of God, put on Fortitude and Faith, Clothe your selves with zeal, as with a
Cloak, but for the Lord sake let your feet be shod with the Preparations of the
Gospel of peace. Follow my directions, and under heaven I will fell these
Spirits, and then will War and Tumults cease, and keep always in memory the
words of our Lord, Matthew 26.41. Mark 13.37.

The Author has written a Book, which is as a Tract of his thirteen years
Experience: Entitled, A Leaf from the Tree of Life. And are to be Sold by
Daniel White, at the Seven Stars in Paul's Churchyard, and by some that sell
this paper.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, Anno Dom 1659.


