AN ANTI-REMONSTRANCE, TO THE LATE HVMBLE REMONSTRANCE TO THE HIGH COURT OF
PARLIAMENT.

Printed Anno 1641.

AN ANTI-REMONSTRANCE TO THE LATE HVMBLE REMONSTRANCE to the High Court of
Parliament.
THese few Leaves of Paper break on through, after the Humble remonstrance,
with less noise, because of less bulk; and not stuffed with the husks of a
bare pleasing speech, but presented to your view with more substance then
Rethorique, and with more things then words, and such as I hope will pluck off
the vizard of dutiful Son from the Author of the Remonstrance, or make his
Mother little beholding to him for his advise. Ye are not ignorant of the
great distractions, oppositions, and of the diversity of affections and fears
of the people of the whole land about the event of the Churches reformation in
hand: for indeed some out of a zeal, somewhat inconsiderate do cry down
Episcopacy as Antichristian. Others very moderate crave and wish earnestly,
Episcopacy were reformed and purged from the Romish and Tyrannical government
that incumbers it, and which since the last reformation in King Edward the
sixth days, no free Parliament yet was so happy as to redress: Again, a
third kind of men carried by a contrary wind, maintain Episcopacy to be by
Divine right, not so much as naming that apply of discord, nor mentioning the
maine thing which is so much stood upon, which is not that Episcopacie is
either of Divine right or not, for if (as the Author of the remonstrance
acknowledges,) a Church may stand without Episcopacie, it matters not much,
which of these two opinions is held: but the maine point debated lies in this
assertion, that Episcopal government, as it is established in England is most
disagreeable to Christ and the Apostles institution, and to therites and
constitutions of the primitive Church, and makes a part of the mystery of
iniquities, which the Roman Church for many hundred years in England has had
the greatest share in. Likewise the favorers of the humble remonstrance
traduce as libellers the opposers of that tenet of Episcopacie by Divine right,
and of the corruptions that attend Episcopacie, as it is established in
England. These distractions and oppositions being such; may it please the
Honorable Court seriously to ponder that there is as great a latitude between
having no Bishops at all, and having them with the tendered limitations by those
they call libellers; as there is between retaining a limited power in Bishops,
and confirming the Bishops in the exorbitant authority and greatness of
Government as it is established in England: which Government God forbid it
were retained, being as it is conceived by the most learned, pious, and
judicious of the land most Antichristian, and attended with more evil then the
quite abolishing of Episcopacie can prove hurtful, and of dangerous
consequence; and that for these reasons and grounds following.

I. Episcopal Government as it is established in England, is a continuation of
the height of power and jurisdiction, which in the darkest times of Popery the
Pope has usurped by his Bishops and Abbots far beyond the footing, he ever
took in France, Spain, or Germany. Therefore what the Author of the
remo^strance alleges of the ancientnesse of Episcopacie, and of its
continuance hitherto 1500. years is vain and frivalous, for the Roman Church
upon the same ground or pleading of antitiquitie makes her heresies and
abominations warantable.

II. The Bishops institution and inthronising is altogether repugnant and
contrary to the laws and customs of the Primitive Church, and against the
constitutions of the Prime Christian Emperors, who ordained that the people
jointly with the inferior Clergy should present to the Emperor a catalogue
of the most pious and learned men of the Diocese, and the man that the
Emperor was to pitch upon, be invested with the function of a Bishop: for
proof thereof read the constitutions of Charles the great; Lewis the godly,
Gregory the great, Gelasius and others.

II. The height and superiority of place that Bishops hold, is one of the
greatest relics of the Popish tyranny in England, which is most unfit in
Ministers of the Gospel, repugnant to the customs of other Nations, and to the
distance, yea rather nearenesse of Office and dignity, that ought to be
between Bishops and Ministers. It is not heard but in England that Chancellors
or Lord Keepers take place after Archbishops, while other Ministers are so
far inferior and distant from them, as a Prince from of poor tenant or a
high sumptuous palace from a poor thatcht cottage.

IIII. The Bishops sole exercise of Jurisdiction is such, as the like was never
heard in any Court of justice, and is repugnant to reason and natural equity,
and cannot be but an appendice derived from the son of perdition, that
arrogates to himself an unerring sole power: The Kings Bench, Common Pleas,
and Exchequer, are benches of a certain number of Judges; The Chancellor of
England has an assistance of 12. Masters. I would feign know when Christ said
dic Ecclesiae, if he understood that a Bishop should be a sole Judge within his
Diocese in deciding any litigious cause.

V. Also the exercising of any power by deputies, which is the prerogative of
Kings, is a monstrous usurpation in the Bishops of England; a strange bird
hatched in no court but theirs, every judge in any other Court discharging his
judicial function in his own person. It Is no marvel if they that Preach by
deputies observe the like practice in keeping of Courts.

VI. The Bishops jurisdiction entrenching upon the civil Magistrate or Judge
by their jus Pontificium or Canon law, which the Pope left them for a legacy,
such are the causes testamentary and matrimonial, is an usurpation no less
bad then the former, and derogates from the holy power of Ecclesiastical
keys, which Bishops assumed in the prime pure times of the Church.

VII. It were not so much to usurge jurisdiction, if their laws were but
sound, and their legal proceeding just: But their High Commission, the oath ex
officio, the horrible abuse of excommunication, the commutations of bodily
penance into pecuniary, their hindrances of prohibitions, stopping the course
of law, their determining of tithes and possessions of livings by a Quare
impedit, are as many pockie eye-sores, which deface the holy calling of
Bishops, and make them, though their first institution had been of Divine
right, to be now less then of humane institution.

VIII. There not depending on any free Ecclesiastical assembly is as much or
more then the Papists ascribe to the Pope, who by maine of them is thought
inferior to the council and censurable by ir.

IX. Their Visitations are apish and counterfeit imitations of the ancient
Synods which are degenerated into receipts of custom, as paying for Licenses,
Procurations, Benevolences, Synodalls, and the like. Nihil est quod curia
Episcoporum non vendat, etc.

X. Their convocations or Synods are little better; where deputati sunt
deputantes, the deputies are deputing; where in most of the members of it,
there is no free choice of election; but Bishops, Deanes, and Archdeacons have
right to sit by their place and office: where those of the lower House are like
to maine stocks, that have no motion, but as they are carried by the members
of the sphere of the higher house.

Who ever shall read Mathaeus Paris and Mathaeus Westmonasteriensis; and view
the disfigured face of the Church of England under Henry the second, John, and
Henry the third, Kings of England, will acknowledge that the Pope had more
power and jurisdiction in England in the persons of his Bishops and Abbots,
then in any other Kingdom, and will not wonder if Bishops have hitherto kept
possession, though they hold no more of the Pope; nor will he easily be
persuaded, that that government is of Divine or Apostolical institution,
which has ever been contrary to the constitutions of the ancient Church, and
to Imperial laws, and repugnant to the proceedings of all Courts of Justice,
and to common equity and sense.

FINIS.

