ANTHROPOLOGIE ABSTRACTED: OR THE Idea of Humane Nature Reflected in brief
Philosophical, and Anatomicall COLLECTIONS.

(...)
(...)
Isaac-Casaubon. in Elogio suo Audr. Laurentij Anatom. LONDON, Printed for
Henry Herringman, at the Anchor in the lower walk in the New Exchange. 1655.

THE STATIONER TO THE READER, etc.
WOuld Custom have dispensed, I well might have presented this discourse to the
World, without the Formality of an Epistle: it being in it self so rich and
absolute, as to deserve a candid and grateful acceptance at the hands of all
judicious persons. But, since use has made it a Law, that the Readers Appetite
must be excited by some Prologue, containing either some Commendations of the
Author, or a Summary account of the Arguments treated of by him: it concerns me
to advertise you, (though briefly and plainly) of some things, the Knowledge
whereof cannot but, in some measure, conduce both to your more easy
Understanding of the Design of this Orphan piece; and the Justification of my
Care and Cost, bestowed upon the publishing of it.

As for the Author, therefore, be pleased to know, that He was a Person so
Eminent both for Wit and Learning, that the University wherein He was educated,
and at length deservedly honored with the Degree of Doctor in Physic,
esteemed him as one of the most hopeful of his Profession, and one of the
choicest Plants in all her Seminary; and when the hasty hand of Fate had crop:
him in the Budd, lamented his immature Death, with General sorrow, so that his
Funeral Orator (as I have been lately told) was allowed to have spoken the
genuine sense of his Auditory, when he said: Our loss is greater than to be
felt at once, it is Time, and the want of such another to succeed into his room,
that only can teach us the just proportion of our misery, and his Worth.

As for the Book it self; though both the Subject Matter, and Language are far
above the sphere of my mean judgment: yet I may adventure (and safely too, I
presume) to tell you from some others, even of the highest Form of Scholars,
that it contains the Rudiments of that most excellent Knowledge, the Knowledge
of our selves; and those too not only disposed into the most advantageous
Method, as well for information, as Memory, but also clad in such proper and
select Phrases, as soften the hardness of the Notions, and in every period,
refresh the Attention with variety of elegant Expressions. So that it is a
question (and long may continue so) whether Philosophy, or Rhetoric can claim
the greatest share in this Treatise.

Whether the Author ever intended to Communicate it to the Public, I could by
no means learn: but the Exactness of the work may, in some sort, warrant my
Conjecture, that he wrote it not only for his own use: it being not usual,
for Learned men to bestow so much sweat and oil upon polishing and adorning
their private Collections and Memorialls, as was necessary to make this so
accurate. However, my good Fortune has, after more than a dozen years since
the Authors decease, brought it into my hands; and I doubt not but the benefit
you shall receive by the perusing thereof, will fully convince you, that the
Consideration of somewhat beside my own Gain, prevailed upon me to put the same
into yours. In the confidence whereof, it becomes me to refer you to the Book
it self.

H. Herringman.

OF THE NATURE OF THE HVMAN SOUL.
CHAP. I.
ANTHROPOLOGIE, or the History of Human Nature, is, in the Vulgar (yet just)
impression, distinguished into two Volumes; The first entitled Psychologie,
the nature of the Rational Soul discoursed: the other Anatomy, the Fabric
or structure of the body of man revealed in dissection. This we shall visit
only in transcursu, and draw a transitory Landschip of so much only, as may
present the method of the Souls Economy, and her manner of dispensing orders
to each distinct organ of the body: of the former, we shall in a distracted
rehersall, deliver our Collections.

The Soul (called Anima, by all the Friends of wisdom) is considered in a
double sense (1.) as Principium and altera pars compositi, seu ut Forma
corporis, the principal half of the composition, or the Form of the body.
(2.) as Efficiens operationum, the Efficient of all actions. Of the acception
of the Soul in each of these respects, briefly; and first of the reasonable
Soul as it is related to the body.

There is no one of the Philosophers, whose judgment is in health, denies the
reasonable Soul to be the Essential Form of Man. But, since there is a
double Form (1.) one called Forma informans, which being the beginning, and
nobler part of the compound, constitutes its specifich Essence, and
differenceth it from all other bodies. (2.) another, named Assistens, which
does not give to the thing (...), to be a specific Essence; but to a thing
already rich and perfect in its own nature, is superadded as Accessory or
Adjutant, to the performance of some nobler actions then of its self it could
enterprise: in this sense, is the Pilot said to be the Essence or soul of the
ship, although he contribute not to the ship its (...), its being, but as an
Accessarie or Auxiliary joined with the ship, is the Author or cause of its
course and navigation, which the ship of its own single power cannot perform:
here it will be seasonable to enquire, An Anima hominis sit ejus forma
informans? an tantum assistens?
An Anima rationalis sit forma hominis informans, alteraque ejus pars? an vero
tantum assistens, quae homini jam perfecto and formam specificam habenti
adjungatur, and nobilioris in eo operationis alicujus, puta intelligentiae,
causa sit? Whether the Rational Soul be the Form informing and one chief part
of man; or only assistant, which to a man already complete in his own distinct
essence, is adjoined, and is the cause of some nobler operation (viz.)
intelligence in him?

The Arabian Averrhoes would betray our reason to an absurdity, by his
assertion, Formam hominis esse cogitativam, etc. that the Essence of man is
cogitative (a narrow term, he is pleased to assign it) and absolutely
distinct from the imagination, and that by this, man did make a distinct
species: but the Rational Soul is only the Assistant form. To this error
our faith stands no way affected. We shall declare for those that advise us;
that the rational Soul is the true Essence of man, and the one and nobler
morty of him.

For, Argument 1.
if the Reasonable Soul were not the Forma informans of man, he could own the
attribute of rational, with no less absurdity, then a ship can be allowed to
be intelligent, only because it carries a Pilot that is so.

Again,

That, Argument 2.
whereby any thing does operate, is the Form or Essence of that thing, to
which we ascribe the operation, for nothing operates but by its Form; But to
man, ( Quatenus man) we attribute reason or intellection; Ergo, the rational
Soul is the Essential Form of the body of man.

It satisfies not, to conversion, that the Heretics to this truth urge, that
the understanding Faculty is accumulated to man per Phantasmata; for these
Phantasmes have no nearer a relation to the intellect, then colors to the
sight: and as colors, nor the subject on which they depend, can be capable of
sight; so can neither the Phantasmes, nor their subject understand, but are
indeed understood: Wherefore we may conclude thus.

That, Argument 3.
whereby one thing is in specie distinguished from another, is its Essence; but
man, by the rational Soul, is distinguished from all other living Creatures.
Ergo, The rational Soul is the Essence of Man.

To this one foot of Reason, we could add the other of Authority, to make this
opinion current: but expansion, in contraction is a Paradoxology.

The explication of this, An Anima rationalis in omnibus hominibus sit una? an
vero in singulis peculiaris?
ushers our reason to the solution of a second question, viz. An Anima
rationalis in omnibus hominibus sit una numero; an vero in singulis peculiaris?
whether there be but one numericall Soul in all mankind; or whether a distinct
one in every individual?

They that determine the reasonable Soul to be but Forma assistens, dream
that it is not multiplied according to the number of men, but that there is but
one single Soul in all the Species, which is the cause of intelligence in men.
This is, e diametro, in opposition to truth, many ways. For, every Forma
informans, (such as we have already acknowledged the ratio^al Soul to be) is
multiplied, as the individualls are multiplied. (2.) If we allow but one Soul
to all men, it will be conseque^t that all men are but one man, for they would
have but one and the same numericall Form. (3.) The Operations, and
intellections or second acts are multiplied according to the number of
individualls, for our intelligence is distinct from the intelligence of
another. Ergo, the Soul, which is the first act, is multiplied: For the
diversity of operations depends on the diversity of Forms: (4.) In one and the
same intellect, would be at the same instant, contrary opinions; for one man
harbors one opinion, a second another, a third a quite contrary to both. But
we should supererogate to light a candle to the Sun.

From this position, that the Rational Soul is the true form of man, a
second Quere receives a hint to insinuate it self, viz. An eadem sit
immortalis? An Anima sit immortalis?
seu, an possit sine sui interitu a corpore separari? Whether this Soul be
immortal, or whether it can be divorced from the body, without the
destruction of its Essence? For us Christians, it is the easy business of our
Faith, grounded on the Magna Charta of our Religion, to attest that the Soul
is immortal, and that the excellency of it, is filed among those grand
maxims, on which, as hinges, Christianity is moved. But whether it be not an
object too subtle and sublime, for reason, though clarified by the bright
perspective of Philosophy, to discern, is an argument yet full of perplexity
and trouble.

First, let us with J.C. Scaliger, Scaliger Exercit. 61. sect. 5. and Excercit.
307. sect. 20. Solus Deus vere immortalis and incorruptibilis, quia solus ex se
suum esse habet, atque a nullo dependit; Dei vero respectu oinnia creata
mortalia and corruptibilia sunt, quae a Creatoris nutu deponi possunt ab ea
essentia, in qua constituta sunt. Non corrumpuntur tamen quaedam ut Angeli, and
Anima rationalis, quia Creator non vult ea Corrumpi, and nihil contrarii ipsis,
a quo corrumpuntur, condidit, nec eas ita materiae immersit, ut extra eam nec
subsistere, nec operari possint.
grant that God alone is truly immortal and incorruptible; and infer, that
there is one immortal, which is superior to to decay, or ruin, and being
absolutely simple in its own nature, receives being from its self, and
depends not on any second: and such is God only, and in respect of him all
things may be said subject to change by Corruption. For although Angels and
the rational Soul, which are in a third sense, allowed immortal, because
they are never actually corrupted, consist of no contraries, and are absolutely
single in their Essences a subjecto: yet because they are not absolute, a
Causa, have not their Esse from themselves, but derive it from another, by
which they may be returned to Non-entities again. For every dependant is
liable, at the arbitrary resolve of that, on which it does depend, to be
changed; and may at the pleasure of its principle, be deposed from that
Essence, in which it was, by it, created.

But the reason why some created natures are not corrupted, is the will and
decree of the Creator; who constituted them single and simple without the
mixture of a contrary, (from which they might derive corruptibility) nor so
obliged them to matter, as that they cannot subsist, or operate without it. And
that amongst natures of this order, the rational soul of man is to be listed;
and that it may be severed from the body, without the ruin of its essence, is
the task of the wiser and modern Philosopher to prove. vid. Marsil. Ficin. de
immortalit. Animae. Lib. 5. Tolet. de Anim. Lib. 3. cap. 5. Quaest. 16. Fran.
Picol. Lib. 3. de Hum. meant. Colleg. Conimbr. in Tract. de Anim. Separat.
disput. 1. art. 3. etc. The state of all which business is briefly thus.

Every thing is known by its effects, and every form reveals it self by its
operations; wherefore since the actions of man are so Noble and Divine, that
they cannot be attributed to a mortal substance, deeply plunged in matter; it
may without obscurity be collected, that the rational soul, from which these
transcendent and divine actions flow, is immortal and separable from matter.

For the intellect does abstract and divest things of that matter, judges of
them without the conditions of matter, quantity, or figure, contemplates them
as unbodied and enlarged from the grosser bondage of their materials; is not
(as the frailer sense) offended, either with the multitude, or vehemence of
objects, but can comprehend things infinite in number, yet still reserves room
for more, and can multiply their number to a higher finity, reflects on its
self, and is familiar with, not only others, but its own nature, and
understands that it does understand its own intelligence; can decree, and
repeal, and resolve, and labor with an insatiable desire of knowledge,
Eternity, Beatitude, (which since it is incapable of satisfaction in this life,
we have reason to believe, that there is reserved for it a future estate, in
which this appetite shall be sated) and can perform its actions without the
instruments or organs of the body.

This of the Soul in her relation to the body.

The disquisition of its nature, as it is principium operationum, Anima immista
1. ab. objecto.
the efficient of all actions succeeds. To the description of it in this sense,
the words of Aristotle, Lib. 3. de anima. Anima rationalis est (...) immista,
approach very near. But the soul must be granted simple, pure, immaterial, and
unmixt, in a double respect. (1.) ab objectis, that its essence might not
participate with the essence of objects, but be endued only withpower to
receive them. For, since the business of the soul is the comprehension, and
knowledge of objects; and this can beperformed only by reception; it is a
necessary illation, that its essence must be simple, pure, and unmixt with the
essence of objects. For, nothing, without an affront to reason, can be said to
receive that, which is its own already by essence: and intus existens prohibet
alienum. And this immistion is common to the rational soul with the senses
also: For, they in like manner contain not their objects in themselves, but
have only a Capacity of receiving them in: but here is the difference, the
senses are free and unmixt, only secundum quid, and from one single species of
Ens (for example, the Sight is free only from Colors) for their business is
not about a plurality of Entities; but the rational soul is absolutely free
from essence of all other things, as, being by the institution of God, directed
to the reception and admission of all created Natures.

Again, 2. Immista ab Organo.
the fational soul is by a peculiar manner (...), immista ab organo, nec cum
eqpermista. Free, and inorganical, when it operats in acts intelligential, or
voluntary, and performs its actions without the bodies assistance. For since to
the performing those actions which are done in and by the body, there is a
peculiar, harmonious temper of qualities, (for every particular reception
expects a distinct, exact preparation, and disposition) and by consequence, an
equally tempered Organ of the same constitution, required; and since each
distinct part of the human body, has a proper and distinct temper: but the
rational soul is neither (as it is in it self) obliged to any certain definite
constitution, or composition of first qualities; nor affected by them: nor can
there in the body be found any adaequate and proper Organ for it: we must
confess, that the soul in the dispatch of her business has no dependence on
the body, but is immaterial, and inorganical.

From this third immission of the soul, we have a clear prospect toward her
operations. For since she in Agendo is not obliged to the body, and that the
actions of the body communicate nothing with the actions of the mind: it
results a familiar truth, that the understanding and will, are powers
inorganical, and do Agere of themselves; so that to understand and to will, are
the proper actions of the mind; nor does the mind understand by the body, or
any instrument of it, as by a Medium necessary.

Indeed she is beholding to the Imagination, for while she remains immured in
this dark Monastery, the body, she never understands without the assistance
of the Fantasy. (Aristot. Lib. 3. de Anima. cap. 7.) yet not as Organon, but
as Objectum. For it is necessary that intelligibles be conveyed to the reason
by the sense. Wherefore, if any shall positively assert, that the actions of
the mind are Organicall; and that the Rational Soul does make use of the
subservient ministry of the Brain and Animal spirit, and senses, as her
Corporeal instruments: We dare admit it, only in the subsequent sense. That
the Soul, while she sojournes in the result of dust and ashes, does not
understand, without the operations of the Organs of the body praeceding her
own operations: or that in her second and subordinate actions she becomes
isntrumental, Hinc sagacissimus Romani Imperij reip. stoicae, and sui ipsius
(...) Mare. Ant. lib. 10. cap. 1. Exclamat, Ah! quando veniet illud tempus o
anima, cum bena, simplex, unica, and nuda, corpore denique tibi circumjecto,
magis conspicua eris, cum gustabis perfecti amoris affectum: plend eris,
nullius indigens, nibil defiderans, neque animati, neque inanimati ad
fruitiones veluptatum, etc. l. 1. n. 10. Ex versione Merry. Casaubon.
and uses the assistance of the Brain and Animal Spirits: but not in the
least measure, when she operates perse, and is undisturbedly employed about
her pure intelligence, and pure will: for then her sublimer conceptions and
intellection tower in an immaterial Sphere, superior to that wherein the duller
mediation of Organs confines her, and is her self the subject of her own
speculation, and intelligence and will. Which last act is by a new, yet
convenient notion, called Volition Scaliger. Exercit. 307. sect. 3. and 9.

And although the understanding Faculty does suffer depravation in diseases of
the brain: yet that depends on no other reason, then that the subordinate, and
subministring Faculties, which are Organicall and interessed in the
Constitution of the brain, are injured.

Moreover, though the Human Soul be plentifully furnished with all the
Attributes of the Vegetative and sensible Soul: yet she is enriched with two
other diviner Faculties, (whereby she transcends in excellence all other
vegetable and sensitive creatures) 1. Intellectus.
the Intellect, whereby we conceive and know; (2.) the will, 2. Voluntas.
which inclines us to those things, which in the judgment of our reason are
good. The sense of this dictated to Hermes Trismegistus, this sentence; (...)
etc. Homo brutis and mundo praestat ratione and mente.

The difference of these two facultiesis manifest, for it is one thing to know,
and another to desire the things known. Further, these two operate diversely;
the fourmer, Patiendo, and by admission of the species, so that they may be
intromitted to the mind; the latter Agendo, and by prosecution, so that the
mind may be by extramission, advanced toward the object. Again, the diverfity
of their objects discerns the power of knowing, from the power of Volition:
for, we know things quatenus entia, but we desire them quatenus bona.

This, by strong inference makes good, that the intellect is not ranked with,
yet has a power spiritually to admit and comprehend all other actual Entities.

Aristotle, possessed with an apprehension, that in the mind of man, beside
that which has a power to be made, all things, viz. by intelligence, and
supplies the place of matter, there is also something else discharging the
office of Form, which has power to make all things, viz. actually
intelligible: differenceth the intellect into (1) Active, and (2) Passive.

But to determine what this Intellectus Agens is, has afflicted the brains of
firmer heads then ours. Some (and those of the upper house of Philosophers)
have voted it to be the Supreme wisdom, or some Demon, or Superior
intelligence auxiliant to man. But these dreamers rove as wide off the sense of
Aristotle, as of Truth. For his theme in Lib. de Anima is Intellectus Humanus:
and in Lib. 3. de An. c. 5. he expressly calls the Active Intelligence, a
certain difference in the Soul. (2.) Again, this intellection, which streams
from the Active intellect, is settled within the region of our selves, and under
our own command, and is not transmitted immediately from God, or any other
auxiliary intelligence (3.). Lastly, since God in the fabric of our intellect,
has enriched it with a wealthy measure of illumination; we shall blaspheme the
bounty and wisdom of our Creation, to compel him to be immediately
supervisor and assistant to it in all actions. But the Active intellect is in
the sense of Aristotle, Intellectus Agens.
that difference of our informator, our Soul, which advances things
intelligible in potestate to the perfection of intelligibles in Actu. For as an
effect Natural owes its production to an Agent of the same genus; and to
Effects Artificial is required a distinct Art: so to the work of the mind,
which is the act of intelligence is required an Agent, not Heterogeneous,
several and distinct from, but what is a part or certain difference of the
Soul.

And although this Intellectus Agens be, by the severity of some judgments,
proclaimed an exile from the borders of Philosophy: yet that it will become the
justice of our reason to welcome it, is demonstrable from this truth.
Whatsoever action is done, is performed in aliquo, et abl aliquo, sedalio, in,
and by some second that is different: Now universals are made, the intellect
being Passive: Ergo, there must be some other active power to make universals.
For since every patient requires a determinate Agent, and nothing in nature can
deduce it self, e potestate in actum: and since our understanding is
constituted only in the power, or capacity to admit objects actually
intelligible, and that by reception: it follows, that if we allow a Passive, we
cannot deny an Active intellect; and if we remove one, we lose both. Wherefore
an intellectus agens is necessary for this reason, that it may make all things
actually intelligible, and translate the object de ordine in ordinem, from the
capacity to the act. For since every object or phantasm is material, and so
under the opposite condition of the power intelligent, which is abstracted, and
immaterial, it cannot be comprehended by the intellect, until it become
abstracted, immaterial, and proportionate to the intellect; and this can never
be done, but by a power abstracted, and an essence intelligent.

From this we may derive information, that the Office of the understanding is
Agere (i.e.) to advance from the Capacity to the act; and of objects
intelligible in Potentia, to make them intelligible in actu.

This office of the understanding the Philosopher explains by that analogy or
similitude, which it holds with Art, Nature, Habit, and Light. For it is as it
were the eye of the mind, and is as nearly related to objects, as Light to
Colors. It surveyes and illustrats the phantasmes or objects, naked and
divested of those material conditions, which like clouds, benight their
intelligibility, that they may be reinvested with the brighter nature of
intelligibles; and thus like prepared Brides be presented to the embraces of
the Passive intellect: just as colors transmit their image to the sight by the
qualification and assistance of light.

But this illustration, illumination, or qualification of the Phantasmes, is
not done Formaliter, so that they retain the impression of any quality, nor
objective only, but effective; because the active intellect as an external
light, does by the association of its own luster, sublime the objects to the
production of the image intelligible: Neither is the in ellectus agens required
only pro subjecto, for a subject, but has an other part to act, viz. in the
Passive intellect, to produce the act of intelligence, by representing to it,
the object in its intelligible species: and this it performs, when associated
with the illumined object, it produces the image of the intelligible to the
passive intellect. Hence may we collect, (1.) on what, (2.) in what manner the
Active intellect does operate; for it is required to the performance of both
actions, as well that it operats on the objects, as on the Passive intellect;
but on each in a distince and several manner: for it is joined to the
phantasmes before the act of intelligence; and indeed, while they are yet
remaining in the imagination, where illuminating them, it becomes their Form,
whereby they are constituted the Objectum motivum of the Passive intellect:
after joined in commission with these objects thus illuminated, it operats on
the passive intellect, by producing in it the species intelligible; and by
sequel, the intellection or act of understanding.

But this intellectus agens does not understand, qua Agens, since it receives
not the images or notions intelligible, although it produce them; neither is
fited in the capacity of intelligence, but is the intellection in the Passive
intellect, as in its subject, wherefore this is called intellectus Formaliter;
the other only effective, because it effects the intelligence.

The intellectus (...) Passive, is, Iutellectus patibilis.
as it were the matter, or subject, on which the images intelligible are
impressed. Hence it derives the denomination of Patient and Patible, for it is
passive in the admission of the species, by the intervention, or mediation of
the Phantasms. This is also called intellectus possibilis, et men's pote state;
because it is endued with a capacity to be all things by intelligence. But to
reveal the dark and mysterious sense of these words, the understanding passive
has a capacity to be made all things by intelligence, we must be illuminated
by a beam of that refnlgent Constellation in the Firmament of Learning. Jul.
Caes. Scaliger Exercit. 307. Sect. 6. Principio (inquit) nego tibi illud a
Philosopho dictum esse; intellectum nostrum esse omnia essentialiter, aut
formaliter: Sed est omnia subjective, sicut Materia prima: quae non fit Equi
essentia suh equi forma, sed remanet id, quod erat substantia quaedam: ex qua
and forma, fit hoc aliquid. Alia tamenratio est in intellectus informatione.
Ipse enim non est potentia pura, ut materia prima, quae reducatur ad hoc, ut
actu sit he aliquid per formam. Sed ipse forma nostra est substantialis,
separabilis, incorruptibilis, aeternus, ex quo tanquam ex subjecto
essentialiter perfecto, and specie, quam recipit fit intellectus informatus:
non alias a seipso: nisi sicut Caesar edoctus, fit alius a seipso: propter
receptas species accide ntales. Nonigitur fit intellectus simpliciter, nec fit
ipsa species, sed sub specie.

The reflex of all which is, that the intellect Passive, is not capable of
being all things Essentially, but Subjectively.

As in this, which concerns the first difference of the understanding, we have
exercised the patience: so we shall the mercy of Candor, and presume
forgiveness if we add: that the intellect Active and Passive are hot
Essentially and Really, but only in the reason distinct. For, two internal
Forms cannot be united by new accidents: and both to effect, and receive an
Action immanent (such as is the intellection) is required a principle single in
Essence. Wherefore our sense is, that the Essence of the Active and Passive
intellect, is one and the same: and that quoad Esse, there is but one
intellect; which, in that it makes things intelligible, illustrates the
Phantasmes, and intrust's them to the custody of the Passive, is called the
Agent: but in that it is the Subject Recipient of abstracted and immateriall
objects, it deservedly ownes the name of Passive.

In this seamlesse Vesture, the Understanding, the factious speculation of
Aristotle, 2. Inellectus in
would epsy a second rent; and untwist it into an intellect (1. in Hahit, and
(2.) in Act: 1. Habitu. 2. Actu.
but Truth dictares, that these are only the degrees of one, and the same
intellect: and are not by any Law, but that arbitrary power of discourse,
warranted for differences.

For, that is the intellect in Habit, which has the object treasured up in the
wealthy Magazine of the Phansy; and by one degree of perfection transcends the
intellect in possibility. For this is in the capacity to the first Act; but
that for the second, or, is prepared to admit the action of the Agent.

Concerning this Zabarell has other thoughts; and believes, that the mind of
man is at first rude, fallow and unapt to the knowledge and comprehension of
intelligibles: but after, by the acts of intelligence multiplied, it acquires
so large an hability and aptitude to comprehension: that it can, without labor
and difficulty, at its own pleasure, address it self to the imagination, and
immediately understand: and that the intellect enriched with this fair
Hability, is called the Intellect in Habit: but when the Passive intellect does
actually operate (i. e.) actually discern the object presented, it is called
the Intellect in Act.

The last distinction of the intellect is into (1.) (...), 3. Intellectus. 1.
Speculations. 2. Practicus.
Speculativum, and (2.) (...), Practicum. Which terms do not constitute a
duality of powers intellectual, nor insinuate, either the differences or
degrees of the same intellect: but implicitly express both Faculties of the
rational Soul: by the Epithet Speculativum; the Understanding properly so
called; by practicum the Will. For when the intellect, in regard of its
apprehension of a thing; and again, according to the affirmation or negation of
the true or false, cannnot be expressed by any more convenient name then
Speculative: it follows, that this difference arose in respect of the third
attribute of the intellect practical, (viz.) the prosecution and aversion or
flight, which are acts of the Will.

The Operation of the intellect (to which all the offices of these degrees are
destined) is Intellection. Intellectus operatio.
Which is not the same with the imamages intelligible, but really differs from
them; and is more truly defined (1.) by the reception and apprehension, 1.
Simplex. 2. Composita.
(2.) by the judgment of the species intelligible. For the intellect
exercises a double operation on the object; the first a simple or bare
apprehension or Knowledge: the second (called Composition and Division) a
compound apprehension or judgment, which consists in the assent or dissent.
Henceis the intellect said to be double also (1.) simple, when it knows an
object simple and incomplex. (2.) Compound, when it judges a proposition true,
or false.

The objectof intellection, Ojectum intellectionis Ens.
which both moves, and determines the understanding, is Ens, accepted
universally, and as it comprehends both material and immateriall natures; yet
allayed with some necessary qualifications and conditions: and first
Universality; 1. Vniversate.
for that Ens may be received and discerned by the intellect, 2. Intelligibile.
it must be abstracted and separate from singulars: (2.) intelligibility, or
sublimation from the faeculent condition of matter: (3.) verity. 3. Verum.
This object, thus, by the Active intellect adaequated, conditionated, and
proportioned to the mind, is called spicies intelligibilis, the image
intelligible: as that which the courser sense receives, is called species
sensibilis, the image sensible.

These intelligible Species are the Phantasms illumined, Phantasmata
illuminata, quid.
irradiated, illustrated (i.e.) extracted from the dreggs or conditions of
matter, and by the Active impressed on the passive intellect; and by the rule
of Consequence, are Accidents spiritual and indivisible. For not the
substance, but the accidents, find admission to the sense. Scalig. Exercit.
303. Sect. 7. Wherefore only accidents constitute the Species in the
Understanding. Among these are Locus, Tempus, and unitas finita quantitatis;
which being removed by the discretive power of the intellect, there will reside
the substantial universal Species: as when you see any disguised or armed,
first you discern the arms; when they are sublated, the man himself.

To relieve our assertion (that the things which are to become objects to the
intellect, must be stripped, Men's humana singularia cognoscit.
and disroabed of matter and Conditions singular) from the ambush of a
Contradiction; it will be opportune to resolve; after what manner the
understanding can know singulars; or whether it be capable only of
Universalls? Our determination is, that the mind of man does also comprehend
singulars. For since all the subordinate cognoscent Faculties are so, by
mutual concatenation united, and as it were identified, that the end of one
action is the beginning to another; and whatever is discerned by an inferior, is
also familiar to a superior Faculty: but the sense and imagination comprehend
singulars: wherefore, by necessary inference, the mind knows singulars also.
And from this knowledge, is man enabled to compare and balance an Universal
with a singular; and the mind forms singular propositions, that from them, it
may collect Universalls: and so often corrects the senses judgment of
singulars, as they, by reason of their disaffection or depraved disposition to
the objects, are guilty of delusion and aberration. But this cognition of
fingulars is wrought by Accidents; for from proper singular accidents, we
extract the notion proper to singulars; as in like manner, from the notions
proper to the species, we pick out the Phantasme proper to the species.

Intellection, Intellectio.
or the Act of understanding is vulgarly disunioned into (1.) Rectam, 1. Recta.
2. Reflexa.
direct or simple. (2.) Reflexam, reflex, or ingeminated. Our intellection is
direct, when at the first limple apprehension, the Species arrests and wholly
possesses the intellect, so that it desists from any further prosecution, or
disquisition: as when it is barely employed in the first conception of a man,
Ox, or Horse, etc. Reflex. doubled, or reciprocated, when the mind reflects on
the knowledge of its self, and does understand its own intellection, and
discernes it self to be an intellect; that is an Essence pure and immateriall,
a bright nature, irradiated by the reflexive glory of the Eternal Wisdom.

Here our Aversion to obscurity may excuse a short digression, Abstractio quid?
if we insert, that, by Abstraction we intend, a separation of singling (in the
understanding) out of one thiug from all others. For in abstraction, not all
things inherent in the subject are known, but only that which is abstracted.
V. G. to abstract Animal ab Equo, the living Creature from the Horse; is to
consider only the Animality, the Equiety being altogether incousidered and
superseded.

Lastly, Voluntas the will, Voluntas.
is the other power of the rational Soul, whereby we prosecute or abhor,
embrace, or reject the objects known by the Undersanding: Or, is the intellect
expansed and diffused, to admit, or execute what it understands. This also by
some, is termed Appetitus Rationalis, the reasonable appetite. For as the
sensitive appetite follows the Knowledge of the Sense. So does a proper and
peculiar desire of fruition attend the knowledge of the mind; which, for
distinction from the former, becomes the appellation of the Will: and that the
rational does absolutely differ from the sensitive appetite, is familiar from
this, Videatur Aurelij Prude ntij (...), seu de Compug^^n tia Animae, liber.
that they have too frequent Conflicts and Contentions betwixt them. This
Antipathy or Duello betwixt these two indigenae, the ingenuous frailty of Saint
Paul discovered to be radicated, beyond all possibility of reconcilement,
until our Exaltation from the residence of sensuality; therefore with (...),
etc. Ejaculates his Vote for Emancipation from the tyranny of Flesh. And were
this Philosophy lectured to the Junior Pharisees of our Age, (though, would
Charity dispense, we may fear their incapacity of Fixation, but by ignition,
or reduction, but by distillation per descensum) it would deride their ambition
of singular and divine purity; and humble them to confession of their large
sympathicall distemper from the Common wounds of Humanity. But we ask pardon
for our Parenthesis.

The object, Ejus Objectum. Bonum and malum.
which provokes the will, is Bonum and Malum, Good and Evil; so conceived by
the understanding and tendered to the will: hence it prosecutes good and abhors
evil. The Actions of the will are (1.) Volition, (2.) Nolition; and these are
double, (1.) Elicitae chosen or elected, which the will, by it self, and not
by the inservient Faculties, does select and execute: (2.) imperatae injunctive
which the Will commands to be done by the subordinate powers.

These subservient Faculties, which by the Law of Fate, are subjects to the
Scepter of the Will, are (1.) the Locomotive, (2.) the Sensitive Appetite. For
our motion and quiescence succeed each other at the pleasure and command of the
Will: But that dominon, which the Will, before our Grandfathers apostasy from
the rule of reason, extended over the sensual Appetite, is contracted and
diminished by the usurped incroachment of Sensuality: and that harmonious
concord, which at the primitive constitution, was maintained betwixt both
faculties, so confusedly infringed; that the revolted sensitive Appetite,
renounces all conformity to the sober adviso'es of the rational Will: and may,
with an easy Metaphor, assimilate Ovids, Fertur equis Auriga, nec audit Currus
habenas: or that diviner distich of Hermanus. Hugo Lib. 2. de piis Votis.

Frena nihil patitur minus, atque libido vovendi,
Nec se lege sinunt libera vota premi.
There Is naught abhorrs Confinement like our lust,
Nor are our Votes Conformed to what is just.
But to a Lordship over the Vegetive Faculty, the Charter of the Will extends
not: for that works positively, and absolutely natural, neither is our
Nutrition, Accretion, or majoration, at the improvement or dispensation of the
Will.

CHAP. II. Of the Traduction of the Human Soul.
THE second grand Remora's, which retard the Soul, in her voyage for the
discovery of wisdom, and Charm her Compass to a variation from the pacifick
Sea of Truth, to the dangerous Torrent of Error; are (1.) servile Credulity
(2.) Vainglorious Singularity. To the first, most have cowardly, or supinely,
prostituted their habilities of disquisition; and have so firmly vowed
implicit homage to the superstitious Sovereignty of Antiquity, that, if but a
Tradition be contradicted, it proves Criminal, and Reason and Experience (the
two best Counselors) are deposed as innovators. The other inveigles her
disciples into the opposite extreme: and would demolish the substantial
buildings, on which the reverend hand of Authority has recorded Truth, in deep
ingravements: that on their ruins, the pageant superstructures of solitary
dreams may find advancement. From this we may (we hope without Treason against
the Majesty of justice) affirm our endeavors diverted from the former, we
despair not to relieve our Reader, who noe sooner, with but half an eye,
glances on the inscription of this leaf; but presumes our discouse Erroneous,
because inquisitive into the Ancient and popular assertion, that the Human Soul
is created by insusion.

If any shall here arrest us, for an incroachment on the sacred royalty of
Theology; our plea is, that whatsoever of the Human Souls Original is within
the borders of reason, lies in Common also to Philosophy: that our thoughts are
so clear from design to propagate Haeresie, or oppose our Conceptions to any
Fundametnall of Faith: that we humbly tender them as Positions most probable
and consentaneous to Verity; but not obtrude them as Magisteriall dictates.

Our first Article is; that the Human soul is, 1. Thesis.
by the hereditary virtue of the divine benediction, Crescite and
multiplicamini, propagated and traduced, by the sea of Parents to their issue.

Our first Argument hopes supportment from that Axiom, Argument 1. Simile,
Simile generat.
Simile Simile generat, so appositely attested by Aristotle. Lib. de An. c. 4.
T. 34: in these words: (...) etc. rehearsed thus: This operation, of all other,
is most natural to Animals, those, I mean, which are perfect, not defective or
mutilated, and are not generated without seed; for every one to procreate his
like, an Animal, an Animal, a Plant, a Plant: That by this way, as far as they
are able, they may enterprise perpetuity. For when the wise Creator constituted
every thing, in its kind, perfect, but man, as his masterpiece and abridgement
(in whom the idaea's of all other created natures are collectively refulgent)
most perfect and exact: he cannot justly own the attribute of perfection, but
must be enrolled amongst Aristotle's (...), Mutilates, if he be destitute of
power to procreate another man, perfect and altogether such as himself. This
has prevailed upon most Naturalists and many Divines, to conclude; That man
does absolutely procreate man and the whole man, which could not be, if the
procreator did not communicate the Soul to his issue, for since man consists of
a body and a Soul, if the Soul be not communicative from the Genitors, man
cannot propagate man.

This also is consentaneous, to the sense of sacred Scripture; For God ( Genesis
1. verse 28.) distributed to man equally, with all other living creatures, his
virtual benediction of crescite and multiplicamini: by the lineal inheritance
of which, the whole man does propagate the whole man. And were it not a
frustration of the Energy of the Almighties blessing, if our opinions concede
the Soul deduceable, from any Extrinsec cause.

For whatsoever belongs to the essential integrity of human nature, Arg. 2.
does man propagate by generation; but not only the body, but the Soul also is
essential to human integrity. Ergo, the soul is also propagated by generation.
Hence Damascen. Lib. de Orth. Fide, defines generation to be ex concursu maris
et faeminae similis substantiae individui procreationem.

Neither is the Souls (...), or transcendent excellence to be derived from her
Creation: For not quicquid creatur est immortale; but rather every created
nature, if we regard its principal, is per se mortal: and the reason why some
natures are mortal, others immortal, is not deducible from the condition of
their materials, but from the omnipotent, sic placuit, and voluntary decretal
of the Creator; who created whatsoever, whenever, and howsoever he pleased.
And such is the human nature, as the eternal will of God resolved it, and
firmly conserving the essence granted, is according to the institution of the
same will propagated. Argu. 2^.


Our other firmer Basis; on which our affirmation of the Souls extraduction
relies, is the propagation and hereditary transmission of sin together with the
Soul, from our fist Grandfather Adam, to all posterity, and is erected by an
argument, betraying to impossibility or absurdity, thus.

If the Soul be created by infusion, or infused by Creation; God either created
the Soul evil and depraved, or infused a tincture of evil into it, after it was
created: both which, while they allow God to be the immediate original of the
Soul, infer a dangerous impiety, and conclude him the Author of sin. Or
secondly, the Soul being by her creation, perfect, white, and immaculate, does
contract her inquination, corruption, and blemishes from the body. But
according to the Canon Law of Metaphysics, no material can agere on an
immaterial, by a natural act. True it is, by a general confession, that the
customary inclinations of the mind, do more then frequently confess their
subjection to the influence of the constitution of the body, but this is done
actu morali, by inclination and disposition, not by impression of any real,
Physical, miasme, or pollution: by the same way whereby the stars rule us, and
God the stars.

2ly. Our Savior, Mat. 15. V. 2. expressly declares, that from the Heart, as
from a polluted fountain, do spring the streams that render man sullied and
impure; and that which comes out of the mouth defiles man, (i. e.) (...),
the mind, and radical Concupiscence, are the common sources, from which all sin
is derivative.

Or thirdly, we must compulsively concede, that sin is transmitted or descended
from Adam, to us, by way of imitation, not propagation or production: which
error of Pelagius is hissed out of the Schools by the Arminians.

But Peter du Moulin conceives to himself an easy protection from the danger
of these rocks, by affirming that God created the Soul morally, good and
perfect, but (by supervention of Adams (...) precipitous fall) destitute of
supernatural light; and therefore because the Soul is, by the natural swindge
of Essential appetite, rapt on to good; but for want of the manuduction of
divine light (...) is purblind, and insufficient to steer it self to the true
supreme good, viz. God; it violently pursues the creatures, viz. Bonum jucundum
et utile: and thus by aberration from, and dereliction of the principal and
true good, does become spiritually depraved and tainted.

But this way of evasion is unsafe, upon a maturer sounding, and this resolve
(without impeachment of the honor due to so much learning) too narrow a tablet
to pourtraict the nature of Original sin on; as if it could be nothing but
barely the privation of supernatural light, by the dictates whereof, it might
direct to, and fix on the summary good, where the Soul is purely passive: When
Genesis Chap. 8. Verse 22. it is entitled, Figmentum Cordis, the contrivment or
Poesy of the heart, evil, and totally corrupted from the Cradle; because,
like a Potter, it moulds, fashions, and actuates lusts, and concupiscence; as
if in our soul were (...), a conformative power, whereby our hearts can fashion
and proportion evil. Truly the cause procatarctica, or provocative, is from
without; but (...), the native, and preconceptive, is in the very Soul.

2ly. That universal determination of Divines, that the Soul in
supernaturalibus est deprivata, in naturalibus depravata: Whence therefore is
this Cymmerian dimnes and obscurity of the understanding; even in the business
of her own proper objects (viz) naturals and intelligibles, to which is no way
required the assistance of divine light? when our ingenerated protogenitor Adam
(before his transgression, contracted a black cloud over his reason, and
obnubilated its primitive clarity) was exactly read and experienced in the
natures of Animals, and hence accommodated appellaations to each distinct
species.

3ly. Why in the Sacrament of Baptism does the element of water Symbolize
washing, clensing, and purging, unless in implicit relation to our
uncleanness, and the Minera of our polluted Nature, the reaty, or guilt,
though not the reality, whereof is absterged and expunged by Baptism? And were
it not a Parergie, we could urge the same of Circumcision.

4. Lastly, if we perpend the nature, and symptoms of the primitive crime of
Adam, we shall discover a tract or view of it deeply impressed in all his
succession; so that thence we may sympathetically confess it to be malum
haereditarium, an evil radically and lineally descending to all posterity: a
desire of knowledge, a palliation, and extenuation of the fact, a translation of
the guilt on others, et quod nemini obtrudi potest; on God himself. All which
are the Vestigia of the first sin, and evidently conclude in the phrase of the
sacred Historiographer, Genesis Chap. 5. Ver. 3. that Adam begot sons in his
likeness, after his own image: which image, all Divines conclude, to include
Original sin, and the penalty of eternal death, which he propagated in his
issue, in the room of that Majestic image of Divinity, received at his first
inauguration to manhood.

Our other position (in the opinion of which we are likely to end our days)
is, Thesis 2.
Animam humanam initio Conceptionis statim adesse: that the human Soul is
present in the very first moment of conception, as soon as the prolifick
seminary Emissions of both sexes are mixed, by mutual incorporation, prepared
to Fermentation, and conserved in the womb, when the operation conformative
begins; and that there can be properly assigned no other cause efficient, which
should enterprise the conformation, but the rational Soul.

For wheresoever the proper operations of the human Soul are, there must her
presence be acknowledged also; but in the first conception her operations are
visible. Ergo, she must then, and there be present also.

The operations of the Soul in the Conception, are (1.) the conformation of the
membranous, scarfs that invade and enshroud the Embyro (2.) The Embryo it
self. (3.) the augmentation of it, for a Meridian truth it is, that no sooner
are the parts of the Infant delineated, and their rudiments proportioned, but
they progress to majoration, or augmentation; but in the augmentation, the
Soul is communicated to the acceding parts; wherefore it is necessary that
those parts which accresce, or are aditional, should partake Animation, in the
very first augmentation. For how it grates the harmonious ears of reason, to
allow the infant after birth, to be Majorated by the influence of another Soul,
then that by which it was augmented in the womb.

That the Conformation begins with the Conception, we are solemnly invited to
concede, as well from the uncessant and early activity of Nature, (in which
idleness can be imagined with no less absurdity then Emptiness) as by the
autopticall observation of Abortive Embrio's. Hippocrates Lib. de Natura Pueri,
describes the Geniture, which his Faemal Harper, by obeying his Pagan
prescript, on the sixth day, after Conception, danced to abortion, in these
words, (...) etc. rehearsed thus; as if one pil of the outward, shel of an Egg
raw, in which the humor contained in the inward membrane is tralucent: very
like this was that liquour, moreover red and round: but there were visible
white thin Fibers contained in the membrane it self, on the outward part
discolored with blood like those that are bloodshotten, in the middle of which
was discerned some slender thing, which I conceived to be the navil, and that
by it, the Embryo did first transpire, and from this proceeded the membrane
that totally investted the Geniture. And lib. de Carnibus, he positively
delivers, that the conceived, has on the seventh day all parts requisite to
integrity, and that an abortion of this septeary age, put in clear water to a
subtle inspector, exhibits all the rudiments of the organical parts.

Faelix Olater in quaest. medic. quaest. 1. Presents the septenary slips, which
he has frequently servey'd, thus. First, the Plastic, or conformative faculty
obscurely ambuscadoed in the seed, issues forth and Marshals the nobler parts
of the seed, which flowed from the three principal members of the Parents, into
three bullous conglobations, or spherical apparitions, which are the rudiments
of the Brain, Heart, and Liver; and rangeth the other adherent portions into
Limbs, which attain perfection, ( viz. of delineation) the first week so that
the Embryo then elapsed, appears an Orbicular, concreted, informous mass,
distinguished with these three globes.

The more exquisite inspection of Sennertus (that great Secretary to Nature)
advanced his Scrutiny to to a nearer familiarity with this retired abstrusity
of Generation: for in an Embryo, not many days after Conception, effluxed, he
delighted his eyes with the full vision of these three Orbs, four other
portions assigned for the arms and legs, and two minute black spots, or
atomicall puncto's in the Surpeam Orb, which he (and on good reason) conceived
to be the delineated rudiments of the eyes.

This being thus, it results a serene and Calm Truth, that the Conformation or
Organization of the infant begins in the very punctilio or first moment of
Conception. And this whispered to Macrobius Lib. in somn: Scipion. Cap. 6. his
assertion; that seed, which does not within seven hours after injection relaps,
is to be accounted animated and enlivened. And of our faith was Lod. Mercatus
Lib. de Morb. Mulier. Cap. 6. for he concludes thus; when the sperme of both
sexes is admitted into the womb, by the vigorous and impregnating warmth of
the same cherished, regulated, and not within seven hours effused, we are to
believe that the woman has perfectly conceived. For this reason Hippocr. lib.
de Genitura instructs us, to compute the Conception, not from the seventh day;
but from the intromission, and retention of the Geniture.

Neither are we destitute of the Sovereign hands of reverend Divines to erect
this our opinion. 1. Tertul. Lib: de Anima.
For Tertullian conlcudes in ipso and ex ipso seri hominem; and vium esse a
primordio semen and Gregory Nyssen: 2. Gregor. Nyssen. Lib. de An. and
resurrectione.
posteriorem esse originem Animarum, ipsaque recentiores esse Corporum
constitutione, nemosanamente praeditus in animum induxerit; cum manifestum sit,
nihil ex inanimis vim in sese habeat movendi, itemque crescendi, etc.

That there can be no other Efficient Cause properly assigned, which should
attempt and finish the Conformative Work, but the Rational Soul is clear from
this; that the Adversaries to this assertion break that statute, Entia non sunt
temere, and citra necessitatem multiplicanda, and incur the praemunire of
those, who on a mistake of Arist. Lib. 2. de Genesis Animal. C. 3. Hominem primo
vivere anima Vegetante, hinc sentiente, tertio Rationalem accipere, absurdly
dream a Trinity of Souls in the Human body.

Thus solid Reason, Experience made up with stubble, and multiplied
observations, and learned Antiquity, Conspire in one firm triangular Basis to
become our Assertion's supportment. On which to proceed to superstructure;
though it might mount our speculation some degrees nearer Divinity, then any
other pillar in the whole Theater of sublunary knowledge: yet it would
transgress the rule of Contraction, which forbids the impossible society of
Enlargement. Wherefore it is time we humbly resign it, to receive Ornament and
perfection from the bounty of some more learned hand.

And thus have we glanced on the Soul in a thinn, blew Lanskip, and through the
obscurity of her Operations. To gaze on the naked and lively glories of her
entire Nature, such as it is when strugled from the Eclipse of Flesh, mortality
is unqualified; and we must suspend, until our estate of Glory. For Solomon,
whose enlarged speculations soared in a Sphere, superior to that wherein our
dull Conceptions flagg, could approach her radiant beauty only by a faint
reflection, thus Wisdom cap. 7. ver. 25. She is the breath of the power of God,
and a pure influence flowing from the Glory of the Almighty. ver. 26. She is
the brightness of the everlasting light; the unspotted mirror of the power of
God, and the image of his goodness. ver. 27. And being but one, she can do all
things: and remaining in her self, she makes all things new, etc.

Wherefore let us turn over leaf, to our easier Lesson, the Body.

CHAP. III. Of the Human Body and its Functions.
THE Human Body is, by the Eternal Architect, contrived and composed of Parts
(1.) Similar or simple, which are so subdivisible, 1. Similaris.
that every minute, atomicall particle is of the same substance with the whole:
(2.) Dissimilar, Compound, 2. Dissimilaris.
Organicall, or instrumental, which may be resolved, or undone, into lesser
compound parts substantially different; as the Hand may not be divided into
other hands, but into Bones, Muscles, Veins, etc. To the Similar and
Dissimilar, is required Unity and Integrity: to the Similar, considered
distinctly, is required a just harmonious Temper: to the Organicall is required
decent Composition and comely Conformation; which according to the Variety of
Actions, in each distinct member is various and several.

The Temperament, Temperamentum quid?
Crasis or Constitution, is one moderrte, harmonious, actually simple quality,
resulting from the intense degrees of the four first Elementary qualities, by
mutual Action and Passion in Commistion, refracted and allayed. And this is
double, (1.) that which belongs to the Body. quatenus simply mixed and
Compound: (2.) that which pertaines to it, quatenus Animate and living. For in
death, this vanishes together with the life: but in the Carcass (until its
universal resolution by putrefaction) the parts, a long time, Conserve the
former.

Though this temper of living man, which results from the harmony, and
determinate Conspiracy of all parts, be Hot and Moist; and life subsist in the
same material principles: yet there is framed a great variety of parts: of
which the most exquisit in Temper is the skin, especially that of the Hand.

1. In the Classis of Hotter parts is first ranked the Heart, 2. the Liver, 3.
Spleen, 4. Flesh of the Muscles, 5. Kidneys, 6. Lunges, 7. Veins, 8. Arteries,
9. The softer oleaginous Fat or Grease, 10. The harder Fat or Tallow

2. The colder are, 1. the Bones, 2. Cartilages or Gristles, 3. Ligaments, 4.
Tendons, 5. Nerves, 6. Membranes, 7. Spinall Marrow, 8. Brain.

3. The moister are, 1. Fat, 2. Marrow of the Bones, 3. Brain, 4. Spinal
Marrow, 5. Testicles, 6. Duggs, 7. Lunges, 8. Spleen, 9. Kidneies, 10.
musculous Flesh, 11. Tongue, 12. Heart, 13. Softer Nerves.

4. The dryer are, 1. Bones, 2. Ligaments, 3. Tendons, 4. Membranes, 5.
Arteries, 6. Veins, 7. harder Nerves.

This Temper, proper to the body Animate consists of the Calidity, Calidum
innatum.
(1) innate, or primitive, (2.) influxive or advenient. This Calidity
ingenerate, subsists in the Callidum innatum. For by the Calidum innatum, we
understand not a bare quality divorced from, but resident in its subject.
Humidum radicale.
This increated Heat consists of the implanted spirit, and primigenious
Moisture; and is (exactly defined) the radical moisture exquisitely perfusEd,
dashed, or incorporated with the implantate Spirit, Spiritus insitus.
and native warmth. For these three, viz. Heat, Spirit, and Originary Balsame,
are by so subtle, and firm an Union, married; that they admit no possibility
of divorce or Extraction. Which mysterious trine-unity, the amazed Philosopher.
Lib. 2. de Genesis Animal. cap. 3. calls (...).

This Originary heat, disseminated and diffused, principally in the spermatick
parts, called by Arist. (...): but chiefly radicate and seated in the heart
(for the same reason by Galen surnamed (...), Focum Calidi innati: Is the grand
instrument, whereby the Soul does enterprise and perform all her actions
corporeal, and is the Taper of life, which, while drenched with a wealthy
revenue of primitive oil, diffuseth a vigorous and orient luster. In the
second or consistent age, when there is no contributing unto, but a prodigal
wast of, the unctious, precious fuel, begins to wane, and yields but pale and
sickly flames: in the last age, or natural marasm, for extreme poverty, winks
out, and an everlasting midnight succeeds.

The influent conserves, fosters, Calor influens.
and invigorats the congenerate heat, by mediation of the spirits, which are
most subtle, volatile bodies, materially the most refined, meteorized, exalted
part of the blood, associated with the Calidum innatum, become the proxim and
principal instrument in the execution of all actions, and enable the faculties
of the Soul to arrive at the second act.

That these spirits are the tie or obligation of the Faculties, and that the
Faculties flow from the more into the less noble parts, by the coadjutancy of
them, is a Doctrine popular, yet discordant to truth. For since the faculties
are inseparable proprieties of the Soul; and she is diffusively equally
resident in every part, we shall affront our reason, not to infer, that she is
every where richly provided of her own efficacious faculties, and receives them
not at second hand, or by the indigent way of mutuation.

Great is the variety of opinions concerning these spirits, Spiritus numero
tres, viz.
for one sect substracts them to a numberless unity, a second multiplies them
to a superfluous plurality: a third (and most regular) computes a a trinity, to
which opinion, as in nearest cognation to verity, we adhere. For though the
originary material of them all be the same, viz. the purified and most sublimed
part of the blood: yet they admit a diverse impression, and distinct form,
according to the diversity of parts, wherein they receive elaboration and
spirituousnesse, and are comparated and destined to diverse and distinct uses:
and are only (1.) the Natural, (2.) Vital, (3.) Animal.

Concerning the existence of the natural Spirit, 1. Naturalis
many suspend their determination; and we, although we admit it into the number
of spirits, must acknowledge no small graduall difference betwixt it and the
two other, neither do we concede it charged with the same office, that the
other bear. Generated it is in the liver, contained in the veins, and is a
subtle spiritual body, produced from the (...) or rarefaction of the blood, and
becomes a subministred material to the Vital spirit.

Which all men concede to be generated in the left ventricle of the heart, from
the Natural spirit, 2. Vitalis.
flowing into the right Ventricle of it, there attenuated and more elaborate;
and the air attracted by inspiration, and dilatation of the Arteries. This
spirit is not only in the heart, concurring with the innate heat of the same,
the principal instrument of all its actions, but by the arteries diffused into
the whole body, cherishes, excites, and impraegnates the congenerate heat in
every part, whence it derives the appellation of Calidum influens. This also is
the prime material of the Animal spirit.

The partiality of some, 3. Animalis.
to magnify the prerogative, and enlarge the dominion of the Vital, would
anihilate the Annimal spirit, but since there is assigned a peculiar royal
organ, the Brain, to its preparation and elaboration, and it is inservient to
those noble uses, which the Vital cannot enterprise (for a member, though
hountifully perfused, and vivified by the vital, yet destitute of the influx of
the Animal spirits, suffers abolishment of sense and motion, as in the
Apoplexy, Palsy, and stupor we cannot but discover) we have reason to
acknowledge not only its existence, but sovereignty, and determine it to be the
immediate instrument of sense and motion, generated of the purer vital spirit,
translated by the Carotides and neck arteries, first into the basis, then into
the substance of the brain, and of the air inspired by the Nostrills.

To the organical parts is required their peculiar singular constitution,
Partss Organice
which is a fit composure and connection of the homogeneous parts, into one form
convenient to the performance of their proper actions. And to this composition
conspire (1.) a definit number of the parts component, (2.) a just magnitude,
(3.) a decent conformation which includes (1.) a comely Figure, or exact
proportion (2.) the cavities and sluices, (3.) a superficies smooth or rough,
according as the nature of the part requires (4.) the situation, (5.) the
connection with other parts.

Thus far our pen has ranged in the blunt declarement of generals; that is, of
things common to all parts, and necessary to all actions in the body; our Clue
of method will henceforward conduct us into sharper angles, and the precise,
though brief, enumeration of the particular parts, by which, and in what
manner, the particular functions discharge their duties.

CHAP. IV. Of Nutrition.
ANd since, Facultas Vegetativa.
by the Law of Nature, it is ordained Guardian paramont of our minority, and
obtaines situation, as in the lowest region of our body: so also at a nearer
distance to our knowledge, we should invert the method of Life, Anatomy, and
Reason, not to assign the Van of our succeeding lines, to the vegetative
faculty

Under this are comprehended the subservient faculties (1.) Neutritive, (2.)
Augmentative, (3.) Generative. And first concerning Nutrition and Augmentation.
Since these mutations arise from the extraneous accession of Aliment, and that
at first application, is heterogeneous and alien to our substance, that it may
be elaborated, and subdued to a qualification analogous, and an aptitude for
assimilation, it must first suffer the impressions of many concoctions.

And this concoction is (1.) private, Conoctio.
which is made in every singular part. (2.) Public, which is ordained for the
common use of the whole body, and is chiefly performed in the stomach and
spleen.

The first digestion therefore is made in the ventricle or stomach, Appetitus.
which for this reason is endued with a twofold appetite, (1.) Natural, 1.
Naturalis.
whereby it is provoked to the acquisition of aliment, 2. Animalis.
sufficient for it self. (2. Animal, which excites and stimulates it to the
affection and admission of provision, for the supportment of the whole body,
and instauration of the threefold substance, which the uncessant activity of
our native chemistry devours.

For when man, Manducatio.
to lenifie the sharp vellication, and silence the convulsive importunity of
hunger, receives in food; the first preparation or alteration of it is made in
the mouth, for there it undergoes manducation, fraction, or contrition by the
teeth, which for this reason (though they concur to the formation of speech
also) are given to man, to the number (in most practical constitutions) of
thirty two, in each jaw sixteen, some whereof are called incisores, Cutters,
Dentes.
others canini, dogs teeth, and the remnant Molares, grinders; the cutters or
fore-teeth, are four in each jaw, the Canine, two, the grinders ten: Moreover
the meat is altered by the permistion of the salivous humidity contained in,
and by the heat of the mouth; and being thus bruised and masticated, it is
immediately by the auxiliary motion of the tongue, detruded by the then gaping
throat, into the stomach: Deglutio.
This thus prepared, the stomach by the ministerial Contraction of oblique
Fibers, welcomes with close embracement and coarctation, and firmly retains,
until by its concoctive faculty and proper heat, Chylificatio.
it be transformed into a mass, or consistence, not much unlike the cream of a
decoction of blanched barley, which is called the Chylus.

The Chylus thus exquisirely Crooked, is by the Pylorus Janitor, or inferior
orifice of the stomach, discharged into the intestines or guts, and by their
immutative action, attaines one degree more of elaboration and fermentation.
The intestins are double or rather of two sorts, (1.) Thin, Inteflina.
which are three, viz. 1. Duodenum dodek adaktylon, or gut, of twelve fingers
length, (though in the minorated and dwarfish race of man in our sickly age, it
be found far short of that measure) then Jejunum, or empty; thirdly, the Ileon,
or circumgyrated gut. (2.) Crass or thick, which are three also; First the
Caecum, or blind; Secondly, the Colon, or Colic; Thirdly, the Rectum, or
straight gut.

But since no meat, Excrementa primae Coction
though the purest, can be all converted into aliment, but yields some dregs
and excrementitious residence, altogether useless to the nourishment of the
body: Choice nature like a subtle Chemist, in this first, as in both the other
concoctions, extracts the benign and wholesome parts, but rejects the
unprofitable and faeculent: viz. the thinner and lixivious by urine, the
grosser and terren by stool.

The exclusion of the faeces is done, Exclusio Faecum alvi.
partly by the intestines, in their superior parts, contracting and
coangustating themselves by the circular and transverse Fibers wherewith both
their inward and outward coats are furnished; and partly by the mutual aid of
the Muscles of the Abdomen, by which the belly is compressed.

The thinner aquosity, or tartareous lixivium, Vina materia.
is not presently excerned, but incorporated with the Chylus, becomes the
vehicle to it, whereby thinned and diluted, it may with the more ease, and
less danger of obstruction, permeate, or glide through the narrow veins of
the mesentery and liver.

The first concoction thus absolved or finished, Cococtio.
the Chylus is, by the vermicular exuction of the lacteous, or milky slender
veins, which in infinite number are with open orifices inserted into the
intestines, attracted, predisposed to sanguification, and (per (...)) by
distribution, conveyed to the Liver.

But that the milky liquor may arrive at the Liver, Lie nis Vsus.
the more pure and defecated, in its journey thither, the Crass and faeculent
part, together with the lixiviated serosity, is extracted by, and by the
splenie branch, derived into the spleen, which converts it (that is, so much of
it as the spleens Haematopoietick power can conquer, and the refractory matter
submit unto) into blood for the maintenance of it self, and the other vulgar
parts in the lower region. And thus the spleen does not only drein and purify,
but is also enriched with the faculty of sanguification, and does generate
blood, though courser and more fixible then that of the Liver: But the
remainder which is wholly excrementitious and unconvertible, is secluded, partly
into the Hoemorrhoid veins, partly into the trunc of the Port vein, and partly
by the splenetick arteries.

The Chylus, by the official selection of the spleen, Sanguificatio.
thus clarified is delivered up to the Liver, and by the transubstantiating
Haematopoiesy thereof, perfectly metamorphosed into blood, which from thence by
the ascendent, and descendent trunc of the hollow vein, and its capillary
disseminations, is by universal distribution communicated to all parts of the
body.

But as in every concoction, Bilis Flava.
so in this of sanguification, there redound two invincible superfluities, (1.)
Choler, or the fiery excrement, which is collected into thee (...) bilious
receptacle, or gall, and (after a convenient intervall of time) from thence,
through the choleric channel, excerned into the duodenum gut, becomes the
bodies natural glyster, and by its acrimony, extimulates the bowels to the
exclusion of ordure. (2.) The salt whey, or lixiviated serositie, which is
through the emulgent veins, sucked in by the Kidneys, in them percolated, and
from them discharged through the Vreters, into the Urinary receptacle, or
bladder, and then called Urine. Serum.
For the Urine is nothing else, but the Aquosity or serous Humidity of the
Chyle, Vrina.
impregnated or satisfied with the superabundant and indigestible salt of our
diet. And this is familiar to vulgar disquisition, not only from the
affections and symptoms occasioned by it; but from the large quantity of salt
drawn of Urine, when the aqueous humidity is Evaporated.

The blood, Sanguis.
which for the general sustenance thereof, 1. Temperatus.
is distributed into the whole body; 2. Biliosus.
although contained under, 3, Melancholicus.
and managed by one single form; yet disparted is Heterogeneous, 4. Pituitosus.
and the more benign and temperate division of it is blood properly and
distinctly so called; the igneous or hot and dry is called Choler; the Aqueous
or cold and moist is called phlegm; the Terrene or cold and dry is called
Melancholy. And of all these, there is no part Excrementitious or unalimentary;
but (while under the wholesome Government and Sovereign Laws of Eucrasie) is
wholly digestible and nutritive.

This Blood or Sovereign Nectar, being Circulated, Circulatis sanguinis. de qua
vid. Epist. Walaei ad Thom. Bartholin. and Lib. doctissimi nostr: Anatomici
Guliel. Harveij Angli.
a voyage or two, through the numerous, slender meanders, and Capillary
divarications of the Veins and Arteries, is wafted to each individual part:
according to the Crasis of each distinct part, admits a peculiar distinct
impression: and is at length transubstantiated and assimilated.

But since in this Elaboration, Humores Secundarij.
the blood undergoes successive transformations; Philosophy conced's the
Generation of four secundary Humors succeeding each other in existence: and
that the blood by these four mutations does gradually ascend to Assimilation.
1. Innominatus.
The first of these Humors is called (assuredly the first Imponent had no very
large nomenclature, since he was driven to assign it this name) Anonymos,
Namelesse, the second is called Ros, 2. Ros.
the Dew, 3. Gluten.
the third Gluten, or the viscid and glutinous, the fourth Cambium, 4. Cambium.
because it exchanges its own nature for that of the part to which it is
applied.

And in this last, and most exquisite Concoction also, there remains a
pleonasmus, or redundancy of excrements, the one whereof are those strigments
and sordid adhaesions to the skin: Strigmenta.
the other is that watery serous matter, which is partly discussed, per, (...)
by invisible transpiration, and partly excluded by sweat. Sudor.
And for the Convenient Evacuation of these Excrements the skin was constituted
porous and transpirable.

CHAP. V. Of Generation.
AND God saw every thing that he had made, Generatio.
and behold it was very good. This is the reason why the Creature so abhors
dissolution, and endeavors to perpetuate its Verity, that is, conformity to
the primitive idea in the supreme intellect. For so much bettr is it to be,
though in the miserable Condition of something, then in the horrid obscurity of
nothing; that (if some guess aright) the Devil, though he might evade his
torments, would not consent to his own annihilation.

But since this desire of eternity can, in sublunary Animals, be satisfied
only in part (for individualls must perish upon their own principle, and the
same flames which kindled them to life must become their funeral Taper, and
light them back to elements) Nature has contrived a way to immortality, by the
succession of the species propagated by Generation. And by this way man (whose
ingredients confess his mortality, not onley since, but before his Fall)
relieves himself from total regression into the oblivion of his first Chaos,
and becomes superior to the tyranny of Corruption, by the immortality his issue.

Now this Generation or act of the Vegetative Faculty is performed by the
seminality of Male and Female, Semen principium Generation is quid?
inheriting fertility from the fruitful benediction of the Creator, in
Crescite and multiplicamini. And this Generative material as made of the
purest part of the blood and finest spirits both Vital and Animal, flowing by
the veins, Sennertus Lib. Inst. 1. c. 10. Qui semen famininum prolificum esse,
vimque agendi in se continere existimant, ij mihi prohabiliorem defendere
sententiam videntur. Et non solum eo nituntur quod semen faemininum a similibus
organis generetur, atque in venere cum eadem oblectatione excernatur. etc.

Nos statuimus utrumque sexum suum ad Generationem confer (...), and neutrius
sexus semen seorsim sumptum, sed utriusque conjunctum, and in utero Faeminae
rite unitum, esse semen prolificum and faecuncum. etc. Plato.


Atteries and Nerves, into the Testicles; whereby their Spermatopoietick power
it is converted into a white, spumous, spirituous substance, containing the
perfect Idea of each individual part.

This prolific Contribution Aristotle will not allow the Faemale sex; but
conceives their parts only recipient for the masculine injections: but if we
consult our reason and our sense we cannot but attest the contrary. For
Femalls have instruments official both to spermification and Emission; are
invited to, and act Congression with the same libidinous orgasmus, and pleasant
fury, that the Males do: and their Seminary Emissions ahve been discovered to
the ocular scrutiny of many. Neither do Male and Female differ in specie, but
sexu.

Yet the singleseed of either sex is not sufficient to procreation; but such is
the institution of the Creator, that from the united Seminalties of Male and
Female, as from two partial Causes mutually contributing their Efficiencies,
one principle and third total Causes should result: from which one motion or
mutation, though distinctly regulated, should advance to the production of the
infant. For the efficiency of the masculine injection carries the greater
stroke in Conformation, and is more virtuall then the Feminine.

The prolifick Ejaculations of both sexes received into the womb, Conceptio.
are, by the proper innate productive faculty thereof conserved, and cherished;
and the plastic Conformator, which lay concealed in the seed is called forth,
excited, and impregnated, and begins the delineation or organization of the
Infant. Ordo Formationis.
The parts first formed are the two membranes, in which the more divine and
spiritual parts of the seed are inwrapped, that enshroud the Infant; Membrana
Faetus.
one whereof is called the Amnios, or Lawn shirt, that immediately invests the
Infant: the other Chorion, or the girdle, which enrolls it, and is the
supportment of the Umbelick vessels, and the cause of its adhaesion to the
Cotyledones, or cakes of the womb; which two involutions conjoined, make the
secundine or afterbirth.

The feminine prolification thus expansed into filmy integuments, Parts
spermaticae, delineantur.
and the new kindled Diety enspheared; the spermatick parts obtain seniority of
conformation, and are spun out into a numberless number of fine slender
filaments, which are the stamina, or groundwork of the solid parts, and (by a
Texture far too fine and cunning for the fingers of Arachne) woven into three
bullous orbs or conglobations.

Theird delineation thus dispatched, Sanguis maternus.
the parts, by the nutritive apposition of the other fertile principle, the
maternal blood, advance to increment and majoration. And for this purpose, the
wise contriver of both worlds has ordained, from the fourteen to the
forty-fifth year of life, in eucratical bodies, a natural Plethora, and
providence exuberancy of blood, Menstruorum causa finalis.
in teeming and ingravidated women, to become the Infants sustentation: or in
vacancy of praegnation, lest it overcharge and prove offensive, to be by
periodick monthly conflux transmitted to the womb, and thence excluded.

The infant having from the mother received the rudiments of the sanguineous
parts, Vasa umbiliealia.
1. Vena umbilicalis.
the conformator frames a vein, 2. Arteriae duae.
two arteries, and the urachus, 3. Vrachus.
convening about the navill, and wreaths them into one contorted umbilicality,
or quadripartit Navill string: the vein being a surcle of the Port vein, and
inserted into the fissure of the Liver, is the Nurse provided to suckle the
Infant. The arteries are two twinn branches of the Iliacall descendent
Arteries, and the conduits by which the best portion of the arteriall blood and
spirits is derived to the Heart of the new production: The Uracus is a
derivation from the Bladder to the Navill. After parturition, the use of all
these ceasing, they are by coalition and exiccation degenerated into Ligaments.

The age (or more truly the nonage) of the Infant in the womb is distinguished
into the time (1.) of Formation, Tempus formationis.
which extends from the Conception to the Calcitration, or quickening; and (2.)
of Exornation or perfection, which is computed from the motion, to parturition.
Others otherwise divide it into the time (1.) of formation, Tempus calcis
trationis.
which in the account of Hippocrates lasts to the thirtieth day in Masculine,
and to the fortieth in Feminine Conceptions. (2.) Of motion, which the
vulgarity of Physicians concede to be in the third month in males, in the
fourth in females. (3.) of parturition, which is so various, that whosoever can
definitively calculate nobis erit Magnus Apollo. The wise ignorance of
Hippocrates confirms the incertitude thus. Lib. de Alimento ad conformationem.
Soles triginita quinque: ad motionem septuaginta, ad perfectionem ducenti
december. Alti tradunt ad formam 45, ad motionem. 76. ad exitum 20. requiri. Alii
adspeciem 50. ad primum saltum 100. ad perfectionem 30. Ad distinctionem 40. ad
transitionem 80. ad elapsum 240. etc. But our experience establishes, above
the possibility of eviction, that no conception, which has an immature exit
before the expiration of 6 months partaks vitality. Hippocr. (...) puer septimo
mense natus, certa ratione prodiit and vitalis est, cum is rationem and numerum
exact ad hebdomadas respondentem liabet. Octavo autem mense natus numquam
vixit. Novem autem mensium and dierum faetus editur and vitalis est; numerumque
ad hebdomadas exact respondentem habet. Quatuor nempe decades hebdomadarum,
dies sunt ducenti and octoginta.
That the aborted issue of the seventh month usually lives, and may (if virile
and vigorous) be cherished to maturity: that Octomestral births are ever fatal,
if the Doctrine of Hippocrates hold good: but that most legitimate, happy,
Tempus partus.
and frequent time of Parturition, is the ninth month, and that the enixation,
or delivery, usual falls out between the fifteenth day of the ninth month, and
the fifteenth of the tenth of the gestation.

But although in the observations of Physicians, there stand recorded diverse
undecimestrall, duodecimestral, and elder editions: yet such overshoot
mediocrity; and are to be filed in the legend of rarities, and sportive
miracles of nature.

Though the months, by which we compute the Gestation, arer solary; yet from
these, the lunary conjunctions of twenty nine days, and twelve hours, are not
in the main much discrepant: neither is this laborious artifice confined to any
certain minute, punctilios of time: For as the magnality of human resemination
is withdrawn from our comprehension; so is the indefinity of its time the
discouragment of our determination.

CHAP. VI. Of the Vital faculty. Facultatum ordo et dignitas.

THe human Soul, De facultatum concentu, et principatus or dine videatur
Fernelius, lib. 5. de Animae Facultatibus. Cap. 17.
though still an absolute Monarch, divides her Empire into a triarchy, nd
governs by the dispensation of a Triumvirate. The three Viceroves, though they
are absolutely distinct by their commissions, and keep their courts in several
Regions, are by so indissoluble a league and sympathetick alliance united, that
the prosperity of one enlarges the principalities of the other, and the
detriment of each, threatens the integrity of all. The natural or vegetative
Faculty, claims superiority in order of procreation, as being governor of our
minority, and commanding the first tertio of our life: the vital merits
pre-eminence in order of necessity, as transmitting a sovereign, and
conservatory influence, without which, the other must, in the fleetest article
of time be deposed for ever. The Animal challenges supremacy in order of
excellency, as regulating the diviner actions, sense and motion, to which, as
to their perfection, the two former are destined. Thus every one of these
rulers is supreme, and yet they are all equal.

The vital faculty, Facultas Vitalis
by proper actions, and peculiar Organs, absolutely distinct from the natural
and animal, is seated in its own royal Throne; the heart. The 3 (...),
Thumetick powers resident in the Heart, all comprehended under the name vital,
are first the faculty Generative of the arterial blood and spirits, (2.) of the
vital conservatory Heat. (3.) the Pulsifick or motive official to the former.

From the irascible faculty, Fac. Irascibilis.
stream all the Pathemata, affections, or passions of the mind, Anger, Animi
Pathemata.
Mansuetude, Audacity, Fear, Hope, Despair, Dejection, or Prostration of the
spirit, Joy, Sorrow, and others of the same Classis, that are either compou^ded
of, or dependent on the former: Of these passions, some are performed
materialiter, seu per modum causae efficientis, by expansion, or excentrick
motion of the vital Heat, Blood, and Spirits; of this order are Anger, Joy,
etc. others by concentration of the same, as Fear, Sorrow, etc. but formaliter,
all are nothing, but the motions of the Appetite, either in prosecution of the
delectable and friendly, or flight and retreat, from the odious and offensive
object, of which the former causes an expansion, or circumferentiall salley,
the latter a retraction or concentrick retreat of the vital blood and spirits:
But these appetitions, or irascible and concupiscible motions cannot be
executed, but the agitation of the Heart, Arteries, and fervent spirituous
blood. From this we receive satisfaction, why the Facultas (...), of necessity
has its residence assigned in a part of the hottest temperature, and endued
with the power of perpetual agitation.

The situation of the heart is (though vulgarly deluded by the sensation of its
pulse, Cordis Situs.
and the sinister declination of its mucro, or cone, oppinion it to be placed
in the left side) in the center of the body, if in our measure we except the
thighs and legs; and its Basis or Center, fixed in the middle of the Thorax,
or middle region of the body, that from it as from a plentiful fountain, the
vital Heat and spirits may be promptly diffused into the whole body.

The ventricles, Ventriculi:
cavities or closets of the heart, are two, the right and left, the right does
by Diastole or dilatation, suck in blood from the gapeing ostiary, or
floud-gate of the ascendent hollow vein, by its intenser fire, cohobate,
refine, and rarify it; the more subtle and meteorized part whereof, is,
through the Foramina, or capillary perforations of the septum, interstitiary
skreen (which notwithstanding Columbus, Spigelius, Hoffmannus, and our
Hippocrates, Septum interstitium.
Doctor Harvie will by no means admit of) or partition wall betwixt both
ventricles, transcolated into the left ventricle; the other parcel passes by
the Vena Arteriosa into the lungs; and one small portion of it converts into
the Aliment of the Lungs, the remainder is transported by the Arteria Venosa,
into the left Chamber of the heart.

These businesses (which we are sorry to confess more the employment of our
wonder, Cardis motus.
then our knowledge) are transacted by a certain admirable and uncessant motion
of the Heart; whereby, in the diastole, 1. Diastole.
the extremities of it are contracted, and the mucro or point ravelled up
toward the Basis, so that the Heart in longitude abbreviated, and in latitude
expansed: but in the Systole or Compression, it is by coangustation of the
sides enlarged in longitude, 2. Systole.
and diminished in latitude.

But since to the regeneration of vital spirits and Arteriall blood are
required two necessary ingredients, Venal blood, and the Aer: and these two
material principles cannot, by one and the same motion, be attracted: besides
these two Ventricles recipient and elaboratory, there are superadded two
notable Cavities, (Christened by Anatomists Auriculae processes or
superstructions) on each side one, extending to the surperior part of the
Ventricles: The uses whereof are (1.) to inspire Aer for the refocillation or
recreation of the vital spirits, and to be the Hearts promptuaries or
storehouses to receive the blood and Aer that they may not (...), with too
sudden an impetuosity rush into the heart and cause suffocation: (2.) to
fortify and guard the Vena Arteriosa, and Arteria Venosa, to which they are
adjoined: (3.) according to the doctrine of Hippocrates, Lib. de. Cord, to
serve the heart in stead of a Fan or Refrigeratory; for they are therefore
distended because impleted; whereas the Heart, by a motion quite contrary to
this, is therefore impleted because distended.

That the Heart in its Contraction and Expansion might be guarded from
impediments, Pericardium.
Nature has constituted it a capacious, membranous, domicilium or Tent, called
the Pericardium or Purse of the heart; the use whereof is (1.) to defend the
heart in its motion from the shocks of the circumjacent parts (2.) to contain
the serous Humor, wherein as in Balneo, the heart is refrigerated, moystned,
and its motion facilitated.

Moreover, since nothing can have ingresse to, Vasa.
and regresse from the heart, but through Conduits and Sluices: there are for
this purpose ordained four conspicuous vessels in the Basis of it, two in the
right, and two in the left ventricle of the heart: in the right are the vena
Cava and vena arteriosa: 1. Vena Cava.
in the left, Arteria magna and Arteria Venosa. (1.) The hollow vein with an
ample and patent orifice looks into the right sinus of the heart, and into it
drops blood for the generation of Arterial blood, the vital spirits, and
provision for the Lungs. Others, notwithstanding, opinion that the blood
redistilled and elaborated in this preparatorie, is immediately distributed
through the whole body. 2. Vena arterialis.
(2.) the vena Arterialis is the derivatory of blood from the right ventricle
of the heart, to the Longs, for their nutrition, and the principal material
of the vital spirit and blood: Arteria venalis.
(3.) The Arteria Venosa conducts the Aer extrinsecally advenient and prepared
in the Lungs, and the blood by the Vena Arteriosa effused from the right, into
the left ventricle; and expells the fuliginous Exhalations, and at the
sameinstant conveies a parcel of the vital spirits into the Lungs: 4. Aorta.
(4.) The Aorta or grand Artery dispenses the vital spirits, and Arteriall
blood, after their Exaltation in the left ventricle, into the whole body. These
four Sanguiducts, Hippocr: Lib. de Cord calls (...) etc. the Fountains of
Human Nature and fructifying rivulets wherewith the purple Island is irrigated.

But since each of these four Considerable vessels is ordained to a double use:
Ex. Gr. the Arteria Venosa does not only suck in Aer from the Lungs, and
inspire it into the left Ventricle of the Heart; but also returns up the vital
spirit; Valvulae.
and Artrerial blood to the Lunges, and belcheth out the smoaky Exhalation:
that the substances admitted into the Heart, may not rebound back by the same
way they entered, before they have attained full tra^smutation, and intended
perfection; or what is effused from the Heart may not remeate into it again,
the omniscient Contriver has annexed eleven Values or Floodgates to the
orifices of these vessels, two to the Arteria Venosa, and three apiece to the
other three.

To the Vena Cava are signed three, called (...), tricuspides, three-pointed
Values, that look inwards, that the blood may have intraction into the right
Ventricle, but no regression into the hollow vein: (2.) Contrarily, those of
the Vena Arteriosa, named, from their figure, Sigmodies, Semi-Cynthian Values,
shut inwardly, but open outwardly, that the blood may have Eructation, but be
denied readmission: (3.) the two Janitors allowed to the Arteria Venosa, being
conjoined represent an Episcopal Mitre, open outwardly, and shut inwardly, and
forbid the reflux of the emitted vital spirit; and fuliginous expiration: (4.)
Those affixed to the Grand Artery, are three semicircular or halfmooned, look
outwardly, and occlude inwardly, that the Arteriall blood and vital spirit
powered out for the vivifying supportment of the whole, may not remeat into the
left Ventricle.

The Ductus, Pipes, or Conduits, Arteria.
through which the heart transmits vital heat spirits and blood to the whole
body, are branches of the Aorta which are also dilated and contracted, Pulsus
quid?
and by this motion draw in the Ambient Aer through the spiramina or slender
evaporatories of the skin; and distribute the vital spirits, and arteriall
blood; which motion of the heart and Arteries is called the Pulse.

Which consists of two Contrary motions, a Diastole or dilatation, Arteriarum.
1. Diastole.
and a Systole or Coanguistation, after a momentary respite or articulate
intervall of time, mutually succeeding each other. (1.) in the Diastole the
heart is impleted with Aer and Blood, drawn in from the Lunges by the Arteria
Venosa: and the Arteries through their subcutaneous orifices attract a
convenient quantity of the environing Aer. (2.) in the Systole the heart, 2.
Systole.
by the great Artery, delivers out vital heat, and Arteriall blood,
invigorated with vital spirits, for the Conservation of all, and by the
Arteria Venosa discharges the smoky effumations, and the Arteries by their
small ostiaries squeeze out their vaporous superfluities; which action is
termed (...), insensible Transpiration.

Again, Pulmones.
in the regard the inspired Aer must part with its intense frigidity, be
refracted and suffer some graduall mutation, before it penetrate to the heart;
the prudent Conformator has instituted Respiration, provided (...)
Respirators, Lungs, as the praeipuous Organs thereof. For although the Thorax
and other neighboring parts may be allowed causes sine qua non, and contribut
their inserviency to respiration, modo secundario: yet primarily, as from its
Causator this motion flows from the Lungs; to which, as well as to the heart
and brain, by the inviolable Charter of Nature, is granted a peculiar innate
power to dilate and contract themselves: Et si merito concedamus hanc, de
Pulmonum and thoracis motu, litem nostro arbitrio discerni non posse: tamen
motum Pulmonum, ab insita iis facultate, non thoracis motum sequi, prosicisci,
and veritati maxim consentaneum videtur, and peritissimorum Anatomicorum
observationibus ac rationibus confirmatur.
which in living Anatomies, and vulnerary perforations of the Thorax, may with
easy animadversion be confirmed. For neither is Respiration a motion
arbritrary or dependent on the injunctio^ of our will; nor are the Lungs dilated
ob fugamvacui, (which would accuse Nature of the want of forecast, and shifting
into one absurdity, to avoid another) when the Thorax is distended: but they
are moved by their own inherent virtue respiratory, and the Lunges and Thorax
are therefore in one, and the same instant moved, because they conspire to one
and the same end: But that this might be with the greater convenience
performed; and the Lungs have a room accommodate to their motion: the Animal
Faculty, at the same instant moves the Thorax. These two motions keep time
together, and observe so even a proportion in Expansion and Coarction, that
some have thence hinted the error, that they are regulated by one and the same
faculty: Neither are the lungs distended, because repleted, as a bladder by the
inflation of Aer, but, since there is no inflatorie instrument, that should
from without puff Aer into them, are therefore repleted, because dilated, as
in a bellous, the cause of its repletion is dilation.

This (...), Respiration, is compounded of two contrary successive motions:
(...) Inspiration, and (...) Expiration, 1. Inspiratio.
and a short quies intervening. (1.) In inspiration, the Lungs and Thorax being
dilated, the Aer, by the mouth and nostrils is drawn in for the fanning and
refrigeration of the heart, and generation of the vital spirits. 2. Expiratio.
(2.) In Expiration, the Lungs and Thorax being compressed, the Fuliginous
Excrements (which in winter, when the intense frigidity of the furrounding air
condenses them, are visible) are by the mouth and nostrils excluded. And for
this reason, Excrementa Fuliginosa.
that both a plentiful proportion of Aer may be sucked by, and contained in
them: the Lungs in magnitude proportionably, exceed any other of the Viscera,
and have obtained a porous, spongy substance.

The Fistula or Cane that conveys the inspired Aer from the mouth and nostrils
into the lungs, Aspera Arteria.
Ejus.
is the Aspera Arteria, or Trachea, with our Nation, the Weazon, or Windpipe,
whose superior part, from the Larynx to the Bronchi, is one single trunc;
Bronchi.
but the inferior is devaricated into innumerable smaller branches or
disseminations (by Hippocrates surnamed Syringae) and distributed into all
quarters of the lungs for their total implection with Aer, which the vessels
extended from the heart, receive and defer into the ventricles of it.

And since we cannot, the shortest account of time, survive the defect of Aer,
both to ventilate and allay the fervor of our cordial fire, which would else
intend to conflagration, and terrify our heart to Cynders, Conformationis ratio.
and to recruit our vital spirits, so prodigally exhausted: This Aspera
Arteria is contrived of many round, annular (or rather sigmoidall) Cartilages,
connexed by intermediate ligaments, that by this structure, it might be always
kept open, and we secured from strangulation, which immediately succeeds its
concision.

But that our deglutition might not prove our destruction, and no part of our
meat, and no more of our drink, then may only betermed a guttulous irrigation,
might drop down into the Trachea, or rough artery, to the hazard of
suffocation; providence has in the upper part of it, framed the Epiglottis,
which is a soft Cartilagineous flap, Epiglottis. (...). Hippocrat. de Morb.
Lib, 4 ctrca finem.
in figure representing a tongue, or (if we applaud the fancy of Hippocrates)
an Ivy leaf, and when we swallow down our meat, shuts the chink of the Aspera
Arteria: For every morsel that descends this forbidden way, has a dangerous
haughtgust of Anacreons grape, and denounces the same harsh fate. Had we said
cross fate, the Epithet had been more genuine, and would have clearly hinted
the inversion and preposterous rarity; for how unusual and perverted an
accident was it, for the invincible stupiditie of a Poet to flow from his
inspiration, and a volatile Muse, to be condensed into eternal dullness by the
sprightly fruit of the Vine; the same inspirer, whose active flames had so
often warmed and exalted her to the sublimity of rapture.

Moreover, since the Thorax, Therax.
or Chest, is, partly the Munimentum or Fortress erected for defense and
safeguard of the vital parts, and partly an instrument to respiration; it must
not have been built totally Carneous; for flesh were too soft a material to
resist the assaults of external injuries; nor totally osseous, for bones would
admit no such flexure as is required to respiration; wherefore it is composed
of twelve pair of Ribs, or arcular bones, to which, that they might be bent and
relaxed, in dilatation and constriction, there are adjoined sixty five Muscles,
whereof thirty two distend, and as many contract the Thorax.

But because no ribs could, Diaphragma.
without perverting the rules of Convenience, be planted in the lower part of
the Thorax; that in this Region, there might not want an Organ fit, both for
distention and Contraction, and also to divide the Vital from the Natural
parts; there is a partition wall, or musculous and carneous interstitiary,
therefore called (...), drawn transversly betwixt this and the lower region,
which in Expiration is elevated, and in inspiration is depressed. And because,
the Gullet, Grand Artery, and Hollow Vein, which in several transforations
pass through the midriff, close to the Spine, may not, by the perpetual
motion thereof suffer constriction and agitation: the Center of it is
membranous and nervous, but the periphery or Circumference Carneous, that so
this part may be less subject to Contraction, when the other perpetually
ascends and descends.

CHAP. VII. Of the Sensitive Faculty.
COnducted by the Constant manuduction of Nature, and ascending by the same
progressionall degrees, by which she advances to the Glory and Crown of her
Endeavors, Perfection; we are mounted to the supreme Orb of our Microcosme:
wherein, as their proper Sphere, the Rational, and sensitive Faculties
exercise their Semi-divinity: and from whence, by their almost immaterial
Agents, the Animal Spirits, they transmit their more then Elementary activity.
And herein, since the first part of our Lecture looked, though by a pale and
faint reflection of its actions, and through the Chaos of obscure brevity, on
the Rational Faculty: we conceive it our duty to address our future
speculations only to the Sensitive; and observe how that governs and actuates
the members of the body to the designs of Sense and Motion.

The two Fountains from which, as from their primitive Originals, all the
operations of the sensitive faculty stream, are (1.) the power apprehensive,
(2.) Appetitive or Motive.

The Apprehensive is that power, 1. Vis Apprehensiva
whereby we discern and distinguish of Objects present and absent. Under this
are comprehended all the Senses, (1.) External, viz. (1.) the Sight (2.)
Hearing, (3.) Tasting, (4.) Smelling, (5.) Feeling: (2.) Internal, viz. (1.)
Common Sense (2.) Imagination or Phantasy, (3.) Memory.

The External Senses residing in the Circumference of the body discern and
censure External objects endued with sensibility, Externi Sensus
by their own act, without information from any other Faculty preceding.

And since Sension is no simple action either of the Soul, or of the body,
singly and disjunctively considered; but resulting from the conjunctive
efficiencies and concurrence of both: to the just performance of it are
required (1.) a sensitive Soul (2.) an Organ or instrument, (3.) an Object,
(4.) a Medium.

The first and chief requisite is Anima, the Faculty sensient, 1. Anima
sensitiva.
or Effectrix: for this is (...) per quam Corpus Animatum sensibile extra se
positum percipit, and (...) actu tale reddit; the power by which the Animate
body perceives the sensible, External Object, and preferrs it from the
imperfection of sensibility in capacity, to the perfection of sensibility in
act. For no sooner does this Efficient or Causality take leave of her
Concomitant the body: but the body compulsively retires back into the
insensibility of its cold materials, and can be reactuated by the information
of no Power, second to that, whose look can speak the Rocks into Animation.

The secondary Causator necessary, is the Organ or Sensorium; 2. Organum.
for although in regard of Essence, the Soul be equally omnipresent in every
atomicall particle of the body: yet is it no where the Author of sense, but
where it meets with the provision of an Organ. Again, although the essence of
the soul be the same in the Foot, that is in the eye or ear: yet because in the
Foot it is destitute of an instrument, it neither sees nor hears. The
instruments of sense that we may interpret the thoughts of Jul. Caesar Scalig.
Excercit. 297. Sect 3.) are (1.) the Spirits whose nature holds a large
correspondency and near affinity to the Facullty it it self: (2.) the members,
which are constituted in some similitude and Cognation to the objects: For the
Spirits are subtle, invisible, and so exalted substances, that we may (by the
favor of comparison) account them immateriall. Yet on these as on their proper
recipient the ideas of sensible objects are impressed; and the instrumental
members are but the Conductors and Vehicles of them toward the Objects. The
members, although they are made up of many several parts so necessary, that
the defect or vitiosity of the meanest, induces abolishment, or depravation on
all; yet is their one part above the rest advanced to the praerogative of being
the precipuous and approximate instrument of Sension, and there is in the
particular Organ of every sense, one determinate similar part, in which the
form of the determinate object is expressed: Arist. Lib. 2. de Part. An. cap.
1. (...), etc.
and therefore is the Sensorium, if no way digressing from the integrity of
constitution, confined within the circle of Analogy, and praerequisite
proportion to its proper object, that according to the peculiar nature of the
object, it may suffer a peculiar and identical alteration, and entertain the
impression of the peculiar Idea, which, by intentional effluviums, or
aporrhoias streams from the object.

The third conspirator is (...), 3. Objectum.
the sensible object, or more strictly, sensible diffusive qualities; for
although in a random acception, it be no impropriety to call the objects
singular and corporeal substances, yet they strike not the sense, quatenus
substances, but as they are endued with sensible qualities, and contain in them
the formality of sensibility. But since to every action is required corporeal
contaction, and the object is very often at a large distance beyond the line of
contiguity, removed from the sensorium: it is no idle quaerie, by what manner,
and by what medium, the object does, beyond it self, invade the Organ? Our
solution shall be the sober resolution of most heads of Mediocrity, that it is
done by certain emanations and invisible rays, carrying with them the
qualities, simulachra, or representations of the sensible objects, from which
they are emitted. For sensible objects are not restrained only to the poverty
and course operations of real and material, but are enriched with the finer
endowments of spiritual and intentional qualities: which are nothing, but the
purer images of themselves, by subtle radiation, and tenuous continued
effluviums flowing from themselves; and that there are such spiritual
effluxions we cannot deny, unless we make invalid the chief inducement of
belief, our experience; for in summer, when to contemperate the aestuation of
the Suns perpendicular embraces, we secure our selves in the gentle refrigerium
and solace of the Groves (the best and most natural Vmbradoes) and recreate us
by accubation, under verdant Arbors, if we will but take the pains to observe
it, we shall see our garments apparently infected with the green tincture of the
supereminent leaves; and if we place a white linen cloth, or fine white paper,
collateral to a Venice-glasse, filled with Claret Wine, it will, in apparition,
wear the crimson Livery of your wine: and many other examples (many whereof are
enumerated by Scaliger, Et in genere Artificialia specula hoc decent, quae
imagines visibiles etiam dissitarum rerum recipient.
Exercitat 80. Sect. 8. et exercit. 298. S. 3.) do with Autoptical testimony
establish, that the intentional qualities, or representative forms of
sensibles, are by emanation, from their grosser materials, delivered at a
distance.

These sensibles, Sensibilia:
in this abstracted notion accepted, 1. Propria.
are (1.) (...) proper, which fall under the comprehension of one solitary
sense, and hold no relation to any other; thus lucid and colorated objects are
subject to perception only of the sight; sounds are the business only of the
hearing, Sapors only affect the Gusto or taste, Odors the smell; and Tangibles
concern only the Touch. (2.) (...) Common, 2. Communia.
which are perceptible by all, or most senses; such are Figure Magnitude,
Number, Motion, and Quiescence.

The last coadjutor is a Medium, 4. Medium. Lib. de Anima. cap. 11. text. 114:
(...). and de An. cap. 9. text 89. (...), etc.
which Aristotle, seduced by the concurrents to, and manner of vision, by an
infirm illation from a plurality to an universality, concludes of
uncontrollable necessity to all sension. But, under favor of so mighty a
Prince of knowledge, this assertion, though by undeniable truth it hold good in
vision; and by probable explication may be maintained in hearing, and smelling;
yet how it can be made out in the touch, and taste, to which is required an
immediate contact and corporeal imposition of the objects on their proper
sensoriums, seems no easy problem, and threatens despair of determination to
the boldest inquiry.

Concerning that grand question with so much ardor of contention, An sensio sit
tantum passio; an vero etiam actio?
banded betwixt the surly disciples of Plato, and the more passionate scholars
of Aristotle; An sensio sit tantum passio; an vero etiam actio? whether sension
be a mere passion, and nothing more then the bare reception of sensible
species; or whether besides this admission, there be required also an action
done by the sensator? We conceive it the duty of our method to supersede the
nauseous enumeration of the arguments which are planted by each faction, to
defend their own, and batter the adversaries opinion, and only to present that
positive and verisimilous assertion, which may best deserve our assent: And
this is it, that the object emitting the sensible image, or imaginary Idea, is
not the agent, or active principium of sension, but does by tender, and
oblation of the sensible species, objectively move the sense. Dari (...)
naturales suadere id videtur hoc; quod aliqui, quoties volunt, abstractionem
and aberrationem mentis a Corpore pati possint. Cardan. de Variet^rerum and de
seipso, and Facio patre id testatur, ac quoties vellent, animis sic abreptos
scribit, ut nullum omnino dolorem in eo statu sentirent. August. de Civit. Dei
lib. 14. cap. 24. Simile quid narrat de quodam presbytero, etc. Et Anima aliis
rebus ita intenta esse potest, ut speciem visibilem etiam oculo praesentem, and
vocem aures circumsonantem, oculo and aure sana non percipiat.
Neither can sensation be justly defined to be only a passive reception, as
may be evidenced by this, that very frequently, although the sensibles are
passively admitted into the Organ, yet is not the Organ actively deduced into
sensation, when the soul in a natural Ecstasy withdrawes her self from the
distraction of the sense, and neglects the Cognition of objects: but is also a
determinate action performed by the Sensator: whose dignity we shall highly
disparage, to deny it the prime activity in its own proper business. More
briefly thus; the soul so far forth as it discernes, and gives judgment of
the objects, may, with safety of reason, be said to be active: but so far forth
as the species are conveyed to the sense, by admission into the Organs, in
which the soul affectively resides, it may, without danger of absurdity, be
affirmed to be passive.

That the External senses exceed not the number of five, Sensus Externi and
tantum.
is the resolution of Philosophy, as uncontrollable as general; for five
invincible reasons: for in Natures wide Amphitheatre, the Universe, are
ordained but five simple bodies (and, for ought we know, no distraction ever
fell on so wild an Alogy, and gross absurdity, as to dream of more) the Heaven
and the four Elements; to which the senses by familiar analogy correspond; the
sight (if we admit the doctrine of the sober Platonicks) claims Kindred of the
stars, for its object is (...), shining and not burning; the smell resembles
the fire, for all Aromaticks confess an Empyreuma and large participation of
that Element, and therefore Fragrantia, quasi Flagrantia, is more then a
Grammarians Etymology; the hearing, by relation to its object, which is
Aeriall, is allied to the Aer; the Taste, for the same reason, is cozen German
once removed to the Water; and lastly, the object of the Touch derives it self
from the dominion of Earth.

2. In the great All (that is so much as lies in the narrow sphere of Human
comprehension) are discoverable but five proper objects, viz. Colors, Sounds,
Odors, Sapors, and Tactile Qualities, and who will find more must gt out of
Trismegistus Circle, and hunt on the outside of the world for them.

3. The Mediums required to the production of sension, are capable of
alteration and predisposition but by five ways; which we must (such is the
command of our method) with industry forget, and referr the disquisition of our
friends to receive plenary determination from Arist. Lib. 3. de Anima.

4. There are no more, nor less then five senses necessary, ad Esse and been
Esse vitae.

5. Experience, the grand inducement of our knowledge (on which we may most
safely erect determination) witnesses that no discovery has or can point out
more then five Organs, either in man, (...), the perfection, and therefore the
norma or rule of all sublunary creatures, or in any other Animal.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Sight.
HAving thus with temerity crowded through the conflux of Generals, we are
admitted to particulars: and the sense, which (deservedly) first arrest the eye
of our observation, is the sight. For although that immortal controversy
betwixt the two grandees in the commonwealth of learning, the Philosopher and
the Physician (two happy stars in conjunction, but opposed, they portend a
deluge of Barbarism) whether is more excellent the sight or touch, depend in
aequilibrio; yet have we thought it no impeachment to our profession, to side
with the Philosopher, and vote for the primacy of the sight, as by
unquestionable right, and the prerogative of Natures bounty, properly belonging
to it, witness these subsequent considerations.

1. This demonstrats to us more variety and differences of objects then any
other sense; for all (at least most) bodies appear clad either in the livery of
some one single color, or in a variegated and versicolor dress, and so fall
under the perception of the sight, but not of the touch.

2. Besides its own proper object, it runs (with unlimited commission) through
all the common ones, and surveyes the Figure, Magnitude, Number, Motion, Site,
and Distance of each visible; so that from hence should any derive the pedigree
of all Arts and Sciences, and affirm that from this Divine sense, as from the
protoplast, all honorable inventions (those aerial ones of Music excepted)
have received their fruitful productions, and successive multiplications: we
confess we could not disallow the probability of the Genealogy.

3. Vision is performed by a motion, swifter then that of ill-spent time, and
even at the remotest distance; and for this reason, should we character the
sight to be the shadows or representative reflex of the soul, as that is of
Divinity, the resemblance would be our warrant; for as this comprehends the
Idea's of things, exalted above the contagion of their materials, so that
admits the incorporeal and intentional images of the objects: as the one is
capable of two contraries, at one and the same instant of time, and
distinguishes betwixt true and false; so the other at once discernes white and
black, and while it receives one contrary, is not hindered from the perfect
dignotion of the other: the intellect enjoyes (...), a deliberation and
arbitrary power of election and resolution, which submits to no compulsion; the
sight in its action is uncontrolled, and boasts a liberty, which the indulgence
of nature has conferred upon it, but denied to the younger brethren, the other
senses; for the ears stand ever open to the admission of sounds, and the
nostrils have no guard, but what they borrow from the hand, to protect them
from the incursion of ungrateful and offensive odors; but the eyes are
fortifyed with counter-scarfs, or curtains, wherewith, at pleasure, they may
repulse the invasion of the destructive object.

3. The sight by its (...), exquisite and infaillible dignotion, and certitude,
contributes more to our intelligence; for a Canon it is in the Civil Law, worn
into a proverb, plus valet oculatus testis, quam auriti december, the testimony of
one eyewitness carries more assurance and authority, then of ten that assume
their information from the ear. From these and other reasons of equal
persuasive validity, we adventure to deduce the error of Theophrastus, who
mistook the sight, for the essence of man, and that laps of Anaxagoras, who
affirmed that vision was the prime end of our creation.

How wonderful are the works of thy hands, Visus elogium.
Oh Lord! were but the Persian learned in the Optics, how soon would he become
this senses Proselyte, with blushes red as his angry deity, forgo his fond
Idolatry of the Sun, and address his more pardonable devotio^ to the more
glorious Luminary, the Eye, wherein the image of Divinity is far more
resplendent; for the Sun irradiates the world. yet without comfort or benefit
to it self; but the bright Gemini of the lesser world, do not only illuminate
the body, but inform and delight themselves in the beauty they discover: When
the Sun goes down to wake the Antipodes, and leaves our Hemisphear benegro'd,
we can delude the Tyranny of Night with Tapers, and kindle an artificial day;
but when once our own lights suffer extinction, what an eternal blackness
surrounds us? from which no beams, but those of the Sun of glory, can relieve
us, and which, in this life is an affliction, that anticipats the horid opacity
of the Grave. and had not the purblind Soul of Momus been more ignorant, then
his calumny would have made Nature appear, he had discovered those windows in
the eyes, which his blasphemy proclaimed deficient in the composure of man; or
according to the charracter given them by Alexander the Pertpatetick, Mirantur
Oculi, a lamant, concupiscunt, Amoris, irae, furoris, misericordiae ultionis
indices sunt; in audacia prosiliunt; in reverentia subsident, in amore
blandiuntur, in dio efferantur, gaudente: animo hilares subsident, in
cogitatione ac cura quiescunt, quasi cum mente simul intenti, etc. Laur. Lib.
de Sens. Org. 11. Cap. 3.
(...), they are the mirror of the Soul, wherein all her closet conceptions,
whether peaceful or passionate, are written in the spiritual alphabet of looks,
and intuitively legible; witness the mute intelligence of Lovers, who can
converse like Angels, and conceive each other by glances, that significantly
deliver their apprehensions, and carry with them the notion and contents of
their desires.

But we reduce our pen (that had not wanderd, but in hope to have met with some
encomium, that might have run parralel to the dignity of this learned sense,
and so expiated the digression) back from this licentious seduction, and chain
it to the definitive expressions of more severe Philosophy.

The sight is an exterior sense, Visus 1. Difinitio. 2. Organon.
that receives and discernes external visible objects, by the ministration or
benefit of the eye, which is the adaequate organ of vision.

This lesser microcosme, the eye, is the instrument of sight, Oculi.
composed of six Muscles, three (the external and conjunctive excepted) Coats
or Membranes, three Humors, two Nerves, very many Veins and Arteries, and a
large quantity of Fat: Of these parts, we shall only meet with so many as
immediately are official to vision, and the first that among them salutes our
observation, is the Cornea Tunica, Horny Membrane.

This coat, being originally a derivation, 1. Corea Tunica.
or process of the Dura meninx, and enshrining the whole eye, wears the
Epithites (...), Corneous and (...) Hard, from the manifest similitude betwixt
it and a Horn, shaved to a transparent thinness; for in substance it is (1.)
perspicuous or tralucid, 1. Perspicua.
that the visible species may have admission or transitus into the eye. (2.)
(...), 2. (...).
void of all color, that the images may permeate into the eye, clad in their
native purity, and not disguised with the infection of any color but their
own: (3.) hard, 3. Durus
that it may the better oppose external injuries: (4.) dense, 4. Densa.
that the iimages after progression through a thinner medium, the Aer arriving
on a thicker medium, this Membrane may be refracted; for we are to observe in
general, that since vision is made by refraction, and refraction is made for
the variety of the diaphanum; that all parts of the eye, that are immediately
inservient to sight, do perform their office as they are tralucide and
perspicuous, and differ in diaphanity according to their tenuity and
thickness. The figure of this coat is round, 5. Rotunda.
that the eye might discern objects greater then it self. Si enim Oculus non
esset rotundus, quantitati rei capiendae non sufficerit. Vid. Perspect. Comm.
Lib. 1. propos. 29.

Between this Membrane and the Chrystalline Humor, 2. Humor Aqueus.
is lodged a liquid substance, called (...) the Aqueous, or Albugineous Humor,
which is ordained diaphanous, and void of all color, for the same reasons the
Horny coat is so, and more rare then it, that here the species may suffer a
second refraction.

This liquor effused, 3. Vuea Tunica.
the next considerable that occurs, is the second coat, called fo the the grapy
Tunicle, Versicolor.
from the resemblance in color and superficies it holds with the kernel of a
grape, and (...), because as the Chorion, it receives and supports the
disseminations of the Vessels, which is a production of the Pia Matter,
immediately investing the Optic Nerve, expansed into a membrane. This, of all
parts of the eye, only is diversicolor; for on the outside, where it touches
on the horny Coat, it bears sables (a color not to be found in any other part
of the body, if Galens inquisition satisfy, Lib. de usu part. 10. cap. 3.) on
the inside, where it faceth the Aqueous and Christalline Humors, it is of a
dark gray, Nigredinis usus
or duskish brown, inclining to black; but where it constituteth the greater
Circle Iris, or the Rainbow, it appears sometimes skycoloured, sometimes green,
and very often black. Luces debiles in locis obscurit magis apparent, in
luminosis latent.


Concerning the black tincture of this Coat, in that part, that respects the
Chrystalline Humor, Anatomists, and the masters of the optics agree, that
Nature intended it, either that the Chrystalline Humor being herewith veiled
over; might the better recollect and congregate his own brightness, for,
according to the position of Alhazen. Lib. 1. prop. 33. a small light in a dark
obscure place is better perceptible, and diffuses a brighter luster, then in a
wide, light place, and makes the circumjacent parts more visible; so the
internal splendour of the eye becomes more bright, and the visible images
appear more illustrious in the Chrystalline Humor, because the inner
circumference of the whole eye is lined with this dark and obscure membrane, by
whose shadow the Chrystalline is eclipsed; so that his refulgent brightness
reflecting back from the opposite opacity of the membrane, is assembled and
united in a more vigorous luster: or for the collection, recreation and
refection of the visive spirits; for when the Chrystalline is offended by a too
vehement light, we for remedy close our eyes, and the spirits recoyling back
upon this natural darkness of the Coat, are reassembled and refreshed; or for
the interception of light, for since the anterior perforation of the grapy
coat, is the only portal, built and destined to the immission of the visible
images; and there ought to be no second passage, whereby the light might
intrude it self, what could Nature more conveniently have thought on to
exclude the light, then the interjection of this black curtain when experience
has confirmed it an Axiom, that nothing better intercepts and shuts out
light, then the interpositio^ of opace bodies. Iridis usus.


But concerning the main intention of Nature, in her embrodery of this Coat (in
that part, which looks outward, and makes the parti-colored rainbow) with
such variety of dies, Iris oritur exinde, quod uvee Tunicae limbus varios
colores habet.
and whether she contrived it either for necessary use (which is most probable)
or pleasant ornament; we find the Curiosities of Oculists rather amazed,
Pupilla.
then their disquisitions satisfied. Wherefore we think it safe for us to fix
on nothing, but a scepticall neutrality; and to acquiesce in no other
resolution, then to sit down, and modestly expect the determination of future
discovery.

In the forepart of this membrane is a small Foramen or perforation, through
which the visible images ae intromitted to the Chrystalline, called the
Pupilla, which vulgarity translates the Apple of the Eye, the narrow
circumference of this (comparatively to that of the Chrystalline, or Cornea)
principally conduces to the perfection and distinction of vision: Dilatatio
and Contractio.
yet in many the amplitude varies; and those in whom Nature has framed it very
narrow, are quick and acute sighted: but those who have it more dilated, see
but weakly and obtusely.

This Apple of the Eye is daily Coangusted and dilated, and appears much more
coarctated in a luminous, then in an obscure crepusculous place; For since an
Excess of light is destructive, and the defect of it insufficient to vision:
the Eternal wisdom has, in the very entrance of the Eye, contrived this
window capable of dilatation and contraction: in dilatation to admit so much of
the weaker light as is required to perfect and distinct vision: Dilatationis
Causa.
in contraction to exclude so much of the copious and excessive, as would
either offend, or perish the Organ.

When we enquire the cause of this dilatation, Common and popular Philosophy
referrs us to the Animal Spirit; and believes that the Apple of one Eye is
dilated when the other Eye is closed, because of the conflux, and congregation
of all the visive spirits into the open Eye: But this does not satisfy our
scrutiny, since though both eyes are open, yet we plainly discover this
dilatation and Contraction. For (according to the annotation of Io. Bap. Porta
Lib. 3. de refract. cap. 6. and the confession of Hieron. Fabricius ab
Aquapendente. Lib. de vision. part 3. c. 6.) if we look into the Eyes of any
opened against the Sun, we cannot but perceive the Pupilla to be so straightly
coangustated, that there will appear hardly room enough to admit the point of a
needle. The learned Schegkius, in his Book de Spirit. Animal. teaches us, that
the Foramen of the Uvea tunica is ampliated and widened by the Contraction of
Muscles in the root of the Eye, which immediately invirons the optic Nerve:
but contracted by the relaxation of the same; for the Coats seem terminated in
the Extreme or root of the Eye. And, in our approbation, this weighs heaviest
in the balance of Truth.

This admirable constitution of the Uvea occasioneth those three natural
degrees, Gradus visionis.
or graduall differences of our Sight; 1. Perfectissimus.
(1.) Visus perfectissimus in indivisibili constitutus, when we, with the
exquisite distinction discern (...) minute atomicall bodies: 2. Perfectus.
(2.) perfectus, when, at a proportionate distance, we distinctly see the
object, but not apprehend the minimum, the smallest particle of each: 3.
Confusus.
(3.) imperfectus, when, besides those objects, which are e directo opposed, we
also have a confused and glimmering apparition of other; placed ad latera, on
the right, or left hand.

The cause of which difference is thus made out; Graduum visus causa.
since the comprehension of the visible image is made per pyramidem, by an
acute angle; but the Certification is made per Axem, by a direct line; and
only that perpendicular radius, which is called the Axis, and is not
refracted, does powerfully and distinctly represent the object; but all other
oblique radij, by how much they are nearer unto, or removed from the Axis, are
by so much the more, or less efficacious and conducible to representation.
Hence comes it, that when the Pupilla is contracted to a smaller circumference;
only the direct and perpendicular radius in the visive Pyramid enters to the
Center of the Chrystalline, or together with it those radij which are nearest
to the Axis: but when it is dilated, many other oblique and refracted beams,
rush together with the perpe^dicular, and confuse the vision. And the barbarous
experiment of Dyonysius upra carcerem tenibricosum, domum extruxit
lucidissimam, clarissimam, calce illitam; and homines carcere obscuro diu
conclusos, ex profundis tenebris in lucem splendi-dissimam Educendo occaeavit.
Dionysius, the Sicilian Prodigy, has with learned tyranny confirmed, that if
the Pupilla, when it is dilated, be suddenly (...)

of Plato's Jubilee) apply themselves to every visible, and hold a voluntary
verticity to the object. Parvula sic magnum pervisit pupula Coelum.

And of these ocular Muscles there are in man just so many, as there are
motions, four direct, and two circular, all situated within the cavity of the
scul, and accompanying the Optic Nerve, and all conjoyning their tendons, at
the corneous, do constitute the namelesse Tunicle, so named by Columbus, as if
it had escaped the observation of the ancient Anatomists; Galen. L. 10. de usu
partium. cap. 2. 1. Attollens.
s when (in truth) it had not the mention of Galen

The first of those implanted in the superior part of the eye, and draws it
upward, whence it is called Attollens, the lifter up; and superbus, the proud;
for this we use in haughty and sublime looks.

The second situated in the inferior part, 2. Deprimens.
is Antagonist to the former, and stoops the eye down toward the cheek, and
from this is called Deprimens, the depressor, and Humilis, the humble Muscle,
for this position of the eye speaks the dejection and humility of the mind.

The third seated in the Major Canthus, or angle of the eye, 3. Adducens.
and leading it toward the Nose is called Adducens et Bibitorius, for in large
draughts we often contractit.

The opponent to this is the Muscle in the minor Angle, 4. Abducens.
which abduceth the eye ad latera, therefore called Abducens et indignatorius;
for when we would look with contempt and indignation, we by the contraction of
this Muscle, hale the eye into an oblique and scornful position.

If all these four work together, the eye is drawn inward, fixed, and
established; which kind of motion Physicians call motus Tonicus, we in our
language, the Set, or wist-look.

The fifth slender oblique Muscle, 5. Obliquus.
running betwixt the eye, and the tendons of the second and third Muscles, by
the outward angle, ascends to the superior part of the eye, and inserted near
to the Rainbow, circumgyrats the eye downward.

The last, and smallest, 6. Trochiea.
twisted into a long Tendon circumrotates the Eye toward the interior angle,
and is called the Trochlea Muscle or pully. These two circumactors are surnamed
Amatorij the Lovers Muscles, for these are they that wheel about the Eye in
wanton or amorous glances. Objectum visus.


Although our reason embrace for a verity, that admits no dubitation, that the
object of Sight is (...) Visible, in general whatever submits to the
comprehension of the Sight; and in particular, that the proper and adaequate
object of this sense is Color; for nothing is visible but under the gloss and
vernish of Color, nay, Light it self (which some entertein for the second
object of vision (submits not to the discernment of the Eye, quatenus Lux,
under the notion of its own formality, but instar albedinis, as it retains to
whiteness: yet when it attempts an established and satisfactory theory of the
true nature of Colors; it soon runns to a stand, and discovers nothing of more
certainty, then that this jewel, the knowledge of the nature of colors, is
only dug out by the miners after Knowledge, but no hand was ever yet so
happy as to be constellated to the Exantlation or landings of it.

1. For the subtle Genius of Nature Lib de sensu and sensili. cap. 3. defines
Colors to be (...), the extremity of a diaphanum terminated; and subjoines,
that Colors belongs to al things ratione perspicuitatis, and that the
diaphanum or pellucid body terminated; is the subject of Color; For if the
perspicuum suffer condensation to the amission of its transparency, and so
forbid the transmission of the visible species, it become colourated, and may
be said to be terminated; for it prescirbes bounds and limits unto the sight,
and determines the act of vision: And thus ascribes the Causes of Color unto
the graduall termination of the diaphanum; which proceeds (1.) from the
condensation of the diaphanum alone, without the admistion of any other body;
thus stars being lucid bodies compacted, become visible: (2.) from the
commistion of an opace, with a tralucent body, thus Fire, in the primitive
simplicity of its own nature most perspicuous, appears red, because commixt;
and obnubilated with fumes and exhalations, De colorum commistione, and
speciebus, multa egregie scripsit Scalig. Exercitation. 325.
and thus from the concorporation and mixture of the Element with another, of a
lucid and transparent with an opace and terrestrious, come forth the primitive
and ground colors; and from the various and complexed unition of these first
and father extreme colors, all other intermediate and changable tinctures
deduce their original.

2. Others refer the causes of primary and secundary Colors to the graduality
of opacity and light.

And the Chemists (who in their laborious exploration have out done all other
in this abstrusity) reduce their causes unto Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury, and
believe that bodies receive luster or obscurity, and by sequel, the various
degrees of colors, from the various mixture of their volatile with their fixed
salt.

But from neither, not all of these opinions arises, to a subtle examination,
satifaction enough to terminate our Inquiry; or to accuse us of singularity,
if (in this particular) we appear scepticall, and profess to suspend our
adhaerence to authority, until it shall, with less obscurity, attempt the
revelation of this Magnale.

The Medium of Sight is (...) Perspicuum, Medium visus.
all bodies qualified with pellucidity or perspicuity: and the (...) has more
opacity then the Medium. Hence is one Element perceptible in another, water in
Aer, and Earth in water; and the same colorated thing is conspicuous in pure
and limpid water; but invisible in turbid and polluted. And for this reason a
colourated object may be a Medium, provided, that it be not absolutely opace,
but more tralucent then the visible. For thus Brassavolus saw his Pismire, and
Cardan his Silkworm, through the diaphanous solidity of their Electricall
Mausoleums.

That Vision was done by Emission, Modus Visionis.
and that the Optic spirits did in a continued visive radius stream from the
Eye to the object, and so apprehend it; was an error of no meaner Extraction,
then the great Patriarch of the stoics, and adopted to the patronage of all
Philosophers, that spent that long intervall of time, betwixt him and
Aristotle, but exiled by the justice of Aristotle's reason, it for ever resigned
the possession of the Schools, to the just dominion of truth: and since few
have been such stubborn votaries to the tyranny of ignorance, as not to
subscribe the opinion of Aristotle, that vision is made by the reception of the
visible images in to the Eye; and that neither radij, nor Light, nor Spirit,
are emitted from the Organ toward the object. The reasons are most elegantly
recited by Jul. Caes. Scaliger, Exercit. 32 5. and 298. and 289. Sect. ib. etc.
Zabar: Lib, 2. de visu cap. 4.5. and Andr. Laur. Libr. 2. de sens. Organ.
Quaestione prima.

When we look within our selves, Finis visionis.
and read the end and duty of our sight, we cannot but conceive the Error of
Anaxaggras Homines ad videndum esse natos, more venial then that of Aristotle
and most of his Pupils, visum esse sensum Commoditatis; and could heartily wish
he had said Faelicitatis. For the beatitude of man is Essenced in the Knowledge
and contemplative (though but graduall) comprehension of God; and no sense so
clearly manifest's the immense glory of the Creator, as this that is familiar
with the beauty of the Creature. For though the Brutall part of mankind,
overrun with sensuality, think the institution of their Creation satisfied in
the actions of sense, and seldom look beyond the barks and Exteriors of
things: yet the Phiosopher extends his eye to invisibility, being ravished with
the borrowed glory of the visible: and some have been beholding to their sight
for their Conversion, and happily confessed that the Eye of their sense has
directed the acies of their reason to the essence of all essences, and soul of
all causalities.

CHAP. IX. Of the Hearing.
'TWas a Hypochondriack absurdity of Plato, that all our Cognition is but
Recognition, and our acquired intellection, but a reminiscence, or rehersall of
those primitive lessons the Soul had forgotten, for proper Science is proper
only to Omniscience, and not to receive knowledge by infusion, or acquisition,
but to have it spring from the fou^tain of his own essence, is the attribute
only of the Essence of wisdom, and a privilege due to none, but the Ancient
of days, to have his knowledge derived beyond Antiquity: but Man, poor
ignorant Man, commanded into the World on the design of knowledge, must sweat
in the exploration and pursuit of it; and can never possess any science, in
this life, but what he must dearly purchase with his own discovery, or
precariously borrow from the bounteous industry of his Forefathers. Now that
the mind of man might partake the notion of what concerns this, Quemadmodum
aspectus ad vitae dulcedinem, and commoda magis est necessarius, ita Auditus ad
accipiendam artem, sapienti am and scientiam est accommodatior. Ille ad
inventionem, hic ad Communicationem aptior est Lauren. Lib. 2. cap. 12.
and the future life, his Creator has furnished him with the sense of Hearing;
the sense particularly and expressly disposed for Discipline, for though we
sing Hymns to the Eye for the invention; yet we must acknowledge a sacrifice
due to the Ear, for the Communication, and distribution of Arts and Sciences,.
And this the Egyptians intimate in their Hieroglyphick of memory, and the
Philosopher expresses in his character of the Hearing, Auditus est sensus
disciplinae: and the glory of our Century, Sennertus elegantly delivers thus,
Aures in Homine quasi porta mentis sunt, per quam menti communicantur, quae
doctrina and institutione de Deo and aliis rebus necessariis traduntur, quaeque
nullo alio sensu addisci possunt.

The Hearing is an External sense receiving and perceiving (...) all sounds
audible, 1. Definitio.
by the benefit of the Ear. 2. Organum.


The adaequate instrument of hearing is the Ear; divided by Anatomists into the
(1.) External, and (2.) Internal.

The External Ear, 1. Auris Externa.
or Auricula, (intended by Hippocrates in that prognostic, (...), Aures
frigidae, pellucidae, and inversae mortiferae) was intended by Nature (1.) for
Ornament, (2.) for the refraction of the Aer, whose uncorrected violence and
impetuosity, would otherwise shatter the Tympanum or Drum-head; (3) to catch
and collect the species of soundes diffused and scattered in the Aer, and
through its unfractuous Convolutions convey them into the (...), or auditory
cavity. For those that have lost their external Ears hear but obtusely and
confusedly, and receive all sounds and articulate voices, like the purling
murmur of a rivulet, or the fritiniancy and shrill note of Grasshoppers. Hence
Brute Animals, by the dictate of instinct prick up or arrect their ears in a
position to meet and intercept the wandering sounds; Hence Hadrian the Emperor
to palliate his (...) and extenuate his imminution of this sense, Hinc exactius
audiunt quibus aures exterius prominent, and si non nimium, tam en longo
decubitu, quam neutricum ligaturis, aures depressas haberemus, rectius
audiremus.
set his hands to his ears in a prominent posture, with the palms forward; and
hence those Scythians, whose outward ears are syderated or sphacelated by
extremity of cold, plant Cockle, or Schallop shells in their rooms, for the
congregation and direction of the sounds that preterlaps the Meatus Auditorius.

The external Aer charged with the audible species, 2. Auris interna.
and thus qualified and conducted by the outward, 1. Meatus auditorius.
is wafted into the inward ear, through the (...) or auditory Canale, which is
a long, round, oblique perforation of the os petrosum, or stony bone, invested
with a thin, dense, hard, perpolite skin, that firmly adheres to the bone, that
the sound may herein suffer densation, collection, and turbination. In this
Cavity is found that bilious humor (called by Aegineta (...) sordiculas in
auribus, and by the vulgar English, the eare-wax (or gluttinous expurgation of
the brain, Cicer. 2. de Nature. Deorum ut si quae minima bestiola conetur
irrumpore, in sordibus his, tanquam in viscio nihaerescat.
provided (if we reject not the conception of Cicero) for the inviscation of
the Auricularia Earewig, and other small insects.

In the end of this Foramen is spread a tranverse interstitiary, or round
parchment (called by some Anatomists the myrinx, by others the mediastinum, 2.
Tympanum.
by most the Tympanum, but by the best the drumhead) to exclude the external
from rushing in, and concorporating with the internal or congenite Aer: for
since the external Aer is subject to Anomalies, incrassation, humectation, and
inquination; were it but admitted to a conjunction with the originary internal,
it would perturb the native tenuity and purity thereof, and impose upon it the
contagion of its own impressions. The substance of this partition is not
osseous, lest the sounds should be repulsed; nor carneous and soft, for that
was absolutely unapt for transmission of the sounds; but membranous and
nervous; yet pellucid, thin, and subtle, that the sounds may be intromitted to
the ingenite Aer; for those, who have this membrane incrassated, and too much
condensed, from the primitive conformation, suffer a (...), or deafness
incurable, and must expect the attenuation and rarefaction of it, from the
energy of no heat, but that of the Sun of Righteousness, which arises with
healing in his wings; and the dryest of any Membrane in the body, for the
better reception of the sounds: for dry and hard bodies principally conduce
both to the admission and resonation of sounds; witness our experiment in
musical instruments and the Aphorism of our Oracle; in his description of the
Tympapanum: Hippocr. Lib. (...).
To (...) There is in the ear, near to the rocky bone, a thin filme or tunicle,
like the spiders web, and of all other membranes the dryest, but that, what
has most Siccity, is most apt to resound, there are many Evidences.

Behind this traverse, in the second cavity of the ear, are found the three
small bones, Ossicula tria.
Incus, Stapes, and Malleus, the Anvil, Stirrup, and Hammer, in probability,
borrowing these appellations, rather from their Figure, then office: For since
solid, compacted, and polit bodies are most accommodable to the impulsion,
delation, and communication of sounds, the soul of reason, the Creator framed
these three bones, substantially very hard and solid, and superficially
perpolite, that by their durities, and laevity, the sounds may be delated to
the implantate Aer; and contrived them naked and uninvested, for were they
obducted with any softer involution, Sunt haec ofsa solidissima, ut resonent;
and quod mirum est, eorum in puerulo, eadem est, quae in seen magnitudo. Andr.
Laur. Lib. 2. cap. 13.
they would be inofficial to pulsation, and the successive trajection of
sounds: and for no other reason their dimensions are the same in all
constitutions, and their magnitude in an Infant, equal to that of those in full
grown procerity.

We shall here, 4. Aer implantatus.
with resolution, be guilty of the omission of some parts in the ear,
concerning whose use, Authors deliver more of conjecture then certitude, and
rather betray our disquisition into the perplexity and wilderness of opinion,
then conduct our curiosity home to the point and unity of established truth;
and apply our perpension only to the implantat Aer, being a subject as full of
obscurity, as worthy the industry of the subtilest exploration. For though all
parts in the ear be necessary to audition, that the vitiosity or defect of any,
induces a depravement or abolition of the action of all: Yet it is an opinion
vulgarly passant, derived as high as Plato, assented to by Galen, Galen. 7. de
decret. Hippocrat. and Platon. cap. 5. Arist. Lib. 2. de An.
and confirmed by Aristotle, Aerem implantatum esse princeps auditus Organum,
that the Originary Aer is the precipuous instrument of hearing. For as to the
reception of the visible image is provided an internal fulgor (...),
consociable to the external, which should propter similitudinem substantiae,
with familiarity entertain the external: so also in the ear is there (...), an
aeriall substance, generated of the most pure, and rarefied portion of the
generative materials, the seed and maternall blood, which by reason of
cognation, and similitude of substance, Seeds aeris implantati.
does welcome and embrace the delated species of sounds. But to conclude on the
place, and situation of this implantate Aer, seems a business of no small
abstrusity: Hieron Capivaccius seats it in the expansion of the auditory Nerve:
Archangelus Picolomin Lect. 5. is positive, that it is pent in the extreme
Cavern, or inmost den, drilled in the os petrosum; and Hieron. Fabricius ab
Aquapendente believes, that all the cavities, angles, and creeks of the
internal ear (which otherwise had remained natural Grotescos, and hollow
vacuums) are possessed and repleted by the implantate Aer.

We must not indubitate the existence of this innate Aer, nor question the
verisimility of the opinion, that it is included in the sinus of the ear, Vsus
deris implantati.
to symbolize with the external advenient Aer, and so invite, at least, admit
it: but that the principal and judicatory instrument of Audition, is Aer, we
dare suspect, and can produce warrant from no contemptible authority to deny:
For Hercules Saxonia, and Andreas I aurentius, (men whose names are Antidote
sufficient against prejudice) account the implantate Aer, only for the internal
medium, inservant to the convoy, and transmission of all sounds, simple or
articulate, into the true and proper Organ of hearing; and teach us, that the
Acoustick Nerve, determined and expansed in the extremity or cone of the
Cochlea or Snayl-shell, is the approximate Sensorium of Hearing: And Galen.
Lib. 1. de cause. symptomatum. Cap. 3. leaves it for granted, that the prime
instrument of the hearing is (...), the internal end or extremity of the
conduit. For the implantate Aer is the receptory of the species audible
discharged from the external Aer, through the anfractus and sinuous
tortuosities of the ear, and immediately transfers them to the auditory Nerve,
which is an exortus or production from the fifth conjugation of the brain,
running through the perforation of the os petrosum into the ear, and there by a
particular constitution, determined and continued for the special and
determinate comprehension of Audibles. And a Catholic Theorem it is, sworn to
by Aristotle, 2. de Anima. Nihil expers Animae alicujus sensus est
instrumentum; but this innate Aer partakes not animation; Vid. Andr. Laurent.
lib. 2. de sens. Organ. Quaest. 10.
for the Soul is not actus corporis simplicis, but Organici; wherefore it
cannot be the immediate Organ, but the internal medium of audition, generated
of the ambient Aer, not by concoction and elaboration, as are the Spirits, nor
there by any action of the Soul, but by the perpetual arival of new Aer; which
is partly transcolated through the Tympanum, and so delated into the Cochlea or
Snayl-shell; and partly derived thither through the slender perforation or pipe
opening into the Palate. Hence may we resolve that Problem, why oscitation or
yawning perturbs our Hearing? For in oscitation, the expulsive Faculty
endeavors to discharge a dull vapor lodged in the cranies and chinks of the
throat, which arising in compression of the parts, unto the ears, by those
Foramina, made from them into the palate, croudes into the Snayl-shell, and
causes a tonitruating and tumultuary noise, which drownes, or adulterates the
calmer and more delicate species of sounds offered from without.

The external medium of this sense is (...), Personabile, Medium externum.
Aer and Water: Both which elements (though Aristotle deaf unto the experiment
of nocturnal piscation, would not hear of the latter) concur in their
efficiencies, and contribute their faculties to Audition, in more then a single
respect, (1.) as a medium qualified both for the reception, and transvection:
(2.) as materials necessary to the production of soundes. For in concussion,
the Faculty of the Medium, or potentia of the Material, is actuated, when it
is intercepted and dilacerated betwixt two solid bodies, vehemently charging
each other. And a sound is a quality produced from Aer, Objectum Audius.
or Water percussed and fracted by the sudden, and violent concussion or
arietation of solid bodies. Hence is it manifest to the capacity of any head,
that was not constellated to ignorance, that to the generation or a sound, is
required the conspiration and concurrence of three concomitant, or rather,
successive Actions (1.) the affront, or shock of two solid bodies: (2.) the
Elision or disruption of the Medium (3.) the resonance of the Medium; after
which, immediately succeeds the sound.

The manner of this laceration, the most Elegant Julius Casserius Placentinus
delivers thus. Fractionis Modus.
When two solid bodies strike one against the other, the intermediate body is
with such impetuosity impulsed, that the Atomical parts of it cannot observe
the order of motion by succession one after another; but rather disorderly
throng and prevent each other, before the first part has avoided the place,
another is driven upon the neck of it, and so the motion, which when
successively performed, is gentle and easy, becomes, by reason of this
inordinate impetuosity, tumultuary and tempestuous. Hence is it that soft and
acute bodies yield no sound in their collision, because the stroke betwixt them
does not so disparkle or shatter the intermediate body, that thereon should
follow any interpretation or fraction, whereby the calm and successive
dissipatior yielding may be prevented.

The External Aer, Audiendi modus.
thus qualified with the impression of a sound, alters the next adjoining Aer,
and this impells and alters the next to that, and so successively until (...)
contiguity and continuation it arrive at the ear; For as on the injection of a
stone into water, there will arise circles on the surface of the water,
enlarging and pursuing each other: so from the elision of Aer, are there
generated invisible aeriall circles, moving in successive rounds, or vocal
waves, until they attain unto the Organ of Hearing. But this undulation is not
dispatched in a moment, but in progression of time. And for this reason, a
sound is not presently after the stroke delivered to places at distance: we
behold the Coruscation of nitrous and sulphurous exhalations, fired in the
Clouds, some minutes before we hear the fragor given upon laceration: and we
discern the flash, a good space of time, before we hear the report of a Canon:
and in the open field we plainly perceive the arm of a man, hewing wood,
lifted up for the second stroke, before we have heard the first.

The Aer thus impregnated with a sound, conducted and conglomerated by the
External ear, first strikes upon the most dry, and resounding membrane the
Drum-head; this thus stricken, justles and impells the three small bones, and
impresseth the Character of the sound on them: they immediately glance it
forwards to the implantate Aer: this shoots it through the windows of the
stony bone, into the winding Buroughs; thence wafts it into the Labyrinth;
thence into the snail-shell, and at last surrenders it to the Acoustick Nerve,
which presently transmit it to the Common sense, as unto the Censor or Judge.

CHAP. X. Of the Smell.
THis is the middle Finger in the left hand of the sensitive Soul, and like
virtue, dwells in Medio, between the other four, whose Natures stand farther
removed from mediocrity; For the Sight and Hearing extend their comprehension
to the largest remove of proportionate distance, and can arrest the object
without the line of their own situation: The Taste, and Touch work not, but by
contaction, and are not active beyond the narrow Orb of corporal Contaction,
and substantial admotion: But the smell, whose nature is a reconciliation of
the others contrary Extremes, and a power in which are united the opposite
impossibilities of the rest, is actuated into apprehension, partly by the
interposition of a medium, and partly by the contiguity and approximity of the
object.

We may therefore define Smeling to be the middle sense of the five external,
1. Definitio:
which perceives the Odors of things drawn in by the nostrills to the mamillary
processes of the brain, for the use and Commodity of the Creature.

That the Object of Smelling is an Odor, 2. Objectum.
is a universal Theorem oraculously established beyond the denial of any: but
what the nature of an Odor is, has been a Catholic Problem, mysteriously
removed above the comprehension of most. Heraclitus cited by Aristotle Lib. de
sens. and sensili. cap. 5. many of the primitive Philosophers, and most of the
Family of Aesculapius, have left on record, for an indubitable maxim, that the
smell is not affected only with an incorporeall quality, or spiritual species:
but that a certain aerial, subtle substance, or (...) a vaporous exhalation is
expired from the Odorate Object, which does substantially move the sense: and
Galen. de instrum. Olfactus cap. 2. (though the Charity of Casserius
Placentinus attempts a witty vindication of so honorable a judgment from the
guilt of Error, and would have us by substantia, under Subjectum Odoris) stroke
in with them and resolved thus; that which exhaleth from the bodies of things
is the substance of an Odor. On the contrary, Aristotle, and all his tribe
determine an intentionall, and no substantial Emission; Odores non sunt
substantiae.
and that only the bare image exhaling from the odorate body, is delated unto,
and apprehended by the Organ of smelling. And in truth this latter latter
opinion deserves priority, provided we admit it with modest Caution and
discreet limitation: although the former includes something of reason, and but
in part deviates from the tract of truth.

For first, the magic of no arguments must seduce us to admit, that Odors are
corporeal substances, Sensus enim substantias non percipiunt, sed tantum earum
accidentia; and we have already demonstrated, that no sense is actuated into
sensation, by the real or material, but by the spiritual or intentionall
quality of the object. Wherefore we shall be unreasonably partial to deny the
same to the smell; and must conclude that nothing corporeal, but only the
species, by Aporrhoia's streaming from the odorate body, does invade the Organ
of smelling. And on the other side, the infidelity of no Academick can be so
obstinate, as not to acknowledge, that there is an Effluvium or exhalation from
the odorate object, diffused into, and transported through the Aer; for
quotidian experience learns us, that odorate exhalations extend their subtle
Energy, not only to the production of diverse affections in the brain,
proportionate to their own variety and vehemence; to the comfort or affliction
of it, by the communication of their own excesses in first or second, or
formal frie^dship or emnity in third and occult qualities, as the Oracle of
Cous observed, Aphor. 28. Sect. 5. Odoramentorum suffitus muliebria educit, and
ad alia plerumque utilis esset, nisi capitis gravitatem inferret; But even to
the painful vellication and rosion of the nostrills, eyes, and the tender
parts of the face. And again, we observe most perfumed bodies in tract of time,
to fall into minoration of gravity and substantial contabescence; and the Odor
to continue vigorous in the Aer; a long time after the remove of the body, from
which it was effluxed. All which are manifesto's sufficient to ascertain us,
that from odorate bodies there does ascend a certain corporeal exhalation,
carrying with it the faoulty of Calefaction, Frigefaction, exiccation,
humectation, and other efficiencies, which no Philosophy can expect from the
naked immateriall species or representative forms of odors: and therefore we
willingly subscribe thus much, that from most odorables there does an odorate
vapor exhale, and that this exhalation is corporeal: but yet, that there is
presumed and required a spiritual or intentional image of this odor, to the
act of the sense or smell of it, is our asseveration, and we hope the sense of
Truth.

But whether there be required a concurrence of both? or whether the species of
an Odor, An species odoris semper vaporis vehiculo indigeat?
which is only and properly the object of smell, be always in conjunction with
some corporeal subject or vapor, without whose association, it cannot be
delated to the sensorium? is yet in dispute, and indeed the Axis on which the
weight of the whole controversy is moved. We are satisfied that the coadjutancy
of a vapor is not semper, in omnibus et singulis, necessary: that this (...),
or exahalation evaporated from the object, does not always accompany the Odor to
the Nostrials; yea that frequently the object emits no corporeal effluvium at
all, and that the smelling is very often excited by spiritual qualities, or
the species only of an odor, expired from the odorate body, and arriving at the
Organ. For whoever grants this exhalation to be always concomitant to the Odor,
as the vehicle or transporter of it; must infer an alogy not a little
derogatory to the great attribute of God, his wisdom, that is, mutilate the
whole fifth days work, rob all the Citizens of the Ocean of one sense, which
by the charter of their Creation, they stand possessed of, and subvert the
experiment of Anglers, who perfume their baits. Boeoti apud Antiquos
stoliditatis et stupiditatis nomine male audierunt, ut innuit. Horat. in Epist.
Boeotum incrasso, jurares aere natum.
For since the Soul of an Odor consists in Sicco a calore elaborato, and all
exhalations by natural propensity ascend to unite with the congenerous element
of Fire, how much a Boeotian is that headpiece, that can conceive they shift
their essence, and descends to the earth in the bottom of the water? or when
therer arrived, that they can conserve the integrity of their nature, since all
odorate bodies no sooner meet with humectation, but they bid adieu to their
odorable endowments. Moreover, whence came so large and diuturnous an
effluvium, which serves to qualify a wast quantity of Aer, be maintained?
Assuredly, if the odorate bodies, which are frequently of very small bulk, were
wholly at once resolved into vapors, they would not suffice to the expletion or
tincture of half that spacious room, which the odors possess And it is no
rarity to observe perfumes of minute bodies, a long time to maintain the
prodigal expense of odors, without a marasmus of substance, or minoration of
gravity.

Our hopes tell us we shall offend but venially, A digression.
though we here make a short excursion on the negative of that question, An
odores nutriendi vim babeant, whether odors are endowed with the power of
nutrition? For since the aliment of a body ought to be corporeal, and ex
iisdem nutriamur, ex quibus constamus; the materials of our nutrition, must be
congenerous to those of our generation; but odors are but simple qualities, and
homogeneous to but one ingredient in our composition: we may safely conclude,
that odors can be no pabulum or aliment proper for the sustentation of compound
and solid bodies; and willingly resign such aerial pasture to the astomy or
people without mouths, mentioned by Pliny, and after him by our countryman, Sr.
John Mandevil, (who was very unfortunate in his travails never to visit
Anticyra) or to the offspring of the western wind, the Spanish Jennets: and must
receive what is observed in the refocillation or refection of the sick, either
in sudden Lypothymies, or Hectic languors, from grateful and fragrant Odors;
and recorded of dying Democritus, that with the smell of hort bread only, he
maintained a three days siege against death, to be meant not of the odors, but
odorate vapors exhaling from the bread, and other odorables. Neither is that a
true and real nutrition, which is made by the apposition only of an analogous
substance; but in propriety of language, a recreation, or refocillation only of
the Spirits.

Concerning the instrument of smelling, in a licentious acception, Odoratus
Organon.
all men agree upon the Nose; but in a more satisfactory and severe, the best
and most Physicians have determined, that the two mamillary processes of the
brain, are the principal sensorium.

The Nose is by Anatomy distinguished into the (1.) External, 1. Nasus
euternus.
and (2.) Internal: The External (to omit the parts of it) is in the intention
of Nature, inservient to a manifold use: (1.) to the delation of the Aer both
into the brain, for the generation of Animal; and lungs, for the material of
the vital spirits: (2.) to the delation of Odors up to the Papillary
protuberances of the brain; hence those who have suffered amputation of their
Noses, fall inevitably into an utter abolishment, or great depravment of their
smell: (3.) to the evacuation of the pituitous excrements of the brain: (4.) to
assist the vocal organs in the^ formation and melodious articulation of the
voice: (5.) to be the beauty and amiable decor of the face: and this certainly
was considererd by that white assembly of Saxon Virgins, Hinc Virgil. Deiphobi
nasi dissectionem vocat vulnus inhonestum. Lib. 6 Aeneid.
(whose memory smells sweetly in our English Chronicle) who, to conserve their
consecrated chastity inviolate and unsullied by the violent lust of the
insulting Danes, gladly embraced the amputation of their noses: taking for
granted that deformity was the best Antidote against a rape, and the greatest
deformity the want of a nose.

The internal nose consists of two parts only (1.) the Os Ethmoides, 2. Nasus
internus.
Cribriforme, or spongy bone: (2.) the Mammillary Processes of the brain. 1. Os
Ethmoides
The spongy bone is the Velamen or muniment of the two mammillary productions,
drilled full of slender holes or spongiosities, through which the inspired Aer
is immediately conveyed to the brain, and in which the Aer qualified with
Odors, undergoes a praerequisite alteration and preparation, before it be
presented to the prime Organ of smelling, which are two long, white, nervous,
2. Processus mammilares princeps odoratus organum.
productions of the brain, situate within in cavity of the scul, invested, as
al other Nerves are, with a crasse, and thin membrane, and derived to the basis
of the nose.

This is a doctrine contemporanie to our reverend Tutor Hippocrates delivered
Lib. (...) thus (...). The brain does smell the oder of dry things, attracting
the same together with the Aer, through cartilagineous or grisly pipes that are
dry: supported by Galen. lib. de Odorat. Organo. 8. de usu Part. and 1. de
Sympt. Cause. and is demonstrable by two irrefragable arguments used by
Laurentius thus.

the Aphorism of Galen. 6. de Placit. Hippocr. and Platon; but the mammillary
protuberancies of the brain, amongst all parts of the nose, have obtained a
peculiar nature, figure, and composition, to be found in no other part; but the
bones, Cartilages, and membranes are in all parts alike: wherefore the
principal cause of this action of smelling is to be ascribed to the Mammillary
processes.

There is no part in the nose alterable by odors, but these processes being
full of spirits, do with facility receive the species of odors, and being
consubstantiall to the Nerves, have a notion of that quality they receive.

The Medium conducible to Odoration is Aer and Water, Medium Odoratus.
yet neither according to esence, but qualification and impraegnation. That the
Aer infected with an odorate tincture is a medium, has ever been a truth
ratified beyond the dubitation of Pyrrhonian infidelity. That the water is
endowed with the like capacity, and perodorable faculty, we may with Aristotle
Lib. de Hist Animal. 4, cap. 8. argue from the vulgar experiment of betraying
Fish with perfumed baits.

CHAP. XI. Of the Taste.
THe irregular sophistry of some, from a circumstantial affinity concluding an
essential identity, and from a too strict exposition of that looser line of
Aristotle, Lib. de sens. and sensili. cap. 2. Gustus est quoddam genus Tactus,
has not only started that Zetema or doubt An Gustus sit idem sensus cum
potentia, quae qualitates tangibiles percipit? But with pertinacity maintained
the affirmative, and confounded this sense with the Touch. But as the inference
is unlawful, so is the interpretation unjust, rendering in a rigid and absolute
sense, what was intended in a conditional, and delivered in terms of some
latitude. For though at first blush, the words seem to prove that the Touch is
the genus and the Taste but the species or subdivision of it: yet to him, that
shall with severer eyes pry into the deuteroscopy and medullary intention of
them, will it manifestly appear that Aristotle meant no more then to
demonstrate the Gognation and similitude betwixt these two Senses. For had the
Contents of his thoughts been, that the Taste and Touch were not in specie
different, in probability he would never have said, Gustus est tactus quidam,
but have spared that conditional particle, and in positive and down right
terms have said Gustus est tactus.

Neither can it become our reason to wonder why Arisiotle speaks thus of this
sense only, and not of any other; since so large an Analogy and resemblance
can be made out, betwixt no two senses, as betwixt this and the Touch; for in
both there can be no comprehension, without the immediate application of the
object on the Sensorium, and the contiguity of their extremities: and Gustable
Qualities, in regard of corporeity, materiality, and terriety, so fitly
correspond with Tangible, that we may safely avouch that sentence of
Aristotle, Gustabile est quoddam tangibile.

Wherefore we must acknowledge the Taste a peculiar Sense, declaring its
dependency on, and distinction from the Touch, both Objecto and Organo; For the
object of one is (...) Tangible, of the other (...) Gustable: and the Touch
conserving its integrity and vigor in the tongue, the Taste may be abolished or
depraved: and ubicunque est Tactus, ibi non etiam est Gustus.

It is generally defined to be one of the five external senses, 1. Definitio.
whereby we discern the difference of Sapours.

The proper and approximate instrument of Tasting is the Tongue; 2. Organon.
and in particular (not the investing Tunicle as Galen, and after him Valesius
opinioned, (...), inest. pars sentiens saporem lingua Arist. Lib. 1. de Histor.
Anim.
nor the gustatory nerve expansed into the investment, as some conceive by
tradition from Columbus) the pulpe or carneous substance of it, which being of
a peculiar and unparralelled constitution, soft, lax, rare and spongy, does
imbibe the sapours, comprehended in their own liquid principles and
conservatories, and impregnated by the slaver or salival humidity of the mouth.

External medium there is none; 3. Medium.
for the gustatory Faculty is not invited into the act of comprehension by the
distantiall, but contiguous position, and immediate admotion of the sapid
object to the Organ; but the internal medium is the porous pellicle, or spongy
integument of the Tongue, assisted by the concurrence, and coefficiency of the
spittle, or salival exudation of it: For this humidity is natures menstruum,
ordained for the maceration, extraction, and impraegnation of sapors, which
having passed the corrective or auxiliant operation, of this liquid mediator,
are through the incontinuities, or interstitiall divisions of the obducted
Membrane, soaked into the pulpous substance of the Tongue, and therein
perfected into gustation. Vtenim Color objectum visus est, and tamen sine
lumine videri non potest: ita sapor objectum gustus est, qui etiam non gustatur
sine humido, quod est veluti actus medij, was the expression of Aristotle.

The object of the taste is (...), 4. Objectum.
a Sapour; this is a position, whose certitude is erected on no meaner
foundations then the infallible, and scientifick doctrine of our sense, (whose
information in its own proper business, is thought superior to the
incroachment of delusion, and carries authority sufficient to convert, or
silence contradiction) and the aggregated affirmation of all Authors, whose
judgments savor any thing of reason: But what the nature and original of a
sapour is, has empuzled the enquiries, and retired from the knowledge of those
ancient worthies, Empedocles, Democritus, Lucippus, Anaxagoras, Galen,
Ariflotle, and all succeeding Philosophers; who had not with more then one eye
looked into the Arcana of Chemistry, and whose caecutiency had missed the
illumination of a Spagyrick Collyrium.

For though Galen and the Peripateticks hunt a sapour from Elements, A
digression concerning Sapors and their causes.
and the determinate contemperation of their first qualities, thus. There is no
elemental or homogeneous body qualified with a sapour, which is properly an
affection of compound materials, requiring to its production the syndrome, and
syncriticall union of three principles, viz. (1.) Terrestrious siccity, (2.)
Aqueous humidity, (3.) Heat, the (...), or active ingredient, which carries the
masculine efficiency in operations natural; for water, in the simplicicitie of
its primitive constitution, being insipid, if percolated through siccum
terrestre, acquireth a sapidity proportionate to the intense or remiss adustion
of the material dissolved into concorporation, as we cannot but observe in
fountains, which contract to their streams the various sapors of those sundry
veins of earth, through whose straits they have steered in their subterraneous
voyages; and in a lixivium or lie, which admits the amaritude, or salsedo;
discernable in the taste of it, from its transcolation through ashes: yet the
essence of a sapour consists more in Humido, then Sicco, and is a quality
affecting the Taste, Saporis definitio.
owing its production to the permistion of an aqueous Humidum, with a
terrestrious siccum, in compound bodies. But since the contemperature is
various, and the Aqueous Humidum united with the earthy Siccium (which is the
subject of sapors) has its consistence participating sometimes of crassitude
or thickness, and sometimes of tenuity or thinness; and the Heat (which is
the active efficient) varies its activity, according to the graduality of
intention or remission, hence do those various and different kinds of sapors
derive their Original.

And though Physicians on the tradition of these principles found the invention
of remedies, and erect rules for the investigation of the manifest faculties of
Medicaments by the dignotion of their sapors; Fernel Method. Met. lib. 4. cap.
3.
and to this end constitute nine differences or ground distinctions of sapors,
as they are enumerated by that mouth of the Arabian Oracles, Eernelius, thus.

A sharp or keen sapor is that which affects the mouth and tongue with an
acrimony, 1. Acer.
compunction, and calefaction; this is conspicious in Pepper, Pellitory,
Euphorbium, etc. It is suscitated from a thin, dry, and hot matter; nor can it
subsist in a subject of any other constitution.

Acide, 2. Acidus.
or sharp, is that which penetrats and bites the tongue, but without any sense
of heat; such is deprehended in Vinegar, juice of Limons, Citrons, some
Malacotones and Quinces: this flows from a thin, dry matter, or that whose
innate heat is expired by putrefaction, or whose Original frigidity is
concomitant to tenuity. 3. Pinguis.


Fat, or luscious, sollicites the gusto neither with heat nor acrimony, but
furs or daubs the mouth with an unctuous lentor or viscidity; such is chiefly
discerned in Oils, either simple, or amygdaline, in butter, and fat, which
has no rancidity, either acquired by antiquity, or originary and natural;
such as the fat of Lions and Wolves; in mucilaginous plants, as Althaea, etc.
This has its production from a thin, aeriall matter, temperate in heat and
cold.

A salt sapor does not very much calefy, 4. Salsus.
but by a sharp siccity bite the tongue: this is manifest chiefly in salt and
Nitre; but more obscurely in the herb Crithmum, or sampier: it subsists in a
matter whose ingredients heat and siccity are equal. For in water (which is
not exquisitely simple) the external heat in duration of time, torrefying and
exiccating those particles or atomicall portions of Earth, which are
incorporated with it, induces a saltness and brackishnesse, perceptible by
the taste. There is another salt sapor produced by Chemistry, out of the most
dry and earthy matter, which the extreme and most intense activity of fire
has torrefied to Cinefaction. And there is no compound body in rerum natura,
from which a Chemist may not extract the Calx and proper salt, discernable by
the taste, as from Soot, Tartar, Nitre, etc.

The Austere does both moderately bind, 5. Austerus.
and with a certain asperity or roughness coarctate the parts of the tongue;
and hence, in some measure dry and refrigerate: this is properly called Crudus
sapor, and is peculiar to all fruits during their immaturity, as all observe in
the juice of unripe Grapes, Apples, Pears, Medlars, and also Pursellane: it
consists in a matter moderately participating earth and water, subject to the
dominion and exuperancy of cold.

The sweet sapor, 6. Dulcis:
with suavity and jucundity delights the sense, and is not offensive by the
unevenness or surplusage of any quality: such is conspicuous in Sugar, Honey,
Liquorish, Polypody, Jujubes, and most fruits after maturity, and in most
Lenitive Medicines.

The Bitter is antagonist to the sweet Sapor, is unpleasant and offensive, and
does, as it were, 7. Amayus.
corrade and devil the sense. This notably discovers it self in Aloes,
wormwood, the lesser Centaury and Colocynthis, by whose example the others are
easily discovered. The matter of it is crass and terrene, torrified and
exiccated by excessive Calidity: and hence omne amarum est calidum and siccum.

The sour borders upon the austere or pontick sapor, 8. Acerbus:
but is far more ungrateful to the sense, does constringe and exasperate all
parts of the mouth, and for this reason more dry and cool: prodigally
perceptible it is in Pomegranate rindes, Galls, Sumach, Cypress nuts,
Achornes, etc. it dwells in a composition totally terrene and dry; whose
languid heat is subdued to inactivity by the conquest of its cold adversary,
confed erate with siccity.

The insipid, 9. Insipidus.
fatuous, (...), is not in the rigor of language, a Sapor, but the privation of
it, and does strike the sense with no manifest quality. To this are referred,
all the species of bread-Corn, Gourds, Gitrull, Cucumbers, etc. Though these
are materially crass, yet not absolutely earthly, dry, and astringent, but
dashed with a portion of humidity, which notwithstanding is not exquisitely
permixed with siccity, by the power of heat. And since neither the cold is
potentiall in any considerable excess, it of necessity comes to pass, that
neither the Sapor can be judged of by the Gusto, nor any quality or medicall
faculty investigated by the insensibility of the effects.

We say, Scaliger. Lib. de plantis, primae qualitates pene ab omnious
existimatae sunt saporum causa: tametsi nobis aliter videtur: Nam si sapor a
calore fit, ergo calidum elementum primo and per se sapidum eoeistet; Quid quod
multa calida mista insipida. Quod si quis dicat ex 4 qualitatum temperatione
consici saporem; respondeat, an in elemento quopiam, qua elementum est, sapor
insit? Non sane est. Coeterum, quemadmodum neque vita prodit ab elementis neque
risus, neque sensus, neque intellectio, ne que crementum, neque motus
voluntarius, sed a formis aliis quam elementaribus; ita sapor quoque
though the endeavors of most have steered this course, and thus attempted the
deduction of sapors from primitive qualities: yet have they rolled the stone in
vain: and had not the light of the Chemists Fire relieved our benighted
enquiries, they had yet been groping in the obscurity of error. For we see
good reason to be of Scaligers opinion, that we may as safely deduce life,
laughter, sense, intellection, increment and voluntary motion (actions flowing
from Forms more noble and divine) from Elements, as Sapors from their first
qualities. Wherefore we conclude it more honorable and satisfactory to adhaere
to the laudable doctrine of Chemists, who refer Sapor unto Salt; Sal enim est
primum sapidum and gustabile, and omnia quae saporem habent, eum propter Salem
habent. Ubicunque enim sapor deprehenditur, ibi sal est: and ubicunque sal, ibi
sapor. Sennert. de Consensu Chymicorum cum Galenicis cap. 11. we direct the
unsatisfied to that judicious treatise of L. Grillus de de sapore amaro and
dulci.

CHAP. XII. Of the Touch.
THis is that fertile sense, to whose delicate invitement we owe our
Generation; for had not the wisdom of providence in her design of immortality,
endued the Organs official to the recruit and rejuvenescence of mankind, with a
most exquisite sense of Touching, and annexed a pleasant titillation, or
lustful fury, which transports man beyond the severity of his reason, and
bewitcheth him to the actions of carnalitie; the Deluge had been spared, Mare
Anton. de seipso. Lib. 6. Number. 10 tum Coitus, intestini parvi affrictio,
mucique excretio, non sine Convulsione. Ita vertit Meric. Casaubon.
for the first age had seen the world depopulated, and been the last age; and
humanity had been lost in the Grave, as well as innocence in the fall of our
first Parents. Quis enim, per Deum immortalem, concubitum rem adeo faedam
solicitaret, amplexaretur; ei indulgeret? Quo Vultu divinum illud Animal plenum
rationis et consilii, quem vocamus hominem, obscaenas mulierum parts, tot
sordibus inquinatas attrectaret, nisi incredibili voluptatis oestro percita
essent Genitalia? and let us but abate the temptation of this sense, and the
libidinous charms of it, preambulous to the act of congression, we shall soon
discover that so magnifyed a delight of sensuality to be no other, then what
that noble Stoic Marcus Antonius desined it (...). But the attrition of an
ordinary base intrall, and the excretion of a little snivell, with a certain
kind of convulsion, as Hippocrates describes it.

This that friend that conserves us in our first life, which we spend in the
dark prison of the Womb; ushers us into this, which our improvidence trifles
away on the superinductions of sin, and never forsakes us until our
translation into the future. For when all our other unconstant senses perish,
or are upon small pertubations of the mind suspended, and leave us unguarded,
and prostituted unto the cold embraces of death, this faithful and unseparable
Achates does attend us unto that moment, which shall determine our mortality.
Arist. de An. L. 3. cap. 13. Text. 67.
Hence Aristotle drew that prognostic, that if any creature be deprived of
this sense of. Touching, death will of necessity ensue: For neither is it
possible (says he) that any creature should want this sense; neither to the
being of a creature is it of necessity that he have any sense besides this.

In brief, this is that persuasive sense, on whose testimony, the wary Apostle
chose to part with his infidelity, and to conclude the presence of his revived
Lord: that painful tender sense, on the patience and victory of whose torments,
the glorious Souls of Martyrs have ascended to the consummation of their faith.
That virtuall and medicinal sense, by which the great Physician of the world
was pleased to restore sight to the blind, strength and activity to the lame,
hearing to the deaf, to extinguish the fever of Peter's Mother-law, stop the
inveterate issue of his Haemorrhoidal Patient, unlock the gates of death, and
reduce the Widows Son from the total privation, back to the perfect habit of
life.

Concerning this sense, there are no mean controversies among Philosophers, and
the first inquiry is, An tactus sit unus numero sensus? An tactus unus numero
sensus sit.
Whether there be only one single power of touching (as there is one faculty of
seeing, a second of hearing, a third of smelling, a fourth of tasting) or many
distinct powers? Aristotle moves this query. Lib. de Anima, cap. 2. and
subjoynes this reason of his dubitation, Vnus sensus est unius primae
contrarietatis, etc. One single sense has but one proper object, to which all,
that it perceives, may be referred: But the touch seems not to have one common
object, but many; for it judges hot and cold, dry and moist, heavy and light,
hard and soft, rough and smooth, thick and thin, etc. which are not reducible
to any one common Genus; and the same reason, according to which they are
qualified for the perception of the touch. And by the treachery of this ignis
fatuus, the facility of some, who were far on their journey toward Athens,
has been seduced so wide off the tract of truth, as to fall upon the absurd
belief, Plures esse Tactus, that there is a plurality of touching Faculties;
and of these some make two, one for the discernment of calidity and frigidity,
another for the dignotion of humidity and siccity; others superadd a third, for
the perception of gravity and levity; a third sect determines, that there are
as many distinct powers of touching as there are (...) differences and
contrarieties of tangibles: a fourth has yet multiplied their number, and
superaded others, to the sensation of pain and pleasure, delectation, venery,
hunger and thirst.

On the contrary, many conclude on the singularity of the touch, which although
it comprehend objects in number, numerous, and in nature, various and
repugnant, yet does apprehend them all under one common reason, and determinate
qualification: after the same manner that the sight discerns white, black, red,
yellow, green, and all sub communi colori, coloris ratione.

Although we confess our judgment below the decision of this high dispute, and
that many great Clerks have determined of nothing, but the immpossibility of
its determination; yet probability invites us to this latter opinion: unam esse
tangendi potentiam. For although there be a certain, (...) or material
immutation in the Organ, preambulous to Taction; and this alteration is various
and different, according to the variety and difference of tangibles; yet from
this the unity of the Touch is not aestimated, but only from the spiritual,
alteration, since it is proper to every sense to receive, not the substantial,
but intentionall forms of its proper object. And this spiritual alteration,
which is the same in all the contrarieties of the tangible objects, constitutes
one individual sense, otherways we may find no less variety in any of the
other senses. Neither shall we need to grant a plurality of Touches for pain
and pleasure, since pain and pleasure are not perceived and distinguished by
the Touch, but the objects of those passions.

The other greyheaded contention (devolved from great antiquity to the present,
Organum tactus
and not unlikely to descend to the bottom of future times) is concerning the
instrument of this sense; some concluding for the Flesh, others the Skin, and
most the Nerves: how lame and inconsistent with the integrity of truth each of
these opinions is, our succeeding lines will attempt to declare. Adaequatum est
Membrane.


Since every sense has its peculiar Organ, without which the faculty must
remain useless and unactive: and this Organ is, by the provident law of
constitution and praedisposition, subject to the admission of that (...), or
affection, which the object shall impose or impresse on it; and that part is to
be accounted the Organ, which is manifestly affected, and altered by the
object; we suppose the induction good, if applied to the touch, that in all
members which discern tactile qualities, there is the instrument of touching;
and that part which in every place of the body, is affected and changed by
tactile qualities, is the Organ of touching. And since the touch resides in no
part which is not furnished with a membrane, and econtra, wheresoever any
membrane is, there is the sense of touching also; we conclude, that the Heart
Membranes are the true, prime, and adaequate Organs of the Touch, and that all
parts receive their sensibilitie from them.

Some have endeavored the subversion of this opinion, but with vain and
inconsiderable objections, Non Caro.
for what they urge; that the Flesh is endowed with the sense of feeling, is
manifestly false. For the Flesh feels not per se, or by any sensible power
inhaerent to it self, but as it is furnished with Nervous, or Membranous
Fibers, which are bestowed on the substance of the Muscles: But the Flesh of
the viscera, and glandules, whose substance is unprovided of Fibers, is wholly
devoid of sensibility.

And although Galen teach us, Nee Necuus.
Lib. de placit. 7. Cap. 6. (...) that every part furnished with a Nerve,
enjoys the sense of feeling; yet are we to allow his Axiom true only in a
qualified sense, that is quatenus ipsi nervi membranosi sunt; as the nerves
themselves are membranous, and disseminate their fibrous surcles and capillary
productions on the parts. Otherwise if we consider the Nerves in sensu diviso,
in the naked simplicity of their own natures, as they are strictly and
properly nerves, they are not the proper instrument of touching, but Canales or
conduits inservient to the distribution and transvection of the Animal spirits
into all parts of the body, in which respect they are official to the touch no
more, then to the rest of the senses. But that qualification and endowment of
sensibility they possess, they borrow from the membranes, wherewith they are
invested; as ordinary observation of wounds of the Nerves, especially the
greater ones, will inform us; for the meduallary substance may be handled and
drawn forth of the wound, without any pain at all; but if the coat or membrane
be but touched, most exquisite and invincibletorments immediately ensue.

Concerning the skin, Cutis est instrumentum tactus, praecipuum, sed non
adaequatum.
we grant it to be the common integument of the body, whose principal and
public action is esse tactus instrumentum and ad subjectarum partium tutelam,
to be the instrument of Touching, and discern external injurious instruments
that invade the body; and we believe that Galen said very truly, Cutem, maxim
quae est in manu, omnium sensibilium normam esse, and tactus instrumentum,
prudentissimo Animali proprium, qua, ut communi instrumento, adres tangendas
and apprehendendas, omnium qualitatum tangibilium differentiae melius quam ulla
alia corporis part, dignoscuntur: Yet we cannot concede it to be unicum et
adaequatum tactus Organum, the only and adaequate instrument of touching; but
since other parts could not want this sense for the avoidance of destructive
and noxious objects, nature has been far more bountiful, and diffused it into
the most retired parts; and for this reason the Membranes are dispersed through
all the body, and by their mediation the sense of touching, which in many of
the internal parts is most exquisite and acute.

The collection of all is, that the praecipuous Organ of the touch, is the
skin, chiefly that part wherewith the hands are lined, as destined to the
common apprehension of all things tangible: but the adaequate, are the
membranes; by the benefit whereof, all other parts (the skin excepted) obtain
the sense of Feeling.

FINIS.

