AN APOLOGY AND VINDICATION (From all false and malignant Aspersions) For His
EXCELLENCY, the right Honorable, and most Noble, ROBERT D'EVREUX, Earl of
Essex, and Ewe, Viscount Hereford, Baron of Chartley, Lord Bourchier and
Louain, Inheritour of all His thrice Noble Fathers Honors and Virtues: NOW
LORD GENERAL of all the Forces in Arms in England and Wales, for the present
High and Honorable Court of PARLIAMENT, in defense of the true Protestant
Religion, Laws and Liberties of the Subject. With a true and brief
CHRONOLOGY of what successful things have been done, since His EXCELLENCY
entered into Action; and went from London, which was in Aug. 1642. until this
present year, 1644.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, and are to be sold at his house in Little
Britain, 1644.

An APOLOGY for His EXCELLENCY Robert EARL of Essex, etc. LORD GENERAL of
all the Forces now in action for the KING and PARLIAMENT.
I Have hardly read or heard of any great and famous men but they have been
subject to detraction by some malevolent and censorious petulant peoples
tongues; no Age being without such Animalls: And as this most Noble and thrice
Honorable his Father was, which caused him to pen and publish his precedent
Apology: And even so may we not eft-soones hear the malignant mutterings of
some men, uttering and vapouring detracting aspersions and speeches of this
most worthy Noble and Heree Robert Earl of Essex, etc. And although his
Excellencies several actions in several places speak and proclaim his
Honor, Valor and Apology; yet because the mouths of many Malignants are
subject to calumniate this thrice Noble General, I take leave to commemorate
his Apology and Vindication, as follows:

And first, there is a small Tract entitled A Remonstrance to vindicate his
Excellency Robert Earl of Essex from some false aspersions cast open his
proceedings to the 17 of August 1643. published and Printed, yet though I
confess it to be written by some ingenious Penman, I do and will forbear to
transcribe it, because I will not be guilty of the aspersion of ploughing with
another man's Heifer: But I will set down, ingenuously the very truth upon mine
own observation gathered as I may say, out of the very bowels of truth? The
12 of July 1642. both the most Honorable Houses of Lords and Commons chose and
voted Robert Earie of Essex, etc. Lord General of their Army, and that they
would live and dye with him. About the midst of August 1642. our generous
General passed and rode with a gallant company of Lords and Captains through
London, and the same night went to St. Albanes or Dunstable; and not long after
his Excellency passed into Northamptonshire, sent some Troops with Ammunition,
into Northampton Town, and into the City of Coventrie; and for a time made his
abode and Rendez-vouz in the strong Town of Northampton daring which time,
some of his Excellencies Forces by his directions, namely, two Troops of Horse
under the Lord Says two sons from Banbury, pursued diverse Cavaliers as they
fled from Oxford toward Worcester, and took 8 of them prisoners, which was
about the midst of Septem. 1642. Then some of his Excellencies Forces hearing
at Coventrie, and knowing the Cavaliers had taken Killingworth Castle within 4
miles of Coventry, and there began to fortify themselves, set upon them, had a
great skirmish, slew many of them, and rescued the Castle from them, which ever
since has been, and is kept and fortified by some of the Coventry souldiets
for the King and Parliament, and it is a very considerable place both for the
safety of Coventry and Warwick, it standing in the very midway betwixt the
said City and Town: And about the same time his Excellency took occall on to
write a serious letter unto the then Lord Major of London, which is here
inserted, to the Readers view as follows.

A Letter sent from his EXCELLENCY Robert Earl of Essax, to the Lord Major of
LONDON.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
I Received so great expressions of affections both to the Cause, and to my
self, from the City of London, at my departure from you, that I cannot
despair; but to obtain my saite from you, that shall be an advantage to the
Commonwealth; upon a true judgment of the condition of our affairs, and of
that of the Enemy; I am confident that we may bring this business to a quick
and happy conclusion; God does bless us with so good success daily: and the
other part by their plundering and burning of Towns and houses, grow so odious
that they grow weaker, we stronger every where; yet are we in one great
straight, and such one, as if be not speedily remedied, may dash all our hopes,
and endanger that peace and liberty which we so much labor for; our treasure,
which must maintain our Army, grows near an end, and you well know our Army
consists of such as cannot be kept one day together without pay: what a ruin
it would bring upon us all if a disbanding should happen, I leave to your
judgments: My desire unto you is, That you would supply us with a speedy loan
of one hundred thousand pounds, which I am confident would (with Gods blessing)
bring these unhappy distractions to an end quickly: Your City has hitherto had
the honor, next to God, to be the chiefest safety of the Kingdom and
Parliament, this will render you to all posterity the finishers of this great
work. If any thing of particular love or respect to me may be any argument
here in; I shall take it for the greatest honor that has befalne me and will
oblige myself to acknowledge it by the utmost and most faithful endeavor of

Your faithful friend ESSEX.
From the Rendezvous at Northampton, 15. Sept. 1642.
THus much, gentle Reader, you have heard issuing from his Excellencies own
Pea; whose actions since that time, have daily spoken and told his valor and
wisdom, insomuch that I shall need to say little more thereof, witness
Keinton Field, Redding, Northampton, Coventry, Warwick, Bedford, Newport,
Ouborne, Oulney, and diverse other places in Northamptonshire, Warwickshire,
Glocestershire, Berkshire, Bedfordshire, and Buckinghamshire: His Excellency
often frequenting the Parliament House to consult in his most serious
enterprises; his care of regulating and reducing his Army to good Commanders,
Officers and well disciplined Soldiers, though it is a hard task to a
General and Commander in chief to do; yet who knows not that will be
acquainted with the truth, his Excellency has frequently done it? and therein
he has taken, as I may say, Indefatigible labor, insomuch that we may verily
hope and believe that Gods blessing goes along with his Excellencies Valor
and Wisdom: And let us not be unmindfull of giving God the glory and thanks,
since August last, for the victorious achievements we have had at Gloucester,
at Newbery, and other places: And albeit the sad news of raising our siege at
Newarke did much deject our hearts; yet how soon after did the Lord of Hosts,
whose Cause our Parliament Forces have in hand, make our hearts glad with Sir
William Waller and Sir William Belfore, their routing the Hoptonian forces,
taking of Winchester, and other Towns thereabouts in the West?

Now because it is said, and their Aulicus has vapoured often of our loss of
some noble Commanders; we do ingeniously confess we lost the life of the
valerous Lord Saint-Iohn at Keinton Field battle; and at Litchfield last
year, we lost the life of the thrice noble and religious Lord Brook, Mr.
Hampden, and some others at other places; but no other Nobleman can I call to
mind has lost his life: Contrariwise, on their side, sure we are, the Earl
of Lindsey their first General, the Earl of Northampton, the old Farle of
Denigh, the Earl of Carnarvan, the Earl of Sunderland, Lord Spencer, the Lord
Viscount Faulkland, the Lord D'Awbinie, and the Lord John his brother, and the
French Marquess, have all lost their lives in this rebellious quarrel against
the Parliament, the great Representative Body of the Kingdom, since this
unhappy and unnatural War.

August 22. After His Majesty came to Stoneley Abbey, within three miles of the
City of Coventry, and summoned it by an Herald, and had Propositions from the
City, which he would not assent unto, he caused Ordnance to be planted against
it: And about the midst of September Prince Rapert commonly called Robert came
before Coventry (which was by this time well fortified) and being grown a
great Captain of the Cavaliers, made a show of besieging the City, and let
fly some bullets from their Ordnance, some of which bullets lighting against
the strong walls of the said City recoyled back, and other some flying over the
walls made some holes in some houses, but did not kill or hurt any penson; and
by the valor and wisdom of the Lord Brook, Colonel John Hampden, (or pious
memory) and Colonel Goodman, with the assistance of the Citizens, diverse of the
Cavaliers were slame, and others taken prisoners and Prince Rupert with the
residue of them were sent away with (as we may say) fleas in their ears:
Amongst those that then were taken prisoners was one Captain Johnson an
eminent Cavalier.

Come we now to his Excellency, he in his own person being advanced from
Northampton into Warwickshire, and quartering at Keinton, hard by an hill
called Edge hill, beyond Warwick Town, about eight miles, which with the
Castle was before secured with a strong garrison; there was a great battle
fought betwixt His Majesty's Forces and his Excellency, the true Relation
whereof is so excellently penned by a reverend Divine, and an eye witness, in
an ingenuous Letter sent to the Lord Major of London, that I could do no less
then insert the same here as follows: This memorable battle was fought the
23 of October, 1642.

A Letter sent from a worthy Divine, to the Right Honorable the LORD MAJOR, of
the CITY of LONDON. Being a true Relation of the Battle fought between His
MAJESTY'S Forces, and His Excellency the Earl of ESSEX. From Warwick Castle
the 24 of October 1642. at two a clock in the morning.
SIR,
YEsterday being the Lords day, his Excellency intending to march from Keinton,
a little Village in Warwickshire, toward Banbury to relieve it, unexpectedly
an Alarm came about eight a clock in the morning, that the Enemy was advancing
within two or three miles, which accordingly proved so; and it pleased God to
make my self the first Instrument of giving a certain discovery of it, by the
help of a prospective Glass from the top of an hill: when the two Armies were
drawn into Battallia, about two of the clock in the afternoon, a very sore
and fierce battle began, which continued about four hours in mine own sight
and hearing, much blood was shed, and a gallant spirit expressed by our
Infantry, even to such a degree of valiantness, as may crown every common
Soldier with the honor of a Commander. But the left wing of our Horse being
charged by the Kings right wing, was suddenly put to slight, so that the right
wing in which you son was placed, did the best service for the Chevalty or
Cavalty: where your son is (or any of the rest of my Lords guard) I know not,
I hope they are safe, because upon diligent enquiry, I yet hear no hurt of any
of them. However, if you have consecrated a son to so Noble a Service, I
doubt not but you will endeavor to bear it cheerfully, if you should hear
that he is either stain or wounded. We have lost none of our Commanders (as
we can yet understand) except Colonel Charles Essex, and Sir James Ramsey, who
is other killed or taken: we have taken Prisoners from the Kings side, the Lord
of Linsey General of the Field, with his son Colonel Vavasor, who was
Commander of the Kings Guard and Standard, which likewise we have taken: As
also Colonel Lunsford, who are now both at Warwick Castle, we did beat the
Enemy out of the Field, and gained four pieces of Ordnance. This morning it is
expected that three or four fresh Regiments on our side, as namely Colonel
Hampdens, Colonel Granthams, Colonel Barckhams, and the Lord Rochfords
Regiments to join with the rest. The residue of our Army to fall on the
remainder of the Kings Forces, hoping for as glorious success as before;
Colonel Vavasor assures us that the King himself for some time was in the
Army, we hear no certainty yet concerning Prince Rubert, some say he is
slain. A few of our Wagons were burned and plundered by the Enemy, who
wheeled about into our Reere, but our Musketeers played bravely upon them in
the mean time, and recovered our Wagon again, and six pieces Ordnance
which we had lost, our Enemy had the wind more with them, but we had more of
the hill, we had but twelve Regiments in the Field, about fifty Troops of Horse
(I think) at the most, and some two Regiments of Dragoneers. His Excellency
maintained the fight most gallantly. And our Noble Lords, as the Lord Wharton,
Willow by of Parham, Brook, Roberts, etc. did as bravely. All this has God
enabled our Army to perform, though from Wednesday till this moment of my
writing, the Common Soldiers have not come into a bed, but have lodged in the
open Field in the wet and cold nights, and most of them scarce eat or drank any
thing for 24 hours together, nay, I may say for 48, except fresh water where
they could get it. Mr. Ash was marvellously preserved from the cruelty of four
Cavaliers which set upon him, one of them cut off his hat and raised his hair
with his sword, but never touched his skin. God has brought most of our
Ministers this night to Warwick, Mr. Ash amongst the rest, and Mr. Marshall,
whose danger was no less: For my own part, after I had discharged my duty as
far as I was enabled, by passing from Regiment to Regiment, and Troop to
Troop to encourage them, at the latter end of the fight, not knowing what the
issue of things might be, in the darksome Evening, while it was yet light, I
rid to Warwick among hundreds of drawn swords, and yet was saved from the
least touch of a blood, thirsty hand. The Cavaliets some of them pursuing our
Horsemen, which as I said before, forsook their ground in the left wing of the
Army, and fled to Warwick. Thus much I made bold to inform your Honor, that
you may be able to speak confidently and stop the mouth of false rumors, you
shall do me a favor if you please to let my noble friend Sergeant Major
Skippon read this letter, because it is news proper for his element, I desire
Mr. Case (next to my humble respect to your good Lady) may know that I love him
and his. If you shall think it convenient to Print this Relation, perhaps it
may be useful, if done speedily, you need not doubt of the truth of any part
of it.

ANd besides the victory here at Keinten Field by Edgehill on the Parliament
side, done by his Excellency, there were slain of eminent men on the Kings
side, the Earl of Linasey, who was wounded and taken prisoner, and brought to
Warwick Castle, but shone dyed of his wounds: The Lord D'Aubigney (commonly
called Dawbeny) brother to the Duke of Richmond and Lenox; Sir Edmund Varney
Knight Marshall to his Majesty, and a little before at Nottingham made his
Standard beater; of which three persons the letter does not make mention:
However, after this victory at Keinton Field, his Excellency, as a Victor
retreated an readed himself with his considerable Army into Warwick, and
there he had the strongly situated Town and Castle for his better safety,
during his abode there; where he was with the acclamations of all good people
there triumphantly received and entertained.

And the more particular Relation of Keinton Field battle was Printed and
published afterward in diverse books done by special license and Authority of
Parliament, undeniable to all reasonable men.

In November following, we must confess that his Excellency being blinded
with a treachery of a three days Treaty, the Enemy taking advantage also of a
mystie morning, did in a manner unawares set upon part of his Forces at
Brainceford, commonly called Branford in Mid-lesex upon the Rever of Tames, and
there they did, I say still, most treacherously kill and slay many of our
unprovided men in a very barbarous, butcherly and immane manner; they also
took some of our men prisoners, but not all, as Naworth most falsely
repotteth; for the next day being the Lords day, the famous and charitable City
of London sent almost 100. Carts loads of Victuals of all sorts, Barrells of
Beer, and some Hogsheads of Wine, to relieve diverse thousands of the remaining
Army: And the Lord General being quartered near Brainceford, returned
deserved thanks to the City for their love in relieving his hungry and wearied
Army: But the Cavaliers did miserably plunder the poor naked Town of
Brainceford. And, some say, his Majesty did view the many dead bodies there
slain of his Subjects with good contentment, etc. and soon after he made his
retreat to Oxford.

In March following, 1642. at Hopton heath in Staffordshire, Sir John Gell and
Sir William Brereton, with some of his Excellencies Forces, set upon the
Cavaliers under the command of the Earl of Northampton, a cruel commander
amongst the Cavaliers; where they for the Parliament had a notable battle,
with good success, and loss of the Cavaliers side, and their Commander in
chief, Northampton, was there slain.

In April following, Prince Rupert came to Brumingham in Warwickshire, where
being but small Forces to resist his Cavaliers, he not only plundered and
ransacked the Town, but at his going away, he caused unmanly a great part of
the Town to be set on fire and burned to the ground, which were almost 100
houses, yet albeit the Town Forces were but an handful in comparison of the
Cavaliers: William Earl of Denbigh an eminent Cavalier was there shot and
slain within a mile of the Town; as also an other eminent man, who was
thought to be a Stewart was there slain and buried in Brumingham Church, with
such secrecy that it would not be known what he was.

At Chinner in Oxfordshire, how valiantly and victoriously his Excellencies
Forces behaved themselves, appears by a letter sent by his Lordship to Mr.
Speaker of the House of Commons, dated at Them; which here follows verbatim
as it was sent.

A Letter sent from His EXCELLENCY ROBERT EARL of ESSEX, directed to the
SPEAKER of the House of COMMONS.
SIR,
THere being some of my Horse that had an Encounter with the Enemy yesterday
being Sunday; I thought fit to give the House an Account of the particulars of
it knowing how apt many are to mis-report things to our disadvantage.

About two of the clock on Sunday morning, the Enemy with about twelve hundred
Horse, and a great body of Dragoones fell into a Town called Porcham, where
one Troop of Horse (being Colonel Morleyes) was Quartered of which they took
the greatest part, and from thence went not far to another Village called
Chinner, where they beat up some of the new Bedfor shire Dragoons, and took
some of them Prisoners, and three of their Colors, and some of the Officers
behaving themselves very well, and defending the houses where they were, they
set fire on the Town; these being our Quarters, the Alarm came where Major
Gunter lay with three Troops (viz.) his own, Captain Sheffields, and Captain
Crosses, whom he presently drew out and marched toward the Enemy; Colonel
Hampden being abroad with Sir Samuel Luke and only one man, and seeing Major
Gunters Forces, they did go along with them, Colonel Dulbeir the
Quartermaster General did likewise come to them: with these they drew near
the Enemy, and finding them marching away kept still upon the Rear for almost
five miles. In this time there joined with them Captain Sanders Troop, and
Captain Buller, with fifty commanded men, which were sent to Chinner by Sir
Philip Stapleton, who had the watch here that night at Them, when he
discovered the fire there, to know the occasion of it, he likewise sent one
Troop of Dragoons under the command of Captain Dundasse, who came up to them.
There were likewise some few of Colonel Melves Dragoons that came to them; at
length our men pressed them so near, that being in a large pasture ground they
drew up, and notwithstanding the inequality of the numbers, we having not above
300 Horse, our men charged them very gallantly, and slew diverse of them; but
while they were in the fight, the Enemy being so very strong, kept a Body of
Horse for his reserve, and with that Body wheeled about and charged our men in
the Rear, so that being encompassed and overborne with multitude, they broke
and fled, though it was not very far: For when I heard that our men marched
in the Rear of the Enemy, I sent to Sir Philip Stapleton, who presently
marched toward them with his Regiment; and though he came somewhat short of the
Skirmish, yet seeing our men Retreat in that disorder, he stopped them, caused
them to draw into a Body with him, where they stood about an hour: Whereupon
the Enemy marched away. In this Skirmish there were slain forty and five on
both sides, whereof the greater part were theirs.

They carried off the bodies of diverse persons of quality. On our side Major
Gunter was killed, but some say he is prisoner, and so hurt; a man of much
courage and fidelity, his bravery engaging him, and his small party too far:
Colonel Hampden put himself in Captain Cross his Troop where he charged with
much courage, and was unfortunately shot through the shoulder. Sir Samuel Luke
thrice taken prisoner, and fortunately rescued: Captain Cross had his horse
killed under him in the midst of the Enemy, and was mounted by one of his
own men, who quitted his own horse to save his Captain.

Captain Buller was shot in the neck, who showed very much resolution in this
fight, taking one prisoner after he was shot. Mounsieur Dulbier with Captain
Bosa and Captain Ennis, did likewise carry themselves very well. We likewise
lost two colors, viz. Major Gunter and Captain Shefields; no prisoners of
quality were taken by the Enemy, but Captain Sheffeilds brother. P. Rupert was
there in person, and the Renagado Hurry. We took prisoner one of the Earl of
Berks sons, Captain Gardener, the late Recorders son of London, and Captain
Smith, with some other of quality, and diverse prisoners.

Sir, this is the true Relation of what passed in this business, I rest,

Your assured Friend ESSEX.
Them 19 June, 1643. Also a little before the said time His Excellency wrote
a Letter of gratitude to the Gentlemen Freeholders and well-affected people in
the County of Essex, wherein because his Nobleness is therein seen, I have
also inserted, as follows.



A Letter sent from His EXCELLENCY the EARL of Essex, to the Gentlemen,
Freeholders, and well-affected people in the County of Essex.
HEaring of your readiness to assist in this great Cause with your persons and
purses, for the defense of Religion and Liberty, and what ever is dear unto
us, and of your willingness to rise generally, and to join with other
Counties, to deliver your selves from that slavery and misery that our Enemies
would bring upon us: I do with much joy receive your resolutions, and count it
a special mercy of God, that makes his people sensible of their dangers and
willing to hazard their lives for him, and do judge it the most hopeful means
of concluding these unhappy distractions of the Kingdom. Therefore I desire
you to assure your selves of all assistance from me that the Army can afford,
and my earnest desire is to help you in it. And I desire such may appear in
this cause as have most interest in it; such of whose constancy and courage we
may be assured, men of Religious lives and affections fittest to bear Arms
for truth of Religion, Men of estates to defend those estates that the Enemy
seeks to devour: The employment is not too mean for the best men, and then we
shall hope for success when such put their hands to the work; for assure your
selves, the loosnesse and inconstancy of the Soldiers, amongst others is one
cause of the continuance of the War: I desire you to provide your selves as
well as you can with Arms and necessaries, and to bring six weeks pay in your
purses, considering that the march is long, and but a month of that may be
spent in service: when that time is expired, we hope you may return home with
peace: if we shall entreat your further help, we shall provide for you as
well as God will enable us. Choose Commanders your selves, Colonells and
Captains, when we shall hear their names, we shall send them Commissions, and
when you shall come near us, we shall send some able and experience
Commanders from our Army to assist you, Doubt not of your Country in your
absence, we shall take a course for the securing and quieting of the
Malignants; your safety is in being in Arms, it will be your happiness to
sight with your enemies at distance, and so keep them from spoiling that as yet
peaceable and flourishing County. If God stir the bearts of people to appear
generally, and to prosper our endeavors, we hope the success will be happy
and comfortable.

Your assured Friend, ESSEX.
Stoken Church, 9. June, 1643.
NOw, because some mouths have been more open than they should, concerning his
Excellencies lying so long before Redding before he took it, let it be
granted, that he might have taken it long before he did; but he must then have
stormed and spoiled the Town, and shed abundance of innocent blood of women
and children; of all which he was tender, and like a right Noble General, he
intending rather to starve the Enemy then storm the Town, waited the time to
cut off all relief to come to the Enemy in the Town, which was at length
surrendered unto His Excellency upon Articles and composition, with the loss
of little or no blood at all, but what happened afterward by mortality of some
infectious disease and nastinesse that the Cavaliers had there left behind
them; whereof abundance of His Excellencies Soldiers dyed at Them and
thereabouts, and therefore that Town of Redding was not held so considerable
to keep, which made the Enemy the easier to obtain it again.

In September 1643. His Excellency with a very considerable Army, and being
assisted by the London Trained Band and Auxilliaries came to raise the fierce
siege at Gloucester, which in a short time he successively and victoriously did
raise, relieved the City, and sent the Cavalier besiegers packing, who went
toward Newbery, which Town indeed they took, but His Excellency pursued and
chased them close at the heels, slew many of them at Auburn Chase, and at
length gave them battle within a mile of Newbery, and there slew very many,
and took many prisoners: This fight was the 20 of September, upon a hill near
Newbery and Enburne Heath; and amongst those that were slain on the Kings
party of eminent men, were the French Marquess de la Vienville, Dormer Earl
of Carnarvon, Spencer Earl of Sunderland, Carey Lord Viscount Faulkand: The
Oxonian Aulicus gives Carnarvon the attribute of Incomparable; indeed he was
known for an incomparable swearer, and deviser of execrable oaths, not to be
named: Sunderland had little in him, but lately came to have the title of an
Earldom conferred on him: For Faulkland, he was a learned and hopeful
Gentleman, and pity it was that he ever turned to be a Cavalier, and to lose
his life in so bad a cause against the Parliament, the true Protestant
Religion, the Laws of the Land, and Liberty of the Subject, caetera quis
nescit?

It remains that I should say somewhat of the victorious success that our
Lord General has had by that most valiant Commander Sir William Waller
(subordinate to His Excellency) in the Western parts of Hampshire and
Wiltshire, and the taking of Winchester, and other Towns in those parts.

It is also known to the world the victorious and happy successes that that
the Parliament Forces have had in taking of Milford Haven and diverse other
places in Pembrokeshire, and others at Nawptwich, and other places in Cheshire,
Manchester, and other places in Lancashire, done and obtained by Sir William
Brereton and Sir John Gell: And who is also ignorant of the happy success that
God has lately given to the Parliament Forces at Selby in Yorkshire under the
command of the noble and valiant Lord Fairfax, and Sir Thomas Fairfax his
generous son: For all which our Parliament victories, who knows not that of
late on Tuesday called Easter Tuesday, by command of the higher Powers in
Parliament, it was ordained, and indeed made a Holyday, and set apart for
thanksgiving to Almighty God for His mercies in the late recited successes: And
in all which His Excellency next unto God, whose Cause we have in hand, is
deservedly crowned with Honor: Sit tota Britannia testis,
Vivatque Essexius Heroes.


And all the premises considered, I cannot but wonder at the unparalled
falsity and impudency of G. Naworth the Oxonian Almanack-maker, who in his
Almanac for this presont year 1644. in his brief Chronology of the most
remarkable occurrences since the beginning of this Rebellion (as he, forsooth,
is pleased to term this our lawful defensive War for the King and
Parliament) to invert, pervert and falsify His Excellencies victory for the
Parliament at Keinton Field and elsewhere; which his falsities by the premises
are confuted; and I could more fully and particularly confute all his false
glozing and parasiticall Chronology, but that I find it is already done by Mr.
John Booker, as indeed it was, and is most properly belonging unto him to do,
dixi.

A true and brief Chronology of what successful things have been done since
His Excellency entered into action, Lord General for the Parliament Forces,
upon the King His beginning to declare His Cavalier War against the Parliament.
NExt after Kingston upon Hull resisted His Majesty's hostile entrance: The
City of Coventry in Warwickshire, an eminent and very considerable place, in
the very center or midst of England, stood out and denied His Majesty's
entrance with His Cavaliers, August 22. 1642. and the City was out of hand
better fortified, and His Excellency sent Ordnance and Ammunition into it.
About the same time the Town of Northampton was fortified. Warwick Town and
the Castle (the seat of the Lord Brook) did the same, about the same time.

His Excellencies victory at Kinton battle, October 22. 1642.

Winsor, and the strong considerable Castle, fortified by His Excellency with
a garrison of London Soldiers, about the beginning of the year, 1643.

Redding surrendered to His Excellency 27 April, 1643.

Cirencester commonly called Cicester, surprised by His Excellencies Forces 16
September 1643.

Gloucester siege raised and the City relieved, 8 Sept. 1643.

The Enemy pursued by His Excellency, chased and beaten at Auberne Chase, 18.
Septem. 1643.

His Excellency still pursued the Enemy, and gave them battle with victorious
success near Newbery, 20. Sept. 1643.

Newport Panell, and other places in Hartfordshire, Buckinghamshire,
Bedfordshire and Northamptonshire taken in, and held by His Excellency in
November and December, 1643.

Sir William Wallers victorious success, routing the Enemy near Winchester,
and his taking in of Winchester, Andover, and other Towns in Hampshire, in
March 1643. 1644. and the City of Salisbury rescued and surprised soon after.

Selby in Yorkshire taken by the victorious hand of the Lord Fairfax and Sir
Thomas Fairfax, in April 1644. etc.

To the READER.
THus ends the first part of this Apology for His Excellency, and his
Actions until May last, when as on the 14 day of the same Month His
Excellency went out of London. The second part of His Excellencies expeditions
since that time, you may expect very suddenly, vale.

Published by Authority.

FINIS.

