THE ANSWERS TO THE Reasons offered by the Hamborough Company, For Excepting
the Rivers Elbe, Weser and Eyder, Out of the BILL for a Free Trade in the
Woollen Manufactures of England.
FIrst, they object and say, That the like Bill was rejected last Sessions of
Parliament.

Hamborough Company, alleging, That the Clothiers would be ruined if the Bill
should pass; the House did not think fit to pass it at that time: But the
Clothiers were presently sensible of the decay of their Trade, and have
suffered very much since that time, and have not been able to employ the Poor
as formerly; so that the Parishes are forced to maintain them.

The Hamborough Company object and say, That far greater Quantities of the
Woollen Manufacture was Exported, when the Trade was in their Hands, than since
a Liberty was given to other Merchants to Export the same.

England, and actually exported to Holland, Flanders, Brabant and Germany, to
the value of Five hundred thousand Pounds more than when the Trade was under
the Regulation of the Hamborough Company only; and the Companies Allegation,
That Foreigners have been the chief Managers of this Trade, is a great mistake.

The Company object and say, That they have great Quantities of Goods at
Hamborough, and have, and can, supply the Germans according to their Patterns.

Germans have, for several Years, utterly disliked the Companies way of
Dealing; and, therefore, will not go to Hamborough to supply themselves: And if
they cannot be furnished with Goods directly from England, they rather choose
to supply themselves with Goods from Holland, or elsewhere.

The Company object and say, That the three Rivers of Elbe, Weser and Eyder,
are only the Inlets to the North part of Germany.

Germany, to wit, Francfort, Newremburgh, etc. and they are, and may be,
supplied, through these Rivers, from England, Eight Pounds per Cent. cheaper
than they can be supplied from Holland; besides, the Hollanders have prohibited
all dyed Goods from England: So that if those three Rivers be granted to the
Hamborough Company only, it will be, in effect, a Confirmation of their
Charter; for they will then have the sole Trade to all Germany, because no
other English Merchants can Trade thither, but through those Rivers, unless
such Persons will be Free of their Company; which is, in effect, to ensnare
them to observe and keep their Bylaws, which are oppressive and destructive to
Trade, as has been proved before a Committee of Their Majesty's Privy Council.

The Clothiers and Others, in the West of England, can have Linen and other
Commodities from abroad, cheaper by Ten Pounds per Cent. than from London,
which the Hamborough Company know to be true; and, therefore, they have
obstructed the Trade in those Parts, by vexing several Merchants with unjust
Suits in Law, and in the High Court of Chancery, merely for Trading in the
Woollen Manufactures of England.

The Trading Members of the Hamborough Company are but few; and if the
Clothiers shall not be permitted to sell their Cloth for Exportation, for ready
Money to all Buyers, the Clothiers will, in a little time, be very much
Impoverished, and will not be able to pay their Rents, nor to maintain their
Families.


