Antidotum Culmerianum: OR, ANIMADVERSIONS UPON A late Pamphlet, entitled,
Cathedral News from Canterbury, etc.

BY RICHARD CULMER, Who is here (according to his friends desire, and his own
desert) set forth in his colors.

PSALM. 63.12. The mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped.

Istie thesaurus stultis in lingua positus est, ut maledicant melioribus.
Gildas Ecclesiastic. Ordin. Corrept. Britannia habet Sacerdotes, sed nonnullos
insipientes; quamplurimos Ministros, sed multos impudentes: -- saepius
detrahentes, and raro vera dicentes: veritatem pro inimico odientes, and
mendaciis ac si charissimis fratribus faventes.

OXFORD, Printed by H. Hall. 1644.

To the Reader.
WAlking London-streets, which echo with nothing more of late, then News, and
Newes-books: (Eme Lisippe nevos tota canit urbe libellos) And hearing one,
among the rest of that upstart Corporation (of Newes-mongers) proclaim
Cathedral News from Canterbury, a place whereunto I have formerly had some
relation; and in my progress a little further, finding the very same News
objected to common view on some Stationers stalls, reeking hot, as new as day,
being by the midwifery of the Press newly brought into the world, for the
arguments sake, I could not but turn purchaser, and bestow a small piece of
silver on it, resolving after I had perused it my self, to communicate it unto
one or other of mine old acquaintance upon the place. Retiring therefore to my
chamber, I presently fell to the fetching out my penny-worths: and, though I
found the Canterbury-tale somewhat long, yet the length of it so sweetened with
gallant palate-pleasing mixtures and varieties, savouring as well of profit as
delight, the prime procurers of an authors praise, (Omne tulit punctum qui
miscuit utile dulci) and set off with Rhetorical flowers, and the quintessence
of enticing language, I would not, I could not leave it, after I had once
begun, until a through perusal. And how much the rather, for the noble and
famous Authors sake; a man whose sweetness and meekness of temper, and
Dove-like conditions, do notably answer to that singular antipathy to the breed
of Snakes and Serpents, See Lambard. perambul. of Kent, in Tanet.
by Solinus an old Historian, ascribed to his native soil, (the Isle of
Thanet:) being indeed a man (as I have heard, and partly know) of great
gravity, singular modesty, and other rare gifts, both natural and acquired:
whereof what further evidence needs any man expect, then the present elaborate
piece, the book in hand. This indeed is my opinion; wherein I think I am so
right, so modest in my Encomiastick of the worthy Author, as I shall not need
to doubt of any man's concurrence in opinion with me. And being taken with the
conceit of the Authors leaving the Pulpit, to follow the Press; in a humor I
resolved to leave my old trade (of street-walking) and go to try another while
how I could play the Mercury, and write a piece of News. Furnished therefore
with materials from Thanet, from the Free-Schoole at Canterbury, from
Magdalen-Colledge in Cambridge, from Goodnestone in East-Kent, from Herbaldowne
and elsewhere, I put them in Rank and File, and marshaled them as well as I
could in the following sheets; how handsomely I fear, it being my first Essay
of this kind, the first time I ever offered at the Mercury. Some candor may
encourage the new beginner to study your requital with better fruits
hereafter. In the mean time (good Reader, to be serious with thee) expect not
here any meddling with State-matters, any censuring of Superiors, any reflection
upon the higher Powers: no, the News and the Newes-monger (and some of his
mates) are the sole subject of this discourse, and that only (as thou have it
in the Title) for an antidote against such gross and notorious slanders upon
his brethren, as his malicious pen, under the notion of News, endeavors to
obtrude upon credulous vulgar Readers in these censorious times; whilst, for
want of a mirror to represent unto them the Accuser himself in his own
likeness, what might set a due value and a right estimate upon his censures of
other men, is altogether wanting. Thus advertised, I bid thee Farewell.

Antidotum Culmerianum: OR, Animadversions upon a late Pamphlet, ENTITLED,
Cathedral News from Canterbury: BY RICHARD CULMER.
TO begin with the Title, Cathedral News. News.
What a false Sign is here hung out? What an Ignis fatuus has this Scribler
lighted, both to his Patrons and Reader? Cathedral News? Why how now friend?
What out as soon as in? Out at the very first step? Stumble at the threshold?
Cathedral News, quoth he? Nothing less man. Does not the whole Kingdom ring
of the spoil of many of its goodliest Cathedralls, become Martyria, (objects
of Martyrdom) by the fury and malice of such desperate wild Reformers as you
and: your fellows, since these arms taken up, as at Winchester, Lincoln,
Lichfield, Peterborough, -- En quo discordia Templa Perdaxit nitida --
etc. and is the serving the Canterburian Cathedral in the like kind, or
worse, Cathedral News now? Away, mistaken man! away with your stale news,
stinking stale indeed, if ever any, in the nostrils both of God and all good
men, Profane wretch! abuse Gods House, deface his Temple, and then vaunt, and
boast, and bragg on it? glory in your shame? triumph in your turpitude? make
Ballads of it? add impudence to your sacrilege? Proh scelus infandum! A
peccavi (one would think) a Miserere mei, an humble confession, accompanied
with an hearty contrition would have better become you.

But stay, From whence
what is next? From Canterbury, Cathedral News from Canterbury. To see: what
out again? Fie, blunderer, fie! what another stumble? mistaken still? Call you
this story (of yours) of that Cathedrals course usage, News? No such matter,
friend: it is but the second part of such Reformation-Newes from thence. The
Reformation I wis, of that Cathedral by some friends of yours, begun (you
know, and I fear the streets of Ascalon ring of it ere this time, how much
more every corner of the Kingdom: D. Pask to the Earl of Holland, in August,
1642.
) well near two years since, the true story whereof recorded in a Letter
written to a noble Lord from a worthy member of that Society (however scorned
and slandered by your paultrie pen, whilst you are not worthy to wipe his
shoes) posterity cannot read, without a due mixture of wonderment, and
detestation; detesting the action, whilst they wonder not so much (perhaps) at
the actors as at the age they lived in, crying out with the Poet, O tempora! O
mores!

Well, What.
but the Canterburian Cathedral (for so he adds) is in an Abbey-like, corrupt,
and rotten condition etc. What mean you, friend? the material structure, the
Fabric? If so, it is true enough. Abbeyes indeed ever since their deserved
demolition and downfall, have been in such a corrupt and rotten condition, a
neglected prey to winds and weather; and to the like does that Cathedral tend
apace, thanks to you and your fellows Orderly Reformation, whereby it is
exposed to the injury of all weathers, by removing its wonted glazen shelter
of a strange thickness, insomuch as, what with the Rain sometimes, with Snow
another while, getting in at the broken windows in great abundance, corruption
and rottenness have begun to seize on the walls. And for the Floor, in what a
strange uncouth pickle it was, all the Church The warm and well-seated
Sermonhouse it self (page 2.) not excepted.
over, with the great Snow the last winter, and both before and since with the
rain, is too well known (I wish it were not) both to strangers and
domestics: the story whereof (of that Orderly Reformation, I mean) is not now
to write, though this be no time for truth, and true stories of this kind to
show themselves. Veritas odium parit.

But we mistake the man. This is no part of his meaning. Strange news, and why.
It Is the Political not the material condition of the Cathedral he intends,
the Constitution of the Society there. And is that your meaning, friend? Why
then you tell us news indeed, and very strange news too; such as your fardell
of arguments, a solis particularibus, a mere personalibus, shall never bear
you out in. What? do you think to argue down a Society, a Corporation. a
College, a Company, from the personal faults, abuses, corruptions, failings
of some one or more particular members, and some of them, if true, not their
own neither, but their wives, or their servants? What Society then of any kind
shall ever stand? What Function not miscarrie? Shall we have no more Ministers,
no more Magistrates, because of each sort some have been Delinquents? Doughty
Logic! Or, to argue ad hominem: There have been rakehellie boys sometimes at
the Canterburian Free-Schoole, and such, that, for an offense of an high
nature, being threatened with due correction, have taken Sanctuary in a A shrewd
sign of a bad cause; for Veritas non quaerit angu^os.
Bench-hole, etc. The same, or some other, when afterward translated to the
University, have played as bad or worse pranks there, such indeed as have cost
their authors an expulsion; does it follow hence (good Richard) by any good
consequence in Logic, that either the School or University must down for this?

But to the News, Stranger yet.
the corrupt constitution of the Canterburian Cathedral. What strange news is
here? This verily is novum and inauditum. No sober, no well-advised Protestant,
before these times, ever said it. Pass you shall, for me, for the first that
ever brought such tidings to the ears of any true son of the Church of
England, since the Reformation of that, and the like places, by Hen. 8. In
former time indeed it might, it did deserve the term, and therefore in an
happy hour the hand of providence sent a remedy, changing it from (what you
call it) a nest of idolatrous, proud, lazy, covetous Monks, into a College of
learned and religious Laborers in Gods Harvest, yielding, from time to time,
such numbers of worthy Divines, and of excellent parts, some in preaching,
others in writing, Champions of such value, both (those with the tongue, these
with the pen) against those Samsonian Foxes ( Rome and Amsterdam) as are, or
ought to be, of precious memory in all the Churches of the Saints, both at home
and abroad. Be ingenuous, friend, if you can, and tell me in sober sadness,
The Canterburian Cathedral fruitful of famous men.
what think you of that blessed Martyr Ridley, your own term, and he deserves
it) of M. Beacon, D. Bale, D. Whitaker, D. Saravia, M. Isaac Casaubon, D. Boys,
D. Clerk, M. Wilson, to say nothing of Du Moulin, the famous French Divine,
and others happily as deserving of the modern Society? These and many more such
like, are known (one and all) to have been in their times successors of those
unworthy Monks in this very Cathedral: but can you in cold blood, put on that
more then brazen impudence, as to aver their imitation of them in practice at
the same instant too when your self (a burning and shining light) are in
election to be of the Society? you may if you please; nay what do you less?
when in plain terms you tell us, that these prelaticall successors of the
idolatrous, proud, lazy, covetous Monks, as they succeeded them in place, so
they followed them in practice: and in a scurrilous, scandalous, base
character, call the Society (the Cathedral Corporation,) A nest of
Non-Residents; an Epicurean College of riot and voluptuousness; a School for
complement in Religion, but a scourge upon the life and practice thereof; A
refuge for superstition, but the bane of true piety; The shame of the Clergy,
and the scorn of the Laity: with many other expressions of that prodigious
nature, Page 4, 13, 16, 20. etc.
both in your Epistle, and several other parts of your Pamphlet, such as
Lucian himself would scarcely own. Hence let the indifferent Reader judge, and
tell me, if we are not like to have a goodly superstructure, a precious story,
when the foundation is laid in Lies, in Slanders; of such a latitude, of such
an influence and reflection. What others may conceive of it I know not, but I am
persuaded that the Papists, the Jesuits, with the whole rabble of Sectaries,
will make great advantage of it against us, not knowing what better sport to
wish for, then to see us spit venom, cast dirt in the faces of their greatest
Antagonists, and our chiefest Champions, the Chariots and the Horsemen of our
Israel, the great and glorious Assertors of the True Reformed Protestant
Religion.

But that which follows in the Title, Miraculous News.
though not of so great concernment, yet is more strange still; The Archbishop
of Canterburies Passing Bell rung miraculously in that Cathedral. Here I would
ask him; if he have this by his own observation, or by (others) information.
It seems from neither: for saving here only in the Title, we hear nothing at
all of it in the whole ensuing discourse. And here observe we a fallacy of his:
A Fallacy.
I have the ensuing History (quoth he, in his Epistle) for the most part of
mine own observation, and I have been punctual (see here the Master-he of all)
in examining the truth of what I have by information: but he places this
passage, this news (of the Passing Bell) in the Front, before the Epistle, and
so will avoid an engagement to make it good either way, namely, by Observation
of his own, or Information from others. And consequently, what have we more
then his bare word for it? Ipse dixit. And this no doubt, (out of an
overweening magisteriall confidence given to the Tribe, priding themselves in
a conceit of their arrival of that height of credit in the world, that all
they say shall eo ipso be belieft) he thought would be sufficient; expecting
(it seems) such a belief here, as (out of an implicit faith) is usually
afforded of the superstitious Lay-Priest, especially the Spaniard, to what his
Father-Confessor avoucheth for truth, Well, whilst he expects what he
pleases, say (Reader) is not there more Gate then City? more of promise then
performance? What, friend! promise a miracle in the Title, and prove it a lying
wonder, or a wondrous lie, by a silent passing it over in the work it self?
Bad wine surely, where there is so much bush.

But from the Title, to the Author, the Historian; The Newes-monger.
and who is that now? Why, no Anonymus, no namelesse Libeller, no creeper into a
Bench-hole, as one of his name once was, whence he was ferretted out at last,
tanquam acuse spelunca, and fetched down on his knees with a Miserere mei
Domine! you have his name, and with it his Title, degree, and place of abode in
words at length, and not in figures: it is (Sir Reverence) Richard Culmer,
Minister of Gods word, dwelling in Canterbury; heretofore of Magdalen College
in Cambridge, Master of Arts. And what is Dick Culmer turned Mercury now?
Mercurius Cathedralis? Mercurius Antipraelaticus? 'twas wont to be said: Ex
omni ligno non sit Mercurius. As for Dick Culmer, he is well known in those
parts he speaks of for a sturdy, stout, rugged K -- a man of his hands, and an
able trencher-man besides, in Cambridge, famous for football and swimming:
Otherwise infamous enough: Qualis Gramaticus, talis Academicus, semper idem, no
versipellis.
but who ever thought him cut out for a Mercury before? as being for those
abilities he has, Marti aptior quam Mercurio, fitter for to serve Mars then
the Muses, and Harae quam Arae, the Hogs then the Gods, better at fighting then
inditing. But this is not his first essay at the Mercury: if you would know
when he first sat up, it was about Christmas last, when he took and sent up in
writing to a brother Mercury (as he is communicative) a learned Legend (for the
quantity as full of Lies as his) of the trial and execution of a notable
Malefactor and Countryman and namesake, Doct. Dick: a fair beginning was it
not? to date his first essays from the Gallows. But see the man's popular itch?
O, pulchrum est digito monstrari and dicier hic est. The Gallows, and a poor
base fellon shall be his theme, rather then fail of public notice. A Jove,
no; A cruce principium, it is with him, and much good do it thee Dick, proceed
and prosper.

Alpha tuum quale est Omega sitque tuum. Leaving his name, His-Colledge, and
demeanor there.
proceed we to his title: heretofore of Magdalen College, etc. Since hs is
pleased to provoke me with the mention of his College, I cannot choose but
mind him, and acquaint the Reader with a story of one of his name, sometime of
that College: the same that borrowed (as you heard erewhile) in a bench-hole,
thence called to this day, Culmeri Latibulum; the same that at another time let
himself down Tanet cliffes by a rope fastened about his fathers Cowes horns
feeding by the place, to seek for Dawes nests (an adventure that has hardened
him ever since against all fear of harm by the rope:) 'twas (they say) a red
hair'd, freckle faced fellow, Judas nown complexion, but no matter for that,
caeteris imparibus: we use indeed to say that Vultus indicat animum, the index
of the mind is the maws countenance, but we will answer that with a Froute
nulla fides, it is uncertain aim that is taken by the countenance, the furest
is the conversation. But to my Story: This Collegian getting him a bag ( Judas
bare the bag) for the mending his commons with boiled, buttered wheat, made it
his common practice about harvest time to plunder for wheat in some
neighboring fields. The owner observing day after day that his corn was
stolen, but ignorant how or by whom, watched it one day, and took the thief
damage feasant; but let him first fill his bag, and then dogging him home to
his burrow, the College, made his complaint of him to his Master, who by the
notoriety of the fact finding him guilty, had him forth with into the Buttery,
gat rods ready for his correction, locked the door to them to prevent his
escape, so that in liklihood here was no way but one with poor Dick, to pot he
must; and yet he must not, at least he will not, if all the desperate wit he
can summon up will save him. Inst then as he should go to it, Scelue scelerae
tulum.
he breaks loose from the Master and Butler both, gets him to the barrells,
whereof there were diverse then abroach, pulls out the spickets one after
another, and whiles the Master and Butler, for saving the beer, busily
bestirred themselves to stop these leaks, the key unhapily being left standing
in the buttery door, the fellow turns it, and so escaped out of the buttery
and College both, whither (as some say) he never returned more, being
immediately, according to his just demerit, shamefully expelled. And (if our
Richard be the man) whatever pride he may take in challenging that College for
his nurse, or that University for his mother, neither of them doubtless can
reap much comfort or credit by acknowledging him for their son.

My reasons, if you ask them, besides what are premised, you may collect from
the following character and description of the man, His vertves.
resulting from a posie of some of those rare virtues wherewith he is
accomplished, by which he is known at home, and for which he deserves to be no
less famous abroad then that notable pair of his predecessors Bale and
Martin, (the one a seditious Priest in Richard the seconds days, the other a
scurrilous Libeller in Queen Elizabeth's) or any other enemy of Imparity in
Church or State, ever were in former times. Herein you may expect me, and be
sure (to the best of my intelligence) shall find me, as far from slander, as
himself from truth in most of the indigested stories he relates in that
confused Chaos of his Mercurian Essay.

The marks of the beast are these: 1. Refractorinesse. 2. Impudence. 3.
Covetousness. 4. Hypocrisy. 5. Clamourousnesse. 6. Unnaturalness. 7.
Maliciousness. 8. Doltishnesse. 9. Lying.


And under these heads, as you shall have the man's life, (which 'twere pity a
man of his part should want, and which added to his work, as the laudable
manner is, when the authot's dead, as this man either is, or ought to be, might
the gallows have its due, would much help to vent their thousands:) so
likewise a sufficient answer to most of his accusations of value, his gross
Lies especially, legible enough in every page and passage almost of that false
Legend.

To begin then with the first, 7. Refractorinesse.
his Refractorinesse. Being born to few natural parts, and bred to less
learning, and consequently wanting what might render him and his society
acceptable and graceful to men of parts and worth, he betook himself upon
his first flight from the University, to vulgar association, consorting and
keeping company and correspondence with none, (except sometime by intrusion)
but the Ignobile mobile vulgus, the vulgar spirited rabble, Charron.
a sort of people naturally given to contemn their governors and superiors,
and to quarrel with the present State; (Turba gravis paci, plaoidaeque inimica
quieti.)

Wherein they wanted not for that encouragement which either his doctrine or
example could contribute. The particulars whereof are so notorious with his
Countrymen, as specification will be needless; nay I could not please him and
his tribe better then to enlarge with instances, Irregularity and Inconformity
to the present government (the fruits of Refractorinesse passing in their
account for such rare virtues as they pride themselves in nothing more in these
times. I shall therefore harp no longer on that string, lest I make him and
his fellows too much music, who love so little of what is good. Proceed we
then to another: for Quisnam hominum est quem tu contentum vider is uno
Flagitio? --

Impudence is his next mark. 2. Impudence.
Having a competency of a natural audacity, the man has much improved it with
use and custom; having hereby arrived at such an height of habitual
hardness, as he is become audax ad omne facinus. What action though of any
modest sober man declined comes anisse to him? As he is a great Athenian, 3.
Instance.
extremely given to hear and tell, to take in and let out news, what report
favoring his party, how false soever, will not he spread? you shall have him
(and it is his vain from one end of the week unto the other) like the
News-cryes of London, or as it were some Equus meritorius, or the Cities of
Veredarius, to hackney up and down all the Town with a piece of news that he
likes, obtruding it upon his customers with that earnestness, and backing it
with such asseverations (as, believe it, Sir it is most true, I had it from a
good hand, you may report it for a certain, and the like) that it would argue
want of ingenuity at least, in any that should offer to distrust it. When all
this while, most an end, it is nothing so, but enjus contrarium, etc. a little
time having given the lie to all this confidence, and that not seldom, now and
then by chance, but ordinarily and of course; whereof there is at length that
notice taken by the most, that observation made of his Impudence in this kind,
that tell them but of an unlikely, improbable, unexpected, strange occurrence,
and you shall be answered streightway with a Proverb: th, this is Culmers news.
A Provtrbe.
Such great strangers usually are truth and his reports each to other, and such
a brand of Impudence has this habit of Lying deservedly cast upon him. From
generals, to descend to some particulars.

Was it not a prerty piece of shameless Impudence to aver (as he did) to a
Committee of Parliament (when the Burgesses of the place were by) that the
Screen, 2. Instance.
the Partition built ath wart the Quire of Christ-Church, to which the
Communion Table stands, as formerly the high Altar did, which Screen he labors
to demolish, did join sometime to (rebellious) Beckets shrine; and when the
Burgesses gainsaid him, to persist and stand in it? though himself, as well as
they, knew that Shrine and Screen never stood near each other by diverse rods.

What a strange piece of Impudence was that for him, first to report, 3.
Instance.
as from the Committee of Parliament for Church Matters, or some prime member
of it, that no jot of painted glass must be left standing in this Cathedral:
and when the thing was afterward disclaimed, as never said by those he vouched
for it, to deny that ever he reported any such thing? what playing Fast and
Loose is here? but qui semel verecundiae limits transierit, oportet ut
graviter sit impudens.

How should he be ashamed to charge the Quire-men (as he does in the petition,
4. Instance.
a witty pithy piece of his own noddles invention) with hudling over (what of
late he loves so dearly) the Common Prayer? when he knows, and so do many
more that he was as guilty of the same himself, as any Quire-man of them all.
when Curate of Goodnestone, using in the afternoons to be so quick to begin,
and so nimble to turn over Evening prayer, upon pretense of a long way home:
Going seven nules to suck a Bull; a proverb well understood in those parts.
(by the way note his Non-residence, and his but one Sermon a day, a couple of
the very neglects wherewith he taxes the Cathedralists) that he had done many
times before the people making to Church at two of the clock (the accustomed
hour) were come together, and yet threatening some that thereupon left his
Church with the Commissaries Court. Turpe est doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum.

Was it not an impudent part in him, 5. Instance.
to possess the Parliament with the truth of what he has fardell'd up in
those foul sheets, so as to get them licenced to pass and come abroad by
their privilege and under their protection: when he is conscious to himself,
and it is well enough known to his Countrymen, that never man abused the
Parliament with such a miscellany, such a hotchpot of falsehood, malice and
slander, as by this pasquill he has done? But of his printed Impudence more
hereafter, when, by occasion of his News, we shall take him to do for his
Lying. Thus then for his words, Qualis homo, talis sermo.

As for his Actions, 6. Instance.
who ever put fairer then himself for vivality in fame with infamous
Horostratus (that, to get him a name, set fire of Dian's temple) to his
surpassing Impudence in the whole acting of this Cathedralls late shameful
rifling, in order, I wis, to its through reforming? who but he had the
Impudence to thresh and clash down the windows, in that promiscuous manner
without any distinction of Kings from Saints, of military-men from martyrs, so
contrary to his Commission, the Ordinance of Parliament? for that end with an
over daring boldness, (by his own confession) climbing ladders of no common
height (a shorter one may serve his turn another day) no more scornful then
himself (scoffing Lucianlike) in terms concerning our Savior, and his
Apostles figures at their pulling down? who forwarder then he shamefully to
violate the sepulchers and monuments of the dead? who so ready as himself to
fly in their faces, that expressed but the least dislike of his or his fellows
wild demeanor in that (for the manner at least) scandalous and distastefull
action, Note.
yea and bloody too, witness that sad occasion given to a poor boy to keep it
in mind, by the loss of a couple of his fingers cut quite off, by the violent
throwing to of an iron door, by some of the more furious instruments in that
orderly Reformation? who but he made that place his Refectory, his dining
room, the place of his repast at that time? being so sedulous, hot and intent
upon the work, that to lose no time in following it, he took his bottle and
bag with him to victual himself upon the place. If all this amount not to
impudence, as perhaps with too many judges in these days it will not, I shall
tell you now of Impudence with a witness, and I term it so, because I have it
from an eyewitness of good credit, that, not without just scandal, saw the
deed done, and will be ready, if lawfully required, to attest and justify the
report with his corporal oath. 7. Instance.
What do you think then of pissing in the open Church, and at noonday, in
public view? what the heathens of old thought of such Impudence, their Poets
will tell us, whereof one, thus: Pinge duos angues, pueri, sacer est locus,
Pers. sat. 1.
extra
Mejite --
And another, thus: Nec sitis apparet cur versus factitet, Horace. De art
Poet. versus finem.
ut cum
Minxerit in patrios cineres --


Now though we have no mention of this occurrence in his News, in the story of
the orderly Reformation, (so much of modesty he has left yet:) nevertheless
Ecce homo: we use to say sometimes Mutato nomine, etc. but here it needs not,
for this is he, I say not the man, but it is the beast, the prodigy, that did
the deed in the body of that Cathedral; the first essay I think that ever was
known to the converting it to (what his black mouth does not stick to call
it) an Augean stable. What Christians heart abominates not this unheard of,
profane, lewd impudence, and rises not in detestation both of it and the
author? what? the Temple, Gods house, the place where his honor dwells, the
gate of heaven, the house of prayer, a place to play the beast and piss in,
for any, especially a Minister? Away profane, unhallowed, impudent wretch,
away I by just demerit, if ever any, the shame of the Clergy, and the scorn of
the Laity. Nor Satyrs, nor scourges can serve, Scorpions are fitter to chastise
and expiate thy prodigious impudence.

-- Abscissa viritia vellem
Prodneus sobolem ne generando parem.
Call you this orderly reformation? Is this a piece of that reformation which
the Abbey like, corrupt and rotten condition of that Cathedral calls for? For
shame, beast, recant, repent; till when be sure thou gett'st no other esteem
with me (whiles what others think of thee J pass not for) then of a piece of
obstinate, obdurate, desperate Impudence.

To proceed in our charge, Covetousness is his next mark. 3. Covetousnes. 1 Timothy 6.10. Col 3.5.
But is he covetously given then? why, covetousness is the root of all evil;
nay it is Idolatry. And has the wretch bestowed so much pains, spent so much
time in purging away the numerous Idols, and sweeping them out of this
Cathedral, in clensing that Augean stable (it is the language of the beast) yet
is he himself an Idol-shepheard? VVhilest he preaches to others, is himself
likely to prove a castaway? Does he preach down, pull down reputed, supposed
Idols? and is he himself the whilst a real Idolater? The Major is clear by
the Scripture, the Minor will be easily made good. To leave the story of his
griping usury to be told by his friend, Richard Pising, and some others, [who
can tell you of his gross oppression; particularly, how that letting out money
(100 l) upon an annuity of 10 l per annum, for the interest, assured to him out
of the debtors Lands, and that for certain term of years, he refuses to
take in the money, but will run out the time.] what think you of him (if I
may ask the question) that having a visible fair estate, a liberal fortune,
being worth, suppose a thousand or two thousand pounds, or more, as some, to
whom his estate is not unknown, avouch, which he daily improoves, by the
thriftiest, if not wretchedst courses he can take, and yet shall beguile and
cosen his own sisters of their portions? shall go whining up and down, just
like a mendicant Friar, and plead poverty and want of means, [witnesse the
many visits he used to bestow upon his poor neighbors, (when he dwelt
amongst them) at Herbaldown, to borrow a few pence to buy himself and family
bread, one of those tricks whereby he wound himself so far into the
compassion of a neighboring rich Matron, that in commiseration of his hence
conceived penury, she made him her constant Almesman while she lived, and her
Executor when she died.] shall betake himself to by, indirect, and unwonted,
unwarranted ways for further improvement of his fortunes, seeking (against the
Law of Nature and common Humanity; for Nemo debet locupletari cum aliend
jacturd:) to enrich himself by other men's ruins: shall (because his desert
before these times could never procure him any Benefice of his own) take
advantage of the present opportunities to dispossess another man of his,
flying sometimes at this, another while at that, and still you must note (like
his fellows, followers of the same game with him) at the fairest Livings in
all the Country: You know, Sir Chartham. Ick ham.
who is true and legal Vicar of Minster in the Isse of Tanet, (a man of
unquestionable worth in any but such times as these, wherein the best
accomplishments of learning and virtue, if at least rewarded upon a man by
former times with any suitable preferment, are all too little for his protection
from such envious eyes, snarling tongues, and undermining brains as yours, had
he not all the uprighter Judges) you know, I say, who is Vicar there at
present, and I know and many more with me, whose covetousness prompts him, by
malicious aspersions and false suggestions, by indefatigable, importunate,
implacable machinations, and solicitations against him, to eject and supplant
him: we know who is the Vicar would be. It Is (he shall be namelesse) Dicke
Culmer, Minister of Gods Word, dwelling in Cantorbury, heertofore of Magdalen
College in Cambridge, Master of Arts. And can you blame him? O! it is a
benefice like the Island, pleasant and fruitful. By the way note, that it is
the oil of the full revenewes of that Vicarage that the covets, Note.
bearing little or no affection to the Flock, but to the Fleece. And no
marvel: for were the proportion of his love smaller, yet it is as much as he is
like to have returned him from thence, his good conditions being so well
known, by long experience of that discerning people, his Countrymen (however
courted of him in that Encomium both of them and their Island) that, not
desirous of such a change, they have agreed to deprecate and obstruct his
coming thither, having framed a Petition to the Parliament to that purpose,
under most, if not all their hands. In the interim he stays his covetous
appetitc, (as well as he can) with a morsel nearer home worth some 120 l per
annum, or better, the Vicaredge of S. Stephens near the City, whence by
tricks and indirect practices, getting the proper Minister (onc of those whom
page 11 he misreports for Malignant Cathedral preaching, a man of choice parts,
and well beloved) to be put by, he has intruded into his place, and thrust in
his sickle there, though with as little success in point of acceptance with
the people, as he is like to find at Minster, if ever his project or getting
thither take effect, which when it happens, we will all cry out with the Poet,
Mopso Nisa datur; quid non supremus? These are pretty checkes (one would
think) to his covetous essays, if the eyes of his mind were not obstinately
shut against them, of whose opening till I see some fruits, how can I choose,
but from the premises, condemn the man of Covetousness?

His next mark is Hypocrisy, ^ Hypocrisy.
whereof in a word: The dissembling his estate by daily pleas of poverty and
want of means; his furious shows of zeal to Babylons downfall, Babels
erection rather, his forward bold attempts for the extirpation of superstition
and idolatry, Nobilis Ecclaesia cathedralis Heresordensis; nobilor Wintoniensis
nobilissima Contuariensis. Mat. Paris. Ann. 1254.
by his laying so much about him in the late disanulling one of the fairest
Cathedralls of Christendom; his seeming good affection to and compliance with
the Parliament and Parliamentary cause and ways, his courting and
countenancing the common peoples humor, in their late Anarchicall practices:
when all the world may see that all is done, Impostor like, merely for private
ends, and to serve his own turn, merely to ingratiate and indeere himself
with the Parliament and people, merely as a bait, a net laid to catch the
times applause, merely in ordine ad spiritualia, as a way, a course that may
bring him at length to that spiritual preferment attended with temporal
profit, his ambitious covetous mind too apparently aspires unto: whence can
these proceed but from an heart full of base hypocrisy? Can any tree bear
such fruits as that? Can you not run and read his hypocrisy?

As for his Clamorousnesse, 5. Clamorousnesse.
besides what arguments and evidences we have of it in Print, it has always
been his vain (for want of some of that Comeat-Physicke, which page 23. he
prescribes and gives to others to cure them of the clamorous evil) to mouth
his own grievances, though (for the most part) but pretended and imaginary,
with so much uoyse and clamor in all companies, as if his sufferings, when
either small or none at all, (making Mountains of Molehills) were transcendent
beyond all pattern, above all patience, for easier audience and access sake,
ever pleading wife and children, and a great charge, to the consening of many,
though not over credulous, into a firm belief of (...) and poor condition. Yet
as clamorous as he (...), to others clamours none more deafe-eard then (...)
witness (for a taste) the dance he led a gentle woman (...), coming to demand
some dues of him, and not so (...) to be turned off with frivolous excuses,
from his House (...) all the Town, as far as the Blean, and then (to be rid
(...)) showing her a pair of heels, who would not be shal^^^ off until she
saw the Fox burrowed in a thick wood.

Et cum clamaret (quo nunc te proripis?) illae
Read, Ricarde, meam, Tu post virgulta latchat.
But whilst some are contented with this summary, me thinks I hear others
call for a large narrative of this rare story: for whose satisfaction I will
over it again more punctual and fully. A suit in Law then depending between
our righteous Richard, and one Mr. B. and that being, The Fox hunted.
by consent of both parties referred to certain friends for arbitration, who
awarded him to pay her a certain sum of money; the Gentlewoman, with her
brother and his wife, comes one day to his house in Margarets Parish,
Canterbury, to make demand (in hope to receive) the a warded sum, and finding
him at home, makes known her arrand to him. The man (like himself) presently
fell to making excuses, pretending that he was but newly returned from a
journey, had speedily another to take, and in the interim he was busy at his
study, being to preach the next Lords day which was at hand, and therefore he
could not now intend them. But the other Gentlewoman (one of a more masculine
spirit then her sister, and fitter therefore to encounter such a baffler) well
knowing the man's conditions, replied, Or
that they had a great occasion for the money, that he knew well enough it was
their due, and he was much mistaken if he thought they would be so put off; for
as they came for money, so money they must have, nor would they leave him till
they had it. And for his preparing to preach, it was, they knew, a mere put
off, for they had not forgotten the time when he could brag what an easy
matter it was to him to make a Sermon; he could ride and study, and was able to
make a Sermon on horseback; and therefore they were assured it was no such
hard matter with him now to preach, as that he should offer that for an excuse,
and if that were all, he must not think they would be answered so. The man
perceiving their resolutions not to depart without money, and being as
resolutely bent of his part to part with none, calls in all haste to his wife
for clean band and cuffes, as if indeed he had intended a journey, which being
brought him, and that not serving to rid them away, he takes his cloak,
Culmers progress,
and out of doors he flings, thinking to get loose of them; but it would not
be: for after their Gentleman usher they all trudge, with repeated lewd demands
of their money, who regardlesse of their close pursuit and clamours carries
them on from street to street, measuring out one street after another, with
such large strides and lanching steps as that by what time he was gotten to
VVestgate-street or thereabouts, Mrs. B. and her brother (a fat burley man)
were so far cast behind, Or
and so outstripp'd of their mannerly Gentleman Usher, that they even gave out,
and left him to be pursued alone by the other Gentlewoman, who indeed stoutly
held it out, and followed him so close, (mending her pace when he mended his)
that he could hardly gain ground of her. On then goes Dick, and up to St.
Thomas-hill he makes, The K -- driven
and so toward Christ-Church wood, a good breathing you may think for a
Gentlewoman, being nere two miles from Culmers house, whence they first fat
out: whiles he leads her through the streets, his pace was somewhat tolerable,
and 'twas his wisest way, for otherwise she was resolved to have made her
outcries after him, that all the streets might ring of the occasion. Out of Town
But being once gotten out of Town, and so out of that danger, he made bold to
run other while, thinking so at last to cast her off: but 'twould not serve
his turn, for being a nimble fat woman, (it seems) she held well with him at
all paces, chattering at him all the way for the money, that all they met took
notice of it. At length being about to take the wood, he faces about, and as
once or twice before offers a parley, and asks her what she meant to pursue him
in that manner; she gives him no other answer then before, that go whither he
would she was resolved to follow, and would never leave him till she had (what
she came for) her sisters money. Finding her still harping on that string, and
being deaf of that ear, on again goes he, threatening to show her a course,
if she would not be gone and leave him: why but (quoth she) you will not, I
trow, be souncivill, having trained out a Gentlewoman thus far, but you will
see her home: whereupon he bends his course straightway toward the house where
he knew herself and sister dwelt, and when he had thus ushered her within or
near the sight of the house, he gathers up his cloak about him, and with all
the speed he could, makes to the side of a rough thicket, hard of access,
especially for a Gentlewoman encumbred with long coats, and silken withal, apt
to be torn with bushes and briars, and in there he rushes which when she
perceived, bethinking herself of the difficulty of a further pursuit, she
gives it over with this farewell to her game: Nay now I see the Fox is
burrowed; e'ne go thy ways then, and be hanged, for I Will follow thee no
further. And so you have the story.

Passing from whence, let us have at him for his Unnaturalness, 6.
Unnaturalness.
which indeed is so notorious and gross, as no heathen almost but would blush
to be so justly taxed for the like. It is a saying as true as trite: Ingratum
si dixer is omnia dixeris. Nothing can be added to aggravate that man's crime
that is once justly taxed of Unthankfulness. And can any unthankfulness
equalize (not to dream of transcending) that of a child to a parent? and
wherein is or can that be better tried, then when need, especially if
accompanied with old age, has rendered the unfortunate parent a fitting object
of his child's relief? and such a one is old Culmer, the Historians father, a
poor aged man, and in point of providence to blame in nothing more, then for
too soon parting with what estate he sometime had to this unnatural some of
his, who now, in requital, so much neglects him (not for want of ability, but
will to succor him) as the whole Island where he lives rings of the Impiety,
whilst the Monster never seeks to lay the clamor, values it not, weighed with
the saving of his money, being ready to take up that of the Poet: -- Quid enim
salvi infamia nummis? No marvel that he proves such a rebellious son to the
Church, his mother, that is so unnatural a child to the poor aged man, his
father.

As for his Maliciousness. 7. Maliciousness.
Not to insist on his continual suits in Law, being indeed a notable
Vitiligator, and legis quam Evangelii peritior, a better Lawyer then Divine; I
will trouble you but with one instance of it, which concerns a Gentleman of
birth and credit, brought in question for his life by the treacherous malice of
this grand impostor, who with open mouth, and all possible aggravation, accused
him to the Councell-Table of treasonable speeches, Recited verbatim at the end
of this Treatise, and purposely referred thither, because too t^dinus for this
place.
occasioned by some discourse between them about eight or nine years since
concerning the Ship-sesses and Impositions of those times, in saying (as the
very words of the impeachment, under his own hand run) that, if we have such
taxes laid upon us, we must rebel, or we must be feign to rebel, or to this
effect. And the better to curry favor, and purchase the more credit to his
indictment, what sincerity of duty does not the counfeit profess therein to
God, and his Sovereigne Lord King Charles? for whom (says he) I pray from the
bottom of my heart (a hollow heart sure, Dick Culmer a Royalist.
without bottom ( that the Lord would preserve him from Dick Culmer, and his
fellows, a sort of) seditious and rebellious men: with many other overtures of
loyalty, seconded with other of the same stamp) in a letter of his (which I
have seen) to a noble friend of the accused Gentleman, written shortly after:
wherein what professions he makes of the good liking he bare to the Service
book, the catechisticall part of it especially, (his stedinesse and care to
continue constant to those professions being so eminent) I may not here,
without wronging the man, pass over in silence: which are these: Yet did I
(quoth he) clearly manifest my loyalty, in that I did so publicly take his
Majesty's part, (loyal Richard I well fare thee) and in my Ministry I have
showed (full sore, An Advocate for the Liturgy.
I doubt, against thy will) the like care; a special proof whereof I showed
(till thou saw thy time) in my short form of Catechism, which I used many
years (before their eyes were opened) and resolve to use again (till time
beter serve thee to cast it off) if it please God to restore me to the
exercise of my Ministry. Which form begins thus: Now we have learned to
say the Catechism, etc. let us see more fully the meaning etc. Quest. What say
you of our Catechism in the Book of Common Prayer? Answ. (Why, it is like the
rest of the Book, Popish, Idolatrous, Superstitious trash, etc. no stay) The
Catechism in our Book of Common Prayer is good, and commanded by the Kings
authority, Quanium mutatus ab illo!
and therefore we should all learn it, etc. (O thou limb of Antichrist! what
Prelat of them all could have said more?) But ad rem. You have heard here of a
heinous and capital charge from a vessel (of malice absit! no) of Loyalty of
Conformity, like to produce what? but the ruin of the accused, by the
forfeiture both of his estate and life. A sad tragedy toward doubtless. And
yet to see, no such matter: for audita altera part, when the accused came to
his answer before as equal as honorable Judges, he so fairly and fully purged
himself of his foul, but false crimination, as brought the business to this
issue, that the accused innocent Gentleman was absolved, dismissed, whilst his
malicious unjust accuser was committed, imprisoned (a due reward for such a
Perillus, Nec enim lex justior ulla,
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.)
As by the ensuing transcript of the Order of the Councel-board in that
business will appear to the lasting shame and infamy of such odious malice,
heightened in this, A treacherous guest.
that the place where these pretended dangerous words were uttered, was the
accusers own table in Christmasse time. No marvel that a Noble man, (one of
the Councell-board) thereupon let fall this wish or deprecation rather: From
such guests good Lord deliver me! Add hereunto that they were concealed, and
not complained of, till almost half a year after, in revenge too, for the
Gentleman's being (as was pretended) a means to dispossess his accuser of (what
he mouths so much by the name of his Benefice) his Curatship, a little before
his complaint preferred; which it is known he lost for refusing to read (what
he has since been heard to wish he had read) the book of Liberty. But to the
transcript taken from the very original under seal. At Whitehall the 9 of
October. 1635.

Present Lo. Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace. Lo. Keeper. Lo. Privy Seal.
Earl Marshall. Lo. Cottington, Mr. See. Wyndebanck.

Whereas upon an information given by R. C. Clerk against E. B. of B. in the
County of Kent Gent. the said E. B. was sent for by warrant, Note.
and bound to appear and answer the same before their Lordship on Friday, the
9 of this present, this day both the said parties having been called and heard
before the board: their Lordships finding the said information and complaint
against Mr. B. to have been causlesse and unjust, did think fit and order,
that he should be forthwith discharged from any further attendance concerning
the same, and that the bonds by him entered into for his appearance should be
delivered up unto him. Lastly, that the said R. C. should, for such his
misinformation and abuse stand committed prisoner to the Fleet. The 12 Tables
would have condemned him to death: Qui falsum testimonium dixisse convictus
erit, saxo Tarpeio descitor.
Ext. etc.

And now (Reader) what think you of his Maliciousnes? I conceive you expect no
further evidence. Leaving that then, let us try him next for his Doltishnes.

And for that, 8. Doltishnesse.
if he please, he shall have his book, let him be tried by that. What
judicious man having read the promising Title page (where he finds the author
arrogating the Title and degree of a Master of Arts) looks over the book, can
refrain from a Scribimus indocti, doctique etc. of a Parturiunt montes etc.
can conclude it to be other then a mere unworthy ridiculous piece, a pitiful
poor, jejune, dry, dull, empty essay for a Master of Arts? Can he be thought
other then a mere Ignoramus, a Duns, a Dullard, a Dolt, a Culmer that has
fardelled up a deal of bald, bold, base, virulent, scurrillous stuff, as void
of learning, as of truth, as void of method as full of malice, written surely
with ink mixed and made of vinegar and kennell water, A foul pen.
and fitter for nothing then the basest of necessary uses? what Master of Arts,
but he would not be ashamed of such a blue come off? had he not great need to
print his thousands?

Quid dignum tanto tulit hic promissor hiatu? But (here is the knack on it) it is
fitted to the genius of (his old patrons) the vulgar, calculated to the
meridian of their capacities: and if the people, the rabble, the multitude,
relish, taste, resent it well, quoth Dick, why Hey then up go we. If it please
their palats, and take well with them, satis est superque; having never yet
learned (it seems) that Principibus placuisse viris non ultima laus est.

But what says he? Equisonem quam equitem mihi plaudere cure. Thus expects he
aurum e stercore, -- ^^e.
like a mere dunghill craven. But though (by his own confession) it is sure
working by the book; yet that is not all the evidence we have to prove his Duns
ship. Ask about in the places of his greatest concourse, amongst those, if you
will, that best affect him, and you shall never find their respect, their
affection toward him grounded upon any learning or Schollerlike parts that he
is guilty of. It Is confessed of all hands, that he is a very mean, dry, dull
preacher, a worse disputant, and for the pen, fit liber Inden, I appeal to his
book. What it is that has commended him to their affection, and begat their
esteem of him is, his forwardness to hear and carry news, and to be active
and dextrous in such works of orderly reformation, as that whereof he blusheth
not to make his boast in that Lying Legend. As for any other matter worthy of
note in him, they are all as great strangers to it as himself. But enough of
that.

Now to his Lying. I have heard of a youth, one of his Tribe, 9 Lying.
a bold, factious fellow, for Schollership as errant a blockhead as himself,
for conversation (it may be) somewhat looser, much taxed for a notorious Liar,
and so noted for it at the University, that a common noted Liar, by a new
invented Proverb amongst them, was nicknamed after him; how well he deserved
it, I partly know, but how our scribler, Dr. Dicke, deserves the like, all the
City, and parts adjacent, by long experience of his common, customary,
habitual lying, know so well, that were it put to the vote there, whether or
no a notorious Liar should be called a Culmerist, I dare warrant you it would
be resolved upon the question, perquam paucis contradicentibus, in the
affirmative. Whence else our common Proverb of Culmers News, A Proverb.
taken up for an odious untruth, a loud Lie? A faculty that has so disparaged
his intelligence, whereof he makes a trade, that truth, and true intelligence
fares the worse, and wants that credit it deserves, many times, with most of
his good Masters, for coming out of his mouth so accustomed to run over with
flammes and falsehoods, the just reward of a known convicted Mendax ho^
lucratur, ut cum vera dixerit, ei non credatur. Arist. apud Diog. l. 5
liar. By the way, tell me, are we not like to have Peace and Truth meet apace,
the hearty and unfeigned wish of all good Protestants, and true Patriots,
whilst these hypocrites mouth nothing more, mean nothing less: are not these
(I say) like to meet and greet apace, when, least our peace should return,
before their ends, their turns are served, to continue their dismal distance,
we must have such fomenting of divisions, such flattering of parties with Lies,
lies by the living, lies by the dead, lies from the Press, and (would I could
not say) lies from the Pulpit too? But all this while we speak without book:
It Is sure going by the book, says Dick. Let Us then from his verbal,
transient lies (whereof somewhat before in his Impudence) to his printed,
permanent lies: yet not all those neither, for fowling too much paper, but here
and there one, for a taste and test of the whole pack, as we use to say, Ex pede
Herculem, you may judge of Hercules dimensions by his foot.

Not to repeat that which bears the bell from all the rest, 1. Instance.
the Passing Bell; and to pass over the Petition marching in the Front, that I
may not seem so rash as to grapple with a multitude, though the thing without
all question be properly his own, as the Amanuensis, who lead the Petitioners
into a manifest untruth, when he made them certify, that Doctor etc. was
Parson of Hith, Parson of Ickham, Parson of Well, Parson of Salt wood, etc. and
Doctor etc. Parson of Back-Church in London, Parson of Barham in East-Kent
near Dover, Parson of Bishopsbourne, etc. when he knows, as well as hundreds
more in those parts, that as Hith and Salt wood are but one and the same
Parsonage, Ickham and Well another, so Bishopsbourne and Barham are no more,
though he reckon the Chappells as several and distinct Parsonages, (one of
which, Well, is long since desolate) and marshall them so far asunder, that
his fallacious and unfaithful dealing may be the better hid. To let these
things pass, I say, and come to his Pamphlet.

What an impudent lie is that, (...). Instance.
page 4. where, with saucy language toward most of the Bench, whom he calls
malignant and Prelaticall Justices, he affirms that they so bestirred
themselves, that the arraigned Cathedralist was ('it is plain, he means
unjustly) acquitted? when it is notorious in the Country (and we have nothing
but his bare word in contradiction) that the business had a square, fair
trial, and the prisoner, by an whole dozen of honest and unbyac'd Jurymen,
was legally a quitted. Thus for the text. Now what says the margin? Why, A
Cathedral less beguiled by a Singing-man. Like text, like margin, both false.
The beguiler, he knows, (nor is it unknown to Town and Country) was no
Singing-man, but a Townsman a Surgeon, that but a while before left the City
to dwell in the Church. Now when in a thing so fresh in memory, he dares to
falsify so grossly, what truth may we expect from his stories of occurrences
pretending to 30. or 40. years standing? Withal, see what a tale he has here
chosen to begin with, to defile his own nest Turdus sibi malum cacat.
withal, like a cursed Cham, to discover his fathers shame, by reviving the
story of his quondam-questioning for beguiling a wench, in those days called
begetting a bastard, which otherwise was well nigh buried in oblivion.
Doubtless (friend) neither Father nor Cui pater est populus, non habet ipse
pa^rem.
Fatherless have reason to con you much thanks for this occasion of making
their credits to bleed afresh, by such unadvised tale-telling.

But since you will needs provoke the discourse (by talking of Bastards)
prithee, man, tell me (as you are an excellent Casuist) what may be thought of
their children that marty themselves? The validity (...) new-fashioned
marriages debated.
(as a precious pair of your acquaintance lately did in Canterbury:) or of
theirs either, which you and your fellows use of late to couple, and put
together ( marrying you would have it called) after an upstart, newfangled (I
should say reformed) way of your own devising; with utter detestation, waving
that of the Church of England, both in point of what is to precede the
solemnization (publishing of Banes, etc.) and in the solemnization it self
(the Form prescribed in our Liturgy established by Law.)

Admit, upon occasion, their Legitimation come in question, what, 1 As to the
Issues Legitimation.
I say, in the judgment of sober men, regulating their opinions by the Law of
the Land, may be thought thereof? or how shall it be justified? when the
policy of this State hitherto (for I speak not of the future, not knowing
what tomorrow may bring forth) allows not of (what their legitimation depends
on) their parents intermarriage in such a case.

And does not the like scruple offer it self in point of dower? 2 As to the
widows dower.
For, suppose that after such a mock-marriage, the good man dying, the widow
be put to sue for her dower, and consequently to plead the accouplement en
loyal matrimony, I would fain know how in this case she shall be able to
justify her plea, being married after such a sort as the Church of England (to
whose connusance the State transfers the plea) is so far from approving, that
the parties so coupled, in her construction, (if those that know her mind, I
mean, Lawyers, may be credited) are so far from being man and wife in foro
fori, that if in foro conscientiae they find no tie upon them to the contrary,
they may even forsake and leave each other when they please, without control.
And what fine work, my masters, this may chance to make in time, judge ye. But
by the way take this story along with you, as in my judgment not impertinent,
not borrowed from either Plato's Commonwealth, or Sir Tho. Mores Vtopia, but
of that reality and certain truth, that 'twill be no news at all to many now
in London, ready with an Ecce (as it were) of demonstration, to point out the
parties. A watch then being lately set on foot between a young couple in
London, and both parties and parents so far agreed, An instance (...) such a
marriage.
both in point of portion and otherwise, as that nothing now was wanting of two
to make them one, but an orderly solemnizing their nuptial rites, they must
needs, forsooth, be married (for so the maids father will have it) after the
new fashion, without asking, without license, without ring, without book. The
young man (for the present) dissembles his dislike of the way, and suffers the
father herein to have his will. With the sequel of it.
After this mock-marriage, what do the young pair, but, like other married
couples, live and lie together? and, by the provocation of such opportunities,
somewhat at length followed, that required the countenance of a real marriage;
which the young man perceiving, and being unsatisfied both with the way of his
marriage, and with the sum of his wives portion; or, it may be, intending to
take advantage of the invalidity and illegality of the one, to procure an
augmentation of the other, and thinking the time now come to do the feat, what
does he, but, as if clear of all conjugall bands, and no way obliged to
nuptial duties, forsakes his pregnant bedfellow, disclaims her for his wife,
A whore and a knave.
nay and in dispute about the matter with her father, that he may cast the
Whore upon her, is contented to take the Knave unto himself: so that, in
short, for his part, actum est de connubio, he will no more of the match, unless
(for, after much ado, to these terms they came at length, and this was that
the young man had in project all the while) to that portion which he had had
with her already, such a further sum might be added as he required, and that
they might withal be married after the old orderly manner, in the legal way
of the Church of England: upon which conditions, and not otherwise, he would
take her for his wife again, and use her as became an husband. The old amazed
Father-in-law finding himself thus unexpectedly caught, Wily beguiled.
so much of his money gone already, and, as it proved, to no better end then to
have his daughter, after so long prostitution, turned back upon him with
disgrace, and all for want of a right and orderly marriage pleadable in Law,
thinking it his best way to make a virtue of necessity, condescended to these
harsh demands, pays down what money was required, and suffers a second (that
is, a right and orderly) solemnization of his daughters marriage to the same
man, being well laughed at for his pains; and whether served in his kind or
not, let any but his peers, such innovating coxcombs as himself, be judge.

Another such like mock-marriage there was, 2. Instance.
happening much about the same time too: but the advantage here was taken on
the woman's part, whose portion being in her brothers hands, and he refusing to
part with it, unless verily she would take an husband of his choosing (a
zealous brother, forsooth, whom she affected not, being indeed in league with
another man before:) she cunningly dissembles her consent, so as upon the
wedding day she might herself receive her portion. Her brother condescended:
so married they were in that spick and span new way. With its sequel.
At night when the Bride should go to bed, she conditions with her Groom, that
since they were married in a new way, so after a new, though preprosterous
order of entering the nuptial geniall bed, he should go to bed first: he did
so; then (having taken a former opportunity to conveigh her marriage-money into
her fore-intended husbands hands) she pretends an occasion to go down, leaving
the poor mistrustlesse gull in bed, expecting her return, and making sure
account to exchange a maidenhead with his Bride that night; who intending
nothing less, and having provided all things in a readiness for her escape,
gets her away after her money, and the next day, or shortly after, became his
lawful wife (by right way of marriage) whose she was before by affection, and
so continues, the former-mock-marriage notwithstanding. But are we not
unmannerly to leave Richard thus long? Craving then his pardon, we proceed.

As for the Glory-cloth, whereof in the Petition, 3. Instance, The Glory-Cloth
vindicated.
and again page 6. to stop the Liars mouth, and satisfy such as are capable
of it, sober men, the truth of that business is shortly thus: The late
Duchess Dowager, of Lenox (no Papist, I know unless her pious legary must
make her so esteemed,) amongst some other like bequests, contained in her will,
giving to this Cathedral 100. pound sterling, at such time as the Society was
in consultation for repairing some decays about the ornaments, and utensills
of their Church; the back-cloth upon the Screene, or Traverse, being much
discolored, with age, and the Screene it self a goodly piece of carved
Tabernacle-worke, The Screene,
which though overlaid with gold, yet when stripped of the imagery that sometime
was about it, the pious and prudent (Reformers of old thought fit to be left
standing) in many places of it, by the golds wearing off being gonne also to
some decay; with this 100 pound legacy, and somewhat added to it of their own,
they purchased a new cloth of purple velvet, and hung it up in the room of the
other; repaired the decays of the gold about the Screene; and for the further
adorning of the cloth, and minding the beholders of the deadfulnesse and
sacredness of that place, not in it self, but from the high and sacred Agends
there, for the better seasoning and preparing the approachers minds with
fitting thoughts and meditations in their addresses thither (fear and
reverence being to walk hand in hand with faith and repentance in that
sacramental action) purposed and took order to have imbroydered on it in gold
and silver, what? why even no more then is pensill'd in as glorious a manner at
the head of most Chancells in London, above the Decalogue, the glorious and
dreadful name, Jehovah, with suitable embellishments. And what matter is there
in all this of scorn, of clamor, of making the world believe that this Glory
is their Shame? Indeed, Nunc aliud tempus, alii pro tempore mores.

How false (next) is his relation concerning Dr. P. page 10. where although he
have the impudence to averr that the Cathedral gates were shut a day or two
for his rescue and defense against the Magistrate and People, 4. Instance.
etc. yet in truth there was no such matter; no shutting of gates, but in the
night time, as at other times before and since, till they were heaved off and
laid by. Nor did the party ever hide himself, or was concealed by the
Cathedrallists, as he pretends, but when demanded by the City-Magistrates,
presently yielded himself without the least resistance, either by word or deed,
as many both of the Church and City of more credit then Dr. Dick, can, and, if
required, are ready to attest.

To let pass his Lie of the Mutiny at Canterbury, 5. Instance.
recorded page 12. a thing that never was above ground; see how he faulters and
falsifies in his Winters-tale concerning the fall of the Vane and Pinnacle,
page 13. going about to persuade strangers (he cannot those that live upon the
place, and know the contrary, and so dare tell him to his face) that the Vane
with the Archb. Arms pulling down the Pinnacle which upheld it, in the fall was
carried (partly against the wind) a good distance from the steeple, and fell
upon the roof of the Cloister, in which Cloister the Arms of the
Archbishopric of Canterbury were carved and painted on the lower side or
concave of the arch or seeling of the Cloister; which Arms in the Cloister were
dashed in pieces by the Arms which fell from the Pinnacle of the steeple. The
Arms of the present Archbishop (so he sums it up) brake down the Arms of
the Archbishopric or Sea of Canterbury: adding in the next page, that the
Cathedrall-men repairing the broken Cloister, gilded and painted the arch over
head as it was before: but (says he) they have made other Coat-Armes in the
room of the Arms of the Archbishopricke, because they would conceal the
strange ruin of those Arms. Mendax lingua quo vadis? for here is lie upon
lie, one in the neck of another, sic unda supervenit undam, and those, for a
taste of his Poetical learning, summed up in the close with certain capring
times, to give his Readers palate some variety, or rather for the lies better
authorizing: for Pictoribus atque Poetis, etc. what Privileges Poets and
Painters have in this kind, is notorious. Would you know the truth? Then thus
it was. About the time he speaks of, Truth cleared concerning the Vanes.
such Vanes were indeed erected for the common benefit and accommodation as
well of strangers traveling by those parts, as of the Inhabitants upon and
near the place; the supereminent place of their chosen positure, yielding
great advantage for a vast latitude of public aspect. Of these ('it is true)
that with the Archbishops Arms upon it, in that great storm on S. John's
night, 1639. fell, and in the fall drew down with it the top of the pinnacle
whereon it stood: but that the Pinnacle and it were carried any distance from
the steeple, with the wind, much less against it, is most false; since who yet
observes may see, they fell directly down into that corner of the Cloister
underneath, almost contiguous to the very pillar of the steeple which supports
both Pinnacle and Vane.

What he adds (that in their fall, they bare or brake down the Arms of the
Archbishopric carved and painted on the lower side or concave of the arch, or
feeling of the Cloister etc.) is a lie as notorious as the former, there never
being any Arms of the Archbishopric either carved or painted in the place of
the breach; nay no Arms at all, but such ordinary work as in the rest of the
untouched roof on all parts thereabouts is at this day to be seen. It Is true
there was on the one hand of the breach, the Arms of the noble house of
Arundell quartered with another coat, as there was of some other (or a plain
shield rather) on the other side, and those are standing still, undemolished by
the fall: but for other Arms there or thereabouts, of the Archbishopric
especially, though magisteriall Richards own self averr it, yet (if Cuilibet
in sua art, perito esse credendum
Heralds and others may be credited to whom the Cloister with the Arms about
it, by curious and frequent observation taken of both, before this breach was
made, was and is better known then ever to him, or any of his tribe) he lies
as grossly, as the man you wot of that told us of the miraculous ringing of
the Archbishops passing bell, or as he that talks of eating a Sackposset out of
the Cathedral basin, p. 20. or as he (the very same hand guided both pens)
that said, the Minister that succeeded M. Culmer. upon his suspension, for
refusing to read the book of Liberty. shortly after drowned himself. Nor does
he otherwise when he assigns the reason for taking down all the other three
Vanes, to be Cathedrallists policy, for taking away the observation and
remembrance of that downfall, which concerned their gracious Diocesan, and
great Cathedral so much. Whereas the known and only cause hereof was, an
experience by this unhappy accident, of the weakness and inability of the
slender pinnacles to support them in stormy weather, without indangering the
steeple: a thing, from the very first, so much feared of the most of the
Churchmen, that, but for the forwardness of some one or two, (whereof the one
in Office for that year, who afterward smarted for such his forwardness,
being at his passing his accounts, made to pay some part of the charge out of
his own purse, as I have heard) they had never been set up; so strong was the
opposition against it from the rest of the company.

Where he insinuates (page 18.) that none but Proctors, 6. Instance.
Fiddlers, Tapsters, and other friends of the Cathedral and Prelaticall party
at Canterbury, were for the Archbishops Secretary to be Burgess there etc. how
saucy and false too is he in that assertion? when it is known, nay the fellow
knows it himself, that the then Mayor, all the Aldermen, but one, most of the
Common Counsel, besides diverse prime Citizens and Freemen, that were neither
Proctors, Fiddlers, nor Tapsters etc. gave, or were ready to have given their
voices for the Gentleman's election. By the way, friend, how rude and uncivil
(not unlike your self in this saucy term reflecting, if you mark it, upon no
small number of your good Masters) the opposite party was in that action, I
report me to the indifferent and sober party of that assembly.

As for his assertion and triumph, in that absurd comparison, 7. Instance.
page 24. That now there is no such heterodox malignant Cathedral stuff heard
at Christ-Church, as before this blessed Reformation, etc. What he means by
such epitheted stuff I know not. But it is too well known to Town and Country,
that since this blessed Reformation, since the settling this able and orthodox
Ministry, as he calls it, since these young beardlesse boys came thither to
preach in Quirpo, since this change of Aenea pro aureis, of Dross for Gold,
there has been and is such strange matter delivered there for Doctrine, such
upstart newfangled stuff for Discipline, as startles many sober, orthodox,
New Cathedral preaching, new.
well-affected Christians to hear, One cries down the Liturgy (the
Service Book established by Act of Parliament) with stale, threadbare, long
since refuted, exploded arguments, picked from the scurrilous, libellous papers
of Martin Marprelate, T. C. and their fellows. Another labors to disaffect
his Auditors to it, with odious comparisons betwixt it and conceived prayer,
resembling that to the constant and unvaried note of the Cuckoo; this this to
the sweet and changeable tunes of the The same mouth was since that, out of
another Pulpit, heard to wish, that all those that bowed at the name of Jesus,
might be crooked, and that as many as kneeled at receiving the Communion, might
rise up no more, or to that effect.
Nightinghale. One (and more then one, and with more then ordinary violence
too, and demonstration of the spirit of contradiction of the orthodox Doctors
and Doctrine of our own and all other reformed Churches:) will have no
Communions at all, fiercely condemning it both in the giver and receiver,
because, forsooth, of the mixture of good and bad, the precious with the vile,
at those meetings; Anabaptistically fancying to themselves, and no less
paradoxically, a CHVRCH here upon earth without spot or And is not here brave
sport for the Romanists? we that were wont to upbraid them with their half
Communions, are now come to fall short of that, and deny all. Besides, what is
become of that Note which we assume of a true Church (the right Administration
of the Sacraments) when we will administer none at all?
blemish. Another will have no Discipline, no form of Church Government, but
that wild one of Independency, protesting, and declaming against all other
forms as repugnant to holy Scripture. Thus they preach, and will you hear now
a little of their Praying?

Tickets come to them from this and that good Sister thick and threefold, And
Praying.
one must be (and was) remembered and commended in a thanksgiving to Almighty
God for an overflowing measure of the spirit in her, (to the admiration you may
think of all her Gossips.) Another must have, and had, their prayers for the
contrary, her lack and want of the spirit, (to your Sister, Gossip, and share
with her of her Overflowings.) A third, whereof I saw and read the Ticket, so
ill written, both for authography and sense, as I never saw any thing of that
kind more ridiculous and absurd, must have, and had, their thanks and prayers
too for a brother of hers: Thanks to God, for the opening of his eyes, and
bringing him to the sight of his error; and what was that? why, taking up
Arms, and engaging his person as a Soldier on the Kings party: Prayers, for
what? why, that he shut not his eyes again, and having deserted the King, A
holy sister beguiled.
revolt, and relapse into his former error, Another of the Sisterhood, a
sedulous and noted frequenter of their zealous exercise, both public and
private, having caught a clap of late, besides the prayers made in her behalf,
both here and elsewhere, how did one of these Orthodox Ministers, tooth and
nail, omni cum valido su^, bestir himself in a Sermon the next Lords day,
made on purpose to salve the matter, and reconcile her to the offended
Congregation, from that proper and pertinent Text of Scripture, Gal. 6. v. 1.
whilst some of the Sisterhood, hearing how the tongues of certain of their
own tribe were lavish in the censure of their collapsed Sister, and in such
terms too as tended to the discredit of their righteous profession, tender of
the consequence, labored to dissuade them from such scandalous censures,
condiscending to have her called Whore, but not, Censured.
as some would term her, Round-head-Whore. And is not the world well mended,
my Masters, at Christ-Church, since this able and Orthodox Ministry was settled
there? does not the Historian justly, worthily celebrate this alteration? A
remedy indeed as bad, if not worse then the disease, not through the
Physicians fault though, but theirs rather, who like pragmaticall patients,
will take no Physic but of their own prescribing, admit of no Pastors but of
their own recommending; a mischief which the wisdom of our State has ever
labored to prevent, by opposing popular Votes in the election of Ministers,
which cure, if at this day for a while remitted, will, I doubt not, be
re-assum'd again, after some few such miscarriages as this, have sufficiently
informed the world of the inconvenience, Fiat.

Thus have you heard of some of the Historians good qualities, Peroratio.
to which I might justly add more, such as his Arrogance, Envy, Revenge,
Rudeness: but since they are glanced at before, and you may nauseate what you
have already, such unsavory stuff it is, and chiefly least some overcurious
Anagrammatist should please himself too much with picking out his name
(Richard Culmer) from the first letter of each word in this goodly Poesy put
together, which, to avoid the giving such a hint, I have ex professo, and of
purpose, marshalled otherwise then they lie in the man's name, and that somewhat
may be reserved for a second edition, if he should provoke it, by obtruding his
News upon us a second time, I will stop here, neither fowling my own fingers,
The Cathedralists accusers competency debated.
nor blasting others ears with representing any more of his wretched
conditions at present. And by this time, Readers, you may be ready, I suppose,
for a question, and be asked what you think of the competency of the
Cathedralists Accuser, now that you have seen him unmas'd? Is not Dick Culmer
a fitting man to accuse other men, and in that bitter, satyricall, sarcasticall
pharisaicall way too, Quis tulerit Gracchum?
that is so many ways obnoxious to just reproof himself? to record, to make
a Register of Cathedral evils, of Cathedralists vices, that is so great a
stranger to all virtue himself? Were it not a great deal fitter, while the
hypocrite is pulling Motes out of his brothers eyes, or pulling out their eyes
rather, if that will content him, for it is their extirpation only, not
reformation will serve his turn, that he were casting Beams out of his own?
Was there so little choice, that a more righteous man then he could not be
found, on whom to lay the Province? In reason such a Censor should himself be
rectus in curia, nay integer vitae, scelerisque purus, some Cato, or an
Aristides, a man of exemplary justice, and moral integrity. It was indeed the
saying of as honest a man sometime as himself: Machiavel.
Accusa fortiter, haerebit aliquid. Accuse home be sure, and doubtless thou
shall not lose thy labor. But then, as generally in cases of this nature, the
Accuser ought himself to be integrae famae, a man without exception. Shall a
Jew accuse a Jew? Claudius cannot pass for a competent accuser of a Moechus,
nor Catiline of Cethegus. Amongst the list of just exceptions by the Civil Law
serving to repel an accuser, I have met with these: 1. Infamy, 2. Capital
Enmity, 3. Guiltiness of the same crime, and 4. Sacrilege. To all which
exception and many more, how liable our precious Recorder is, ex allegatis and
probatis, is so notorious, as that henceforth (after this Antidote I mean) I
shall not doubt to find both the Accuser and his Accusation (the News and the
Newes-monger) accordingly esteemed with indifferent Judges.

As for the Proctors book, The Proctors book vindicated.
about which he keeps so great a stir, (I pray tell him) had he thought me
worthy of one of his books, (as well as some others that I think had as little
relation to him) I should have thought my self more obliged to have said
somewhat in his defense, however for the book it self, I will say so much for
truths sake, that I have heard many whom I took to be judicious men, and
well-affected to the Public, speak of it with good respect: but to this day
never heard any (of any judgment) blemish it with any such imputation laid
upon it, as that of much advancing Idolatry, (page 22.) But may he not be
thought his own foe in flying so eagerly and angrily into the face of the
Prector? For (if it be true that I have heard) that he has the keeping of the
Neck-verse Book) time may come, when the Proctor may do him a special
courtesy. Friends, you may one day be beholden to him, (since you talk of
Books) for that book of mercy (if it be not above your learning, being
written in Latin) to prevent an ascent upon the fatal Ladder, which your
readiness to come up the first, and your feats upon it, may sooner bring you
then you are yet aware of. A rope was then as a bridle about your loins, take
heed it get not up higher and prove hereafter a Collar for your neck. Dick! you
bad the Prelate remember the Pinnacle, but me thinks I hear sombodie make you
this return: Plunderer! remember you went beyond your Commission: And indeed,
A jeer retorted
(friend Richard) as much as you joy and scoff at the hearing of the
Cathedrall-Gates, look it come not to that pass one day, that you wish the
City-Gates, nay the Kingdomes-Gates, (the Ports stood as wide open as these,
when one pair of heels may be worth two pair of hands, when an escape away
may prove your best sanctuary against such a legal trial by the known Laws
of the Land, as may turn you over to Tiburne-Faire. And then Bones Noches,
good night Dick. In the mean time, Clama, declama, exclama usque ad Ravim --
Rumpantur ut Ilia.

Bark, bellow, bawll; do even thy worst,
Till both thy bowels and thy belly burst.
FINIS.
A Copy of the Information presented to the Councell-Table by Richard Culmer,
against M. E. B. whereof mention is made before, Parag. Maliciousness, Numb. 7.
I Heard M. E. B. of B. in the parish of G. next W. speaking of the Ship-taxes,
Culmers first charge against M. B. for speaking against the Ship-Sesses.
say, that such and such places were taxed so much, and some so much etc. and
in the end he said, that if we have such taxes laid upon us we must rebel, or
we must be feign to rebel, or to this effect punctually, and hearing him say
so, I said, that if we considered our burden with others compared, we had no
cause to think of Rebellion. The next occasion I could find I called him
aside after Evenning-song, and gave him the best admonition I could, telling
him, that I could not hear such words but with detestation, and said, that as
a Subject, and a Minister, and a Guest, I was bound to tell him what I did, and
entreated him for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, that he would forbear such
speeches, else I would never come to his house more, with other speeches to
this effect. He replied, did I say so? yes said I, that I did hear you say;
ask your wife and friends at home. After that he never spoke word of it more,
till, I heard of late, he in a passion against me, at some meeting, railing
upon me, hoping to get my Your Curatship, good Richard!
Benefice for his Cousin H. by my The very ^rade you ^rive your self (...) this
day.
ruin, he there, as I heard by credible Information, amongst other vile
comparisons and speeches against me, said, that he invited me to his house at
Christmas, and afterward I called him aside, and would have him accuse
himself, but he spoke words of sedition, when as I did it not to bring him
into a snare; If I had, I would have called witness, when (...) shed him, but
the Lord knows I did it out of (...) duty to God and my Sovereign Lord King
Charles, for whom I pray from the bottom of my heart, that the Lord would
preserve him from seditious, and rebellious men. And my wife says, she well
remembers the same speech of his and mine at the Table.

And I heard the said M. B. say, His second charge against him, in behalf of
the Book of Sports.
having read over the book of Sabbath-Recreations, and delivering it to me
before Evensong in the Church, I asked him if he had read it, he replied, yes,
it will make a good privy seal. And my wife and I heard him in our own house
say of the said book, that it was, as if a Schoolmaster should say: it is a
good boy, ply thy book and thou shall go to play in the afternoon. And I and
my servant heard him say, that it was unfit such books should be sent for
Ministers to read in the Church: yet after he had a project to get my Benefice,
he to collogue for it, said in my hearing that it was a good book, and if it
were read the Sabbath would be better kept then ever it was. Dated July the 31.
1635.

Per me Rich. Culmer.


