An Antidote against four dangerous Quaeries, pretended to be propounded to
the Reverend Assembly of Divines, touching suspension from the Sacrament.
THe exercise of Excommunication, and suspension of persons notably scandalous
from the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is a thing so expressly warranted
in the holy Scripture; yea, so commanded and commended to the true Church, that
the establishing of it, by public authority, ^ath no difficulty in it, nor any
matter of doubtfulnesse at all. Cain the first unclean and unholy Sacrificer,
was rejected by God himself, who had no respect either to his person, or
offering. And when he went on in his impenitency, and by his obstinacy became
notoriously scandalous, God cast him out from his presence, Genesis 4.16. that is,
from all Communion with the godly in his Worship, and in his Church the place
of his special presence, which then was only in his Fathers House and Family.
Also, in the times of the Law, Ge 17.14. Exodus 12.48.
and old Testament, all they who remained wilfully uncircumcised, were cut off
from Israel; by which was signified, that al persons, who openly profess
uncircu^cision of heart by are the Word of God, to be cut off from the Church
of Christ, and Communion with the Saints. And in the days of our Savior, Ioh.
9.22.34 verse. and 12.42. and 16.2. Act. 8.21.
Excommunication out of the Synagogue continued among the Jews; and our Savior
did not abrogate it, for the abuse of it by the Priests, Scribes, and
Pharisees: but, his Apostles under the Gospel did exercise it against Simon
Magus, when by professed sacrilege he declared himself to be in the gall of
bitterness, and in the bond of imquity. And Paul passed the sentence of
Excommunication against the incestuous person in the Church of Corinth, in the
name and by the power of the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 5.4 And he exercised it
against Hymene^s and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.20. And he gives a Warrant to the
Churches of Christ to exercise it against Schismatiks, Gal. 5.12. and
Heretics, Tit. 3.10. and such as do not love the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor.
16.22. but preach another Gospel, Gal. 1.8, 9. As for the words o^ our Savior,
Matt. 18.17. They are in the judgment of the generality of the Orthodox
Ministers of the reformed Churches, (whose judgment no modest Christian will
reject, without express Warrant from Gods Word, or convincing reason) a most
clear commandment of Christ, for the exercise of Excommunication in the
Christian Church. For they are plain, that he who sins against his Brother,
though privately, (whether by wrong done to his person in backbiting and
slandering him, or by committing some scandalous sin, which might be to him a
stumbling block, or in going about to corrupt and seduce the weak, it is not
much to the purpose, the more private it is at the first, the more severe, in
the instance of our Savior, is the course of proceeding to Excommunication for
it) yet, if he scorn private admonition, and when it is brought to the Church,
he refuses to hear the Church, then he offends publicly, and becomes openly
scandalous by his obstinacy and impenitency, and is to be esteemed in the state
of an Heathen man, and a publican in the judgment of every particular
Christian; he is as one now out of the Church, which must be by
Excommunication, by which men are ou^ed and cast out of the Church. For any man
to account any Brother as an Heathen, when the Church does not cast him out, is
a great sin: If one particular man has Warrant, and is bound by Christ's
Commandment to esteem another man as an Heathen; all other Christian, even the
whole Church, which knows his contumacy, are bound so to esteem him also.
That these Scriptures do fully prove Excommunication of contumacious sinners
out of the Church, I ho^e every sober Christian will easily grant, when he
has well weighed them; though Aridus Aretius should hold the contrary.

And whereas our Savior bids us forgive a Brother, though he fins against us
seventy times seven times if he professes that it repents him, Luke 17. this
does no whit cross his Commandment of excommunicating, such as are impenitent
and obstinately refuse to hear the Church. Let this suffice for
Excommunication, that it is an Ord^nance of God, commended by Christ, to be
exercised in all Christian Churches.

In the next place, That suspension of scandalous sinners, after admonition and
conviction, from the holy Communion, is necessary to every Church; I do
demonstrate clearly from the Scriptures, before named, and Number. 12.14. and
Dent. 23.1.23 For, those do prove Excommunication to be an Ordinance of God in
the Church; (as is confessed by the Adversaries of suspension) which
Excommunication is an exclusion of corrupt and infectious Members out of the
Church, by which they are deprived from Communion in the Sacraments, and all
public Ordinances; (as the Adversary does here go about to prove by the
Testimonies of Tertullian, the Canonistes Sch^le-men, and Aretius) whence I
thus argue.

The Scriptures which prove Excommunication, and an exclusion of scandalous
impenitent, and contumacious sinners, from Communion with the Church in the
Sacraments, and all public Ordinances and divine Offices, they do necessarily
prove all the steps and degrees, which are required in an orderly and Christian
proceeding to Excommunication, and casting such sinners out of the Church.

But, the Scriptures before named (as the Adversaries confess) prove
Excommunication to be the Ordinance of God, and of Christ in his Church.
Therefore, they prove the necessary steps and degrees, which are required in
orderly proceeding to it, as reproof, sharp rebuke, the first and second
admonition, suspending for a time from the holy Communion, or Lords Supper.

I hope no sober Adversary will hold it fit to excommunicate any sinners
(except in capital crimes of Idolatry, cruel murders, blasphemy, and the
like) before reproof admonition, and suspension from the Sacrament; which last,
especially done with discretion, gravity, and much Christian compassion, may
bring scandalous offenders to be ashamed and to repent, and so prevent
Excommunication, and cutting off from the Church. It is a very weak, it not
perverse kind ^^arguing, to say, That such and such Scriptures do prove
Excommunication, and therefore, are erroncously produced to prove suspension,
for this latter is necessarily employed and included in proceeding to the
former, and is as necessary a step and degree to it, as reproof and admonition:
Unless, men will dream of Popish, and late Prelaticall Excommunications, which
were Br^ta fulmin^, sent out against men without any orderly proceeding, before
they were convicted, or did plead for themselves.

Presbyteries established according to Gods Word, and godly Pastors, Ministers,
and Elders; if the Church be well reformed, will be far from proceeding, as in
the Papacy and Prelacy, with indiscret, over severe, ambitious, passionate, and
revengefull hands: He who nourishes such most unchristian and uncharitable
thoughts and suspicions in his heart, of Ecclesiastical Rulers and
Judicatures, this year; will perhaps argue before the year be out.

Upon the same ground, against the high prerogatives and privileges of
Parliament, and the power of Civil Magistrates, Judges, and Courts of Justice,
That it is a matter of great danger to give them legislative power, lest they
make Laws as in the times of Popery, for the advancing of Tyranny, Idolatry,
superstition, and punishing and persecuting of men, for true piety, Religion,
and godliness; and compelling them to submit to Popish traditions, Liturgies,
and superstitious ceremonies: And to leave the expositions of Laws in the
breasts of Judges, lest they pervert Justice and judgment, and to wrest the
Law to justify Tyranny and oppression and to overthrow the Liberty of the
Subjects, as we felt by woeful experience in the latter times, of domineering
Prelates who made their will and lust Law. For my part, I dare not be so
suspicious, nor intertain any such thoughts into my heart; but am confident,
that a strict Discipline according to the Rules of Christ, and the practice of
the pure primitive Apostolical Church, once set up and backed, confirmed, and
established by civil authority; there will be no place for Judges and Rulers
civil, nor domineering, and ambitious, revengefull Governors Ecclesiastical
to tyrannize over the consciences of Christians: If any scandalous persons
creep into Pastoral charges, there will be a plain and easy way to cast them
out: If a Congregationall Consistory offend grossly through indiscretion,
superior Presbyteries will correct them, and there will be appeals to
Provincial Synods from erring and unjust sentences of Presbyteries. The
Gospel powerfully preached by godly and faithful Ministers, set up in all
places of the Land, encouraged with double honor of liberal maintenance and
due reverence, will work a great Reformation, and increase of knowledge grace,
and godliness, in the Peers and Commons of the Realm, and in Judges
Magistrates, and Lawyers: Judges will be taught, that they judge not for man,
but for the Lord, who is with them in the Judgment. People will grow more
peaceable and free from continual contentions: Lawyers shall not get the
wealth, of be Land into their hands by fishing in troubled waters, encouraging
men in unlawful and quarrellous su^^es, pleading wicked causes for large fees;
prolonging suites, and making men spend, in ^ong ^uite, unto twice the value of
their just right and debt for which they sue, and by taking treble fees, and
keeping them, though they fail their client, and be employed at other (...),
when his cause is to be pleaded. Godliness and true Religion being increased
by faithful preaching, and godly Discipline^ In the hearts of men, will make
the Commonwealth free from the necessity of many Lawyers, which the learned
Philosopher held to be a pla^ue in a State and Kingdom, and an evidence of the
miserable condition thereof. And therefore it is no marvel, that the corrupt
ones, of that pros^ssion, are deadly Enemies to the maintenance, honor, and
other encouragements of the Ministers of the Gospel.

But, not to trouble my adversary any longer with this unpleasing Discourse,
which his importune and unseemly speeches have occasioned, I proceed in the
proof of the main point in hand, and argue from the holy Scriptures; That
scandalous impenitent persons are not in any wise to be admitted to the holy
Communion, at the Lords Table, until they confess their offenses and profess
godly sorrow and repentance, and promise amendment to the utmost of their
power, and endeavor.

And my second Argument is this.

That person from whom every faithful Member of the Church, and every
Professor, 2. Arg.
whether Pastor, Elder, or private person, is commanded to withdraw himself,
and to have no fellowship with him, may not nor can without sin, and offense of
God, be admitted by the Ministers, Elders, and whole Congregation, to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. To deny, this is to rebel against the light of
Common reason.

Every sinner openly scandalous, either in corrupt life, or in fall opinions
and doctrine, walking disorderly and causing divisions; which are not according
to godliness, which he in pride maintains, and delights in perverse
disputations for them and the like; is such a person as appears, 2 Thessalonians
3.6.14. 1 Timothy 6.5. Romans 16.17, 18. 1 Cor. 5.11. 2 John 10.11. Where the
Apostle injoynes Christians yea commands them in the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, to mark such as cause divisions, scandols, offenses, and to withdraw
themselves from every Brother that is a drunkard, or unclean person, or
extortioner, or walks disorderly, or obeys not the Word nor consents to
wholesome words and sound doctrine; but is proud, do^ing about questions and
strife of words, which cause envy strife, railings, and evil surmises, and
perverse disputations of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the Truth. And
with such (though yet not Excommunicated and cast out, but called a Brother)
not to company, nor to eat, nor to bid him, God speed lest they be partakers of
his evil deeds.

The conclusion therefore necessarily follows, that such openly noted and
convicted scandalous sinners, are not to be admitted to eat with godly
Christians; nor to have Communion with them, nor company with them at the Lords
Table.

My third Argument is grounded on our Saviors Commandment, Mat. 7.6. Give not
that which is holy to the dogs. 3. Arg.
By holy thing is certainly meant that which is consecrated, and set apart for
the holy use of them that are Saints. By dogs are meant unclean, impure, and
noted scandalous sinners, whom Gods Mi^isters cannot offer and commend to God,
as holy Members of Christ, neither can they offer themselves, souls and bodies,
to the Sacrament and to the Lords (...), but as unclean; even as dogs, being
unclean beasts, were abomination in the offerings of the Law. By giving to dogs
is meant, not a bare propounding, or showing, or offering that which is holy,
to al in general, who can and will rightly receive it as we do in preaching the
Word to every creature and to all even heathen Nations, to see and try if God
will convert them: But, a giving to them holy things, as having already a true
right in them, as Children have in the bread, which their Father has provided
for them; as for example, applying to them the promises of eternal life, and
the righteousness and satisfaction of Christ which belong only to men, who do
repent and profess true faith in Christ, as preachers do to them that are
called to belively members of the true Church, and hunger and thirst after more
communion with Christ; And giving of the sacraments which are feales of
regeneration, remission of sins, and communion with Christ, to infidells and
to scandalous and impenitent sinners; This giveing of holy things to unclean
and unworthy persons, is that which our Savior here forbidds, and therefore to
such persons as are like dogs in uncleannes by reason of scandalous sins and
impenite cie, the holy Sacraments are not to be given; Though ministers may
preach and propound the Gospel and the promises thereof to all ingenerall for
their conversion, yet they may not apply promises of ^he remission of sin, of
Christ's satis^action and of eternal life to any in particular, but only to
such as profess faith, repentance and holiness of life Yea if any be found like
swine, who when the pearl of the Gospel is cast before them, do scorn,
contemn, tread it under foot, and persecute and tear the preachers; they
must turn a way from them, shake of the dust from their feet and not cast holy
pearls before them any more as our Savior taught his Apostles Math. 10.14.
And they put in practice Acts. 13, 51.

Levit 7 20. and 22.3. and Number 9.10.11. And therefore much more does the
uncleannes of scandalous sin which is wors, debar men from the holy communion
of the Lords supper which far exceeds legal holy sacrifices.

Judas, whom he knew to be a devil and a traitor, to the holy sacrament and
therefore such may not be suspended.

Judas made profession of faith and holiness and was out wardly so unblameable,
that none of the Apostles did descern him to be the traitor which our Savior
sal^ should betray him, but they suspected rather every on himself but we
speak not in this question what men are indeed in secret, devils, hypocrites
and the like: but of them that are openly scandalous and give offense and are
infectious.

Secondly it is manifest, John. 13, 30. That Judas immediately went out when he
had received the ^op, which was given him before the supper was fully ended.
But our Savior ordained the Sacrament after supper, Luk 22 20 and 1 Cor.
11.25. Yea it is manifest that he made that long ^ermon which is set down, Job.
13.31. to the end of the 17. Chapter, after Judas was gone out; and that prayer
and thanksgiveing with which he concluded and wherein ^e prays for that union
and come munion of the faithful with him, Chap. 7. whereof this Sacrament is a
seal; seems to me to be the blessing of the bread and wine. So this objection
is a mere mistake and vain imagination.

Paul did 1 Cor. 11. For giving of warning frees him. Ezech. 33.4. Acts. 2.26.

Paul being absent could write of the danger, but not put any back unless he
had been present, it was enough to make the pastors in Corinth to suspend
scandalous sinners in that he told them that the unworthy receiver did eat
judgment to himself and profained the Lords body, and that every man must
first sift and examine himself and then, come and eat, which scandalous
impenitent sinners, do not, and therefore are not to be admitted.

In this case it is not enough for Ministers, to warn men of sin and danger,
unless they having power to keep them back, do use it, and hinder them at
least from open acting of sin. It is not enough for a man to tell one that is
desperate that if he runs upon the drawn sword which he holds before him in
his hand it will kill him, but he must pull back his sword, and not thrust it
into his bowels, when he sees him running upon the point of it, and must put
him by with all his might, or else he is guilty of murder. And so it is in
this case, the Minister that gives to a scandalous impenitent sinner that which
he knows to be deadly poison to his soul, is guilty, and pertaker of his sin.





I add only one word more, that by extraordinary Revelation and special
warrant from God, Moses and Aaron did speak Gods word to Phar^^h, and Isaiah
to the Jews, which the knew would harden them. Ex. 7.3. Isa. 6.10. This is no
warrant for us, unless we have like Revelation.



worthy, and judged unworthy of the holy Communion, and kept from it, while he
is openly incorrigible. In this case we are not to dispute of Gods power, but
what is Gods will, and that is not to give holy thing, to such as are
manifestly unclean like dogs as all scandalous impenitent sinners are for the
present; It is hard to be believed that God will bless a graceless and
presumptuous act of sin, with an holy change of heart in a moment. If men do
murder their souls and drink their own damnation, they shall bear their
own burden, But if Ministers put this damning cup into their hand, and bid
them drink of it, their blood shall be required of them, because they imbolden
them and act with them in this profanation.



Christ will in this case judge or deem sinners unworthy; This is, that which
they require. Let sinners thus humble themselves, and the Controversy is ended.

Christ, and preaching the doctrine of Gods free grace, and Christ's meritorious
satisfaction and mediation.

This i^ as contrary to the encouraging of scandalous impenitent sinners in
their evil ways, by admitting them for good and true Christians to Communion
with the Saints, (which is the Controversy in hand) as darkness is to light.
The one is that which all Gods faithful Ministers take delight in, and do in
the holy practice thereof follow Christ. The other, is hateful to God, if it
be done wittingly and willingly, and all Gods Ministers abhor it as a thing
most detestable. Now, therefore, let the Objecter see, how he has wrested Gods
Word, commanding an holy duty; to justify profaine iniquity, and so has
confounded and mingled Heaven and Hell together-



This Objection is most profane, for it tends to prove that the Heathen,
Infidels, and Excommunicated persons, may be admitted to the Lords Supper^ for
the Word is preached to them all. But, my answer to it is this: That in
preaching the Word to them who are hardened by it, the Ministers of Christ seek
and hope to do good, and by accident it turns to hurt: But, in giving the
Sacrament to scandalous and impenitent sinners, they know they give that which
will certainly bring judgment, because in that case they cannot cat but
unworthily; So (...) the comparison holds not. Also in giving the holy
Sacrament to such, they do wittingly profane holy things, and do lie
desperately, in saying, This is the Body and Blo^d of Christ broken and shed for
thee; when they know him to be in such a case, that i^ he continue in it to
death, he shall be certainly damned, and is one who never had interest in
Christ.

The Conclusion of the Adversary, is most absurd and irrational, and contrary
to manifest truth, For what seeking of unlimited Ecclesiastical power is this
when Christ's Ministers desire, that scandalous unworthy receavers may not
profainly intrude and come boldly to the Lords holy Table; And that they may
not be compelled to do that which famous Calvin professed he would not do
though he were pressed to it with threatening of death, and did fersake his
charge and flock, and did suffer banishment, (until Gods vengeance o^^ ^^cke
his persecutors) for refusing to yield in that case against his conscience.

The power of judging who are scandalous is not ^^bitrary, nor in the lust of
Ministers and Elders, but is limited to the rule of Gods ^^presse word. It is
not a power to put back all whom they please, but such as the whole Consistory
do see to be scandalous and unworthy. Their power is not ind^^^ndent but may be
controlled by a superior Presbytery. This power also is a sp^^^all part of the
exercise of the keys which Christ gave to the Apostles, Pastors, and Teachers,
and which they exercised in the primitive times and Churches, as is before
proved and by this means kept Gods holy ordinances from profanation, and made
scandalous sinner ^^shamed of their evil ways, and others afraid to walk in
(...).

Wherefore I will conclude my answer to these four Qu^^ies with this
Antiquaeree, Whether it be not Antichristian pride, and exorbitant,
transcendent unlimited power usurped, and dangerous opposition and
contradiction of Gods holy word and truth. That this inquisitor should control
Christ's holy Commandments call it tyranny and oppression of men's consciences
to restrain them from profaining of Christ holy Ordinance, from eating their
own damnation, murdering wilfully their own souls, troubling the
consciences of Christian communicants driving them from the Lords Table, and
causing them to separate from our congregations; And that he should charge a
whole Assembly of godly grave and learned Pastors and Ministers of Christ true
Church, with the ambitious seeking of such unlimited Ecclesiastical power as
Lordly Prelate never durst to clame. When they most humbly desire by way of
Petition, that they may not against their own consciences guided by the word of
God, cast holy things to dogs, nor be tyrannized over by open scandalous
impenitent sinners permitted to intrude themselves boldly to the Lords table,
and to take out of their hands the bread of Gods Children which is proper to
such Christians as come Professing true repentance and faith in Christ.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed according to Order, For Nathaniell Webb. 1645.


