A CONSIDERATION OF Certain Controversies at this time agitated IN THE
KINGDOM of ENGLAND, Concerning the Government of the CHURCH of GOD.

Written at the Command and appointment of the Walachrian Classis, BY
Guilielmus Apollonii, Minister of the Word of God at Middleburgh.

And sent from the Walachrian Churches, to declare the sense and consent of
their Churches, to the SYNOD at LONDON.

October. 16. 1644. Stilo novo.

Translated out of Latin according to the printed Copy.

London, Printed by G. M. for Tho. Underhill at the Bible in Woodstreet. 1645.

To the most Excellent and Noble Lords, The Lord William Boreel, Lord of
Duynbeque, etc. Counselor and chief Syndick of the City of Amsterdam; The
Lord John de Reed, Lo. of Reinswoud, etc. Deputy in Ordinary in the General
Assembly of the United Provinces, in the name of the Province of Vtrecht; The
Lord Albert Joachimi, LORD of Oedekenskerk in Oostende, Secretary of the
Republike of ter-Goes; Ambassadors in the name of the High and Mighty Lords,
the States General of the United Provinces of the Netherlands.
Most Excellent, most Noble, Magnificent, and most Illustrious Lords,
THe Pastors of the Churches of the Walachrian Classis, being moved with the
deplorable face and condition of the English Churches, would gladly contribute
some assistance for the quenching of that flame of controversies, risen amongst
them, concerning the Discipline and spiritual Government of the Kingdom of
Christ; and afford not their prayers only, but their counsel and assistance
also, meet for composing these contentions, whereby the billows of dissentions
might be assuaged, and a happy peace restored to those troubled Churches. By
their authority therefore and command, they have employed me in this present
work; and out of pure zeal and brotherly love to those Churches, have lately
enjoined me to exhibit to the Assembly of Divines at London, our
Ecclesiastical Government, proved by the word of God, and confirmed by grounds
of holy Scripture, and the consent of Reformed Divines. Which work being now
finished, and after a diligent Examination by those Pastors approved, I offer
to your most Noble and most Excellent Lordships: for to you, as is well known
to us all, the tenderest care of the true Religion, and the sacred peace and
unity, together with Truth, of the Churches of England, is, by the Command of
the High and Mighty Lords, the States General of the Netherlands principally
committed. The promoting whereof with all your utmost endeavors would even by
the event be manifest, if so be the condition of the Kingdom and Church there
would permit. And surely, if God shall by his providence sometime prosper your
endeavors, and make the earnest prayers of us all effectual; I do certainly
trust that the wounds of the Church of Eng. may by your assistance and help be
cured, and the dissentions raised, by your peaceable and prudent counsel, be
composed. For God has conferred on you large gifts of Wisdom, Prudence,
Piety, and Zeal; whereby the disturbed condition of the Church of the Son of
God may be reduced to the moderate counsels of Peace; and the perplexed
affairs of a shaken Kingdom to the straight bonds of renewed amity. Which
that the Great and Gracious God may more and more stir up and increase in you,
and bless with prosperous successes in the business committed to your most
excellent Lordships, I beg with fervent prayers; and from my soul desire, that
he will graciously preserve your most Excellent, most Noble, Magnificent, and
most Illustrious Lordships; and inspire those counsels into his Royal
Majesty, and the High Court of Parliament, which, you affording your assisting
endeavor, may restore to the Churches of England peace and tranquillity,
together with edification in the faith, and increase of love.

Middleburgh, the first of November, 1644. Your most Excellent and Noble
Lordships most observant, Guilielmus Apollonii,
Pastor of the Church of God at Middleburgh in Zeland.
TO THE SYNOD at LONDON.
Reverend, and Beloved Brethren in Christ, assembled in the Synod at London,
WE have received by your most courteous Letters, written some Months since to
the Churches of Zeland, an express testimony not only of your entire
friendship, but also of your confidence, and sincere affection toward us, into
whose bosom you were pleased to pour forth your fluctuating minds. Our wishes
and endeavors are, that we may give you a real experiment of our brotherly
compassion: for our very inmost bowels burn within us, with the zeal and love
of Christ and the Saints, when we hear of the Churches of Christ in
affliction, when the moanes and lamentations of our holy Brethren pierce our
ears, and when we seriously consider the causes of your calamities. O that our
eyes were resolved into Fountains of waters, that we might lament day and
night the desolations of the people! Our mind trembles to hear the desperate
counsels and wicked attempts of those whose endeavor has been to blot out
from amongst you the whole face of a Reformed Church, and totally to hinder all
better counsels, and have brought it thus to pass, that the band of the
Kingdom being broken, all things are now involved in a cruel war, all hope
of peace and agreement taken away, and the happiness of Church and Kingdom
overthrown. But as God does by his favor prosper right counsels, so for the
most part he brings the wicked plots of men upon the heads of those who
contrive them, and by a divine wisdom does overruled the vices of the world,
whereby his Church is oppressed, either to the safety of his own, or a trial
of their Piety. For whoever they are that truly love God, they do not fasten
the Anchor of all their hope on the barren sands of mutable things and humane
strength, but on the solid Rock which cannot be moved by any waves, that is,
Jesus Christ, the Churches Husband, peculiar and present with every one. In
whose bosom who-ever do with full confidence repose themselves, and cast all
their care on him alone, are quiet in the midst of troubles, and enjoy comfort;
and are as well thankful in adversity as in prosperity. Though, to speak the
truth, what is adverse, but that which hinders us in our course to eternal
happiness? what is prosperous, but that which conduces to it? Christ is both
the Husband, the Lord, and Physician of the Church. The Husband, because being
out of love to us drawn to die, he has knit us to himself, and himself to us
in an everlasting Covenant: The Lord, because by the price of his blood he has
rescued us from the tyranny of Satan, he governes us, and bears rule in us,
and disposes at his pleasure of his own propriety: The Physician, because he
is the Savior, he alone does efficaciously heal the evils of men, dispelling
the diseases and distempers of the souls, purging his Church, and restoring it
to health. He is oft-times more merciful when he sends bitter things, then
when he refreshes with sweet things. He knows what is expedient for his
Church, and is neither slack nor sleeps in the care of his. We oft-times
judge those things prosperous, which are most adverse, and think those things
adverse which are most prosperous: Our duty is to obey, it is Christ's work to
judge. All prosperity is from him, from whom if it proceed not, it cannot be
called prosperity: from him comes adversisity, which, to us, he makes to be
either a remedy, or a gain to Piety: by that he comfort our infirmity, that
we may be able to bear it, by this he tries and crowns our faith: The
Church cannot have entrance to the glory of heaven but by the cross, that is
the common way of all, whether we be Kings (as one speaks) or poor Peasants,
every one must take up his own cross: But Christ lives, ordering the Scene of
humane affairs by his secret counsel. We pray, therefore, that he who knows
what is conducing to the good of mankind, of his Church, of you, would
vouchsafe to inspire such counsels into the hearts of Princes, which may
restore to you Godliness, together with holy agreement, and prosperity: since
we see we have nothing but prayers left for the asswaging the floods of
troubles amongst you. O God of Peace, remove this confusion from the Church of
thy Son, from the flourishing Kingdom of England. O Lord Jesus, the
fountain of all peace, dissipate the counsels of those who out of a desire of
spoil, being greedy of glory, stir up the tumults of wars, and waves of
persecutions, even against those who deserve it not. Thou art the Redeemer,
save thine own purchase: Thou art the Savior, suffer not those to perish who
depend on thee: Thou art the Lord, vindicate thine own possession: Thou art the
Head, afford succor to thy members: Thou art the Prince of Peace, inspire
those that are thine with mutual love: Thou art God, have compassion on thy
suppliants. And you, Brethren, endure labors with a good courage, and compose
your spirits, that for the cause of God, and the Churches good you may with
assured hope and firm confidence undergo whatever by the counsel of God is
laid upon you. There is no affliction so great, but humane nature may bear it,
if accustomed to it, especially if there be Christian Fortitude, godly
confidence, and a courageous mind. Think with your selves not only thus, That
the Affliction does thereby become the more mild, if born with patience: but
that also the Philosophy of the Gospel binds you wholly to entrust and commit
your affairs to God our Savior; like as one sick and in danger of life
commits himself to the Physician anointing, bathing, lancing, searing: being
persuaded that in whatsoever ways he disposes of your troublesome condition,
he will do it all for your healths sake. We are not to prescribe to God, let
him save or destroy, do what he will; and know that he wills nothing but
what is best for you; you shall have God with you while you labor with a good
resolution in a good cause; and you shall have with you the righteous cause of
faith, which was ever at last victorious against all the assaults and
subtilties of the wicked, and will doubtless be so now, though God in his just
judgment for the grievous sins of men may suffer the ship of his Church to
be tossed in these waves. Christ has purchased the Church, his Spouse with his
own precious blood, and has promised to be with her to the end of the world;
he will not therefore now forsake her, but rather confound those who fear not
to extol themselves against the truth; from the great and gracious God
therefore expect a happy issue. The seeds of mourning and of tears promise a
harvest of glory and joy. God will pour forth the oil of gladness on those
that mourn in Zion; he will clothe them with the garments of salvation and
praise, who are oppressed with a spirit of heaviness. The House of God shall
be purged by your tears, God has sent a fire into your lands, not to consume
the golden and precious vessels of the Lord, but to purify the sons of Levi,
and to cleanse his house from the dross and filth of false and adulterate
worship, superstition, schisms, errors and offenses; that there be offered in
all your borders a pure offering of spiritual worship according to Gods
Institution. For how great a thing are we to judge this, that these troubles of
your Churches have produced this holy Covenant between the three Kingdoms;
plucked up by the roots the differences between your Kingdom and that of
Scotland; conjoined the English and Scots as brethren in the strictest bonds of
unity, and engaged you all really, constantly, sincerely, and to your utmost
power to labor and endeavor to defend and maintain the Reformed Religion of
the Church of Scotland in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government against
the common enemies; and also to endeavor the Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, according to the Rule of the Word of God, and the Pattern of the
best Reformed Churches: as likewise to bring the Churches of God in these three
Kingdoms to the nearest Conjunction and Uniformity in the Confession of Faith,
form of Church Government, Directory for Divine Worship, and Form of
Catechism, that all you and your posterity after you may as brethren live in
the true Faith and mutual Love, and that the Lord may be pleased to dwell in
the midst of you. Which sacred Oath does promise fruits greatly profitable to
the Churches of God, and exceedingly desirable, wherein you have bound your
souls under an execration, if you do not holily, sincerely, and constantly in
the presence of God perform those things you have covenanted in the former
heads of the Covenant. We beseech you therefore in the name of God, that,
denying all humane affections you deal faithfully in this business, you do
wholly cast forth of the house of God, not only the Bish^tyranny and
superstitions already suppressed, but also heresies, and schisms, and
whatsoever is contrary to sound doctrine and the power of godliness, as your
Oath asserteth. Let your own consciences judge, how heresies of all kinds can
pass unpunished, manyfold seeds of schisms be spread without control, and
profane doctrines of errors be commonly vented in public, in that city which
by so express, so sacred, and severe an oath has bound it self in the
presence of God to cast out all errors, heresies, schisms, from the house of
God. Pardon us, Reverend Brethren, it is just grief of heart that enforces us
to complain, for that we understand that in Religion, the public worship of
God, and the spiritual Government of the Church, there are such confusions
rise amongst you: that those amongst you who endeaour schisms, spread
heresies, traduce the Reformed Churches, breed stirrs and render the Churches
face polluted, do so without control exult. The true Church of God favors,
not seditious proceedings, as being, by instinct of its holy nature, averse
from all dissension: for it is truly that Vine and that Figtree in the parable,
in the book of Judges, which being by a message from the Trees called upon to
bear rule and to wage war, answered, that they could not leave their
natural sweetness, and be involved in troubles. We exhort you therefore in
the Lord, and do seriously in the abundance of charity require you, that you
take care to discover a way and means whereby you will endeavor the removal
of this loathsome evil of schisms and errors, while the disease is yet
curable, from the midst of your nation, of your city. Unless you do timely
withstand the spreading gangrene of separatists and the unlawful conventicles
of schismatics, farewell all sacred discipline of the Church, due policy, and
spiritual government. We have had experience, in the troubles of our Churches,
of the subtlety of those who being day and night intent on innovating, leave
no stone unmoved, go to and fro by sea, by land, to gain disciples and patrons
of their cause, and so at last by force and fear curb and oppress the cause
of Truth and of God. The remedy comes too late, when evils have gotten
strength by long delays. The heavenly affairs of the Church go to ruin,
when by worldly reasonings of humane wisdom they are protracted, abated,
retarded, settled and unsettled. It is not unknown to the Churches of God what
are the dispositions of Heretics and Schismatics, who study to innovate,
carry on their affairs subtly, and first like the mysteries of Ceres they
keep them close, and do first covently sow the seeds of dissension, they love
the dark, say, and unsay, and say again, as they find suitable to the affairs
and times, and are hardly drawn forth in public: but when with open face they
come forth to the light, they threaten ruin: Believe us upon our own
experience. You must therefore speedily withstand their designs at first.
These things we advise, Dear Brethren, with a mind troubled and perplexed, yet
brotherly and truly pious; for we sigh, and from the most inward sense of heart
cry to God, both in private and public, for your civil wars, intestine
confusions, the dubious and darksome condition of the Church with you. We are
anxious for you, and therefore are forced to change our voice, and pour forth
the grief of our heart into your bosom. We are transported with zeal for the
glory of God, the beauty of Gods house, the government of Christ's Kingdom, and
the Churches peaceable unity. Lord Jesus ^digest this Chaos of confusions, let
thy Spirit spread itself upon these waters of evil fluctuating opinions; thou
by thy Spirit have reconciled earth and Heaven, by it thou have joined so many
tongues, nations, and several sorts of men into one body of the Church, which
by the same Spirit is knit fast to thee her head; vouchsafe therefore to renew
that Spirit in the hearts of our brethren, that all these confusions and
calamities may cease amongst them, and may tend to the advantage of godliness
to thy Church. Reverend Brethren, we are desirous to repay to you our debts.
When our country was on a flame by the intestine dissentions about Religion; by
your help, counsel, and assistance were our wounds healed, our griefs
assuaged: when you therefore ly under the same disease, we labor in way of
gratitude to heal you. This is our end: this is that we aim at. This our
labor we bestow to this end, that the seeds of schisms may be pulled up, that
the divine government of the Church of Christ may be established amongst you,
and the true peace of Christ's Kingdom brought to you. We join therefore with
these letters, our judgment concerning certain controversies now agitated in
your kingdom, we omit many others, maintained by heretics and schismatiks
which disturb the peace of the Church, nourish dissension, and put a stay to
the desired reformation of the Churches; not that we would call you to give an
account at our tribunal; far be it from us; for we acknowledge that there are
amongst you, and those brethren who maintain the contrary part in these
controversies, men learned, godly, lovers of peace, who are abundantly
sufficient in judging, explaining, and deciding all these controversies; but in
quenching a common flame in a city, they not without cause run to help even
uncalled, whose neighbors house is on fire: we are bound not only by the same
bonds of Ecclesiastical unity, but by the common danger, and hazard of the
Reformed Churches, to afford our advise and prayers, for the removing of those
opinions which would bring injurious and destructive damage to our Reformation.
You have called upon us, in your most courteous letters, that we would be
helpful to you in your shaken condition by such remedies as by our common
advise should be thought meet: and we have judged it at this time most suitable,
to show to you, who are in conflict, your diseases and their remedies; to
signify the practice and laws observed by our Churches, in their spiritual
Government and public Worship of God, and to vindicate them by the Word of
God, against the erroneous conceits of some. Of Some, we say, for we are
assured that the whole body of the Church is not yet infected with this ulcer:
and therefore what we have gathered out of the public writings daily published
amongst you, we desire not to impute to any, but those who defend, nourish, and
maintain those perverse opinions, or receive them into their Churches. If some
of those brethren of the contrary opinion do in ought differ from them, we wish
they would declare so much by public writing, and express it by common
consent, that the Reformed Churches of Christ might be freed from the just
fear which their writings have caused them to conceive. For not without cause
do the godly conceive that those are hatching some monster, that use shifts,
and dare not with open face clearly set down and maintain their opinions.
Therefore by the name of Christ and the love of the spirit we beseech those
brethren, that they would clearly, sincerely, plainly and distinctly without
the vizard of Rhetorical flourishes, declare and describe to us their
Ecclesiastical policy, and form of public worship, not here and there a
piece, but in the whole frame of it, and that they would not vent doubtful
expressions in public, but in a due order, which tends to edification,
manifest it to the Reformed Churches of Christ, if there be ought deficient in
their Ecclesiastical Government; that with a peaceable brotherly mind, and in
a due manner the truth may be searched out, and held forth in public to the
eyes of all. These things we persuade, most dear Brethren, with a mind
studious of your affairs, most desirous of peace, well-affected to you,
solicitous for the cause of the Church of Christ. And we pray that God, the
Father of lights, would by the beams of his Holy Spirit inlighten your minds
with the knowledge of his sincere Word, unite your hearts in the bands of
brotherly love, incline your minds to the Kingdoms and Churches Peace.

Middleburgh in Zeland, October. 16. 1644. stilo novo. Subscribed in the name of
the Walachrian Churches, by us, Jacobus D'Herde, President of the Walachrian
Classis, pro tempore. Iodocus Larenus, Assessor, pro tempore. Isaacus
Hoornbekius, Preacher at Middleburgh. Cornelius Beuckelarius, Preacher at Vere.
Melchior Burs, Minister of West Souburch.


Errata.
Page 98. lin. 16. And doubtless, etc. to the end of this Section, change of
letter. p. 104. lin. ult: Luke relates, unto p. 105 l. 9. Calvin, these words
must all be in the same letter as the former and the following. p. 113. l. 19.
And it appears, etc. until p. 114. l. 13. where he shows exclusive, all
these words must be in other letter. p. 114. l. 5. and one dele. p. 136. l. 11.
Though therefore, etc. fifteen lines change of Letter. p. 137. l. 2. For a
Synod, etc. this whole page and the following, unto lin. 20. We hold exclusive,
change of letter. p. 97. l. 1. dele being. l. 18. read and not to be tedicus.
p. 98. l. 21. read see examples. p. 114. l. 10. read (...) p. 128. l. 27. dele
so. p. 137. l. 22. r. this is. p. 135. l. 3. and 1^.5 Indices lin. 16. 1. Index.

A Consideration of certain Controversies at this time agitated in the Kingdom
of England, concerning the Government of the Church of God, sent from the
Churches of Walachria to the Synod at London, to declare the sense and consent
of their Churches.
CHAP. I. Of the Qualification of Church Members.
Question.

WHether there be none to be admitted into the Communion of the external
visible Church, but who is endued with the real internal holiness of
Regeneration, and with justifying faith in Christ: or, who upon strict
examination does manifest such evident signs of true faith, and real
internal holiness, as may convince the consciences of the Church to which he
joyneth himself, of his sincere faith, repentance and communion in Christ: and
that if any Congregation admit others, in whom there is not evident proof of
these signs, they admit impure and false Churchmembers?

Answer.

THe Reformed Churches distinguish between the Mystical invisible Church of
Christ; which is the Company of Believers called, who have communion with
Christ, to which are made all the Promises of heavenly good things in Christ,
to which no hypocrites can belong, which has the power of Christ's Spirit
inwardly working: and the external visible Church of Christ; which is the
company of those who profess the true faith, for the exercise of
Church Communion and Fellowship amongst themselves, to which hypocrites may
belong. For any one to be a true member of the invisible Church, we require,
according to the Word of God, true justifying faith, repentance, and spiritual
Communion with Christ. The admission of members into this Church is Gods work,
who by effectual saving Vocation does ingraft men into the mystical body of
Christ. But the admission of members of the Church visible is committed to the
care of the Overseers and Pastors of the Church; who by the Word of God may
admit none other to the complete external communion of the Church visible, and
ought to admit all such, who by external federall holiness are separated from
the world, are instructed in the knowledge of God and of the true Religion,
profess the name of Christ, and walking without offense in their outward
conversation, are accounted in the judgment of Charity as true Believers, and
upon examination of the Eldership concerning these things, are received into
brotherly and Ecclesiastical Communion.

We grant therefore in this question. 1. That any one be in foro Dei, at Gods
tribunal, a true member of the Church invisible, there is required in him,
that he be endued with real internal holiness of regeneration, and
justifying faith in Christ.

2. That it is man's duty who will duly for Salvation join himself to the
Church, that he truly believe in Christ, and being endued with real holiness,
worship God aright in all his ways.

But we affirm, that to the external and visible Church, the Pastors are to
admit those who profess the true Religion and faith of Christ, lead their
lives without scandal, or being fallen into scandals do by repentance wash
them away in foro Ecclesiae, at the Churches Tribunal, submit themselves to
Discipline, publicly frequent all exercises of divine worship, and desire
Church Communion with us: although they do not manifest such evident signs of
Regeneration, which may convince the Consciences of the Church of their true
faith in Christ.

Our opinion is proved by these arguments.

1. From the admission of members into the Primitive Church in the Apostles
time, when all who made profession of Faith, according to the Word of God, and
desired Ecclesiastical Communion, living without manifest scandals, or having
given scandals, did by repentance, in foro Ecclesiae, amend them, were by them
admitted into the Communion of the Church visible: see for instance Act. 2. 41,
42, 45. Act. 8. 13. Act. 4. 34, 37. in so much as even hypocrites had entrance
into the Church (notwithstanding that the Apostles were endued with an
extraordinary spirit of discerning) as appears in the Examples of Ananias,
Judas, Simon Magus, Hymeneus, Philetus.

2. From the admission of members into the Church of the old Testament; where
those were admitted into the external Church, and the visible communion
thereof, who being adorned with federall holiness did profess the true God of
Israel: as appears by the admission of the whole people into that Church,
Deuteronomy. 29. 4, etc. Josh 24. 23, etc.

3. From the description of the Church visible, the nature whereof is described
in the Word of God, that it is as a Barn wherein the chafe is gathered
together with the Wheat; the House of God, in which are vessels both of gold
and of wood; a Net, wherein are caught fishes good and bad, Matthew. 3. 12. and
13. 47. 2 Timothy 2. 20, 21. so that to the admission of any to be a member of the
Church visible, the Pastors can require no more in foro ecclesiastico, as a
necessary requisite, then what may also be found in hypocrites.

4. From the state and condition of the Churches of God in the time of the
Apostles, who acknowledged for true Churches of Christ, those visible
societies, amongst whom there were hypocrites, carnal men, schismatics, and
others not endued with real holiness of Regeneration and justifying faith: to
whom notwithstanding the Apostles wrote their Epistles as members of the Church
visible. See to this purpose the condition of the seven Churches in Asia, Rev.
2. and 3. Chap. The condition of the Churches of Corinth and Galatia, 1 Cor. 1.
11, 12. and 3. 3. and 6. 1, 2* 3. and 11. 17, 18. Gal. 1. 6. and 3. 1, 2, 3, 4.
and 5. 7, 8, 9, etc.

Thus have our Divines determined this controversy. Calvin. Instit. lib. 4.
cap. 1. sect. 7. But oft-times (says he) by the name of the Church the
Scriptures intend the whole multitude of men throughout the world, who profess
to worship one God and Christ, are initiated by Baptism into his faith,
testify by their partaking the Lords Supper a unity in the true Religion and
Charity, consent to the Word of God, and for the preaching thereof maintain a
Ministry instituted by Christ. But in this multitude are many mingled who are
hypocrites, and have nothing of Christ but the name and show, etc. which in
respect of men is called a Church, and we commanded to maintain the communion
of it. And, sect. 8. he shows, that it is the Prerogative of God alone to know
who are unfeined Saints, and true members of the Church. Yet (says he) because
he fore saw that it was somewhat requisite that we should know who are to be
accounted for his childr^n, herein he applies himself to our capacity. And,
because a certainty of faith is not herein requisite, he has in stead thereof
appointed the judgment of Charity: in which judgment we acknowledge for
members of the Church, those who in the confession of faith, and example of
their life, and participation of the Sacraments, profess the same God and
Christ with us. Hence Ames affirms it to be false, that the Reformed Churches
require inward graces, to the admitting of any into the Church, as to the
visible state thereof: Antibellarm. tom. 2. iib. 2. cap. 1. not. 5. And not. 3.
of the same chapter, he affirms out of Augustine, that there is in the Church
the inward soul, to wit, the gifts of grace; and the body, or outward
profession, whence it comes to pass, that some are both of the soul and the
body of the Church, others of the body only and not the soul. Which, says he,
is expressed by Alexander Alensis in other words, when he says, That evil men
are of the unity of the Church, but not of the unity of the body of the Church;
not of the body of the Church according to the true nature of a body, or in
reference to the union of the body mystical. Which distinction he proves out
of 1 John 2. 19. Romans 2. 28. a Jew openly, and a Jew in secret. So Trelcatius
the elder, in his common places, loco 15. puts the differences between the
members of the visible and of the invisible Church, in a lively faith, purity
of life, certainty of Election and Salvation, and Perseverance in faith; which
are found in the members of the Church invisible in sincerity and truth; but in
the members of the Church visible only in the judgment of Charity, oft-times
not in truth, because of a vocation and profession external, but often
hypocritical. So almost all the eminent Reformed Divines affirm the matter of
the Church visible to be men outwardly called professing the faith of Christ;
for they define it to be, a company of men, who by an outward calling, or the
preaching of the Word and participation of the Sacraments, are called to the
exercise of the Worship of God, and Ecclesiastical Fellowship amongst
themselves. See both the Trelcatii in their common places, loco de Ecclesia.
The Professors of Leyden, disp. 40. these. 33. Hence also have our Belgic
Churches in our National and Provincial Synods ordained, that he be admitted
to the Lords Supper, who has first made profession of his faith, submitted
himself to the Discipline of the Church, and brought testimony of unblameable
life. See the Synods at Dort, Anno 1574. art. 70. and Anno 1578. art. 64. at
Middleburgh, Anno 1581. art. 43. at the Hage, Anno 1586. art. 54. at
Middleburgh, Anno 1591. art. 51. at Dort, Anno 1619. art. 61.

We reject therefore these ensuing opinions, I. Of those who affirm the
external and particular visible Church to be the proper subject to which
belongs the Covenant of Grace, all the Promises of God, the Properties, and
Privileges which Christ the Mediator has purchased for his Church. The
reasons of our denial are:

1. Because that Church for which these privileges are purchased, is
perpetual which never falls away: for this infallible Promise is made to it
from God, Jer. 31. 36. Matt. 16. 18. But now no particular visible Church is
secured from falling away, as our Orthodox Divines demonstrate against the
Papists: it is not for it, therefore, that these Privileges are purchased by
Christ the Mediator.

2. Those Churches, for which all these promised Privileges are procured, are
called out of the world, by the word and Spirit of God, to faith and holiness,
and have sincere and inward Communion and fellowship with Christ and all true
believers: whence frequently in Scriptures they are called the Spouse and
Beloved of Christ, Cant. 4. 7. Ephesians. 5. 27. The Holy Sion, and heavenly
Jerusalem: and the Israel of God, Isai. 52. 1. Gal. 4. 26. and 6. 16. so
likewise, The Church which Christ has purified for himself, to present her to
himself glorious not having spot or wrinckle, Ephesians. 5. 27. The Body of Christ
fitly joined together and compacted by that which every joint supplyeth, Ephesians.
4. 16. It Is called Christ's people whom he saves from their sins, Joh. 10. 16.
Matt. 1. 21. Gods house, and a holy Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 5. The Temple of God,
in which the Spirit of God does dwell, 1 Cor. 3. 16. The Lambs wife, Apoc. 21.
4. All which, and such like, do not agree to an external visible particular
Church, as such, Romans 9. 6. but only to the Church invisible, which Christ had
redeemed with his blood, Acts 20. 28.

3. The Privileges promised and procured for the Church of God (amongst many
others) are these, That God puts his Law, and his Fear into the minds of the
members of it, Jer. 31. 33. That they are all taught of God, and know him. Joh.
6. 42. That they are redeemed by the blood of Christ, Act. 20. 28. Ephesians. 5. 27.
But these agree not to an external and visible particular Church: Therefore
that external visible particular Church is not the proper subject of the
Covenant of grace, or of these Privileges which by Christ our Mediator are
procured for the Church.

Whereunto the Reformed Divines assent, See (amongst others) the Professors of
Leyden, in their Synopsis Theologiae, disput. 40. These. 29, 30, 31. And Ames
himself against Bellarm. tom. 2. lib. 2. cap. 1. not. 10. where he affirms
that those glorious things which are spoken in Scripture of the Church of
Christ, that it is redeemed by Christ, the Body of Christ, the Spouse of
Christ, quickened, acted, and guided by the Holy Spirit, partaketh of all
spiritual blessings, so that the gates of hell shall never prevail against
it; does properly and fully agree not to the whole multitude of those that
profess the Christian faith, but to those only that are true believers: or,
they agree to the Church militant according to i^s essential nature peculiar
to true believers; not according to its external manner of existence, in which
are included both godly and reprobates.

II. We reject the opinion of those, who think that in the Church none are to
be admitted as members into the external fellowship of the Church, but such as
have been by a strict examination first tried by other believers, or the Elders
of the Church, in the exercises of Piety, the duties of Prayer, holy
conferences, and spiritual Communion, and have manifested to them evident
signs of Regeneration: and have afterward, before the whole body of the
Church, publicly professed a sincere confession of faith; and have either by a
continued speech, or by questions and answers, made manifest by evident signs
the saving grace of God in them, whereby they are translated from the kingdom
of darkness to the Kingdom of God; and such a spirit that in a Church
Covenant sincerely, faithfully, and godlily in the presence of God and the
whole Church, they both can and will walk in the ways of God. For we read not
that in the Apostolical Church this manner of admitting Church members was in
use. Those three thousand, Act. 2. were not in this manner added to the Church
of Christ: but men were upon such a confession joined to the Church of Christ,
as whereby hypocrites and persons not converted might have entrance into the
Church: and that under the inspection of the Apostles, who were endued with
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit.

Whence also in our Reformed Churches of the Netherlands, members of Churches
are admitted by a confession of the true Faith and Religion, a solemn
Protestation to submit themselves to the Discipline of the Church, a testimony
of an unblameable and inoffensive life. As also Ames himself affirms, that
men are duly admitted into the Church by a confession of Faith, and promise of
obedience. Medull. lib. 1. cap. 32. these. 17. And in some more numerous
Churches in the Netherlands it is the custom and practice, for the Churches
greater prudence in admitting members, that those who desire admission into
Church Communion, before their solemn profession of faith, are for some weeks
several times privately exercised, and instructed if they be not sufficiently
exercised; and this instruction is by the Ministers in the Visitation of their
several precincts, and is also publicly offered to all, when notice is given
of celebrating the Lords Supper. The Ministers inquire likewise of the
integrity of life and conversation of those who expect communion with us:
Afterward they use to undergo an examination before the consistory in their
consistoriall meeting, or before the delegates of the Consistory; which is
performed by the Minister through all the points of Catechism; And last of all
having been thus tried, they do in public before the body of the Church by a
bare affirmation give answer to these general Positions, Whether or no they
acknowledge the Doctrine of our Churches to be the Orthodox faith and the way
of Salvation? Whether or no they promise, by the grace of God, to persist till
death in the Profession of this Doctrine? Whether or no they promise to live
holily and as becomes this Doctrine? Whether or no they submit themselves to
the Discipline of the Church? In this manner are those who desire admission,
admitted to our Church Communion. This custom though laudable, is not indeed
contrary, but yet is beside the order of our Churches; and is not in use in all
our Churches: which therefore we do not urge as absolutely necessary, but make
use of it, for the greater Ecclesiastical prudence in so grave and serious a
matter. In the mean time we esteem that order established in our
Ecclesiastical constitutions to be sufficient for the due admitting of members
into Church Communion, according to the word of God.

CHAP. II. Of a Church Covenant.
Question.

Whether a Church Covenant solemnly made between the Members and the
Governors of a Church publicly before the whole Church, whereby the members
of a particular Church are by a public and express agreement and promise
associated and united amongst themselves, to exercise the fear and sacred
worship of God, unity of faith, brotherly love, mutual edification, and all
duties of piety in a holy communion with God and amongst themselves; be
absolutely necessary and essential to the constitution of a true Church: so
that without this Covenant there is no true or pure Church, nor true Church
member?

Answer.

THe Reformed Churches judge it necessary to the constitution of a particular
visible Church, that there be sacred union in the exercise of Ecclesiastical
communion, expressed by certain external acts appointed by God, and to be
exercised in a visible Church society, under one ministry, and spiritual
discipline. But this union, they affirm, the members of a true Church enter
into amongst themselves, when they are united in one external profession of
the truth and holiness, and in the same baptism; and will frequent the same
divine worship, be subject to the same Church Governors, be governed by the
same law and jurisdiction Ecclesiastical; and do submit themselves to the same
discipline, and partake of the same Supper of the Lord. And in this union there
is, they affirm, a kind of tacit and virtuall Covenant, which uniteth the
faithful into a particular Church: although such a solemn Covenant between
them in express terms be not publicly entered into before the whole Church,
as the question requires.

We grant in this controversy:

1. That there is a Covenant of saving grace between God and repenting Sinners,
founded in Christ the Mediator: whereby all the faithful are obliged to the
performance of all duties of piety which he has commanded in his word, as well
in Church communion and fellowship, as out of it: by which Covenant all those
who are truly partakers of it obtain right to all those saving benefits which
are contained in the promises of this Covenant.

2. That there is a tacit or virtuall Covenant between the members of one and
the same external particular Church: whereby they are obliged to the
performance of those mutual duties, which are required of the members of a
visible Church in reference to their particular Church communion: as that they
will be subject to the care and Discipline of their own Pastors, frequent the
same public worship of God, and be ruled by the same law and jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical: by which Covenant they also obtain to themselves right to
those things which are peculiar to this particular Church, and the members
thereof, and do not belong to other particular Churches.

3. We grant that there may be an express and solemn Covenant, in the
presence of God and the Church, upon extraordinary occasions, entered into, by
all the members of the visible Church of one nation or kingdom: when the
Church in that kingdom or nation has made defection from God and his worship,
or some other necessity call for it; for the preserving, or propagating, or
restoring of the decayed worship of God. By which Covenant notwithstanding
there does not accrue to the Church of that kingdom any new right, but that
right which before they had to enjoy the ordinances of God, which by reason of
their defection, or some other cause, was hindered and as it were suspended,
they may now freely and purely again reduce to practice. Thus did the Church of
God under the Old Testament often in the time of defection, or extraordinary
necessity, enter into a solemn Covenant in the presence of God.

4. Neither do we hold that the Covenant mentioned in the Question, is for the
matter of it altogether unlawful: for it is lawful also expressly,
publicly, and solemnly to vow to God those things which are in the precepts of
God enjoined to all believers: But that necessity of making this public,
solemn, and express Covenant, in the presence of the whole Church, requiring
it as a thing of absolute necessity to the essential constitution of a
particular Church, we do not acknowledge: but that union above mentioned, we
conceive sufficient by the word of God for the joining men professing the faith
into one particular Church. So that, by the word of God, to the essence and
entireness of a particular Church, this union is sufficient.

We deny therefore in this controversy: 1. That a solemn and express Church
Covenant, between the Governors of a Church and the Members of it, publicly
entered into before the whole Church, for the performance of all exercises of
piety in a holy communion with God and amongst themselves, is absolutely
necessary and essential to the constitution of a true visible Church, so that
without such a Covenant there would be no visible Church of God, no member of a
true or pure Church.

2. We deny also, that by such a Church Covenant that right is obtained which
the members of a Church in Ecclesiastical communion have to the Sacraments of
grace, the privileges of the Ecclesiastical Ministry and other benefits which
Christ has given to his Churches.

The Reasons of our denial are these: 1. Because the Apostles have not
ordained any such Church Covenant between the Members and the Pastors of a
Church; neither in the admission of Members into the Church did require such a
Covenant as necessary: but by the Sacrament of Baptism they received such as
professed the truth and holiness in^o the Church visible, and joined in the
same exercises of divine worship with those who were without any such Covenant
received into an Ecclesiastical body with themselves. See Acts 2. 42, 47. and
5. 13. and 8. 12. and 9. 26. and 18. 8.

2. Under the Old Testament the particular Churches in the Synagogues entered
not into any solemn Church Covenant in the admission of members: but only on
extraordinary occasions, when they had made defection from God, all the
faithful of the whole national Church renewed their Covenant with God, for
restoring the decayed worship of God; or when they were by some other necessity
called upon for renewing such a Covenant.

3. No man can injoyne any thing upon the consciences of men, (as absolutely
necessary to enjoying the Sacraments of divine grace, and the benefits of the
Ministry of the Church,) which God has not enjoined; without damnable
will worship. But God has not enjoined such a Covenant on the consciences of
men as absolutely necessary: for there is no law of God wherein he has
enjoined a necessity of this Covenant as the essential form of
Church Communion, so as that without it no man can be member of a visible
Church, or have right to the seals of the Covenant: Therefore the necessity of
this Covenant is a will worship; and so to be rejected.

4. The means whereby the members of a Church visible are associated and
united into external Ecclesiastical communion, are Baptism under the New
Testament, as Circumcision was under the Old Testament, 1 Cor. 12. 13. as
Cornelius, Acts 10. 47. Lydia, Acts 16. 15. and others, were by Baptism
ingrafted into the body of the Church visible: which in those of years is
joined with an embracing and profession of sound Doctrine and subjection to the
ordinances of God; as appears in the believers, Acts 2. 41. the Bereans, Acts
17. 10. and by Christ's commandment, Mat. 28. 19.

Hence say the Professors of Leyden, that beside the primary uses of the
Sacrament of Baptism, there are other secondary uses of it: to wit, the
external ingrafting them into a particular visible Church, Acts 2. 41. the
uniting of Christ's members amongst themselves, and into one body: 1 Cor. 12.
12. and consequently upon these, a signification of our profession; and a
distinction and separation from all other assemblies of unbeleevers. This
Church Covenant therefore is not the formal reason of our Ecclesiastical
communion in the Church visible. Hence also our Churches of the Netherlands in
admitting of Pastors or Church members do not enter into any such Church
Covenant: which yet are true visible Churches of God; whose members have all
essential requisites necessary to Church communion in the visible Church.

We reject therefore the Opinions of those: 1. Who make this Church Covenant to
be the Form of the Church of God: so that true believers professing the faith
are indeed Materials of a Church, who yet so long as they have not entered into
such a Covenant want the Form of it; and therefore are no true Church of God.
The Argument upon which we reject this position, is, because the Form of a
thing gives it its being and operation, so that there can be no property, no
operation, or act of a true Church in such an Ecclesiastical company, who are
not joined in such a Covenant. And therefore this opinion depriveth all the
Reformed Churches, which are not united in such a Church Covenant, of a true
Church Ministry, of the power of calling and ordaining Ministers, of a lawful
administration of the Sacraments, of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, etc. And
denies all that are baptized, etc. in those Churches, to be truly and rightly
baptized, etc.

2. We reject also the opinion of those, who make this Church Covenant to be
that moment of time, wherein the Minister of a Church has Church Power over
his Congregation committed to him; and the people enjoy the benefits of his
Ecclesiastical function; and the members of the particular Church amongst
themselves exercise the care and power, and hold Ecclesiastical communion and
fellowship; whereas it is certain out of the Word of God, that the Ministers
and Pastors of Churches receive Ecclesiastical power over their flocks, and
the people become subject to the Ministry of their Pastors for the Salvation
of their souls and their mutual edification in faith, not from any contract
which those men make amongst themselves, but from Gods Calling, whereby the
Pastors are sent forth by the Church of Christ to the Ministry; and the flock
enjoined by divine appointment, to receive the ministry and labor of their
Pastors by Gods institution for their salvation: See 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2* 2 Cor. 5.
20. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. 1 These. 5. 11, 12. and it is certain also that believers
amongst themselves have charge of each other by virtue of the communion of
Saints, whereby they all dispersed through the whole world are associated into
one body, Ephesians. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and 1 These. 5. 14, 15. and by the duty of
Charity which requires this mutual care from all. Lev. 19. Heb. 3. and 10.

3. We reject also the opinion of those who affirm, that the Sacraments of the
Old and New Testament, are signs and seals to confirm this Church Covenant,
and so instituted by God for the ratifying of it; that they are to be
administered to those only, who are by such a Church Covenant united amongst
themselves; but to be denied to others, though known to be Godly, who be not
in such a Church Communion and strict fellowship. Whereas it does most clearly
appear out of the holy Scriptures that the Sacraments were instituted by God
in his Church, chiefly and in the first place to be signs and seals of the
Covenant of Grace, and of the benefits promised in the Covenant of Grace, and
of Salvation procured by Christ for us, as is manifest by the Sacrament of
Circumcision, Genesis 17. 7, 10. Romans 4. 11. of the Passover, 1 Cor. 5. of
Baptism, Mark 1. 4. Act. 2. 38, 39. and 22. 16. Romans 6. 3 4. Tit. 3. 5. and of
the Lords Supper, Matthew. 26. 26, 27, 28. 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25, 26. But in a
secondary respect we acknowledge the Sacraments to be seals of our outward
ingrafting into the Church visible, and our conjunction into one body of the
Church, Act. 2. 41. 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. and that, as we conceive, of the
Catholic Church; so that he that is baptized is not baptized into the
communion only of this or that particular, or parochial Church, but is joined
into that one body of the Church Catholic and universal: as the whole
Ministry of the Church is given by Christ to men, to bring them to the unity
and conjunction of the Church Catholic and universal, and to ingraft them as
members into it, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Romans 12. 5, 6, 7. And as by
Excommunication duly performed the person excommunicate is not cast out of this
or that particular Church only, but is bound all the world over, and shut out
from the brotherly communion of the Church universal, Matthew. 18. 17, 18. so
the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper are seals to a man of
Ecclesiastical communion, not only in a particular Church, but in the Church
universal. And therefore we hold that these Sacraments are to be administered
not to those only who by a Church Covenant have joined themselves to some
particular Church, but to all the members of the Church Catholic, who have
duly prepared themselves for the partaking of them. Thus our Belgic Churches
deny not the seal of Baptism to the children of those parents, who have not
by a confession of faith and submission to Ecclesiastical Discipline, joined
themselves to any particular Church; according to the practice of the Jewish
Church, Josh. 5. 4, 6. as neither do we deny the participation of the Lords
Supper to those who by reason of the necessity of their calling cannot join
themselves to any particular Church, but are forced to travel through diverse
Parochial Churches.

CHAP. III. Of an institute visible Church.
Question.

Whether no other external visible Church be described in Scripture, and
acknowledged by the word of God, but a parochial or particular Church: which
is confined to such limits, as that of necessity it must be such as may be
contained, and ought to meet, ordinarily in one place, for the celebrating of
Gods public worship, and all the Ordinances of God with mutual edification:
so that the constitution of such a Church, which by reason of their multitude,
or some other cause, cannot in all their members meet ordinarily in one place
for the celebration of the worship of God and exercise of all Gods ordinances,
is unlawful and repugnant to the word of God and the Apostles institutions
concerning the constitution of a Church described in the holy Scripture?

Answer.

WE judge an external visible particular Church, to be a Church duly and
lawfully constituted according to the pattern of the Churches erected by the
Apostles, which, when it may be, does in one Place under the inspection of one
Pastor and Elders adjoined, frequent the service of God for their mutual
edification. But when, by reason of the multitude which God daily adds to the
Church, or some other cause, it cannot meet in one place, but does in several
places exercise the divine worship of God and the work of the Ministry, under
more Pastors and Elders joined into one Consistory, Presbytery, or Classis; the
constitution of such a Church, we say, does very well agree with the word of
God, and the Apostolical institution. And therefore we also conceive that the
visible Church described in the holy Scripture, is not only a parochial or
particular Church, but that there is also a National and Universal Church,
dispersed through a whole kingdom, yea through the whole world; which does in
Ecclesiastical communion make up one body Catholic. Yea we affirm that the
name Church in Scripture is applied to a company of Elders with Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction assembled together for transacting Church affairs.

Therefore concerning a visible Church instituted by the word of God we defend
these following positions.

1. That the constitution of such a Church, which by reason of its multitude,
or some other cause, cannot meet ordinarily in one place for celebrating Divine
worship, and exercising the ordinances of God, is lawful, and consonant to the
word of God and the Apostolical institution, though they exercise the worship
of God and the work of the Ministry in diverse places, under several Pastors
and Elders joined into one Presbitery. This position is proved.

1. From the constitution of the Church of Jerusalem instituted and erected by
the Apostles, which could not meet in one place, but must by reason of their
multitude meet distributively from house to house in diverse places, under the
inspection of diverse Pastors: and yet was a visible instituted Church, and is
called in Scripture a Church in the singular number. For the number of that
Church was so great, that three thousand were added to it in one day, Act. 2.
41. and the number of those that believed and were added to the Church grew up
to the number of five thousand men, Act. 4. 4. and the number of those that
believed increased daily more and more both of men and women. Act. 5. 14. Act.
2. 47. which yet daily met, and that in the time of persecution, from house to
house for performing the exercises of Divine worship. Act. 2. 46. and 5. 42.

2. The Church of Ephesus, duly constituted according to the word of God, was
one Church. Revel. 2. 2. which yet was governed by diverse Pastors joined in a
common Presbitery for Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, Acts 19. 8, 9. and 20. 17,
18. which did also very greatly abound in multitude of members, as appears
Act. 19. 10, 17, 18, 19, 20. and 20. 20, 21. 1 Cor. 16. 8. Revel. 2. 2, 3. And
yet met in some private house for celebrating the worship of God. Act. 19. 9,
10. and 20. 20. But that this whole multitude could in one school or house
celebrate the worship of God, is impossible: It Is certain therefore to us that
they met in diverse places and at diverse times under the inspection of diverse
Pastors.

3. The Church of Rome did not meet in one place for celebrating the worship of
God, there were more holy assemblies there in diverse places; there was a Church
in the house of Aquila and Priscilla, Romans 16. 5. Paul when he was at Rome had
holy Church Assemblies in his own house, Acts 28. 23, 30, 31. which yet was
not that whole (collectively taken) and famous Church of the believing Romans,
whose faith was famous through the whole world. Romans 1. 8. Other examples we
meet with in the Scripture of Churches duly constituted according to Gods
appointment, which met not in one place for exercising the worship of God, but
did in diverse places under a common Presbytery of diverse Pastors perform holy
duties. Hence also in our Belgic Churches in some greater towns, though
there be more believers then can celebrate the holy worship of God, and
exercise other ordinances of Christ, together in one place; yet they are not
divided into several Churches, but do together make one visible Church, under
the common Presbitery and government of diverse Pastors.

II. We affirm, that a visible Church described in the holy Scripture, was not
only parochial or particular, but there was also a National Church, of one
nation or kingdom, which consists of many and diverse parochial Churches,
joined under one Ecclesiastical government, and knit together amongst
themselves by a mutual visible communion and fellowship Ecclesiastical. We
deny indeed that there can be any such Typical National Church now under the
New Testament, as the Jewish Church was; wherein all of that nation were bound
to a public and solemn Typical worship to be performed, in one place chosen
by God, under the inspection of one visible pastor or priest, who in worship
and Sacrifices did hold forth and represent the whole people or nation. For
this vanished away with the types and carnal precepts of the Old Testament. We
reject also that National, and Provincial form of a Church, introduced by
men, in which many Churches are united and subjected to a Cathedral Church,
and depend upon one visible Pastor, who is Pastor and Lord of all other pastors
and inferior particular Churches; wherein the inferior Churches enjoy Gods holy
ordinances, and Ecclesiastical power by derivation and commission from the
power and jurisdiction of that Cathedral Church or that National or
Provincial Pastor and Bishop. For these are the inventions of Antichrist,
which bring a tyranny into the Church, and overthrow the power granted by God
to the Churches and pastors. Yet such a National and provincial Church we
acknowledge, wherein many particular Churches are by one visible Ministry and
Churchgovernment joined into one collective Ecclesiastical body visible, for
celebrating all those ordinances of God which are necessary to the visible
ministerial government of those Churches, and mutual Ecclesiastical
followship in it. This notion of a Church we deduce from Scripture by these
arguments.

1. The Church of God under the Old Testament consisted of many particular
Churches and Synagogues, which did in diverse places celebrate the worship of
God, and the exercises of Doctrine, Discipline and Church Government; as
appears, Act. 15. 21. Act. 13. 15, 16. Luke 21. 12. Ioh. 12. 42. all which
were yet conjoined into one national visible Church which God had chosen out of
every nation and people, Deuteronomy. 7. 7. and 32. 8. But the Churches of the New
Testament are of the same nature and form, in all effentialls which do
constitute a Church; as having the same Faith, the same Covenant of grace, the
same signs of that Covenant for substance, the same way of Salvation, the same
Religion, the same visible profession of Faith (which constitute a Church
visible) common to both, and differ only in accidental typical ceremonies,
which change not the essence and form of a Church. Hence Protestant writers
observe, that the holy Scripture does not refuse to make use of the name
Synagogue to denote a Christian Church, Jam. 2. 2. 2 These. 2. 1 Heb. 10. 25.
For when as the Church of both Testaments is one and the same, for essence,
there is no reason why both people may not be described by one and the same
name, says Tilenus in his Theses. part. 2. disput. 14. These. 3. It was moral
and perpetual therefore, that those many Synagogues, and parochial or
particular Churches, should unite into one Church National. Hence also the
Jewish Churches brought to the faith of Christ under the New Testament, though
dispersed through diverse Countries, were joined into one Ecclesiastical body,
ruled by the same law, government and Ecclesiastciall discipline. 1 Pet. 1. 1,
2. compared with chap. 5. 1, 2.

2. The Church of Galatia consisting of many several particular Churches, as
appears Gal. 1. 2. and yet was united into one Ecclesiastical body of that
nation, and united in a Church society under one common Discipline and
Government: Hence Gal. 5. 9. it is compared to a Lump which is easily corrupted
by a little leaven; like as the united and compacted body of the Corinthian
Church is set forth by the same similitude, 1 Cor. 5. 6. He gives command to
the Galathians concerning an uniformity of government in external discipline
and worship to be observed amongst them, against the seducers and false
teachers, Gal. 4. 10. etc. and 5. 9, 10. which intimates an united authority in
Church government; whereby the false teachers might be removed out of all the
particular Churches. The Church of Galathia therefore was Provincial.

3. The particular Churches of one province or nation, which in the
ministerial government, in Ecclesiastical fellowship and communion are
conjoined and united into one visible Ecclesiastical body, for the exercising
visible acts of Church communion jointly amongst themselves; those constitute a
Church Provincial or National. For the members which do in an Ecclesiastical
manner mutually exercise amongst themselves visible acts of Ecclesiastical
communion, and do together jointly participate in the same acts and
privileges of a Church, they make one visible body of a Church. But the
particular Churches of one Nation do according to the Word of God, exercise
amongst themselves such visible Ecclesiastical communion: for they do by
their particular members, by their Pastors and Elders delegated, sometimes
hear the same Word, frequent the same divine Worship, partake of the same
Sacraments; and do ordinarily avoid and shut out from the Kingdom of Christ
the same excommunicated person; exhort, reprove, comfort, and mutually edify
one another Ecclesiastically: and when one of them has made defection from the
Gospel of Christ, others endeavor by Ecclesiastical Ministry and the
Discipline of Christ to reduce it into the right way; and, if they refuse to
hearken to their Ecclesiastical admonition, they judge them as a company of
heathens and publicans, avoid, and exclude them from their holy communion.
Since then the Churches of one people or nation perform amongst themselves
these specificall exercises of Ecclesiastical communion and union; there is
therefore a coalition of them into a Church National. Hence also our Churches
of the Netherlands in their Synodall Canons have ordained not only
Ecclesiastical Assemblies, Consistoriall, Presbyteriall, and Classical; but
have also often decreed that Synods Provincial and National are to be called
for the Ecclesiastical judging of the affairs of the Church. As appears by
the Synod at Emda, Anno 1571. art. 6, 7, 8, 9. at Dort, Anno 1578. art. 16, 17.
at Middleburgh, Anno 1581. art. 20, 21. at the Hagh, Anno 1586. art. 26, 27. at
Middleburgh, Anno 1591. art. 25, 26. at Dort, Anno 1619. art. 29, 30. where it
is decreed, that there shall be four sorts of Church Assemblies held, to wit,
Consistories, Classes, Synods Provincial and National: wherein nothing but
Ecclesiastical affairs may be handled, and that in an Ecclesiastical manner.

III. We affirm that there is described in Scripture an universal external
Church, dispersed through the whole world, which in a visible polity makes
one. Ecclesiastical organicall body, under which are contained all Particular,
Classical, Provincial, and National Churches, as parts of that whole. This
assertion we thus prove from Scripture.

1. From 1 Cor. 12. 28. God has set some in the Church, etc. where by the word
Church is signified that one body of which there are many members, spoken of
ver. 12. wherein is not described the Invisible and mystical Church of Christ,
as such; but the Church of Christ as Visible and external: as being that which
is distinguished by the visible Sacrament or sign of Baptism, ver. 13. which
consists of various and heterogeneous external members and organs, ver. 15,
16, 17, 18. to which are given from God those various and external
administrations for edification, spoken of ver. 28. which is subject to Schism
and separation, ver. 25. Nor is it any Particular Church that is there
described, but the Universal and Catholic Church; wherein all, as well Jews
as Gentiles, are joined into one body, ver. 13. which comprehends all that are
baptized in one Spirit, ver. 13. to which are given from God, Apostles,
Prophets, Teachers, Pastors, the gifts of tongues and miracles, etc. ver. 28.
which are not given to this or that particular, but to the Catholic Church
visible. There is therefore here described an Universal Church.

2. There is by the Word of God some fellowship and communion Ecclesiastical
between all the visible Churches of the whole world; and therefore we must
acknowledge by the Institution of Christ a universal body of the Church: For
there is between them an internal fellowship and an obligation to mutual
duties of Christianity, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6. which requires also an external
Ecclesiastical fellowship and communion in exhorting, reproving, comforting
and edifying of all, and binds us to offer prayers and thanksgivings to God
in the Ministry of the Church, in behalf of all the Churches of the whole
world; to reduce Churches gone astray, etc. and that fellowship which the
members of a particular Church hold amongst themselves, the same in a due
proportion ought the Provincial and National Churches to hold amongst
themselves, for the mutual edification and increase of the body of Christ, by
which Ecclesiastical communion all National Churches do make up one
Universal Ecclesiastical body.

3. So also we see in Scripture Ecclesiastical meetings held, which
represented the Church Catholic and Universal of the whole world; wherein
businesses were transacted which concern the Universal Catholic Church of
the whole world: as Act. 1. where an Ecclesiastical meeting is held by
Preaching the Word, and exercises of Discipline or Church Government, ver. 15,
16, 26. and that in the name of the Church Catholic: for there are the
Pastors of the Church Catholic, the Apostles (sent into the whole world,
Matthew. 28. 19.) with the brethren out of Galilee and Jerusalem ver. 15. and
they transact a business which concerns the Church Universal, to wit, the
Election of an Apostle to be a Pastor of the Church Universal. And they who
transact those things which concern the rule, government, and oversight of the
Church Universal, ought to represent the Church of the whole world. And All.
15. 22. that meeting of Apostles, Elders, and Brethren is called a Church, who
by an ordinary power prescribed Ecclesiastical decrees and canons to all the
Churches of the Gentiles, and imposed them in a way of Jurisdiction, which no
Provincial, or National, much less Parochial Church might lawfully do; but
is an act of the Catholic Church.

The Reformed Divines also acknowledge a Catholic visible Church: see (amongst
others) Walaeus in his common places, loco de Ecclesia militante, page 458. of
his works in folio; where, explaining the nature of the Church visible, after
the definition of it, he affirms, that this Church visible is considered two
ways; either Universally, for the Church which through the whole world is by
the preaching of the Gospel called out of the world, which in some respect may
be called also Catholic; or for a Particular company confined to one certain
place. See also the Positions of the Professors of Leyden, disp. 40. these. 27.
where they tell us, that the Church Visible is by some consounded with a Church
Particular, and the Invisible with the Universal; But we, say they, saving
always better judgments, think^ these members ought not to be confounded. And
these. 33. thus they say, This Church visible is considered two ways, either as
a certain* company of one particular village, town, or province, those, to
wit, who are knit together not only in a community of Faith and Sacraments, but
also in the form of external Government and Ecclesiastical rites: or as a
certain company Occumenicall and universal dispersed in diverse places through
the whole world, though in the very external form of Government and
circumstantiall rites, they do often much differ amongst themselves, yet
agreeing in the essential community of the Faith and Sacraments: whence also
that is frequent in Cyprian, The Bishopric is one, whereof each severally hold
a part.

IIII. We affirm that a company of Presbyters met together with
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction for transacting Church affairs, are a Church; to
wit, a ministerial, or a governing and representative Church, (as they call
it;) and therefore called in Scripture by the name Church. We confess that
such a company of Presbyters are not a Church Representative properly so
called; as if the Elders were the delegates of the believers, who in their name
and their stead govern the Church, and judge of Church affairs; so as that
the company of believers govern and judge by those Elders as their instruments
and deputies: like as the Kings deputy represents the King himself. For the
multitude of Believers in the Church has not by the Word of God a power of
ruling, and judging Church affairs by a spiritual jurisdiction, and therefore
cannot delegate it to the Elders and Presbyters: But the Presbyters do
themselves immediately from Christ the King of the Church receive power of
ruling, and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, 2 Cor. 5. 20. 1 Cor. 4. 1. In this
sense therefore we do not acknowledge a representative Church. Neither do we
acknowledge such a Representative Church, as by commission from the multitude
of believers, should have absolute power by their laws and acts of
jurisdiction to bind the multitude, and subject their faith and consciences, so
as without trial they should receive and embrace what soever should be
determined by this Church. For this is the Papists tyrannical Antichristian
representative Church, in the Pope and his popish Bishops, which by Reformed
Churches is denied and cast out: But this representative Church we acknowledge
out of the holy Scriptures, viz. a company of Presbyters chosen by the
multitude of the Church, which by authority and ecclesiastical jurisdiction
received from Christ is set over and takes care of the Church, and rules it by
spiritual jurisdiction, and decrees made consonant to the Word of God; to whom
the whole multitude of believers is bound to yield obedience, in all things
which from the Word of God and by the power by Christ committed to them they
decree. This governing ministerial or representative Church is proved by these
Arguments.

1. From Matthew. 18, 17, 18. Tell the Church This is that Church which has the
power o^ the keys, the power of binding and loosing in heaven and earth. But
now this power was not given to the whole multitude of believers, but to the
Elders and Governors of the Church, who must be obeyed in the Lord under the
penalty of Excommunication. For the Government of the Church is not a
promiscuous and popular Government, but is committed by God to the Presbyters
and Elders, which are the (...) and (...), the Rulers and Guides in the Church.
This is that Church which is to receive and judge of the believers complaints
brought before them, concerning the scandals and offenses of the members of the
Church: which is the office of the Pastors and Presbyters, to whom the Holy
Ghost has prescribed laws and rules, according to which they ought to receive
and judge of those complaints, Tit. 1. 13. which to all the multitude of
believers in the Church is not enjoined. This is that Church-which has the
power of remitting and retaining sins; which was given to the Apostles and
their Successors, Matthew. 16. 18, 19. Joh. 20. 21, 22. but no where to the
whole multitude of believers. The ruling and ministerial Church of Presbyters
is therefore here understood. Whence also says Beza upon Matthew. 16. 18. that
in the Holy Scripture the word Church is sometimes used for an Ecclesiastical
Senate, as Matthew. 18. 17. to wit, because convened in the name of the whole
Church over which they are set; it is elsewhere called by Paul a Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4. 14. and that in this place by Church the Evangelist understands a
College of Elders he proves from hence, that he does after make mention of
binding and loosing, which power and jurisdiction was always in their power,
who were therefore called (...), rulers of the Synagogue. And Tremellius in his
notes upon the New Testament translated out of Syriack, To the Church, says
he, that is, to that Council instituted by God and the congregation of his
Saints, that the authority both of binding and loosing, according to God,
should be in their power, as appears in this and the following verse. Deodate
in his notes on the Italian Bible upon this place expounds Church, to be a
meeting of them that have the care of governing the Church amongst Christians,
and the inspection of the order, peace, and discipline thereof. 1 Cor. 5. 3, 4.
and 2 Cor. 2. 6. according to the custom of the Jewish Church, which also had
their Consistory for correction of manners. The Doctors and Professors of
Geneva in their notes on the French Bible, in this place do understand those
who have the care and ordinary calling of administering Doctrine and Discipline
in the Church: as there had always been use of it among Gods people, but was
specially renewed in the Ecclesiastical Ministry under the Apostles. The
Dutch interpreters in their notes on the new Dutch translation upon this place
expound Church, by Church Governors, who as it were represent the whole Church,
1 Cor. 12. 28. 2 Cor. 2. 6.

2. It Is proved from 1 Cor. 5. where is an Ecclesiastical assembly described,
which by a spiritual jurisdiction transacts the Church affairs, and represents
the Church, to wit, the Presbytery taking care of the Church discipline, which
is gathered together with Paul's ministerial spirit, and the power of the Lord
Jesus, that is, the power of the Keys, which Christ, as Lord of his Church,
only has, Revel. 3. 7. which therefore consists only of the Churches
Ministers, and Christ's Ambassadors, as being they who alone have the
ministerial spirit of the Apostles, and the power of the Lord committed to
them: which is also gathered together for this end, to deliver to Satan an
incestuous person, a Church member: which exercise is committed not to all the
Churchmembers, but to the Ministers and Pastors. We must therefore acknowledge
a governing and representative Church.

We reject therefore these opposite opinions following. 1. That there is no
other Church visible described in Scripture, but a particular or parochial
Church, which might meet together in one place to celebrate the holy worship of
God. For there is such a visible Church described in Scripture, which has
those attributes given to it, which agree not to a particular Church, as such:
as that it is dispersed through Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithinia.
1 Pet. 1. 1. compared with chap. 5. 1, 2. that all both Jews and Greeks,
whether bond or free make up one body thereof. 1 Cor. 12. 13.

2. That a particular visible Church is by the Word of God limited to such
bounds, as that of necessity they may be ordinarily contained, and ought to
meet in one place for performing the public worship of God with mutual
edification. For we have showed that the constitution of such a Church, as by
reason of their multitude or some other cause, cannot ordinarily meet in one
place, does well agree with the word of God and Apostolical institution. For
the essence and lawful constitution of a Church depends not on the outward
circumstance of place, but on a due Profession of faith, and bond of holy
communion. For, as Ames says, that same in Profession does constitute a Church
Visible, which in Reality and it is internal nature constituteth the Church
Mystical, that is, Faith. Medull. lib. 1. cap. 32. these. 7.

3. That there is no visible instituted Church, but that which is met together
for the performance of all the Ecclesiastical ordinances of Christ, for
preaching the word of God, and administration of the Sacraments, and the
exercises of all the offices and spiritual gifts, in a constituted Church. But
Christ speaks of a Church ( Mat. 18. 17.) met together not for the word and
Sacraments, but only for the exercise of Church Discipline. So likewise is that
meeting called a Church, wherein the Apostles did not by way of Sermon preach
the word, nor administer the Sacraments, but only told what God had done among
the Gentiles. Act. 14. 27. and 15. 4. or chose some to carry their decrees to
others. Act. 15. 22. which were acts of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. And
therefore that meeting, which meets only for the exercise of discipline and
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, is also a Church, and so called in Scripture.

CHAP. IIII. Of Ecclesiastical power.
Question.

Whether the Ecclesiastical power, or power of the keys, be given by Christ
to the multitude or all the members of a Church as the first and immediate
subject: so as believers not bearing any Church office may by themselves
immediately exercise all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, discipline, and causes
Ecclesiastical, save only the Sacraments. And consequently, whether private
Christians being Church members have such an Ecclesiastical power as that they
may authoritatively admit Church members to Ecclesiastical communion, reprove
by Ecclesiastical authority such as commit offenses, bind by excommunication
and Church censures, absolve from excommunication, and authoritatively remit
sins? whether to them also belongs the conferring the power of the keys on
the Ministers and Pastors of the Church, and that power which gives to the
Ministers an Ecclesiastical office; and consequently, the examination of
Pastors, the sending unto and confirming them in that Church office by
imposition of hands, and again authoritative suspending and removing Pastors
from that function?

Answer.

THe Reformed Divines teach that none in the Church of Christ, which is his
Kingdom, may arrogate any power to himself, but from a divine calling and
delegation from Christ: for whereas those Ecclesiastical affairs are
administered in the Church in the name of Christ and with his power, none may
perform them but he to whom they are committed by Christ, 1 Cor. 4. 1. and 5.
4. 2 Cor. 5. 20. and when as Christ has vouchsafed this calling and delegation
to administer those holy functions not to all in the Church, but to some only,
1 Cor. 12. 28, 29. Romans 12. 4, 5, 6. they therefore deny that this power
belongs to all. They allow indeed to all believers and godly members in the
Church visible a spiritual dignity and authority of Grace, whereby they are
Kings and Priests to God (for divine Grace has a heavenly authority and
majesty accompanying it) but deny, that authority of Office, and
Ecclesiastical power or jurisdiction belongs to them all.

We grant in this controversy. 1. That the power of the Keys is given by
Christ for the benefit of the whole Church, and of all believers, for their
spiritual edification, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.

2. That to all the members of the Church belongs power to choose their
Ministers and Pastors, either by suffrages, or by free consent. For this power
is found grounded on rules of holy Scripture, Act. 1. 23. and 6. 2, 3, 4. and
14. 22. But by this Election the believers do not confer or derive the power
of the Keys on the Ministers or Pastors chosen; but only design him, on whom
the power of that Church office is, by divine Institution, to be conferred, by
Ecclesiastical Ordination. The whole derivation of Ecclesiastical authority
and spiritual power on Ministers (so far as it can be ministerially,
secondarily, and subordinately performed by the Church) is by the whole
Ecclesiastical Vocation. But by Election is only the designation of the person
on whom that power is to be conferred: and by Ordination he is authoritatively
sent, and put into possession of that function to which he was by Election
designed to be ordained. Ordination therefore is an act of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, as the Bishop of Spalato righly discourses, De repub. eccles.
lib. 2. cap. 3. number. 54. but the act of Election or Nomination is not an act of
jurisdiction or Ecclesiastical authority, but of the gift of discretion;
whereby they prove the spirits, and discern the voice of the shepherd, and
choose him by whose teaching they will be lead.

For the better clearing of this business. When we consider of a Pastors
Calling entirely and absolutely, and not in reference to some part of it, by it
is the whole derivation of Ecclesiastical right, on this or that person
performed. And thus it comprehends Election and Ordination. Election has
three parts, Examination, Approbation, and Nomination. Examination consists in
the trial of his Learning, and Gifts, and former Conversation. Approbation
lies in two things, Judgment, and Assent. Judgment we call that sentence
whereby the person examined is judged fit to undertake the Ministry, and may
profitably perform it. Assent is of them who rest satisfied in this judgment.
Nomination is when one by name is by common advise decerned to be invited to
the Ministry of a Church. Ordination comprehends Mission and Admission.
Mission (or sending) is an authoritative act of the Presbytery, whereby the
Office is conferred on the person elected, and he sent and commended to the
Church for which he had been designed, and put in possession of his Ministry.
Initiation (or Admission) is the public administration of an outward rite,
whereby the person elected is established in the ministry of that Church, and
is performed by explaining the divine Institution, Prayer, and a solemn
blessing: the common Symbol of this Ordination is Imposition of hands. In this
whole business therefore of Vocation, we grant to the people Nomination; which
was at first in the power of the Presbyters and people in common: The
Governors of the Church mean while moderating the whole action; for they
being better able to judge of the quality of their learning and gifts, were
therefore to perform this charge, that according to the canons they were not
to follow the people, but to lead them: for the Election was chiefly the act
of Ministers, the work of the faithful people to consent to that Election:
distinct. 63. cap. Nosse, and cap. Cum long. For it is clear by Apostolical
examples, and the practice of the Ancients, that the Ministers were first to
Nominate; and the people to assent to that Nomination duly performed, or to
consult in common about the person to be nominated, or lastly, if they have any
cause why they might justly oppose that Nomination, freely to produce their
judgment to the Governors of the Church. Their consent they signified
anciently (as Junius acknowledges disput. 38. Anni 1604. de potest.
Ecclesiast. these. 14.) either by lifting up their hands, or in silence
approving the Judgment of the Church. An Assenting suffrage was called (...),
a Dissenting (...). The Examination was performed by learned and grave men
chosen out of the Presbytery of Pastors, or College of Doctors, for this
work; for to these above others is this care committed, 2 Timothy 2. 2. Act. 20.
30. And for the Judgment of the Examinates sufficiency and learning, that
this did chiefly belong to those that labor in the Word, is without doubt, for
the spirits of the Prophets must be subject to the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14. 32. The
Assent is of the whole Church, whereby they acquiesce and rest in the Judgment
of the Examiners and those present at the Examination. But that this is
necessarily required before proceeding to Ordination is a thing manifest. All
this business of Election does not constitute any one a Pastor; but does
judge and declare that person to be fit, and sufficiently endued with gifts,
and decrees by common consent that he shall be invited to the ministry, that
the dignity of the Pastoral office may according to the order of Christ be
conferred on him. For the Peoples Nomination, and the whole matter of Election
may be rightly performed, and yet it may so come to pass that he which is
chosen by a people may never be their Pastor: to wit, if the person elected do
justly refuse it; or the Presbytery duly determine the Person elected to be
unfit for the Ministry of this people. But by Ordination if a man be
Ecclesiastically sent forth and separated for the Ministry, Act. 13. 1, 2, 3.
and the power of the Ministry committed to him, 2 Timothy 2. 2. 1 Timothy 4. 14. and
he put into possession of the Ministry, Act. 6. 6. 1 Timothy 5. 22. This being a
potestative act of Ecclesiastical authority, is every where in Scripture
attributed to those who have Ecclesiastical authority: to wit, to the
Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4 14. to the Prophets and Teachers that ministered, Act. 13.
1, 2, 3. to the Pastors and Ministers of the Church, 1 Timothy 5. 22. and 2 Timothy
1. 6. whence also in the Old Testament, God commanded, that by Moses an
extraordinary Prophet should sacrifices be o^fered for Aaron and his sons,
and they anointed, when he made them Priests. And that this rite in the High
Priests was still continued, appears by the instance of Zadik, who was by
Nathan anointed to be Priest. And Numb. 8. 10. by imposition of hands of the
Elders, and the Firstborn, who enjoyed an Ecclesiastical function, are the
Levits put into their office. Ordination therefore contains in it the
Potestative Mission, whereby according to divine appointment a Pastor receives
the Ecclesiastical Office. Which Mission (or sending) is so necessary, that
without it no man may duly undertake an Ecclesiastical office. Romans 10. 15.

3. We grant that there are some acts of Ecclesiastical government which by
the word of God may not be performed without the agreement and consent of the
Church. For example, in excommunication of a Member in a Church: private
believers are by the word of God to exhort and reprove offending brethren, to
complain to the Church of the obstinate, Matthew. 18. 15, 16. And, by the law of
charity, as they are brethren in Christ, to admonish their Governors if remiss
and negligent, Col. 4. 17. to avoid a person excommunicate as a heathen and
publican, Tit. 3. 10. Mat. 18. 17. to reprove him as a brother, 2 These. 3. 14,
15. etc. All which manifestly require an assent of the people to the
excommunication of an offending brother. The Exercise of Ecclesiastical power,
to preach the word, to administer the Sacraments of the Covenant, to retain and
remit sins, is given to the Church Rulers in some things (called commonly the
Power of Order) severally and a part considered, as single Pastors. So a Pastor
may preach the word, and administer the Sacraments, without special consent
either of the whole Church or of the Governors to every act. In other things
(as in the use of the Power of Jurisdiction, or Excommunication) the exercise
and power thereof is given to an Unity, not to One; to the community of the
Governors of the Church, not to single Pastors severally; for in the Church,
one single man has not power of Ecclesiastical discipline. If a Pastor alone
do excommunicate any one, that excommunication is invalide, as well at the
tribunal of Christ, as of the Church: but if one Pastor alone, do baptize a
person without an Assent of the Church, that Baptism is valide. The government
of the Church or Kingdom of Christ is Free and Voluntary, to which all the
children of the Church do voluntarily submit themselves: but yet it is a
Government, properly so called, for there is in it Authoritative Jurisdiction,
and Ecclesiastical coaction by spiritual punishments on the Soul. In
reference to the former, (that this Government is voluntary) the whole people
by their free and voluntary consent and agreement do concur to the Election
of the Governors of the Church, and the Excommunication of Members. But, in
reference to the latter, (that the Government of the Church is properly
Government) the whole people does not rule or govern in the Church; but the
Church is divided into Rulers, and those that are Ruled: and therefore only the
Guides and Rulers of Churches in Ecclesiastical jurisdiction are Christ's
vicegerents, to rule and in his name to command, to judge and by Church
censures to correct: the power of Ecclesiastical office has therefore in the
government of the Church, over and above the peoples consent, an authoritative
and coactive power of the discipline and rod of Christ, which belongs not
to the people.

We deny therefore in this controversy, that there belongs to the
brotherhood, or body of believers in the Church, an authoritative power, whereby
they may join with the Elder^hip in an Ecclesiastical Judicial act, as
Judges authorized with Christ's authority, in judging causes ecclesiastically
determined.

We maintain therefore in this cause these following assertions: I. That the
Power of the Keys, and the exercise thereof in a constituted Church, is not by
Christ given to the Brotherhood, or People in a Church, but to the Presbytery
and those that have the oversight of Churches, or the Pastors and Ruling Elders
only. This Assertion is proved.

1. Because that Office which does essentially contain the power and exercise
of the Keys, is not common to all believers in a Church, but to some
specifically, chosen for it, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. To Apostles,
Pastors, etc. as such, is the power of the Keys given, Ioh. 20. 21, 22, 23. 2
Cor. 5. 20. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Therefore to those only, and not to all believers
does this power belong. For to those has God given the power of the Keys, who
are stewards of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4. 1. who are Servants in the
house of God by special office, 2 Cor. 4. 5. who know how to behave themselves
aright in the house of God, 1 Timothy 3. 16. and to give to those in the house
their due portion in season, Math. 24. 25. rightly to divide and distribute the
word of God, 2 Timothy 2. 15. For the Keys are a sign of power entrusted, which
are by Christ committed to the stewards and overseers in his house, whereby to
administer their power. And by the Keys in Scripture is signified, authority,
faculty, power, administration of government, which is exercised in commanding,
forbidding, allowing, restraining: As Isa. 22. 22. compared with Isa. 9. 6.
Rev. 1. 18. and 3. 7. And Mat. 16. 18, 19. denotes Ministers power and full
administration. They are committed therefore to those who are set over the
Church, not to all in the Church.

2. That opinion is not to be admitted, which does overthrow the order
constituted by Christ in the Church: by which order, Christ has in the Church
visible, as in an Heterogeneous Organical Body constituted of diverse integrall
parts, to which he has given their peculiar functions and operations in that
Ecclesiastical body. For he has set in the Church, eyes, ears, hands, feet,
rulers, and such as are over them in the Lord, overseers, watchmen, Pastors,
Ambassadors in Christ's name, preachers, fathers, builders, sowers, etc. And, a
flock, a people, a house, a field, children, and such as governed, and who are
bound to obey those that are set over them etc. see Heb. 13. 17. 1 These. 5. 12.
1 Timothy 5. 17. 2 Cor. 5. 20. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2, 15. 1 Cor. 3. 9. etc. But if all in
the Church have the power of the Keys, power of building, ruling the Church by
censures Ecclesiastical, etc. all will be Ambassadors, Rulers, Fathers,
Pastors, Watchmen, Eyes, Ears, for to those parts of the Church do
Ecclesiastical and authoritative oversight and rule belong, as their proper
function: Therefore the power of the Keys and exercise thereof is not common to
all members of a Church, but is the proper function of the overseers and
Pastors, to whom the Rod and that severe power is committed for the edification
of the Church, 1 Cor. 4. 21. 2 Cor. 13. 10.

3. The Cannons and rules proposed in holy Scripture, whereby the right
government of the Church, and the due use of the Keys is directed, are not
given to all the believers in a Church; but the Pastors and Elders, Timothy and
Titus, and other Church-Governors are by the Apostle instructed, how to behave
themselves in the house of God, as faithful stewards; in the Epistles to
Timothy and Titus, and also 1 Cor. chap. 3. and. 4. And the faults which are
committed in mis-governing of Churches, and abuse of the Keys, are not by God
imputed as the fault of all the believers in a Church, but of some, to wit the
overseers, 1 Timothy 3. 4, 5, 6. Tit. 1. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 3. Revel. 2. 14, 20. 3. Ioh.
16. 10. The praise and reward promised for due ordering of Churches, is not by
God promised to all the believers in a Church, but to the Pastors and Elders
who rule well in the Lord, 1 These. 5. 12. Heb. 13. 17. 1 Timothy 5. 17. 2 Timothy 4.
4, 5. 1 Pet. 5. 4, 5. Revel. 22. Therefore to those only is the Government of
Churches, and the exercise of the Keys entrusted by Christ.

4. To whom Christ gave the power and exercise of the Keys, or Rule in the
Church, to those he gave the spirit for administration, and those gifts which
are necessary for the government of the Church: For when God sends any into
his Church, he always qualifieth them with gifts sufficient and fit for the
exercise of that ministry and office committed to them; as is evident by the
examples of all, whom God has sent into the Church. But where is the Spirit
promised to all, whereby all the believers in a Church may remit and retain
sins, spoken of Ioh. 20, 21, 22, 23. Where is that prudence and wisdom
promised to all, whereby they may be able to rule the house of God, to go in
and out before the people of God? etc. Therefore the Government of the Church,
and the exercise of the Keys is not by God committed to all.

Hence also have the Reformed Churches always rejected a popular
Church Government; See Sadeel's treatise in French, concerning Ecclesiastical
Discipline, against Morellius: Of whom Reverend Beza, (libro de Ministrorum
gradibus, cap. 25.) when he had described the manner of Election in the Church,
says thus, which order by the goodness of God religiously and prudently
observed hitherto in this City, when one democraticall fanaticall Morellius of
Paris was bold by word and writing to find fault with, that his writing was
both in this Church and in France in many Synods worthily condemned. And in our
Synodicall constitutions the Churches Ecclesiastical power, Judgment,
Exercise of the Keys, and Church Government, is every where committed to the
Pastors and Elders, to Presbyteries, Consistories, Classes, and Synods. See the
Synod at Embden: Anno 1571. from Article 25. to art. 35. At Dort. Anno 1578.
art. 92. to art. 101. at Middleburgh, Anno 1581. art. 58. to art. 66. at the
Hagh, Anno 1586. art. 64. to art. 74. at Middleburgh, Anno 1591. art. 58. to
75. at Dort. Anno 1619. art. 71. to art. 81.

II. We affirm that the power of sending or ordaining Pastors or
Church-Governors is committed by God in a settled Church, not to the multitude
of the Church, but to the Pastors and Elders or Presbyters of Churches. We
grant indeed (as was said before) that there is a liberty of nomination or
election allowed by the word of God to all the members in a Church, so as no
Minister may without the agreement and consent of the people be obtruded upon a
Church, whether they will or no: which Nomination or Election does not yet
confer Ministerial power on the person elected, but only designeth a Person on
whom it may be duly derived according to the instituted rule, by those who have
under Christ received that power, whereby Ecclesiastical authority is derived
on this or that person. We deny not also but that extraordinarily in a
perplexed and depraved estate of a whole visible Church, the multitude or
faithful people in a Church may choose their Pastors and Rulers, and
authoritatively put them into the power, right and possession of the Ministry;
and that by reason of a cogent necessity which admits no law, and to which
all positive law gives place. But we affirm that in a settled and constituted
visible Church, the people by the positive law of God have not power of
ordaining or sending their Pastors: but that potestative Mission and
Ordinatio^, whereby Ecclesiastical authority or the Ministerial power is
conferred on this or that man designed to the Ministry, belongs to
Presbyteries. Our assertion is proved.

1. From those precepts described in holy Scripture concerning Ordination or
Sending Rulers to a Church, whereby it is committed not to the multitude of
believers, but to the Elders and Church-Governors, 1 Timothy 5. 22. 2 Timothy 2. 2.
Tit. 1. 5. etc.

2. From the Examples of the Apostolic Church, wherein the power of sending
and ordaining Pastors was reserved to Church-Governors, and never committed to
the people. See examples, Act. 6. 6. Act. 13. 1, 2, 3. 1 Timothy 4. 14. 2 Timothy 1.
6.

3. Because the power of suspension or degrading Ministers of a Church
belongs not to the Multitude: For to whom belongs the authority of taking
away an Ecclesiastical Ministry, to the same it belongs to confer it; for
in what way any thing is obtained, in the same way it is dissolved: But no
where in Scripture is this committed to the people, to pass an Ecclesiastical
censure, on false Ministers or Teachers, or remove them from the Ministry; but
is required of the Angels of Churches, and their Presbyters, Tit. 1. 10, 13.
Reve. 2. 2, 14, 15, 16, 20. Act. 20. 28, 29.

So also is it decreed by our Belgic Churches, that the Election of Pastors
and Elders be not transacted without the peoples suffrages or free assent; yet
that the Mission or Ordination into the Ministry of a Church, as also the
suspension and degradation of a Minister be done by the Consistoriall
Presbitery upon the judgment and assent of the Classis. See the Canons of the
Synod at Middleburgh, Anno. 1591. art. 3, 4, 5, 11, 58. at the Hagh, Anno.
1586. art. 4, 13, 72. at Middleburgh, Anno. 1581. art. 4, 7, 64. at Dort. Anno.
1619. art. 4, 5, 79.

We reject therefore these contrary opinions following. I. Of those who ascribe
to the people or multitude of believers, the power of the Keys, even where
there are no Rulers or Governors, so that a Congregation of believers joined in
Church Covenant, though wanting Church Governors, has power of
excommunication, and of exercising all acts of the Keys, or Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction and government, save only the Sacraments. But to us it is certain
from the word of God, that that Church to which Christ gave the power of the
Keys, and the exercise of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, is an Organicall body
of diverse members, wherein are Eyes, Ears, Hands, and Feet: Pastors, Rulers,
and a Flock, which is lead and governed, 1 Cor. 12. 14, 15. Romans 12. 4, 5. 6.
Act. 20. 28, 29. But now believers joined in Church Covenant, destitute of
Church Rulers, do not make up such an organicall body. And therefore never in
Scripture do we meet with a Church, which exercised Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction and the power of the Keys, and yet was destitute of Church Rulers;
See 1 Cor. 5. 4. Act. 20. 28, 29. Revel. chap. 2. and 3. Therefore to no Church
of believers, wanting Rulers, are we to ascribe the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven.

II. Of those who affirm that the multitude of a Church does derive
Ecclesiastical power on the Church-Governors, and the Church-Governors are the
believers servants properly so called, the Churches mouth, hand, and
instruments, by whose intervention she does execute her decrees, so that the
Church of believers, under Christ the Lord and Head of the Church, as his
spouse and wife does communicate government, stewardship, and legal exercise
of Jurisdiction, to some certain men chosen by her self, who as her servants
and deputies, by an authority borrowed from the multitude, as the first and
immediate subject of Ecclesiastical authority, do govern the house of God, and
exercise the chief acts of their function. But we in this cause do from the
holy Scriptures thus judge;

1. That all the Functions, and Offices, and their authority, are instituted by
Christ in the Church and House of God; and that the Governors of the Church do
derive and receive the offices which they bear, and their power and authority,
not from men but from Christ alone and his institution. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. 1
Cor. 12. 26, 27, 28, 29. Act. 20. 28. and that the power of the Keys and all
authority of order and jurisdiction is primarily in Christ; which Christ does
immediately communicate to his Apostles and their successors therein.

2. That the multitude of believers in a Church, by this nomination or
designation of a person, on whom it may, according to Christ's institution, be
duly conferred, does effect thus much; that the Ecclesiastical office and the
power thereof, by the donation of Christ, may be applied to this or that man;
but does not derive this power on that person. But the Presbytery of Churches
by a potestative Mission, or authoritative Ordination and imposition of hands,
does apply and send forth that person designed by the peoples choice, into the
possession and exercise of that function and authority. So that Church Offices
and their authority is immediately from Christ conferred on the Church
Governors: but the application of these Offices to these or those men, is done
by the potestative Mission of the Presbytery, with the previous assent or
nomination of the people,

3. The Pastors therefore in the execution of all acts of their office, are not
the Churches servants, properly called, but Governors, Guides, Fathers, Rulers
in the Church, to whom the people are bound to obey, whose Government, Rod, and
authority they ought to submit to and embrace with due subjection and
reverence, Heb. 13. 17. 1 These. 5. 12, 13. 1 Cor. 4. 1. And therefore when they
are called the Servants of the faithful, 2 Cor. 4. 5. they are called by that
name, not subjective, as if they derived and held their authority from the
Church, for then were they the servants of men not of God: but finaliter or
objective, because they are the servants of God for the Church, for whose good
and benefit they labor. As Christ is called our servant, Mat. 20. 28. and the
Angels are called ministering Spirits, Heb. 1. 14. Yet neither Christ nor the
Angels have the authority of their vocation from us, but exercise it for our
good and service. The Church Officers therefore are servants, but servants of
God and of Christ, 1 Cor. 4. 1. in whose name they are Ambassadors in all the
acts of their Ecclesiastical functions, 2 Cor. 5. 20. and are furnished with
his commands, 2 Cor. 5. 18. are his Angels, Revel. 2. 1. and stewards in his
house, 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2, and 3, 10.

III. We reject also the opposite opinion of those, who teach, that the
exercise of Excommunication cannot be duly and lawfully done, but by the
judgment and decree of the people; so as the whole multitude of the Church be
the Judge in the case of Excommunication. Although we grant that no man may in
the Church be duly excommunicated without the knowledge and against the consent
of the people, but that the Exercise of the greater Excommunication ought to be
with the assent of the whole people, as was said before: Yet to set all the
Church members in the places of Judges, we certainly believe would bring
anarchy and confusion into the Church. And our assertion is proved.

1. From Mat. 16. 17, 18. where the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven are promised
to Peter, as a Pastor, and ordinary Ruler of the Church of God; for to those is
promised the power of binding and loosing, of retaining and remitting sins,
ver. 19. which authority is peculiar to Christ's Ambassadors, whom he sends
into the world with his authority, Joh. 20. 20, 21, 22. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. To
those therefore is the exercise of the Keys in Excommunication entrusted; and
not to the whole people, to whom they are not promised.

2. From Matthew. 18. 17, 18. We have showed before, that this place is to be
understood of a Church representative, or Company of Presbyters; to whom Christ
has given power, whereby they actually cast out the scandalous and obstinate,
as heathens and publicans, from Church Communion: which power is not given to
the multitude of believers.

3. Our assertion is evident from 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. You (says the Apostle) and
my spirit being gathered together in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, with
the power of the Lord Jesus Christ, let such a man be delivered to Satan: and
this rebuke or Church censure, was done (...), by many, as he writes, 2 Cor. 2
6. Surely, that by these many the Apostle understands not the whole
multitude, is easily manifest; if all were present at the deliberating, every
one, even of the meanest capacity, may see there was no reason, why Paul should
not have written, (...), of all, for this had been very suitable to commend that
cause which the Apostle was urging; for from the multitude of those who had by
Ecclesiastical Discipline corrected the incestuous person, he endeavors to
prevail with the Corinthians that they would now afford pardon to him upon his
repentance. And further, let it be remembered, that these (...), these many, are
described in the former place to be (...). gathered together with the power of
our Lord Jesus Christ: For since we know that this power is by Christ committed
to the Ministry of the Church, and lies in the administration of the
spiritual Keys, we may easily guess that by the term many, is to be
understood the company of Pastors and Elders, to whom the care of
Ecclesiastical Discipline is committed. Hence Bullinger on that place 1 Cor.
5. does thus comment; Therefore the ancient Church had a holy Senate of
Presbyters, which did diligently admonish offenders in the Church, sharply
correct them; yea, and exclude them from Church fellowship, to wit, if it
appeared that no amendment might be expected. And Hyperius notes upon this
place, That by Congregation must not simply be understood, the whole multitude,
amongst whom are mingled many Jews, Ananias's, false brethren, men vicious,
who would never suffer that such a sentence should be unanimously passed; but
rather certain selected Elders, eminent for learning and piety, in whose power
he would that the Judgment of the Church should be in like causes: so that
these by a Synecdoche are taken for the whole Church. Which hence appears,
that Matthew. 18. after it was said, Tell the Church, it is added, Where two or
three are gathered together in my Name, I will be in the midst of them. And 2
Cor. 2. 6. he says, Sufficient is the punishment that was inflicted by many.
And Tertullian in his Apologetick, chap. 39. says, that all the approved
Elders used to preside, If any (says he) do so offend as that he be to be
debarred from communicating in Prayer and Assemblies, and all holy commerce,
all the approved Elders did preside, who attained that honor not for money, but
desert.

CHAP. V. Of the Ecclesiastical Ministry, and the Exercise thereof.
Question 1.

WHether the end and effect of the work of the Ecclesiastical Ministry be
only the Confirmation and Edification of those Church Members who are already
converted and truly godly; so as that Pastors are not more obliged by virtue
of their Ecclesiastical function to convert the straying souls of such as
live in the world, and in sins out of Church Communion; then all believers
endued with the gifts of the holy Ghost, are by the common duty of Charity
bound to do?

Answer.

WE judge that the Word of God duly and truly preached, and publicly received,
is both a means of constituting a Visible Church, and a note of a true Visible
Church; and a means also of confirming and saving of believers, who do
already in a visible Church profess the Faith.

We grant in this Question. 1. That private Christians from the common duty of
Charity, making use of those spiritual gifts which they have received from God
for men's edification, do sometimes convert to the faith those souls which went
astray; and bring those, who live in the world out of the Church, unto the body
of the Church of Christ. See John 4. 29. etc. 1 Cor. 7. 16.

2. We do not think, that the office of him who preaches the Word, as sent of
God and the Church, does confer any efficacy to the Word preached by him; or
has any influence upon the soul of him that is converted. For the power of
God only, and the Spirit which accompanies the Word preached, does give to the
Word preached a virtue and saving efficacy for the Conversion and Salvation of
souls, 1 Cor. 12. 11. and 15. 10. But we affirm that the Word preached by
him, who is ordained to an Ecclesiastical Office, and does, by his
Ecclesiastical Office, authoritatively preach the Word, is the ordinary
means, to which God does by the Efficacy of his Spirit give assistance, for
the Conversion of those who live in sin out of Church Communion. So that
Pastors, as Pastors, by virtue of their Pastoral Office are the ordinary
means of the Conversion of those men who live in the world.

This Assertion is proved: 1. Because Faith is given and first attained by the
Word preached, by those who by an Ecclesiastical call are sent of God, to the
Pastoral Office, and by virtue of mission and function preach the Word,
whereby faith is wrought in man. See Romans 10. 14, 15. 1 Cor. 3. 19. Gal. 3. 2.

2. Because Pastors of Churches by reason of the Office they bear, are
Fathers, who do first beget their children to Christ in the Church; and by the
spiritual seed of God, do give spirit and life to those that are dead in sins:
See 1 Cor. 4. 15. Gal. 4. 19. 2 Cor. 2. 16.

3. Pastors are enjoined, as an Office peculiarly belonging to them, to preach
the Word of God with all meekness, mildness, and patience, if perhaps God
will give repentance to those who are held captives in the shares of the
devil, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25, 26. to open the eyes of those who sit in darkness,
and to bring them to the light of the Gospel and of Grace, Act. 26. 18. to seek
lost sheep for the Lord, Ezekiel. 34. 4, 5. and to bring into captivity to the
obedience of Christ, those who with high minds exalt themselves against the
Word of God, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.

We reject therefore the opposite Positions of those,

1. Who affirm, that the Conversion of wicked men, is not an effect intended,
that it should be produced by virtue of the Ecclesiastical Ministry, as a
means appointed to that end; and therefore that never any are converted by the
Pastors of the Church by virtue of any Ecclesiastical Office, but, by
accident, as they are gifted Christians: affirming that ordinarily the
Conversion of such as go astray is by such Christians endued with gifts of
Prophecy. But it is certain from the holy Scripture, that the Ecclesiastical
Ministry is appointed by God for this end, as the ordinary means whereby such
as are strangers and enemies to God may be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 20. and
brought to Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 2, 3, 4.

2. Of those who affirm, that sincere Conversion of men, is a certain
argument, that those by whose preaching the Word they are converted, are sent
of God, according to that Romans 10. 14, 15. Jer. 23. 32. But we judge that the
sending which the Apostle speaks of, Romans 10. 14, 15. is a sending to an
office in a due order, whether extraordinary or ordinary, Ecclesiastically
performed; and that it consists not only in conferring gifts, whereby a man
is made fit for the Ministry, or Prophecy, but in conferring authority, and
conveying Ministerial authority; as the Protestants prove by manifest
Arguments against the Socinians. And although private Christians in the duty of
Charity, and by reason of gifts wherein they are subservient to God, do convert
some from their sins; yet it follows not that they are thus sent, as that
they have authority, as the Ambassadors of Christ, in his Name, to preach the
Word of God authoritatively; because they want the Authoritative Mission by the
Church of Christ, whereby that Ministry in the Church is conferred, wherein men
as the Ambassadors of Christ, preach the Word of Reconciliation, 1 Timothy 4. 14.
Tit. 1. 5, 9, 10. 2 Cor. 5. 20.

Hence also our Belgic Reformed Churches acknowledge that Preaching of the
Word by Ministers Ecclesiastically called, is the ordinary means of men's
repentance and first Reconciliation to God: as appears by the Ecclesiastical
Form of establishing Pastors in the Ministry of the Church through the whole
Netherlands.

Question 2.

Whether the Minister of a particular Church may not only by virtue of his
gifts, and from the common duty of Charity, but also by virtue of his
Ecclesiastical Function, lawfully perform ministerial acts of his office in
the Ecclesiastical Communion of another particular Church, to whose ordinary
ministry he is not called?

Answer.

OUr Judgment in this question is, that he who by an Ecclesiastical call is
lawfully called, is by virtue of his office not only fastened to the Particular
Church, but also to the Provincial, National and Universal Church of God; so
that the Communion of Saints tyeth him to this body of the Church Universal;
not only by reason of the gifts he has received, but also by reason of
special Office which he bears in the Church; to which he is bound to bestow
and apply the exercises and works of his Office, for the common edification of
that whole body. And therefore is bound, by the authority and power of his
Ecclesiastical Office, to afford succor to the distress and indigency of the
Church of Christ throughout the earth; yet without confusion and in due order:
and there lies on all the Pastors of the Church a Pastoral charge and care
of all the Churches of Christ. For to this end did Christ appoint Pastors, and
give them to the Church for the edification of his body, that all might attain
to the unity of faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, Ephesians. 4. 11,
12. 1 Cor. 12. 24. Romans 12. 5, 6, 7. And therefore he may exercise the
ministerial acts of his office not only in one particular Church, but in
others also, when the edification of those Churches requires it. We grant
indeed that by Election, a Pastors Ministry is restrained by the Word of God
to this or that particular Church for his ordinary charge; yet by Ordination,
and Mission, whereby authority, and Ecclesiastical power, and the whole right
of the Ministry is committed to a man, he is made a Pastor in the Communion
of all Churches; and therefore ought to have a Pastoral care for the
edification of all Churches, and consequently may exercise ministerial acts in
any visible Church throughout the world; so that it be done without confusion,
and in a due Order.

This Assertion is proved,

1. Because the particular Churches of one Province may by Ecclesiastical
authority send forth Pastors to Nations and people to whom the Gospel is not
yet made known; or to other Churches in distress or want, who are
unsufficient for the Call of their own Pastors, and working their own
Edification: Examples of this we meet with in the Word of God, Acts 13. 1, 2,
3. But this sending forth of Pastors is a Ministerial act, which is performed
by virtue of their Pastoral Office in the Ecclesiastical Communion of another
particular Church; a Pastor therefore of one particular Church may exercise
ministerial acts in the Communion of another particular Church.

2. A Pastor as a Pastor does exercise many ministerial acts not only in
reference to his own particular Church, to the ordinary Ministry whereof he
is fixed, but also in reference to other Churches Particular, Provincial,
National, yea, and the Universal Church: For by Baptism he admits members
into the Church Universal, 1 Cor. 12. 13. By Excommunication he does cast
members out, not of his own particular Church only, but out of the Provincial,
National, and Universal Church, Matthew 18. 18, 19. By his Pastoral Office he
offers up Prayers to God for other Churches distressed: He may preach the
Word of God in another particular Church, not only by virtue and reason of his
gifts, but with Pastoral Authority, so that by his preaching he does bind and
loose sinners, he does retain and remit sins, and as an Ambassador sent from
God, does beseech men to be reconciled to God.

3. There is an Ecclesiastical Communion between diverse particular Churches,
not only in the common gifts of all Christians, but also in the Pastoral
actions and administrations; for they are not performed beyond the Communion of
Saints: Particular Churches as they are Churches united into a sacred
fellowship, do exhort, reprove, comfort, and admonish one another mutually;
and consequently do maintain Communion in Ecclesiastical Authority, not only
as they are Saints, but also as they are Churches. Ministerial acts therefore
may be lawfully exercised by the Word of God, in diverse particular Churches, by
the Pastors of one Church.

And therefore this practice is held forth in our Ecclesiastical Canons in the
Belgic Churches, that the Pastors of one Church exercise Ministerial acts in
another particular Church, there with Pastoral Authority they preach the Word
of God, administer the Sacraments, admit members, attend to Ecclesiastical
censures, choose Pastors and Church Governors, etc. and that to the great
Edification of those Churches.

We reject therefore the opposite Assertion of those, who affirm that a Pastor
may indeed in another particular Church exercise the gifts of Praying and
Preaching the Word of God, but not by virtue or force of his Pastoral Office,
but only by reason of gifts which he is to employ for the common edification:
but that he may exercise no ministerial acts which he performs by
Ecclesiastical power and authority, as a Minister of the Church, and of God,
in dispensing the Mysteries of God, save only in that Church, to which he is
fastened by Election for his ordinary Ministry.

Question 3.

WHether the exercise of Prophecy be a perpetual institution in the Church of
God, whereby private men who bear no Church-Office, may, for the exercise of
the gifts of the Spirit, publicly before the whole body of the Church preach
the Word of God with all authority in the Name of God, and explain and apply
it, for instruction, confutation, reprehension, and consolation of the hearers?

Answer.

OUr Judgment is that none may publicly, in the Church Assembly of the
faithful, preach the Word of God, in the Name of Christ and of God, but he who
is sent by a divine Calling for that work; as the Protestants demonstrate
against the Socinians and Anabaptists from Romans 10. 14, 15. Heb. 5. 4, 5. Act.
13. 1, 2. and 14. 22. Tit. 1. 5. 2 Timothy 2. 2, and other places and arguments;
and from the examples of all those, who either in an extraordinary or ordinary
manner were sent to preach the Word. Which Mission, or sending, consists not
only in conferring gifts, whereby an Ability, (...), is given by God; but in
conferring a power, whereby is given an Authority, (...), to preach the Word of
God; which Authority is oft-times not conferred on those, on whom yet God
bestows gifts and ability. For it is by the Word of God denied to women, in
whose lips is the Law of God, Prove. 31. 26. and a fitness to teach the younger
women, Tit. 2. 3, 4. It is certain from the Word of God, that God injoynes all
Believers to exhort, comfort, reprove, and edify one another, Heb. 3. 13. 1
These. 4, 18. and 5. 14. but it is from the common duty of Charity, and the law
of Nature, that they are thus bound: and therefore the word which they declare
to their neighbors, does not by the authority of any special office bind to
obedience those that hear it, but by virtue of the subject or matter contained
in that word. But the Churches Ministers declare the Word of God as Christ's
Ambassadors, with authority of special Office, and power to bind and loose, 1
Cor. 4. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 5. 20. Joh. 20. 21, 22. There is therefore a many-fold
difference between the Charitative admonitions of private Christians and the
Authoritative preaching of Gods Ministers. For 1. the Admonitions of ordinary
Christians are to our neighbor privately, and as joined to us by the bond of
Charity and the law of nature: The Ministers of Churches do publicly preach
the Word of God with pastoral charge of souls, and Gods Authority, to the
Church, as a Church, over which God has made them Watchmen and Overseers. 2.
The Ministers Authoritative preaching the Word has joined with it the
Ecclesiastical power of binding and loosing sinners, remitting and retaining
sins, Mat. 16. 18, 19. Joh. 20. 21, 22. which authority is not affixed to the
Charitative admonitions of private Christians. 3. There is not so absolute and
strict an obligation on private Christians for that brotherly correction which
is performed by them, as the obligation on the Pastors of the Church of God for
their office of preaching, who may not involve themselves in the affairs of
this world, to the end that they may wholly attend upon the office of
preaching, 2 Timothy 2. 4. and who are in a special manner to give an account of
the Salvation of their hearers committed to them, Heb. 13. 17. Ezekiel. 3. 18. and
33. 18. which do not concern private Christians in the exercise of charitative
admonition.

We grant therefore in this cause:

1. That it is a duty enjoined on all believers to speak the Word of God in
private to their neighbors, for their mutual edification; and that they are
obliged to it from the common duty of Charity, and the law of nature.

2. That private Christians in an extraordinary case, in a Church to be
erected, or that is decayed and ruined, may sometimes publicly preach the Word
of God, for the planting a Church, when there are not such as by Gods ordinary
call have received from God power to preach the Word. For the positive rituall
law of God, gives place to the moral law of God, when necessity requires it.

3. We grant also that private Christians in some special cases, and upon a
particular occasion, may sometimes speak the Word of God in public, by a
special Calling from God: as Martyrs are called to a public confession of the
faith.

But all this does not infer, that there is an exercise of Prophecy
constantly and ordinarily to be observed in the Church, whereby the Word should
by private Christians in the Name of Christ, and with all authority be
publicly preached for the edification of the Church. And therefore we
maintain the negative of the question proposed, and deny that there is such an
exercise to be perpetually retained in the Church of Christ.

The Reasons on which we ground it, are these:

1. Because preaching the Word of God, in the Name of Christ, with the
authority of an Ambassador of God, is joined with the administration of the
Sacraments, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. yea, and there lies a more excellent utility and
eminency of the Pastoral Office, in preaching the Word, then in administration
of the Sacraments, 1 Cor. 1. 17. But the administration of the Sacraments is
not to be permitted to all indifferently who have those gifts; as the
Protestants do solidly demonstrate against the Papists: and therefore neither
the Preaching of the Word.

2. No man may take this honor to himself, unless he be called of God, and
sent to preach his Word in the Name of God, Romans 10. 14, 15. But all who have
the gifts of Preaching the Word, are not called and sent of God. For those who
are sent of God, are sent either by an immediate and extraordinary call, or by
a mediate call by the Church: but whereas now an extraordinary Mission or
Sending is ceased in the Church, those are therefore by the ordinary
Ecclesiastical call separated to the Office of Preaching, who may lawfully
undertake it. 1 Timothy 4. 14. and 5. 22. 2 Timothy 2. 2, 3.

3. Those duties which are required of all those who publicly preach the Word
of God in the Name of Christ, are not required of all those Christians that are
gifted: as that there lies on them the Pastoral charge of souls, of which
they are to give an account to God, Heb. 13. 17. that they ought to give
themselves wholly to the reading and studying of the Scriptures, 2 Timothy 4. 15,
16. that they may not apply themselves to the things of this world, 2 Timothy 2,
4. that in the Name of Christ as his Ambassadors they entreat men to be
reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. 20. that they are to distribute to all and every
one in the house of God their portion of food in due season, Matthew. 24. 46.
that they are authoritatively in the Name of Christ to remit and retain sins,
Joh. 20. 21. Now all these things are not enjoined on all Christians who have
received the gifts of the Spirit.

4. Hence also the Privileges and Promises which are made to Pastors, who
preach the Word in the Name of God, are not given to all believers who are
endued with the gifts of the Spirit; as, that they are worthy of double honor,
1 Timothy 5. 17. that God will by a peculiar and singular assistance of his Spirit
be present with them, Matthew. 28. 20. Luke 21. 14, 15. And so a Prophets
recompense and reward is distinguished from the reward of a righteous man,
Matthew. 10. 42. Therefore that labor, duty, and burden, to which these Promises
are made, is not imposed on all the righteous that are endued with gifts of the
holy Ghost.

We reject therefore the contrary assertion of those, who affirm this to be an
Ordinance perpetual and ordinary in the Church, that a private Christian
endued with gifts, either ordinarily, or upon occasion, being thought fit in
the judgment of those to whom it belongs, may (by the Word of God) preach
publicly in the Church-Assembly with all authority, though he bear no Church
Office. But to us it is certain, that even under the Old Testament in the Jewish
Church, every one was not admitted to speak publicly in the Synagogues, but
that it was the ordinary function of those that are called Scribes, and
Lawyers, (the Levites being also for this cause distributed into many places,)
whereupon they are said to sit on Moses chair. If any were endued with
extraordinary gifts of Prophecy, as the Prophets in Israel, this was permitted
and enjoined him by the Word of God, publicly to preach in Gods Name. When the
Prophet Amos was forbidden by the chief Priest to prophecy at Bethel, he does
not challenge this liberty to the Israelites, that they might publicly preach
the Word of God in Gods Name in the holy Assemblies, but pleads his
extraordinary Mission, whereby he was sent of God to preach this word, Amos 7.
14, 15. And so perhaps was it permitted to the sons of the Prophets, who were
fitted, educated, and set apart for the Ecclesiastical Ministry, 1 Samuel 19.
20. In the Synagogues, after the reading of Moses and the Prophets was ended,
there were exhortations added; which Exhortations if at any time occasion
required, and it so seemed good to the rulers of the Synagogue, in corrupt
times especially, it was indeed permitted to some, out of order, to teach and
exhort; but they were always such as had testimony of their gifts, and of whom
there was a general opinion of their Mission extraordinary or ordinary, by
reason of the doctrine they preached, and the works they did. Thus at Nazareth
Christ was permitted in the Synagogue to read and explain the writings of the
Prophets, Luke 4. 16. As one who by reason of his Majesty and Miracles did
every where obtain audience, as reverend Beza here notes; by which right he
taught both in the Temple and every where: wherefore also the ordinary Doctors
demanded of him, by what authority he did it, Matt. 21. 23. So we find that
Paul and Barnabas were allowed, Act. 13. 15. publicly to speak and exhort in
the Synagogue at Antioch; as being such whose fame was already known to those
of Antioch: for they had, before this time, for a whole year preached the Word
of God to many there, and brought many to the faith of Christ; and Agabus who
was joined with them, did by an extraordinary gift of Prophecy foretell to
those of Antioch the famine approaching; where were also many other Prophets
and Doctors, who preached the Word of God both to Jews and Greeks: See Act.
11. 19, 20, 21, 25, 26, 27, 28. and 13. 1, 2. etc. But in the practice of the
New Testament, none but Prophets by gift and Office, either extraordinary or
ordinary, were permitted publicly in the Assembly of believers to preach the
Word of God in Christ's Name, as appears 1 Cor. 14. 29, 30, 31. etc. The
Apostle speaks not of any in the Congregation promiscuously, but of Prophets
lawfully called to instruct the Church of God (says Beza on this place) and
therefore they are not to be hearkened to, who from hence gather, that any of
the Assembly may speak in the Church, and who reprehend the custom of having
only a Sermon preached by one.

So also in the practice of the Reformed Belgic Church, according to their
Synodicall Canons, none is admitted to the Ministry of the Word, but by a
lawful calling and due examination of his doctrine and conversation for the
time past. No man (says the Synod of Middleburgh, Anno 1591. art 6.) shall be
promoted to the public preaching of the Word, unless he be an established
Minister of the Church, belonging to some certain Church. Yet this Canon
excludes not the exercises of Proposants, which are performed, the doors
being shut; nor the offices of those who are sent forth to Churches oppressed
under persecution.

Question 4.

WHether those Infants whose next parents do not by a solemn Church Covenant
join themselves to some particular Church, are not to be baptized in the
Church, but are to be accounted as incapable of Baptism, and to have no right
to Church Priviledges?

Answer.

THe opinion of the Reformed Churches is, that a certain Federall holiness,
whereby those who are in this manner holy have right to the means of
Salvation, and the Sacrament of Baptism, and whereby they are distinguished
from Heathens, Turks, and such other Infidels, 1 Cor. 7. 14. is communicated to
a whole Nation or people, to whom God so affords the tables of his Covenant
as that they receive and profess them, whom he calls and leads to the state of
his visible Church, Romans 11. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. This Federall holiness is
transferred to posterity, not by the next parents inherent holiness, by whose
faith or unbelief their immediate posterity should be deprived of it, or
confirmed in it; but by the merciful will of God, whereby he extends the
outward privileges of his Covenant, promised to parents even more remote, and
does constantly afford it to their posterity professing the faith for many
generations, even to those whose next parents were ungodly, and unfaithful in
the Covenant of God. Thus God often testifies that for the glory of his Name,
and his Covenant made with Abraham, he has constantly kept and continued the
grace of his Covenant, and the privileges promised, for many ages, to those
children whose nearest Ancestors rebelling against God and unworthy of all the
grace of the Covenant, had revolted from God: See Psalm. 106. 35, 36, 44, 45.
Isai. 63. 10, 11. and 51. 1, 2, 3. Ezekiel. 20. 8. etc. Again, Baptism was also
instituted by God to be a sign of our ingrafting into the Communion not only
of a Parochial or Particular Church, but of the Church Universal and
Catholic, 1 Cor. 12. 13. And therefore those who are within the visible
Catholic Church, though through neglect, or want of opportunity, or the like,
they have not joined themselves to a particular Parochial Church, by a
confession of the faith, the knowledge, and worship of the Covenant, are to be
admitted to Baptism, as also their children. But, that any be constituted in
the visible Catholic Church, it is requisite that he embrace the tables of
Gods Covenant, that is, that he embrace the Word of God, and the means of
Salvation, and profess the faith of the Christian Church Catholic, and the
Doctrine and Worship of the Covenant, and live in that holy and visible
communion with the Church of Christ, which distinguishes them from those that
are strangers to the Covenant, and insidels.

We hence affirm therefore, that in the Church of Christ Baptism lawfully may
and ought to be administered, not only to those infants whose next parents have
joined themselves in a Church Covenant to some particular Church, and in that
Church Communion do lead their lives piously; but even to Infants of those who
have joined themselves to no Parochial Church, and by their wicked ways have
rendered themselves unworthy of the grace of the Covenant, if so be they be
borne of a Christian stock, and baptized parents, who profess the faith of the
Christian Church, the doctrine and worship of the Covenant; and by those
parents, or those that are near to them, under whose power they are, be
according to the accustomed order of our Churches offered to Baptism.

The Reasons on which we ground it are these. 1. Because under the Old
Testament, the Children of the Israelites were admitted to circumcision,
although their next parents had made defection from God, and wallowing in
sins to their lives end, had made the benefit of the Covenant as to
themselves void. As appears, Josh. 5. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. where the Children of
such Israelites of whom many had dyed in their wickedness, as well as of the
godly, are commanded to be circumcised.

2. Because the children even of ungodly parents, who in the visible Church
profess the Christian faith, and the Doctrine and Worship of Gods Covenant,
are under the Covenant of God, and endued with federall holiness: for their
infidelity does not make the faith of God and his constancy in dispensing the
grace of the Covenant, without effect, Romans 3. 3. Hence God calls the children
of the ungodly Israelites, His children although they offered them to Moloch,
Ezekiel 16. 20. and 23. 37. For the ungodliness of their next parents, does not
make void the efficacy of the Covenant toward the following posterity which
live in the visible Church; See Ezekiel. 20. 18, 19, 23, 36, 37, 42, 43. And
therefore those privileges and promises of federall holiness belong to them:
and so the Church ought to confer on them the Sacraments as seals of that
holiness.

3. Because in the New Testament, those of years were all Baptized, by John
Baptist and the Apostles, Publicans, Soldiers, and whoever out of Judea and
the Regions round about came to his Baptism, without any longer examination,
if so be they professed the faith and confessed their sins; though there were
amongst them hypocrites, generations of vipers, and debauched men: And therefore
the Infants of such are likewise to be admitted to Baptism. This question
Walaeus disputes at large, in defense of the practice of the Reformed Churches,
in his common Places, Page 494, 495. of his Works in folio.

We reject therefore the contrary Assertions, 1. Of those who deny Baptism to
the children of such as live wickedly, and by their ungodly life make the
efficacy of their Baptism to themselves of none effect. To these we oppose the
judgment of the Professors of Leyden, in their Synopsis Theologiae, where they
thus discourse, disput. 44. these. 50. Neither yet do we therefore exclude, say
they, from the Communion of this Sacrament, those Infants who are borne of a
Christian stock, and baptized parents, though their parents by their ungodly
life and corrupt faith have made the efficacy of the Covenant sealed in
Baptism, to themselves of none effect; if by those parents, or those that are
near to them, under whose power they are, they be according to the order
accustomed in our Churches presented to Baptism, because under the new
Covenant the son does not bear the iniquity of the father; and God
notwithstanding remains the God of such children: as himself witnesses,
Ezekiel. 16. and 23, where he calls the children of the wicked Israelites his
children; whom they had begotten for God, though they offered them to Moloch:
and out of them also does God ordinarily gather his Church by the ordinary
preaching of the word. Wherefore also he commands the children of such
Israelites, many of whom had dyed in their wickedness, as well as of the
godly, to be circumcised, Josh. 5. 4, 6. and that this ought to be done both
the Jewish, and the primitive Christian Church have always held without
controversy. Thus the professors of Leyden.

2. Of those who deny Baptism to the Children of such, as have not joined
themselves to any particular Church by a Church Covenant, though they
acknowledge them otherwise godly. But, for that Baptism does unite men not to
a particular Church only, but also to the Universal Church visible, we hold
that it is to be denied to none who belong to the universal Church. See what
we have said above concerning a Church Covenant.

CHAP. VI. Of Classes, and Synods, and their authority.
Question 1.

Whether Classes and Synods have an authoritative power, whereby they may
authoritatively judge causes Ecclesiastical, with Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction; so as that particular Churches ought to submit themselves to
their decrees, under the penalty of Ecclesiastical censure?

Answer.

We judge that there is an Ecclesiastical and sacred communion between
particular Churches, not only as they are joined in a brotherly communion, and
profess one common faith and piety; but also as they are Churches and bodies
of a spiritual polity, and have and exercise a government and Ecclesiastical
discipline in common. So Ames himself confesses, Medul. Theolog. lib. 1, cap.
39. these. 27. That particular Churches, as their communion requires, the light
of nature and the equity of Scripture rules and examples teach, may, and very
often even ought to enter into mutual consociation, or confederation amongst
themselves in Classes and Synods, that they may so far as conveniently can
be, make use of common consent and mutual assistance, especially in those
things that are of greater moment.

But yet how much greater and further space and remoteness of distance there
is between particular Churches, so much the less also is the visible communion
of those Churches: because the danger of scandal and infection, and the
opportunity of mutual edification, is less or more according as the distinct
distance of places is greater or less. Wherefore there is a more strict visible
Ecclesiastical communion between the Churches of one Province or Nation, then
between the particular congregations of the Church Universal; and consequently
the jurisdiction and Ecclesiastical government is also less visible between
these, then between the Churches of one Nation.

This communion of Churches in government and Church discipline, is not only
for the informing of Churches, what is commanded by the word of God; but also
for the governing of them by laws and spiritual jurisdiction: for there is an
authority and power of rule, belonging by the word of God to Churches joined in
Classes and Synods, which to particular Churches singly and severally belongs
not; to wit, a power of making Canons and laws Ecclesiastical, which may bind
all the particular Churches of one Province or Kingdom to obey them.

We grant in this controversy; 1. That the power of Classes and Synods does not
take away or hurt the power or liberty Ecclesiastical of a particular Church:
for it serves to direct, preserve, and promote the power of Synods is not
privative but cumulative, and granted for this end, that the power given to
particular Churches may be more efficacious, orderly, regular, able, and apt
for edifying.

2. That there is a power belonging to a particular Church immediately granted
from God, not derived from Classes or Synods; as likewise there is belonging to
Classes and Synods a power of their own, immediately granted by God, and not
derived from the particular Churches. For though in regard of the Original, or
the rise and constitution of a Synod, particular Churches entire in themselves,
collateral one to another and equal in Church power, do in common,
contribute, associate, and exercise their Church power, and so make up a
collective and combined body of a Synod: yet the Synodicall authority of it
self is not granted to any other first subject, from whence it should be
derived to the Synod, then to the Synod it self, to which alone by the word of
God and Apostolical institution that power belongs: for no particular
Churches singly and severally considered, may exercise a Synodicall power over
other Churches.

But we affirm, 1. That this union and communion of particular Churches in a
government and discipline Ecclesiastical in common, which is exercised in
Synods and Classes, is grounded upon the word of God, and in the examples of
the Apostolical Church is proposed to us to imitate.

2. That these Synods and Classes have a power and authority Synodall and
Classical, whereby they do by spiritual jurisdiction authoritatively decerne
matters Ecclesiastical, and impose those decrees, under pain of
Ecclesiastical censure, on particular Churches. Our opinion is proved by these
following arguments.

1. In Act. 15. we have in the Apostles practice an express example of a
Synod, held at Jerusalem about a question concerning the observation of the Law
of Moses. In which Synod, that business which had wrought a disturbance in the
particular Churches, ver. 2, 4, 5, 23. is by the deputies of several Churches,
ver. 2, 6, 23. Act. 21. 17, 18, 25. determined, with power authoritative to
bind particular Churches to obedience, ver. 22, 28. chap. 16. 4. and 21, 25.
And the false doctrine of those who subverted the souls of their hearers, is
by an Ecclesiastical judgment condemned, with spiritual power, ver. 28, 29.
which thing is an act of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, as appears, Revel. 2.
2, 14, 20. and the determination of this Ecclesiastical law, was not by an
extraordinary Apostolic authority, but by an ordinary authority
Ecclesiastical: for it was done not by the Apostles alone, extraordinarily
acted by the Spirit of God, but by the Elders and brethren of the Church,
joined with the Apostles acting, not by their Apostololicall, but by their
ordinary Pastoral authority; with great discussion and disputation, and the
assent of the Churches; which argue that the decrees of this Synod were not
made by an extraordinary Apostolical authority, but by an ordinary
Ecclesiastical power.

2. Our assertion is proved from Christ's institution, Mat. 18. 17, 18. where he
does institute such Ecclesiastical Assemblies, as may by Ecclesiastical
authority make provision and prepare efficacious remedies against all scandals
and offenses. If the members of a particular Church do give scandal to one
another, he bids that it be showed to a superior Ecclesiastical Judge, to wit,
the Church representative, which by Ecclesiastical authority does condemn and
punish, and remove from Ecclesiastical and brotherly communion the person
offending; and therefore does likewise command, that if particular Churches
give offense to one another, it should be carried to a superior Ecclesiastical
Judge, which may by spiritual authority condemn, punish, and put from
Ecclesiastical communion the particular Church offending: for where the law
makes no distinction or restriction, there must not we distinguish or restrain
And certainly the remedy instituted in this place, is ordained by Christ for
the removing out of the visible Church, all scandals not only caused by
particular members, but also by whole Churches: and therefore there must be
acknowledged a superior Ecclesiastical Assembly, which may by authoritative
Ecclesiastical power judge of the scandal of particular Churches, as well as
a superior Ecclesiastical judge in a particular Church is to be acknowledged
from this institution, for judging the scandalls of particular members. For
since that according to the holy Scriptures we must grant that there is an
Ecclesiastical communion between the visible Churches of one Province, Nation,
yea and of the whole World: as is proved before: which communion is not only
fraternall, but Ecclesiastical, whereby Churches, as Churches, or bodies
Ecclesiastical, are joined and united in doctrine, government, worship,
discipline and Ecclesiastical polity: and seeing that in this holy communion
scandals are committed, which are unbeseeming those Churches, and to be cast
forth from that Ecclesiastical communion: therefore both by the law of nature,
and this divine law here instituted by Christ, we must acknowledge a superior
Ecclesiastical Senate; furnished with spiritual and Ecclesiastical authority,
which may remove those scandals. Hence Parker himself, de politia Ecclesiast.
lib. 3. cap. 24. groundeth the authority of Synods on this place. And the
Professors of Leyden, disput. 49. these. 10. discourse thus; The institution of
Ecclesiastical Assemblies, and so also of a Synod, is not of humane, but of
divine right, being founded on the words of Christ. Tell the Church; if he
hear not the Church etc. Whomsoever ye bind on earth etc. Where two or three
are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them, Matthew. 18.
and I am with you to the end of the World, Matthew. 28. Which primarily are to be
understood of the inferior Consistories: but there being an union and communion
amongst themselves of all Churches, the superior consistories are comprehended
likewise.

3. We deduce our argument from the practice of the Jewish Church: For the
Christian Church borrows her frame of her Ecclesiastical polity from the
co^stitution, not pedagogicall, but essential and perpetual, of the ancient
Church; and therefore the Churches Consistories are now lawfully constituted
according to the same form, according to which the Ecclesiastical assemblies
were constituted under the Old Testament. And the reason is, because it is
manifestly evident, that this order, (besides that it was of old instituted by
God, and by the fathers most religiously observed,) belonged only to the
(...), or good order, of a Church, not to the pedagogy of the Law, nor the
distinct nature of that government. But now, under the Old Testament there were
Synagogicall consistories in each City, wherein the Scribes and Levits being
presiding, some Elders of the people, and men more eminent in dignity were
joined to them: whose office consisted as well in teaching, as in moderating
the actions of the Church, and who took notice of believers manners, and
dispensed pious reprehensions, and Ecclesiastical censures toward the vices
of offenders. And there was also at Jerusalem a general consistory or
Synedrium held, to which the most weighty matters were brought, which in the
lesser Synagogicall judicatories, either by reason of their difficulty, or the
dissentions of parties could not be decided or ended. Se Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9. 2 Chronicles. 19. 5, 6, 7. Jer. 26. 9, etc. This argument our eminent and reverend
Gersom Bucer, in his dissertation de gubernatione Ecclesiae, page 65. does thus
propose; and not to be tedious, it was requisite to set down distinctly, in
what respect the order appointed amongst the Jews does express the polity to
be observed by the Christian Church in holding their meetings. For first as of
old the use of sacred Consistories, as well Synagogicall in the several
Cities, as the supreme at Jerusalem, was appointed by Gods institution, for the
passing of judgments, and determining controversies. So in the New Testament
even from the beginning of the Churches birth, the Lord would have as well
particularly in each City, as in many Cities in common, some form of ordinary
judicatory, to the end that both the Ordination of Ministers may be duly
performed, and the censure of manners administered: else what could be more
absurd, either then the Precept of Christ, commanding that he, who refused to
hear his brethren, should be brought to the Church; or the Apostles reproof,
reprehending the Corinthians that they had neglected to proceed in the public
judicatory of the Church against the incestuous person. Neither only had each
particular Church their proper distinct Consistories; but that also diverse
Churches when more weighty controversies did arise, which could not in lesser
Assemblies be determined, did in the new Testament come together to one
general Council, the history of the Apostles testifies, Acts 15. etc. And
doubtless not only this ordinary superior Court (or Sanedrim) was kept at
Jerusalem, but extraordinary Conventions called for the Churches Reformation,
the establishing Religion, and the sincere Worship of God by a National
Covenant, and for other holy occasions: See Examples thereof, Deuteronomy. 29. 20. 2
Chro. 15. 9. and 29. 4 and 34. 29 Nehem. 10. 32. to 34. And such conventions
being celebrated for moral duties, the celebration of them lies as a duty on
the Churches of Christ at all times.

4. A fourth Argument is taken from 1 Cor. 14. 32. where the spirits of the
Prophets are to be subject to the Prophets by Apostolical Precept: whatsoever
therefore an Ecclesiastical Prophet does in his sacred function perform,
either in sacred Doctrine, or divine Worship, or Ecclesiastical Discipline, it
ought to be submitted to the judgments of other Prophets. Therefore one single
Prophet of this particular Church is to be subject to the judgment of Prophets
of other Churches. And consequently Assemblies of many Prophets meeting out of
diverse Churches are here established, to whom by the Word of God, the Spirits
and ways of Prophets of particular Churches are subject. Other arguments are
also at hand in this cause, if we purposed to contend by number of Arguments.

Hence also do the Churches of the Netherlands hold their Synods, endowed with
authority and power Ecclesiastical, which do so impose their decrees on
particular Churches, that they permit not a private or particular Church to
alter the order established by the Synods: but injoyne all to observe their
Canons established, till it shall be otherwise appointed by the Synods: See the
Synod at Embden, Ann. 1571. art. 53. at Dort, Anno 1574. art. 91. at
Middleburgh, Anno 1581. art. 69. at the Hagh, Anno 1586 art. 79. at
Middleburgh, Anno 1591. art. 80. at Dort, Anno 1619. art. 86.

We reject therefore the opposite Assertions.

1. Of those who allow to Synods and Classes no other power then of Counsel
and Persuasion: as one brother toward another, and one particular Church
toward another Particular Sister Church, may be counsel and persuasion direct
and exhort to their duty: so neither have the whole number of Churches that
hold Ecclesiastical Communion in Synods and Classes any other authority
granted them by the Word of God, but to persuade, exhort and admonish. Against
whom we use no other arguments, then what Master John Cotton himself has, in
a late Treatise in English, concerning The Power of the Keys, Chap. 6. We dare
not say, says he, that their power reaches no further then giving counsel:
for such as their ends be, for which according to God they do assemble, such is
the power given them of God, as may attain those ends. As they meet to
minister light and peace to such Churches, as through want of light and peace
lie in error (or doubt at least) and variance: so they have power by the grace
of Christ not only to give light and counsel in matter of Truth and Practice;
but also to command and injoyne the things to be believed and done. The
express words of the Synodall letter imply no less; It seemed good to the
Holy Ghost, and unto us, to lay upon you no other burden, Acts 15. 27. This
burden therefore, to observe those necessary things they speak of, they had
power to impose. It is an act of the binding power of the Keys, to bind
burdens. And this binding power arises not only materially from the weight of
the matters imposed, (which are necessary necessitate praecepti from the Word)
but also formally from the authority of the Synod, which being an Ordinance of
Christ, binds the more for the Synods sake. Thus Master Cotton.

2. We reject also their contrary opinion, who allow to Synods a power
Dogmaticall, but deny a power Diatacticall and Critical. A power Dogmaticall,
which is a power and right of judging in matters of Faith and Religion does so
belong to Synods, as that it is also given by God to single Pastors: For the
Apostle requires of Elders, not only to exhort by sound doctrine, but also to
convince gainsayers, and to stop the mouths of the unruly, vaintalkers and
deceivers, Tit. 1. 9, 10, 11, 12. Does not this plainly intimate that they are
to judge of matters of faith, if in a Particular Church there arise a
disputation about any question of faith, or the soundness in judgment of one
who is reckoned a member of that Church, be doubted of? This therefore is not
the whole power of Synods, which belongs even to single Pastors. Hence there
is also attributed to Synods a Diatacticall power, whereby they have right to
manage the external Government of the Church, so that all things be done
decently and in order, in the administration of Gods worship to the common
edification of al. Not only the Apostles, but the Elders also, did in the
Council at Jerusalem decree, that the Gentiles who had given themselves up to
Christ, should abstain from things offered to idols, and from blood, and
things strangled, Acts 15. 25, 28. So when Paul at Jerusalem was received by
the brethren, not only James but the Classis of Elders advised him, for the
believing Jews sake, to join himself with some, though too much addicted to
the Law, who had a vow on them: and decreed to entreat him, that for the peace
of the Church, and satisfaction of the weak, he would vouchsafe, so far as
in that case was yet lawful, to submit himself to the observance of the Law,
Acts 21. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. We see therefore that a Classis of Elders do by a
joint care and endeavor provide for the observing of what with one consent
they judged expedient for the Church. I need not further instance in Councels,
in which, that Presbyters joined in consultation and decision, for the
establishing Ecclesiastical decency and order, is so clear by their Acts that
none can be ignorant: So the Laws of Ecclesiastical Government in the
Netherlands are by the Synodicall decrees imposed on particular Churches. And,
that a Critical power, which contains the right of maitaining and exercising
the Ecclesiastical Discipline, given by God to the Church, for the judging and
removing of scandals, belongs to Synods and Classes of Presbyters, we shall
by and by prove by places of Scripture: For a Synod may assemble not only to
admonish an offending Presbytery or Consistory of a particular Church; but
also, if they refuse to hear, to censure them by suspension, deposition, or
removing from their Ecclesiastical function, etc.

Question 2.

Whether Classes and Synods have power of sending, or ordaining Pastors in a
particular Church?

Answer.

WE affirm in this controversy. 1. That some heads in this argument are by
the judgment of Scripture to be held undoubted; which our Reverend Bucerus
refers to these heads: First, (says he) that Election and Ordination of
Ministers belong to the Church, not to those that are without, who are
strangers from the commerce of believers, and have not yet applied themselves
to their fellowship and conjunction. For no where do we read in Scripture,
that such had Votes in Election of Ministers. Secondly, that this holy action
belongs to the whole Church, that is, to both its integrall parts, whereof the
one is of those who are Church Ministers, the other of those to whom they
minister: which is evidently declared by testimonies which may be brought from
Scripture, Thirdly, that this business is not to be committed to some one or
few of the Presbytery selected, but belongs to the whole College of Presbyters
in common; which appears by the Example of the Church of Jerusalem and of
Antioch, Acts 1. 23. and 6. 2, 3. and 13. 1, 2. and 15. 22. Fourthly, that the
principal parts herein belong to the Ministers of the Church: for they are to
preside and guide the Church, that the multitude through levity, or tumult, or
ill designs do not miscarry; and therefore to teach and exhort every one, and
moderate the whole action of Election with wholesome and right counsels: Which
is manifestly evinced by the testimonies we have produced. I add, lastly, that
the Nomination was principally in the Ecclesiastical persons, the people were
by their suffrage to declare their consent to it. So when one was to be taken
in into the place of Judas, the Apostles named two, and when one of them was
chosen by lot, the Churches approbation was presently added: otherwise they did
by their suffrage concur to the Election. But that the Apostles in the
institution of Deacons did somewhat more condescend to the multitude, Acts 6.
3. there was a peculiar reason for it: for that they were, (especially in that
tenderness of the Church, and when a murmuring arose of the Grecians against
the Hebrews) to put off from themselves all sinister suspicion of those whose
suffrages did not approve them. To this purpose Calvin; Luke relates that there
were Elders constituted in every Church by Paul and Barnabas, but he notes
withal the way and manner of it, when he says that it was done by suffrages,
(...) says he, (...): those two therefore did create them, but the whole
multitude, as the custom of the Grecians was in Elections, declared by lifting
up their hands, whom they would have. Calvin. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 3. sect. 15.
Therefore the chief of what the people were to do, was of those who were
nominated to choose one. All which is fully clear from Scripture. Thus
Bucerus, dissert, de gubernat. Ecclesiae, page 323, 324.

2. But because we are to account those in Ecclesiastical Communion with us,
not only who have joined themselves to some one particular Church as fixed
members, but those also on whom by reason of their function the charge and care
of many Churches does lie, and who are to take care that in them all things be
done decently, in order, and to edification: hence the power of ordaining
Pastors is not so granted to a particular Church, as that absolutely by
themselves they may be the Word of God perform all those things, that are
required to the Ordination of their Pastors; But if the Ordination of Pastors
in a particular Church be duly performed, it ought to be done in Church
Communion, with the judgment, consent, and potestative Mission of Classes or
Synods, with whom that particular Church holds Ecclesiastical Communion. For
Ordination of Pastors is not a thing peculiar to one Church and its members,
but a thing common to all the Churches of one Classis or Synod: and what
concerns all, ought to be performed by all. That therefore a particular
Church, in such a matter of common concernment, do not do ought which may
disturb the common order, or which in a like case may prejudice other
Churches, they are in the Vocation of Pastors to proceed with the common
consent of all the Churches of that Synod.

3. In the acts and exercise of power Ecclesiastical in the Ordination of
Pastors, we conceive, there is this difference between a Classis or Synod, and
a Particular Church. 1. That as it is the act of Classes and Synods, it is
actus imperatus, as it is the act of the Particular Church is actus elicitus:
that is, that Synods and Classes are to take care and authoritatively to
enjoyne Particular Churches that they excite their power and exercise it, for
the ordaining their Pastors: But the particular Churches are to do those
Ecclesiastical acts, whereby the Ordination it self is performed. 2. That
there belongs to Synods and Classes an authoritative judgment of the
sufficiency and suitable sitnesse of the person to be ordained to the
Ministry, and of the due and orderly manner of proceeding in the whole
Election dispatched, and the Ordination to be performed. 3. That it belongs to
Synods and Classes to decree Canons, and prescribe decrces, for the common
edification of all those Churches, according to which the particular Church
ought to do those acts, whereby the Ordination of Pastors is performed. 4.
That the Synod and Classis do authoritatively concur with the particular
Church, in the power of sending Pastors, and in the exercise thereof, by which
an Ecclesiastical Right is derived on the Minister. For the Ecclesiastical
Power, which is conferred on a Minister by Ordination, is derived
ministerially, secondarily, and subordinately under God, not only from the
Eldership of that Particular Church, but from that whole ministering or
governing Ecclesiastical Society, into which the Pastor ordained is admitted
by Ordination, to perform the exercises of the Ecclesiastical Ministry. Thus
we conceive these acts are to be distinguished in the legitimate Ordination of
Pastors, in a constituted and settled Church.

4. In a case extraordinary, when a National Church is corrupted and depraved,
the due power of Classes and Synods overturned and destroyed, and when the
polity of the Church so utterly ruined, as that there is no more any face of it
to be seen, no where any to be found that labor in sound doctrine, no marks
of a visible Church discernable by the eyes of men: In such a case the
Ordination of Pastors is in the power of the particular Church, who have
received from God right to ordain in this necessity by their own Eldership:
and therefore where there is no such Eldership, they first go about the
constitution of it, and then being thus constituted they perform their
Ordinations by it. For that is sure, which Melancton does often inculcate; When
the ordinary Bishops (says he) become enemies to the Church, or refuse to
afford Ordination, the Churches retain their own right. For where ever there
is a Church, there is power of dispensing the Gospel; so that of necessity the
Church must retain a right of their own to call, elect, and ordain Ministers.
And this right is a gift granted to the Church, which no humane authority can
take from it. Argum. and Respons. part. 7. de potest. Epise. argum. 2. That
this power should be wholly abrogated and brought to nothing for want of
Pastors, is not to be thought; but common sense teaches that it is better in
such a case to enlarge it, then that the Church should be destitute of the
large fruits of the Gospels preaching: for that the Church should be then
deprived of this power, when the exercise of it is most chiefly required, is
absurd. And on the other hand, when there is no particular Church, nor
Eldership, in some place, where there is a Church to be planted and erected,
and the dispensation of the Gospel to be first introduced, here the
neighboring Ecclesiastical Assemblies, who are by the opportunity of
occasions invited by God to afford their mutual help and assistance in this
spiritual matter, have power of sending Ministers and Pastors with
Ecclesiastical power for the gathering, erecting, and promoting a Church in
that place: for that manner of Mission is warranted by the holy Scriptures,
Acts 13. 1, 2, 3. where Paul and Barnabas are sent by the Church of Antioch, to
the neighbor Churches.

Hence therefore, concerning the power of Classes and Synods in the Ordination
of Pastors, and a particular Church, we maintain these assertions.

1. That a particular Church wanting a Presbytery, may not in the ordinary and
settled state of Churches, perform the Ordination of Pastors. But the Mission
of Pastors and Elders into a sacted function is to be performed by the
Governors of the Churches, which is proved.

1. From express places of Scripture, wherein this Ecclesiastical act is
enjoined the Pastors and Elders, 1 Timothy 5. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man;
and 1 Timothy 4. 14. Neglect not the gift which is in thee, which was given thee
by Prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. And that by
Presbytery there, is signified a College of Presbyters, is proved by most
certain arguments against the Hierarchy. Our reverend Bucerus discourses
excellently of this place, Dissert. de gubern. Ecclesiae, page 339, 340. I know
(says he) that the word Presbytery, may be expounded either of the College of
Presbyters, or of the Office of Presbyters; but three reasons chiefly persuade
me to think that we ought to rest in the former signification. The first is,
that we find it no where used by the Holy Ghost, so far as I remember, for
the Presbyters Office. But that on the contrary, it is used to signify their
Meeting, is evident. For what Luke relates, Chap. 22. 66. that when Christ was
apprehended, (...), the Presbytery of the people was gathered together,
certainly cannot be understood of the Presbyteriall Office. So Paul at
Jerusalem, rendering an account of his faith, for testimony of what he said,
cites the high Priest, and the Presbytery, (...), Acts 22. 5. Where every one
understands the word Presbytery to be taken for the Company of Elders not the
Office. A second Reason is, that there will appear a kind of Tautologie in
Paul's speech, if by the word presbytery we understand the Presbyteriall
Office; for the Gift, (...) which Paul bids Timothy not to neglect, in the
exposition of most, signifies that Office it self joined with a sufficiency of
Gifts. The Apostles words therefore would sound to this purpose, Neglect not
the Presbyteriall Office which was given thee by Prophecy with the imposition
of hands of the Presbyteriall Office. In good earnest I like it not. I know
that (...) is understood by some, only of the faculty of teaching; but when
Paul adds, that it was given Timothy by Prophecy, whether or no will you not
judge this expression to suite better to the Office of teaching? for any one
will easily discern with me, that it is a harsh speech, to say, that the
Faculty of teaching was conferred on Timothy by Prophecy, that is, by a
singular Revelation of the Spirit, at the Prophets Command. But on the
contrary, it is a very apt expression to say, The Presbyters Office was
conferred on Timothy by his Vocation both extraordinary declared by the
testimony of Prophets, and ordinary, performed by the judgment of the Church,
in obedience to the Revelation of the Spirit, etc. Two things does Reverend
Bucerus here evince; that by Presbytery, is understood the Company of
Presbyters, and that by (...) is signified the Office of the Ministry,
together with sufficiency of gifts. This place therefore does assert, that the
Ministerial Office by the Ordination of the College of Presbyters, is
committed to Pastors by Gods Law and Apostolical Institution.

2. It appears from the Apostles practice, wherein Ordinations of Pastors
were performed by Pastors and Ministers that had the Government of Churches,
see Acts. 6. 2, 3. Act. 13. 1, 2, 3. and 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5. etc. Nor is there
any example to be found wherein the Ordination of Pastors was performed by the
multitude of the Church without Presbyters. And because the practice of the
Apostolical Church is our safest rule of Church Government; we judge that by
Gods Ordinance it cannot be, that a Pastor in settled state of Churches should
be ordained, and put in possession of his Ecclesiastical function, by the
multitude of the Church. See also what was said, Chap. 4. concerning
Ecclesiastical Power.

II. We therefore affirm that Classes and Synods have power of sending and
ordaining Pastors in particular Churches, which want Presbyteries. This
assertion appears also by the practice of the Apostolical Church, which by
Ordination did set apart and send forth Pastors for the Ministry of neighbor
Churches, Acts 8. 14. Acts 13. 1, 2, 3. And surely that in the Reformed
Churches the right of Mission for the planting of Churches, or for the raising
them up out of a defect, was always practiced by Classes and Synods, as is
known to all who have but so much as heard any report of Churches laboring
under persecution. As also the Apostolical Synod, for supply of the Churches
defect, chose and sent men for the performance of Ecclesiastical duties
necessary to that end, Acts 15. 22. It seemed good to the Apostles and Elders
with the whole Church to choose men of their own company, and send them to
Antioch; and ver. 25. It seemed good to us being assembled with one accord to
choose and send men unto you, etc. Neither did the Apostolical Churches do
this by an extraordinary Apostolical, but by an ordinary Ecclesiastical
power; for they did this jointly together with ordinary Elders and the whole
Church, in an ordinary Synod. These Examples therefore declare the ordinary
right of Mission, to those Churches who are destitute of a Presbytery or
Ministry, or labor and groan under persecution and defect. But, that Mission
does infer Vocation and Ordination, and does confer power of preaching, and
of ruling the people, Reverend Voetius proves by many arguments, in Desperata
causa Papatus, lib. 2. sect. 2. cap. 17. And it appears from the word it self
to send, (...), from whence comes sent, and sending, or Mission, which is
nothing else but a Commission, whereby a man has some Function or Charge fully
committed to him: which is nothing else but to call, and constitute: for as
Mission or sending is taken either actively, or passively, as it implies either
a relation of him that sends to him that is sent, or of him that is sent to
him that sends; so also Vocation, or Ordination. For all those Metaphors, to
send into the Vineyard, to send into the Field, to the Lords work, to the
Ministry and Charge of the Flock, etc. signify nothing else, but to call one
to the Feeding of the Flock, dressing the Vineyard, or to constitute one a
Pastor and one that takes charge of souls. Hence those that are called and
constituted Pastors of souls, are commonly called Apostles, (...) sent: In
Hebrew, the Priest and Pastor of the Church is called (...) that is, sent, a
Messenger, or Ambassador, Malach. 2. 7. of the original and signification
whereof Ludovicus de Dieu speaks, Append, ad Matthew. 27, 2. where he shows
elegantly, from the footsteps of the Arabic and Aethiopick root, that this
name is derived from sending. Whence also Presbyters, whether the greater and
extraordinary, or the lesser and ordinary, lawfully ordained and called, are
sent to preach and to feed; and on the other side those who are lawfully sent,
are ordained to preach. For to the actual giving an Apostleship, or calling to
the Ministry, that is, to an Active Mission of him that sends, there is
answerable a Passive Mission of him that is sent, which is an actual Receiving
an Apostleship, or Ministry: for, or Relatives, the affirming one infers
the other. The Ordination of Pastors therefore for a Church that wants an
Eldership, or is laboring under defects, which hinder the ordinary exercise of
the Eldership, is lawfully performed by Synods and Classes under whose
Ecclesiastical communion they lived. So in the Belgic Churches, the Mission
or Ordination of Pastors which are sent to Churches groaning under the Cross
of persecution, is performed in the Classical Assembly. See the Synod at the
Hagh, Anno. 1586. art. 4. And so of those who are sent to the Churches of the
East and West Indies.

III. We allow also this power to Classes and Synods in the right of
Ordination; That even in a settled and constituted state of the Church, a
particular Church which holds Ecclesiastical communion with other Churches in
a Classis or Synod; may not perform the vocation or Ordination of their
Pastors, without the authoritative judgment and potestative mission of the
Classis. This assertion is proved by these arguements.

Because he that is to be ordained is admitted into the holy society of the
Classis or Synod, and into the Ecclesiastical body, as a member belonging to
the Consistory of the Classis or Synod; in the right of that particular Church,
and is therefore with their judgment and consent to be admitted by Ordination
into that society. Because also by Ordination a Pastor is put into the
possession of his Ecclesiastical function; by virtue of which function he may
perform ministerial acts of his pastoral office in other particular
Churches; and exercise a ministerial authority in many cases toward other
Churches: and reason plainly shows that it cannot duly be performed without
the judgment of those Churches, over whom the person to be Ordained receives
ministerial power. A particular Church may not lawfully Remove or Put-out a
Pastor from his Office, without the assent and authoritative judgment of the
Classis or Synod, wherein he is duly admitted a member: therefore without that
judgment they cannot lawfully admit into an Ecclesiastical office by
Ordination: for it is of the same power to take in, and to put out: in what
manner ought is contracted, in the same is it dissolved. Hence in a Synod of
the Churches was performed the Ordination of the Deacons elected, Act. 6. 3.
with the common consent of those Churches. So 1 Timothy 4. 14. the Presbytery to
whom the power of Ordaining is attributed, does not only denote a Parochial
Presbytery, of which sort both in towns, and in more eminent villages, there
were anciently one in each; but it signifies a college of Apostles or
Apostolical men; in whose number Paul was one, 2 Timothy 1. 6. (as the Apostles
are sometimes called Elders, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2. 2 John ver. 1, 3.) for this was
done in the Church of Lystra, as the Dutch Translators observe from Acts 16. 1,
2. In which the Brethren of Derbe and Iconium were also actors, as is evident
from the place; under whom are included also the Churches of the Region round
about, as may be gathered from Acts 14. 6. And if those most excellent servants
of God, whom God had rendered eminent, by induing them with most ample gifts,
and setting them in a degree of an extraordinary and more sublime Ministry,
would not yet at their own pleasure without the counsels of others, admit
Timothy, (though named by the Spirits designation) into the order of Presbyters
by public Ordination, but thought fit for the observation of order first to
acquaint sundry Pastors and Churches with it; shall we who are no ways to be
compared with them, be yet in doubt what we ought to do? for not their sayings
only, but their doings also, should be to us a rule what we ought to say, and
do. And so in our Belgic Churches, according to the order established,
Ordinations of Pastors are performed with the consent and judgment of the
Classis. As appears by the Synod at the Hagh, Anno 1586. art. 4. at
Middleburgh, Anno 1591. artic. 3, 4. at Dort, Anno 1619. art. 4.

We reject therefore the contrary assertion of those, who ascribe to particular
Churches in a settled state of the Church, the absolute power of ordaining their
Pastors, without the inspection or authoritative jurisdiction of any Classis
or Synod.

Question 3.

WHether Synod and Classes have power of Excommunication.

Answer.

In this controversy we hold;

1. THat a Classis or Synod of Pastors has power to admonish and rebuke
authoritatively, and with power Ecclesiastical, such as offend, subvert souls
by error, and commit scandalls, Acts 15. 10, 24. This admonition, reproof, and
condemnation in this Synod, was performed by the Apostles and Elders in order
to Ecclesiastical censure. And this power not a power of Order, but of
Jurisdiction; performed not by the concionall key only, but the key of
Ecclesiastical discipline. For it is done not by one, but by many, by the whole
Synod, ver. 6, 22. In the society of an Ecclesiastical body, which had power
by common advise to decree this rebuke, and what ever is determined in this
cause, about that question for which they came together: See ver. 2, 6, 23, 24,
25. chap. 16. 5. and 21. 25. The cause in which it was done, was not only a
case of conscience, but of scandal and public offense given in
Ecclesiastical communion, ver. 19, 28, 29. with 1 Cor. 10. 24, 25, 26, 27.
Romans 14. 14, 15. Whereupon it is determined, for the peace and edification of
the Churches, that all troubles and unprofitable burdens should be removed out
of the Church, ver. 2, 19, 23, 24. and chap. 16. 4, 5. and that in an
Ecclesiastical assembly, ver. 6, 15, 22, 25. So that this rebuke performed by
the Apostles in order to spiritual censure was an act of Ecclesiastical
discipline.

2. There belongs also to Synods and Classes this power, and exercise of
Ecclesiastical discipline, to make Ecclesiastical laws: which are,
determinations necessary for the observation of moral precepts, especially
those of the first table; and for the ordering the external Government of the
Church, that all things be done decently and in order to the common edification
of all.

By this power they establish outward ceremonies suitable to the due
administration of the worship of God, outward forms of behavior, and things
indifferent, such as tend to the outward order, decency, and edification of
particular Churches, and make rules for directing the discipline of the
Churches. The Apostles and Elders in the Synod decreed, that the Gentiles, who
had embraced Christ, should abstain from things offered to Idols, and from
blood and things strangled, Act. 15. 25, 28. Lambertus Daneus discourses
soundly and accurately in his Poliria Christiana, lib. 6. cap. 3. Moreover,
says he, as for the rites and ceremonies, and the outward order which is
necessary in ordering the Church, let an Ecclesiastical Synod be assembled
with the command and presence of the godly surpeme Magistrate, and this
Ecclesiastical Synod duly gathered shall determine what that order, and
external government of the Church ought to be, etc. See what was said before
of the Doctrinall power of Synods.

This power of making laws is a power of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction and
Government; for it does direct and dispose authoritatively those means by
which the government of the Churches is put in execution. For these laws are
made with the sanction of a spiritual and Ecclesiastical penalty against
delinquents, and consequently proceed from that spiritual jurisdiction from
whence proceeds this threatening and inflicting of spiritual power. Again
the public judgment of direction passed with Ministerial authority, of a
scandal given or taken, of cases of conscience in the exercise of charity
about things indifferent, of the spiritual edification of the Church, belongs
to the external tribunal, and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction: But he that
appoints rites of order and decency in the public worship of God, and in the
exercise of Ecclesiastical discipline, must of necessity give a public
judgment passed by ministerial authority, concerning scandal given or taken,
concerning cases of conscience in the exercise of charity about things
indifferent, concerning the spiritual edification of the Church: for to this
end are Ecclesiastical laws made, for the avoiding of scandal, for the
spiritual edification of the Church, for the due exercising of brotherly love
in Church communion. It is therefore an act of spiritual jurisdiction.

3. Classes and Synods have an authoritative inspection and judgment, not of
discretion only, but of Jurisdiction and approbation, in the exercise of
excommunications from particular Churches; so that no particular Church which
holds Ecclesiastical communion with other Churches in Classes and Synods may
lawfully excommunicate and deliver to Satan any member of their communion
without the authoritative judgment and approbation of the Classis or Synod.
Which appears by these arguments,

That which concerns all, ought (in their own way and manner) to be handled by
all, now the excommunication of any, in a consociate Church, concerns all the
Churches of that society, for they all receive scandal, they are all liable to
the danger of infection, by reason of the communion which they hold in one
Ecclesiastical body and society. Again, that whole communion or society is by
excommunication deprived of its members; and so the particular Church
exercises excommunication in a business not proper to it self, but in a
mattter common which concerns all the Churches of that Ecclesiastical body;
it ought therefore to be judged and handled by them all. The end of
excommunication, that the evil and the leaven of infection be taken away from
amongst them, the Ecclesiastical society purged from offenses, concerns not
only the particular Church, but all the Churches of the Classical or
Synodicall society; and therefore the excommunication is to be decerned by the
judgment of all, that it may attain the proper end for which it is to be
exercised in the Church; See 1 Cor. 5. 6, 7. The censure of Reprehension and
Condemnation, against those brethren that troubled the Churches, and subverted
the souls of the godly, in the Church of Antioch and Jerusalem was by the
decree of the Synod performed and put in execution, Act. 15. 1, 6, 24. That
degree or step toward excommunication, shows that there is in the Synods power
the judgment of the excommunication: for to that assembly to which belongs an
Ecclesiastical Reproof and censure (...), there belongs also, in case of
disobedience and obstinacy, the authority and judgment of Excommunication,
Matthew. 18. 17, 18. compared with 1 Cor. 5 4, 5. and 2 Cor. 2. 6. For it is a
part of Ecclesiastical Binding, as the Reformed Divines do every where teach,
Furthermore, Binding, (says Bucer, Dissert. de gubernatione Ecclesiae, page
374.) consists: partly in taking knowledge of the sins, which are committed
with the offense of many, partly in correction, answerable to the quality and
greatness of the sins, whereby we provide both for the Salvation of the
sinners, and the edification of the Church. The kinds or degrees of correction
are, Reprehension, Abstention from the Lords Table, and Excommunication.
Accordingly in the Churches of the Netherlands, no particular Church is
permitted to deliver any one to Satan by Excommunication, but by the judgment
and Approbation of the Classis. See the Synod at Middleburgh, Anno 1581. art.
62. at the Hagh, Anno 1586. art. 69. at Middleburgh, Anno 1591. art. 69. at
Dort, Anno 1619. art. 76.

4. Classes and Synods have power to exercise Church Discipline and censure on
the Pastors and Elders of a particular Church; or in those acts of
Excommunication which are appointed for keeping of Ecclesiastical persons only
to their duty. Which acts consist in Prohibition, and Execution. Prohibition
is, whereby the Church forbids to Pastors and whole Presbyteries, under
penalties to be inflicted on the disobedient, what ever things are accounted
scandalous to the sacred Ministry, or do hinder public edification; as, to
involve themselves in secular employments, to take money for admitting to
Baptism, to retain an adulterous wife, to take up arms in sedition, to keep
Hawks and Hounds for hunting, to use gaming, to be present at dancings, and
stageplayes, which have been forbidden in Councels with judicial and
definitive authority, as may be gathered from the Acts of the Councels. By
Execution is understood Ecclesiastical punishment, which was according to the
Laws to be inflicted on offenders; which were various, according to the
quality and greatness of the offenses. The principal are Suspension, and
Deposition. Suspension, when they prohibited any from the whole Exercise of his
Office, till such time as he had given the Church satisfaction. Deposition I
call that, whereby they did wholly put the offender from his function, the
Greeks called it (...): of which there are also some degrees: For some when
deprived from their Office, are only hindered from meddling with holy things,
but do not wholly abstain from the Communion of the Lords Supper; other are
debarred from this also, yea, and shut out from all sacred Communion and
Ecclesiastical Fellowship. Of these censures the Canons and Histories of the
ancient Church do frequently make mention. And that in inflicting of these,
Synods did improve their authority and endeavor, is konwn to all, that are not
strangers in the Acts of the Councels. But let us consult the Scriptures
themselves. When the Apostle commands the Elders of the Ephesine Classis, to
watch against such as should speak perverse things to draw Disciples after
them, he intimates clearly that they had an authority to drive away wolves,
Act. 20. 30, 31. The Church of Ephesus was not a particular Church of one
Congregation, but a Presbyteriall Church, or an united Society of many
particular Churches; as we have proved before. The Synod at Jerusalem passed a
Prohibition and condemnation, in order to Church censure, on those Pastors who
taught perverse things, and troubled particular Churches with much disputation,
as has been said from Acts 15. And thus Censure, Suspension, and Deposition of
Pastors and Elders from their Ecclesiastical function, in many cases is
attributed to the Classical Assembly and Provincial Synods, in our
Ecclesiastical Canons in the Netherlands. See the Synod at Dort, Anno 1578.
art. 9, 99, 100. at the Hagh, Anno 1586. art. 39, 40, 72, at Middleburgh, Anno
1591. art. 58, 59, 60. at Dort, Anno 1619. art. 79.

5. There belongs Authority to Classes and Synods, to pass an Ecclesiastical
censure against the whole Consistory of a particular Church, in case they
disturb the Church with damnable error, or pollute it with the leaven of
vices: And if they obstinately adhere to their perverse doctrines and corrupt
manners, then, according to the quality and greatness of the sins, by the
dreadful sentence of Excommunication to cast them out of the spiritual
Communion of the Churches, and deliver them to Satan. This assertion is proved:
Because a Synod of Pastors by the Concionall Key, may authoritatively in the
Name of God denounce an Anathema against a particular Church erring perversely:
For this one single Pastor of a Church may do by authority of the Office
committed to him, how much more then a Synod of Pastors? Now to an unity or
Ecclesiastical College instituted by God, to whom by authority of their Office
there belongs the Concionall or Doctrinall Key, there belongs also the Key of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, and the Exercise thereof: for in an Ecclesiastical
College or Society, God has conjoined the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
and given them together, Matthew. 18. 17, 18. And in a Particular Church this
appears evidently; to the Consistory whereof, God has given not only a
Concionall and Comminatory Power to denounce an Anathema, but also a Power of
Excommunication joined with it: And consequently to greater and superior
Church Assemblies also, has God given both these powers jointly. The Apostle
attributes to the united Association of the particular Churches of Galatia a
power of cutting off all those Troublers, who corrupted the sound Doctrine, and
the peace of the Churches, Gal. 5. 9, 10, 11, 12. what hinders therefore but
that they might exercise this power against a whole particular Church, or a
Church Consistory? Christ in Matthew. 18. 17, 18. establishing the power of
Excommunication in his Church by divine institution, does not restrain the
exercise thereof to be applied only to a single brother in a particular Church,
though he give the instance in such an one: for he does institute that Order in
his Kingdom, whereby all scandals may be removed out of the Church, and cured
by spiritual authority, whether committed by a particular Church, or by a
particular person, or by whomsoever. And therefore if a particular Sister
Church in the Ecclesiastical Society of many Churches do give a scandal to
those other Churches, they may by this institution of Christ be brought into
order by this spiritual Power. And surely it is clear even out of Parker
himself, that the divine institution of Classes may be proved from Christ's
institution in Matt. 18. 17, 18. For, lib. 3. cap. 24. de Politia
Ecclesiastica, he thus argues from the proportion. Christ Commands that upon
the despising one man's admonition, we should proceed to admonition by two or
three; and, if that be contemned, to the censure of the Presbytery; and, if
that be despised, to the censure of the whole Church: and why not therefore
from the despising of one whole Church, to more in a Classis? and again, from
those more in a Classis, to yet more in a Synod? And therefore also by this
Institution of Christ, not a particular Church only, but a Classis and Synod
also have power given of Excommunicating such as commit scandals, if by this
institution of Christ the nature and authority of Classes and Synods may be
concluded.

And accordingly in those hard times of the Belgic Churches, when the Church
amongst us was infested by the troubles and errors of the Remonstrants, whole
Presbyteries of Churches were exauthorated by the Power of Classes and Synods.

We reject therefore the contrary Assertions,

1. Of those who hold the Power of Excommunication to be so appropriated to a
particular Church, so that it may not be attributed to Classes and Synods. But
we hold that a particular Church, by reason of that arct Ecclesiastical
Communion which it holds with other neighbor Churches in the same Classis or
Synod, whereby it makes up one Ecclesiastical corporation or body, and one
visible sacred Society with the associate Churches, has not an absolute and
complete power to cut off and cast out a member from that particular Church:
because that member has a near, arct, and visible union and communion with the
Churches associate; amongst whom he does daily converse, and celebrate the
worship of God, so that he does occasion to them danger of scandal and
infection, and receives from them means of edification: wherefore without the
judgment and consent of the associate Churches, he may not be cast out of that
brotherly and visible Church communion, by the decree of one particular Church.

2. Of those also who make the highest power of Synods and Classes in the
exercise of Ecclesiastical censures toward a particular Church, to consist in
a denying or withdrawing brotherly communion. But this Non-Communion (as it is
called) we conceive to be such an act as a brother may exercise toward a
brother, a particular Church toward another particular Church, who yet cannot
exercise any authority or censure of Ecclesiastical power amongst themselves
one over the other: nor has it that Efficacy by Gods ordinance to bind in
Heaven: nor was it ordained by the Institution of Christ for this end, to save
the spirit of man in the day of the Lord, and to teach from God, such as be
erroneous, not to blaspheme: which to the legitimate censure of Excommunication
do appertain, Matthew. 18. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 5. 4. 1 Timothy 1. 20. In the correction
of a Sister Church, the same degrees are to be observed by the Ordinance of
Christ, Matthew. 18. 17, 18. which are observed in the correction of a brother;
and therefore we are not to rest in the admonition of two or three Churches:
but by that order proceed to Excommunication, thereby to cast out from the holy
Communion of the Churches as a heathen and a publican, and to deliver to Satan,
an obstinate offending Church.

CHAP. VII. Of set Forms.
Question.

WHether it be lawful for Churches to prescribe to themselves constituted
laws and forms, and certain Canons, by Ecclesiastical authority, wherein
Articles of Faith, and things necessarily required by God for the Government
and Discipline of the Churches, are out of the holy Scriptures expounded and
determined; and things not necessarily required are by Ecclesiastical power
prescribed, according to the general rules of Scripture, from the precepts of
the law of Nature and holy Prudence, for the edification of the Church, and the
order and decency of Gods Worship; and imposed on particular Churches, and
Church-Governors, as bonds of Peace and Unity?

Answer.

WE grant in this Controversy.

1. That these Forms are not absolutely necessary to the constitution of a
Church: For we know that the ancient Church of the Jews wanted such Forms;
when as being collected in one people, they had express rituall laws, and the
Prophets frequent directions. Nor did the Christian Church want its being or
well being before such time as the branches of the Apostles Creed, gathered out
of several places of Scripture, were in a brief Abstract joined together in
one.

2. We deny that these Forms or declarations of Faith and Church Government,
are to have that authority and (...), or authenticknesse, attributed to them,
which belongs only to the Word of God, as that they should be obtruded as a
rule of Faith, and that in the Examination of Doctrines, and of Church
Discipline, judgment should be made, ex formularum terminis (as they speak)
by the letter of such forms. We approve not the judgment of those, nor would
have their practice to be imitated, of whom our Divines did heretofore justly
complain in that writing which Zacharias Vrsinus in the name of the University
of Neostad, opposed to the Bergenses concordistae, who would obtrude the words
of the Augustan confession, and the writings of Luther, as a rule of faith and
Ecclesiastical proceedings. See Chap. 4. of that book, where much is said
concerning the use and abuse of Confessions.

3. We judge forms of confessions, and Canons of Ecclesiastical Government to
be declarations of the true faith and discipline, badges and tokens of union
and communion in the Church, collected in the meetings of the godly learned,
and ratifyed by an unanimous consent after a diligent inquiry out of Scripture:
wherein those things which are in diverse places of Scripture pertaining to the
sum of Christian faith and discipline, gathered as it were into a bundle, are
together and at once proposed to a few eyes; and by the comparing of all places
wherein mention is made of one and the same article, the wholesome truth in each
one is expressed and explained, that the controversies arising concerning the
doctrines of faith and discipline, and the sense of Scripture, being examined
by ordinary ministerial knowledge, may by common consent be explained and
decided: that there may be an agreement also about the proper form of speaking
and proceeding, agreeable to the phrase and sense of the holy Scripture and of
the Church: and that it may appear what those Churches hold which set forth
those Confessions and Canons; and what they judge out of Scripture that all
those Orthodox, with whom they will keep communion, should hold; that there
may be a restraint of licentiousness in inventing new opinions and orders to
distract and trouble the Church: and lastly, that there may remain a testimony
to posterity of the faith and doctrine of their ancestors; that vicious, or
unnecessary and unprofitable innovations may be avoided; and the purity of
doctrine and discipline, the concord and peace of the Churches the better
preserved. They are useful therefore for the understanding divine Scripture, as
handmaids with due subjection; without any absolutely necessary prescription of
using them, so that there be an agreement in one and the same true sense: but
are impediments and hindrances to those only, who with Licentiousness rather
then Liberty endeavor to overthrow, and fear not to call in question those
principles which are as the foundations of our faith and Christian discipline;
and who assume to themselves a power to think and even to speak what they
list, which the Scripture does every where reject, as being far from
Christian modesty.

4. We attribute therefore to these Forms only an hypotheticall necessity; for
we acknowledge that necessary occasions of this kind of writings, arise only
from the Reformations of Churches, heretics and erroneous persons contentions
or sophistications, fraudulent expressions and interpretations, or the
adversaries calumnies, or the necessity of instructing the ignorant, or the
testification of a consent with other Churches both ancient and present, or a
necessary declaring the union of concord and consent.

5. Therefore these Forms of faith and discipline, are to be composed, by the
gift of prophecy, out of all places of Scripture compared. And cannot be
prescribed to Churches but by Colleges of Prophets, to whom Ecclesiastical
power of government is committed. Hence the meeting of Apostles and Elders did
by common consent compose explications out of Scripture, of opinions in
controversy, Act. 15. and set out an Epistle, wherein by a Form of confession
concerning the Question in controversy, it was decided, and a Canon prescribed
to other Churches.

6. We consider these Forms, either as touching the Matter of them (which is
divine, being deduced from Scripture) which we make use of as Indices in
explaining and determining dubious senses of Scriptures and Controversies: for
being searched out by so great diligence of godly Teachers, and approved by
their consent, and received by those Churches wherein we live; we cannot see
that there is too much attributed to these Forms, being examined and tried by
Scripture, if they be looked upon as Indices of some controverted doctrine, or
sense of Scripture, of which the meditation even of a private Christian, much
more of a numerous company of Prophets, may be an Index. Or they are considered
Formally, as they are Synodicall determinations duly concluded, confirmed with
Ecclesiaasticall authority, carrying in them the unanimous consent of the
Prophets as a badge of Ecclesiastical union and communion: and thus we make
use of them as Ecclesiastical Judges in deciding and explaining
Ecclesiastical controversies, in preserving the purity of doctrine and the
peace of the Churches. And when we consider them jointly, we attribute to them
this authority, which we propose in Vrsin's words, Their authority, says he,
is showed, in that it is not lawful for any one to recede from those doctrines
which they recite out of the Word of God; nor is any thing to be innova^^^ in
form of exposition or speech without just and necessary causes: Yea and if they
either have indeed, or seem to have, any thing blameworthy, nothing yet is to
be attempted in a rash, disorderly, and turbulent manner, nothing to be spread
abroad to the contrary, without a previous communicating of opinions with such
as are teachers, and others able to judge of doctrines, and the common
knowledge and consent of those Churches wherein those Forms of Confessions are
received and approved. Though therefore the authority and power of Synods, which
prescribe those Forms, be not of it self infallible; nor instituted by God to
be the supreme and infallible rule of our Faith: and therefore cannot by itself
and its own authority oblige believers to believe that which is determined in
those Forms: Yet we acknowledge in Synods which constitute those Forms, the
supreme power of Ecclesiastical judging and determining controversies, given
by God for avoiding confusion and rending of Churches; whereby they may inflict
Ecclesiastical censures on such as openly oppose their decrees. Hence have
those Forms an excellent force and efficacy to beget in the minds of all, a
persuasion of the true doctrine therein contained. For, (as the Learned Camero
well notes, tom. 1. Prelect. de Ecclesia, in that discourse concerning the
Infallability of the Church) so often as any thing is decreed by an Assembly of
those who are placed in Au^^ority in the Church, it makes that this is not
rashly and without accurate and grave observation to be rejected. For a Synod
has a peculiar assistance of the holy Ghost and so a greater then that which
belongs to teachers judging singly and apart: They have also more certain
means of finding out the truth; to wit, the Prayers, and Fastings, and
Disputations, etc. of the principal Pastors of the whole Church: They have
also a better course to know what is the opinion of the whole Church concerning
a controversy raised, and what course the Churches observe therein. So that
they who doubt of the truth of the Forms constituted in a Synod, or upon light
and probable reasons judge them to be false, and so do not certainly know them
so to be, are bound so far to yield obedience to the Forms decreed, as may
be agreeable to Order and decency in that Case; which obedience is an
observance of Christian humility, and mod^stie; whereby the faithful in such
cases abstain from public or open Profession of their opinion, and
condemnation or confutation of the opinion determined in those Forms. And this
evident, because for giving obedience to the decrees of Churches, we have the
certain and manifest authority of God, commanding to obey them, Heb. 13. 17.
But for opposing them, we have only uncertain and probable conjectures; and in
such a case the common rule is to be followed, Hold that which is certain, and
leave that which is uncertain. Again, to oppose openly the Forms of Churches
upon arguments but probable, and less evident, gives an unbridled and endless
license of contradicting any Ecclesiastical decrees whatever, Yea, when there
is any thing of falsehood prescribed in those Forms of Churches, and that
golden rule is to be followed, To obey God rather then men; yet a pious son
of the Church will not rudely insult on them, but with a reverentiall
bashfulnesse avoid them, as Waldensis elsewhere speaks. But when Forms are
composed and established by Synod call authority, for the promoting and
deciding of truth, the establishing integrity and order in Church Government,
they have then Ecclesiastical and definitive authority, whereby they may be
imposed on particular Churches in Doctrinall Causes, and Ecclesiastical
affairs, under the penalty of Ecclesiastical censure: For the spirits of the
Prophets, are subject to the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14. 32 and all the Sons of the
Church, are to be subject to the Discipline of the Church, Matthew. 18. 17, 18.
We hold therefore that to Churches congregated in Synods, there belongs power
by the Word of God, that they may be Ecclesiastical authority prescribe and
impose Forms both of Confession of Faith, and Ecclesiastical Government,
which particular Churches, and their Governors, and private members are bound
to confess and receive under pain of Ecclesiastical censure. This Assertion
is proved,

1. Because the Synod at Jerusalem, by an ordinary Power Ecclesiastical, did
prescribe and impose such a Form to other Churches in a question in
controversy, Acts 15. 22, 29. and 16. 4.

2. Because those things which the Churches of God ought to believe with the
certainty of Divine Fiath, and undoubted Conscience, these may Synods also
injoyne, by Ecclesiastical authority, to particular Churches: For by the Word
of God their power extends to require of others obedience to the Faith; and may
in the Name of Christ with spiritual power bring under those that are
obstinate, and who stubbornely oppose themselves against the decrees and
constitutions of those that are to govern the Church. They may therefore by
Ecclesiastical authority impose on others Forms of Faith, and of obedience to
the Faith, drawn up according to the Scriptures.

3. Churches have Ecclesiastical Power to prescribe just and approved means,
for preserving the purity of true Doctrine, and the peace and union of
Churches, and for overthrowing the wicked counsels and endeavors of Heretics
and disturbers, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5, 6. and 13. 10. Gal. 5. 12. 1 Cor. 4. 21. But
Forms of service, and confessions determined concerning questions in
controversy, are approved and just means for preserving the purity of
Doctrine and the peace of Churches, that they be not endangered by distractions
and the poison of errors, Act. 15. 23, 24. etc. They may therefore be imposed
on particular Churches by Ecclesiastical authority.

Accordingly, in the ancient Synods of Churches such Symbols, Ecclesiastical
Canons, Confessions and Declarations of Faith were set forth; that they might
thereby testify not only what themselves did believe, but also what ought to
be believed by others, with whom they would hold their Ecclesiastical
Communion: as all the acts of Synods do testify, in which (where they speak
concerning Doctrines of Faith) they do, by Paul's example, Anathematize those
who think or teach otherwise; whence also is that Preface of the Athanasian
Creed, (...) etc. Whosoever will be saved, before all things it is necessary
that he believe, etc. And Calvin rightly, Epist. 87. to the Protector of
England; It is requisite to provide against petulant wits, who assume to
themselves too great a license; and the gate is also to be shut against curious
doctrines: And the ready course for this purpose is one, to wit, That there be
a sum of Doctrine extant, to be received by all, and this in preaching to be
followed by all; and to the observance thereof all Bishops and Ministers to be
bound by oath; so as none be admitted to the Ecclesiastical Function, but who
promises to retain that consent of Doctrine inviolate: That there be also a
common Form of Catechism for the use of children, and ignorant people; Thus
will the truth be made familiar to them, and withal they will learn to
distinguish it from impostures and corruptions, which are apt by degrees to
creep upon the slothful. For this you must be certainly resolved of, that the
Church of God cannot want Catechizing; for that therein the true seed of sound
doctrine is contained, from whence a pure and good harvest is afterward to
arise, and so to be multiplied more and more, etc. Nor yet does the benefit of
a Catechism consist only in the instruction of Children; for there is withal
this other benefit, that both the people being thereby instructed, will be
better able to profit in the ordinary hearing of the Word; and also if any one
being puffed up would bring in some new opinion, being called to examination by
the Catechism, he will straight be discovered. Thus Calvin.

And thus also, in our Belgic Churches, is that authority applied to our
Forms of Harmony, to wit, the Confession, the Catechism, and Ecclesiastical
Order decreed and confirmed in Synods, that the Profession, the Doctrine, and
observation thereof is by Ecclesiastical authority enjoined to all, who will
enjoy the dignity of the Ecclesiastical Ministry, and who live in the holy
union of our Churches, See the Syned at Embden, Anno 1571. art. 2. at Dort,
Anno 1574. art. 2. and Anno 1578. art. 8. etc.

We reject therefore The opinion of those, who grant it indeed lawful for a
private person, or even for a particular Church, yea, and for all the Churches
of a Kingdom to make Confessions and Forms of Doctrine and Discipline; but
hold it unlawful and unprofitable to prescribe them either by Ecclesiastical
or Civil authority as binding Rules of Faith and Practice, that men should be
constrained to observe them in Faith and the practice of Divine Worship. But
now those things that are to be retained with that firm faith, and unmoved
constancy and certainty of mind, as that for the profession thereof all
believers should not doubt to shed their blood and suffer Martyrdom, and the
Churches with the certainty of divine faith judge that so they ought to do;
those things surely they may by Ecclesiastical and spiritual authority
prescribe to others, and constrain men to observance thereof in faith and
practice, under the penalty of Ecclesiastical censure: But for the profession
of the pure faith, and of the spiritual Government of Christ's Kingdom, all
who are faithful sons of the Church are bound to shed their blood: See Rev.
2. 13. Act. 7. 57, 58. Luke 21. 15, 16. Therefore Canons and Rules of this
profession, prescribed out of the undoubted Word of God, may be Ecclesiastical
authority be imposed on the Churches of God, by those who are by Office to
watch over the purity of Faith, and integrity of Ecclesiastical Government.
Yea, and we may bind our souls by Oath, to preserve and profess the saving
truth of God in faith and the obedience of faith, that we fall not away from
the holy Profession and exercise thereof: See Psalm. 119. 106. Nehem. 9 38. And
if we may lawfully bind by Oath our own souls and the souls of others who
live under our power, to such a profession of saving Faith; we may bind them
also by Laws and Canons to the same profession: for of like things there is
like judgment.

Question 2.

Whether it be lawful to use in the Church prescript Forms of Prayer,
administration of the Sacraments, etc? or whether those Churches who use them
be guilty of superstition, and will worship? and whether it be lawful to hold
Ecclesiastical Communion with those Churches where such Forms in the public
worship are in use?

Answer.

IN this controversy, we easily assent to what is written by Ames upon this
question in his Cases of Conscience, lib. 4. cap. 17. quaest. 4. and to what
the professors of Leyden have in their Synopsis Theologiae, disput. 36. These.
33, 34. And, that we may handle the question distinctly:

1. We reject such Forms of prayer, of Administration of Sacraments, etc.
which for the matter of them are vicious: for we may not in prayers, and other
parts of the public worship of God, propound any thing unlawful, impertinent,
and unfitting, which savoureth of superstition, Idolatry, or heresy, or carnal
profaneness, and pomp of the World, and which introduces a communion with the
unfruitful works of darkness. And for this cause we reject the ceremonies
and forms of public worship introduced in the Church of England in these last
corrupt times by the Hierarchicall Bishops; as which, being superstitious and
idolatrous, did deface the Church and worship of God, and obscure the
brightness and beauty of a glorious Reformation: and a Church which takes up
superstitious and idolatrous ceremonies partakes in superstition and idolatry.

2. We reject also those Forms of prayers and public worship, which by a
tyrannical and violent command are imposed on the consciences of men as
absolutely necessary and as essential parts of Gods worship: though for the
matter of them, they be legitimatly disposed; yet for the Form of them, and the
manner of their introducing, they become illegitimate instruments of cruelty,
and pretenses for perverse wickedness, and occasions of violent tyranny
against the worthiest and best sons of the Church. For there are not by
Christ or the Apostles, (whose institutions are not defective in the absolutely
necessary parts of Gods worship) any Forms prescribed, as simply and absolutely
necessary, wherein they have drawn up an exact and immutable rule for all
Christians in Churches, in matter, and form, and method, to which all faithful
worshippers of God to the worlds end are to be precisely bound.

3. The question is not here, of the absolute necessity of Forms, whereby they
are obtruded as parts of Religion, and essential means of divine worship: but
of such a prescribing them, whereby they are by Ecclesiastical authority
commended for the order and decency of the worship of God, as useful and
profitable for those who want either sufficient ability, or freedom of
exercising it, for the seemly expression of those parts of divine worship, that
they may be as it were guided by them as helps in their meditations, petitions,
words and actions, and that the attention of the auditors, especially in great
Congregations, may by those forms be helped and directed; and that there may be
an Uniformity observed in the exercises of public worship in all Churches, for
the preventing of scandalls and for the greater edefication of the Churches.

But we judge those Forms, as well publicly as privately used, to be lawful
and profitable, so that they be read out of the book with due attention,
reverence, faith, and spiritual affection and zeal toward God: and that not
only in case of necessity, when he that is to perform those parts of divine
worship is destitute of sufficient ability and fit words to express the
prayers and other parts of divine worship; but also for the helping and
directing the attention of the auditors thereby, and for keeping an uniformity
in the exercises of Divine Worship, for the edification of the Churches of God.
This Assertion is proved:

1. Because we may in a prescript form sing Psalms, and offer thanksgivings to
God with due reverence, faith, spiritual affection and zeal. Asaph and his
brethren had Forms for the due praising of God prescribed them by David,
according to the prescript whereof they were in set words to celebrate public
thanksgivings; See 1 Chronicles. 16. 7, 8. So in the dedication of the Temple, the
Priests and Levites did celebrate the public worship of God according to the
set-Forms prescribed by David, 2 Chronicles. 7. 6. The like examples we have, Numb.
6. 22, 23. 2 Chronicles, 20. 21. Esra. 3. 10, 11. Psalm. 92. 1. But now if
thanksgivings, and singing of Psalms, which ought to be performed with
spiritual affection, reverence, and understanding, and joy, 1 Cor. 14, 15.
Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16. both lawfully may be and were performed according to
the Word of God, in set Forms; then also Prayers and other parts of Divine
Worship may in set Forms be duly and lawfully conceived and offered to God: for
thanksgivings and blessing of God are kinds of prayer, and of the same nature,
which require the same affections of mind with other parts of Divine Worship.

2. That is a just and lawful form of prayers, in which are observed the
essentialls and necessary requisites to all prayers. But all things which in
the holy Scripture are required to the due constitution of prayers, may be
observed, and by the godly are observed in a holy manner in prayers conceived
in set Forms, and pronounced out of a book: Therefore this form of prayers is
just and lawful. For what is there in Scripture required to the worship of
supplications, and godly prayers, but that the matters of them be lawful, and
stily disposed according to the present necessities, that they be offered to
God in a holy manner, with reverence, zeal, humility, and faith; and that they
duly express our urging necessities? But we know by certain experience that a
prayer holy and lawful for the matter of it, may in a set Form be pronounced,
and offered to God, with an humble sense of our necessities, desire, and zeal,
holiness of affections, faith, and religious motions of our will toward God,
and that according as our affairs require. The faithful read the text of holy
Scripture with understanding, humility, reverence, zeal, religious motions of
the will, and faith in God, and application of them to particular necessities:
and why may not prayers in like manner be pronounced in prescript forms? when
as prayers differ in this only from hearing and reading the Word of God, that
in the one, our will is moved toward God that we may be moved by him; but in
the other, our will is moved toward God that he may be affected with our
desires: as Ames elsewhere observes.

3. Our Lord and Savior Christ has prescribed us a form of prayer; For he
has given us the Lords-Prayer, not only as a pattern or platform according to
which we ought to direct our prayers, but also as a prayer which when we pray
we may say; Pray ye therefore thus (says he) Our Father, etc. Mat. 6. 9. and
when ye pray say, Our Father, etc. Luke 11. 2. Our Lord therefore did not only
deliver a rule for prayer, but composed this prayer in set words, and commended
it to us not only for imitatio^, but to be used in prayer: affording us in
mercy a most useful help for our infirmities, and not to be despised, and a
perfect supply of the defects of our prayers; the use whereof though not
always necessary, yet we judge it ofttimes safe and convenient, our Lord
himself suggesting these words and commending the use of them. Hence in all
the Liturgies of Reformed Churches that are extent, the rehearsing the
Lords-Prayer is prescribed. So Christ has prescribed us an express Form of
Baptizing, Matthew. 28. Mark 16. and though the Churches of Christ are not by
absolute necessity tied to the syllables of it, yet in the sense and substance
of it we must admit no mutation. As also the ancient Jewish Church had their
set forms in the use of prayers, blessings and thanksgivings in the celebration
of the Passover: which also Christ by his practice did approve to be retained;
See Mr Beza, on Matthew. 26. 20. Paulus Brugensis on Psalm. 112. and Scaliger de
Emendat. Temporum, lib. 6. whom he there cites: as also Ainsworth himself on
Exodus 12. 8. So likewise our Savior has by his example prescribed a Form of
words for the Lords Supper, Matthew. 26. which the Apostolic Church thought good
to retain, and is by the Apostles proposed to us to imitate; as appears from
1 Cor. 11.

Hence also in almost all Reformed Churches, Ecclesiastical Lyturgies, and
Forms of Prayers are approved, as useful and conducing to the edification of
the Church: And, in our Belgic Churches, Forms of Divine Worship are together
with our Psalters, and the greater and lesser Catechism, allowed, and
publicly extant to the view of the whole world, and carried to the utmost
Indies. Masculine is the opinion of the eminent and Reverend Master John
Calvin, Epist. 87. to the Protector of England. As for the Forms of Prayers,
and Ecclesiastical rites, says he, I much approve it, that there be one
certain Form extant, from which Ministers in their function may not depart; as
well that thereby provision may be made for the simplicity and unskilfulnesse
of some; as also that the consent of all the Churches amongst themselves may so
more certainly appear: lastly also, that the petulant lightness of some may
be prevented, who affect innovations; to which end also, the Catechism
tends, as I have before showed. So therefore there ought to be a set Form of
Catechism, of administration of the Sacraments, and of public Prayers.

These arguments do also manifestly show, that Ecclesiastical Communion in
Divine Worship may be held with those Churches, which retain set Forms of
Prayers and Sacraments in the public Worship. For no where has God commanded
that a Christian should separate himself from that worship which is performed
by a prescript Form: and Christ himself has prescribed to his Churches
Forms of Prayer and Sacraments; and celebrated the Exercises of Divine
Worship, according to the appointed Forms of the Jewish Churches, and we
think it uncharitable to condemn all those Godly Churches, as guilty of
superstition and will worship, which from the times of the Apostles and the
Primitive Churches downward, even to this day, have celebrated the public
Worship of God, in prescript and set Forms. And therefore we blame the precise
singularity of those men, who banish all set Forms from the Worship of God,
and separate themselves from all the Protestant Churches into private and
separate Congregations of their own, because of the Forms used by the
Protestants in the Worship of God.

FINIS.
A Table of the Chapters and Questions.
CHAP. I. Of the Qualification of Church Members. p. 1.

Q. WHether there be none to be admitted into the Communion of the external
visible Church, but who is endued with the real internal holiness of
Regeneration, and with justifying faith in Christ: or, who upon strict
examination does manifest such evident signs of true faith, and real
internal holiness, as may convince the consciences of the Church to which he
joyneth himself, of his sincere faith, repentance and communion in Christ: and
that if any Congregation admit others, in whom there is not evident proof of
these signs, they admit impure and false Church Members?

CHAP. II. Of a Church Covenant. p. 13

Q. WHether a Church Covenant solemnly made between the Members and the
Governors of a Church publicly before the whole Church, whereby the members
of a particular Church are by a public and express agreement and promise
associated and united amongst themselves, to exercise the fear and sacred
worship of God, unity of faith, brotherly love, mutual edification, and all
duties of piety in a holy communion with God and amongst themselves; be
absolutely necessary and essential to the constitution of a true Church, so
that without this Covenant there is no true or pure Church, nor true
Churchmember?

CHA. III. Of an instituted visible Church. p. 24

Q. WHether no other external visible Church be described in Scripture, and
acknowledged by the Word of God, but a parochial or particular Church: which
is confined to such limits, as that of necessity it must be such as may be
contained, and ought to meet, ordinarily in one place, for the celebrating of
Gods publikeworship, and all the Ordinances of God with mutual edification: so
that the constitution of such a Church, which by reason of their multitude, or
some other cause, cannot in all their members meet ordinarily in one place for
the celebration of the worship of God and exercise of all Gods ordinances, is
unlawful and repugnant to the Word of God and the Apostles institutions
concerning the constitution of a Church described in the holy Scripture?

CHAP. IIII. Of Ecclesiastical power. p. 43

Q. WHether the Ecclesiastical power, or power of the keys, be given by
Christ to the multitude or all the members of a Church as the first and
immediate subject: so as believers not bearing any Church office may by
themselves immediately exercise all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, discipline,
and causes Ecclesiastical, save only the Sacraments? And consequently, whether
private Christians being Church members have such an Ecclesiastical power as
that they may authoritatively admit Church members to Ecclesiastical
communion, reprove by Ecclesiastical authority such as commit offenses, bind
by Excommunication and Church censures, absolve from excommunication, and
authoritatively remit sins? whether to them also belongs the conferring the
power of the keys on the Ministers and Pastors of the Church, and that power
which gives to the Ministers an Ecclesiastical office; and consequently, the
examination of Pastors, the sending unto and confirming them in that Church
office by imposition of hands, and again authoritative suspending and removing
Pastors from that function?

CHAP. V. Of the Ecclesiastical Ministry, and the Exercise thereof. p. 66

Q. 1. WHether the end and effect of the work of the Ecclesiastical Ministry
be only the Confirmation and Edification of those Church Members who are
already converted and truly godly; so as that Pastors are not more obliged by
virtue of their Ecclesiastical function to convert the straying souls of such
as live in the world, and in sins out of Churchcommunion; then all believers
endued with the gifts of the holy Ghost, are by the common duty of Charity
bound to do?

Question 2. p. 70.

Whether the Minister of a particular Church may not only by virtue of his
gifts, and from the common duty of Charity, but also by virtue of his
Ecclesiastical Function, lawfully perform ministerial acts of his office in
the Ecclesiastical Communion of another particular Church, to whose ordinary
ministry he is not called?

Question 3. p. 75

Whether the exercise of Prophecy be a perpetual institution in the Church of
God, whereby private men who bear no Church-Office, may, for the exercise of
the gifts of the Spirit, publicly before the whole body of the Church preach
the Word of God with all authority in the Name of God, and explain and apply
it, for instruction, confutation, reprehension, and consolation of the hearers?

Question 4. p. 84

Whether those Infants whose next parents do not by a solemn Church Covenant
join themselves to some particular Church, are not to be baptized in the
Church, but are to be accounted as incapable of Baptism, and to have no right
to Church Priviledges?

CHAP. VI. Of Classes, and Synods, and their authority. p. 89

Q. 1. Whether Classes and Synods have an authoritative power, whereby they
may authoritatively judge causes Ecclesiastical, with Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction; so as that particular Churches ought to submit themselves to
their decrees, under the penalty of Ecclesiastical censure?

Question 2. p. 103

Whether Classes and Synods have power of sending, or ordaining Pastors in a
particular Church?

Question 3. p. 118

Whether Synods and Classes have power of Excommunication?

CHAP. VII. Of set Forms. p. 130

Q. 1. Whether it be lawful for Churches to prescribe to themselves
constituted laws and forms, and certain Canons, by Ecclesiastical
authority, wherein Articles of Faith, and things necessarily required by God
for the Government and Discipline of the Churches, are out of the holy
Scriptures expounded and determined; and things not necessarily required are by
Ecclesiastical power prescribed, according to the general rules of Scripture,
from the precepts of the law of Nature and holy Prudence, for the edification
of the Church, and the order and decency of Gods Worship; and imposed on
particular Churches, and Church Governors, as bonds of Peace and Unity?

Question 2. p. 143

Whether it be lawful to use in the Church prescript Forms of Prayer,
Administration of the Sacraments, etc. or whether those Churches who use them
be guilty of superstition, and will worship? and whether it be lawful to hold
Ecclesiastical Communion with those Churches where such Forms in the public
worship are in use?


FINIS.
WE whose names are subscribed, Delegates of the Walacrian Classis, do
testify that our Reverend Colleague Mr William Apollonius was enjoined by the
said Classis, that in these sad troubles of England he should by writing set
down, what is the Government practiced in the Churches of the United
Provinces, which we also judge agreeable to the Word of God; and what are the
Controversies at this time agitated in England concerning the Government of the
Church of God; and state that controversy by way of Theses and Antitheses,
showing the Grounds of them. And that we have diligently perused and approved
that writing of his. We desire from our soul, that there were a way of
Government, as much as may be, Uniforme, observed in all Reformed Churches, for
the greater edification of the Church of Christ, and the destruction of the
kingdom of Satan. We pray, that the learned and worthy, our Brethren and
Fellow Laborers in the Kingdom of England, would be pleased fairly to
interpret this our affection.

Iacobus D'Herde, President of the Wallacrian Classis pro tempore. Iodocus
Larenus, Assessor pro tempore. Isaacus Hoornbekius, Preacher at Middleburgh.
Cornelius Beuckelarius, Preacher at Vere. Melchior Burs, Minister of the word
at West-Souburch. Maximilianus Teellinck, Preacher at Middleburgh.
This writing is set forth by prescript of the 46. Article of Ecclesiastical
Policy, established by the most Renowned and Noble, the States of Zealand.

Melchior Burs, Minister of the Word at West-Souburch.
