AN APOLOGY AND VINDICATION Of the Major part of the Members of PARLIAMENT
Excluded from sitting and speaking for themselves and the COMMONWEALTH.

Isa. 59.6. Their webs shall not become Garments, neither shall they cover
themselves with their works. Their works are the works of Iniquity, and the act
of violence is in their hands.

Quint. Curt. lib. 4. Nulla quaesita scelere potentia diuturna est.

January 24. 1659.

LONDON, Printed, by Tho. Ratcliffe, 1659.

AN APOLOGY And VINDICATION of the Members of PARLIAMENT excluded, etc.
THe Members of this present Parliament, who have been eleven years kept out by
a variety of force from sitting and discharging the public Trust, to which
they were elected: having observed that by Gods good providence the Officers
and Soldiers of the Army, who have hitherto, as it were giver* Laws to all
civil Authority, had declared a submission thereunto, being reduced to their
duty by the affection and conjunction of the good people, with several
declarations and endeavors of General Monk; whilst they supposed that the
freedom of Parliament was thereby to be asserted, and restored; and that a
general expectation and desire in all places has been express, that all the
Members should return to Vote in Parliament, according to the due Liberty and
prividedges thereof: did many of them go to the Parliament House, where their
entrance was denied by Officers of the Army, and others appointed thereunto.
And since they and the people having expected a Vindication from those Members
now sitting, and a Declaration against all future force.

The Parliament in 1648. well weighing the state of Affairs, after they had
about six years contended by a War for public Liberty; and duly considering
that the end of War is Peace; did betake it self to ways tending thereunto,
after mature deliberation* and the most solemn Debates the House of Commons did
pass a Vote, without division upon the Question, in order to a settlement of
future Peace, which disagreeing with the depraved Interests of some, who
conducted the Army, they drew up a Declaration (filled with invectives against
the Parliament and new and dangerous subtilties against Government) and having
seduced the Army to their Counsels, 6. and 7. of December 1648. contrary to
the Orders and Commands of Parliament bring it up from the more distant
Quarters and by a Guard set upon the House, did shut out at that time more then
a hundred Members, and imprisoned one and forty. Those sitting in the House
understanding some disorder without doors, and that diverse of their Members
were detained there by Soldiers, did send their Sergeant to require their
attendance on the House; but the Officers would not permit it. Whalley and
other Officers at the Bar of the House delivered some Papers, propounding and
demanding several things, among others, That the Members secluded should not be
readmitted until they should acquit themselves particularly of the said Vote,
and give clear satisfaction to the judgments, of those who then sat in the
House and had dissented, and the grounds of such satisfaction be published to
the Kingdom.

The House yet tender of the Interests of Parliament appoint Mr. Pierpoint and
others to confer with the General Officers of the Army, for discharging their
Members; upon conference had with them, the Result was, that they referred to
their former Papers. And though the House did nothing thereupon: Yet some
persons earnestly insi^^d diverse days, that according to the practice and
privilege of Parliaments, no debate might be entertained until the Privilege
of the Parliament and Members were vindicated. And finding no redress they have
ever since withdrawn themselves from siting in the House.

There was a printed Paper* scattered abroad in the behalf it seems of the
secluded Members, protesting against whatsoever should be done in Parliament in
their absence: which both Houses (there being about three or four Lords, a
proportionable number to the Commons, then remaining in that House) did fix
upon the Members excluded; and then condemning the Papers as false, and
scandalous; and declaring no Member to be capable to sit in either House until
they should disclaim it. Which Paper, was neither subscribed nor owned by any
of these Members, nor they heard, nor any thing like a legal or rational
proceeding had therein: But this was in it self so slight a judgment, upon
grounds so unjust, and unparliamentary, that even themselves took no notice of
it afterward; nor does it appear in any Entry upon the Books, that any of those
Members were put to disclaim it, who were afterward readmitted.

On the 20. of December It was carried upon division of the House that the
message to the General and Council of Officers for discharge of the Members
should be renewed. Upon the Question the Negatives were 19. and the
Affirmatives 32.

Nevertheless on the 11. of January following, The House having by several
Votes, and Preparatives, and secret consultations altered their humors, (they
without receiving any answer to their renewed message, the Army insisting, and
they complying) did approve the former answer of the Council of Officers and
the Papers of December. 6. brought from Colonel Whalley to the House.

And now having declared a Union with the Councels of the Army, it was ordered,
Feb. 1. That such as shall dissentor disapprove the Vote of December the 5.
shall repair to a Committee appointed thereunto by the first of March; or be
suspended voting, or sitting, till they dissent or disapprove, and give
satisfaction of their Delay, and be restored by particular order of the House.

And the 9. of June following, a final Judgment was given: It being then
ordered that none should be capable to sit that should not give satisfaction to
the Committee by the 30. of June, but that then, the House should proceed to
the Elections of new Members in their Places.

After five years reign by themselves, and no Restoration, nor new Election;
the House was interrupted and discontinued until May 7. 1659. when the
Soldiers again opening the doors the Secluded members attempted to go into
the House, but were kept back by Gaurds, and afterward by a Vote, that such
Persons heretofore Members of this Parliament, as have not taken the Engagement
now upon the Roll in this House shall not sit till farther Order.

The Parliament seeming again to be restored from another violence of the Army,
made upon them in October: Diverse secluded Members endeavored again to go into
the house, but were hindered by Officers of the Army, and others. And on the 5.
of January following, the doors were as it were sealed up by the last, and most
peremptory Vote, viz. That upon the whole matter of the Report touching the
absent Members, the Parliament does adjudge and declare, that the Members who
stand discharged from voting or sitting as Members of this House in the years
1648. and 1649. do stand duly discharged by Judgment of Parliament.

By these several Briefs of those Orders, and proceedings which are most
material in this case, it easily appears, That nothing does arise out of any
Vote or Judgment, which shows that there has been any judicial hearing either
according to Law, President, or Parliamentary proceeding: nor that any matter
of conviction is to be found in the most artificial suggestions and pretenses
against these Members. Nor that any Crimes, but the being the Major part of the
Parliament, and the adhearing to their duty and Judgment in Parliament have
been the ground or Argument of the several Votes or attempts against them. So
that the sum of All on both sides amounts only to this, That the House Votes,
that because They stand discharged, therefore they stand duly discharged; and
the Vote of the people is in the Negative, who generally in the streets, and
Market places, and public Assemblies (which are the ordinary Courts of the
people) do cry out, That their Members stand not discharged, because they are
not duly discharged.

So that upon the whole matter, The Result of the fact shows it self to be
plainly thus, that some principal persons in the Army, unhappily entrusted with
too much power, in 1648. designing Empire to themselves, and confusion to all
the parts of the opposing Government, secretly conspired against that peace,
which the Parliament was then providing for, and winding up, being brought on
thereunto by all the Reason, and Arguments, that Religion and Prudence could
suggest. And because no Councels, but the most desperate, could effect things
so stupendous as were plotted; the Parliament (as the chief Bulwark of the
Commonwealth) was by them, and by their influence, assaulted with the utmost
Indignity, Treachery and Violence; and about two parts of three of them (the
number of Members being a chief part of the constitution of Parliaments) forced
from their Seats, and many of them imprisoned; whilst a permission was left to
some to remain in that house; on condition that they should disavow their own
Foundation, and Privileges, and Votes, and Members, and join themselves to
those new and hated Principles (which had been publicly in the presence of men
and Angels by the Parliament, and the whole people vowed, declared and
protested against) and which were now invented and contrived in the dark: for
the ruin and the blowing up of that public liberty, which had conserved this
People in most eminent felicity so many Ages; although it sometimes required
the extraordinary applications of Parliaments to redress some evils which time
and full prosperity, and the corruption of Ministers of state, do oft-times
draw upon the best framed Governments.

The Members thus selected, and set apart, betake themselves to the promoting
of the Armies interests, as if they were now become their Representatives
only, and contract all the several Authorities of these Nations into
themselves, and having vested themselves with Sovereignty, and cut off
whatsoever grew in their way, they by the Votes, Orders and Artifice above
mentioned, pretending a formal proceeding against the Major part of the
Members, and an intention to elect others in their places, do seal up the House
to their own private use, whilst they in scorn, and a resolution not to be
satisfied, call for a Satisfaction, and a Retraction of the Vote which
themselves ought only to have acquiessed in, as bound up by it; but to have
made it good, as the Right of Parliament, against all contradiction or
opposition whatsoever.

By these grounds, and beginnings, the Commonwealth of England has been thus
long interrupted, and the shadow and name of Commonwealth (all the essential
parts of it being condemned and vanished) has been set up instead thereof;
which by necessary and unavoidable consequence, easy to be foreseen, has
induced as great a variety of successive Evils as any State ever saw and felt
in so few years; for in this Interval the Ambition of him that first formed,
and forced this change, did declare and show it self, and revenged the People
in some measure, upon those who wholly against their will had engrossed their
Liberties, and assumed the Supreme Authority on the behalf only of such as
should desert all former Obligations, to adhere to the new, uncertain,
impossible things which they pretended to.

And notwithstanding the full experience those few expulsed and restored
Members had of the tumultuary and unsteady Genius of that Army, who in May last
had again conspired against a Parliament, and invaded the Government of their
own framing; and were apparently constrained, for their own safety, and by
their own incapacity and distraction, suddenly to erect, or own some other
kind of Authority, which should depend only upon theirs; and groaping, like
blind men for the wall, they did as it were by chance light upon the recalling
their Members; whom they had formerly selected, and made use of.

This Army once more affronts this remainder of Authority, which more solemnly
then before themselves had owned, and bowed to, and having in their own fancy
(according to the expression of one of their Grandees) melted down all the
several Powers, Authorities, and Persons into a narrower Interest, and closer
body, and projected a more refined and more exalted tyranny, that might better
assure the Military Dominion, and the Reign of those few to whom they had
adjudg'd the Government of the Earth as a Right and Inheritance; they did
awaken by so loud a violence, and pretense, a General, who had happily hitherto
been disengaged from their Councels and their guilt, and had been long an
object of their envy, who being at a secure and proper distance for this
purpose gave the Alarm to the three Nations, and an invitation to betake
themselves to their several strengths and defenses; and himself drew out a
well-form'd Army, capable of ballancing the Power, that without pretense of
Commissions, had renewed their former outrages of expelling and making War
upon the Parliament: The whole people abhorring the continuation and increase
of Force, did (as many as had remained capable thereof) every where declare, or
join together against the Army, and were so successeful through the activity of
the English interests (which now united themselves as against a common enemy)
that without any other bloodshed, then some few Murders in the City, intending
thereby to terrify and suppress their courage) this Army, but even now
defying even the name Parliament, and decreeing it to be eradicated, was by a
dejection in their own spirits and consciences; accusing and amasing them; and
a confusion arising out of the folly and impiety of their Councels, driven to
consult how they might preserve themselves by a Parliament (as the last English
refuge for all Parties, and in all extreamities) and having vainly endeavored
by their own Power, and their great Seal, to qualify and summon one; they
fainted in the attempt, and by a weak and general desertion and falling back
from one another, Liberty seemed to be restored to the Parliament: and it was
become the general hope and expectation, that no violence should be continued
upon it; But that, as the Force in 1648. and 1653. and 1659. is of the same
only, and rebellious nature; So all men that can consider things as they are,
and what they tend to, should equally abhor it; whither as moral men, it
being treachery and breach of Faith; or as Christians, it being perjury, and
against many Vows to the high God; or as English men only, it being the
establisher of Tyranny and of Arbitrary Government; or as such as are Lovers of
themselves, it bringing destruction upon such persons or Confederacies as
suport themselves by it against a whole people, that know not how to wear the
yoke of the basest servitude. And surely whosoever shall take an account from
Time (the best Informer) and ask the eleven years (in which Force has reigned
absolutely by it self, and by its own Laws only) what they have produced, they
shall be answered. That the expulsion of many by a few, gave opportunity, and
means, and encouragement to one to Vsurp, that such usurpation begat emulation
in those that had been his equals: That from thence did spring new Turns of
State: that amidst all these revolutions, the people have been commanded to
believe that they were under a Commonwealth, and that they enjoyed freedom,
and public advantages proportionable to what they have suffered and paid for,
whilst only the name and shadow of Liberty has appeared abroad; and the
interests of the Nations were suspended, or pursued by contraries; and infinite
Treasure has been spent to purchase Poverty, and Disgrace, the only Remainders
of more then twenty Millions. Whilst above fifteen hundred Sail of Shipping,
and the wealth and the intrinsic value of them, have been the prey of our
Enemies: the public Fleet having had enough to defend the several intruding
Governments against the pretenses of others, and the discontents of the
unsatisfied People. Whilst Trade it self Foreign and Domestic, Manufactures
and Traffic, is insensibly stolen from this Commonwealth; being subtly
invited, and engrossed by our neighbors. Whilst every County, City and
Borough (not under awe and force) every degree and society of men, the whole
Nobility, the body of the Gentry, and the Commons, and indeed almost all such
as were engaged in the War upon the Parliaments account before 1648. do with
one voice and consent as far as they dare, being kept under by an iron hand,
press and solicit the Restoration of a full Freedom to the Parliament,
whereby all Interests may be considered and provided for: and such courses be
prosecuted by common consent, as may raise money to satisfy the souldery, even
with satisfaction to those who will be then as ready to give, as others are now
to levy it by Force; and those moderate, and equal, and healing Councels may
(by the good blessing of God) be so happily applied to, that Faction may be
extinguished; or at least rendered more incapable of disturbing that settlement,
which upon free Debates shall appear to be most proper and necessary for these
distracted Nations.

This being the State of the whole matter, as it appears out of the Records and
the observations of this last eleven years, and the present resentments of the
people as they relate to the secluded Mmbers, and the Force still continued. It
is not to be doubted, but some Countries, or some Numbers of Men (not obnoxious)
will suddenly testify against them, if they have unfaithfully represented any
thing herein: But it ought no way to discourage them from insisting upon their
Right to sit in Parliament; whilst these only shall suppress their Claim,
and oppose their Admission, whose particular duty it is to endeavor it, and
who may be driving on such designs, as neither will endure free and equal
debates; nor comply with the Sense of those they would seem to represent. And
although some are arrived now to such a height of Confidence that the word
Free-Parliament sounds as dangerously to their Ears, as heretofore to the
greatest Enemies of it, and is countenanced accordingly; yet surely such sober
Considerations as are herein offered in behalf thereof, will make some
impressions for good upon the several Interests concerned in it; especially
upon every Person of Honor and Trust to whom God has given an opportunity to
vindicate public Liberty, that he may not draw back his hand, and by doing it
partially and imperfectly be guilty of leaving the same kind, though not the
same measure of violence upon the Parliament and the people. For what person
soever entrusted, and enabled to deliver, and defend a people; shall apply
himself only so far to their relief and redress, as his own private conceit,
or Interest does lead him; and does it not according to common Right, and the
cry and general desire of his oppressed Countrymen (especially whilst they
ask nothing but what their known Laws and Liberties do allow and enjoyne) does
but use the peoples sword against them; and does, at best, no more then correct
some extravagancies in a faction, whose inconsistencie with reason and humane
society might in a short time have disolv'd it, or made it molder into nothing,
whilst the forming and assisting those looser parts, and the giving some
method and reputation to those wild proceedings, does tend only to the
strengthening thereof, and as much as in him lies, to the fitting and fastening
those fetters which even of themselves were falling off.

And surely it may become even those who have laid hold on the Helm, and
wilfully carried us to sea, far off among Rocks and quicksands, upon Coasts
strange, and unknown; in time to Consult their better Reason, and remember that
themselves also are but Passengers and must be lost and swallowed up at last,
by the same shipwreck with the public. For whatsoever Power or Council wants
Common consent, and Reverences and Authority, and Principles, and Union, and
well ordered Armies, and Treasure, and Alleys; and in brief all those
requisites which tend to the support of a politic Body, and great domminions;
may for some time vex the people, and keep them under, but can never subsist
in a condition of Honor and Security. And that warm desire of Liberty, which
is now said to be madness in those that affect it, and a thing noxious and
unseasonable and unfit for this generation; will (it may be well feared) ere
long flame into fury, and make them rather choose to fall Sacrifices to the
Public, in attempting its Deliverance, then to endure tamely farther Essays
of enforced Government, and submit their necks to every yoke that the Lust,
and wantonness, and spleen of a few of their equals (the best they can pretend
to) shall think fit to put upon them and become thereby liable to every
mischief and inconveniene that must, and shall necessarily arise, and continue
from Councels so founded and deposed. For whatsoever Evil has been acted, and
appeared since, 1648. must as certainly return upon us, in as many, or more or
worse Revolutions, as that the same Causes do naturally produce the same
effects.

FINIS.

