A COPY OF A LETTER FROM THE LORD INTRIM IN IRELAND TO THE right Honorable
the Earl of Rutland, bearing date the 25. day of Febr. Anno Dom. 1642.

Wherein is contained the Description of Two Battles fought between the
English and the Irish Rebels.

As also the Number of those that were slain on either side.

London, printed for T. P^^^l. 1642.

My Lord,
It is a great sorrow to me, my name and honor should be so much defamed and
scandalized by false and slanderous reports, nay permitted to be published in
print, that I have revolted from my King and turned Rebel, the very name
wounds me sore, which never had the least thought of treason against my
Sovereign or disloyalty to my Country, I am so far from such imaginations,
that I will rather perish at his Majesty's feet, and suffer any punishment what
ever shall be thought requisite to bring a period to my life and fortunes, then
live stained with such a horrid denomination as Traitor: And am so far
incensed against these reports, that I vow to God I will to the uttermost of my
power mainetaine the rightful power and prerogatives of his sacred Majesty, to
whom I desire to approve my self an obedient subject and servant, and his
Government as the undoubted and lawful King over his Majesty's Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland: I desire not to be disobedient to any the Laws
and Ordinances of his Parliament for the good Government of his Kingdoms, that
may not abridge and restrain the free exercise of the Roman religion, which I
am devoted to and am engaged to maintain in duty to God and respect of my
future happiness and salvation. Her Majesty, my Gracious Queen, I will to my
power endeavor to obey, and her rightful reign in his Majesty's Dominions
under his Government endeavor to uphold and maintain to the uttermost of my
life and Fortune: And such respect and honor I owe to my Lady, whom my prayers
are daily for, and to whom I recommend my dearest affections, that she may be
confident I will intermeddle with any affairs that may I hope prove
destructive to my self or Family, or in defamation to mine or her Honor,
which I humbly desire your Honor to certify her, and to present his Majesty
with my unchangeable and dutiful Intentions.

My Lord,
Some passages of the affairs here in Ireland I thought good to present you
with all which is necessary to be taken notice of. There was a great Battle
fought before the City of Dublin, where was slain 4000. English and Scotch,
and Sir Edward Denny one of our Captains with his forces of 400. Soldiers
has Slain Thomas Eger with five hundred more of his Soldiers, and put all
the rest (besides some prisoners taken) to Flight. This is the greatest
overthrow to the English as yet has been: And Sir Edward Denny having the
Victory, on the next morning being by his Soldiers saluted in a most Noble
manner, for their better encouragement, gave to each Soldier five pounds, and
in vindication of his reputation made a royal Feast to entertain his
Soldiers, in a deriding and scoffing manner to the English. There was also
another skirmish on saturday last, which continued some 8. hours between the
Forces under the command of the Lord Osmond Neterfield and others, and the
Forces under the Command of Sir Simon Harecourt, Sir William Cootes, Mr. Moore
of the English; the L. Douglas, Sir Charles Bland, Mr. Henry Stewart, and
others of the Scots, where were Slain 2000. Irish, and about 100. Scotch and
English, the rest of the Irish being forced to retire, great spoils being left
by them as a prey to the English of Ammunition and provision of Victual,
sufficient to furnish and maintain 500 men for 6. months, which was a great
weakening to the Catholic party: And thus having no more at this present, I
will not be troublesome to your Honor, but humbly take my leave.

Your Honors in all due observance INTRIM.
Lemster 25. Febr. 1642.
FINIS.

