AN ANSWER TO AN IMPERTINENT PAMPHLET LATELY set forth by JOHN SPENCER.

WHEREIN IS REFVTED THE ARguments brought for the justification of the
Lawfulness, and Universal exercise of every man's Gift, PUBLIC, and PRIVATE.

By a Well-wisher to the Reformation.

ROMANS 16.17. Mark them which cause divisions.

LONDON, Printed by G. B. and R. W. for W. L. and are to be sold at his Shop at
Paul's Chain. 1641.

TO MASTER SPENCER.
IT is the advice of a learned and godly Divine, That Christians in all their
actions should seriously survey, and by the particular light of spiritual
prudence, guide and manage whatsoever they undertake. It is also noted by
Solomon, That a prudent man foreseeth the evil, and does presuppose the
consequences of his performances: which places if you had seriously considered,
the world had not been a Spectator of this your weakness, neither will
posterity wonder at your inconsiderateness herein: these thoughts might have
deterred you from such unwarrantable practices, and stifled them in their very
conception; for you cannot be ignorant of the sad effects they have produced,
and what heavy censures you deservedly lie under, not only generally from the
world, but particularly from many good Christians, Divines, and others, whose
judgment in this respect perhaps you may slight: for my own part, I cannot but
admire to see Gods Word so miserably rent, by such extorted expositions, when
as the natural circumstance of the places, and the necessary conclusions
issuing from thence, do manifestly prove the contrary; Nay, whereas the whole
scope and intent of your book being to justify the public preaching of
Laymen without any outward call from the Church, (and a solemn sequestration
to that sacred function, and a declaration of the inward sufficiency that God
has endued a man with, for the execution of the same) and not only in times of
necessity, but when there is no such need, the very Brownists herein (a
generation extravagant enough) are become your adversaries, witness Mistress
Chidlies allegation out of Robinsons Book the Separatist; who says, A private
member may become a Minister for an action of necessity to be performed by the
consent of the rest; M. Chidlie. Justif. page 3.
Wherein I note, that it must be a case of necessity, that shall constrain
these people to consent to an action so done, but you go further, to defend
the universal practice (as you call it) of preaching both public and private,
not only in times of necessity, but out of it; and to that end you have picked
out certain Texts of Scripture to prove the same, but which what poor success,
I leave to the judgment of the godly and judicious Reader, upon the
examination of the ensuing discourse, in the which there is sufficient
demonstration to conclude, that of all whimsi^s hatched in the brain, this may
carry the bell, and fitly be branded for singularity, and therefore most
justly called by learned Cartwright, as indeed it is, Anabaptisticall, and mad.

Can you then so peremptorily conclude, and by such undeserved attributions
assume that to your self, that particularly belongs to others: B^ltons Instr.
page 160.
Hearken I beseech you to what Master Bolton says, The burden of the Ministry
is such, that as some of the Ancients amplify it, is able to make the
shoulders of the mightiest Angel in Heaven to shrink under it. And is it then
think you, the work of every puny and ordinary fellow that pretends the
Spirit, to dispense the sacred Oracles of God, that is miserably deficient in
those things God has ordained and sanctified for that purpose? Never, O never
seek to delude the poor ignorant vulgar with such frothy and undigested
conceits, and to blind the eyes of those (who are and will be as zealous of a
thorough Reformation as your self) that desire to have all things done by that
Apostolical rule, Decency and in Order; You allege Master Bolton, Calvin,
Ursinus, Perkins, to prove that which none denies; but are you content to
condescend to what they say; will you agree that they shall be Mediators in
this particular cause, I hope you will not deny, but that they were men for
piety and learning, as eminent as any we have now living; and were not they as
able to expound Scripture as you? if so, it will not be amiss to rest in their
determination, but you will say they dissent from the Word; How I pray? It may
be indeed in the generality of their Writings they may err, the best men have
their faults, and have no exemption from humane infirmities and errors, but if
they err in one thing, do they so in another? or to come more near, do they
err in this special point now in agitation? no such matter: Unless you say
(as I believe you think at least) they err, because they dissent from you,
and so indeed they may err in, and by your estimation, although not by the
Word; and I challenge you to produce me any one testimony, from any one
Orthodoxe, and sincere Minister of Jesus Christ that does favor your
assertion, and the cause is yours.

But because I will not hinder you from that which follows, I leave you to
consider, whether in this you dissent not only from learned and godly Divines,
but from the Truth also, upon which you would pin this your factious opinion.

TO THE READER.
THe holy Ghost in sacred Scriptures does often inculcate by many iterations,
and persuasive expressions to the diligent, and serious study after Truth: and
amongst them all, there is one (as I may so speak) transcends the rest: In the
third Epistle, John 4. I have no greater joy than this, 3. Epist. Joh. 4.
to hear that my sons walk in verity: a strong inducement to incite all men
to such a proficiency: for as Solomon speaks, Without knowledge the mind is
not good, because it deprives a man of the isntrumental means, to the
attaining of which, his chiefest happiness consists: so unless this knowledge
be originally radicated in the principles of Truth, Esaias 50.4.
it can never minister to a man (as the Prophet speaks) a word in due time,
for comfort and satisfaction: which point if seriously studied, would prove a
means to extirpate those Heresies, and Schisms which do miserably devide the
seamlesse Coat of Christ: It is true, the Apostle says, There must be
Heresies, etc. but I may to this speech of the Apostle, add that of Christ,
Woe be unto them to whom such offenses come, Mistake me not Reader, I do not
hear condemn the holy oppositions that accompany the sincere Ministers of
Jesus Christ, against the corruptions of the times: no, no, far be it from me
to be such a Proctor for the devil, or to maintain his quarrel, I only
speak against that blind zeal, which possesses abundance in the world, that
zeal that wants both knowledge and truth, for direction, and runns either upon
conjectures, or evil Enthusiasmes, of which the Apostle aims at, that has
its Original and breeding from a distempered brain, and at length produces
many exorbitant and giddy deviations from the sobriety and analogy of true
Religion, M. Bolton.
as a Learned Divine speaks, this is that zeal which requires just censure
and sound conviction: What shall I say? I only wish that the God of heaven,
who has all power in his hands, and knows the hearts of all men would bridle
the outragiousnesse of his enemies and cure the errors of his own people, that
we might all with one heait and one soul, willingly submit to the Scepter of
his dear Son, endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace, etc.

AN ANSWER TO A BOOK LATELY SET forth by JOHN SPENCER.
SPENCER. THat there is no private gifts, nor private Christians that we read
of in Scripture.


ANSWER. THat this is otherwise, may easily appear: for some actions are
private, and some are also public: and again, some persons are private, and
some are public: and so it follows, that some actions proceeding from men
as private, their actions are private also: private actions have reference to
private men, and men are private in respect of their conditions, and callings
God has set them in; and private men may sometimes perform public actions,
being by authority called thereunto: and this may not only hold in the Civil
State, but in the Ecclesiastique: for Jesus Christ has lest Offices, and
Officers in his Church, and those designed to particular places: This appears
manifestly, as may be seen in Scripture: To set down one instance in Acts 6.
ver. 1, 2. The Grecians complaining that their Widows were neglected, the
Apostles to remedy it, called the multitude together, and wished them to look
out so many men; full of the holy Glasts to be apponted for this business: Now
there is no man will deny, but that this act was divine: if so, and that none
could perform these actions but those who were publicly ordained to that
purpose, then it follows.

That those men (who were full of the holy Ghrst) by a divine ordinance were
appointed to do such Offices in the Church, not only as they were Christians,
and so had a spiritual sufficiency to performs those duties, but been private
men were now publicly ordained to execute that which they were called to.

But it is worth while to consider what you understand by pivate Christians,
and private Spirits, for if you mean that every Christians gifts, are not for
private use, but public, and in that respect to do service to the whole, and
so generally to be assistant according to those gifts given him, then your
speech is true, and so there is no Christian whatsoever that is a true member
of Jesus Christ, but has a duty lying upon them to help to edify the body in
his place: but if by private Christians, and private gifts, you understand that
there are none such, because that every one that has gifts from the head may
do and perform (...) Office in the Church, which is only properly and
peculiatly attributed to some, and so not to be differenced, out of any
particular Office, from him that is specially called to a certain Office, then
your speech is untrue and tends the highway to Anabaptisme, besides your self
tells us, that in respect of Congregated bodies, the more part are out of
office: now if the more part in this respect be out of office, then they that
are out of office cannot perform, the duties of them that are in office, for
what does the word Office import, but only a calling to, and a performing of
certain duties that pertain either to the civil State, or the Church, and
none can perform these duties, but only those that are designed thereunto, and
if there be these differences in those that are in office, and those that are
out of office, I would know of you upon what ground you can affirm that there
are no private gifts, nor private Christians; if in the first sense you
acknowledge it, it is granted to you, if in the second sense which you must
assent to, or else you do but dally; then show us better proofs then these, or
else coase to be so universal in your conclusions, until the premises be
better: for every member that is out of office may be said to have private
gifts and private spirits, because they are not to execute, and perform those
actions in a public way which others may but in private, as Vrsinus writes.

Furthermore in things pertaining to the Church, and as every member stands in
relation one to another, and are members of that head from whom they receive
life, so there is distinctions of these members in their several operations.
The Apostle in 1 Cor. 12.4. says, that there are diversities of gifts flowing
from one and the same spirit, and although he does diffuse several gifts to
those members for a mutual benefit, and to profit withal, verse. 7. yet these
gifts that are thus given, and the persons to whom they are given, are to be
differenced in their proper operations, for the gifts make the members, and not
the members the gifts, and to this purpose the Apostle speaks very
pertinently, are all Apostles, are all Prophets, have all the gift of tongues,
do all prophecy, etc.

Hence then it follows, that as some gifts consist in the performance of some
things, and some of other things; so also those persons in whom those gifts
are, are to be differenced likewise, and this the Apostle does clearly
intimate in 1 Cor. 12. for speaking of the gifts of the Spirit, and their
diversities of operations, verse. 6. he proceeds by way of comparison, that as
in natural bodies, one member cannot perform the office of another, and the
distinctions of their operations in the body, so also Christ Jesus being the
head of the spiritual body, he has communicated several gifts to several
members, and has designed certain peculiar offices to some of those members;
now not only the several gifts, but also the several functions in the body
Ecclesiastic proceed from Jesus Christ, and therefore the Apostle says, verse.
28. And God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets,
thirdly Teachers, etc. and although in the general the gifts may concur in
one man, yet there are some particulars affirmed of one, which cannot be spoken
of another, and therefore the Apostle again, verse. 29. Are all Apostles, are
all Prophets, are all Teachers, etc. but you say, these For as a man and a
beast being both living things are severed one from another by their several
properties and special differences, as they be called of the Logicians; even
so Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors being all Preachers of
the Gospel, are severed by that wherein they differ one from another, and as
he can be no man, which have none of these differences whereby a man is severed
from living things, so he cannot be Prophet, or Apostle, which has nothing
whereby he may differ from a Pastor, Doctor, or Evangelist. Cartwright, 1.
Part of his R^^^yao Whitgift. Page 380.
offices were extraordinary, true, but yet by them and after them, the ordinary
offices have the same distinctions, as thus. Pastors, Elders, and Deacons, are
not these distinct offices? from all which that has been spoken, it is a
necessary conclusion and issuing from these premises: to wit,

That as God has set down, not only a distinction of those Offices and
Officers which are extraordinary, but also ordinary, and that even in these
ordinary Offices which should sueceed perpetually in the Church, the least of
them cannot take that public Office upon him without the call of the Church,
as was instanced in these Deacons, Acts the sixth, it follows invincibly that
there is an absolute and plain distinction between, and a difference in, a
puplike and private Spirit, and so of those persons in whom there are; and that
when such places are void, no man can take upon him that arrogance, (unless in
case of necessity) to execute them, unless called thereunto.

Again, that there is difference betwixt the spirit of a Minister publicly
called, and a private man, to whom God has given the gifts of the Spirit; is
proved from Saint Paul, where he says, the Spirit of the Prophets are subject
to the Prophets, and not to every private man, as Master In his Cases of
Conscience.
Perkins says, and he shows also that God does give a larger measure of
gifts to Ministers and public dispensers of his Word and Sacraments, then to
ordinary and private men; The Virtues of the third Commandment consists in the
propagation and spreading abroad of the true doctrine of Gods Essence, not that
publication which is done by the public Ministry, and which belongs to the
public function of the Church, but that propagation which pertains to every
one, because every one privately in his place is bound to bring others to the
knowledge and worship of God. Deuteronomy. 4.9. Luke 22.32. Col. 3.16. 1 Thessalonians. 5.11.
Ursin. Cat.
and this also may be proved by a necessary induction from those words of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.5. I would that you all spoke with tongues, from which it is
evident, that the Apostle by ascribing to the knowledge of tongues, the
Epithet of a spiritual gift, and that those men whom God has called also by
his Spirit to the work of the Ministry, sanctifying those gifts unto them; it
follows necessarily, that to whom larger gifts are given, both unto the
knowledge of tongues, and of the Scriptures in those tongues, that there a
larger measure of grace may and does dwell; now if a larger measure of grace
and gifts do remain in some men more then others, then those men are more
fitter for the greatest Offices in the body, and so likewise a distinction of
their duties must be granted for the manner; for the knowledge of the true and
exact meaning of the Scriptures, and the extents of the holy Ghosts meaning
therein; Withour the study and learning of Arts and Sciences men cannot be made
fit to teach, nor the purity and sincerity of doctrine maintained against
Heretics. Ursin. Cart.
There must be something else to concur besides the gifts and graces given to
the Elect; and to this purpose Wherefore says he, serves the Schools of the
Prophets, and the knowledge of Arts and Tongues, but to divide the Word aright,
and to distribute to every man's necessities, Bolton in his 3. Treat. page
Master Bolton speaks excellently, and so also how shall the Ministers of God
convince the learned adversaries, if there be no skill nor knowledge in Arts
and Tongues, from all which it appears, that as God endued his Ministers with
larger measures of gifts in tongues, and in the knowledge of the holy
Scriptures, and these being sanctified unto them, and has not given such large
measures to private men, who have not such public offices designed to them by
the Church (because indeed not fit) he must needs be a very strange man that
will deny that there are not private gifts, nor private Christians; the consent
of judicious, godly, and learned Divines assenting thereunto: and so those
Divines, as Perkins, Calvin, Bolton, etc. do only show that there ought to be
a mutual edifying of one another in those graces that God has given to his
people, and members of the Church, but they do not prove this speech: That
there is no private gifts nor private Christians.

Now because that which follows in your book, is not to be questioned, but by
all faithful men, Divines, and others granted, to wit, that Christians may
edify one another mutually, and according to those gifts that God has given
them, we will therefore proceed to that which follows to be answered.

And first you make an objection against the universalitie of this truth.

That none ought to preach but those in office,

To this you answer, when the dispersed Christians in that persecution were
scattered abroad, it it said, that they went about preaching, and the hand of
the Lord was with them, Act. 11.19, 20, 21.

But do you think that this is a sufficient warrant for you to preach
publicly, Because they would rather lose their lives at Jerusalem, then ^epart
from the Congregations they had converted. Gualt. in 4. Acts.
remaining at Jerusalem, privately for fear of the persecutors as some think,
as St. Paul did in the like case for fear of the Jews, and so by that means
the Gospel could not be preached to them; other places Saint Steven was
stoned, and others of them no doubt but were in prison, there was now a
necessi^^e that the Word should be preached by them if at all; especially in
those parts of Judea, where the Churches at that time were not planted, or if
they were, it was newly done, and these Christians no doubt were
extraordinarily called to the same; and me thinks there is such strength in
the particle (therefore) of Act. 8.4. the scope of that Chapter being to
declare the persecution of the Church, and of the stoning of Saint Steven, and
of his burial, then comes the holy Ghost with an inference; (therefore) those
that were scattered abroad preached the Word, implying, that had not that
persecution been, and that the Apostles had not thought fit to suspend their
preaching in these places, there had been no such gate opened for these men to
do as they did; and besides also in the next verse, speaking of Philip, who
was but a Deacon, serves to illustrate this point, for in the fifth verse, he
went into Samaria and preached there, which he could not have done, nor could
he, had it not been a thing extraordinary, and therefore well says At this
time Philip, who was but a Deacon might preach, necessity requiring it, Ibidem.
Master Gaulter upon the place, now if this was a thing necessary and so
extraordinary in Philip, who was an under Church officer; why not in the
Christians who were no Church officers at all, and we find also that Philip
was one of those seven Deacons chosen in the sixth of Acts, front all which I
argue thus.

That persons which could not perform the place of an inferior Church
officer, without being ordained by the Church, could not much less perform a
greater office, unless called by the Church.

But the first is true, Acts 6.5, 6. as was instanced in the Deacons, Ergo, so
is the second.

Furthermore it was never the practice of any either in the old or new
Testament, that was not in office in the Church, and designed to public
preaching of the Word, that did ever take upon them to preach, Neither is there
any one except those which are called extraordinarily which can have any
assurance of an inward calling but by means of the outward. Cart. 2. rep. 1.
part. page 260.
but upon an extraordinary occasion, and in case of necessity, as here these
men did, let the contrary be proved, and you may write to some purpose. As for
the Apostles, they were called extraordinarily by Christ himself, inwardly by
his Spirit, and outwardly by his own voice, only Saint Paul, to whom was
added Barnabas, was after Christ's ascension called to the work of the
Ministry, yet neither of these two, but had the confirmation of their calling,
the one by Ananias, the other by those of Antioch, as also in Act. 11. Barnabas
was sent by the Church at Jerusalem.

For no doubt But God could have given Paul his sight, without the laying on of
the hands of Ananias, but God to show that he loves order, and that although he
can do things altogether by himself, yet he is pleased to use man as an
instrument to work by, and without whom some things cannot be done without
manifest violation and breach of his Law, as here it is evident Ananias was
sent by Christ, that Paul might receive his sight and the holy Ghost, that so
he might preach the Gospel, now if you will have such sending here as is
mentioned in the 10. Romans 15. and such preaching too, although it is wonderful
to see what a strange collection you fetch from the 10. of Romans but I for my
part take it, that the Apostle speaks there of the extraordinary sending, and
if you please to look in the Margent Although Paul in this place speak of
calling and sending, and this is as I said, ordinary, and extraordinary; there
is no doubt but he speaks here of the extraordinary, Pet. Mart. on this place
of the 10. to the Romans Paul does not here speak of the lawful calling of every
man, Calvin upon the place.
you shall see the expositions of two excellent judicious, and learned Divines,
so that if you collect any thing from these places it must be applied to
extraordinary practice, and if you can plead, and make good the calling to be
extraordinary, then you have a sufficient warrant for the fact, but if you
cannot, you must answer to God for your intrusion to such an office, without a
sufficient warrant from the Church, and besides, the sincere Ministers of Jesus
Christ are utterly against you in the universalitie of this your practice.

But you allege the fact of the woman of Samaria, at which a man may wonder
at; the woman of Samaria went and told the Samaritans what Christ said to her;
Ergo, a lay man may publicly preach the Gospel; here is an excellent
consequence, that has neither form nor fashion in it, you might better have
concluded that women may preach; for consider judiciously what passage is there
in this woman's fact, (which you would have ordinary, and inevitable) but may
better be applied to women than to men, and if you are of that mind, then you
shall hear the judgment of Divines in that point, The Ministry of the Church
is not to be committed unto women, but to men. Ursin. Cat. page 588. Eng. Our
Savior Christ has joined the preaching of the Word, and the administration of
the Sacraments togetle; and this S. Paul knew by the Commandment, of Christ,
whereupon it follows, that as women may not baptize, so they may not preach.
Cart. Rep. to Whitgift. page 109. That which these Samaritans believed was,
that this Christ was the promised Messiah, which yet was not so certain by the
woman's report, as appears in the 42. verse; Now there is difference be tween
believing on him generally to be the Messiah, and in particular for ones
salvation; in the first sense the Samaritans believed at the woman's report, in
the second sense when they came to Christ.
I but the Samaritans believed at the report of the woman; What then, therefore
a woman may preach? stay good sir, you are too wide, this woman did no more
then call her neighbor Citizens to Christ, being convinced in her conscience
that he was the Messiah, which Christ in plain terms told her, she being now
overjoyed to communicate that to others which she now had her self, leaving
her water pot behind her, and making have to inform her neighbors, not only
that he told all that ever she did, but also desiring them to come themselves,
and the Samaritans believed the woman's report; to wit, that such a Prophet
there was as was promised, being the Messiah, and when they came to Christ
themselves and had seen manifestations from him, then they believed on him,
not so much for her speech, but because they had seen those things of him with
their own eyes, which made them cry out, this is the Savior of the world; so
that this woman's fact was no more, but in general terms to call her neighbor
Citizens, Come, says she, and see a man that told me all that ever I did, is
not this the Christ? She should have dealt very rashly, if she had taken upon
her the office of teaching, but seeing she only desires to stir up her Citizens
to hear Christ speak, we will not say that forgetting her self she went
beyond her reach; she only plays the part of a Trumpet or Bell, that she might
win men to Christ, for that which I find in the Psalm. 116.10. I believed,
therefore have I spoke, must needs be true, and we must so much the more note
the earnestness, and the gladness of the woman, because only a small sparkle
of faith breeds them, for she had yet scarce tasted of Christ when she
published him to the City. Calvin on the place.
which was a very short Sermon, and was not so convincing till they had been
with Christ themselves; now what is all this to preaching, or to ones being
sent that he might preach; you know Saint Paul says, how shall they preach
except they be sent? and sending is either ordinary or extraordinary, and if
you will needs have this woman to be a Preacher, show us her Commission. You
will say she preached, but how is that proved? well suppose she did preach (for
we will grant nothing) where is her sending mentioned? you will say it is not
expressed, her fact is sufficient; I tell you that if she preached, and was not
ordinarily called, it follows, it was extraordinary, and so unimitable; and
show me if you can, any instance in the Scripture that ever any person took
upon him to preach publicly, but they were called thereunto, not only
inwardly by God, but outwardly by the Church, and that expressed in the
Scripture, unless in some cases extraordinary; so even the Apostles
themselves, who were extraordinary called, for their manner, yet their calling
is set down, both inward and outward also; and now if the Apostles, who were
extraordinarily called for manner, and yet is set down for all that; how comes
it to pass, that the woman's fact, which you would have ordinary is not set
down, seeing ordinary callings and ordinary actions, which the succeeding
Churches was to walk by for directions, are not regestred? the Apostles as was
said were extraordinary in the manner of their calling, and in the manner of
the exemption of that to which they were called, but the substance of their
duty which they exempted, to wit, preaching was communicated to posterity,
else how has God provided for his Church; but as for these allegations of
yours out of the Acts, and of this woman of Samaria (if you will have her a
Preacher) they were extraordinary both in circumstance and substance; the
reason of the first, because of the persecution at Jerusalem, there were none
now to preach the Gospel, but such as God had extraordinarily raised up, and
you should do well to show us when here was ever any such practice of
preaching by lay men in the times of the Apostles liberty and when they were
freed from the stops and hindrances of persecution, then the cause could not
possibly but win credit to judicious understanders; but when you can allege
no examples then the woman of Samaria, and these Christians in the Acts, I must
needs conclude to you as Christ did to the woman, verse. 22. ye worship you
know not what, no more do you of what you affirm, of the second for the
reason before alleged.

The next argument is taken from the 8. of Luke 39. the man in whom Christ
wrought the Miracle being possessed with devils, after the devils were gone
from him, Christ bids him to go to his own house and tell what great things
the Lord had done for him; ergo, a lay man may publicly preach the Gospel;
this inference is like the former, well, but how prove you he was a preacher?
Marry because the Text says, he went and preached, some copies read it
Published; but it seems where ever you find the Word preached or prophesied
in the Scripture, though God he knows the meaning is far otherwise, where in
this case the holy Ghost only by way of Narration has set down this miracle,
and how the person in whom it was wrought, published it, for the joy that
possessed him; and why do not you as well conclude that because those two
blind men in Matthew. 9.31. that had received their sight, were Preachers too,
for the Text says, they spread abroad his fame in all that country, and you
may better so conclude from these two then from the other, because these two
proclaim his fame. Why although it be a general expression, yet contains
more in it then that, and may as well have relation to Christ's doctrine, as to
that particular miracle he did to them; in this there was but a dispossession
of those devils, and this proclaiming of what Jesus had done for him, now if
you will needs have this man to be a Preacher too, and so a warrant for you,
you may be pleased to know, that although he had no extraordinary spirit, yet
the fact may and was For some things are extraordinary besides the penning of
Scripture and working of Miracles, as we see in Timothy and Titus, for they
went up and down and performed the offices ^f Vice-Apostles when yet they were
mediatly called by the Church.
extraordinary, because that he in so doing had the command of Christ, Christ
purposely commands him to show forth the work of God, so that he being
accounted for a true Prophet and Minister of God might so get the more credit
to his doctrine, Calvin on the place.
and that from his own mouth, which I think you will confess to be
extraordinary, do you think or suppose if the ordinary way as Christ
prescribes in Matthew. 17.21? if doing Miracles were performed by some Ministers
to restore a man from some soar disease, or to dispossess him from Satan by
Prayer and Fasting, would not you (if such a one should disperse that act
through a whole City, when he was wished only to go to his own house and to
declare what great things the Lord has done for him) conclude him that so did
to be a Preacher. I know you would; else what can you make of this example,
certainly these be very strange collections, to say, that because such a one
reeceived such a particular mercy by Prayer and Fasting, and proclaimed it to
his friends or near neighbors, and to those of his near acquaintance; he was
therefore a Preacher; so here, the Act on Christ's part was sudden, and so no
doubt but extraordinary, and upon the sudden performance of the same, the man
proclaimed what Christ had so done, being full of great joy, that if he could
he would, as the Text says, have continued with Christ; and may not you as
well conclude that those two blind men were Preachers, for they did the same
that this man did in spreading abroad his fame, if you say that these two were
not sent, but the other were, then let me ask you this question, where is it
said that the woman of Samaria was sent? and yet you will have her a Preacher,
and besides upon the same ground that you take her to be a Preacher, upon the
same will I prove the two blind men to be so too, for the woman she called her
Citizens to come to Christ, the other which was dispossessed of the devils went
and preached what things God had done for him, and these two blind men that
Christ cured, went and spread his fame abroad, now if it be a sufficient proof
to make a dissent, in these actions because the one Text says, the one
preached, and the other has it not, and so to make a difference upon the word
(Preaching) which in the sense is all one, I leave all men to judge.

Furthermore, if the uttermost that you can gather from this place be granted
you, that this man did preach, yet you cannot hence prove your calling, to wit
that a Lay man may publicly preach, being not called by the Church, when there
is the means that may be afforded for that end, because Christ sent this man
out by his voice and command, and so must needs be extraordinary, and that not
because he wanted an extraordinary spirit, but because he being no Church
officer, nor was mediatly called or sent, but immediately, for as was said
before, some things were extraordinary besides penning of Scripture, and the
works of Miracles, as those actions performed by Timothy and Titus, they were
extraordinary persons, etc did and performed acts and offices that were
extraordinary for their manner, and their performances made them extraordiry
men, whence they are called Ewangelists, and although they were mediatly called
by the Church, yet the execution of that to which they were called made them
extraordinary, but here this man was not only extraordinary in what he did,
but also was extraordinarily sent from Christ's own vocal commission; now if
Timothy and Titus were extraordinary because they did actions extraordinary for
their manner, why is not this man extraordinary, when he was not only
extraordinarily sent, but did execute that also, in an extraordinary manner to
which purpose he was sent, neither was a Church officer? likewise it behooves
you to prove that these actions performed by the scattered Christians, and the
woman, and this man, were perpetually so done by them, and not once or twice,
which you cannot prove, for there was good reason for them now to do that, but
not as Church officers, and so left imitable to posterity, but as the
Christians for the necessity that then was, the woman and the man for the
great joy that did then possess them, when Christ did those things for them.

To that other allegation of yours from that speech of Moses, Numb. 11.29.
where he wishes that all the Lords people were Prophets, is very impertinent to
this purpose: do you not know to what end this speech of Moses was, or is your
skill in comparing spiritual things with spiritual, so weak that you know
not how to apply them when they are compared, or else in comparing them not
right, you apply them to a wrong end? for according to your manner of
reasoning, the argument runs thus; Moses wished that all the Lords people were
Prophets, therefore a Lay man, or he that is no Church officer may out of
extraordinary times preach the word publicly, which is as far from true
reasoning, as Jerusalem from Amsterda^^, but you cannot be so ignorant as you
make your self, that the meaning may be this, that they were Prophets, that
is, that they had a spirit of prophecy, to sound forth the praises of God and
to express the same by Timbrels and other Musical Instruments as Elisha did
in the same manner, 2 King. 3.15. but to put you out of all doubts, because we
will not use conjectures in so plain a matter, the true sense is this, which
does best agree with the order of the story in this, Numb. 11.39. and in a
plain Narration you may be pleased to understand that these Israelites
mentioned in the Chapter did murmr and complain verse. 1. Moses he being not
able to bear this burden, desires the Lord in a possionate expression that be
might die, verse. 14.15. But God moved with the complaint and grief of his
servant yields him helpers to bear his burden with him, that so he might
have the more comfort, verse. 16. these 70. men will he have furnished with his
Spirit; never placing any to do a duty, to whem he gives not a measure of
ability to do the same, and God did here extraordinarily call them to be
assistant to Moses in this work of government, and to confirm this calling,
he did as he promised Moses, took off the spirit that was on him, and gave it
to these Eldres, verse. 25. now so soon as this was done the Text says, they
prophesied and did not cease, which prophecy did consist in sounding forth
Gods praises and also in ministering assistance to Moses in this work of
government; now what Moses meant by wishing that all the Lords people were
Prophets, is easy to find, for his wish was spoken in relation to Eldad, and
Medads phophesying in the Camp, peruse the Chapter well, and you cannot but
see in what sense Moses words are to be taken, that had it not been that those
two Elders were in the Camp who were spoken against by Joshua, Moses servant,
that expression had never been uttered by him toward the people, the two
Elders being in the Camp, a young man ran and told Moses, and said; Elad and
Medad do prophecy in the Camp, and Joshua the servant of Moses said, My Lord
Moses forbad them, Moses he answers him with a reproof. Enviest thou them for
my sake, says he, would God that the all Lords people were Prophets, whereby
it appears that Moses his speech must needs carry a dependence and reference
to those two Elders in the Camp; or else it were very incongruous: Now shall I
ask you this question? Had not Moses some ground for his wish, and is not this
wish spoken with reference to those two Elders? I know you cannot deny it; does
it not follow then by necessary consequence, that as the Spirit (that God took
from Moses, and put it upon these Elders, and which Spirit Moses wished were in
the Lords people) was a spirit of Government, which those Elders were to share
in with Moses, and which would have produced a happy effect in the people; if
they had had the same: Will you see an example to illustrate this point; Let
the example of Saul then be here brought forth; and which comes next to be
answered. That as he was extraordinarily called by God to his Kingly office, so
was this his calling confirmed to him by the pouring of his Spirit on him. 1 Samuel 10.6. Such an example we have likewise in Gideon, in the 6. Judges 34. Who
by this sign of prophecy, and other things joining with it, had his place
confirmed to him, the Spirit it self was a Spirit of government and of courage
and magnanimity to support them, and to fill them with sufficiency for the
performance of those places that God had designed them to.

The prophesying it self consisted in sounding out Gods praises by the
instinct of that Spirit they now had, with Psiltery, Tabret, and Pipe, and in
this very sense are those places to be understood of Gideon, 1 Samuel 10.5.
and Saul, and Elisha, as also a pregnant place to his purpose of Joduthun in 1 Chronicles. 25.3. who is said to prophecy with a Hurpe, and to give thanks and
praise to the Lord, by all which it may appear what is the true revealed
intent of the holy Ghost in Moses speech, to wit;

That the Lord would if he so pleased pour upon these people (who before did
murmr) a spirit of government, Paraphrased.
that so they might know how to carry themselves toward their God and his
servant Moses their governor, and these 70. Elders, whom he had
extraordinarily and specially designed for that purpose.

To that other objection of Saul, in 1 Samuel 10.6. and you have it, 1 Samuel 6.10.
but it is no great matter, we will pass that by, because the whole book
almost is full fraught with ill applications and misconstructions: to the place
of Samuel then I answer, that the meaning of Saul's prophesying is as was said
before, to sound forth Gods praises, by the instinct of that Spirit he now had,
with those Prophets in the fifth verse, Or changed his spirit.
the whole story is this.

Four things Samuel had prophesied concerning Saul, after his anointing and
departing from him and that when these things came to pass, Saul might be
assured of Gods calling of him to be King; the signs were these.

1. That when he was departed, he should sinde two men by Rachels Sepulcher,
verse. 3.

2. That after that he should meets three men going to Bethel to the house of
God, verse. 3.

3. After that he should meet a company of Prophets with Harp, Tabret, Pipes,
etc.

4. When he came thus far and saw these Prophers, then the Spirit of the Lord
should come upon him, and he should prophecy with them.

Now when all these came upon (...), he might be assured in the accomplishment
of these prophesies that God had called him to be the ruler of the people, and
that he should do them is nocasion served, for the hand ( verse 7.) of the
Lord was with hime; so that it seems undeninbly that Saul's prophesying amongst
these Prophets; was such prophesying as theirs was; for so the words (with
them) do clearly intimate the spirit it self was poured upon him for the
consirmation of his calling, and the effect of that Spirit, filling of him with
strength and valor, and also to sound out Gods praises; and besides the holy
Ghost has thought sit to express the manner thereof (the Spirit of the Lord
came upon him) now God gives his spirit either visibly, or else invisibly; the
one is extraordinary, the other ordinary.

Now the holy Glibst came upon Saub in a visible manner, not by any local
appearance The holy Ghost comes visibly not by any local motion, but by the
signs, he works, only the signs is taken for the thing it self, Vrsin Cau
but by those signs which were produced to the eyes and senses of the by
standers, his operations; not by any local or visible sight of himself, but
by those effects which he wrought.

The holy Ghost is given invisibly when he bestows his gifts, not so much
with infallible, outward, and external restimonies, as by an inward operation
on the faculties of the soul, in measures, and so is given to wicked men, and
the elect; to wicked men at the best speculatively regenerating them; to the
elect both speculatively and practically.

The spirit then was given to Saul in an extraordinary manner visibly by those
effects he did produce, The gifts of the Holy Ghost, as Mir^cles, and Tongues,
Prophesies were given in the Apostles times in an extraordinary manner. ibid.
so that it appears that his example serves your turn not one whit, for if
the holy Ghost came upon Saul in an extraordinary manner, and that this his
prophesying consisted in praising God with Tabret, Pipe, as the Prophets did in
the sift verse, and he with them, then what can this prove to your purpose?
and as the holy Ghost was given to the Apostles in the primitive Church
extraordinarily and immediately because of those effects they did produce, why
not upon Saul who had this spirit given him immediately as appears by the
effects they wrought in him? as making him another man, and by his prophesying,
all which were confirmations extraordinary to confirm his calling of being
King, which was extraordinary also, the like we see in David, 1 Samuel 16.13. who
had the Spirit poured upon him in the same manner as it was on Saul, and all to
fit him for those weighty duties of his kingly office, and although David had
not such visible conspiouous signs at his anointing as Saul had, yet we
read in 1 Samuel 16.18. that he was strong, valiant, a man of war; in so much
that it is said, 1 Samuel 18.14, 15. that Saul was afraid of him, all which
things being laid together will evince this truth, to wit that these were
extraordinary Spirits in their manner of being given to certain persons; again
if Saul were a Preacher, as this allegation seems to insinuate, then a
question would be asked, to whom did he preach? It is said indeed he
prophesied, but there is diverse kinds of prophecy in Scripture, only the Text
says he prophesied with the rest of the Prophets but not that he preached to
any, for he neither did as the Samaritan woman did, nor as the man in whom the
devils were; and truly their actions and performance of them do manifest a
disparitie, the woman went only and told what things had passed between her
self and Christ. The man preached it, but as for King Saul, he prophesied by
the instinct of that spirit he now had in praising and singing with instruments
of music to God, which did confirm him in his extraordinary call of being
King, all which you could not choose but know, only it seems you are disposed
to make the world merry.

To the next, 1 Samuel 19.20. where Saul is said to send messengers to David, and
that they prophesied, that is all one with the other, 1 Samuel 10.6. and Saul's
messengers here prophesied, with the rest of the Prophets, as Saul himself did
there, and their prophesying must needs have reference to the prophesying of
the Prophets, for so the words imply, that when these messengers came and said
the college or company of the Prophets, then says the Text, they also
prophesied, and so also in the same manner did Saul himself prophecy; Now
what this prophecy was is expressed in 1 Samuel 10.6. as before was declared, it
consisted in sounding forth Gods praises with Tabret, Pipe, Harp, and as
Jeduthun did, 1 Chronicles. 25.3. and this was to declare the infinite power and
mercy of God toward David, whom Saul now had an intent to have slain, as
appears by the whole Chapter, Saul sending his messengers, and going himself,
yet all could not do, nor bring to a full period his wicked designs against
David, the like example we have in 2 King. 1. of those two Captains and their
fifties, that came to apprehend the Prophet Eliah, these men thinking to bring
the Prophet to King Ahaziah, their ends were frustrated, and they themselves
were consumed with fire from heaven, wherein the power and mercy of God, was
also manifested toward Eliah. So that it appears here, it was the wonderful
mercy of God to David to deliver him from the hands of Saul and his messengers,
the opportunity being so, that notwithstanding Saul sent time after time, yet
God so ordered the matter, that these messengers being sent from Saul who was
enraged against him, verse. 10. could not have access, much less to do him
any wrong; so gracious is the Lord, that to vindicate his peoples innocence or
else his own in them, that the strongest assaults of wicked men, though
attended with never so much policy, shall challenge no success but by his
overruling power, not that God had a special aim that these men should be
Preachers, much less to be example therein to posterity, but only that God
might deliver David from the hands of Saul; nay, Saul himself, who like Herod,
after he had sent forth the wise men to discover Christ but came not again,
was now as much in his bedlam moods as Saul was at this time, who went himself
to Ramah, and the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he prophesied and rent
his clothes, as an infallible testimony of a convicted conscience for pursuing
so innocent a man as David was; an excellent example we have to this purpose
in the 7. of John. 46. of the Pharisees who sent their messengers to fetch
Christ before them, but contrary to their expectation, that in stead of these
men's intended fact of taking Christ, Christ took them, and as they came to
apprehend Christ, as Saul's messengers did David, they were so wrought upon by
his powerful speeches, that in the 46. verse they cry out, That never man
spoke like this man; and you may better conclude that these servants of the
Pharisees were Preachers, then Saul's messengers; and the reason is stronger in
them then in the other; for,

Saul's messengers prophesied among the Prophets when there was not such need,
but only here that the works of God might be made manifest, turning that into
good which these men intended for evil, and never returned again, to give
Saul account of his message. But here these men that came to Christ had their
eyes opened, and had some smatterings of illumination that he was Christ, and
did also return to the Pharisees again, declaring Christ's saying, Never man
spoke like this man; these men had been better presidents for you to have
proved the point; all the marrow of the business I see lies in this one word
(Prophecy) which if you were at a dead lift, as here you are, can never help
you, considering its diverse acceptations.

As for that you say afterward, that these men were no way extraordinary, for
so your words imply, they had no extraordinary spirit, Ergo; were not
extraordinary.

Here you show your self either very ignorant in the Scriptures, or else your
writing at this time was very rash and inconsiderate, and because I have here
just occasion to speak of that I mentioned before, let me ask you this
question.

If nothing were extraordinary but the penning of Scripture and the works of
Miracles, Timothy and Titus were extraordinary Officers, by those offices and
acts which they did, if nothing were extraordinary but what you say? for you
affirm (when it was objected that these men had extraordinary spirits) that
none had extraordinary spirits but they that penned the Scriptures, or wrought
Miracles, implying, that because they had not extraordinary spirits in penning
Scriptures or working Miracles, therefore they were not extraordinary, and so
you have with one puff taken away all the strength of the Antiepiscopall
party, and given occasion to them to triumph in the discord which they
maliciously attribute to our Divines; for my part I leave you either to clear
your self, or else to acknowledge your error, for it is manifest abroad in
the world, that by reason of the ill, unadvised, rash, inconsiderate,
impertinent Pamphlets that are now extant (setting some aside) the adversaries
of a through reformation do not stick to say in their Bedlam fits, that all
dissentions about the Church are set on foot, by the occasion of our best and
sincerest Divines.

To the next you say, that such a spirit as this was promised to all Gods
people.

It is most true, that God has promised to his people a spirit of Prophecy,
but now all the question is what this kind of Prophesying is, because it
serves much for the illustration of this point, and the opening of this Text;
there are then diverse acceptations of the word Prophecy in Scripture.

1. It is taken in the strictest sense, for foretelling things to come, thus
the Prophets, as Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel were Prophets.

2. For public preaching the Word, by Sermons to the Church, so it is taken
and attributed to the Shepherds of Israel, men in a public office in the
Church, Ezekiel. 34.2. Isa. 56.10.

3. For private interpretation (yet not being contrariant to public doctrines
that are true) for the use and benefit of the Church, so it is taken in 1 Cor.
14. now although these men here of Corinth did according to their gifts given
them, We do not read in all these two Epistles to the Corinthians, that there
were any settled Pastors, and therefore these men's prophesying in the public
meetings, was without all doubt extraordinary.
exercise publicly, yet they did not do it as public Church Officers, but as
men private, not in what they did, but as they were, for there were now as is
thought, no public Church Officers, and the Apostles with their fellow
Laborers did continually visit them, both by personal presence, and Epistles.

4. For sounding forth Gods praises by musical instruments, as Harps, Pipes,
etc. so it is taken in 1 Samuel 10.5. 1 Chronicles. 25.3.

5. For professing and celebrating God, so all Gods people do prophecy, and
are likewise Prophets, Genesis 20.7. Matthew. 10.32.

Now in what sense you take this speech in the 2. Acts 18. is presently proved,
for you take it to be meant of a Spirit of prophecy, to consist not only to
interpret Scriptures privately, but publicly too; and it so appears, because
you bring this Text to prove a promise made to some, nay to all Gods people, to
enable them publicly to dispense the heavenly Mysteries of Salvation: but now
what reason can you bring to prove this Text is to be so expounded, I see not;
if you can produce none but your own fancy, then you will give me leave to
dissent from you for this reason: you know the Scriptures call Gods people
Prophets, as before was instanced, and if they are Prophets, then they have a
prophetical office, which consists (according to your description) in public
Preaching of the Word of God, as well as professing it; only you are deficient
in your proving it, unless your bare affirmations be proofs; but Sir, one
word with you, let me tell you as a friend, you have done wonderful wrong to
the sacred Scriptures, thus to abuse them by such wretched and extorted
Expositions; the true meaning of the place is this, as if Saint Peter had said,
or the Lord by Saint Peter. I will pour out my Spirit in those days, and on
your Sons, Daughters, I will pour out my Spirit, and they shall prophecy:
That is, So Vrsinus expounds the place.
Profess my Name, Truth, walk according to those dictates of my Spirit,
celebrating and praising me; so that it appears that this your mistake issues
from an universal Exposition of a Word, which you see admits of diverse
acceptations (Prophecy) is the only beam that hides the truth from
approaching your judgment; it is true that all Preaching is Prophesying, but
all Prophecy is not Preaching, and I wonder a man should be so miserably
mistaken, as to expose himself to the public censures of learned Divines, who
cry out in their Pulpits against such impertinent allegations, certainly if we
had but the Presbyteriall discipline established in the Church O Lord who can
patiently hear this horrible disorder ascribed to the Apostles Church, which
here you attribute unto it, that every one hand overhead Preached, Baptized,
and expounded the Scriptures; what a window, nay what a gate is here opened to
Anabaptists to confirm their fantastical opinion, wherein they hold that
every man whom the Spirit moves, may come even from the Plough-taile to to the
Pulpit to Preach the Word of God, Cart. 1. Rep. to Whitg p ^. 38.
you would go near to come under the sconrge of Ecclesiastical censure, for
bro^^hing such detestable opinions, although you never practiced them, because
herein you open wide the mouths of the Anabaptists; and in the mean time if
you repent not of this your sin, you shall certainly answer to that God
before whom there is no respect of persons in the dispensations of his justice,
and chastisements, and if a Spirit of Prophecy be admitted in your sense, then
it will follow, that all Gods people must be public Preachers, for what other
sense or interpretation can the words admit, or your allegations from this
Text, for the holy Chost says (they shall Prophecy) and you say this
Prophecy is public Preaching, which is a pretty exposition and serves
excellent well to trouble the Church.

As for that you say, that some object and say, that this promise was made good
in the Apostles times, are you able to disprove them that so say, or do you
know what you do in taking upon to answer such an objection. All that you can
say is (If in the Apostles times they were called the last times, much more
now) all this is true in it self, but it behooved you to show, that the last
times there mentioned are our last times in which we live, for it is not to be
denied but the Apostles times were the last times, and the last times, are also
our times, and therefore the Apostles, as Peter and Paul, when they speak of
the last times do give us evident light, that when such or such things come to
pass that then we may assure our selves that those last times are the last
times they mean, and so when the Apostle says in the last days, or toward
them, shall come perilous times, wherein men shall be lovers of themselves,
covetous, proud, boastors, cursed speakers, etc. and this sign says Mr.
Perkins has been, in former ages, and is no doubt at this day in the world.

So you see that some times are said to be the last times not because they are
so in themselves but with reference to certain special things which then
happen; now the last times here in Joels prophecy, and in Saint Peter's
allegatition is (as That the Jews might know the Church could not be repaired
which was now lmost ruined, but by the Messies, that is the sense ^^ Cal^in on
the sea and of Acts.
Calvin excellently notes) spoken in reference to the going out of the Jewish
Church, for so his words import, which was some four or five hundred years
after Joels prophecy, and therefore they that said this Prophecy was
fulfilled in the Apostles time, say more then you shall ever be able to
disprove; yet you must take some limitation; this promise was not so
universally fulfilled in the Apostles time It comprehends a larger knowledge of
him which was to be given to the faithful in the Kingdom of Christ, Call.
inst. page 706.
as that the people of God in after ages reap no benefit from it, but the
special thing in Ioels Prophecy, as visions, telling things to come, was
fulfilled in the Apostles time, as appears by Saint Peter's allegation, and
therefore Protestant Divines do affirm against the Jesuits that this promise
was fulfilled in the Apostles days, so says In his Synop ^ap St. Peter showed
how these prophe^es were fulfilled, when the holy Ghost was sent like fiery
cloven tongues, and he ci^eth the very words of Joel to confirm the same
Saying. Dr. Williams true Church, page 547.
Dr. Willet Ruffinus an ancient writer says they are impudent that think
otherwise, only Cornelius a Lapide, a learned Jesuit, with Bellarmine, and
deny it, because forsooth, they allege this place of Acts to prove their
Church are never without Prophets that can foretell things to come.

But the other part of this Prophecy in Acts 2. verse 18. does belong to Gods
people to the end of the World and does contain a spirit of conformity, and
of professing the name, truth of God; so Calvin and Vrsinus expound the place;
Calvin says it is referred to the worshippers of God, those that are in
Covenant with him, etc. Vrsinus of professing and celebrating God, so that from
hence it is evident, you can have small comfort from these Texts; And I must
further admonish you, to take heed, ere you be aware lest you slide into the
Tents of the Papists while you thus plead for a Text, and the exposition
thereof.

To the next, contained in six Answers: None is fit for the work of the
Ministry, unless he be skilled in Arts and Tongues, for if he be not so
qualified, how shall he be able to answer the learned Adversary? Neither is it
your answer that has, or ever will prove the contrary; if you had said, The
true understanding of the Scripture comes not only by humane learning, then
your speech might have been admitted, and the Texts of Scripture that you have
alleged, prove nothing to this purpose, or if they did, yet they do not
exclude humane Learning; the scope of the Apostles meaning in that place of 1
Cor. 2.13. and yours is, 2 Cor. 2.13. is to show that we cannot understand or
know that Eternal Love, that superabounding mercy, that incomprehensible
sweetness that is to be found in the powerful ways of Jesus Christ, but by
the Spirit; this is evidently proved from the foregoing Chapter; the Apostle
speaking that Christ was made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification,
and Redemption, proceeds all along, telling us that we cannot know these things
but by the Spirit, for as no man knows the things of man, but the spirit of a
man which is in him, so nothing can reveal Gods love to the soul concerning
Predestination, and Sanctification, but the Holy Ghost, which sheds abroad the
love of God in the hearts of his people; and as Jesus Christ does impart these
things by his Spirit to his people, so he sends his Ministers to preach the
same, not in the words of man's wisdom, but in the demonstration of the Spirit.
Now I would entreat you in the next Pamphlet, to tell me if there be not a
large difference between the interpretation of the true and universal,
revealed meaning of the Holy Ghost in the sacred Scriptures, as well by the
understanding of the Original, and line reading, pointing, collation, as by
the Spirit himself: And the certification of those things that concern a man's
Eternal Salvation, by the same Spirit, which lie hid in Gods everlasting love,
yet revealed in the Scriptures, of which the Apostle here speaks: It is true, a
man my run into extremes as well one way as in another; And as he that is
skilled in Arts and Tongues, without the light of the holy Ghost, cannot
universally interpret and apply Scripture according to the mind of Christ, so
a man that is destitute of skill in Arts and Tongues, and has nothing in him,
but that light which proceeds from Gods Spirit, cannot on the other side
expound according to the original, for God works by means, he will and does
convey his mind revealed, so far forth as men can comprehend him, with the
conjurison of those means he has ordained instrumentally to communicate
himself; now your self says, that this may be desired in those that want it,
besides the Apostle wishes that the Corinthians had the gifts of tongues,
calling it a spiritual gift; now if this be a spiritual gift, and ought to be
desired, and witout which a man cannot interpret according to that tongue in
which the holy Ghost spoke, then God does communicate himself more to him in
larger measures of his revealed will by those means he has ordained and
commended to that purpose, then to him who is deficient in the enjoyment of
those means, by which he so conveyes himself, and so he that is universally
qualified and has both these, is fit for the work of the ministry,
Therefore to the end that unquiet and troublesome men should rashly thrust in
themselves to teach or rule; it is expressly provi^ed, that no m^n should
without calling take upon him a public offic^ in the Church unless called.
This we may oftentimes mark in Pa^l, when he means to approve his
Apostleship, he does allege his calling; if so great a Minister dare not take
this upon him but by the commandment of the Lord, how great shamefulnesse
shall it be, if any man wanting either of these shall challenge such honor to
himself, Calv. iustit. page 522.
and so is not he that is wanting in either; true it is that Jesus Christ has
not greater adversaries then those that are greatly learned, and unsanctified,
witness the Pharisees; but yet again, he has no greater friends and
soldiers to fight his battles (although vilified by the world) then those who
have those humane excellencies sanctified unto them; to the other five answers,
because they are for their substance contained in the first, and are answered
in that, I will here pass them by and come to the next, where you say;

All the call mentioned in Scripture, was the peoples great necessity, and
their great willingness to hear is most untrue; yet to be admitted in cases
extraordinary, and if you had made that limitation you had done well, but when
your speeches are indefinite, making no caution and restruction, where it is
required, you show your palpable ignorance, for God has prescribed other
things as additionall to the calling of a Minister publicly to preach the
Word, besides the peoples necessity and their own willingness, his orders
must be observed, not neglected, now the peoples necessity is to be relatively
considered, and so made their election, but before a Minister can be completely
fitted for the public function of the Church, he must be ordained by the
Presbytery, for if none be fit for the public function of the Ministry, but
men sufficiently learned, as before was declared, how can the people judge of
his ability who have no knowledge therein? And if the Apostles would not have
any to execute the office of a Deacon in the Church, which was a lesser, and an
inferior Church Officer, why should those that are designed to a greater and
more public duty miss of that confirmation? And You should understand that the
assurance of the inward calling depends upon the outward, for albeit the
Spirit of God works that assurance, yet he works by the outward means, by
the judgment of the Elders, and of the Church, touching his aptness for the
Ministry, whilst he considers that calling is not the calling of men, but
of God, through the Ministry of men; so that this separation of the knowledge
of an inward calling from the outward is not only absurd, but confirms the
An^baptists, which boast of an inward calling, where no calling of the Church
went before. Cart. 2. rep. to Whitg. 1. part. p. 260, 261.
although a man can plead never so much his inward calling, yet sent he must be
as well by the Church, as by God himself; and show if you can any person in
the New or Old Testament, that ever publicly Preached, unless in
extraordinary cases, but he was confirmed in his calling by the Church; now
what necessity you can plead is somewhat hard to be understood; doubtless
there was no necessity in you so to do, when there were godly Divines and
others to do it; or is your necessity so great, as those Christians in the 8.
Acts when there were none at all, but the Apostles now at the persecuted Church
at Jerusalem? if you object, that those Ministers that did so preach, did not
Preach Jesus Christ purely; what of that, they preached him truly, did they
overthrow any substantial points of Faith? the Apostle Paul notwithstanding
did rejoice when some preach Christ out of envy: so although they preached him
not purely, yet they preached him truly.

To the next.

Spenc. That it may be lawful in a man's family, but not in a Church.

Answ. And so it may be lawful in a man's family, but not in a Church.

For as there is no member of the body of Jesus Christ, but is of the same
nature of the whole, a public member of a public body, and the spirit
proceeding from the head to every member is one and the same spirit, and his
gifts of like nature, public gifts of a public spirit, for the good of the
whole body; and so though they be members of one body, and are to be assistant
one to another in that body, yet can these members perform the duties of each
other? indeed in the general they may because the generality of their duty is
to be assistant; but here lies the question, whether one member can perform
the office of another, which is perticularly appropriated to him, and none
other? or as you had it before, can the eye perform the office of the hand, or
the hand of the eye? for as you say, though in respect of congregated bodies,
the more part are out of office, yet as we are one body in Christ and members
one of another, first all members may be generally assistant to the service of
the whole, but can every member perform that which is specially affirmed of,
and attributed to one? if you grant it, then factum est, it is done,
Anabaptisme, and Anarchie, and all, we shall have come tumbling into the
Church; for tell me, are not you he that said a little before from the Apostle,
that the chiefest members cannot say to the least, I have no need of thee; now
if every member can perform that which is specially affirmed of another, then
how can you justify your speech from the Apostle, who says, the one has need
of the other, and if the one have need of the other, it follows that he wants
that in another which he cannot perform himself; if one have no need of
another, then he cannot only do that which properly is this, but that also
which is specially attributed to another, and so you have falsified the
Apostle, and beaten your self with your own weapon.

To the next, it is true, that in the work of Reformation it is necessary that
all errors should be discovered, and all truths embraced, but you have very
slenderly proved that your universal practice is a truth, and if you bring no
better reason then you have here in your book published to the world, I am not
afraid to tell you, that in stead of being truth, it is a most notorious
untruth, and such a one, that you going about to prove true, you have both
exposed your self, to abundance of censure from godly Divines, but also showed
the ignorance in resting upon such broken Reeds that will never hold in the
trial, and besides, are there not abundance of faithful Ministers of Jesus
Christ that notwithstanding they have had their admission into their public
offices from the Prelates, yet do preach Christ in his purity, and do not
you here show your pride, that dare take acception of their allowance by the
Prelates for S^y a man have been trained up in the Schols of learning, and have
never so great gifts, and fitness to exercise a public office in the Church,
yet he may not take upon him to Minister till he first be approved, 1. Tim.
3.10. that would open a gap to dangerous Schisms in the Church, good therefore
it is to hearken to the advice of the Apostle, Romans 12.3. Hildersham on Joh.
page 248.
they would not preach the Word publicly, nor take upon them any public
function in the Church, unless they were externally allowed thereunto, and
although there be imperfections in the same, yet Sir, the substance of it is
contained in their ordination, being only this, that Ministers should be
examined, and proved for their ability to be apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3.2. and by
sound doctrine to exhort and convince the gainesayers; now can every man that
pretends the spirit be able to convince, nay are they able to speak a word to
a learned adversary? and is it sit now that such should have any public office
in the Church? In the 1 King. 12.31. it is noted by the holy Ghost as a fault
in Jeroboam, that he made Priests of the You know they mean the basest of the
people, such as gave but one leap out of the Shop into the Church, as suddenly
are changed from a Serving man's Coat, into a Ministers Cloak, making for the
most part the Ministry their last Refuge. Cart. 1. rep. to Whitgift. page 26.
lowest of the people, which was a great profanation to the Ministry, and that
he took them not out of the Tribe of Levi, which were men fitted and qualified
for the Ministry, and if this were a fault in Jeroboam, because he chused such
as he should not choose, why shall it not be a fault and a great presumption in
you to take that function upon you without a call by the Church, and I am
afraid that in stead of expecting a glorious Reformation, we may rather expect
a hinderance of the same, occasioned by your practice, use your gifts you may
in a private way (and it were to be wished, that you did not so tumultuously
draw such a number of people after you) the reason is because it does open the
mouths of the adversaries of a thorough Reformation, which if it were
otherwise, might less offend good Christians, and upon the right performing of
the same, might have good warrant from the Word of God.


FINIS.

