AN ANSWER to a most pernicious and factious PETITION, framed against the SCOTS
in IRELAND: Together with the Vindication of a Gentleman from the false
Aspertions of Major ROBERT ORMESBY: As also some serious QUERIES to be
presented To the said Major in behalf of the STATE.

LONDON, Printed in the Year. 1647.

An Answer to the infamous and scandalous Libel, presented by way of Petition
to the Right Honorable, Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX his Excellency, in the name of the
English now about London inhabiting, having interest in the Barronies of Raphoe
and Kilmacrennan in the County of Donnegall and Kingdom of Ireland.
The Petition is thus
Shows,
WHereas the English Gentry had the greatest share of the barronies of Raphoe
and Kilmacrennan, and other Lands in the County of Donnegal, lying on that side
of the Mountains, and were possessed of several Castles, houses and places of
strength. So it is, That Sr. William Stewart, and Sr. Robert Stuart (upon the
Rebellion) raising of the Scots Nation, two Regiments of foot, and two Troops
of horse, have quartered them in those parts, and not suffering any but their
own Nation to have Command in in their Regiments, have so oppressed the poor
English by settling Garrisons amongst them, quartering upon those that live
there, and absolutely disposing of all English men's Lands at their mere will and
pleasure, that the poor English are quite undone, and likely to be utterly
rooted out of those parts, unless some timely provision be made to free those
poor souls, that yet remain, from their heavy pressures, and to Countenance the
English to sit down upon their own again. And Sr. William Stuart being now
dead, It is the humble Request of the English now in London, who have relation
to those parts, that advantage may be taken of this opportunity, to send over
some deserving English Gentleman, to Command the said Sir William his Regiment
of Foot and Troop of horse, and to send with him 300. English which may render
him considerable, and subdue all mutinous endeavors to oppose him; And that
his head quarter may be at Liffer, which is a very fine English Plantation, a
Corporation and a considerable place of strength, within ten miles of Derry,
and so very ready to second the English there; And that the rest of the
Garrisons in those parts may be made and commanded by him: That so the
languishing and poor oppressed English may be put into some heart to live, and
hope to be freed of their heavy pressures, and enjoy their own. And whereas the
said Sir William Stuart was viceadmiral of Vlster, it is desired the same may
be conferred upon the Lord Folliot, Governor of Derry, and the Governor for the
time being.

The Answer is as follows.
Says, That upon the breaking out of the horrid Rebellion of Ireland,
Commissions were granted to Sir William Stuart, and Sir Robert Stuart to raise
their Regiments of Foot, and Troops of horse, which being so raised were put
into the establishment and Parl^aments pay. And further says, That every word
and sentence set forth in the Petition against the said Colonels, their
Regiments and Troops in oppressing the English, inhabiting in the aforesaid
places, either by settling of Garrisons, or disposing of their Lands at their
pleasure, to the undoing of the English, or that they made use of their own
Nation, not suffering any Englishman to have Command amongst them, is
altogether untruth, and a most wicked and National aspersion. For to answer the
last, First. There was not an Englishman in that Country that could wear a
sword, but was employed either as an Officer or Soldier according to his
quality. As may appear by the list of Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, Majors,
Captains, and other inferior Officers of the English Nation in those parts; And
to this hour none of that Nation in those parts are without Employment, except
such as retired and withdrew themselves from bearing a share, and opposing the
common Calamity. 2. As for oppressing them by sessing or laying Garrisons on
the English; so much as was preserved from fire with the hazard and loss of
many men's lives (who might have withdrawn themselves as others did, who came
here to England) It was afterward divided equally by advice and consent of the
Inhabitants of the Country, as well English as Scots, amongst the Officers and
Soldiers of the four Regiments lying in those parts; As by a division under
their hands may appear, for preservation of the Soldiers lives, which was
nothing upon the matter for such a multitude, together with the Inhabitants of
the Country. If hungry bellies and desperate necessity had not extorted both
food and raiment from the Rebels, who formerly had robbed those who were alive
of both Nations. And as for those Lands that were wasted by the Rebels, and
recovered again by the Soldiers, which are now beginning in some few places to
be possessed and inhabited, for the ease of those few quarters that have born
Soldiers these six years, and are now impoverished, and almost reduced to a
total devastation; It is no prejudice to the owners who live in England far
from danger, that some trenches and houses be set upon their land, to make them
habitable, when the enemy shall be reduced and beaten out of the field; for what
can men expect of waste lands, when the land which was never destroyed by the
enemy pays no rent at all? The Soldiers being necessitated to provide bread in
some place til the Parliaments great occasions give them time to provide better
for these Regiments in those parts. For if the Soldiers should have left the
Country, when they got no Provisions from the Parliament either for back or
belly, then the occasion of that scandalous Libel had bin taken away long ere
now, and the Country possessed peaceably by the Irish, til the Parliament of
England should get leisure to make a new Conquest of Ireland. But if those
Petitioners will either provide bread for the said Regiments, or be Instruments
to move the Parliament to provide bread, which is a reasonable desire, they
shall be presently possessed of their respective Claims or holdings, whereof
they were dispossessed by the Rebels. And whereas the Petitioners (who are named
poor souls) desire to be releived from the pressures of the Scots, by taking
advantage of the opportunity of Sir William Stuarts death, by sending over an
English man to Command Sir William Stuarts Regiment and Troop, and three
hundred English men with him to make him considerable, that he may more easily
suppress the mutinous endeavors of those that oppose him: As this desire is
pernicious and factious (favoring of much malice) so it is unnecessary, In
respect the Parliament of England has settled the command in chief of that
Regiment and of the three other Regiments in Lagan upon an English man of such
integrity and worth, as that he is above envy or exception, Sir Charles Coote,
Lord President of Counaught; who also has a Commission from the Parliament,
Authorizing him to dispose of the quarters and Garrisons of those four
Regiments and Troops as he in his Judgment shall find most advantageous for
the service.

And as for sending over 300. men to oppose mutionous endeavors, It is very
well known, that mutiny has been a stranger to us in those parts hitherto, or
any falling out amongst our Officers, but like an entire wall cemented together
with brass couplets, we have all of us been united together, which with the
goodness of our cause and the blessing of God has made us hitherto, maugre all
the malice and power of the Irish, unvanquishable. And it is our desire that
the Doctrine of Mutinee be never taught nor professed amongst us, since
disobedience is as the sin of Witchcraft. Nevertheless we concur with the
Petitioners in this; That the three hundred English men be sent over with
convenient provisions for their subsistence, otherwise a greater burden will
be added to those former pressures, and make the cry greater. And as for a
Colonel to command the Regiment and Troop; we doubt not but Sir Charles Coot,
Lord President of Connaught, Commander in chief, has such confidence in Sir
John Cunningham, Lieutenant Colonel to the Regiment; and Captain John Stewart,
Lieutenant to the Troop, and such proof of their faithfulness and zeal to the
service, who have served in their several places these six years without
reproof, the Lieutenant Colonel, raising and arming his Company at his own
charge, and to this hour quartering them upon his own Inheritance (together
with another Company of Colonel Mervins Regiment) and who is likewise engaged
in great sums for Provisions for the Regiment, not as yet discharged by the
Parliament.

And likewise Major Arskin, whose estate in times of peace was worth 1000 l'
per annum, ought to be considered. We say these men recommended by Sir Charles
Coote, who have served out their several Apprentice-ships, ought to be made
Freemen, and no stranger placed over their heads, unless something can be
proved against their faithfulness to the Parliaments service; and they doubt
not but the Parliament is so noble and generous toward those that have
deserved well, That now when they cannot well reward them for their great
services, they will not put dishonor upon them, by displacing them, and
excluding them from that, for which they have served almost as long as Jacob
did for Rachel, both in the heat of the day, and cool of the night. As for
that desire, that the Town of Lifford may be the head-quarter. If Sir Charles
Coot, Lord President, think it convenient, we submit most willingly to that
Order. As to that part that the three hundred English being at Lifford, will be
more ready to second the English; It is a most pernicious expression proceeding
from the spirit of contention, and a son of Belial, which cannot be read nor
spoken without some secret horror, by any ingenious or honest man, thereby
secretly importing, that the English are in so dangerous a condition, that they
needed seconding against the Scots, or as if the Scots had a purpose to invade
them. O coelum quid ad haec non sudas, O terra quid non dehiscis; Should they
who have lived so sweedy together, tied by many relations, and inviolable bands
of amity since the first Plantation, now near fifty years, confirmed by
interchangeable ties, bonds of affinity, and so mutually engrafted in one
another affections, that they are become one Tree, though of several stocks.
As if they, we say, should invade one another, which is as impossible (or at
least as unlikely) as if a man should be so mad, as to tear his own flesh. For
our part, if ever such a day shall dawn, we wish it may be without perfect
light.

Touching that desire of the Admiralty of Vlster, which Sir William Stuart had
during his lifetime, that it may be conferred upon my Lord Folliot. To this it
is answered, That Sir Charles Coot procured that place to be settled on Sir
William Stuart about three years since. And now the Committee of the Admiralty,
having designed a Ship of force, and a Pinnace to lie upon the Bay of Sligo,
Ballishannon, Kilbeggis, Do: Lochswilly and Lochfoyle; and has given power to
the said Sir Charles Coot to command those upon any design for the Parliaments
advantage, he having the command of the Land Forces in those places: The said
Committee therefore have thought it most convenient for his Lordship to have
the Admiralty of Vlster, as being most proper for him, who has the command of
the Ships, to exercise that place, and have resolved to report it so to the
House.

September the ninth, 1647. The Vindication of Captain John Cunningham, from
the false aspersions cast upon him by Major Robert Ormesby, concerning his
Troop, alleged by Ormesby, never to have been raised, occasioned in taking of
a List of the Officers name at Derby-house, the 28. of August last, in Master
Frost the Secretaries chamber, for a dividend of some moneys to be given unto
the several Officers toward their journey into Ireland.
1. IN Answer hereunto, Captain Cunningham says, That by virtue of a
Commission from General Major Monro, he did levy a Troop, which attended the
Scottish Army for one whole year, in the Province of Vlster, and amongst other
good services done by him, and that Troop against the bloody Irish Rebels in
the County of Longford, Cavan, Ardmagh, and Westmeath, that one days service
at the bridge of Fynna may be sufficient to equal, yea overvalue all the
actions done by Major Ormesby since the day of his birth to this hour.

2. That the said Troop, by virtue of a Commission from Sir Charles Coote,
Lord President of Connaught, granted unto Captain Cunningham, was afterward
brought into the service of that Province.

3. That it was levied, and transported from Vlster thither without pay or
levie-money from the State; so likewise (soon after) for want of quarter,
means, or other encouragement from the Parliament, they dispersed, as diverse
other Troops of the like nature did, taken on by Commission from the Lord
President, as by his Lordships special Letters and Certificats may appear;
wherein his Lordship most nobly engages himself for them to the State, that
upon the settlement of means upon them, these Troops so dissolved, speedily
to being into the Field again, and faithfully to serve the State, as formerly
they have done.

4. That this Troop being so levied without charge to the State, so it
dissolved without any prejudice unot the Army there, or Parliament here, by any
unworthy act of Captain Cunninghams, or dishonor unto him whatsoever, which
Major Ormesby so much endeavors to lay upon him, though this same Ormesby
most unworthily lost his own Troop, foot Company, and Garrison, as follows.

That in the year 1645. the English Garrisons in the Province of Connaught
having taken horses, and other considerable prey by force from the Rebels
there; Major Robert Ormesby out of which got together about 80. of those
plundered horse, from some of our own soldiers without charge to him (upon the
matter;) good horses then being sold for a crown, or noble the piece, but the
most part of them he got for nothing. And having procured Commission from Sir
Charles Coot, Lord President, to command them as a Captain of a Troop of
Horse, was by his Lordship listed and put into pay; which with that Troop and
a foot Company (whereof at that time he was only Captain) he was betrusted to
keep the Garrison of Toulske in the County of Roscomen.

That by the strength of the English Garrison in that County, they were all put
into a very good condition of livelihood, by forcing the Irish inhabitants
thereabouts into contribution.

That by this means the said Major Ormesby had at least brought into his
Garrison of Tulske, fourteen hundred pounds per annum, duly paid in money,
Grain, and other provisions, by the protected Rebels for the maintenance of his
Troops and foot Company, besides his share of preyes upon dividend, with the
other Garrisons, when they joined in parties, and marched into the enemies
quarters, and besides great store of corn sowed in the ground from time to time
by the Officers and soldiers, and many Families of the English, who came to
reside at the Garrison of Tulske, having in the year 1645, no less corn and
provision in store, then would have maintained all of them in that Garrison in
a plentiful Condition for a whole year.

That about that time, the Lord Viscount Taaffe, a Rebel, came with a great
party of the Linster Rebels, assisted with the Earl of Clanrickard and his
Connaught Rebels, all under the command of the Lord Taaffe, authorized by
Commission from the Lord Marquess of Ormond, to fall upon the English
Garrisons of that Province, as was alleged, who had not submitted to the
cessation with the Rebles.

That upon their advance into Connaught, they did immediately fall upon the
Garrison of Toulske, in the County of Roscomen, whereof Captain Robert Ormesby
(now Major) had the command with his said Foot company and Troop (consisting
of eighty good horses) which the said Major kept within his Trenches of
Toulske, and would not be advised at a Council of War by the Lord Presidents
brother, (a gallant Gentleman) Captain Richard Coot (now Collonell of Horse)
Sir George St. George, Captain King, Captain John Ormesby, his Uncle, and other
Captains of the several Garrisons all of them resolving (if Major Ormesby
would join with them) to stand out in the field with all the Horse, to annoy
the enemy, stop their Provisions, and so to preserve our English Garrisons from
being beleagured, but this Major Ormesby would not adhere to their resolution
(though it was the only best) and told them in plain terms. Gentlemen I have
heard you all, but I will follow my own mind; they desired to know it, but he
would not discover his intentions (which soon after to their great grief was
discovered) whereupon they departed discontented.

That the Enemy approaching near with great eagerness and resolution to gain
so considerable a Troop, being assured it was in their power to do, seeing he
kept it within his Trenches, and well knowing Major Ormesby to be a man of as
great words as deeds, stormed his works and entered, fell in close to the
Castle-grate (which had a strong Iron-gate on it) where this Major Ormesby
himself was, and might have held it to this day, but he being overcome with
pusillanimity and a panick fear, came suddenly running out of the Castle,
calling for mercy, delivered his Pistol charged and cocked, to the Rebel
Captain Barnwell, without either parley or quarter. Much like a silly Hare in
her thicket, which though she seem to look big, yet with the cry of the
Hounds, and noise of the hunters, she is so terrified, that she runs and
knows not where: So this great Soldier left the strong hold committed to his
charge, from whence he could not be beaten without Cannon; and ran into his
enemies arms, where he behaved himself with great modesty, not speaking a
word but mercy, mercy, which Castle the Rebels keeps now to the annoyance of
the Parliaments Forces in that Province.

Thus was the considerable Garrison and Castle of Toulske most unworthily lost,
where the Rebels possessed themselves of all Provisions, Arms, Ammunition, the
whole Troop, Foot Company, stripped both Officer, Soldier, and all the English
Families, who were residing and had their goods within that place for safety:
Then the Rebels they carried this brave Ormesby along with them upon mercy,
whom they might have hanged at their pleasure, seeing he had no quarter, yet
saved him upon a Design to have Castle-Coot delivered up into their hands,
which they conceived might have been effected, by reason Major Ormesby's Father
and diverse of his nearest Kinsmen were in Castle-Coot and had the Command of
the place, men, Ammunitions and Provisions good store. And the same, according
to their plot, was delivered up to the Rebel Lord Taaffe, by Major Ormesbys
Father, his Cozen German, Ensign James Ormesby and his brother in Law, (whilst
Major Ormesby himself was in the Rebels hands upon mercy:) So that it may be
conjectured, and that upon great presumptions, that the place was delivered
merely to preserve Major Ormesbies life; It having formerly held out 14. weeks
siege (being then under the Command of Captain Richard Coote) General Bourke
with 4000. men still battering the same with his Ordnance, and was at last
forced to leave it with the loss of many of his men. But to return to the
matter, the Enemy being much elevated with this good success, having got so
considerable a Garrison as Toulske, 80. good Horses, 100. Foot, all their Arms,
one whole years Provision, all the Plunder of the English which they had put
into that Garrison for safety.

That the Rebels forces then drew themselves immediately before the Town and
Castle of Elffynne, the Bishops seat, and Garrison of 100. men, which was
delivered up to the Enemy; Also the walled Town and Corporation of James-Town,
a Garrison of one hundred, besides many English Inhabitants, yielded up to the
Rebels with diverse others of the like manner.

That all these Towns, Castles, and Garrisons, Arms, Ammunition, Provisions,
Men and Horses, might hitherto have been preserved from the Rebels, if the said
Major Ormesby had been advised by the rest of the Commanders of the several
Garrisons before mentioned, especially those who were, by much, his superiors;
which not only occasioned the loss of these considerable holds by his
wilfulness and pusilanimity, but also Castle-Coote* the chief house of Sir
Charles Coote, Lord President of that Province, a most gallant, active and
faithful servant of the State, so much prejudiced by Major Ormesby and those of
that name, that so delivered up Castle-Coote, (to the great grief of Captain
John Ormesby the Majors Uncle, and Lieut* Charles Ormesby the Majors brother,
both wel-deserving men, who have done very good service) and who merit
encouragement from the State, whose Father and self were servants unto the Lord
President and his ever renowned father old Sr Charles Coot, and made up under
them to some fortune of Inheritance, and rendered capable by their favor of the
place of Justice of peace in the Country. And since these troubles, by Sir
Charles the Lord Presidents favor in hopes of better carriage in the service,
This Ormesby was made Captain and Major of Horse by his Lordships several
Commissions.

Yet so ungrateful to his maker is this Ormesby, that upon all occasions he
striveth to put particular prejudices, as much as lies in him, not only on the
whole family of the Cootes, but also upon several persons of honor, worth and
action, in affinity most faithful, near and dear to Sir Charles Coote, and most
zealous in the service of the State, as their sufferings can well witness. Yet
this Major Ormesby with a seeming show (though in a bold, il-bred, blustering
way) of agitating for the public, and therein makes use of Sir Charles Cootes
name, when on the contrary, nothing is more certain, then the working of his
own particular ends, as may evidently appear by his high and unmerited hopes
and demands from the State. And the said Ormesby, by the former losses
aforesaid, occasioned also the loss of the Abbey of Boil, Sir Robert Kings
house, the Fort of Carrickdrumcouske belonging to Sir George Lisedoorne,
Knockevicker, with many other holds, and consequently the whole Province of
Connaught; But what since thereof has been regained by Sir Charles Coote Lord
President, with the Parliaments Forces under his command, since his Government
there. All which may most evidently appear against Major Ormesby, if questioned
at a Council of War in that Kingdom before the Lord President, at once with
Lieut. Roukesby (to which purpose it is desired that the said Ormesbies person
be secured here and he sent over) which Roukesby, who is apprehended in this
City, and is by Order of the House to be sent over to Sir Charles Coote to abide
trial for his betraying and delivering up of James- Town aforementioned, with
other matters there to be laid to Major Ormesby's charge concerning the last
defeat given by the Rebels to our Connaught horse, near the Castle of Roscomen,
wherein he was Actor.

Yet notwithstanding all which apparent agreat prejudice done to the
Parliament, by the loss of a Province occasioned by Major Robert Ormesby as
aforesaid, put many good English Protestant Families a begging in this Kingdom,
and many in that Kingdom, who have not wherewithal to carry them hither to be
relieved; the loss of so considerable a Troop, Foot Company, Garrison, and
plentiful Quarters, Arms, Ammunition and Provisions in the several stores,
which will cost the Parliament great sum of money, besides the loss of many
English men before those holds and Province can be regained, which by his
means merely have been lost. And his own quarters being unworthily lost, as
we before related, he came with his wife, father and family, to the Lagan,
where he was scarcely well settled, till he and his father began to pry into the
secrets of the country, and look for Custodiums, as if the several Colonels
and Officers who had fought for the preservation of that country had deserved
none, but al been hitherto reserved for him who lived an hundred miles from
thence in another Province; and by importunity procured a Custodium from Sir
John Clotworthy, and Sir Robert Merideth of Castle Bliaen, and of six quarters
of land, which entertaines eight score soldiers, which after the rate of
fifteen pence a week, amounts to five hundred and twenty pound a year, for
ten pound to be accounted to the State, which will put him in a condition
thrice so good as ever he was in his life before; beside his employment, having
a Troop of Horse, being Major of a Regiment and a foot Company, when hundreds
of better men then he and morefaithful to the State, have not bread to put in
their mouths, or to cover their nakedness; neither these eight score Soldiers
who have faithfully served in many bloody battles against the Rebels, have not
any means to releeve them, if this Ormesby take away their quarter upon any
pretext whatsoever.

That Major Ormesby nevertheless, as if no such matter had ever been done by
him, applies himself to the Parliament here, with impudence and boldness.

First, importunatly desiring from my Lord Lile, then Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, a Commission, to command a Regiment of Horse, made up of the several
Troops raised and armed in the beginning of the rebellion, by my Lord
Cleandeboys, Sir William Stewart, Sir Robert Stewart, and Sir William Col,
without the which Troops to attend the Regiments, they would be almost
unprofitable. This desire his Lordship most prudently put off to the
determination of a Council of War, as being unwilling to discourage him, being
a stranger, but his Lordship (by the advice of the said Council of War holden
in Salissbury House) found it dangerous to grant that request, which might
prove prejudicial to the service, by giving an Irish man, bred in the most
remote and barbarous parts of Ireland, the command of so many men of Honor,
all of them being Colonels, one of them a Lord Viscount, the other three
Knights, and some of these Privy Councillors and Barronets.

And secondly, He likewise Petitions the Committee of Star Chamber, seting
forth how that his Father and he had disbursed 4000 l. in the Parliaments
service, and in raising, arming, clothing and maintaining of that Foot Company
and Troop of Horse, procures Certificates on his behalf, gets an Order of that
Committee for a Report to be made in the House for this 4000 l. to be granted
unto him, demands a new Troop for himself, and the Command of a Regiment of
Horse, and aims at greater matters with as much confidence as if he had left
both Troop and Company in the service, nor never had the said 1400 l. per annum
out of his quarters of Toulske for maintaining and clothing of them.

Let therefore the premises and particulars herein contained be taken into
serious consideration by all well-affected people, whether Major Robert Ormesby
does deserve the granting of this 4000 l. unto him by the Parliament, or such
additions of greater employments to be conferred upon him, until he be first
tried and cleared at a Council of War for the same, or according to his
demerits punished, to the terror of others to commit the like hereafter.

For if such encouragements should be conferred upon men so highly prejudicial
to the State, and others who have been lately here having faithfully served
them, and been very fortunate bygiving many great defeats and overthrowes to
the Rebels, without the least spot or dishonor whatsoever, and have suffered
extremely in their estates, deeply engaged in several sums of money, for
raising and arming of their several Regiments, Troops, and Companies, who have
humbly Petitioned the State to be releeved of their engagements, having
exhausted themselves by long attendance, in which time some of them were
Arrested for the engagements of the State, others for old demands before these
troubles, and could neither procure their persons protected, releived, nor any
part of their Arrears given unto them whereby to subsist. Notwithstanding they
never had any pay from the State six years, but three months means in
commodities. That above forty of those Officers of Ireland had only of late
about 300. l. divided amongst them to carry them away, some of them having
attended the State here above 15 months, others a lesser time. Then let the
world judge what such who have served faithfully and have not received any
manner of encouragement from the State shall think, when this Major Ormsby who
has done them so great dis-service shall receive the 4000. l. he is now a
Petitioner for, and great employments conferred upon him, and who has received
as much as any one of those Officers upon this dividend of the 300. l. to carry
him into Ireland and yet not gone, besides 100. l. in ready money which he
received at his coming over.

Articles whereupon Major Ormesby is to be tried at a Council of War.
1 WHether or no did the said Major in June 1645 (he being best acquainted in
Connaught) when the British in Vlster went thither, go along with those
Forces, and was he not used as a guide through Connaught to the Castle of
Shrewl? did not the said Major hinder the English and Scots who resolved to
fight the Rebels being drawn up in their way, And did he not allege, That
those Rebels were the Earl of Glanrikards friends and Kinsmen, who had not
then declared himself in a hostile way? And for the truth hereof let Colonel
Conway vvitness, Sir James Mountgomery, Captain Anteill, Captain Kilner, and
many other Officers both English and Scots, who were only strangers in that
Province, and directed by the said Major. Yet nevertheless the British were
reproachfully branded with that neglect whereof he was the cause, merely to
save some of his Country men and acquaintance, neighbors and Kinsmen, he, his
father and Ancestors living amongst them, and allied to them by many
generations, and whose Estate, if he have any, is amongst them yet in that
Province?

2. Whether or no the said Major by his Covvardize rendered himself Prisoner to
Captain Barnwell in his own Trench, and so basely lost a Troop of good horse,
though they cost him nothing, a Foot Company which sheltred themselves in
Tulske, and all the goods belonging to the English there, and in General did
not the said Major occasion all the loss?

3. Did not the said Major occasion the loss of Castle Coote, wherein his
Father and some of his friends were chief Commanders, to save his life, who
submitted himself to the mercy of the Rebels without Quarter, and might have
hanged him when they pleased.

4. Did not the said Ormsby lose the battle of Roscomen, by giving a vvrong
word, and flying himself first, and was never seen for 10 or 12 miles, when
as others whom he blames and calumniatess, kirmished all the time in the Rear,
receicing the charges of the Enemy till the spent horse were gone and
recovered breath: And in this manner most of the Officers behaved themselves in
a body near 20 miles together, but he was never seen, alleging that he was
shot through the Arm, when a Bullet only grazed on him, as by the skar may
yet be seen, his bones being all whole?

Queries to be put to Major Ormesby by the Lord President of Connaugh
concerning the 4000. l. he Petitions the Parliament for.
1 WHere this 4000. l. was in the time of peace, it not being known to his
neighbors that he was worth 100. l. of ready money?

2. When gave he out this money for the Parliaments Use?

3. By whose Direction was it and who undertook to pay him?

4. For what commodities to the Parliaments use was that money disbursed and
which way could the Parliament be bettered 4000. l. by him?

5. What is become of those penniworths, and who disposed of them or made use
of them to the Parliaments advantage; For if a Merchant give an account he must
set down a list of the Commodities, and who received them, when and where, the
day of the month, and year of God?

6. Why did the said Major presume to mis-informe men of honor, quality, and
known integrity, who could not be privy to all his Actions in procuring a
certificate from them, which certificate he uses as a principal ground to
strengthen his Petition for the said 4000. l. Which is to be reported to the
house of Commons; And also under color of that certificate be assumes the
glory of the services; performed in Conaught, to himself, when as others far
more deserving are past by with silence.

Now, if Major Ormesby shall pass free, notwithstanding what can be said
against him, or be rewarded for doing nothing, It will be far more favor then
the L. Moore, L. Convvay, Lord Chichester, Claneboyes or Ards, have had, though
all Noblemen: and any of them have suffered more by the Rebellion, and
disbursed more then he and al his generation are worth: yet al of them either
want their Regiments, possession of their Estates, or their persons lie in
Captivity many months for their service to the Parliament; And yet their
Petitions, it read, be not granted. But indeed this brave Ormsby takes a better
course then any of those Noblemen to atchieve his ends, for he is of every
Nation and every profession as may best serve his turn. Amongst the
Presbyterians he is Presbyterian, amongst the Independents he is an
Independent, amongst the Irish he is an Irishman, and that is true indeed;
amongst the English he is an Englishman, if he were not betrayed by his Irish
accent and breeding; and amongst the Scots, if his God dam-me may be taken, he
loves them above all the world. And for his valor, if you believe his own
report, it is above that of Achilles and his Mirmidones whereof he had a great
purpose to have given sufficient proof with the Venetians against the Turks,
had he not been informed that Prince Rupert was to be General of their Army,
who has conceived such indignation against Major Ormsby (as himself reports)
That the Prince has vowed he never shall have quarter if he get him in a
field: and the reason is, the name of Major Ormsby struck such terror in the
Irish, that they durst not send over the ten thousand they promised the King,
for fear of him, least he had destroyed the whole Kingdom of Ireland in their
absence. And to conclude, it may appear by this preceding discourse, that this
man lies aming at great promotion, great sums of money, but as yet he is only
possessed by hope; howsoever he deserves this Epitaph.

Here lies the lusty Phaeton, which took in hand to guide,
His Fathers Chariot, from the which although he chanced to slide,
Yet that he gave a proud at tempt, it cannot be denied.
FINIS.

