GODS PRESENCE MAN'S COMFORT: OR, GODS INVISIBILITIE Manifested unto MAN'S
CAPACITY.

The heads of which Tractate were delivered in a Sermon at the Abbey of
Westminster, and since enlarged for the benefit of the Church of God.

By the Lords unprofitable servant, Chapter Anthony.

AUG. lib. 6. de TRINITAT. Qui Trinitatis Mysterium, vel ex part, vel per
speculum, vel ex aenigmate videt, gaudeat; cognoscens Deum, and gratias agat:
Qui vero non videt, tendat per pietatem ad videndum, non per coecitatem ad
calumniandum, quoniam unus est Deus, sed tamen Trinitas. Imprimatur:

Ja. Cranford.

LONDON, Printed by J. Y. for George Lathum, at the Bishops-head in Paul's
Churchyard. 1646.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL GILBERT MILLINGTON Esquire, and all the rest of the
Honorable Committee for the plundered Ministers.
As also, TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, and his much honored friend, ROBERT JENNER
Esquire, one of the Members of the Honorable House of COMMONS, Grace, Mercy
and Peace from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
THe glory of all Creatures originally made by God is Man, the glory of Man
consists in the powers of the soul; in them he excels all other
Creatures, and nearest resembles his Creator. When God would make Man, (
having beforehand made all things for his Being and Dominion) he summoneth (as
it were) a Council of the Trinity, Genesis 1. 26. Tilen.
Come, let us make man after our likeness: Haec Dei imago in nulla re
aspectabili, praeterquam in homine conspicitur: Man only being endowed with a
reasonable soul, and adorned with the gifts of wisdom, justice, equity,
sanctity, and verity. But, alas! Man did not stand long in this happy
condition, but, through the subtilty of Satan's temptations, soon fell; (for
such is the malice of that destroyer, that he labors to hinder the increase
of heavenly knowledge, and that none may be the inheritors of that kingdom, of
which himself is dis-inherited) and ever since, the powers of the soul of man
are depraved and weakened, so that his Wisdom is become foolishness, his
Understanding darkness, and all is out of order. And as mankind increased in
the world, so sin increased with mankind; and the older the world grows, the
more sinful it is: Aetas parentum pejor avis, tulit and nos nequiores. By this
corruption of nature, a spiritual darkness has seized man's soul, so that in
heavenly matters he is blind, and the image of God almost blotted out in him.
Yet has not God suffered the whole light of nature to be quite extinct; for
what may be known of God is seen in the Creation, sufficiently to evince
Atheistical opinions; but more clearly in the Scriptures, which, as a light,
shine clearly out of darkness, though all cannot perceive it; for all have not
faith, (I mean, a true saving faith,) and consequently, all have not the true
knowledge of God. 1 Cor. 15. 34.


In this mist of ignorance Satan labors to captivate men, and to this effect
he is become a lying spirit in the 1 King. 22. 22.
mouths of Ahabs false prophets: and the Apostle Paul tells us, that in the
last days perilous times 2 Timothy 3. 1, etc.
shall come, for men shall be lovers of their own selves, etc. Having a form
of godliness, but denying Verse 5.
the power thereof: of whom he forewarneth us, from such turn away. The kingly
Prophet David also tells us of a fool that has said in his Psalm. 14. 1.
heart, ( not with his tongue) there is no God. Surely they both foretold these
days in which we live; irreligion and impiety toward God, and
unfaithfulness and uncharitableness toward men, being grown to the height;
and Satan, that grand malignant, having instilled into the minds of some
wilful, heady, and unlearned leaders damnable heresies, whereby the hearts of
too too many ignorant people are poisoned with sour leaven. Hear Gods
judgments against such; Because my people have forgotten me, they have Jer.
18. 15, etc.
burnt incense to vanity, and caused them to stumble in their ways from the
ancient paths, to walk in paths, and in a way Note.
not cast up, etc. I will scatter them as with an East-winde before the enemy:
I will show them the back, and not the face in the day of their calamity. The
Apostle Peter speaks of some unlearned and unstable, who ( in his 2 Pet. 3. 16.
days) wrested many things in the Epistles of Paul, as also they did other
Scriptures, to their own destruction: So that heresies began to spring even in
the days of the Apostles, and their immediate successors: And although they
seemed to be cut down, and (as it were) buried in oblivion; yet now are they
raked up, and (Hydra-like) sprouted innumero capite; witness the many
dangerous pamphlets of poisonous opinions lately spread abroad: O! happy were
it, if they were so served as were those Magick-books at Ephesus. Acts 19. 19.


No marvel then if very few see God in the true glass of the Scriptures, when
the eye of their soul has such scales to dim them. Some are wilfully blind,
and will not see God, like the Atheist: some are blind, yet know it not; they
say they see, like the selfe-justifying Pharisees: Joh. 9. 41.
some see God only in images, like the purblind Papist: some see him only in
the letter, not in the sense, like the ceremonious Jew, or fantastic
Anabaptist: some again see him only obliquely, in his free grace declared in
the Gospel, and will not look upon him in his severe justice manifested in his
Law, which (the Apostle says) is holy, just, and good, yea, spiritual, Romans
7. 12, 14.
like the licentious Antinomian: Whereas all the properties and attributes of
God are in himself essentially one and the same. Trahit sua quemque voluptas;
every man will serve God after his own fantasy, and imagine God to be what his
dull capacity conceives him to be. But Christ has told us, that every plant
that his heavenly Father has not planted, Matthew. 15. 13.
shall be rooted up. Let then all such beware how they build; for, Other
foundation can no man lay, 1 Cor. 3. 10. ad 16.
then that is laid, that is, Jesus Christ, etc. Upon which place Calvin says
excellently, Some preach Calv. in loc.
sound and edifying doctrine, others mingle idle disputes of their own brain,
more for ostentation, then for edification of the hearer: now, although these
are in as good account, and oft-times more, amongst men, then are the soundest
teachers, yet the day of the Lord shall manifest their difference. And when he
shall visit them by his Spirit, then shall it appear, whether their garments be
fine linen, clean and white, which is the righteousness of the saints, Rev.
19. 8. Deuteronomy. 22. 10, 11.
or linsey-woolsey, which is abominable in Gods eyes: then shall it appear,
whether they break up the Lords vineyard, and plow his field with laborious
oxen, or not; yea, then it shall appear, whether their seed be pure wheat,
which may yield a plentiful crop, fit to be stored up in Gods granary; or
tares, fit only to be cast into the fire.

Nor is it (Right Worshipful) that I have adventured (out of any conceit of
worth in my self) to expose this ensuing Discourse to the view of the world in
this censorious age; but partly to satisfy the requests of some who were
auditors of the chief points thereof delivered in a Sermon in the Abbey in
Westminster; and partly to express a grateful heart to this Honorable
Committee, whom my self with many others are bound to honor for your
vigilance and care. Solomon tells us, that he that has friends must show
himself Prove. 18. 24.
friendly, for there is a friend that sticks closer then a brother: And which
way can I express my respects and service ( I owe you) any other ways, then
by imparting unto your Worships some of my weak labors? Greater gifts you need
not; higher prized I cannot: I may say with the Apostles, Peter and John,
(...). I humbly crave pardon Act. 3. 6.
for my presumption, in fleeing to the arms of this Honorable Court for
patronage of this small Tract, whom I know to be religiously devoted to
religious exercises, and to accept of this mite thrown into Gods treasury: God
gave liberty (where ability was wanting) to offer under the Law, in stead of a
lamb, a pair of turtle doves, or two young pigeons. It may, through Gods
blessing, enrich as well those who shall read it, as I hope it has those who
have heard it. It is not clothed with the rich embroiderings of humane
eloquence, and wisdom of words; I rather choose the Scripture phrase, as best
suting to the capacity and conscience of my country Auditory, amongst whom I
have enlarged it, and of such as may read it: Vouchsafe it (I humbly entreat)
your protection, and you shall sufficiently reward him, whose prayers to God
for you shall be, that you may be filled with a large measure of grace in this
life, and rewarded with a full measure of glory in the life to come; this he
cordially wishes, who is devoted to be

Your Worps, to be commanded in all Christian service, CHAPTER ANTHONY.
West-Hoadligh, in Com. Sussex.
GODS PRESENCE MAN'S COMFORT.
CANT. 2. 9. Behold, he stands behind our wall, he looks forth at the
window, showing himself at the lattesse.
MOst worthily is this Book called Cantica Canticorum; not because it was
penned by the wisest of men that ever was born of a woman by a natural
generation, but because in it is set down in a most patheticall and mutual
colloquie, the unspeakable love betwixt Christ and his Church under the
similitude of a Beloved and his Spouse.

In the verse foregoing the Text, as also in the former part of this verse, the
Church compares her Beloved (for his care, love, and diligence in hasting to
bring comforts unto her) to a Roe or young Heart; Behold (says she) he comes
leaping upon the mountains, and skipping upon the hills; In the words of the
Text she rejoiceth in that she enjoys his presence, thereby pergustans
suavitatem amoris, and Lyra.
future ae beatitudinis, having got a relish of his love, and a taste of her
own future happiness, though not so fully and perfectly as she would, or as
she desired, nor as hereafter she shall: yet in that she has (as it were) a
glimpse of his person whom she longed to enjoy, she exulteth in the words of
the Text; Behold, he stands behind our wall, etc.

In which words, without wresting, flow these five particulars:

1. God cannot be seen by the eye of mortal man, because of the wall of his
flesh.

2 Yet God is pleased to exhibit himself to man four ways: 1. By voice. 2.
By the book of the creatures. 3. By the book of the Scriptures. 4. By the book
of conscience.

3. In these, it is but hieroglyphically, enigrnatically, obscurely, darkly.

4. Yet so, that the soul of a true Christian by the eye of unblemished faith
may be sure that she sees him in them.

5. That being thus assured that she does see him, she may rejoice, and
desire a greater union and communion with him.

I shall not need to insist long to prove whether there be a God or no; I hope
there is none so Atheistical as to deny it, at leastwise with their tongue,
although I fear, there are some as bad in Ephesians. 2. 12.
their heart, such as are without God in the world. Now of Atheists there are
three sorts: First, Atheists Psalm. 14. 1. and 53. 1.
in thought; The fool has said in his heart, there is no God: that is, as
elsewhere the Kingly Psalm. 10. 11.
Prophet explaineth it, He has said in his heart, God has forgotten: God
will not require it. Secondly, Ver. 13.
Atheists in words, who speak of God as of no God, How does God knew? Is there
knowledge in the Psalm. 73. 11. Job 21. 14, 15.
most High? Thus the seventy ancients of the house of Israel did horrible
things, every man in the chambers of his imagery, and said, The Lord sees us
not. Ezekiel. 8. 12.
Thirdly, Atheists in conversation; these are they that so live, as if there
were no God, They profess Tit. 1. 16.
that they know God, but in their works deny him. Certes, did these truly know
that there is a God, and that he sees all their abominations, and will at the
last day call them to a strict account, and severely punish them, it would make
them tremble even in this life: but they are altogether corrupt, Supra.
abominable, and to every good work reprobate.

To omit School-distinctions, Utrum Deum esse Aquin. 1. qu. 2. art. 2.
sit demonstrabile; these arguments following shall sufficiently prove:

1. That excellent order of nature, seen (both in that Microcosme or little
world [ Man,] as also in that Megacosme, the greater world, or whole Universe)
in the disposition of parts, and succession of motions and actions, which could
not be nor subsist, were there not an Omnipotency to rule and order it; which
Omnipotency must needs be Psalm. 8. and 19. and 104. and 135. and 136. and 147.
and 148.
God, as appears by the places quoted in the margent.

2. That excellency of humane understanding, Man alone being above all other
creatures rational; Reason, Knowledge, Wisdom, etc. being that image of God
in man; and in this sense Saint Paul has it, when he says, We are his
offspring. Acts 17. 28.


3. The nature of man acknowledges a Deity; for no Nation under heaven is so
barbarous, but worshippeth a supreme power, either 2 Kin. 17. 16.
creatures, or else the workmanship of their own hands.

4. The sting or worm of Conscience, even in the most reprobate, either in the
very act of sin, or at least after sin committed, proves a Deity, and that
there is a supreme Judge, who will call them to an account, which sting of
theirs shows the law of a supremer power written in their hearts. Romans 2. 15.


5. The execution of justice in rewarding the godly, and punishing the wicked;
as in the deluge drowning all but eight persons: as in delivering the
Israelites, and overthrowing Pharaoh and his host: as in preserving Lot and his
two daughters, when Sodom was consumed: So that a man Psalm. 58. 11.
shall say, Verily, there is a reward for the righteous: doubtless, there is a
God that judges the earth.

Thus you see that there is a God; but what this God is, mortal man cannot
define, and that for two reasons:

1. Because he is incomprehensible.

2. Because his essence cannot be known. Yet has he been pleased to make
himself known to us these three ways:

1. By his Attributes; as his Mercy, Justice, Wisdom, (...), or Goodness to
mankind, and Truth: all which are revealed to us, who live within the lists of
the Church; but are not known unto the Heathen, who are without the pales
thereof.

2. By his Persons, being a Trinity in Unity; this we acknowledge, that Tota
Trinitas unus est Deus: this the Heathen are ignorant of.

3. By his works; as of Creation, Preservation, Rule and Government, which are
known to none so clearly as they are to such, to whom the sound of the Gospel
has come; much less have the Heathen known that blessed work of Redemption by
Christ Jesus.

Again, the Attributes of God are either Nominall, or Real.

Nominall; as Exodus 15. 3.
Jehovah, which signifies an eternal Being of himself: this Name he took unto
himself, thereby to point at, and shadow out unto us his Essence, which is
incomprehensible; by this Name Exodus 6. 3.
he was not known unto Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but by the name Shaddai,
which signifies Almighty; that was a name of Omnipotency, this a name of
Majesty: Or Jah, that is, Lord, because he is the Alpha of all things: Or
Elohim, which shows to us the distinction that is to be made of the Persons of
the Trinity, Mal. 1. 6.
the Father, Luke 1. 35.
the Son, Acts 2. 4.
the Holy Ghost: Or, as in the New Testament, (...), as being the first Essence
of all things: hence is he called (...), sole Lord Paramount, because he has
his Being in and of himself, and depends on none other: Or, (...), because
he sees or compasses all things. Other nominall Attributes there are, as El,
Abba, etc. but I omit them, and hasten to his real Attributes, such are they
that are only proper unto God, and show his divine Essence.

Such are either Absolute, or Relative.

Absolute, as his Perfection, being solely of himself, and giving life and
being to all other creatures in the world: or his Infiniteness, or Eternity,
being principii and finis expers, having neither beginning of days, nor length
of time: or his Invisibilitie, not having any bodily shape, and therefore not
to be discerned by humane sense: or his Immutabilitie Mal. 3. 6.
in his Essence, I am the Lord, I change not; in his Psalm. 33. 11.
Will, The Counsel of the Lord stands for ever; or in his Jer. 23. 24.
Place, I the Lord fill heaven and earth: or his Omnipotency, for quicquid vult
facit, he does whatsoever pleases him. To these I might add his relative
Attributes, as Knowledge, Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, Truth, Liberality,
Bounty, Mercy, etc. Relative I call them, because in God they are essential,
in man accidental; in man finite, but in God infinite, incomprehensible,
invisible.

Now all these Attributes are given unto God pro nostro captu, vel ratione
cognitionis nostrae, in respect of us men, and for our benefit; by which that
light which is in it self inaccessible, may after a manner be shadowed out to
the dim eye of our dull apprehension, which is not able to behold so
resplendent a Majesty: for the glory of God does far more excel the glory of
the Sun, then the light of the Sun does the light of a candle. Well may we
therefore admire, and say, O the height, Romans 11. 33.
the breadth, the length, and the depth of the Infiniteness and Invisibilitie
of Almighty God! yea, and pray also with the same Apostle, That we may Ephesians. 3.
18, 19.
be able to comprehend with all saints, what is the breadth, and length, and
depth, and height; that so we may be filled with the fullness of the
knowledge of God, whom to know is life eternal. John 17. 3.


Now there are four degrees or windows, by and through which the presence of
this God manifestly shines to the eye of our souls.

The first whereof is universal, whereby in his Jer. 23. 24. Psalm 139 7. etc.
Essence he is fully everywhere, inclusively nowhere; totus est in toto
mundo, and totus in qualibet mundi part. And as he is thus universally
present in his Essence, so is he also in all his essential Properties, as his
Psalm. 147. 5.
Wisdom, Deuteronomy. 9. 29.
Power, Exodus 2. 5, 6.
Providence, etc.

The second is special, whereby he is said to be in heaven Eccles. 5. 2.
Psalm. 19. 1, 6.
because there his glory, power, wisdom and goodness are seen in a most
excellent manner; from whence also he showers down Acts 14 17.
in a most plentiful sort his blessings upon us for our temporal benefit.

The third is most special, as he dwells by his gracious and sanctifying
Spirit in the hearts of his elect and chosen; so much S. Paul affirms, Know 1
Cor. 3. 16.
ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in
you?

The fourth is most special and singular, namely, when he is present by his
Spirit in Christ: so S. Paul, In him (viz. Christ) dwells all the fullness
Coloss. 2. 9.
of the Godhead bodily.

And yet in none of these can the brightness of the Deity be seen by the eyes
of humane flesh: and the reason is twofold; Either,

1. Ex part objecti apparentis, in regard of the excellency of Gods glorious
Majesty appearing: Or,

2. Ex part subjecti videntis, in regard of man's infirmity in beholding.

For the first cause: Such is the Majesty and brightness of Almighty God,
that the most glorious Angels, the Seraphims and Cherubims, are Isa. 6. 2.
forced to cover their faces at his presence: And if such created natures, yea
rather, such spiritual substances, cannot see that incorporeall uncreated Hom.
14. in Johan. Dialog. tit. Immutabilis.
Virtue (as Chrysostom calls it,) or (as Theodoret) that incomprehensible
divine Substance, much less can man. If that saying of Christ be objected,
Matthew. 18. Their Angels always behold the face of my Father: I answer, The
Angels see God, but it is according to their capacity and strength; not
according to the divine Substance, for that is incomprehensible: And S. Austin
says, that it is one Epist. 12. a^ Paulin.
thing to see, and another thing to comprehend the whole by seeing, when as
nothing of the whole is concealed, but all is seen round about in every part
thereof. Again, If that City which is above be so glorious, as Saint John
speaks, the wall is of Jasper, the City Rev. 21. 18 etc.
it self of pure gold like unto clear glass, that it needs not the Sun
or Moon to shine in it, etc. how glorious then is the Lord God, whose glory is
the light thereof? As then a man may be upon the sea, and yet not exactly know
the full breadth and depth of the sea: even so the Angels themselves, although
they are in heaven, and see God really in his glory; yet cannot they fully
comprehend either the Ludovic. Gratanensis lib. 1. duc. peccat.
depth of his Majesty, or the altitude of his Eternity.

The divine Essence is of that perfect beauty, and of that excellent glory,
that man is not able to comprehend the fullness of Gods Majesty; (...), No man
(says Saint John) has 1 John 4. 12. 1 Timothy 6. 16.
seen God at any time. He only (says S. Paul) has immortality, and dwells
in light which no man can approach unto, whom no man has seen, or can see. So
holy Job, Lo, he goes by me, and I see him not: he Job 9 11. and 23. 8, 9.
passes on also, but I perceive it not. Behold, I go forward, but he is not
there; and backward, but I cannot perceive him: On the left hand where he does
work, but I cannot behold him; he hides himself on the right, that I cannot
see him. Verily, (says the Prophet Isa. 45. 15.
Isaiah) thou art a God that hidest thy self, O God of Israel the Savior.
Deus ubique praesens est, attamen Greg. in Hom. in Ezekiel.
vix inveniri potest; stantem sequimur, at apprehendere non valemus: He is
above us, and below us, before us, and behind us, on either side of us, yea,
within us, yet we can neither see him, nor feel him. Per molem corporis nusquam
est: per incircumscriptam Idem.
substantiam nusquam deest. He is above us by his power ruling us, he is
below us by his sustentation relieving us, he is without us by his greatness
environing us, and he is within us by his Spirit piercing the very secrets of
our hearts.

For the Essence of God consists not of members, as does an humane body; nor
of affections, as does the soul of man: and although members, as hands, eyes,
ears, feet, etc. yea, and passions of the mind, as anger, jealousy, patience,
etc. are diverse times ascribed to God in his word; yet are these terms
ascribed to him none otherwise then by an (...), and (...), according to the
weakness of our capacity; for his perfection admits not of the least
weakness or perturbation.

Simonides the Poet, being demanded by Hiero the Tyrant, what God was, craved a
day to deliberate; and not being then able to define the true Nature and
Essence of God, he craved two days more; that time being past, and himself
yet unresolved, he craved four days, still doubling his number: and being
demanded the reason hereof, he answered, that the more he studied and dived
into that abyss, the less able was he to define what God was; so
incomprehensible is Gods Essence.

In a word, whatsoever can be said of God, cannot fully express his infinite
Immensity. Cujus Greg. in Moral.
ergo gloriae non sufficit obstupescens conscientia, quomodo sufficient loquens
lingua? If then the astonished conscience of man cannot sufficiently conceive
the Majesty of God, how then can his tongue express it?

O! then admire the length, breadth, height, and depth of this Deity, whose
length is Eternity, whose breadth is Charity, whose height is Majesty, and
whose depth is Wisdom: Qui amat ut Bern. in considerat. Dei.
Charitas, novit ut Veritas, sedet ut Aequitas, dominatur ut Majostas, etc. Who
loves as cordially as Charity, knows all things judicially as Verity, judges
uprightly as Equity, rules royally as Majesty, governs potently as
Principality, protects impregnably as Safety, works mightily as Power, helps
readily as Piety, and is manifested as the Sun in his splendor gloriously.
His power is inexplicable, Hug. Card. lib. 1. de clav. any.
his goodness incomprehensible, his wisdom ineffable, and his definition is
always to be praised by his holy ones. Thus much for the excellency of Gods
glorious Majesty appearing, which cannot be seen by our bodily eye.

The second cause of man's not seeing God is, his infirmity in beholding; and
this is twofold: Either,

1. Through the guilt of sin: Or, 2. Through the frailty of his flesh.
1. Through the guilt of sin. When God appeared Exodus 3. 6.
to Moses, Moses hid his face, because he knew himself to be a sinful man.
The guilt of sin makes a man conscious to himself, and afraid to look even an
earthly Judge in the face, much more to behold so glorious a Majesty as is the
divine Essence: thus Adam went and hid himself Genesis 3. 8.
when he had transgressed, by eating the forbidden fruit: And if (when the
voice of God walked in Note.
the cool of the day) he hid himself, oh! how would he have trembled if God
had come in the heat of the day? When Christ was transfigured upon the Mount,
and his face did shine like the Mark 9. 6.
Sun, and his raiment was white as the light; Peter and the other Apostles were
afraid, and knew not what to say: So also, when Peter saw the Majesty of his
Master in that great draught of fishes, he falls down at Jesus his feet, and
says, Depart from me, O Luke 5. 8.
Lord, for I am a sinful man.

Oh then! since horror of conscience in regard of sin makes men afraid of the
face of God, that men would remember, that his eyes are upon the Job 34. 21, 22.
ways of man, and he sees all his goings. There is no darkness nor shadow
of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves. As also, that
nothing terrifies the conscience so much as does the guilt of sin, which is the
mother of fear. Conscience is that book in which all our sins are registered; Et
Cassiod. lib. 4. Epist. 8.
quid acquiri putatur, ubi mala conscientia praedicatur? aut, in qua part
possit homo proficere, si innocentiam probatus fuerit amisisse? What can be
gained where conscience preaches terror? or, what can a man plead for
himself, if guilt of sin tortures and terrifies? A sinful guilty conscience
cannot endure to behold so infinite a Presence, but soon shall be swallowed up
with so glorious a Majesty.

2. The second cause is the frailty of man's flesh: for such is the weakness
and tenderness of the eye of man, that he is not able to behold the Sun in
Rota, when in a clear day he is as in a chariot adorned in his glorious
splendor, then which no creature is brighter; for the more a man gazeth on it,
the blinder is his sight. The Israelites were Exodus 34. 30.
not able to behold Moses his face when he came from talking with God on mount
Sinai, they were afraid (says the Text) to come nigh him, until he had put a
veil over it: And if man cannot endure to behold that glory wherewith God has
invested his creatures, how much less able is he to behold ipsam vim divinae
Essentiae, that infinite glory of that infinite God, who gave such glory to his
creatures? for the workman is always of more excellent aspect then the work it
self, as the potter is more honorable then the clay, and the builder of the
house of more esteem then the house builded. As then glass cannot endure the
violent-working heat of the fire, without either breaking or melting; no more
is man able to behold Almighty God, who is a consuming fire, without Heb. 12.
29.
perishing.

Again, God cannot be seen by the bodily eye of man, for then he should be of
some humane shape, and we should conceive grossly of him, juxta passibilitatem
humanam, according to vain fancy: Behold, (says Solomon) the heaven, and the
2 Chro. 6. 18.
heaven of heavens cannot contain him: Heaven is his throne, and the earth is
his footstool; and as he is of infinite Immensity, and cannot be circumscribed
within any bounds or limits; so is his Essence invisible and incomprehensible,
and cannot be seen by the frail eye of man.

When Moses desired to see Gods face or glory, that is, the fullness of Gods
glorious Majesty, the Lord told him that it would be hurtful to him, Thou
can not see my face and live, says God: Mortali Exo. 33. 18, etc. Bibl.
Interlin.
carne Deum videre non potuit. Such was the glorious splendor of Almighty God,
and such the weakness of his dazzled eyes, that although his desire was great,
yet his infirmity was greater; he could not see the face of God in full
Majesty: God indeed vouchsafed to show him his backparts, which some interpret
his wondrous works; others, Gods attributes and properties, by which God
mightily made himself known to Moses; but his glory, or his glorious Essence,
by his mortal eye he could not see. As we are not able to know the essence
of any star; so are we not able to reach to the knowledge of the Essence of
God. While man is clothed with flesh, he is subject to weakness, yea, he is
weakness it self. Even the eye, which is the light of the body, is not
capable of things other then what are sublunary; nay, many of them it cannot
discern perfectly: but when this earthly clod is laid in the dust, and this
corruption has put on incorruption, and this mortality has put on
immortality, then shall he see God ((...)) face to face; that is, he shall
see God in greater perfection, although even then he shall not be able to
comprehend him in his Immensitie. In this life the Church knows him either by
hearing his voice, or by seeing him standing behind a wall, or else looking
through grates or lattises; that is, in the book of the Creatures, or the book
of the Scriptures, or the book of Conscience: And this brings me to the second
general of the Text, in which is evidently manifested the exceeding love of so
infinite a God, who vouchsafes to impart himself unto man by familiarity;
not by exhibiting his Essence, but by sending forth his voice.

In the foregoing verse of the Text, the Church By Voice.
rejoices in that she hears the voice of her Beloved. It is by voice that
God is pleased wonderfully to make himself known unto his own. Thus by voice
did he make himself known to the Patriarchs before the Law, to the Prophets
under the Law: and thus did Christ manifest himself at his Baptism, and at
his Transfiguration.

This voice of God sounds sometimes terribly; as at the giving of the Law, when
there were thundrings, Exodus 19. 16.
and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the Mount, and the voice of a trumpet
exceeding loud, so that the people trembled: Observe the place; Trumpets
sounded mightily in the air, fearful thunders brake forth from out the sky
with fierce lightnings, with horrible mists, with thick clouds, and terrible
smokes arising from the mountain; and, in the midst of all this, a dreadful
terror of the voice of Gods more dreadful Majesty, I am the Lord, etc.
Whence observe, that sithence the Law of God was delivered with such trembling,
that we also tremble to violate this Law, and the rather, because the exaction
of this Law shall be with greater terror at the last and general day of Gods
great assizes, then the publication of it was with astonishment. Daily
experience teaches us, that the violation of the laws of earthly Princes are
executed upon delinquents with greater severity then they were proclaimed: Even
so Almighty God, by his voice in giving the Law, speaks, threatens, and
thunders, in each denouncing open war against all such as shall contemptuously
offer violence unto his Law: he will be avenged on his Jer. 46. 10.
adversaries, and comfort himself in their destruction. Thus also when Christ
desired his Father John 12. 28, 29.
to glorify his Name, a mighty voice came from heaven, saying, I have both
glorified it, and will glorify it again; insomuch, that the people said, it
thundered. And sometimes this voice comes mildely, as when the Lord appeared to
the Prophet Elijah; for first there came a violent wind, which rent the 1
King. 19. 11, 12.
mountains, and brake the rocks in pieces; yet the Lord was not in that wind:
then an earthquake, yet the Lord was not in that earthquake: then a fire, yet
the Lord was not in that fire: last of all came a still soft voice, and in it
God was. To stubborn and incredulous Note. Psalm. 68. 33.
people God sends forth his voice with fury: but to obedient and believing
people, in love and mercy.

Now if God manifests himself by voice, then not by Imaginary conceits, like
the ungodly person, who (as David observes) runs the road of Psalm. 50. 18, 21.
all villainy, joining with the thief, partaking with the adulterer, and opening
his mouth with the slanderer, and thinks God to be such a one as himself. Nor
yet by Imagery draughts, as the Papists would, who picture him like an old man
sitting in a chair, grossly abusing his Divine Essence. Beloved, none can
conceive so holily, so reverently, and so divinely of God in every respect as
he ought; therefore has God given an especial charge to the Jews (and in
them to us) concerning his worship, to take heed, because they saw no
similitude, Deuteronomy. 4. 12, 15, 16.
they only heard a voice out of the fire.

And a voice there was, to teach us, that as God at first taught the Jews by a
voice; so likewise in these days, and to the worlds end, God will use and
sanctify a voice to men for their salvation.

Naturally indeed man inclines to that which affects the eye and other
outward senses; and this is a notable bait in Popery to adore goodly images,
and as the Athenians the shrines of Diana, Acts 19. 34.
thereby to bewitch the common people, and these they call the Lay-mans books:
but in the mean time, the chief instrument, the voice, is either altogether
taken away or else uttered in an unknown tongue, which cannot edify. Thus do
they feed the peoples greedy-eyes, whiles in the mean time they sterve their
hungry souls. God has (and blessed be his Name that he has) thought good to
manifest himself unto us by voice; and to this end has he given to us the
organ of the ear, to hear what the Spirit says unto Revel. 2.
the Churches: he then that has an ear is bound to hear; for this we may
conclude on, that they who will not be instructed by hearing, are past hope of
saving, for faith comes by hearing: and, Romans 10. 17. Heb. 11. 6.
without faith it is impossible to please God.

If then we desire truly to know and see God, let us diligently prepare our
hearts, as well as the ears of our bodies, to that means which God has
appointed to bring us to the knowledge of him; that so, whether the Lord shall
speak either immediately by his own voice unto our souls, or mediately by his
Ministers, we may be ready to answer with Samuel, Speak Lord, for thy 1 Samuel
3. 10.
servant hears. For (Beloved) God cannot but be offended, if we shall do
like those Jews of whom he complains, that say one to another, Come (I pray)
Eze. 33. 30. etc.
and hear what is the word that comes forth from the Lord; and they come unto
thee as the people comes, and they sit before thee as my people, and they
hear thy words, but they will not do them. And lo, thou art unto them as a
very lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an
instrument, for they hear thy words, but they do them not. O, Beloved! while
the Angel of the Covenant causes his voice Mal. 3. 1.
to be heard in our Land, let us in the fear of God be attentive and
attendant; and above all things, detest we Popery, which would quite blindfold
the eyes of our souls for ever seeing Christ standing behind our wall, and
deafen our ears from hearing him in his ordinances, and leave us to read him
only in dumb images.

Again, seriously consider, and judge in your own consciences, what a sottish
stupidity it is for any to go about to express a Being infinite by a thing
finite. Hear Gods own words by the mouth of that Evangelicall Prophet Isaiah,
To whom will Isa. 40. 18.
ye liken me (says the Lord)? or, what likeness will ye compare me unto?
In which very words is expressly shown, that none can make an Image able to
resemble Almighty God; All things compared ver. 17.
to him are as nothing, nay, less then nothing, even vanity: so then, Man
cannot conceive any thing whereby to express this incomprehensible Majesty.
Besides, it is a most blasphemous vilifying of this divine and spiritual
Essence, to make any figure or similitude of it at all; for it makes us to
conceive carnally of God, when as carnal shapes can no whit express him: Joh.
4. 23.
God is a Spirit, and spiritual 1 Cor. 2. 14.
things must be discerned spiritually. The exactest Image of purest metal is
but the workmanship of mortal man, and without life, and therefore can no way
set forth him who is life it self, and gives life and being unto all things.

Obj. But Christ is as well Man as God, and therefore, as Man, he may be
figured by an Image.

Resol. He that makes the Image of Christ as he is Man, leaves out the
chiefest part of him, namely, his Divinity, which makes him to be (...), the
Lords Anointed: But his Divinity and his Humanity are inseparable: He then
that presumes to make such an Image, separateth that which God has joined, and
makes himself accursed, by turning, not the image, but the nature and
substance of the incorruptible God into the image Romans 1. 23. etc.
of corruptible man; thus changing the truth of God into a lie, worshipping and
serving the creature more then the Creator, who is blessed for ever.

Diverse other reasons might be brought to prove the folly of Idolatry. Let this
one observation suffice to stop all Papists mouths: If a voice can be
pourtrayed, then may the Essence of God be pictured.

Wherefore let us detest Popery, the beauty of which doctrine does only
consist in the external representation of this eternal Deity: and let us
know, that whom the mind of man cannot conceive, him the tongue of man cannot
express, much less can the work of man's hand figure out or pourtray. And since
God has been graciously pleased to manifest himself unto us by voice, then
which nothing is shriller; let us be careful and attentive to hear him, when
he speaks unto us, either by his own immediate voice, or by the voice of
his Ministers; or whether he be pleased to manifest himself unto us by the
book of the Creatures, or the book of the Scriptures, or the book of
Conscience; which now I come to handle in their order, being the second part of
the second General.

Secondly, God manifestly exhibiteth himself By the book of the Creatures.
unto us by the book of the Creatures, which are various and innumerable.

The Kingly Prophet David, admiring the excellency of the glory of God seen in
his creatures, ( when I consider (says he) the works of thy hands) Psalm. 8. 3.
falls presently into a deep consideration, both of the work of God in man, as
also of the love of God toward man; What is man? Because then man is the most
excellent visible creature of all, and the image of God is more lively
deciphered in him then in any, or in all other creatures whatsoever, let us see
how many ways man reads unto us a lecture of this Deity.

God may be seen in man four ways:

If we consider, 1. Who made him. 2. Whereof he was made. 3. In what form. 4.
To what end.

1. If we enquire who made man, Moses (the penman of God) will tell us, that
God made him. Come, let us make man: the whole Trinity had Genesis 1. 26.
hand in the creation of man. The Prophet Isaiah has the like phrase; O Lord,
thou art our Father, Isa. 64. 8.
we are the clay; thou art the potter, we are all the work of thine hands.
And, (says that holy Psalmist) Know Psalm. 100. 3.
ye that the Lord God is he that has made us, not we our selves.

2. If we enquire, Of what man was made; See we, His substance was the dust
of the ground, Genesis 2. 7.
and even that at first was of nothing; so that man originally is nothing.

3. If we enquire, Of what form man was made, Moses also tells us, that in the
image of God God created Genesis 1. 26, 27.
him; which image (as I have already shown) is Wisdom, Knowledge, etc.
Imaginis hujus subjectum animam esse rationalem dicimus, sanctitatis, and
Tilen. de imag. Dei, in hom. these. 8.
veritatis, and justitiae dotibus exornatam.

4. If we enquire the end why man was created; It was for Gods glory: Now God
is then glorified by man, when man comes to the true knowledge of God, and
loves him with all his heart, with all his soul, with all his strength, and
makes him the true and only object of his prayer. Homo principaliter conditus
est ad celebrationem u^sin. Cat.
Dei, hoc est, ad professionem and invocationem nominis Divini, etc.

In the first of these is seen the goodwill and pleasure of God, in that he
would make so glorious a creature as man. In the second is seen the power of
God, in that he could make him. In the third is seen the love of God, in that
he would make him after his own Image. In the fourth is seen the wisdom of
God, in that he would make him a rational creature: jointly together, they
all show that near conjunction that ought to be of man with God, and how
earnestly man should desire a fuller enjoyment of his presence and communion,
who is unto man all in all.

So then you see that man is to be considered in a double respect. First, as
he is a creature: Secondly, as endued with a rational soul; of both which
God is the principal author. Our parents indeed were the instruments of our
fleshly being under God; for without God they could not do that, for the fruit
of the womb is the blessing of the Psalm. 127. 3.
Lord: And if the parents of the flesh were the only and sole instruments of
generation without God, then might they exactly know how many muscles, nerves,
veins, bones of all sorts, humors, and joints were in the body, yea, where and
how located; but this they know not, even the skilfullest Anatomist may fail
herein: hence says the Psalmist, I am fearfully and wonderfully made, etc.
Psalm. 139. 14, 15, 16.


Again, if the Parents of our flesh had the sole and only power in our
making, then, when our body is sick, they might recover us; or, if any member
were rotted away, or cut off by violence, they might restore it: but this
neither can they do. Since then God is the principal cause of the bodies
being, which is earthly, we may well conclude, that he only created the
soul, which is spiritual, and that our earthly parents had no share in the
creating of that at all: Quod ex carne natum est, caro Joh 3 6.
est; That which is born of the flesh, is flesh: But the soul is immortal,
created only by God, he only it was who breathed in man the breath of life.
Genesis 2. 7.


Add to this, the union of the soul with the body, which makes the body to be
complete, could not be effected by any other, save only that powerful Worker,
whose word is a law; no skill but Divine could unite them twain together. As
then we are creatures, as we are rational creatures, we solely are the work
of his hands, that is, of his Wisdom, and of his Will. Hence are those sayings
in Scripture: Thy hands have made me, and Psalm. 119. 33. Job 10. 11.
fashioned me round about. Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh, and
fenced me with bones and sinews: And, says the mother of the seven sons, I
know 2 Mac. 7. 22, 23.
not how ye came into my womb, for I neither gave you breath, nor life, nor
was it I that formed the members of every one of you. But doubtless the
Creator of the world, who formed man, and found out the beginning of all
things.

Secondly, consider we whereof man was made, viz. of the earth, which is slimie
and filthy, and which we tread under our feet: By how much therefore man is
made of viler substance; by so much it stands him upon to be lowly and humble,
knowing that as he is of the dust, so to dust he must return, and that dust
at last shall be reduced to its former nothing; for, says Peter, The heavens 2
Pet. 3. 7.
and earth that are now, are by the word kept in store, reserved unto fire
against the day of judgment. It Is true, that body which we shall have at the
general resurrection, although it shall be the self same flesh with which we
are now clothed, shall yet be incorruptible: it shall not be, as now it is,
earthy, animated only by a soul separable; but it shall be spiritual, all
danger of separation being done away by Christ's Spirit quickening it, if we be
inheritors of the kingdom of heaven: so much the words of Saint Paul import,
Flesh and blood 1 Cor. 15. 50.
cannot inherit the kingdom of God; where, by flesh and blood, the Apostle
means bodies earthy and frail. Nor may we think with Origin, that Mayer. in
loc.
our bodies shall not then consist of flesh and bones, as now they do, and
that the flesh shall be abolished, because they are then called spiritual:
But, as here, our bodies are called animal, because animated by the soul,
they both being kept together by means of sustenance; Even so then, our bodies
are called spiritual, because perfectly guided by the spirit, and vivified
unto a life, that, being without all sustenance, shall never have end: And,
that this is the Apostles meaning, is evident, when he says, Corruption does
not inherit incorruption.

Thirdly, Consider we the form in which man was created: God created man
after his own image; it is not said, after his own similitude: Imaginis enim
vox est (...) the word signifies diversely: either it may be taken for the very
Essence of God, and so only Christ is said to be (...), the Image Col. 1. 15.
of God: Or, more emphatically, as the same Apostle, (...), the express image
Heb. 1. 3.
of his person: Or else the word may be taken as signifying Wisdom, Justice,
etc. which I have observed formerly. Again, Man was created or formed after
Gods image, not of Gods substance: As then the substance of which man was made
was more vile, so the image in which he was made was more glorious: Nor do I
mean the outward shape of man consisting of members and lineaments of body,
though that also be exceeding glorious above the shape of all visible creatures
whatsoever, ( Os homini sublime dedit, etc.) for the outward shape of man is
accidental, not substantial; but I mean the substantial part of man, which
makes him to be the glory of all creatures, consisting in reason,
understanding, and will, in which he nearest does resemble his Creator. Imago
Dei homo est, non ratione corporis, sed spiritus; Deus enim Spiritus est, non
corpus. And as a man is thus the image of God, he has dominion over all other
creatures: For it is worth observation, that man has his pre-eminence over
other creatures, not in regard of such things as are common to him with them,
as swiftness, strength, bulk of body, or the like; for we see that creatures
are far swifter, much stronger, more corpulent then man: but in regard of
reason, will, knowledge, etc. His glory consists not in things common to him
with brute beasts, but in those things of which they are not capable. To
conclude therefore this third Observation, As the beauty of the body consists
in the members well proportions, and in comeliness of complexion; so does the
beauty of the soul consist in the light of understanding, reason, and will:
For when the soul of man shines with wisdom, and his will with uprightness,
then is God said to delight Psalm. 49. 20.
in man; but when man, whom God has thus created to honor, has no
understanding, he is compared to the beasts that perish.

Fourthly, Consider we the end why man was created, and that is twofold:
First, intrinsecall, or inward, and so a thing is then said to be made, when
the end for which it was made is fully finished and completely perfected: thus
a Palace is then said to be finished, when all things requisite to the full
adorning thereof are so complete, that nothing more is wanting: Thus also a
tree is then said to be a good and perfect tree, when it spreads forth its
branches, shoots forth its leaves, and brings forth good fruit. And in this
sense is man said to be created, when he attaineth unto that end for which he
was created; namely, when he has attained to eternal happiness; which shall
be, when he shall enjoy the fullness of Gods presence, and be transformed into
his image. The 1 John 3. 2.
second end why man was created is extrinsecall, or outward; namely, to
manifest unto the world the glory of that God who* created him; and this by
offering to God Psalm. 50. 23. Josh 7. 19, 20.
prayer and praises, by Rev. 7. 15.
serving him day and night, by confessing his mercies, and Number. 20. 12.
sanctifying him in the eyes of the people; which is done by believing on him,
and, if God shall see good, to suffer the loss of all, even life it self, for
Christ's cause and the Gospels, O happy he who 1 Pet. 4. 16.
is not ashamed to glorify God on this behalf. As then the outward end why a
Palace was built, was for the honor of him that builded it, as Nebuchadnezzar
could vaunt; Is not this great Babel that I have Dan. 4. 30.
built, for the house of the kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the
honor of my Majesty? Or, as the cause why trees are planted is for the
pleasure and benefit of him that planted them: even so the end why man was
created, was to set forth the glory of the Creator; for God created him for
himself. All other things are made for man, and man alone is made for God: and
this gives me two other Observations worthy your heedfullest attention.

1. That all things created by God, either in the heavens, earth, or seas, are
not ordained for themselves, but for the use and service of man: Thus the
heavens empty themselves upon the earth, to make it fruitful, and the earth
again returns her fertility, and all is for the behoof and benefit of man,
man only is reserved for the glory of God.

2. That all other things spend themselves to maintain and enrich man, yet
cannot man enrich God: God stands not in need of man's performances, Nulla re
indiget Deus, since Psalm. 50. 10, 11, 12.
all things are at his command. The total reward, gain, and profit of man's
service to God redoundeth unto man. So wonderfully excellent is God in all his
works, so superabundantly gracious is he to his chiefest work, man: and yet in
a more peculiar manner is he like a tender Father to them that fear him, in
that he has laid up for them a crown of life, and himself will be unto Rev.
2. 10.
them a diadem of beauty. And what is this Isa. 28. 5. Matthew 25. 21.
Crown, but an entering into the joy of our Lord, a fruition of eternal rest
with glory, which is a good beyond all apprehension? so says S. Paul,
repeating Isa. 64. 4. 1 Cor. 2. 9.
it out of the Prophet Isaiah, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has
it entered into the heart of man to conceive the things which God has prepared
for them that love him. Since then God has thus provided for man, man is
obliged to glorify God. This may suffice to have been spoken concerning God
manifested in man, or how the image of God is seen in man.

Our next discourse shall be the Heavens, in which God has placed those
glorious lights of the world, the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, so extolled
by that Kingly Prophet, When I consider Psalm. 8. 3.
the heavens, etc. In which let us see how God is pleased to manifest himself
unto us.

The heavens declare the glory of God, and the Psalm. 19. 1.
firmament shows his handiwork, being all gloriously adorned, and curiously
bespangled with stars. Nor does the prophet only mean the heavens, but, by a
Synecdoche, the whole fabric of the world; for there is not the least angle of
the world, but even in it, after some certain manner, the eternal power and
Godhead is manifested; but because the glory of God is more exactly and
apparently engraven in the heavens, then in any other irrational creature,
therefore he the rather names them, whose glorious splendor is seen unto all
throughout the world; yea, he lays down the manner how the wisdom and power
of God is discerned in them in the ensuing verse, One day Psalm. 19. 2.
tells another, and one night certifieth another: that is, they evidently
declare, that they were not made by chance or fortune, but by that most wise
and omnipotent Architector, even by that most excellent Creator, whose glory
they do manifest. So that, if man had no other book to read God in, but only
the book of the Creatures, the Heavens themselves would sufficiently declare
the Majesty, the Power, and the Goodness of Almighty God: For, consider how
God has placed in the firmament of the heavens those glorious creatures; the
Sun to rule the day, the Moon and the Stars to govern the night: nor do they
rule by their own power, but by that power which they receive from God their
Creator.

In the Sun the holy Ghost sets down three remarkable things, and worthy our
best observation.

1. That it is a most glorious creature, adorned Psalm. 19. 5.
like a Bridegroom.

2. That it runs always, and that most swiftly Verse. 5, 6.
and strongly like a Giant.

3 That from the Suns reflection all other things receive their vegetation; for
nothing is hid from the Verse. 6.
heat thereof.

1. The Sun is a most glorious creature, and therefore compared to a
Bridegroom going forth of his chamber: and we know that then are men always
best bedecked, when the day of their espousals are come, that they may seem
most lovely in the eyes of their Bride. But if we were able perfectly to
behold the body of the Sun for its immensity and quality, we should not need
this comparison of a Bridegroom to illustrate its inexpressible beauty. All
the beauty of the eye consists in light; if the light be gone, and darkness
cover the face of the earth, the eye can discern nothing. And because nothing
is so amiable and lovely as the light, therefore would God be pleased to be
called light; God is light, and in 1 John 1. 5.
hind there is no darkness. And in this light of the Sun we may see him who
is (...), the Father Jam. 1. 17.
of lights, even light it self.

2. The Sun is always in a very swift and wonderful motion; he rejoices
as a Giant to run his course: Now in a Giant, according to his greatness and
strength, so is his swiftness; but the Sun is far swifter then any Giant,
when in the space of four and twenty hours he compasses his Orb: and who can
but in this also see the stupendous wisdom, and admirable power of Almighty
God?

3. Nothing can hide it self from the light thereof; the Moon and the Stars,
the Air, the Earth, and the Seas all borrow their light from this light, and
all receive their maturity from its heat; yea, even the Mines under the earth
have their production from it: And as the earthy bodies receive their
nourishment from the Sun, even so the souls of men receive their enlightening
from God, who is the Father of lights. Sol pater est luminum corporalium, Deus
vero luminum spiritualium: The Sun indeed is the father of lights corporal,
but Almighty God is the Father of lights spiritual.

And as the power and glory of God is seen in the Sun, which is the glory of
the day; so also are his power and providence seen in the vicissitude and
changes of the Moon, which is the governesse of the night. And this creature
affoords these two doctrinall Observations:

1. That as the Moon is nearer to the Sun, the brighter is her body toward the
heavens, and the darker toward the earth: Or, when she is in conjunction with
the Sun, she is bright upwards toward the Sun, and dark downwards toward
the earth; so on the contrary, when she is in opposition to the Sun, her body
is dark toward the heavens, and bright toward the earth; all her light then
reflects downwards, none upwards. So in like manner, (for I shall consider man
like the Moon, and God like the Sun;) when man (like the prodigal) is gone
from the Sun of righteousness into a far country, then that light of his
understanding (wherewith God had endowed him) being abused, reflects only
earthward, his thoughts are only minding earthly things: and although Philip.
3. 19.
to the eye of the world this man is judged and esteemed to be the only wise
and happy man, yet perhaps in the eyes of God he is poor, blind, and naked.
On the other side, when a wicked man turns from his wickedness, and proves a
true convert, a faithful believer, an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no
guile, he is then subjected to God by humility, and knit, or in a manner in
conjunction with God by charity in an holy union; so that Quae sursum sunt
quaerit, He minds the things that are above, where Christ sits Col. 3. 1.
on the right hand of God: then also his understanding is heavenly, and from
above, it is pure, peaceable, Jam. 3. 17.
gentle, easy to be entreated, etc. It is not sordid, that is, earthly,
sensual, divellish. And although Verse. 15.
to the eye of the world he may seem abject, forlorn, despicable, and
accounted no better then the Jer. 8. 2. Zeph. 1. 17.
dung upon the earth, and even Job 18. 17. Isa. 26. 14.
as a dead man out of mind; yet is he dead only to the world, but Col. 3. 3, 4.
his life is hid with Christ in God, and therefore when Christ, who is our
life, shall appear, he also shall appear with him in glory.

2. By this changing of the Moon, God would give us to understand how frail man
is, how subject to fall from his God by sin, and therefore how careful he
ought to be in seeking a perfect union and communion with God, and to turn to
him betimes, quia nescit an alias reverti dabitur, nam qui promisit
poenitentibus veniam, and revertentibus gratiam, non promisit longiorem vitam,
nec poenitentiae donum sponte peccantibus: because he who has promised pardon
to the penitent, has not promised longer life to repent; he who has
vouchsafed to confer grace to them that truly turn unto him, has not
promised the gift of repentance to wilful and obstinate sinners, such as abuse
the riches of his mercy. Let us therefore Hebr. 4. 16.
(while we have grace offered) come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we
may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in the time of need. And let us know,
that the nearer we draw unto God, the brighter will the beams of his
countenance shine upon our souls: not but that the Lord is pleased sometimes
(as it were) to cloud himself from us; and this he does in his wisdom, and
on purpose, that we may both more earnestly long after him, and more highly
prize his presence when we enjoy it. In Chrysostom.
omnibus sanctis hoc facit Deus, ut neque tribulationes, neque jucunditates
continuas sinat habere. God deals thus with all his holy ones, that neither
the burden of afflictions may oppress them, to make them despair; nor the
flash of prosperity puff them up, to make them presume. Hear Almighty God by
his Evangelicall Prophet: For a small moment Isa. 54. 7, 8.
have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee. In a little
wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will
I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer.

Nor are the Stars without some expression of the Deity; Species coeli gloria
stellarum, mundum autem illuminat Deus: The beauty of heaven is the glory of
the Stars, but God is the glory of the world: for whatsoever beauty is either
in the Sun, the Moon, or the Stars, is borrowed from God, who is the Father
of lights; and they, in their being, set forth unto man that excellency and
power of God: for in their order they manifest the Wisdom of God, and in their
obedience to his command they show the power of his Will, they taking a delight
to obey their Creator.

Again, The Stars set forth the workmanship of their Creator, both in their
swiftness of their motions in their proper courses (for in their several
spheres they are always moving,) as also in their sweet harmony and music
observed by Job; Job 38. 31. etc.
which harmony is not to be heard by the ear of the body, but of the soul and
understanding.

Thus from the beauty and virtue of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, as we may
gather not a little of the knowledge of God, so we may conceive more of that
eternal blessedness which all they shall enjoy who shall be citizens of the
new Jerusalem, in that they shall exceed even the Matt. 13. 43.
Sun in his luster and glory.

I could long insist in this book of the creatures, having a large subject to
discourse on; but I will shun tediousness, and briefly discourse of them
generally.

Man at his first creation was a perfect creature, yet mutable; at first he
was endowed with a fullness of knowledge, yet subject to fall, and so to come
short of that first perfection.

Not long after man's creation, through the subtle temptations of Satan, Eve
was beguiled, and Genesis 3.
she persuading her husband to eat, both sinned, and fell short of that their
former happiness. Since which time, much of that knowledge in which he was
created is impaired; for whereas before he was able readily to discern the
virtue and nature of all things, yea, and to give names to every creature
agreeable to that their nature and virtue; he now falls short, and hardly can
with much labor and study find out the virtue of any vegetable. Whereas
before he was Lord over all creatures, and might both command and teach; he
may now from them learn lessons worthy observation: All his senses are now so
depraved and weakened, even in things natural, that it is no marvel if he
fail in things spiritual. The ox knows Isa. 1. 3.
his owner, and the ass his masters crib; but Israel does not know, etc. So
that now the brute creature must read a lecture to man, whereby he may come to
the knowledge of his Creator. And if man diligently observe the variety and
nature of the creatures, together with the wonderful fabric of the world, he
shall find them as a shop or storehouse, full of various wonders, and
wonderful variety, of secret mysteries, and mystical secrets; or as a
School, wherein he may read large lectures of deep Divinity, the world being
as a book in folio, every page whereof is written full of his excellent works,
and those in capital letters, insomuch that he that runs may read.
Excellently does the son of Syrach set for the wisdom Ecclus 43.
and power of God in the variety of the creatures, and yet says he, Who can
magnify him as he is? Ver. 31.
Yet nevertheless, by these his works in the world, and governance thereof,
man may in part discern the Justice, the Knowledge, the Wisdom, the Power, and
the Providence of God: for God has imparted certain sparks of his beauty unto
his creatures, thereby to draw us to the consideration of the love of him who
is Pulchritudo ipsa,* Beauty it self, and whereof all other is but as a
shadow: Even as a man, finding a small current of water, may thereby be moved
to seek out the head of the spring; or, as happening on some small vein of
gold, may be thereby animated to search out the mine it self. But we, alas!
like silly children, delight our selves only with the fair cover of the book,
not minding what is contained within: Whereas, in all fair creatures which
daily we behold, we should rather consider thus within our selves, that if
God could make one clod of earth so amiable, by imparting unto it some small
sparkle of his excellency; how infinitely fair must he then be in himself,
yea, how worthy all-love and admiration, who is sole perfection? yea, and how
happy we then shall be, when we shall enjoy his beautiful presence, from
whence all creatures do borrow theirs? But (as I said) commonly we only rest
in the external appearance of visible objects, and carry not our
contemplations from the creature to the Creator.

In the old Law God commanded, that whatsoever Lev. 11. 41, 42.
did go upon its breast, should be abomination unto man: Oh! how abominable
then is reasonable man, who has his soul as it were glewed to the creatures,
even to this white and yellow clay? yea, and how vain are they that pride
themselves in their apparel, borrowing from all creatures to make themselves
seem lovely? from one they borrow wool, from another his skin, from another
his furre, from others even their excrements; as silk from the worm, and
perfume from the cat: and not content herewith, but they borrow pearls from
fishes, silver and gold from the earth, and precious stones from the stands;
and these they hang about their bodies, to draw the eyes of others to stare on
them, as if this beauty were their own: for when the stone glitters upon their
finger, they in their own conceit glitter also; and when the silk shines on
their backs, Lord! how proud are they in their own fancies! never considering
that God who infused that beauty even into those creatures from whom they
borrowed it. So that, although the creatures of the world do wonderfully set
forth this great God; yet every man sees not God in them, only the true
Christian, the Spouse of Christ, can discern him through these grates, can
perceive him from behind this wall, and that only by the clear eye of
unblemished faith. Not that the manifestation of the Deity is debarred any man,
for Saint Paul says, The invisible things of God from the creation of Romans 1.
20.
the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even
his eternal power and Godhead: So that it is plain, that God is made manifest
unto all, even by the works of the creation, although all do not observe it.

Obj. But God is insensible, that is, invisible, and therefore not cognoscible:
quod enim non cadit in sensum, non subit intellectum; that which comes not
within the compass of our sense, comes not within the verge of our
understanding.

Resol. God considered in himself, that is, in his Essence, is indeed
invisible, according to S. John, (...), No man has seen God at any 1 John 4.
12.
time: yet is his invisibility manifested and understood in the things created;
for, (...), that which may be known of God is manifested in the Romans 1. 19.
creatures, namely, his eternal power and Godhead.

As the exquisite skill of a workman is discerned by his work; so is the
wisdom and power of God perspicuously manifested ex operibus, by his works:
Whether you consider the nature of the heavens, or the influence of the
stars, or the motion of the planets, or the various and terrible meteors, or
the creatures in the air, earth, or seas, how strange they are for form, how
innumerable for multitude; or if you consider him in one of his most excellent
and admirable miracles, namely, the variety of the visages of so many millions
of men, not one exactly and in all parts like unto another, which Pliny notes,
In facie vultuque nostro Lib. 10. Hist. Not.
nullas duas in tot millibus hominum indiscretas effigies existere, quod ars
nulla in paucis numero praestet affectando: all which are a large Commentary of
the divine Essence and Wisdom of Almighty God. And again, that all things
should be made of nothing, solo nutu and verbo, absque labor, only by his
command and word, not by any labor; this shows his eternal Omnipotency: Ens
ex ente producere est potentiae creatae; ens vero. ex non ente, vel ex ente
indisposito est potentiae increatae; which I will English thus: To erect a
curious fabric, having convenient materials, is the skill of every common
artist; but to erect a curious fabric, out of base materials, requires more
then ordinary skill: But now, to erect so curious a fabric as is the whole
Universe, and that out of nothing, only By speaking the word, this needs must
be the finger Exodus 8. 19.
of God.

Thus, Beloved, have you heard how that God has left his footsteps imprinted
in his works, so that man cannot be altogether without the knowledge of God: In
omni re aspectabili quaedam extant Vel palpando inveniri potest Deus, Tilen.
Dei vestigia; in every thing visible some print of Gods footsteps is
impressible, by which man may (if he will) track and find out his Creator, or
else be (...), Judge, to pronounce sentence of condemnation for his wilful
ignorance against himself; for God by his works has left man (...), without
all excuse. In a word, God by his works exhibits himself to a man, to see if
man will by them seek and search after him: The works of the Lord are great
(says the Psalmist) sought Psalm. 111. 2.
out of all that have pleasure therein. So then delight may be taken by viewing
God in the creatures.

Yet more apparently does God manifest himself By the book of the Scriptures.
to man in the book of the Scriptures. Although then man may sufficiently read
the Wisdom, Justice, Power, Goodness and Providence of God in the book of the
Creatures; yet because for the most part he beholds the creatures but
slightly, and with a glancing eye (for he seldom looks farther into them then
they stand him in stead) very seldom he either sees or observes God in them,
(and if he is purblind in things natural, and such as are obvious to his
sight, no marvel if thick scales cloud his eyes concerning things
supernatural and spiritual.) God therefore, who is abundant in goodness,
exhibits himself to man by a far clearer light, namely, by his word and
Sacraments, by which (as through a prospective) man may discern him: and yet
every man has not this glorious privilege, for He has not dealt so with
every nation, the Psalm. 147. 20.
heathen have no knowledge of his law: it is only his Spouse that can discern
him in them; The natural 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15.
man perceives not the things of the Spirit. This peculiar blessing we shall
apply unto our selves by Gods gracious assistance.

God in his great mercy has affoorded this favor to us, more then to many
other people in the world; which argues his wonderful love that he bears
unto us. Blessed be his name, he has taken away the scales from our eyes, as
he did from Saul's at his conversion, by giving unto us his Acts 9. 18.
word and sacraments, by which we may see him clearly, if we will: O pray we
then that he would be pleased to anoint our eyes with heavenly eyesalve, Rev.
3. 18.
and that he would give us the eye of true faith, that so we may see him in
them: for else, as the light of the Sun is not discerned by a blind man,
although the Sun shine never so brightly; even so this supernatural light in
the Scriptures is not seen by any who have not the eye of their souls opened by
faith.

Some have been so Atheistical, as to doubt whether there were a God or not,
and consequently to deny his word: but when what through the terrors and
affrightments of their own consciences, together with the observation of the
order and governance of all things, they could not deny a supreme power; the
Devil sought to delude them by faining, that this God was of some corporeal
substance, and that he spoke unto them by his lying Oracles: by this policy
the Devil deluded many, and hindered them the knowledge of the true God.

Others again grant, that there is a God, and yield that he has a written
word; yet blush not blasphemously to say, Melius consultum fuisse Ecclesiae,
Observat. Tilen. de orig. sac. Scrip. These. 35.
si nulla unquam extitisset Scriptura; that it had been happier for the Church,
if there never had been any Scripture: therefore blasphemously stiling it,
Theologiam atramentariam. Thus impudently controlling the wisdom of God, who
was pleased thereby to make himself known unto his Spouse, the Church.

Another sort there are, who equal their unwritten verities in authority unto
the sacred Scriptures, and most grossly abuse both the letter and the sense of
the Scriptures; thus making the invention of man of like authority with the
word of God, which was given by the inspiration of the 2 Timothy 3. 16.
holy Ghost. God has (blessed be his name) miraculously preserved the
Scriptures in their genuine purity, maugre the fury of King Jehojachim, who
burnt the roll that Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jer. 36. 23.
the Prophet Jeremiah: or maugre the madness of 1 Mac. 1. 56, 57.
Antiochus, and other tyrants, who sought utterly to Pro libito mutare, vel
addere, demere quicquam. Crashaw on Romes forgeries.
abolish the books of God extant in their days: or maugre the sacrilegious
policy of the Papists, who have corrupted it in the text.

So that if any shall now ask, What is meant by the Scriptures? I answer, Not
men's traditions, nor the unwritten verities of the superstitious Papists, which
they equalize with the pure word of God: but those books which are received for
(and commonly called) Canonical, contained in the Old and New Testaments,
commended unto us from the Prophets and Apostles times even until now, through
the power, providence, and mercy of God; which also are not of any private 2
Pet. 1. 20, 21.
interpretation: For prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but
holy men spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost; and therefore are not to
be wrested to please the strange humors and opinions, or to make for the
private ends of either Papists, Heretics, or Schismatics; much less to be
corrupted in the text by any, but construed according to the true sense and
meaning of the holy Ghost. Perverters there were of the word of God in the
Apostles days; the Apostle Peter speaks of some who wrested the writings of
his beloved brother 2 Pet. 3. 16.
Paul, and other Scriptures also unto their own destruction. I could wish there
were not some such in these our days: but because there are some such, I shall
advertise you in the words of the same Apostle, Beware, seeing that ye know
these things before, lest Verse. 17.
ye also be led away with the error of the wicked, and fall from your own
steadfastness.

Quest. But some may say, How then shall I know that Scripture which is
commended unto us, to be the very true word of God?

Answ. The holy Scripture takes not its authority from the penmen who wrote the
same, for they (for the most part) were unlearned men, as shepherds, plow-men,
fishermen, and the like: But the authority of the Scriptures arises,

First, From the majesty of him who inspired the writers to pen things so
sublime in such a familiar style, and simplicity of words: and yet such is the
majesty of the style, that it is unutterable, being more powerful in matter,
then in words; which none could do save only that God who is clothed with
Majesty.

Secondly, The matter it self being of that efficacy, that it divides
assunder the soul and the spirit, Heb. 4. 12.
and is a discerner of the thoughts and intentions: as it strikes terror into
the hearts of the greatest adversaries that despite it; so it works an
aversion from evil, and a conversion to good in them that love it: yea, the
comfort that some have taken in it, has made them abandon all sublunary
things, and yield their lives as a prey into the hands of merciless men,
rather then disclaim it: so that, what by convincing and converting, what by
affrighting and delighting, all have been forced to acknowledge it to be not
the invention of mortal man, but the true word of immortal God.

Thirdly, The events of the prophecies; as of the promised seed, the calling of
the Gentiles, the deliverance of the Israelites from the Egyptian thraldom,
etc. How does Isaiah prophecy of Christ to come, as if he then were already
in the flesh, Unto us a child is born, etc? and the same Isa. 9. 6.
Prophet fore-telleth the freedom of the Jews from captivity by Cyrus, naming
him; whereas Isa. 45. 1.
Cyrus was born about 100. years after: so another Prophet that cried against
the altar at Bethel, 1 King. 13. 2.
named Josiah, and what he should do upon that altar; whereas Josiah was born
above 300, years after. In the New Testament S. Paul tells us of seducing
spirits, of doctrines of devils, forbidding to 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2.
marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God has created to be
received with thanksgiving; and this is fulfilled in that Antichristian Romish
Church: so Peter fore-telleth of scoffers, walking 2 Pet. 3. 3.
after their own lusts; and have not we some who scoff at Religion, and hate
the work of Reformation? I wish we had not. Thus the events of the Prophecies
prove the truth of the word, to be the word of Truth.

Fourthly, The admirable consent of the penmen, all pointing at the same
Messiah, though living in several ages: Add to this the consent of the Spirit
mentioned by Paul; and, says Peter in 1 Cor. 2. 12, 13.
the behalf of himself and the rest of the Apostles, We have a more sure word
of prophecy. 2 Pet. 1. 19.


Fifthly, The wisdom of God in the penning of his Law: No law of man could
ever be so exactly devised, but some offender might find a shift to evade the
penalty of that law: man's law therefore requires to be reviewed and amended;
but this law of God remains as at first it was made, and no delinquent can
find the least way to escape the judgment threatened; and this also proves it
to be the very word of the invisible God.

And if any desire to be satisfied yet farther concerning the Scriptures,
whether they are the very word of God, let him do this; compare Scripture by
Scripture, and place by place, let the letter and the sense go together, then
let him yield himself obedient to the Spirit of truth, and that Spirit of
truth shall witness unto him the truth of the Spirit: and, let as many as be
perfect be thus Phil. 3. 15.
minded: and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even
this unto you. But if any one will not be content to suck the wholesome milk
from the breasts of the Scriptures, let him continue still, like the swine, to
feed upon the husks that he so much does relish.

But as for you (my brethren) of whom I hope Hebr. 6. 9.
better things, and such as accompany salvation, Receive (I humbly beseech you)
with meekness, sobriety, James 1. 21.
and thankfulness this pure word of God, which is the truth of God, proceeding
from the fountain of Truth it self, which is only able to make you wise unto
salvation, and which will open the eyes of your understanding clearly to see
God: and as for others, no marvel if they never attain unto the true and
perfect knowledge of God, who either know not the Scriptures at all, or else,
knowing them, search them not diligently, nor read them with a single eye.
Christ reproved the Sadduces concerning the resurrection, You err (says he)
not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God: He reproved also the Jews for
their ignorance of knowing him, when he proved by the testimony of his Father,
of John, of his works, and John 5. 17, 32, 36.
of the Scriptures, who he was; and therefore he counsels them to search
the Scriptures, for they Verse. 39.
testified of him: Scrutamini Scripturas. It was the honor of the Bereans, in
that they received the word Acts 17. 11.
with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily whether the
things spoken by Paul were so, or not: and as it was their honor, so it will
be your blessedness to be studious in the Scriptures, which so evidently
reveal God to you.

For meditation in the word of God is that key that opens the door to the
closet of our hearts, where all our accounts do lie; it is also that
looking-glass, or rather that very eye of our soul, whereby she sees her
self, and her whole estate, and without which she runs on blindely into a
thousand inconveniences, stumbling at every step, being in continual peril of
some deadly mischief. And, indeed, the very end why man came into the world
was to glorify God, and serve him by meditating on his word: if then we
perform not that service for which we were created, we never shall receive
that reward which is promised unto that service. It is true, wicked men build
their hope of eternal felicity on a sandy foundation, but this their hope
shall at last make them ashamed; Romans 5. 4.
for when their earthy tabernacle shall fall, the fall thereof shall be great;
great (I say) Matthew. 7. 27.
in respect of the change that they shall see, great for the horror they shall
conceive, great for the misery they shall suffer, great for the unspeakable
joys of heaven they shall lose, and great for the eternal and unsupportable
pains in hell they shall fall into; every way great, else the mouth of the Lord
would not have spoken it. This is the woeful estate of the wicked, who desire
not the knowledge of God in his word.

So now we know, or may know, that living ill, we cannot die well, and
consequently, not be saved; and we know, or, at least, ought to know, that
many are damned for their sins; and we know, and cannot choose but know, that
shortly we must die, and receive the wages of our sins, (if unrepented of)
namely, eternal death, which is both intolerable and eternal; at which time
ignorance shall excuse none.

Wherefore, since God manifests himself unto us more clearly and apparently
in the Scriptures then any other way, let us with heavenly devotion seek him in
them, as the Spouse did her Beloved among the lilies of the field, and we
shall be Cant. 6. 2.
sure to find him whom our soul loves, looking upon us with a ravishing
countenance, even with eyes of delight: and let us with the ears of humble
attention listen to him in his word, in which we shall hear him speaking to
us, not in an high hyperbolicall strain, but according to our capacity; and
yet again with such stupendous majesty, that the wisest heathen Philosopher
could never fathom, and therefore must of necessity admire the secret and
wonderful wisdom of him, who has vouchsafed to deliver in such familiar
terms, that which they with greatest scrutinie could never dive into. Hence
that gratulation of our Savior, Father, I thank thee, that thou have hid these
things Matthew. 11. 25.
from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes: even so, Father,
for so it seemed good in thy sight. Hence also is it, that the Scriptures are
called Ezekiel. 47. 3, 4, 5.
waters, wherein the lamb may wade, and the elephant may swim: In them is Heb.
5. 12, 13.
milk for babes, and strong meat for men of riper years: and in Jer. 2. 13.
them God manifests himself in all his essential attributes and properties:
O let us draw, with joy, Isa. 12. 3.
waters out of these wels of salvation.

The attributes and properties of God mentioned in the Scriptures are diverse, I
shall only observe four.

1. His Wisdom: this is profitable to direct us unto him, and by it we also
may grow prudent, and wise unto salvation. Wisdom (says the Preacher) Eccles.
8. 1.
makes the face to shine; and not the face alone, but the whole man shall be
beautified with heavenly wisdom, and this heavenly wisdom is found in the
Scriptures only; therefore it is called 1 Cor. 2. 7.
hidden wisdom, wisdom that Prove. 1. 7.
gives instruction: this the 1 Cor. 1. 20, 21.
world understands not; it is a Job 28. 17.
jewel of inestimable worth.

2. His Justice; as in punishing the wicked, so in rewarding the godly: and
although some are grown so cunning, that they can blind and deceive the eye of
mortal man; yet the all-seeing eye of Almighty God will find them out, and
his hand will punish them: David knew full well that God observed him at all
times and places, when he says, O Lord, thou have searched and known me,
thou Psalm 139. 1. ad 14.
know my down-sitting, and mine up-rising, thou understandest my thoughts
long before: Thou compassest my path, etc. And as God espieth all our ways, so
will he judge us according to all our works; he will bring to judgment every
secret thing. O Eccles. 12. 14.
that men would lay to heart, that he that sees in Matthew. 6. 4.
secret, will reward openly! But although God can make all things as naked and
open to the eye of the world as they are to his own eye (witness the many
private murders, secret adulteries, etc.) yet some are so exceeding vile in
their ways, as if there were neither God to judge them, nor Satan to accuse
them, nor Hell to torment them. It is a shame (says Saint Paul) even to speak
of those things which are done of them in private: yet although a Christian in
modesty is ashamed to speak, they themselves blush not impudently to act: The
show Isa. 3. 9.
of their countenance does witness against them, they declare their sin as
Sodom, they hide it not: woe unto them, for they have rewarded evil unto
themselves. The consideration of this (me thinks) should make all, even
incorrigible sinners, cease to sin any more, since Truth it self, who cannot
lie, has spoken it, that nothing is secret that shall not be manifest, nor
Luke 8. 17.
any thing hid that shall not be known, and come abroad.

3. His Mercy is manifested in the Scriptures: not a Prophet, not a Chapter,
scarce a Verse, but some ways or other reflects on his Mercy; yea, the whole
earth is full of his mercy. In him Mercy Psalm. 119. 64. Psalm. 85. 10.
and Truth are met together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other.
His Mercy reaches to the Psalm. 57. 10.
heavens, and his Truth unto the clouds. He is plenteous in showing mercy, it
is his nature and property. Of this his Mercy the stiff-necked and
incorrigible sinner has no share, it is only extended to Gods afflicted ones,
such as tremble at his Isa. 66. 2.
word. Build upon this, In whom there is no fear and knowledge of God, to them
there shall be no mercy extended from God: It is one of his rich jewels, which
he will not bestow on swine, who never look up unto him; yea, who would
undervalue it, and trample it under their feet.

4. His Providence is manifested in the Scriptures: The eyes of all look unto
him, and he gives Ps. 145. 15, 16.
them their meat in due season: He opens his hand, and satisfies the desire
of every living thing. Job recounting the Providence of God, says, that he
feeds the young ravens that call upon him. If then Job. 38. 41.
God takes care for ravens, sure much more will he provide for those that
fear him; he will fulfill their desire, and in time of adversity he will
hear their cry, and help them. It was past the power of the King of Israel to
help the woman that cried unto him when Samaria was besieged, and famine was
sore in the City: well might he say, If the Lord do not help thee, whence
shall I help thee, 2 King. 6. 27. Even Kings themselves must depend on Gods
providence for their daily maintenance. And although the wicked oft-times have
a larger portion of temporal things then the righteous; yet God will in a more
peculiar way so provide for his own, that in time of dearth they shall have
enough, when the wicked shall suffer scarcity: Thus says the Lord, Behold, my
servants Isa. 65. 13, 14.
shall eat, but ye shall be hungry; my servants shall drink, but ye shall be
thirsty: behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed: behold,
my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart,
and howl for vexation of spirit. As every master of a family will provide for
his household, yet more especially for his children; so will God for his after
an especial manner: he will provide for them in time of captivity, as he did
for Jeremiah: God put it into the heart of King Nebuchadrezzar to give charge
concerning Jeremiah to the captain of Jer. 39. 12.
the guard, saying, Take him, and look well to him, do him no harm, but do to
him even as he shall say unto thee. So also for Ebedmelech: I will deliver
thee, Ver. 17, 18.
says the Lord, and thou shall not be given into the hands of the men of whom
thou art afraid. For I will surely deliver thee, and thou shall not fall by the
sword, but thy life shall be for a prey unto thee, because thou have put thy
trust in me, says the Lord. Since then God is thus careful and provident for
us, let us, as S. Peter advises us, cast all our care upon him, for he cares
1 Pet. 5. 7.
for us.

Nor does God provide thus for his own in things of this life, but he has
prepared also for them eternal habitations; and this is also assured to us in
his word, I go (says Christ) to prepare a John 14. 2.
place for you. In my Fathers house are many mansions. Fear not, little flock,
for it is your Fathers pleasure Luke 12. 32.
to give you a kingdom: yea, such a kingdom as never shall be ruined. He
has provided for them that fear him an incorruptible inheritance, and 1 Pet.
1. 4. and 5. 4.
crown that fades not away. And in truth, unspeakable, yea, unconceivable are
the things which God has prepared for them that set themselves to seek him, to
know him, to fear him, and to love him: Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, etc.
I could 1 Cor. 2. 9.
instance more of Gods manifestation of himself in other his attributes and
properties, out of this book of the Scriptures; but let these suffice: And come
we now to observe how God exhibiteth himself to us by the book of the
Scriptures in general.

Thy word (says the Kingly Prophet) is a lantern Psalm. 119. 105.
to my feet, and a light unto my paths: a lantern, to direct us to him in
the night of our ignorance; and a light brightly shining on our souls, that
we may see him. As then, when a man is in the dark, he knows not which way
to go; so, when the fogges of our natural ignorance have darkened our
understandings, we cannot find the way that leads unto the heavenly Canaan:
God therefore in mercy has given to us the light of the Scriptures, by which
we may see to make straight steps thereunto. Wherefore, as when a man has
lain a long time in a darksome dungeon, or some close place where no light has
appeared, at last having gained the least benefit of the light of the Sun,
he rejoices; for (says Solomon) Truly, light is sweet, and a pleasant thing
it is for a Eccles. 11. 7.
man to behold the Sun: So should we show our selves joyful unto the Lord our
God, for that when we were in the darkness of ignorance, and shadow of death
through unbelief, he was pleased to vouchsafe, that this glorious light of
his word should break forth unto us, and that not for a time only, and then be
clouded again never to shine more, but that it should shine forth unto a
perfect 1 John 2. 8.
day; yea, so clearly, that in it we might see God apparently: And although
the darkness of Popery has sometimes overshadowed this light In the days of
Queen Mary.
for a time, yet (blessed be God) those mists are dispelled, maugre the plots
of Antichristian superstition; and let our hope and prayer be, that those
clouds may never obscure it more. Wherefore, since the night is past, and the
morning-starre has appeared, let us not any longer sleep in sinful ignorance;
but rather awake, and hear Christ in his word, saying, Surge qui dormis, and
illuminabit te Christus: Awake thou that sleep, and arise from Ephesians. 5. 14.
the dead, and Christ shall give thee light: and the sooner, lest our
candlestick be removed from us. In the days of old Eli, The word of the Lord
was precious, 1 Samuel 3. 1.
there was no open vision: the good Lord grant that the famine of the word may
never be known in our land, by our neglect of casting off Romans 13. 12.
the works of darkness, and putting on the armor of light. The meditation
that David had in the word of God, made him to find, that God was his light
and his salvation: and certes, in the Scriptures is that light, of which David
speaks, sown Psalm. 79. 11.
to the righteous, and joyful gladness to all that are true of heart. Labor
we then to see this light, even God himself in the light of the Scriptures.

That God is light is apparent; David says, God Psalm. 27. 1.
is my light, and my salvation: and Christ says, I am the light of the world,
he that follows me shall John 8. 12.
not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life. This is the message
that we have heard of him, and declare 1 John 1. 5.
unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness: Thus God is light. If
then we will follow him, our paths must be light also; for, says Solomon,
The path of the just is as the shining light, that Pro. 4. 18, 19.
shines more and more unto the perfect day. The way of the wicked is
darkness, they know not at what they stumble. To the Law then, and to the
Testimony; if Isa. 8. 20.
they speak not according to this rule, it is because there is no light in
them. In the word only is that true light to be found, that can best direct us
to see the face of God comfortably shining upon our souls.

When ever therefore we take the sacred Bible into our hands to read, in
which (as I have showed) God most brightly looks upon us, let it be with holy
devotion, with reverend intention and attention, supposing the title of every
page to be Holiness to the Lord. Exodus 28. 36.


And although there be extant many excellent books, lively discovering Almighty
God unto us; yet let us know, that they all borrow their light from the Bible:
branches they are of this Vine; slips from this Root; sweet flowers, but
gathered out of this Eden of God; streams of wholesome water, clear as
crystal, but yet all flowing from this Springhead: So that I may say, that
the Bible is (...), the book of books, because written by men inspired by the
holy Ghost, who is 2 Pet. 1. 21.
the Spirit of truth: and therefore ought not this book to be denied to the
people, that they should not see God in it; much less, be undervalued,
slighted, or corrupted by any. And let us know, that the more our souls are
affected toward God, the more will he graciously manifest himself unto us;
even as David, whose meditation being daily in the law of God, found the light
of Gods countenance shining more and more upon him, inso-much, that he
earnestly requested God not to turn his face away from him; this also was that
that made him wiser then his teachers. Psalm. 119. 99.


Saint Peter commending the majesty of Christ at his transfiguration, of which
himself was an eyewitness, 2 Pet. 1. 16.
commends also the sure word of prophecy, (that is) of preaching the word; and
says, that it is a light shining in a dark place, till the day dawne, and Ver.
19.
the day star appear in men's hearts. Since then the ministry of the word is
a chief means to bring this light to our souls, let us both heedfully attend
it, and highly prize it. What although to the worldly-wise it be accounted
foolishness; yet to 1 Cor. 1. 23.
the heavenly-minded it is the joy of their hearts, and the savor of life to
salvation: by it God is 2 Cor. 2. 16.
pleased to save them that believe. Listen therefore 1 Cor. 1. 21.
unto it attentively, practice it faithfully, and despise not the message,
respecting the meannesse of the messenger, though it be the idle humor of too
many to distaste the word preached, because they dis-esteeme the preacher; but
know, that God is pleased by earthen vessels to magnify his mercy: 2 Cor. 4.
7. Luke 10. 16.
and let the other also know, that whosoever despises us, despises him that
sent us. If a malefactor, adjudged by the law to die, should refuse a gracious
pardon, because his enemy brought it, all would condemn him of impudency, and
(so dying) censure him guilty of his own perishing: But this by the way. Return
we to the observation of the benefit which we receive by the Scriptures.

The Lord tells the Jews, and in them us, that he had taught them statutes
and judgments. Deuteronomy. 4. 5, 6.
Keep them therefore, and do them (says he;) for this is your wisdom and
understanding in the sight of the nations, who shall say, Surely, this great
nation is a wise and understanding people.

And as daily meditation in the Scriptures brings you nearer unto God, so by
its illuminating virtue it renders you more heavenly-minded toward God: Pray
then as Saint Paul advises you, That (...), the Col. 3. 16.
word of Christ may dwell richly in you in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding, and not be only at your fingers ends, nor in your mouths only
for discourse sake, nor yet in your hearts only, like a guest or tenant, which
stays for a time, and then is gone; but that it may be like a king, dwelling,
ruling, and reigning there, as in its proper seat, by the power of his Spirit;
even that word which so lively sets forth to you him whom Abraham foresaw,
whom Jacob prophesied John 8. 56. Genesis 49. Isa. 7. 14. Jer. 33. 15. Mal. 4. 2.
of, whom Isaiah calls Immanuel; Jeremiah, The branch of righteousness; and
Malachie, The Sun of righteousness, that comes with healing in his wings: that
that morning-starre may shine in your heart which was typified in the old law,
but exhibited in the new; so that what was foretold in the one, is manifested
in the other: him (I say) that you may see in the light of the Scriptures by
the eye of faith: search them then, for they testify of him; he through them,
as through windows, looks upon you: With Timothy know them from your youth,
practice them in your riper years, and let them be your study in your old age;
so shall you discern so much of him, even in this life, through these grates,
as shall even ravish your souls with desire of a fuller fruition of him
hereafter.

And, as God manifests himself to you in his word, so also in the blessed
Sacraments: And first, in the Sacrament of Baptism, when believers are
regenerate and born anew of water and the holy Ghost, when they are received
into the Ark of Christ's Church, and made lively members of his mystical body,
by remission of their sins, and bestowing on them his holy Spirit, by means
whereof they receive such blessings from God, as make them to live in him by
grace in this life, and assure them that they shall reign with him in glory
eternally hereafter. Secondly, but most clearly of all, in the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, wherein he gives them his flesh Qui fidei ore panem hunc
manducant, ei tanquam membra uniantur, Tilen. de Coen. Dom. These. 21.
to be their meat, and his blood to be their drink, imparting to them that
heavenly hidden Manna, which they take by the hand, and eat by the mouth of
faith. Every true spouse of Christ in this sees his super-abundant love, in
that he was pleased to veil his glorious Divinity with the mantle of our
infirm mortality, that so he might more easily make himself known unto us.
For as he is God co-equall with his Father, he is invisible; but as he in
great humility assumed our nature ( per operationem (...)) by making himself in
form of a servant, who was Lord of all, (for he did only ( majestatem
seponere, non deponere) for a while lay aside his majesty, not quite disrobe
himself of it) he was visible amongst men, he was conversant with men, he
did eat, drink, sleep, talk, and at last suffered death by men; every way he
did communicate himself unto men, making the faithful one with him by
spiritual union and conjunction. Hence is that saying, Paries est verbi
Cornel. a Lap.
incarnati humanitas, per quam stans, quasi per fenestras prospicit in
Ecclesiam and fideles, unde and nos aspicimus Deitatem per humanitatem. These
are the windows through which Christ, manifesting himself, reveals himself
unto us, and in them declaring the secret will and work of God concerning our
redemption and salvation; whereof, except he were perfect God, he could have
no knowledge: for none, being mere and only man, could ever have searched out
that bottomless abyss, nor ever have found out so intricate a mystery.

Lastly, God makes himself known unto By the book of Conscience.
man by the book of Conscience: for there is none so atheistical, but the
terrors of his Conscience will make him acknowledge a Deity.

Conscience is a practical syllogism condemning Conscientia est syllogismus
practicus ex lege, Ursin.
man for the breach of Gods law; the Major whereof is the letter of the law,
Cursed is every man that continues not in all things which are written in the
book of the law to do them: The Minor is the accusing of Conscience, But I
have broken the law: Hence the Conclusion necessarily must follow, Therefore I
am accursed. Sometimes it is put for the spirit or soul of a man, and
sometimes for the faculties of the soul; so we read, that the law of God is
written in our hearts, our consciences either Romans 2. 15.
accusing or excusing: which must be understood ( in intellectu nostro) in the
understanding faculty of the soul; and in this sense, the majesty and power
of God shines even to the consciences of the heathen and infidels: Non omnis
Numinis sensu Tilen.
carent, qui in sylvis oberrantes, ferinam agunt vitam: Even they who live like
savage beasts in woods, are not altogether void and senseless of a supreme
power: and whence is this but from the inward curb of conscience?

Yet more especially and clearly God is manifested to the consciences of men
these two ways:

1. By the ministry of the word, by which he powerfully works on their
consciences.

2. By the inward checks of conscience after sin committed, both in the godly,
and also in the wicked.

First, by the ministry of the word; and this is four ways:

1. By opening that which was before locked up: The closets of men's hearts are
locked up by sin and ignorance, so that they cannot rightly conceive of God as
they ought, until he who has the key of David be pleased to open them by the
Revel. 3. 7.
ministry of the word: the heart of man naturally being like unto a
spring-lock, which shuts of its own accord, but cannot be opened without a
key. Thus God is said to open the heart of Lydia, when Acts 16. 14.
she heard the word of God from the mouth of Paul, and by the same means to
convert the Jayler Verse. 31.
and his household; so also God opened the hearts of three thousand at Peter's
preaching. God Acts 2.
has committed the keys of his kingdom unto the Ministers of his Gospel,
whereby he enables them Matthew. 16. 19.
to speak unto his people; yet, Spiritus sanctus est, qui verbi praeconio
hominum mentes illuminat, qui aures perforat, and qui corda aperit, ut
Scripturae tanquam divinae firmiter assentiantur.

2. By softning that which before was hard: The heart of man naturally is Ezekiel.
11. 19.
flinty, God only (says Job) can soften it; and this God works Job 23. 16.
by his word. Thus, when Josiah heard the judgments 2 King. 22. 19.
of God threatened against the Jews, he grew tenderhearted: O that the word of
God might work the like effect on us, even now, when not only his threatenings
are denounced, but his hand is also heavy upon us! But, alas! we have too many
that refuse to hearken, that pull away the shoulder, and Zech. 7. 11, 12.
stop the ear, that they might not hear: Yea, they make their hearts as an
adamant stone, lest they should hear the law, and the words which the Lord of
hosts has sent in his Spirit by the former Prophets; therefore has there come
great wrath from the Lord of hosts.

3. God reveals himself to man by the ministry of the word in convincing
the conscience for sin, which was before as it were seared up: Thus dealt he
with Ephraim, After Ephraim was Jer. 31. 19.
instructed, he smote upon his thigh, he was ashamed, and even confounded,
because he did bear the reproach of his youth. Thus Agrippa could not but be
convicted in conscience of the Deity of Christ by the preaching of Paul, when
he said, Almost thou perswadest Acts 26. 28.
me to be a Christian: such a victorious grace of wisdom has the holy Ghost
infused into the ministry of the word. Felix also could not but be convicted
in his conscience of the dreadful justice of God, when he trembled, hearing
Paul's discourse Acts 24. 25.
concerning the torments of hell, and judgment to come: Happy had it been for
them both, if they had fully assented to the power of his preaching. Tanta est
Scripturae vis, ut etiam hostibus suis verum Tilen.
testimonium exprimat, and in tenebrionum latibula fulgorem aliquem immittat;
nimirum ut liquido constet, internam esse hujus lucis proprietatem, ex se, and
per se existere: Such is the power of the Scripture, that it gives evident
testimony of its truth, even to its very enemies, and sends forth its beams of
light into the secrets of the craftiest plotters, that it may manifestly
appear, that it is the property of the Scriptures to work inwardly on the
conscience, by shining of it self, and in it self.

4. By the ministry of the word God purges the conscience from dead works, to
serve the living God: The word does metamorphose a man, and makes him to be
other then what he was before: thus Paul, after that he was converted,
exercised himself Acts 24. 16.
to have a conscience void of offense both toward God, and toward man. At
first Paul thought to have domineered over the poor Christians at Damascus, but
after he had seen the Lord Christ in the midst of that glorious light, which
exceeded the light of the Sun, he was content to sit (as it were) at the feet
of Ananias, and be instructed by him. Now, Lupus hic Benjamin ovi caput
submisit, Hieron. Epist. 3. Note. Aug. de Doctr. Christ. proleg.
if he that was such an eminent Apostle, yea, who heard Christ himself from
heaven, must receive instruction from another; how dare any man despise even
the meanest of Gods Ministers? Nor was this conversion of the Apostle without
some special signification; for hereby is showed, that they which are truly
converted, are also spiritually enlightened: they are made blind to worldly
things, and the eyes of their minds are only taken up with the beholding of
things heavenly; and the bent of their affections is, to hold the mystery 1 Timothy 3. 9.
of faith in a pure conscience. To conclude this point; Happy is he, who when
God speaks to his conscience by the ministry of the word, (whether it be for
peace, or for war) receives it with an honest and good heart, and is ready
to say as once David did to Abigail, when she met him, Blessed 1 Samuel 25. 32.
be the Lord God of Israel, which has sent thee this day to meet me, and
blessed be thine advice: so they, Blessed be the Lord, who has sent thee this
day to speak home to my conscience, and blessed be thine instructions, which
make me to look back to him from whom I was, like a prodigal, estrayed. Thus
much concerning Gods manifesting himself to the conscience by the ministry of
the word.

Secondly, God manifests himself to man by the checks of conscience after sin
committed; and thus both to the godly, and to the wicked.

First, to the godly: What was it that made Adam hide himself from the presence
of God, but the Genesis 3. 8.
check of his conscience for the guilt of his sin in eating the forbidden
fruit? The check of conscience is called the smiting of the heart; so we read,
that when David had cut off the skirt of Saul's garment, 1 Samuel 24. 5.
his heart smote him; that is, his conscience checked him: The like smiting
David had after his 2 Samuel 24. 10.
numbering of the people. And to this end does God reprove man by the check of
his own conscience, even to awaken him from sin, lest he sleep the sleep unto
death. The Prophet complains, that there was no rest in his bones by reason of
his sins: until Psalm. 32. 3.
his heart was purged from sin, he could feel no rest within his soul; for
conscience is a part of the understanding, determining all actions either with
or against; it either accuses man for good omitted, or evil committed, or
else excuses him, in assurance that his person is accepted as righteous before
God.

Secondly, to the wicked: For there is none so notoriously wicked in committing
any villainy, but he has sometimes a sting wounding his conscience, and
telling him of a supreme and just revenger; sometimes his heart smites him, and
humbles him, though but for a time; and though not for effectual conversion,
yet some gripings there are, such as Cain, Ahab, Belshazzar, and Herod had:
these (I say) lasted but for a time; for the Preacher observes, that because
sentence against an evil work Eccles. 8. 11.
is not executed speedily, therefore the hearts of the sons of men is fully set
in them to do evil: Yet in all, both in good and bad, Conscience will do her
duty; for she is like the poise of a clock, which, being wound up, sets all
the wheels a going: even so Conscience, being wound up by the hand of Gods
justice, sets all the members on work, makes the tongue confess, the eyes
weep, the heart throb, the knees smite one against another, the fist strikes
upon the breast, no part but acts its part. And now (Beloved) judge, when the
conscience of a man finds that she has to deal with an angry God, Job 13.
26.
one that writes (as Job complains) bitter things against Psalm. 139. 7.
her, and that she knows not where to betake her self (for to flee from his
presence she cannot) how she is perplexed: especially, if she cannot feel
God reconciled unto her, and herself unto God. No marvel that David mourned
through the disquietnesse of his heart, saying to God, Thou Psalm. 30. 7.
hiddest thy face, and I was troubled. To a deep sense Matthew. 26. 75.
of misery was Peter brought after he had denied his Lord, and forswore his
Christ, till his Master, looking back upon him, brought to his remembrance his
bypast sin; then went he out, and wept bitterly. And to such a sense of
restlesnesse was Judas Matt. 27. 3, 4, 5.
brought after he had betrayed his Master, though he found not the like
comfort as the others did: On some, the horror of conscience works repentance
unto salvation; whereas it drives others to the gulf of despair.

Certes, it was not without divine providence, that the very heathen termed the
terrors of a wicked conscience (...), the searcher out, and punisher of sin;
sometimes called Furiae, the furies of hell, or worm of conscience; sometimes
also called Intemperiae, the tortures of the mind; and sometimes ( per (...))
Eumenides, the daughter of Acheron and Nox, that is, Hell and Darkness; hereby
Q^^d minime sin^ benignae.
insinuating the woeful bitterness, and extreme horror wherewith the wicked
are perplexed: And if the heathen styled them by such horrid terms, how should
we dread to harbor in us such snakes?

And our Savior tells us of an unquenchable fire, so also of a never-dying
worm: such a worm there is of conscience; and it is so called, because, as a
worm lies eating and gnawing that wood in which she abides: so the worm of
conscience, lying within us, gripeth and tormenteth us, by bringing to our
memories all the causes of present and future calamities; as our wilful
negligences whereby we lost our first enjoyed felicities, at every of which
considerations she gives us a deadly griping; as also all our occasions
offered to escape those miseries in which we are now plunged; add to these
all those opportunities for redeeming that glory which we have now hazzarded;
as also how ungraciously we have quenched the good motions of Gods holy
Spirit, by which we might have been reclaimed: add further, how vain those
worldly trifles are, which we have too eagerly followed; and lastly, how we
our selves are become worldly fools, and others spiritually wise, whereas we
dreamed otherwise.

From whence we may observe, that A secure sinner is an enemy unto himself;
for if there be no fullness of joy but in the presence of God, then certes, in
a woeful condition are they, who, wallowing in their sins against the curb of
conscience, deprive themselves of this happiness.

Thus you see that an accusing conscience manifests a Deity, and that the law
of God is written Romans 2. 15.
in the hearts of men. You see also that both good and bad have sometimes these
checks of conscience, which, like that voice mentioned by the Prophet Isaiah,
calls to them, saying, This is the way, Isa. 3. 21.
walk in it, when they turn to the right hand, or when they turn to the left;
pointing out another way then what they formerly trod awry in: to which voice
of conscience, if men will listen and obey, then shall it go well with them;
for they shall not only know that there is a God, but they shall in some
measure see him, and be acquainted with him: but if they shall harden their
hearts, and labor to quench the good spirit of God, which at that time 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19. Revel. 3. 20.
knocks at the door of their hearts, and seeks admission for their salvation,
then are they guilty of their own damnation.

Would thou, O man, then know whether thou art a child of God, or not? know
then that there is a conscience,

First, Good, yet not quiet; and this is in the godly, when they are restless
in themselves for sins as yet unrepented of: Thus was it with that kingly
Prophet David after his committing of murder and adultery; how does he, in
perplexity of his soul, being awakened by the Prophet Nathan, cry out, that
God would, according to the multitude Psalm. 51. 1.
of his tender mercies, blot out his transgressions, etc. So also when God had
laid his hand heavy upon him, how does he mourn? There is no soundness Psalm.
38. 3, 4.
in my flesh because of thine anger, neither is there any peace in my bones by
reason of my sin: For mine iniquities are gone over mine head; as an heavy
burden, they are too heavy for me. The sickness of his body put him in mind
of the sin of his soul; that which he did endure, did put him in mind of
what he did deserve, which galled his conscience with the remembrance of his
particular slips and failings, both by omission and commission.

Secondly, There is a conscience quiet, yet not good; and this is in the
wicked: as namely, when after sin committed, their hearts remain still
obdurate, cauterized, senseless: they sleep so soundly in sin, that they never
feel the sting of conscience wounding them; they are so delighted in sin, that
they never regard when they sin, nor how they sin, nor against whom they sin,
nor before whom they sin: The show of their countenance does Isa. 3. 9.
testify against them, they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not;
therefore woe to their souls, for they have rewarded evil unto themselves. S.
Paul excellently decyphereth them; They have their understanding Ephesians. 4. 18, 19.
darkened, being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in
them, because of the blindness of their heart: Who being past feeling, have
given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness.

Thirdly, There is a conscience both good, and quiet; and this is proper only
to the elect: namely, when God speaks peace to their souls, by assuring them
of the free pardon of all their sins, and the Spirit of God testifies to
their spirits, that they are the sons of God, and shall be made partakers of
life everlasting in the heavenly Canaan.

Fourthly, There is a conscience neither good, nor quiet; and this accompanies
only the reprobate: namely, when through sense of sin, horror of conscience,
and Gods wrathful, yet just indignation, such a dreadful trembling seizes on
them, that they know not where to betake themselves. From this perplexity no
incorrigible sinner can exempt himself; neither Kings, nor great Rev. 6. 15.
ad finem.
men, nor rich men, nor mighty men, nor bond, nor free men.

According to these observations examine thou thy self, and thou shall easily
find whether thou belongest to God or not: And if thy conscience has wounded
thee, so that thou can without any flattery assure thy self that thou have
thoroughly repented thee of all those sins, which, like Zecharia's talent of
lead on the mouth of the ephah, Zech. 5. 7, 8.
pressed thee even to the pit of hell, and that thou find God to be a
reconciled God to thee in the face of his Son; then is thy condition happy, and
the brightness of Gods countenance has shined upon thee: otherwise, if thou
were never sensible of thy sins, nor have yielded to the checks of conscience;
then is it an evident sign, that if ever thou did confess thy sins, yet it
was but a mere orall confession, hypocritically performed, and so thy condition
is most miserable.

And now (Beloved) conceive within your selves what an horror it is to have an
accusing and tormenting conscience always pursuing a sinner; nay, not only
pursuing him, but always harboring in his breast, like an Erynnis, quae
indagatrix est gravissimorum flagitiorum, which is the Inquisitor, and hunter
out of the grossest crimes, to be his bosom companion, and yet always
pleading guilty, so that the sinner shall not know where to repose himself
for fear; the very shaking of a leaf shall make him to tremble, and be at his
wits end: Such a comrade had that fratricide Cain, after he had spilt his
brothers blood, when he said, Behold, thou have driven me out this day from
the face Genesis 4. 14.
of the earth, and from thy face shall I be hid, and I shall be a fugitive and
a vagabond in the earth: and it shall come to pass, that every one that
finds me shall slay me.

The sting of death is sin, says Saint Paul; yea, and the sting of conscience
is sin also, which so overwhelms some with an horrible dread, that they flee
when none pursues. It is the nature of sin to Pro. 28. 1.
pursue the sinner, and a wounded conscience who can Prove. 18. 4.
bear? Moses told the Israelites, that they should be sure, that if they
sinned against the Lord, their sin would find them out: and, Evil pursues
the sinner, Numb. 32. 23* Pro. 13. 21.
says Solomon.

Now, although God speaks thus to the conscience of the wicked; yea, although
the sting of conscience does (as it were) make their ears to tingle, 1 Samuel 3.
11. 2 King. 21. 12.
as the Lord speaks: although it awakens them by sounding an alarm of Gods
judgments in their ears, yet veternum excutere nolunt: they will not be roused
from their sottishness, but, with Solomon's fool, A little more sleep, a little
more slumber, Pro. 6. 10.
a little longer basking in sin, till at last that grim sergeant Death arrests
them, and lays them in the prison of the grave, there to remain till the great
and general Assizes.

This evidently appears, in that they labor to quiet and appease the gnawings
of this worm of conscience, then whose bite nothing smarts more, then whose
sting nothing galls more, and then whose torment nothing frets more; and yet
they fain would hush and still it, that it may not affright and appall them.
But conscience will not be corrupted; but as she keeps a true register of all
sins, so she gives in a true evidence against all sins. Do the wicked what
they can, God has said that their worm shall never die, and that no peace
shall Mark 9. 44. Isa. 57. 20.
be to the wicked, but they shall be like the raging sea, whose waters cast up
mire and dirt.

Add to these inward torments of the conscience, those outward plagues by
which God shall Psalm. 2. 5.
vex them in his sore displeasure, and by which at last they shall be enforced
to confess him just, whom willingly they would not acknowledge to be at all.
Wherefore, Beloved, labor to gain a quiet, yet a tender conscience, which, as
it is a continual feast; so it is a most delightsome garden to solace a man's
soul in; it is the Exchequer of the King of kings, in which he keeps the
audit of all his accounts; it is the high Court of the great God, and the
habitation of the holy Ghost: and think not to beguile conscience, or to delude
Gods all-seeing eye; for the one will be an upright witness, the other a
severe Judge. I conclude this point with that observation of Tilenus: In
calamitates magnas incident, qui vel subdoli ingenii strophis, Magistratus
cognitionem eluserant; vel virium fiducia, perruptis legum clathris, Judicum
subsellia contempserant: ad ineluctabile enim tribunal summi Judicis
pertrahentur, qui nec fraud eludetur, nec vi superari poterit.

Thus have I at large declared how God is pleased to manifest himself to the
consciences of men both by the ministry of the word, and also by the checks of
the same. In a word, take as a Corrolary the sum of all; God is pleased to
exhibit himself to all our senses: Thus we see him in the admirable fabric
of the world, and variety of creatures: Thus we hear him in his word
preached: Thus we taste him in the fruits of the earth carnally; but
spiritually in the blessed Sacrament: Thus we smell him in the fragrancy of
his graces: And thus we feel him in the checks of our consciences; our outward
senses being the grates or windows of our souls, nothing being conveyed into
the one, but by the other: We understand nothing, we know nothing, but either
the ear, or the eye, or some other sense must first present it to the soul. As
then many windows yield more light into a room; so the more senses there are
that present a matter to the soul, the more clearly does the soul understand
it, and conceive it. These (Beloved) are the windows, grates, and lattesses
through which Christ looks upon his Spouse, the Church: Yet, as follows in
my third General,

It is but hieroglyphically, enigmatically, obscurely.

The Egyptians used to express themselves by mystical ciphers; and when
Almighty God appeared to Moses, it was either in fire, or else in a Exodus 3. 6.
cloud, in both which, to the eye of Moses, it was Cap. 40. 34.
obscurely: So when the Lord appeared to Elijah, it was by a voice, which is
audible, not visible: 1 King. 19.
When Christ was transfigured upon the Mount, it Mark 9. 3.
was in such a brightness, that the Apostles could not endure to behold the
glory of his Majesty. So that although God is everywhere about us, yet such
is our dimnesse, we cannot perceive him: like the servant of Elisha, we are
blind, and see 2 Kin. 6. 16, 17.
not God near us, unless God in mercy open our eyes, as he did his. The book
of the Creatures, the book of the Scriptures, and the book of Conscience may
serve us in some stead; yet are but as dark shadows, glimeringly setting forth
him who is light invisible: They may serve as a candle in the night; but as
when the light of the Sun appears, the light of the candle is darkened: so
when our veil of mortality is put away, we shall see God more perfectly.

In the Scriptures we read of a fourfold light.

First, Light is taken properly, as of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, which give
light to all creatures Genesis 1. 14, etc.
upon the earth: to this end they were created.

Secondly, Light is taken figuratively; sometimes for God himself, God is
light: sometimes 1 John 1. 5.
for Gods countenance; so David prays God to lift up the light of his
countenance upon him: sometimes Psalm. 4. 6.
it is taken for Christ, for his Apostles, for true Luke 2. 32. Matthew. 5. 14.
believers; or it may be taken for the light of Gods Spirit, with which some
were endued in the days Ephesians. 5. 8.
of the Apostles, for the discerning of those who spoke by the Spirit of God,
from those who spoke by a false spirit; therefore it was called the gift of 1
Cor. 12. 10.
discerning of spirits.

Thirdly, Light is taken for the light of the Scriptures, leading us to God;
Thy word is a lantern Psalm. 119. 105.
to my feet, and a light unto my paths: for naturally our understandings are
dark, only God in mercy reveals himself unto us by the light of the
Scriptures: Hence is it, that we are advised both by that Evangelicall Prophet
Isaiah, as also that beloved Apostle John, to walk in the light of the Isa. 2.
5. 1 John 1. 7.
Lord.

Fourthly, Light is taken for comfort after the troublesome storms of
affliction: so the Prophet Micah, Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: When
Micah 7. 8.
I fall, I shall rise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto
me. When Hamans plot was defeated, The Jews had light and gladness, joy and
honor; Esth. 8. 16.
and says David, Light is sown for the righteous, Psalm. 97. 11.
and joyful gladness to them that are true of heart. Hence is it that the
Prophet Isaich comfort the Church in the uberity of her children, by the
promulgation of the Gospel; Arise, be enlightened, Isa. 60. 1.
for thy light comes, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.

The first of these lights makes not for our purpose, the three later may help
us very much. If therefore the Spirit of God shines upon our souls, it will
clear our understandings to discern God in the light of the Scriptures; and if
we can see God in the light of the Scriptures, we shall be sure to attain to
the light of saving comfort, because the latter depends on the former: Thus
the Eunuch, although his devotion led him to Act. 8. 30, etc.
read the Scriptures, yet did he not understand all that he did read, till
the Spirit sent Philip to expound it unto him, then went he away rejoicing.
Nor was it (says Calvin) unprofitable for him to Calvin.
exercise his mind in places of Scripture more obscure, because by searching
and studying therein, the sense of them, through the assistance of Gods Spirit,
is to be attained unto. And by the way, Note the blind condition of the Romish
Note.
Laity, who satisfy themselves with embracing any doctrines of their Church,
without searching the grounds thereof from the Scriptures, taking all upon the
trust of others, and being content to go without examining them by that
touchstone.

But, to proceed, Our knowledge of God in this life is in part, that is, is
imperfect, as the beholding of a man suddenly passing by, whose back-parts
only we can look upon: our more fuller knowing God is reserved until that
time, in which we shall be made like unto him: When we all, with open 2 Cor.
3. 18.
face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, shall be transformed
into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord.
The brightness of this knowledge breaks forth in this life, when of sinners
we are made righteous by justification; but attains not to its perfect height
till we are transformed into that image. Thus we pass from the glory of
creation, to the glory of justification; and from the glory of being the sons
of God, to the glory of being like unto God. Alluding hereunto is that of S.
John, Beloved, we are 1 John 3. 2.
now the sons of God, yet it does not appear what we shall be: but we know,
that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he
is. In this life we cannot, in the life to come we shall receive the
endowments of perfect beatitude, both in soul and body. Here we may only
conceive him with the eyes of our minds, but then we shall perceive him with
the eyes of our bodies; Even with these same eyes (says Job:) only we must
Job 19. 26, 27.
grant, that corruption must first put on incorruption, for Flesh and blood
cannot inherit the kingdom 1 Cor. 15. 50.
of God. Our bodies shall not then be earthy, animated only by a soul, and
separable from them, as now they are; but spiritual, all danger and cause of
separation being done away by the Spirit of Christ quickening us. Nor yet may
we, with Origin, suppose that our bodies shall be aeriall, and not consist of
flesh and bones; this repugneth Jobs confession: and our Saviors body after
his resurrection was not a spirit, for that has not flesh and bones, as his
body had, which is Luke 24. 39.
an assurance that our very bodies shall rise again, though not frail, as now
they are; but, as Augustine Aug. epist. 145. ad Consent.
shows, they shall be spiritual; not that the flesh shall be abolished, but
spiritual, because fully guided by the spirit, and vivified to a life, being
without all sustenance, never to have end. And reason there is, why this our
corruption should put on incorruption; for how else can we enjoy the
incorruptible crown of glory? 1 Pet. 5. 4.


By consequence therefore it must follow, that whilst we are clothed with
corruptible clay, Ex part tantum cognoscimus, modicum ex multo; We know but
in part, and alas, less then we ought; we are not able to discern the pure
and perfect vision of the Deity. Whilst we live in these earthy tabernacles,
our primest knowledge of God in respect of his incomprehensible Essence, is
like the knowledge of a child to a man of riper years, weak and tender; for
children have not sapientiam ad sensum, knowledge according to discretion. The
perfectest light that we have of God in this life may well be compared to a
kingdom descryed by a small land-skip, here a city, there a castle; here a
village, there a mountain; here a forest, there a river; here beasts, there
men; all which are done with very little touches, to represent greater bodies:
Even so our best knowledge of God is clouded and imperfect, and our brightest
speculation admits of much weakness and imperfection, of many fogs and mists;
yea, our knowledge in Theology, and Divine mysteries is obscure, and in part,
quia fide nititur, because it is built upon faith: now that which reason cannot
apprehend, faith does believe; ideoque ex part tantum est scientia, our
knowledge therefore must needs be in part, faith being the evidence of things
not seen: We see (says the Apostle) sed per speculum, as through a 1 Cor. 13.
12.
glass, darkly; our knowledge at the best being like dim-sighted eyes, which
see somewhat indeed of God through the glass of the creatures, and Scriptures;
or at the most, by similitudes and figures, by which God exhibiteth himself to
such as are most in favor with him, as to the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 2.
when he was taken up into the third heaven; and to S. John, in Patmos in the
Spirit.

Object. But some may object, and say, If we see God through a glass, then we
see him clearly: Speculum enim non rei imaginem, sed rem ipsam oculis exhibet;
A glass does not set forth to us the image of the thing, but the thing it
self.

Sol. True, a glass does demonstrate the thing it self to the eye; yet so,
that still it is per radium non directum, sed reflexum, by a ray or beam not
direct, but reflexed; and therefore not properly, clearly, and distinctly; but
at a distance, obscurely and confusedly: and such is our knowledge of God and
divine mysteries in this mortal life, (...), as through a glass darkly, per
speculare, as through spectacles, which, you know, make things legible and
visible which before were not, and that, per medium obscurum, and similitudinem
umbrosam; or, as the Apostle, (...), in a riddle; or, as in my Text, per
cancellos, per transennam, as through grates or lattesses, which is a
Metaphorical speech borrowed from merchants, or tradesmen, qui per cancellos
vimineos expandunt mercaturas, who through grates or lattesses expose their
wares for sale, and to be viewed by such as pass along, non prope, sed procul;
non distinct, sed confuso modo: not nigh at hand, but at a distance; not
distinctly, but confusedly. And thus Almighty God manifests himself to us in
this life, not really and fully apparent, but as from behind a wall, as through
grates or lattesses.

And yet not altogether so obscurely, as that no knowledge can be had of him,
but that a true Christian, by the eye of unblemished faith, may be assured that
there he stands; for, says his Spouse, Behold, he stands behind our wall:
which is the fourth General of the Text.

Behold, he stands behind our wall, he looks forth, etc. By the way (I
pray) observe, that this word [ behold] is not to be understood in this place
as a note of attention, but of demonstration, quasi Ecclesia digito monstravit,
quem cord dilexit; as if his Spouse pointed him out with her finger, whom she
loved in her heart: Behold, he stands, etc.

Quest. But how is his Spouse assured of his voice and presence?

Resol. Per visibilia invisibilem: by things visible and audible, she is
ascertained that it is only he; for she is assured, that it is his voice
that Cant. 5. 2.
knocks, and calls to her to open unto him; she is assured that she sees
him in the variety and beauty of the creatures; she is assured that she
hears him in the book of the Scriptures; she is assured that she feels
him in the checks of her conscience; she is assured that she smells him
Cant. 5. 13.
in the fragrancy of his graces; and she is assured that she tastes him in
the sweetness of his word, which the Apostle Peter calls sincere milk: and 1
Pet. 2. 2, 3. Heb. 6. 4.
the Apostle Paul, the good word of God. These are the windows through which God
shines inwardly upon her soul: Haec quasi speculum Creatorem suum
repraesentant; God through these manifests himself so far unto her, as
she is able to apprehend him in them and by them. Ex effectibus Dei
demonstrari Aquin.
potest Deum esse, licet per eos effectus non possimus eum perfect cognoscere
secundum suam Essentiam; By the works of God it is evident that there is a God,
although even by those works we cannot perfectly discern his Essence. Yet
(...), what may be known of God by the light of nature, is manifested in the
creature; as that there is a God, that there is but one God, that he is
Eternal, Omnipotent, the sole Creator of heaven and earth, and all therein;
that he is most holy, most wise, and most just, the rewarder of the godly, and
the punisher of the wicked: But yet this light of nature is not of it self
sufficient, unless it be helped by a supernatural light: For, Non potuerint
Gentiles per solum naturae lumen unum agnoscere solum esse Deum: the Heathen by
the dim light of nature were not able to know that this God is but One.

To those therefore, whom the holy Spirit makes to discern God, the same
Spirit conferreth the spirit of wisdom and sanctified knowledge, by means
whereof they do see God: Hence that speech of Christ, He that sees me,
sees my Father John 14. 9.
also; scil. opere Spiritus sancti, namely, by the work of the holy Ghost. On
the contrary, they, the eyes of whose souls the holy Ghost has not enlightened
with the saving beams of divine truth, can never see or know the Father in the
Son.

As then none is said to touch Christ, when the Mar. 5. 30, 31.
multitude thronged him, save only she who had the bloody issue; so none is
properly said to see Christ, save only such, in whom the holy Ghost has
wrought faith to believe him and his word, for it is impossible without faith
(which is the eye of the soul) either to see him, or know him; and according
to each man's faith, so shall it be unto him.

For we must know, that there is a twofold sight,

1. Of the body. 2. Of the mind.
1. The eye of the body cannot see God, for he is invisible, his Essence is
spiritual; and if a man cannot see his own spirit, much less can he see God,
who is the Father of spirits. Now if it be objected, Heb. 12. 9. Exodus 33. 11.
Genesis 17. 1.
that Moses and Abraham saw God. I answer, that they saw not his substance, he
only appeared in similitudes, by which he testified his presence. But Job
says, In my flesh I shall see God, Job. 9. 26.
and mine own eyes shall behold him. Answ. By God in that place is meant the
second person of the Trinity, who being God, was incarnate, and so God may be
seen in Christ. But Paul says, that we shall see God face to face. Answ. God
has not members 1 Cor. 13. 12.
as we have; but this is spoken per (...), according to our humane capacity;
and the meaning is, that we shall have such a full knowledge of God, as we
have of him whom we do see face to face. But shall our eyes serve us for no
use in heaven? Ans. Yes: with them we shall behold the glorious Saints, and
Christ our Judge and Redeemer, glorified in his humane nature, whom to Acts 3.
13.
behold yields unconceivable comfort.

2. The second is the sight of the mind, which in this life is imperfect, and
only sees God in his works and word, etc. by which we may gather the great
love of God toward us, in exhibiting himself so far: but that perfect sight
which the mind shall then have of God, is reserved till hereafter, when seeing
him, we shall be transformed into his image.

This sight of the mind which properly is called the soul, is twofold:

First, Simple; as when a man sees a thing absolutely, and as it is in it
self: thus God cannot be seen, by reason of his Immensity, filling all places.

Secondly, Comprehensive; namely, when a man sees God so far forth as he is
capable of the knowledge of him: and in this sense we shall see God perfectly
in the world to come, and be filled with the fruition of his presence, as a
vessel may be filled with the water of the sea, though it hold not all the
water of the sea.

In this comprehensive manner, as the Spouse of Christ is sure that she sees
him, so is she sure also that she hears him; for, says she, in the verse
preceding the Text, Behold, the voice of my Beloved: she was a partaker of the
first resurrection, and so heard his voice, which enlivened her John 4. 25.
soul; and she was sure that it was his voice indeed, and not a strangers,
their often mutual conference had given her an exact knowledge thereof: As
then the true Spouse of Christ can only rightly discern Christ's voice; so,
whosoever has not plighted his faith to him, knows it not from the voice of a
stranger, and so may soon be deluded, as may appear by Ahab, giving credit to
the lying spirit in the mouths of his false prophets. 1 King. 22. 22.


Object. But some may object that saying of Christ, No man knows the Son, but
the Father: neither Matthew. 11. 27.
knows any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will
reveal him.

Sol. The words are to be understood comparatively; that is, as the knowledge
of the Son is originally in God the Father, and it is by the Fathers revealing
of the Son, that any come to know the Son, that is, to believe in his Name: so
the knowledge of the Father is originally in the Son, and it must be by the
Sons revealing of the Father, that any can come to know him. Excellently
therefore says Chrysostom, None know the Chrysostom.
Father with that knowledge with which the Son knows him, that is, fully to
obey him and in all things perfectly to conform to his will, which is
knowledge unto salvation. Of this perfection of knowledge, which is solely in
Christ, the best of Gods children come short in this life: It Is true, they know
him, and see him, but here it is weakly and imperfectly, as from behind a
wall. Or thus: As by seeing a piece of coin, a man may know whose coin it is
by the image and superscription engraven thereon; so the Spouse of Christ
knows whose image is engraven in the heavens, and who that is that shows
himself in the windows of the Scriptures, and in the grates of Conscience. Or
thus: As by seeing a picture, a man may know whom it represents, especially if
there has been any former acquaintance; so the Church (which is Christ's
Spouse) seeing the face of God in the light of the Scriptures, and the beauty
of the Creatures, exactly knows whose it is. So that, unless our faith be
turned into infidelity, and the light of our understanding into the darkness
of ignorance, we cannot but see him who sanctifies his Church, who softens our
hearts, who quickens us by his Spirit, and who enlighteneth our souls by
driving away the foggy mists of our natural blindness.

And here, give me leave to make a little digression, and, I hope, not
altogether impertinent. Behold, he stands behind our wall: Some by wall
Cornel. a Lap.
would understand man's incredulity, as having reference to that of the Prophet
Isaiah, Your iniquities Isa. 59. 2.
have separated twixt you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from
you. Others understand that thick cloud which was between God and the
Israelites Exodus 19. 16.
at the giving of the Law, ex qua procedebant coruscationes, adeo ut
Israelitici tremuere, out of which went fearful lightnings, which made the
Israelites to tremble. Others, the ceremonial Law, which was afterward
abrogated, when the partition Ephesians. 2. 14.
wall was broken down. Others, the Prophets, who mystically set forth Christ to
come. Others, the humanity of Christ; so says S. John, (...), The Word was
made flesh; O blessed salve to John 1. 14.
clear our sight! Take we all, or either of these, August. in Joh. tract. 2.
and they set forth the love of him who is, or at least should be, the joy of
our hearts, and the desire of our eyes. Nor may it be thought vainglorious
presumption if I interpose mine opinion: By wall therefore I understand
protection and safety wrought by a prudent and faithful Magistracy, such
Magistrates being as walls and bulwarks to preserve a people from ruin and
desolation, intended by the subtle plots of cunning Ahithophels, 2 Samuel 17.
Esth. 3. Amos 7. 10.
bloodthirsty Hamans, and idolatrous Amaziah's. And if we take it in this
sense, we cannot but acknowledge, that God has stood for our good behind our
wall, in that he has made our vigilant Patriots to be to us as David and his
servants were to Nabal and his servants, a wall both by night and 1 Samuel 25. 16.
by day: And because they have labored to take Jer. 15. 19.
forth the precious from the vile, therefore has the Lord made them unto his
Church as a fenced brazen Ver. 20.
wall. What although men fight against them, yet they shall not prevail: for
God, by the mouth of his Prophet Jeremiah, has promised, that he will be with
them, to save them, and deliver them: Jer. 15. 19, 20, 21.
yea, he will deliver them out of the hand of the wicked, and redeem them out
of the hand of the terrible. So that we may well sing that song of Isaiah, We
Isa. 26. 1, 2.
have a strong city, salvation will the Lord appoint for walls and bulwarks.
Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation which keeps the truth may enter
in. Yea, we may justly say, that the Lord has been both to them and us a wall
of fire round about, and will be Zech. 2. 5.
the glory in the midst of his people.

And now I come to the fifth or last General of my Text; namely, that the
Spouse of Christ, being assured that thus she does see him, may rejoice with
comfort, and be ravished with desire of a greater union and communion with him.

This does consummate whatsoever tends to the perfection of happiness: In it
we are to observe two things;

1. That to see God yields comfort to the godly in this life.

2. That to be made one with God crowns all with eternal felicity.

First, That to see God yields comfort to the godly, not to the devils and
reprobate; for their sight shall be their sorrow: they shall indeed see him,
not as their Savior, but as their Judge, to sentence them to eternal
punishment: Every eye Rev. 1. 7.
shall see him, they also which pierced him; but yet, as it follows, they
shall wail because of him: their sight shall rather afright them, then any way
minister the least crum of comfort to them.

1. That therefore we may see God with comfort, Mark we what Christ teaches;
we must be Matthew. 5. 8.
pure in heart: Now he is said thus to be pure, whose heart minds not
unchaste things; so Chrysostom. Chrysostom. Hom. 15.
Or he is said to be pure, whose heart is always free from malice, and
continually addicted to temperance; so the same Father. Calvin styles Calvin.
that heart pure, which is not crafty or deceitful. Perkins calls that heart
pure, which is first truly Perkins.
humble in sense of sins past, resolving ever after to live more holily, and
not to sin against God any longer wilfully: Secondly, which testifies this
humility, by laboring exact obedience to the will of God; for a pure heart,
and a wicked conversation cannot stand together. A resolution therefore not to
sin, is an evident mark of a sanctified soul, and of a pure heart, which shall
see God.

2. That we may see God with comfort, we must endeavor to draw near God now
in this time of grace; for the nearer we are thus to him, the cleerer we
shall discern him: which that we may do, we must set God always before our
Psalm. 16. 8.
eyes; and remember, that whatsoever we think, speak, or do, or wheresoever
we are, we always are in his sight; Walk we therefore before God, and Genesis
17. 1.
be we perfect was Gods precept to Abraham. O that all called to eminent
places would remember this!

3. That we may see God with comfort, use we the means ordained by God; that
is, frequent we his house; there God manifests his presence most gloriously.
It was David's prayer to God, that he might not be debarred the beholding of
the beauty of the Lord in his house, and enquiring in Psalm. 27. 4.
his temple. The like respect have we to his word and sacraments; for in those
he manifests his beauty as well as in his Sanctuary: receive we them as
pledges of his love and goodness toward us, and they shall be as a ladder, by
which we may ascend to perfect happiness.

4. Remember we what an horror it is not to see God: now God is said to hide
himself from the wicked. As then the sight of David's face was the light of
Israel; so is the sight of Gods face the 2 Samuel 21. 17.
light of his chosen, In his presence is life, and in his Psalm. 90. 17. Psalm.
30. 5. Psalm. 16. 11.
light we shall see light: yea, In his presence is fullness of joy, and at his
right hand are pleasures for evermore. The Queen of Sheba reckoned Solomon's
servants happy, because they did stand before him, and hear 1 King. 10. 8.
his wisdom: so and much more happy are the children of God, who stand before
him continually, and see his glory. If Moses was happy in that he saw Gods
back-parts; or the disciples of Christ, who saw his glory in his
transfiguration: O, what joy shall it be to the Spouse of Christ to see her
beloved clothed with robes of Majesty! O! say we then, as sometimes Moses
said to God in behalf of himself and the whole congregation, If thy presence
go not with us, carry us not hence: For Exo. 33. 15, 16.
wherein shall it be known that we thy people have found grace in thy sight?
Is it not in that thou go with us in this vale of misery, and wilderness of
woe? And pray we, with David, that the Lord would cause his face to shine upon
us, and lift up Psalm. 4. 7.
the light of his countenance; for his face is favorable, it rejoices the
heart, it reviveth the soul, and Prove. 19. 12.
is as the dew upon the tender grass.

To conclude this point; This cannot but minister great comfort to the godly,
in that, although after many reproaches in this life, God only looks upon
them as through a glass, yet hereafter they shall be sure to behold him face to
face: Wherefore, Hear ye the word of the Lord, you that Isa. 66. 5.
tremble at his word: your brethren that hated you, and cast you out for my
Names sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified: but he shall appear to your joy,
and they shall be ashamed.

Our second point was, That to be made one with God by an holy union, crowns
all with eternal felicity.

The chiefest and most ardent desire of the faithful here, is to gain
assurance of eternal happiness hereafter: this Christ has promised, and this
he will make good, when the day of his espousals shall come, which also is at
the day of judgment. It Is true, this is the time of their wooing, in which the
Spouse knows her Beloved but in part; but then she shall know him as he is,
for she shall be made one with him, all glorious within. In this life he Psalm.
4 5. 13.
gives her evident testimonies of his more ardent love, as the gift of
regeneration, of obedience to his will and word, of faith to believe his
promises, of confidence to rely on him for protection in times of danger, and
of prayer to importune him fervently: Add to these the knowledge of
reconciliation, the inward comforts of his Spirit in times of temptation, and
strength to persevere in times of fiery trial. These graces he bestows, as
pledges of his love, only on his Spouse, and she as highly priseth them.

Nor does Christ bestow all his favors only on his chosen; but, as he that
is a suitor to a woman gives some gifts to household servants, yet keeps his
prime jewels of value only for her on whom his love is fixed: so Christ
bestows common favors even on the wicked, thereby making known his riches;
yet his choice and selected graces, and the enjoyment of his love, he solely
reserveth for his beloved Spouse, who affectionately locks them up in the
closet of her heart: so that she seems to speak in the words of Mephibosheth
(when David returned safe from battle) concerning Ziba; Let him take all,
forasmuch as my lord the king is returned again in peace unto his own house: So
she, as undervaluing all earthly things in comparison of the enjoyment of
Christ his presence and graces, Let whosoever will take all these, only let me
enjoy my Beloved, and let my soul be filled with the graces of his Spirit.

And no marvel that the souls of Christians are thus ravished with the desire
of an union with Christ, which ( Paul says) is best of all, in regard of that
felicity wherewith both soul and body shall then be dignified in the new
Jerusalem, that heavenly Canaan:

First, In regard of the felicity of the body, which consists in its change
(after the general resurrection) from being a corruptible body, to be a
glorious body; for that which is now cumbersome, and infested with many
miseries, subject to mutation, vexed with diseases, defiled with corruption,
and replenished with innumerable calamities, shall then be made most glorious,
perfect, ever durable without mutation, it shall be freed from a decaying
estate, and placed in an ever-flourishing condition; yea, the whole body shall
be glorified, and being glorified, shall be filled with all fullness of
contentment; eyes, ears, mouth, nose, hands, and heart with unutterable
sweetness: They Psalm. 36. 8.
shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou shall
make them drink of the river of thy pleasures: besides, death shall have no
dominion over it, for the just shall live for ever. Christ setting forth the
felicity of the righteous, says, that the righteous shall shine forth as the
Sun in the kingdom Matt. 13. 43.
of their Father; which proves the glory of their bodies. Et quanta tunc erit
gloria animarum, quando Solis habebit claritatem lux corporum? How gloriously
shall their souls be invested, when their bodies shall shine like the Sun in
the firmament? which is the second part of a Christians felicity.

Secondly, In regard of the felicity of the soul; and this consists chiefly
in visione Dei beatifica, in the beatificall vision of God; Haec sola summum
August. lib. de Trin. cap. 13.
est bonum, this is the chiefest good: This also St. Paul averreth, when he
says, that we shall see God face to face: The like also does S. John, when he
says, that we shall see him (qualis est) as he is: and the reason is, because
Ibi tota erit virtus, videre quod ames; Aug. de Civ. Dei.
and tota felicitas, amare quod videas: ibi beata vita in suo font bibitur,
ubi veritatis visio clarissime aperitur. All the contentations in the world are
but as small sparkles sent forth from God, in whom they are most perfect and
excellent: All the perfections of his creatures are more perfect in him then
they are in themselves: whosoever then enjoys the presence of God, has full
felicity presented to him at once, so that he cannot wish for any good, but
there he finds it in its full perfection; yea, whatsoever deserves love or
admiration: All the faculties of the soul, and all the senses of the body
shall be satisfied with the fruition of the presence and glory of God. In a
word, God shall be universal happiness to all his elect; for, by enjoying his
presence, they shall also enjoy whatsoever is delightful: by enjoying his
presence, they shall know the secret judgments of God, which are a great
depth: by enjoying Gods presence, they shall love God above all, and their
fellow-saints equally as themselves, and for the same causes for which they are
themselves beloved of God: by enjoying Gods presence, they shall rejoice at
their own happiness, for they shall enter into their Masters joy. It is not
said, that the joy of their Master shall enter into them, because no created
heart can receive the fullness of this joy; but they shall enter into the joy
of their Master. Lastly, by enjoying Gods presence, they shall, with the holy
Angels (whom Augustine calls Hymnidici chori) Aug. in Johan.
praise God without ceasing, with a perfect heart, freely; so the Psalmist,
Blessed are they that dwell Psalm. 84. 4.
in thy house, they will be still praising thee. To sum up all together; In
this beholding of Gods face, the saints shall know the power of God the Father,
the wisdom of God the Son, and the goodness of God the holy Ghost, which is
the joy of Angels, which is the reward of eternal life, which is the glory of
the blessed spirits, the new Jerusalem, the perfection of bliss, and that
peace which passes all understanding; by virtue whereof they shall praise God,
and praising him love him, and loving him possess him, who is the inheritance
of his people; witness his promise to Abraham, I will Genesis 15. 1.
be thine exceeding great reward. O! say we all then, O Lord, thou art in thy
self exceeding great, and therefore thou must needs be an exceeding great
reward: It is life everlasting to see thee, it is life Joh. 17. 3.
everlasting to know thee, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. If then the
wise men rejoiced to see Christ in the manger, what joy will it be to see him
in his glory? If old Abraham rejoiced to see Joh. 8. 56. Aug. Tract. 43. in
Johan.
the day of Christ yet afar off (for he rejoiced through hope that he should
see it by understanding it) and he saw it, then which, what greater joy could
be expressed? for, if they rejoice who have their bodily eyes opened, what joy
does the unutterable light of the soul bring? If a bride rejoiceth, not only
when she hears the voice of her bridegroom, but more affectionately when she
enjoys his presence, because they twain shall be one flesh; Or, if a loving
wife rejoiceth when her husband returns safe after a long and tedious
journey: So and much more does the soul of a Christian rejoice, when she is
united to Christ her head.

Thus you see what inexpressible consolation this union of Christ yields to
all the children of the first resurrection: First, in that they shall be so
changed, as that they shall be made capable of eternal glory. Secondly, in
that death shall no more be terrible, because their bodies shall be no more
sinful.

And herein the godly differ from the wicked in three respects:

1. In the Causes: for the wicked shall indeed rise, but it is by reason of
Gods summons, when the trumpet shall blow, and all must of necessity appear;
whereas the godly rise to be united to their head Christ Jesus.

2. In the Manner: for the wicked rise with horror and grief; whereas the
godly rise with joy and comfort.

3. In the End: for the wicked rise to eternal confusion; whereas the godly
rise to everlasting glorification: They that live in Christ shall sleep in
Christ, and such as sleep in Christ, God will bring 1 These. 4. 14, 17.
with him, and they shall be ever with him.

Lastly, This union of the godly with Christ shall be glorious in regard of
their cohabitation: for the wicked, after sentence pronounced by Christ (who
then shall sit as Judge,) shall be hurled into hell, a place loathsome and
grievous, because of that stink which never shall be abated, and because of
that pain that never shall be ended: whereas the godly shall be enthronized in
a kingdom prepared for them from the beginning of the world, which is a
kingdom of bliss, in which they shall live eternally.

So then, as the pains of the one place are universal, so are the pleasures of
the other universal also: Pain and pleasure in this life are temporal, in the
other they are eternal; and as the torture of the one (in regard of the loss
of Christ's presence) is inexpressible, so the comfort of the other (in the
fruition of his presence) is unconceivable. With old Simeon then, who rejoiced
to embrace Christ in his arms at the time of his presentation, let all
truehearted professors rejoice, in that Christ will present them to his Father
when the time shall come for their glorification: In the mean time, while we
see him standing behind our wall, let us sing with that old Simeon, Lord, now
let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen the Prince of
peace, thy salvation.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 7. lin. 22. for most, read more. p. 10. l. 27. for as, r. us, p. 26. l.
2. for unto r. to. p. 34. l. 21. for for, r. forth.


