ANTIDOTES AGAINST SOME infectious passages in a Tract, concerning Schism.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Underhill at the sign of the Bible in Woodstreet,
1642.

Antidotes against some infectious passages in a Tract, concerning Schism.
IT is a great pleasure, Page 5. Toward the end: poor spirited persons.
and advantage to the Socinians, to lessen the estimation of the judgment of
the Fathers, that so their mighty works against Arrians, and others of kin to
Socinians, may have less credit and trust; But certainly his Argument does not
follow, That because they have failed in some lesser points, therefore their
judgment is not competent in greater: This Argument being set against Barnabas,
and Paul would have showed an ill face: Because Barnabas and Paul did not agree
in the small Controversy of taking Mark with them, they were incompetent
Judges of greater Controversies of Faith. It is a wise Dispensation of Divine
Providence, That in this life we know but in part, and it is a great
preservation of Humility, that it is so. Our blindness in lesser matters
shows whence we have our Light in greater, and calls upon us to give the
Glory of our Light to the Father of Lights. Again, this knits us the faster in
a spiritual Commerce, while one man knowing but in part, has need of another
help, who knows that part, which to himself was unknown. If this Author know
more concerning the Controversy of Easter, surely I believe the Fathers knew
more then he (before he had read them) of the great Controversies of the
Trinity, And certainly if the mighty Arguments taken out of the heart of
Scripture, by Athanasius, Cyrill of Alexandria, and others, against those
Heresies, which are now revived by Socinians, be duly weighed, it must be
acknowledged that the Spirit of Truth was powerful in them, and that they had
the very mind of Christ: And so at worst, they were but like the Church of
Thyatira, Revel 2.
which the Spirit commends for Faith, and works, though with all the same
Spirit says, I have a few things against thee.

This passage has need of Salt, Page 7. Toward the end. What if the gesture
or adoration be used to the Altars?
to make it savoury. If there be an idolatrous adoration to Altars in one
place, and none in another, I think it is no Schism to forbear that place,
where this abominable wickedness is committed, which both offends God, and
vexes the souls of righteous Lots: and to go to another, where neither God,
nor man is so offended. And it is considerable, whether thy voluntary, and
indifferent using such places do not encourage such Idolaters in their
Idolatry, yea, give some hint to a weak brother to think that it is approved by
thee. Saint Paul's reason against eating things sacrificed to Idols, seems to
lead us to such an opinion. Neither does this example of the Israelites coming
to Shiloh, Deuteronomy. 12.5, 11, 13, 14. 1 Samuel 1.3.
(where were the corrupt manners of Elies sons) agree with this case: For there
was a necessity at that time to repair to that place, it being settled, and
peculiarly appointed for a great part of Gods worship, which could not
elsewhere be performed.

It seems that the buyers of this Author inclines more to Arrianisme than to
Macedonianisme, Page 9. Indeed Manichaisme, Valentinanisme, Macedonianisme, etc.
Manichaisme, etc. And certainly, if Socinians may be Judges, they will find
reasons, why Arrianisme shall be accounted but a Schism, and the others
Heresies: But indifferent Judges will perchance find such to be Judges of
partial thoughts, and that not upright balances, but special favors are
used in this partiality. For is it not a favor to undertake, that Valentinus,
Manes, Macedonius did know their Errors to be lies, and Arrius did not? Again,
though there be such a difference in these heads and roots of Errors (which I
think this Author can hardly make good out of any acquaintance with their
hearts) yet if he had carried an equal affection to each side, he might with
equal favor have excused their followers, upon whom the names by him
expressed ( Arrianisme, Valentinianisme, Mahometisme, etc.) are fixed: For
though the first Authors of these Sects might differ, yet no question many of
their followers were alike, and equal, that in simplicity of heart, and out of
ignorance, not wilfulness, did embrace their Errors. Neither did these know,
that the opinions, which they received, were lies. Yea, even at this day
Mahometans generally do not think, that the Doctrine of Mahomet, which they
believe, is a Lie: being seriously, and extremely zealous in it.

Secondly, Deum verum and cum patre, unum Deum nolunt fateri, August. cont.
sect. Arianorum. Hi dictitant Nos creaturam quidem illum esse dicimus, etc.
Epiph. Her. 49. Psalm. 18.
is it not an high favor to affirm, that the Rents in the Church for the
opinions of Arrius, and Nestorius were at worst but Schisms, and that upon
matter of opinion? For is it merely matter of opinion (wherein is a safe
freedom to opine one way or another) to believe, or not believe that Christ
Jesus is not true God, but a creature? Does not this look like a matter of
salvation, or damnation, and not merely of opinion? Can that faith, which
believes not Christ to be God, ingraff us into him, who is God? And can we be
carried into union with him, further then our faith goes before and apprehends
him? If our faith do not believe him to be true God, our union will not be
with him as true God, and being not united to him, as he is God, we can have no
salvation from him. Christ as he is God is that Rock, on which the Church
being built has safety and salvation, and in him is that saying of David
verified. Who is a Rock but God alone? Again, if there be a real disunion
between such a Misbeliever, and Christ; Is there not a real disunion between
such a Misbeliever, and the Members of Christ? He that is not in union with
the Head, has no union with the members, and this disunion is not merely in
matter of opinion, but in deed, and Truth.

Thirdly, it seems a very scandalous favor allowed to Arrians to frame
Liturgies, for their sakes, that we, and they might join in one Liturgy and
one Congregation.

For is not this in effect to say, That in all our Liturgy we must not say,
Christ is very God of very God? nor call him, that which he is, nor pray to
him as God? yea, Romans 9.5. 1 John 5.2.
may we read those Chapters, wherein he is said to be God blessed for ever,
or, This is the true God, and life eternal? Far be it from us in the least
Atome to abate the Godhead of Christ, or the Glory, and worship due to that
Godhead: to join with unbelieving men, that diminish both his Godhead, and his
Glory. If they have not unity with us in the Head, I know no reason, why in the
name, or for the sake of that Head, we may, or should have Communion with
them. It is Christ (God with us) that unites Christians, who believe in that
God Christ: And if men are not united to him, and in him (through the faith
which is in him, 1 Timothy 3.16.
as God manifest in the flesh) there is a true disunion both between Christ,
and them, and between them and true Christian. And where there is such a
Disunion, and likewise a Disunion in the very object of worship, how can they
fitly join in one worship, who do not worship, one, and the same God?

Fourthly, it seems a favor to the Arrians, to save them from the title of
Heresy, which is the ancient term deservedly fastened to them. He cannot but
know that misbelief in fundamental points was anciently accounted Heresy, and
it was profitably done to put this misbeliefe under a fearful name, it being
destructive to salvation, that men might shun and avoid it. To this end were
the Rules and Sums of Faith commonly used, and carried about, that men might
take the contrary beliefs to be Heresies: Opt. lib. 1.
So Optatus, Haeretici veritatis exules, sani and verissimi Symboli desertores.
Tertull. de proser cap. 14.
And Tertullian long before him. Haec Regula [Fidei] a Christo ut probabitur
instituta, nullas habet apud nos quaestiones, nisi quas haeretici inferant aut
haereticos faciant. And if this Author will needs have the name of Heresy
taken away from these misbeliefs, yet he cannot thereby take away the killing
nature of them: So are they still mortal, like Heresies, by what name soever
they be called. Indeed the wilful holding of less and extrafundamentall
Errors may be deadly, but not from the nature of the points, whereon the Error
is fixed, but by reason of the pravity of the will, which affects a Lie, and
has not in it, the love of the truth. But Saint Augustine being a true
believer in the greater points, and not loving Error in the lesser (much less
in the greater) might well say, I may err, but I will not be an Heretic.

Surely a Socinian may easily think that he may go to an Arrian Church, Page
10. Why may I not go to an Arrian Church?
but orthodox Christians have accounted it an abomination: Let us bring forth
one example, instead of many, not unknown to this Author. Epiph. Tom. 2.
advers. Haer. Haer. 48. sinc 68.
When Alexander the Bishop of Constantinople should be enforced to admit Arrius
into his Communion by Eusebius a favorite Bishop of the Court, he fled to
sighs, tears, and prayers, desiring of God, that he would take him out of
this life, that he might not be polluted with the contagion of Arrius (a man
reproachful against God) or that God would show some strange work; This Prayer
shortly obtained his request: For Arrius going aside to a place of Retreat,
brake in sunder like Judas, and in that unclean place ended his life.] So
Epiphanius. Their prayers and their persons are an abomination to that God the
Father, who is not well pleased with any prayers or persons, that are not
presented to him in the name of God the Son. And surely if a loose belief in
Christ, and such as does not reach home to his Godhead may be a ground of
Communion, why may not this Author join in Communion with the Mahometans?
whose Alcoran tells them, that Christ was a good man, though not God, which is
not much short of the Arrians.

To call the difference between us and the Arrians private fancies, Page 10.
Private fancies upon which we differ.
is an untrue, and scandalous expression. The Scripture I am sure, is neither
of private inspiration, nor fancy, but men of God spoke it as they were
inspired with that universal Spirit, which breaths into the Catholic
Church. For the same Spirit, which animateth the Church, inspired the Prophets
and Apostles. Now the Scripture says of Christ, 1 John 5.20.
This is very God: So indeed to deny Christ to be true God is a private fancy
of Arrius and Socinus, but to confess him to be true God, and to pray unto him
as such, is a Catholic verity. Wherefore let every true and Catholic
Christian say unto Christ with converted, and believing Thomas. My Lord, John
20.28.
and my God.

AMEN.

