Antipharmacum Saluberrimum; OR, A SERIOUS and SEASONABLE CAVEAT To all the
SAINTS In this hour of Temptation. Wherein their present Dangers are detected,
and their present Duties vigorously urged.

Isa. 35.3, 4. Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees: Say
to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not; behold your God will
come with vengeance, even God with a recompense, he will come and save you.

Rev. 16.15. Behold I come as a thief, blessed is he that watches, and keeps
his Garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.

Quo quis sanctior, eo promptior novellis contra ire.

Virenen. Hominibus placere non licet, ubi voluntas hominum, non capit Domini
voluntatem.

Cyprian. Printed in the Year, 1664.

To the READER.
Reader.
AS God has stretched out the Expansum or Firmament of Heaven, over the
natural World, so has he stretched out his Word over the rational World; and as
in that he has placed the Stars and Luminaries, to enlighten the Earth, and to
be for Signs, and for Seasons, Genesis 1.14. So has he placed a Constellation of
Scriptures in this also, by which they that are skilful in the Word of
Righteousness, may discern very much of the Designs and Issues of those rouling
and amazing Providence that are over our heads.

And doubtless, nothing more settles and supports the hearts of Saints, under
terrible and tempestuous Providence, then to view them in their reference and
relation to the World: for of these we may say as David does, Psalm, 148.8. of
the stormy Winds, that they fulfill his Word, and are the undoubted
accomplishments of its Predictions, and Prophesies.

Now to those that heedfully observe the Scripture-Prophecies, relating to the
ruin and destruction of Antichrist, it cannot but appear that their
accomplishment is nigh, and that glorious Design come even to the birth.
Confundetur omne jus, and leges interibunt, non fides in homnibus, non pax, non
pudor, neque securitas, neque regimen; et hujus. confusionis, haec erit causa,
quod Romanum nomen quo nune regitar orbis, deterra tolletur. Lactan. p. 576.
But then, as the darkest part of the night is that which immediately precedes
the dawning of the day, so before the Vial of the Lord's Indignation be poured
out upon the Throne of the Beast, it will be a time of trouble to the Saints,
such as never was since man was upon the Earth, Dan. 12.1. It is observable,
that Rome in this Prophecy, bears the name of Egypt and Babylon. in respect of
the misery and bondage exercised upon Gods People by it; by which also, is not
obscurely hinted, the time and manner of their deliverance from it; for both
from the one, and the other, were the Jews delivered, when reduced to the
greatest extremity, See Exodus 6.9. and Ezekiel. 37.11, 12.
Rev. 11.7, 8. The Witnesses of Jesus must first be slain, and their dead
bodies for a time, lie in the streets of the great City: And as Naturalists
observe, that a Beast never bites more furiously, and deadly, then when dying;
even so it is with this Beast also; which has Iron teeth, and is terrible
above all that were before it, Dan. 7.7. and when the strong God arises to
judge Babylon, She shall be found quite drunk with the Blood of the Saints, and
Martyrs of Jesus, Rev. 17.6. So that we, whose lots are fallen into such a day
as this, wherein the fiercest rage of the last and most furious of all the
Beasts, is falling in a dreadful storm upon all the reformed Churches of
Christ, had need of a more than ordinary degree of Faith and Patience, to
establish us in the Truth, and enable us to bear a glorious Testimony for the
Lord Jesus.

If any man's heart now shall fail him, and to avoid the fury of Antichrist,
shall basely betray the Truth, and forsake the Camp of Christ, and receive the
mark of the Beast, though not in his forehead, yet in his hand, by a pollitick
and secret Compliance with his Worship, that man is adjudged by the dreadful
Sentence of the great God, to drink the Cup of his pure and unmixed Wrath and
Indignation, Rev. 14.10. even such as the Devils and damned drink: For we may
say of that wrath, which is ordinarily poured out upon sinners in this life, as
they say of darkness, Non dantur pure tenebre; there is no pure or perfect
darkness here; so neither is there any pure unmixed wrath here, it has in this
life an allay of sparing mercy in it; but this is pure.

To prevent this sad issue, and preserve thee from this terrible Wrath of the
Lamb, are the following Counsels and Cautions designed and intended: And Oh,
that they might be blessed to establish the sliding feet of tempted Saints; For
I cannot without trembling observe, how many forward Professors begin to give
ground already, and fall into a Compliance with Antichristian Abominations;
surely this is the worst time that ever they could have chosen for it, now that
the Day of Vengeance is in the heart of Christ against Her, and the year of his
Redeemed even come; his Righteousness so night at hand, and his Salvation ready
to be revealed.

I shall detain thee no longer, but entreat thee to weigh these things, brought
to thy hand by providence, and with the spirit of love, to cover the weaknesses
of the Author, who is sensible of his own infirmities, and continual need of
divine Assistance, to enable him to stand; And to that end earnestly begs a
remembrance in thy Prayers, when thy heart is most Dulce cummercium, sed breve
mementum, cum talis fueris, memen to mei. Bern.
warmed, enlarged, and raised in communion with thy God.

Farewell.
Antipharmarum Saluberrimum.
Dear Christians,
When our Lord Jesus Christ, His bowels yerned.
the great Shepherd of the Sheep, beheld the multitude, he had (...). Bowels
are a metaphor, to signify motherly and tender mercies, Luke 1.78.
Compassion on them, because they fainted, (...). quite spent, tired, and
fallen down.
and were as Sheep having no Shepherd, Mat. 9.36.

After the pattern of those tender Bowels of Christ, the chief Shepherd, do the
Bowels of Compassion infused by him into his Ministers, the under Shepherds,
work and move toward the Flock, in like cases and exigencies. God is my record
(says that great Apostle) how greatly I long after you all [In] put for
[instar,]
[In] or after the manner, of the Bowels of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.8.

And truly, considering the deep distresses, and languishing conditions, to
which many thousands of the Lord's Flock are at this day exposed, how many
among you are wandering from Mountain to Hill, seeking Pasture, but finding
none; and like those Troops of Tema, Job 6.19. return ashamed, and
disappointed, from those places where you were wont to be refreshed, enlarged,
quickened: And how your pretended Shepherds have taken to themselves the
forcipes, and mulc tra,
Instruments of a foolish Shepherd, ruling you with force, and rigor, Ezekiel.
34.4. not sparing the Flock, it makes my heart melt within me, and my
compassions for you flow together.

And further, apprehending what a deep and desperate design your adversary the
Devil has upon you in this hour of temptation, to overthrow your Faith, quench
your Love, and undermine the very Foundation of your Profession; and what
singular and extraordinary advantages he has now upon you, engaging you singly
and apart; your faithful Teachers being removed into corners, your Societies
broken, dangers threatening on every side, carnal neighours and relations, by
persuasions, examples, and dangerous insinuations digging about and loosing
your roots, and so preparing for your utter subversion, by the next gust of
temptation: I thought it high time to come in to your assistance and relief,
with a Word of Counsel and Support, though I venture for you, as David's
Worthies did, to bring him the Waters of the Well of Bethlehem through the Host
of the Philistines.

And may I but preserve the peace of mine own conscience, by discharging
faithfully a duty to which it impels me, and have the blessing of some poor
soul ready to perish, come upon me, I shall little regard the pains or hazard
of this enterprise for you.

The plain design of these few sheets, is to countermine the Enemy of your
souls in his present grand Designs against you; either in point of stability,
by unsetling you; or of duty, by affrighting you; or of comfort, by
discouraging you.

To prevent the success of the Tempter, in all, or either of these, I shall
offer you my best assistance, under these eight ensuing Heads of Advice and
Counsel; beseeching you, by all the dear regard you have to the dreadful and
glorious Name of God, which is called upon you, Ephesians. 4.1. Col. 1.10, 11. 2 Timothy 2.19. or to your own precious and immortal Souls, whose eternal happiness
is not a little engaged in these things, Mat. 10.33. Gal. 6.9. or to the
comfort and encouragement of your suffering and afflicted Ministers, and
Brethren abroad, a great part of whose joy (yea life) lies at your mercy, 1
These. 3.8. Col. 2.5. and is as it were, bound up in your stability; that you
will heedfully observe and embrace these Admonitions, according to the weight
and evidence that is in them, and let not any fleshly interest in the world,
carry you against the convictions that may hereby be left upon your consciences.

And the first Advice or Counsel is this.

COUNSEL. I.
Cleave fast to Christ, and the Profession you have formerly made of him, what
aspect soever the times have upon you.

Psalm. 44.18, 19, 20, 21. Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps
declined from thy Way, though thou have sore broken us in the place of Dragons,
and covered us with the shadow of death. If we have forgotten the Name of the
Lord, or stretched out our hands to a strange god, shall not God search out
this? for he knows the secrets of the heart. Hence those new Converts, who
were turned to the Lord in a time of great temptation and persecution, were so
earnestly persuaded, Acts 11.23. That with purpose of heart they would cleave
unto the Lord; (i. e.) as they had made a good choice, so now, to stick to
their choice, and not repent of it, whatever afterward they should meet with.
Oh take heed, lest after you have lifted up your hand to God, you should lift
up your heel against him. Though the Job 29.16
Hypocrite will not pray always, yet the Dan. 6.10. Omnia de me presumes,
preter fugam, qui odium et impetum totius orbis sustinui. Luther.
upright Soul abhors to flinch from his duty, let come on him what will. It is
now Autumn with many flourishing Professors, but if thou be a tree planted by
the River side, thy leaf shall not wither, Psalm. 1. You look for happiness as
long as God is in Heaven, and be sure God looks for holiness, as long as you be
on Earth. What duty is more importunately urged upon you by every part of the
Gospel, than Stability? The Preceptive part peremptorily requires it. See Rev.
2.10. Heb. 4.14. Rev. 3.11. these be commands flowing from Sovereignty,
clothed with the highest Authority. The Minatory part urges it; See Heb.
10.38. Mat. 10.33. Rev. 21.8. and these dreadful threats are discharged against
the soul, and levelled at the very breast of the Apostate. The Promissory part
marvellously encourages to it, a sweet voice seems to come down from Heaven in
these Promises, saying, Good souls hold fast, if ever you hope to possess the
Glory that is here, hold fast, Gal. 6.9. Mat. 10.22. Rev. 3.12, 21. Rev. 21.7.

Now, lest all this should leave but a floating and ineffectual conviction upon
you, give me leave to follow it a little farther, and endeavor to work it in
by a few warming Considerations upon your hearts.

1. Consider, God has hanged the whole weight of Eternal Happiness upon this
Wire; so that the deepest, dearest, and everlasting interest of thy soul, is
bound up in thy Perseverance, Romans 2.7. Gal. 6.9. Heb. 3.14. and if so,
methinks this should make thee cling fast, despise dangers; face the storm, and
make a stand for Christ, let come on thee what will: for consider soul, what
comparison betwixt a moment suffering, and this Eternal Glory? Romans 8.18. 2
Cor. 4.16, 17, 18. Oh that vast Eternity! that amazing Word! which none but He
that was from Eternity, and is to Eternity, comprehensively understands: when a
soul is swallowed up in it, yea, or when it sits in a dying hour trembling,
upon the brink of it, how are its apprehensions of present things altered!

2. Confider how constant and faithful Jesus Christ was to thee, when he
conflicted in the days of his flesh, with sufferings, dangers, and
difficulties infinitely beyond thine; and what a motive that should be, to
persuade thee to a bold and constant owning of him in this day of thy trial? 1 Timothy 6.12, 13, 14. Fight the good Fight of Faith, lay hold on eternal Life,
whereunto thou art also called, and have professed a good Profession before
many witnesses. I give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickneth all
things, and before Jesus Christ, who before Pontius-Pilate witnessed a good
Confession, that thou keep this Commandment without spot. He flincht not when
the Terrors of Death and Hell beset him round: He was faithful to the trust
committed to him, till death beat the last breath out of his breast. If thou
now start from him, may not he say to thee, as that Roman Soldier said to his
General, who refused his Petition after the War was ended, Well (says he) I
did not serve you so at the Battle of Acteum.

3. Never imagine to be owned and acknowledged by him, in that great Day, if
thou dissert his Cause and Interest now, Mat. 10.33. He that is ashamed of Me
before men, of him will I be ashamed, when I come in my Fathers Glory, and mine
own Glory, and the Glory of the holy Angels. Oh Sirs, one of these days the
Lord will break out of Heaven with a 1 These. 4.16.
shout, accompanied with Jude 14.
myriads of Angels, and ten thousands of his Saints, those glistering Courtiers
of Heaven, 2 Pet. 3.10.
the Heavens and Earth in a dreadful conflagration round about him; Joh. 5.28.
the Graves shall open, the Sea and the Earth give up their dead: Mat. 25.31.
Thou shall see him ascend the awful seat of Judgment, 1 Cor. 6.2.
his faithful Ones setting on the Bench as Assessors with him: Mat. 25.32.
All flesh gathered before him, Joel 3.14.
even multitudes, multitudes in that Valley of Decision; and then to be
publicly disowned by him in the face of that great Assembly, and proclaimed a
Traitor and Delinquent to him, that fearedst not to deny Him, and betray his
Truths into his enemies hands, because of the Frowns of a poor Worm that shall
die, and be made as grass; Oh what Confusion and everlasting Shame shall cover
thee! This, this is the portion of all such from the hand of the Lord; 2 Timothy
2.12. If we deny him, he also will deny us.

4. Consider ere thou let go thy Profession, how remarkably the righteous Hand
of Heaven has met with and paid home the Apostate, even in this life; which
nevertheless, is but as a few drops upon them before the cloud dissolve, and
the whole storm falls, but as the perboiling of them, before they be roasted in
the eternal Flames. See what is become of Judas, Mat. 27.3, 4, 5. compared
with, Acts 1.18. poor Spira, though I determine not of his final state, yet
what a living monument of wrath was he, whiles he lived; I feel (said he) the
very Torments of hell in my soul. Lucian and Julian, two scoffing Apostates,
the one torn to pieces by dogs; the other, when mortally wounded by a darr,
flings up his blood toward heaven in a way of revenge, and cries, Thou have
overcome, O Galilean.

5. Suppose thou escape such a stroke, yet never expect a comfortable hour in
this world any more, unless the Lord give thee unfeigned repentance to life,
which in such cases is but seldom: thou may have as much comfort in thy
enjoyments here, for which thou have sold Christ, as Judas had in his thirty
pieces, or Spira in his wife and children; Mark 8 35. Whosoever will save his
life, shall lose it (i.e.) at least, its comfort.

COUNSEL II.
Touch not with Idolatry and Superstition; under what name or notion soever it
be presented to you.

1 John 5.21. Little Children, keep your selves from Idols. Here you had need
be exceeding cautelous, and qui eavet ne decipatur, vir cavet, cum etiam cavet,
et cum cavisse ratus est, sepe is cautor captus est.
circumspect. (1.) because it is a creeping thing, which works in it self by
plausable pretenses and insinuations, 2 Pet. 2.1. Ephesians. 4.14. Col. 2.23. In
which respect [Mystery] is written in the Whores forehead, Rev. 17.5. For as
Dr. Usher well observes, The Roman Apostasy stole into the Church disguised,
and by degrees. It is a Mystery of Iniquity (says the Apostle) and a working
Mystery, 2 These. 2.7. Iniquitas sed mystica, pietatis, et fidelitatis nomine
palliata; (i. e.) Iniquity, but a mystical iniquity, because palliated, and
cloaked under the name and pretense of piety and fidelity. Davenant in Loc.
Idolatrous practices have a show of wisdom, Col. 2.23. ( i.e. says Davenant
on the the place) They are more modest then to pretend an immediate revelation
of the Spirit: yet lest their placets and inventions, should want a pretext of
divine wisdom, they are wont to say, that their Doctrines and Traditions are
not indeed consigned to writing by the Apostles, but delivered by lively voice,
according to that, We speak Wisdom among them that are perfect: and by the name
of this wisdom, every one calls his own fictions. Says Ireneus, Lib. 3. Cap.
3. Thus sometimes under the pretext of Wisdom, Order, Decency, Apostolical
Traditions, Antiquity, the power of the Church, etc. it steals upon men
Peditentem, usu ipso, et tacita doctorum approbatione expit esse in praecio,
hac estimationae, sensim sine sensu crescente.
insensibly, especially being so advantaged by the pronity of corrupt nature to
it. To this purpose it is observable, that Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, is
said, Rev. 17.4. to give the Wine of her Fornication in a golden Cup. Wine in
it self is temptingly pleasant, but more, when presented in a golden Cup; the
Velati pueris absynthia tetra medentes, cum dare conantur prius oras pocula
circum: contingunt dulci mellis. flav^que liquote.
brims whereof are sugared and sweetened, to make it the more grateful,
Therefore little Children, I mean you simple, plain, credulous souls, apt to be
taken with fine glistering things, look to your selves; (2.) because nothing
more provokes and inflames the fierce Wrath of the Lord, who is a jealous God,
than this does; it makes his anger to come up in his face, as that expression
is, Ezekiel. 38.18. and kindles consuming wrath, Ezekiel. 43.7, 8, 9. Upon this
account the blessed God complains, after the manner of men, as if his heart
were broken, Ezekiel. 6.9. I am [broken] with their whorish heart, and with their
[eyes] which go a whoring after their Idols. If it be but an unchaste glance
upon an Idol, it goes to the very heart of God: when he sees his People
yielding to the temptations of it, he shreeks as it were, and cries out, Oh do
not this abominable thing that I hate; Oh if there be in you the hearts of
Children, do not do that, which does as it were break the heart of your Father.

Quest. But what mean you by Idolatry and Superstition? we hope there are no
such things practiced among us; Pagans and Papists may be guilty of it?

Sol. Give me leave here to open these things unto you, and then perhaps you
may see them nearer to you, then you are aware of; and that this Caution is a
word in Season.

Idolatry then, What Idolatry is.
according to the true and generally received definition of it, is, Cultus
Religiosus qui exhibitur rei, quae non est verus deus: vel etiam ipsi-vero Deo,
sed aliter quam ipse praescripsit in Verbo suo. Ravanelus.
A religious Worship, given either to that which is not the true god, or to the
true God himself, but otherwise then he has prescribed in his Word. From hence
we plainly see that worship may be idolatrous two ways; (1.) In respect of the
Object, if it have any thing besides the true God for its object, its gross
Idolatry; such as the first Commandment condems. Pagan Idolatry, which the
light of the Gospel has long since profligated, and expelled out of these
parts of the the world. Or (2.) in respect of the Manner, when we worship the
true God, but in a way and manner which he has not prescribed in his Word, but
is invented and devised by our selves; and this is condemned as Idolatry in the
Est autem idolo latria, cum vel fingitur esse Deus et colitar pro Deo quod non
est, vel cum verus Deus colitur aliter quam vult coli. Pareus. Com. in Romans
1.23.
second Commandment; Thou shall not [make to thy self;] (i.e.) out of thine own
brain, or of thine own head, any [graven Image] under which title all humane
inventions, corrupting the pure and simple Worship of God, are prohibited, as
idolatrous; for In this command the question is answeed, which has so
disquieted the Church in all ages. sc. Who shall prescribe the Form of God's
Worship shall Angels? shall Men? shall the Church? shall Councils? The answer
is, that when we have chosen Jehovah for our God, and rejected all false gods,
according to his first Law, lest our minds should invent him any service, he
has here prescribed Laws himself. for his own most devine and spiritual
Service. Hollands fourfold State of Man, page (mihi) 31.
Images are hereby a Synecdoche put for all false ways of worshipping God, as
the best Expositors tell us. See Ames. Medulla, lib. 2. p. 334. Holland on the
second Com. Willet, Hexapla in loc. This inventing or making to our selves, is
that which makes it Idolatry, Amos 5.26. Numb. 15.39. Hence the Molten Calf
became an Idol to the Israelites, not because it was the object of their
worship; for it is evident, it was Jehovah, the true God, they intended to
worship by it; as appears from Exodus 32.4, 5. To morrow is a feast to the Lord.
And as Dr. Willet observes, it had been impossible, that so good a man as
Aaron, would have yielded to them, if they had intended to worship it as a god:
but yet it being a way or manner of worshipping the true God, which was of
their own devising, it became Idolatry. And this worship of God in ways of our
own invention, becomes idolatrous upon a double ground: (1.) As it is
Will Worship; (i.e.) such worship as has no other ground, or warrant, but the
will of man, Deum amare quidem cultorem voluntarium, hoc est, eum qui laetus et
lubens ea facit que ipse fieri jussit, sed odisse cultum voluntarium, hoc est,
illa opera que pro immediato Dei cultu illi offeruntur com ab ipso non fuerent
prescripta et mandata ad hanc finem, hoc enim est fornicari in ad inventionibus
suis. Psalm. 106.39. Daven. in loc.
Col. 2.23. and so dethrones God, by setting up the will of the Creature above
his, and bestowing the peculiar Honor, and incommunicable Sovereignty, and
Glory of the blessed God, upon the Creature: For the absolute Sovereignty of
God, which is his Glory, 1 Timothy 6.15. is manifested in two things especially;
In his Decrees, Romans 9.20. and in his Laws, Isa. 33.22. Jam. 4.12. The Lord is
our King, and Lawgiver: and there is one Lawgiver. Now by prescribing any thing
by our own Authority, in the Worship of God, the Commands of God are made void,
Mat. 15.6. his Royal Law is slighted, the Throne of God invaded by the
Creature; who will be a Lawgiver too, which can no more be born, then the
Heavens can bear two Suns; and God is hereby forgotten; as Hos. 8.14. Israel
has forgotten his Maker, and builds Temples; (i.e.) by building [Temples]
when God had appointed but one Temple. This is as Melancton observes, Cum Deo
certare, aliud instituendo; To strive with God, by instituting some thing of
our own. And Chrysostom notes, Hom. 2. in Romans That it is a greater Sin, in
God's Worship, to do what we should not, than to omit what we should: For,
says he, by the one we show the difficulty of the Law; but by the other, we
charge the Law and Lawgiver with folly; make our selves wiser than God: In the
one we show our weakness, in not doing the Will of God; but in the other, our
impudence tocontroul the Wisdom of God. And it is, as Lactantius phrases it,
lib. 3. cap. 13. Summam arrogantiam, sibi vendicare quod humana conditio non
recipit; The highest Arrogance, to challenge that to our selves, which the
condition of a Creature is not capable of. And upon this account it is, that
the Indignation and Wrath of God smoaks so dreadfully against such Usurpers, as
in the sad story of Nadab and Abihu, you see, because God is a jealous God: and
Jealousy is the rage of a man. Zelotes est, nolens habere consortium in
amando, can endure no corrival. This God looks upon as the greatest, and most
daring Wickedness, that a creature can lightly commit. Hos. 9.15. All their
Wickedness is in Gilgal. [a pro summo] (i.e.) the height of their wickedness is
there, because there they worshipped him according to their own devices; which
was such an affront to the Wisdom and Sovereignty of God, that he could by no
means bear it. This is called, a setting our Threshold besides the Lord's
Threshold, Ezck 43.8. and the nearer this comes to him, the more it provokes
him: therefore it is said in the same Text, There was a Wall betwixt me and
them; (i.e.) either, it caused a Wall of separation betwixt me and them; as
it is generally expounded; or else it notes, how God is provoked, by bringing
their own inventions so near him: For in the Hebrew it is, There was but a Wall
betwixt me and them. And hence it is evident, that doctrinal, symbolical
Ceremonies, I mean such Rites and Ceremonies, as are brought into the Worship
of God, with a spiritual signification, merely upon the Authority of Man; are
idolatrous Mixtures and Additions, and such, by which the Lord is dreadfully
provoked. It Is true, men pretend order and decency, and the power of the Church
in such cases: but as learned Amesius well notes; Illa igitur quae pertiuent ad
ordinem et decorem, non ita relinquuntur hominum arbitrio, ut possint quod
ipsislibet, sub illo no nine Eeclesiis optrudere. Medulla, p. 345.
Those things which pertain to order and decency, are not so left to the Will
of man, that they may under. that name, obtrude what they please upon the
Churches. All the liberty that Scripture, 1 Cor. 15.40. gives us, is but this,
To observe and perform those things which God has instituted, in an orderly
and comely manner; and not to innovate new things, what, and as many as we
please. And then (2.) it becomes Idolatrous upon this ground also, because this
daring Impudence of men, in worshipping God in their own way, argues gross and
carnal notions and conceptions of God. When we devise a carnal pompous way of
worship for him, it is an argument we have set up an Idol-god first in our
imaginations, one like our selves, and utterly unlike the true God; who is a
most simple, pure, spiritual Being; and as such, will be worshipped, Joh. 4.24.
But by devising such a fleshly way of worship, I say, it is manifest, we have
fansied to our selves another god, altogether different from that God, revealed
to us in the Word. Hence it was that Joshuah told the people, Josh. 24.19. Ye
cannot serve the Lord, sor he is a jealous God, and will not forgive your sins;
q.d. you cannot serve the true God, till you have gotten right apprehensions of
him: You fancy to your selves a god made up all of Mercy, as if he had no
Justice nor Righteousness, to call you to an account for your sins; and so do
but worship an Idol, formed in your own imagination, instead of the true God.
And if the thing be duly weighed, it will appear as well Idolatry to submit
to, and acknowledge the Hinc implicit et per interpretationem Dei ipsius,
illum nobis deum constitutimus et honorem Deo deb tum deferimus illi, cujus
authoritati vel institutis nosinetipsos subjicimus in religioso cultu. Ames.
Medulla. lib. 2. p. 335.
Sovereign Authority of a Creature, in appointing Laws for worship; or falling
down before an imaginary God, or Idol, formed in our own fantasy; as to bow
to, and worship a graven Image, or the stock of a tree.

Now hence you may come to see at once, both the nature of this second sort of
Idolatry, and also the rise and original of it; which is nothing else but the
proud and carnal heart of man, which not willing to contain it self within the
limits of the Word, wherein a plain, simple, and spiritual way of Worship is
ruled out; invents to it self, new Rites, Ceremonies, and ways of worshipping
God, more suitable and pleasing to the flesh. And hence it is, that Idolatry is
in Scripture, reckoned a work of the flesh, Gal. 5.20. because man naturally
having a proud heart, and a working imagination, which depending upon sense,
and not elevated and rectified by faith, first forms to its self carnal
conceptions and notions of God; and then devises a way of worship suitable to
those notions of him. So that as one well observes; Erroris hoc est Principium
quod quae nobis. placent, Deoetiam placere putamus; and quae nobis displicent
Deo etiam displicere Putamus.
This is the Fountain and Principle of all Error, that men think that those
things which please them, must needs please God; and what displeases them,
must also displease him. So that this brat, Idolatry, is begotten betwixt a
proud carnal heart, and the Devil; who since he cannot draw men to the former
sort of Idolatry, endeavors all he can to entangle; and defile them with this,
and that partly out of malice to God, knowing what a dear thing his Worship is
to him; and partly out of a design of ruinng such as he can entice to it: for
he knows their sorrows shall be multiplied, Psalm. 16.4. and God seldom lets it
escape without some remarkable stroke.

Upon the whole then, you plainly see, Worship may be right as to its Object,
and yet Idolatrous in respect of the Manner; because the assuming of a
despotical power in this case, is not only a slighting of that (...), that
royal Law, but as high a piece of Treason against Jesus Christ, as can lightly
be committed by a Creature. I will shut up this with two worthy and full
Testimonies to the truth of the point in hand. The first is Melancton in loc.
Com. de Ceromon. Humaius, his words are these, and they are grave and weighty.

Accedit and hoc, Phil. Melan. in loc. com. p. 631, 632.
quod Episcopi arrogant sibi potestatem coudendi traditiones, quam tamen non
concedit eijs evangeliam, etc. non est leve crimen tentere Deum, est enim non
infirmitate labi, sed contemptu Dei, proposito ipsius verbo, quase cum eo
certare, aliud instituendo, (...), et illius sapientiae, nostram anteferre. The
Bishops arrogate to themselves a power of making Traditions, whcih the Gospel
has not given them. It is no small crime to tempt God, for this is not to
slide by infirmity, but by contempt of God, his Word being set before them as
it were to contend with it, by instituting another thing, and overcome it. This
is to prefer our wisdom to his.

And a little after (having given some instances of it) he proceeds thus;

Tales fuerunt et sunt fontes cultus idolorum. Haec sunt arccana mala, quae
political sapientia non potest judicare, sed nos in Ecclesia, ea considerare
debemus; ut moniti, subjiciamus nos verbo Dei, nec nostris opinionibus regi
velimus. Such have been, and are the fountain of the worship of Idols. These
are secret Evils, which political wisdom cannot judge: but we in the Church,
ought to consider these things, that being warned, we may submit our selves to
the Word of God, and not be willing to be ruled by our own opinions, etc.

To this I shall add the most worthy Testimony of that right Honorable Lord
Brook. Lord Brooks Treatise of Episcopacy, p. 60, 61.


A Bishops wearing a Surplice, Cope, Miter, using the Cross, bowing to the
Altar, etc. (though they may be Errors) yet all, or one of these make him not a
Pope, or Popling, or properly Antichristian; but receiving these from the Popes
Dictates, doing them because he commands, acknowledging his power in commanding
them, pressing them on others in such a despotical power, makes a true Pope, a
real Antichrist: Nor may our Bishops evade by this, which I easily see will be
answered, that though indeed they do, and command these things; yet they
neither do them from the Popes command, nor command them in the Popes power.

Though I should grant this, which yet many wise men will not grant (for our
Bishops first power come from the Pope; and of late laso, we have sound
Letters, Advice, Commands, Dictates from the Pope, to some of our Bishops, and
that in matters of greatest consequence, both for Church and State:) But grant
all this they say, yet they may be Antichristian, and so such (in re) as the
Pope is; though not literally Romanists, except they do or command in the power
of Rome. This I shall be bold to assirm, and maintain, till I see better
reason, that he, (who ever he be) that commands the least tittle of Doctrine,
or Discipline, merely ex imperio voluntat is, in his own power and authority,
without license or warrant from Scripture, or right Reason (where the Scripture
has been silent) though the thing he so commands, should happen to be good
in it self, yet he in his so commanding, is not only Tyrannical, but
Antichristian, properly Antichristian, encroaching on the Royal Office of
Christ; which is truly High Treason against God, and most properly
Antichristianism.

By all which, you see where the Idolatry of Worship lies: the instituting of
any, though the smallest part of worship, in and by our own authority, without
Scripture warrant, makes it Idolatrous, as well as if we worshipped an Idol.
And hence it is, that God gives his People the same call from this latter sort
of Romish Idolatry; See Rev. 18.4. as he does from the more gross Pagan
Idolatry, 2 Cor. 6.17. So that if that worship you perform to God, be corrupted
by a mixture of mere humane, doctrinal, symbollical Rites, and Ceremonies which
God has not appointed in his Worship, by the Word; though your worship be
right for the object, yet it is Idolatrous in the Manner. Here you had need to
be advised, and careful, for you are upon a ticklish point.

And for superstition, that is nothing else, What Supesstition is,
but an excess in Religion. For the better understanding whereof, consider
three things.

1. That all and every part of God's instituted Worship, depends entirely upon
his own Sovereign Will and Pleasure: So that no man can appoint any part of it,
but God alone, forasmuch as no man knows either what will be acceptable to
God, but God himself; that which is highly esteemed among men, is an
abomination to God: besides, none can give efficacy to a Creature, as Bread,
Wine, Water, or raise them up to such high supernatural ends and uses, but God.

2. The Will of God, which is the Foundation and Rule of his Worship, is only
revealed to us in the Scriptures, whence it is manifest, that in Worship, all
men are bound to keep close to the Word, and besides the reason that is in the
thing it self, the Command is express, Exodus 23.13. Deuteronomy. 4.2. Gal. 6.10.
[(...)] according to this Canon, or Rule: This is true Canonical Obedience. So
Romans 12.7. [(...)] is properly Word-Service; (i.e.) such as the Word prescribes.

3. Hence then you may see the door at which Superstition enters, even addition
of new and uncommanded things. When we invent new Rites and Ceremonies, and
bring them into the Worship of God, with a spiritual signification and use,
this is Superstition; being [Supra Statutum] something above and beyond what
God appoints and requires. And as all the water in Tyber, cannot wash the
Papists from the Filth of their Idolatry and Superstition, in their Mass,
Altars, Surplice, Cross, etc. So neither can any thing besides the Blood of
Jesus, cleanse us from the same, if we do like them.

Having thus opened the nature of Idolatry and Superstition to you, I shall
reinforce that Apostolical Caution upon you; Little Children, keep your selves
from Idols; I beseech you get senses exercised, Heb. 5.14. and suffer not your
selves to be abused by an easy credulity: The simple believes every word,
Prove. 14.15. There is no Idolatry or superstition in Rome so gross, but is
glost over with plausable pretenses, and many subtle Additio corrumpens, et
conservans. Additio accidentalium, et essentialium.
distinctions invented to defend it. But take not you any thing upon trust in
God's Worship; be like those well-bred Bereans, Acts 17.11. examine the
grounds-of your practice. It was a good saying of Sir Thomas Moor, I will pin
my Faith (said he) upon no man's sleeve, because I know not whether he will
carry it. See that you be provided with an answer, if God should speak to you,
when you are at your Divine Service, as he did to Elijah, 1 Kings 19.9. when he
was hid in the Cave at Horeb, What do thou here, Elijah? Or as to the Jews,
Isa. 1.12. Who has required this at your hands? See that you be able by the
Word, to justify your practice: and as you love your souls, defile them not
with Idolatiy, or Superstition. And the rather;

Because, should you be found in a false way of worship, Arg. 1.
you betray a special trust committed to you by the Lord.

Christians, unto you has the Lord committed his precious Gospel Truths and
Appointments, as precious Treasure, to defend and keep for him, Rev. 3.10. Jude
3. 1 Phil. 7.17. and one special means of its preservation, is by witnessing
against all those Errors and Innovations, that corrupt and endanger it: O see
that none of Christ's Jewels be embezled, if you can help it. You your selves
have committed a trust to Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 1.12. and expect he should be
faithful in what you have committed to him; and he expects the same from you.
Oh! consider what precious things the pure Institutions of Christ are: Ruat
Caelum, potius quam una mica veritatis percat. Luth.
all the good in this world, cannot compensate the loss of one of them. Let
Heaven rush (said Luther) rather than one crumb of Truth should perish. Oh what
hard things have the Saints in all generations suffered, to preserve and
transmit it to us! and shall we now betray it? would not the generations to
come curse us, and abhor our remembrance? And then to speak nothing of any
solemn bond or engagement under which you have put your souls to the contrary.

Shall we not hereby oppose and cross the great Design which God is carrying on
in the world, by his present Providence? Arg. 2.
Oh 'twill be sad to be found opposing God's Design! Now what is that but, by
Tali concussione ad primam Christi adventum viam paravit, tali etiam ad
secundam. Magnus antehac fecit rerum mutationes, sed restat, long major.
Grotius.
shaking Heaven and Earth, to remove the things that are [made;] viz. by man
invented in his Worship, Heb. 12.27. To pluck up by the roots, every [Plant;]
(i.e.) Ceremony and Tradition not of his planting, Mat. 15.13. Are not all
these things appointed to perdition? Col. 2.22. and dare thou then by thy
presence, or pleading for them, go about to support and establishe them, and so
strive against God? Oh consider it sadly.

Is it not dangerous to be found amongst Idolaters? Arg. 3.
does not Judgment sometimes sweep away the whole community and neighborhood
of such sinners? Read 1 Samuel 6.19, 20. 1 Chronicles. 15.13. And has not God given
thee timely warning of the danger before it come? Rev. 18.4. and is it not more
than ordinary dangerous, to be found among them now, when God is preparing his
Troops to invade Babylon; I mean ready to pour forth the Vials of his Wrath
upon Her?

And may not your example have a mischievous influence upon others? may it not
harden sinners in their ways? Arg. 4.
and even compel and draw away the weak Christian? Gal. 2.13, 14. and so draw
the guilt of their sins upon thine own soul? and what a dreadful thing is that!
Accessorium sequitor naturam Principolis Agentes and Consentientes, paripaena
plectuntur.
Actors and Consenters are alike guilty and punishable: Oh you have too much
personal guilt of your own, add not the guilt of others sins to it: nay, by
this means, thou may be sinning in another, when thou lie in the dust.

Lastly, consider how careful God has always been to keep his People off, at
the greatest distance from Idolatry. Compare these Scriptures, 2 King 17.15.
Ezekiel. 44.20. Numb. 23.38. 1 These. 5.22. Heb. 4.1. O let these Arguments be
impartially weighed, and let not any low fleshly interest, be set up to oppose
them.

COUNSEL III.
Beware of such persons as are Factors and Agents for Antichrist, and keep off
from such a Ministry, the tendency and scope of which, is to entice and draw
you to Idolatry, Mat. 7.15. and 10.17. Phil. 3.2. Col. 2.8.

There is a It is not my design to asperse any godly person, that by the
prevalency of temptation may join with them; the Lord I hope will recover such
out of the snare but I speak. of the body, and generality of them.
generation of men now abroad, skilful to destroy souls, who would make
Merchandise of you, and by good words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of
the simple [(...),] such as mean well, but want prudence to discern such as
mean ill. These are of two sorts; the generality of them are by a righteous
hand of God, given over to such dissoluteness and debauchery, that their folly
and madness, is made manifest to all men, 2 Timothy 3.9. And others that have
gifts and parts, how few are there of them, but employ them in defending
abominable Superstitions, and persuading their Congregations to submit to them:
So that you have your choice, whether you will drink poison mixed with water, or
infused into brisk and generous wine, which will give it a speedier access to
the spirits. These are Jactant crepanque Scripturam, sed eam non intelligunt,
imo pervertunt apperiunt quasi fontes scientiae, qui aquam non habent
doctrinarum, praemittunt imbrem, velut nubes prophetiae. Hieion. contra Jov.
Wells without water, deceiving the hope of weary and thirsty souls: Clouds
they are without rain, that send not forth one gracious shower to refresh the
Inheritance of the Lord: The best of them is a bryar, and the most upright of
them sharper than a thorn hedge, Mic. 7.4.

I believe there be many among you that are sharp set, and by this time have
felt the misery of a spiritual famine. It Is bread you come for, but your Father
has shut up house, and is gone for a time, the Glory is departed; they are
become Wells without water, breasts without milk: is there not a vanity in
these, as well as in the creatures, when God is withdrawn from them? We may say
concerning them, as Isaac did to his father, Genesis 22.7. Behold the fire and the
wood, but where is the Sacrifice? Here you may see the skin, and shadow of an
Ordinance, but where is the power? where is the life, quickening, and soul
refreshment, that was wont to accompany them? Ah poor England! what have thou
lost! what a Ministry have thou sinned away! wast thou not renowned among the
Nations for the power, and purity of Ordinances? were not thy Ministers as
sheep coming up from the washing, whereof every one bare twins, and none was
barren among them? How was the Lord Jesus lifted up in thy Ministry, that all
might see the Necessity, Beauty and Excellency of him! and did not the pangs of
the New Birth, frequently come upon souls in thine Assemblies? But alas, those
days are over, they are gone, they are gone; ah woe is us, that we must say, So
it was! Well then, what will you do in this case? will you seek the living
among the dead? will you suck empty breasts, whence you can draw nothing but
wind or blood? O no, but rather say, as Cant. 1.7. Tell me, O thou whom my soul
loves, where thou feedest, where thou make thy Flocks to rest at noon; for
why should I be as one that turns aside by the flocks of thy companions? These
Companions of Christ, must be none of yours.

Because it is the manifest drift, and design of their Ministry, Arg. 1.
to unteach, and beguile you of those precious Gospel Truths which you have
formerly received, and learnt. This some of them have not shunned to declare in
the face of their Congregations; and nothing is more apparent, than that it is
the design they all manage. I appeal to your own observations, what is more
common with them, than to tell you, you have been misguided by your Teachers
these twenty years, and now must return to the good Old Way, which themselves
are utterly unacquainted with?

Now what do you by attendance on such a Ministry, but run your souls upon a
temptation to unsettlement, and Apostasy? and dig a grave (as I may say) to
bury all the precious Truths you have learned under your former faithful
Ministers? Who may sigh over you, and say, as Peter Martyr did, when he was in
Oxford, at the coming in of Queen Mary; he heard a Colledge-Bell ring to Mass,
and looking out at his Study window, saw the Scholars flocking apace to it,
being struck to the heart with this sight, he brake out into this expression,
Pet. Martyr.
Haec una notula (said he) omnem meam doctrinam evertit; (i.e.) This Bell rings
a passingpeal to all my Doctrine: and upon serious consideration, this will
appear to be no small evil. For you cannot but be convinced, that it is your
duty to be immoveably fixed in the Truths of the Gospel which you have
received, and to suffer no man to spoil you of them: if you doubt that, read 2
Pet. 3.17, 18. Col. 1.23. Ephesians. 3.17. Col. 2.6, 7. 1 Cor. 15.58.

And if this be your sin, to be moved away from it, then it must needs be your
duty, to avoid the temptations, means and occasions of such unsettlement. And
this is that which is intended in all those cautions given in the Word, and but
lately recited.

I am against the Prophets that [steal] the Word, every man from his neighbor,
Jer. 23.30, He means the false true Prophets that enticed the People from those
Truths, which the Prophets had taught them. There be spiritual Cut-purses
abroad, pray look to your selves: the old Chemarims are revived again in this
Generation: the word, Zeph. 1.4. is conceived to come from (...), incaluit; (i.
e.) men more zealous and hot than ordinary, for their superstitious Traditions;
inflamed with desires to draw you to it: Ut multitudine sequacium, sese
efferunt: Which the Apostle englishes, Gal. 6.13. that they may glory in your
flesh: And therefore beware of men.

Does not your attendance upon, Arg. 2.
and following of such a Ministry, help to midwive and bring forth all those
evils with which their Ministry travels, and is in pain to be delivered of?
could they do any hurt, if they were generally declined and avoided? their
strength lies in you: As a great Commander once said to his Soldiers, That he
flew upon their Wings. Hence it was the Pharisees were so often disappointed in
their attempts to lay hands upon Christ; they had a strong design to do it, but
the Text says, They could not because of the People, Mark 14.2. Acts 4.21.
Mark 14.2. Acts 4.21. So the false Teachers in Jeroboams time, Hos. 7.6, 7.
were as hot as an Oven, with desires and designs to draw the People to false
Worship, but the People were a great Lump, and could not presently be leavened;
and therefore in the mean time, till that were done, the Baker slept, and
ceased from raising. This for a time, obstructed the design. But here is the
misery, the people are materia disposita, matter fit for them to work into any
form, if they give them but an heat or two in a plausable Sermon, they are
malliable, and fit to be hammered into any shape, Jer. 5. ult. The People love
to have it so: And Amos 4.5. This-liketh you, O house of Israel. Fear of
Persecution makes them comply with any thing, Gal. 6.12.

Can you attend lawfully and comfortably upon such a Ministry, Arg. 3.
upon which you cannot pray for, or expect a blessing? doubtless, you will
readily confess you may not. And can you pray for, or expect a blessing, where
you have no promise in all the Book of God, to warrant or encourage you so to
do? it is as clear you cannot. Now produce but one promise made to the labors
of such as God has not sent. A curse upon their labors you may find, Jer.
23.32. and upon their gifts and parts. And a prohibition of hearing them, you
may find, Jer. 23.16. But no promise of a blessing; that only attends a
Ministry of Christ's own sending, Mat. 28.19, 20. Object.


But has not Christ sent them? how shall we be satisfied in that?

Consider what is requisite and necessary in the sending, Sol.
or due Call of a Minister. (1.) Whether it be personal Qualifications,
described, 1 Timothy 3.7. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. 1 Timothy 3.2. 2 Timothy 2.2. John 21.15, 16,
17. (2.) Or free Election by the Church, to which the Ministry is given. See
Acts 1.23, 24. Acts 6.5. (3.) Or (according to true Presbyterian Principles)
Ordination, by Fasting, Prayer, and Imposition of Hands, Acts 6.6. and 13.3.
and 14.23. 1 Timothy 5.22. and 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6.

If the Sending or Call of a Minister, consist in all or either of these, than
judge your selves whether these men are sent. For their Gifts and
Qualifications necessary to fit them for such a work, let their Congregations
witness, who are fed upon husks, and starved under them.

For their Election by the Church, let the Godly in their respective Parishes
witness, whether they were elected by them, or obtruded upon them, and so stand
upon the ruins of their own lawful and godly Pastors.

And for their Ordination, their own Canons may inform you: Wherein it is
ordered; (1.) That they be made Deacons; (2.) Then after a years space, they
must be presented to the Bishop, or his Suffragan, by an Arch Deacon or his
Deputy, saying, Reverend Father in God, I present these persons to be admitted
to the Order of Priesthood. (3.) Then after the Lettany and some Collects, the
Prelate asks them, Do you think in your hearts, that you be truly called
according to the Will of Christ, and the Order of this Church of England, to
the Ministry of Priesthood? and every one of them answers, I think it. (4.)
Then they promise reverently, to obey their Ordinary and other chief Ministers
of the Church. (5.) And then kneeling down at the Prelates feet, he, with the
Priests present, lay their hands on their heads, saying, Receive the holy
Ghost. Whose sins thou do forgive, they are forgiven; and whose sins thou
do retain, they are retained: and be thou a faithful Dispenser of the Word of
God, and of his holy Sacraments, In the Name of the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost. Amen. (6.) Then delivering to each of them a Bible, he says, Take thou
Authority to preach the Word of God, and to administer the holy Sacraments, in
the Congregation where thou shall be so appointed. (7.) And after all this, by
the Canons of 1603. none of them are to be admitted to any Ecclesiastical
Living, or suffered to preach, except he be licensed so to do, by the
Archbishop, or Bishop of the Diocese, and shall subscribe, That the Book of
Common Prayer, and of ordering Bishops, Priests and Deacons, contains in it
nothing contrary to the Word of God, and that it may be lawfully used, and that
he himself will use the same; And that he allows the Book of Articles of
Religion. (8.) And then lastly, having abjured the Covenant, etc. he is a
complete Priest to all Intents and Purposes.

Judge now what a fair and regular Call here is to the Ministry. I remember
Aquinas tells us, that, If the Artificers Hand were his Rule, he could never
work amiss. And so, if the Prelates Hand be the Rule of Ordination, they cannot
but be well ordained: but if the Scriptures be indeed the Rule, I am at a loss
where to find a Text parallel to this Practice, unless it be that in 2 Chronicles.
13.9. which, I confess, suits it to an hairs breadth.

Object. But this will invalidate and nullify the Call of our former ancient
and godly Ministers, for they came in the same way: Yet God has owned them,
and they have made full proof of their Ministry.

Sol. Not at all. For (1.) though it must be confessed (and themselves will not
deny, but there were many grand Irregularities in their Ordination; yet it was
(comparatively) a time of ignorance and darkness; and in such cases, God is
more indulgent, and the sin receives not such aggravations, Acts 17.30. Heb.
5.2. Heb. 6.5, 6, 7. Jam. 4.17. (2.) As hard as the terms then were, they are
harder now by far: several things since that, have intervened, which are
considerable. (3.) They were holy men, qualified with Graces and Gifts, able
and apt to teach, which is mainly considerable in a Ministers Call. (4.)
Lastly, they generally came into their places at the desire, and upon the call,
of the most godly persons in the places where they lived. And this, if they had
no more, makes them true Ministers (in the judgment of many judicious Divines)
although their Episcopal Ordination should be a nullity. Let us here what is
said in this case by others. Amesius, his words are these, speaking to this
question; In whom is this right, and power of calling the Ministers? he
answers; (1.) Summum jus vocationis, est penes Christum solum, Ames. Cas.
consci. lib. 4. p. 233.
qui est Ecclesiae caput, and Ministerij auctor, ac Dominus Ministrorum. (2.)
Jus delegatum non potest proprie esse vel Episcoporum Diaecesanorum vel
Patranorum, vel Magis tratuum, qua sunt tales; quia Christus qui Ministerium
instituit, de istis ordinibus nihil singular prescripsit, nihil novi juris
ipsis communicavit, et Ecclesiam sine illis optime ordinatam reliquit. (3.) Jus
delegatum est Penes Ecclesiam illam totam, cui Minister vocandus debit
inservire, etc. (1.) The chief right of calling, is the Power of Christ alone,
who is Head of the Church, Author of the Ministry, and Lord of Ministers. (2.)
The delegated right cannot properly be, either of diocesan Bishops, or Patrons,
or Magistrates (as such) because Christ, who instituted the Ministry,
prescribed nothing singular, concerning those Orders, communicated nothing of
any new right to them, and left his Church well ordered without them. (3.) The
delegated Right is in the power of that whole Church, to which the Minister
that is to be called, ought to serve, etc. Which he proves by many weighty
Arguments. To this I shall join the Testimony of that blessed man, now with
God, Mr. Jer. Buroughs, his words are these; For their calling; I make no
question, Buroughs on the 11th of Mat. 28. 2d Book, p. 110.
but there are many Ministers in England, as they were, and as they are, that
are the true Ministers of Jesus Christ, and have a true Call from Christ.

Object. But how can that be? they hold their standing from the Bishops, and so
from Antichrist.

Answ. Take it for granted, that their Authority from the Bishops was wholly
naught, and sinful, yet that does not follow, but that many Ministers, that had
their Ordination from them, are true Ministers of Christ: Why? not because of
that they had from them, but they had their calling likewise from the People of
God, as well as in a seeming way from them: for we will take that for granted,
that that they had from them, there was such corruption in it, that they sinned
against God; but yet mark, that does not nullify their Call, because they had
somewhat super-added, wherein they sinned against God. This he farther
illustrates in the same place by this similitude, If a man have two Deeds or
Evidences for a piece of Land, and one be naught, Mr. Collins vindiciae Minist,
p. 73.
yet if the other be good and sound, he has a true Title. Mr. Collings also,
answering this Objection, Ministers had their Ordination from Bishops, and they
from Rome. Rome is no true Church, and has no true Ministry; and those that
were not Ministers themselves, could not make others. Having inferred several
absurdities from the Objection, gives this answer; Suppose the Reformers had no
Ordination, but the Call of the People, it was a plain case of necessity; and
they had power doubtless, to restore that Ordinance to the Church again.

So that as long, as they were holy men, so eminently qualified, and fairly
called by good People, far be it from me, to question the validity of their
Call. But the Case before us, differs Heaven-wide from this.

Object. But they are not worse than the Scribes and Pharisees were? yet Christ
commands his Disciples to hear them, Mat. 23.2, 3.

Sol. Because this is the Achilean Argument, I shall endeavor to satisfy you
in this Scripture, and destroy the Argument commonly drawn from this place, by
these plain and (as I judge) satisfactory replies to it.

1. Those that infer from this Text a duty or a liberty of attending on, or
joining with a profane and corrupt Ministry, do thereby (though perhaps
unawares) gratify the Popish Cause and Interest; for from this very Text, they
draw many of their Arguments to condemn our separation from them, and also to
convince us of the necessity of obeying the Mandates of their Prelates, and
hearing their Jesuits and Monks, notwithstanding their corruptions in worship,
and filthy sodomitical lives. Huc enim torquent verba Christi, says Calvin, To
this sense they wrest the words of Christ. And to the same sense Pareus speaks,
Ut hodie Papa, et Episcopi clamant, omnia, omnia servate; As the Pope and the
Bishops cry out at this day, all things, all things they bid you do, observe
and do. So that by taking the words in such a large unlimitted sense, we do
the Cause of Christ more disservice, than we are aware of.

2. It is further considerable, that the Arguments drawn from this Text, are
commonly fallacious, taking it for granted, that religious hearing, as an act
of worship, is here enjoined; whereas there is not a syllable of any such thing
in the Text: Indeed Christ bids them observe and do whatsoever they bid them;
but it does not thence follow, they should religiously attend on their
Ministry: (1.) Because its evident, these Scribes and Pharisees sustained a
double capacity; they were Expositors of the Law, that we allow; and they were
also of the Sanedrim, in a civil capacity, as Rulers; that appears from, John
3.1.10. Acts 5.34. In this civil capacity, they are most properly said, to sit
in Moses's Seat: for the 70 Elders which made up this Sanedrim came in upon a
civil score at first, as appears from, Numb. 11.16, 17. and so were joined with
Moses in the Government. Now then, this command seems most properly to respect
them as Rulers; who in that capacity both opened the judicial Laws of Moses,
and enjoined the people to obey them. (2.) Because Christ had before warned
them, to take heed of their leaven (i.e.) their Doctrine, Mat. 16.6, 12. and
told them they were blind Guides, and what the fatal issue of them and their
Disciples that followed them, would be, Mat. 15.14. both should fall into the
ditch; and that their worship was vain, Mat. 15.9. and it is not like he would
afterward encourage them to attend on it.

3. But admit it were so, that Christ gives them liberty to hear them as
Ministers, though they were corrupt, yet it is no good consequence, that
therefore we may hear any Ministers, though never so corrupt in principles and
practice now. And the reason which destroys this consequence, is this, because
there is a vast difference betwixt the infant State of the Gospel Church in the
days of Christ on earth, and its more perfect State after his death; we know
the first Tabernacle was then standing, the Vail of the Temple not then rent in
twain, the Gospel Ministry not then instituted: and therefore during that
State, as Christ himself submitted to the Ordinances of the Law (for it became
him to fulfill all Righteousness:) so did his Disciples submit to them also:
yea, and he exhorts others also, to observe the rites appointed by it; as Mat.
8.4. bids him that was cleansed, to go and show himself to the Priest, and
offer his Gift which the Law of Moses required. But since the death of Christ,
and the taking down of that first Tabernacle, and the institution of the
Gospel Ministry, none of these Precepts bind: for, as Judicious Pareus on the
place notes, this was but [Mandatum temporale] a temporal Command; which ceased
to oblige upon the commissionating and full instruction of the New
Gospel Ministry: And then it is manifest (says he) they made a Separation from
the Pharisees, and the Jewish Synagogue.

Now we are to attend upon no Ministry, but of Christ's institution; for to
them only has he promised his Presence, Mat. 28. ult. and none can preach
(i.e.) lawfully except he be sent, Romans 10. And I have proved before, these are
not his Ministry, nor sent by him.

COUNSEL IV.
Give your uttermost diligence to promote Religion, and the Power of Godliness,
in your respective Families, and Neighbourhoods; and the rather do this with
all your might, because the ordinary and more public means of their Conversion
and Edification, is cut off.

This Counsel consists of two Branches; the first concerns your Families, the
second your Neighbors: a word distinctly to each.

1. As to your Families, O shine as Lights there; lay out your Talents as many
ways as they may possibly be improveable for the good of all about you,
especially those under your guardianship and charge, Exodus 20.10. By this the
Power of Godliness must be discovered in you, and begotten and kept alive in
them. The Jews have a Tradition, that the Fire of the Altar was miraculously
preserved under ground, during the Babylonish Captivity. I am sure this is the
way to preserve Religion alive, now the public ordinary means are ceased.
Precepts are not wanting to enforce this duty upon you; Deuteronomy 4.9, 10. and 6.6,
7. Exodus 12.24, 26, 27. Josh. 4.6, 7, 21, 22. Psalm. 78.5, 6. Prove. 22.6. Ephesians.
6.4. nor yet worthy Examples to encourage to it; Genesis 18.19.1 Chron. 28.9.
Prove. 31.26.2 Tim. 3.15.2 Joh. 1.4. Aquila and Priscilla, had a Church in their
house, 1 Cor. 16.19. Nymphas and Philemon in theirs, Col. 4.15. Philem. 2.
Hence it is, says Adjungit specialem Salutationem, ob specialem et eximiam
hujus viri pietatem, equum enim est extra ordinarium illis defer honorem,
quorum egr gia virtus prae caeteris eminet et effulget in Ecclesia. Day. in Loc.
Davenant on the place, that the Apostle sends a special Salutation to them, by
name; because of their singular Piety, which manifested it self in their family
Government. And indeed, how fresh and glorious a remembrance in the Scriptures
have those worthy Saints unto this day, and so shall have where ever the Gospel
is preached, unto the end of the World; who have burned with an holy Zeal, not
only to offer up themselves, but their families also unto God! David well
understood how near this Duty lay to the heart of Religion, when he puts his
soul under the bond of such a solemn engagement to the Lord, Psalm. 101.2. It
does not a little affect me to read what a Buxtorf. in Synog. Judaic. Cap. 3.
learned man observes of the Jews; Although Religion be miserably deformed
among them, yet it seems there are some prints of their ancient family
Discipline to this day remaining among them; for (says he) they are so careful
to teach their Children in their tender years, the Law, and Books of Moses, and
after that their Talmudical Traditions, as that their skill in Judaism at 17.
exceeds the knowledge of many among us in Christianity, at 70. Nay, the very
Jesuits boast themselves, the grand Conservators of the Romish Religion, in
that they are Catechisers. Oh let this Provoke Caristians! we see how light
breaks out more and more in every age; as Luther said, I see more than blessed
Austin saw; and they that come after me, will see more than I see. And we have
great hopes and expectations of the young Generation, that they may enter into
the good Land, though we should die in this Wilderness. O then let us labor to
prepare and make them ready for the Lord; and that not only by instructing them
in the Principles of Religion in a Catechistical way (though that be an
Ordinance of God, and of singular use in its kind) but by endeavoring to the
utmost, by Counsels, Persuasions, Prayers, for and with them, to have the Power
of Godliness wrought in their hearts, to travel with them again in pain, till
Christ he formed in them, And to this Duty, these Arguments among many others,
may persuade.

From the relation it self, which is betwixt you and them; Arg. 1.
look but into your own bowels, and you shall find arguments enough to provoke
your utmost care and industry for their good: What is a Child but a piece of
your self (as one says) wrapped up in another skin? what an inestimable value
does nature it self teach you to set upon them. See Exhortation to Catech. by
the Ministers of the Isle of Weight. p. 17.
The life of Jacob is said to be bound up in Benjamins, Genesis 44.30. This dear
and ardent affection to them, we use to express by our earnest desires of them,
till we have them, Genesis 15.2. What will thou give me, seeing I go childless,
said Abraham, Genesis 30.1. Give me Children, or else I die, said Rachel. 1 Samuel
1.10, 11. How earnestly did Hannah pray in the bitterness of her soul, for a
Child. Also by the singular contentment we take in them, when we have them,
John 16.21. and the wonderful tenderness of our affections to them, and earnest
desires to keep them, no value can be set upon a Child, Genesis 42.36, 38. Luke
8.41, 42. John 7.47, 49. Also by our sympathizing with them in all conditions;
their comfort is ours, Genesis 45.27, 28. and their misery is ours, Mark 9.22. And
lastly, by our extreme grief when we lose them, Genesis 37.33, 34, 35. Mat. 2.18.

Now are they such near and dear things to you, Oh then how many motives does
this dear and tender relation wrap up in it, to endeavor the eternal Salvation
of their poor Souls! it is the Soul of the Child, that is the Child; and if that
perish for want of knowledge, where is the mercy of having Children? surely an
untimely birth is better than they: Ah when you shall see them enemies to God,
those that came out of your bowels to be in rebellion against him; will it not
make you take up Jobs wish, and apply it to them; let the day perish wherein
they were born, Job 3.1, 5.
and the night in which it was said they are conceived, let the darkness and
the shadow of death stain it; let a cloud dwell upon it, let the blackness of
the day terrify it, why dyed they not from the womb? why did they not give up
the Ghost when they came out of the the belly? why did the knees prevent them?
or why the breasts that they should suck? Ah if you have the hearts of Parents
in you, think how sad a consideration this will be to you, that those who are
so dear to you, should be the objects of God's Wrath; those you have been so
tender over, and have so often put into your bosoms, must underlye eternal
torments, and their bed be made in Hell? if you have any good thing your
selves, you cannot withold it from them; if you be feasted abroad, and they
pining at home, the greatest dainties do you no good. Why now, unless they be
taught the knowledge of Christ, and a saving change pass upon them, when you
shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of God, abundantly
satisfied with the Fatness of his House, and drinking of the Rivers of his
Pleasure, they shall be shut out: Nature teaches you to feel the pains of
their bodies, and cannot Grace teach you to sympathize with the misery of their
poor wretched Souls? Well, the day is coming, if they die Christless, that they
will wish they had been the generation of Tigers, or offspring of Dragons,
rather than your Children: and when you can have them no more, you know who
must, and will.

From that exceeding Joy, Arg. 2.
it must needs be to a godly Parent, to see his Children, and Relations
gracious. May not every godly Parent say as John did of the Children of the
Elect Lady, I have no greater joy, than to see them walk in the Truth, 2 John
1.4. Is it pleasing to you to see your own image in them? and will it not much
more delight you, to see the Image of Christ in them? Grace doubles the
relation, and so must needs exceedingly increase your joy in them. This is the
true way to build up the Felicity of your issue. How many anxious thoughts and
sollicitous cares, will this discharge thy heart of! O if thou leave them in
the Covenant of Grace, thy heart may be at rest concerning them; if thou leave
them not a groat, they shall not want a father to care for them when thou art
in the dust. Besides, Grace will effectually teach them the duties of their
relation to you, while you live; hereby you will provide, not only for their
eternal good, but your own joy also.

The work lies now upon your hand more than ever, Arg. 3.
as I hinted before; and truly you have many singular advantages above all
others, to do the work. (1.) You are continually with them, and so may take the
fittest seasons to drop your admonitions upon them, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. (2.) You best
know their tempers and dispositions, and so can apply your selves with more
advantage to them. (3.) You have the deepest interest in their hearts and
affections, which is a great matter, this will make your words, (especially if
dropped upon them with much affection) sink deep. Oh what Child can choose but
relent, while a Parent it speaking with a melting heart to him, about his
Eternal Concernments. I remember Austine writes of his Mother Monica, that she
planted the Precepts of Life in his mind by her words, watered them with her
Tears, and nourished them with her Example. A precious pattern for all Mothers.

Me thinks these Arguments should excite you to your duty; O if you have in you
the bowels of Parents, let them impel you to it; you cannot plead danger here,
as in other duties; against such there is [yet] no Law.

2. As to your Neighborhood. You should study to be useful in your generation;
are there any poor carnal Neighbors about you? O visit them, and be ever
dropping some serious words of Counsel upon them: how do you know but tere may
be some sleeping conviction left upon them by the Ministry they once sat
under, which you may be instrumental to awaken? And are there any that feat the
Lord near you, O be often together, strengthen the hands that hand down. The
Jews have a Proverb. that One dry stick will set two green ones on fire. A
lively Christian may be of singular use in such a day as this. In Mal. 3.16. we
find what the practice of Christians was in an evil day, as it appears that
was, by the 15th verse, They that work wickedness, are set up, yea they that
tempt God, are even delivered. And yet, Then they that feared the Lard, spoke
often one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a book of
remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and that
thought upon his Name. and And they shall be mine, etc. Oh how well does God
take it, when his People will not be terrified from their Duty by the fear of
men! The Lord hearkened and heard it; They did not whisper so in one another
ear (says a modern Divine) but God overheard them; the Lord listened, as it
were, at the keyhole, he was under the window, and kept it upon record; a book
of remembrance was written. Oh how pleasant is it to God, to see his secret
ones making hard shifts to get together to worship him! Cant. 2.14. Oh my Dove
that art in the Clefts of the Rocks, in the secret places of the Stairs; let me
see thy Countenance, let me hear thy Voice; for sweet is thy Voice, and thy
Countenance is comely. What are these Non in domicilio sed in latibulo
versatur, Brightman in loc.
Clefts of Rocks, and secret places of the Stairs, but those secret retiring
places, where the People of God get together in difficult times to seek their
God? there they Hoc est illud os totum oppletum lachrimis, cujus aspectutam in
mirifice delectatur Dcus; ibid.
poured out their souls together in brokenhearted confessions of sin. The
Primitive Christians, says Hillary, were not to be sought, in Tectis et
exteriori Pompa, (i.e.) in Palaces and outward Pomp, but rather in Deserts and
Mountains, in Dens and Caves of the Earth; as Heb. 11.38. In Queen Mary's time,
(says Mr. Fox) there were sometimes 40, Acts and Menfol. 1881.
sometimes an 100, sometimes 200, came together as they could, in private
places in London, for mutual edification.

And though men call this by hard names, and load it with reproach, as if it
were Faction and Sedition, yet it undergoes another censure in Heaven. I
remember Cum boni, cum probi coeunt, non est factio dicenda, sed Curia, and e
contrario, illis nomen factionis accomino dandum est, qui in odium bonorum et
proborum conspirant. Ter. Apol. cap. 39.
Tertullian, about 1400 years ago, in his Apology, vindicates this Practice of
theirs, against the Calumnies of the Heathen; When good Men meet together
(says he) it is not to be called a faction, but a Court. And on the contrary,
the name of Faction is to be applied to them, who conspire in hatred against
good and honest men. And what place is accounted so honorable, and abounds
with delights, as the Courts of Princes? Yea, let us hear what a Quaevis
collectio fidelium, eatiam si ob paucitatem suam intra, privatae domus parietis
includi possit, etiamsi ob furorem hostium nocturnos conventus agant, est vera
ecclesia. Dav. in Loc. p. 410.
Bishop of our own speaks of such Meetings; Sometimes (says he) the rage of
Persecution suffers not the Church to meet in the public sight of all, but
forces them as it were, to creep into private Holes; as Rev. 12.6. as
Athanasius and other Orthodox Christians, were fain to seek hiding places from
the Arrians.

Every Meeting of the Faithful, although for their fewness, they may be
included within the walls of a Private House, although by the fury of the
Enemies, they keep their meeting by night, yet it is a true Church. Thus Bishop
Davenant. And truly if the Saints had nothing else but the gracious Presence of
Christ, (which is by promise engaged to be among them) it were enough to oppose
to all the difficulties and dangers attending on such a Duty. What a sweet
Promise is that, Mat. 18.20. Where two or three are gathered together in my
Name, there am I in the midst of them: That is? says Cameron, not only with
them, but as a President among them: Christ will be there to defend, teach and
bless them. How often has this Promise been made good to the experiences of
the Saints? John 20.19. Then the same day at evening, being the first day of
the week, when the doors were shut, where the Disciples were assembled, for
fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst of them, and says unto
them, Peace be unto you. Oh if Jesus be in the midst of you, no matter how many
Enemies combine against you; If He speak peace to you, no matter who prepares
war against you: it is worth the venturing far, to meet with Jesus Christ, and
enjoy fellowship with him in such duties.

And besides, this is the way to prevent the decay and cooling of thy
affections: In times of abounding iniquity, the love of many will wax cold, but
he that endures to the end, the same shall be saved. Lo it is but an [He]
(says one upon the Text) a single man, a very few, that hold out in comparison
of the Apostates. The whole world went wandering after the Beast, Rev. 13.3, 4.
Such was the paucity and obscurity of Christians in the Arrian Times, that
Basil cries out, An Ecclesias suas prosus dereliquit Dominus? Has the Lord
utterly forfaken his Churches? the ship of the Church was then almost
overwhelmed, faith Hierom; when the storm is at its height, thou shall see
Professors fall like the leaves in Autumn, or as rotten fruit in a windy day.
The Dragons Tail shall sweep down the third part of the Stars. Now to fix thee
in such a day, the Communion of Saints is of singular use, they do wedge in and
fasten one another; all the enemies rage could not sever them; in the Primitive
times, Acts 4.23. being let go, they went to their company: In Spirituali
societate, hoc etiam locum precipue habet, ut matacis cohortationibus animorum
in pietat frigus and Congelationem inducto Deizelore pellamus. Cartwright in
Loc.
Two (says Solomon) are better than one, because they have a good reward for
their labor, for if they fall, the one will help up his fellow: But woe to him
that is alone, Eccles. 4.9, 10. If two lie together, then they have heat; but
how can one be warm alone? Communion with spiritual Christians, affords this
double benefit; if one stumble, yea fall, another will recover him; if ones
affections grow chil, another zeal will warm them again: the benefit of such
Society, is unspeakable: and truly the nearer you keep to God, the closer you
will cleave to one another, as lines are nearer at the center.

COUNSEL V.
Study to keep your selves pure from the Corruptions of the present World.

It is not only a great sin, but an ill sign, to be carried away with the
streams of the times. A Sin, because directly opposite to the Command, Romans
12.2. Be not conformed to this World, [(...),] to this age; the meaning is, do
not get into the garb of the Times. And an ill Sign, because the Scripture
makes it the character of a wicked man, Ephesians. 2.2. They walk according to the
course of this World. In the original [(...)] accord to the age, as the manner
of the Times went: it is as dangerous living in ill company, as breathing in an
infectious air; for as Peccatum adeo facile alios invadit, ut nulla Pestis
tantopere aerem inficere potest. Chem. Har.
one observes well, No Pest does sooner infect the air, than Sin infects and
defiles the mind: it is as hard a matter to preserve your selves from guilt
among wicked men, as it is to keep your selves clean, where many dirty dogs are
leaping and fawning upon you: the diseases of the soul are very catching. How
great a commendation was it to Noah, Nemo erat sibi ipsi, sed demon tiam
spargit in proximos. Seneca.
that he was upright, and walked with God, when all flesh had corrupted their
ways! And how beautiful a sight is it to see Christians shine as Lights in the
midst of a crooked and perverse generation! Phil. 2.15. to continue a Lilly
among Thorns, The world is a Sea, and every particular person in it a drop; now
to see a drop of water in the Sea carried in a counter motion to the Tide, is
mavelous. Christians are a distinct company of themselves, Acts 4.23. You are
of another world, Joh 17.14. and your converses should be in Heaven, Col. 3.1,
2. and with Heavenly Spirits, Psalm 16.3. Oh how hard is it to escape
partnership with them in sin, if we converse unnecessarily among them! If fine
bread be in the same Oven with course, the finer partakes of that which is
course, but the course seldom partakes of the fine: If you lay bright and
clean Armor among that which is rusty, the rusty Armor communicates its rust
to the clean, but the bright communicates not its brightness to the rusty.
There are more ways than one, by which thou may be involved into guilt by
them. Suppose thou consentest not with them, muchless instigatest them to sin,
yet may thou be defiled by their sin, if it be but by thy silence when thou
ought to reprove them, Lev. 5.1. or by not being so grieved, and tenderly
affected with their sins, as thou ought, 1 Cor. 5.1, 2. Thus did David,
Psalm. 119.136. And Lot, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. that they might free their own souls.
From this I might diswade you by many Arguments: As,

The express command of God laid upon you; Arg. 1. (...).
he has forbidden you to follow a It may signify either quantitatem
continuam, or discretam; either magnitudinem or multitudinem.
multitude to do evil, Exodus 23.2. it may be understood either of multitude or
magnitude. Many men, or great men (for the will of God is not revealed to men
with respect either to their numbers, or greatness; but his secret is with them
that fear him;) to go in the way of evil men, Prove. 4.14. to have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 5.11. to save your selves from this
untoward generation, Acts 2.40. with many of like importance. And this is
reason enough to make you cautelous, seeing God has given such express
prohibitions in this case.

The special eye of favor which God has always cast upon such as have been
upright in their generation, Arg. 2.
and kept themselves pure from the corruptions of the times they lived in. Noah
walked with God, when the earth was overspread with an inundation of
wickedness, Genesis 6.9. and Noah is saved by the Lord when the Earth is
overwhelmed with an inundation of water, Genesis 6.8. Lot his righteous foul is
vexed with the filthy conversation of the Sodomites, and he is graciously
exempted from the desolation that came upon them, Genesis 19.16. he would not join
hands with sinners, and God will take him by the hand, as a friend to rescue
him out of the danger. Elijah will walk with and appear for God, when he could
see none to stand by him, when Idolatry had overspread the face of the whole
Country; and what miraculous and wonderful Providence did he experience in his
protections and sustentations! Either the Lord will hide him in the grave, from
the troubles that shall be among the living, Isa. 57.1. (so Angustin was taken
away a little before the Sacking of Hyppo; Pareus a little before the taking of
Heydelburg; Luther before the Wars break forth in Germany; Methusela just
before the Flood) or else he sets some special mark upon them, that they may be
distinguished in the general calamity, Ezekiel. 9.4, 5. Go through the midst of
Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of them that sigh, and that cry
for all the Abominatins that be done in the midst thereof. And to the other he
said, Go after him, and smite, let not your eye spare, neither have ye pity.
So Rev. 7. before the Vials come to be poured out upon the Earth, the Servants
of God are sealed; even such as had kept themselves pure from Antichristian
Polutions.

The danger we run our selves into thereby, dangers I say, Arg. 3.
not only of destruction (Sor a companion of Fools shall be destroyed, Prove.
13.20.) but of defilement also; the Devil has his Agents and Factors in every
corner, to entice you to sin, and you have corrupt hearts, as apt to receive
impressions from the examples and persuasions of sinners, as tinder is to
receive fire; and it is no wisdom you know, for him that carries Gunpowder
about him, to come too near the fire, where the sparks fly.

Now to prevent this danger of being infected with the Sins and Evils of the
Time, I shall lay down a few Directions.

1. If you would prevent Infection in these evil days, begin every day with
God; season your hearts ever morning by communion with the Lord. This was
David's practice, Psalm. 139.18. When I awake, I am still with thee. It was
blessed Counsel which a worthy person gives in this case; Before earthly things
(says he) break in upon us, Mr. T. Case in Epistle to the Morning Exercise.
and we receive impressions from abroad, it is good to season the heart with
thoughts of God, and to consecrate the early and virgin operations of the mind,
before they are prostituted to baser objects. When the World gets the start of
Religion in the morning, it can hardly overtake it all the day; and so the
heart is habituated to vanity all the day long: but when we begin with God, we
take him along with us to all the businesses and comforts of the day; which
being seasoned with his Love and Fear, are the more sweet and savoury to us.

2. Be choice in your company. Christ indeed conversed frequently with
Publicans and Sinners, but it was still in order to their good, and there was
no danger of receiving any evil from them, there was nothing in him to fasten a
temptation upon; but we can seldom get off without a taint.

3. Quicken up your zeal for God; this will be a spur to the discharge of your
duty in all places, times and companies. Love (said Mr. Gurnal) ever goes armed
with Zeal, this is her dagger she draws against all Opposers of Truth. Qui non
zelat non amat. Many times we hear the Name of God profaned, and dare not take
as much liberty and boldness to reprove sin, as they do to commit it; whence is
this but from the want of Zeal? O it would make thee, as it did Jonathan, to
cast a Kingdom at thy heels, to appear against Sin: and methinks thy interest
in God, should provoke thy zeal. We must not neglect the duty of a friend, for
fear of incurring the suspicion of an enemy: it is better lose the smiles than
the souls of men: if thou discharge thy duty, the sin is his; if not, it is
thine too.

4. Furnish your hearts with such Principles, as are antidotes and
preservatives against infections. As Physicians advise in times of infection,
to carry some Preservatives still about you. Of this sort I shall commend four
or five, and shut up this Head.

1. Nothing must lie nearer thy heart, if thou be a Christian, than the Glory
of thy God; all ends, interests and designs, must be subjected to that; and
whatsoever cannot be subordinated, must be rejected. If this Principle were but
well settled upon the heart, what brave Spirits would it breed and raise in thy
breast! it would untye thy tongue, like Craesus his dumb son, to plead for thy
Father. It was a brave Speech of Hierom, in an evil day, when the rage of the
enemy was great against the Name and People of God; O that they would turn
their weapons upon me, and be satisfied with my Blood. And a sweet one is that
of Bernard to the same purpose, Malo in nos murmur hominum, quam in Deum;
Rather let their reproach fall on Us, than on God. Bonum est mihi si dignitur
Deus, me uti pro Clypeo; I should account it a mercy, if God would vouchsase to
use me as a Shield. Much like that of David, The Reproaches of them that
reproached thee, are fallen on me. If Gods Glory be thy principal end, thus it
will subject all other ends and interests to it, and then it will open thy
mouth to plead for him, and appear in all the concernments of his Name.

2. The Peace of thine own Conscience. is to be preferred to the favor of any
man, and will abundantly recompense the frowns of men. This is our rejoicing,
even the Testimony of our Conscience. This is the sweetest friends, sacrifice
it not to any man's lust or will.

3. The greatest expression of love to another, is to hate his sin. Prove. 27.6.
Faithful are the Wounds of a Friend; and the greatest injury to another, is to
connive at his wickedness, Lev. 19.17.

4. No man shall be a loser at last, by being faithful to God, and to his Duty;
if you have no reward from men, yet to be sure you shall from God; and yet God
so orders it oftentimes, that men shall love you the better for your
Faithfulness; Prove. 28.23. He that rebukes a man, afterward shall find more
favor than he that flatters with his lips.

5. A Christian should do that, and nothing but that now, which he judges will
be comfortable to him in a calm review at death and judgment: this would make
you accurate Christians indeed. O treasure up these Principles, and live in the
daily exercise of them.

COUNSEL VI.
Prepare for fiery Trials, whilst the Lord gives you such a gracious Season of
Peace and Liberty.

Eccles. 8.5. A wise man's heart discerns both Time and Judgment. And indeed
it is a special point of wisdom, to apprehend and improve Seasons aright.
Christian, thou must use thy forseeing faculties, to discover dangers at a Non
facile inveniuntur praesidia in adversitat, quae non fuerint in pace Quesitae.
Aug.
distance, and so prevent surprizals; A prudent man fore sees the evil, Prove.
22.3. yea, sense it self teaches the bruit Beasts to get to the hedge, when a
storm is coming; and can not thou forsee a Storm in the Clouds, do they not
gather blacker and blacker over thy head? O prepare for it; get thy suffering
Graces, thy winter Germents on. Put them in mind (says the Apostle) to be
ready to every good Work, Tit. 3.1. be it active or passive obedience, you must
be ready for it. Blessed Paul had fitted and provided himself, Acts 21.13. I am
[ready] not only to be bound, but to dye at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord
Jesus; he had, as I may say, laid his neck on the block before hand, 2 Timothy
4.6. I am ready, says he, to be offered up. Thus Christ was ready for his
sufferings, Lo I come, says he, upon the Fathers Call, Psalm. 40.7. And as
this is an argument of an heart truly gracious, so is it a singular advantage
to the Christian when troubles come; it is as the shoe, Ephesians. 6.15. and your
feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace. Ah when you come off
these plains of peace and liberty, into the hard rugged paths. of suffering,
you will find what a benefit it will be to you, to be well shod with this
preparation of the Gospel of Peace. Habakkuk had it. chap. 3.16. I trembled in
my self, that I might rest in the day of trouble: and then when difficulties
and straits came, he could go away singing under them, ver. 17. Though the
fig tree, etc. yea, he could walk securely through the thickets of trouble, and
over the craggy rocks and precipices of danger, as is intimated, ver. 19. The
Lord God is my strength, and he will make my feet like Hinds feet, (i.e.) to
pass with ease, per montes, per rupta, in such ways of difficulty as would
distract others: and he will set me. upon my high places; (i.e.) Libere et
absquae metu in cedere in locis excelsis.
he will enable me to go without fear over Mountains of trouble. Oh Christian,
how soon a storm may rise thou know not, Genesis 22.2. Acts 12.1. to be sure it
will not be long, the Heavens are black, and some drops already fallen: prepare
therefore for it, and have your suffering Graces ready.

Quest. But what are they? and how must they be prepared?

Sol. Though every Grace is necessary in its place, and in the course of a
Christians conversation, comes to take his turn; as every spoak in a wheel
bears a stress, and is of use in the whole turn and round thereof; yet as those
spoaks which are undermost at present, do present service, so those Graces
which are now exercised, and are to bear the present burden of this day, are
such as these.

1. Faith. This has a precedence given in to all other Graces; as in point of
justification, so of sustentation in a suffering hour; Ephesians. 6.16. Above all,
taking the shield of Faith: this is like the liver-vein, this goes to Christ,
and conveies Blood and Life to the soul from him; now the Just shall live by
Faith, Heb. 10.38. It was by Faith those renowned Worthies, Heb 11. performed
such glorious Actions. By Faith it is that a poor Christian gets a glimpse of
the invisible God, and Glory, which marvellously supports him under distresses,
Heb. 11.27. 2 Cor. 4.18. By this the soul is filled with peace and inward
tranquillity, Romans 5.1, 2. And that is a singular preparation for suffering,
Ephesians. 6.15. Smite Lord, smite (said Luther) for my sins are forgiven me. Feri
Domine feri, nam a peccatis meis absolutus sum. Luth.
By Faith a poor soul rouls its self and its burden upon God, 2 Timothy 1.12. and
so quits and discharges it self of all that anxiety and perplexity of spirit,
which puts the sinking weight into affliction. Oh then look to thy Faith, see
it be not only alive, but lively; keep that Grace in thy heart, and thou shall
do well.

2. Patience; a Grace fitted for the purpose: it is not only a grace it self,
but the Conservatory of other graces. And God has placed Temperance on the
right hand of Godliness, to defend it from injury by the flatteries and
allurements of the world, so has he placed Patience on the left, to defend it
from the wrong it might receive by adversity, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6. a grace so
necessary in an evil day, that the Spirit has set it in equipage with Faith it
self, Heb. 6.12. and the Crown promised to it, Romans 2.7. It Is an hardy Grace,
bred by tribulation, Romans 5.3. will make a Christian long-winded in his race to
Glory. Oh then beg that you may be strengthened with all might in the
Inner-man, unto all Patience; if not, though you may be set out with much
seeming gallantry of resolution, yet you must needs faint in the way, and fall
short at last.

3. Holy Courage and Magnanimity. This Grace must now say in thy heart, as
Elijah once did; As the Lord lives I will show my self. How conspicuous has
this Grace been in those worthy Hero's that are past on before us. See Dan.
3.16, 17. Heb. 11. per tot. Acts 20.24. and 21.13. When Valens the Emperor
endeavored to draw Basil from the faith, he first offers him great
preferments, but his spirit was raised above that; Offer these things (said he)
to Children: then he tryes him by threanings of grievous torments, but his
spirit was above that also; Threaten these things (said he) to your purple
Gallants, that give themselves to pleasure. The same Basil relates the answer
of the forty Martyrs (whose story he writes) When the Persecutors, says he,
offered them great Preferments to draw them from Christ, this was their answer;
Why offer you to us these small things of the world, when you know the whole
world is contemned by us? One of the Nobles of Jutian present at the tormenting
of Marcus Bishop of Aerthusa, was forced to say, We are ashamed, O Emperor, the
Christians laugh at your Cruelty, and grow the more resolute. Our very Women
and Children, not to speak of men (says Lactantius) do overcome their
Tormentors, and the fire cannot fetch so much as a sigh from them. The same
glorious Spirit of courage for the Lord Jesus, rested also upon Luther, Quas
non oportet mortes praeeligere, quod non supplicium potius far, imo in quam
profundam inferni abysinferni abyssum non intrare, quam contra conscientiam
attestari. Zuing 3 Epist.
Zuinglius, and those blessed Souls that freely offered themselves to the Lord
in Qucen Maryes time. And truly Christian, not only necessity which lies upon
thee, should provoke courage, for there is no retreating, unless thou resolve
to perish, Heb. 10.38. but methinks the infinite Excellency of Christ, in whose
Cause and Quarrel thou art engaged, exacts it of thee, and should make thee lay
down all at his feet, not by constraint, but willingly, looking upon it as thy
privilege, Phil. 1.29.

4. Lastly, to name no more, Self-denial must now be promoted; If any man will
come after me, he must deny himself, Mark, 8.34. both sinful self, which must
absolutely and universally be denied; and natural, yea religious Self, which
must respectively and in some cases be denied also. The want of this, has been
the downfall and ruin of many an eminent Professor. The most dangerous nick
and opportunity of temptation, is when a man is tried in his darling lust; now
he falls by the root, if that be not mortified. This was the ruin of Judas;
Covetousness was his predominant lust; and when he was tried there, he falls
immediately, Mat. 26.16. What will you give me, and I will betray him? This
overturned Demas also. Oh consider these things.

COUNSEL VII.
Get your hearts deeply affected with Sions Misery, and strive earnestly with
the Lord on its behalf.

Psalm. 137.5. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my tongue eleave to the roof
of my mouth. The pouring out of this Spirit of compassion, will be a token for
good to us: Psalm. 102.13. Thou will arise and have mercy upon Sion, for the
time to favor her, yea the set-time is come: Mr. Case in Englands
Encouragements; p. 74.
But how knew he that? for thy Servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor
the dust thereof. Upon which words one glosseth thus; It is as if he should
say, would you have me give an account of my hope and confidence, that God will
arise and have mercy upon Sion; why (says he) do you not see the Servants of
God every where troubled for Sion, and bemoan Sion, and weep over her, crying
out over her ruins, O is this Sion? what, the City of our Solemnities? what,
she that was the praise and beauty of the whole Earth? Ah Lord, who can hold
his peace at such a sight as this? Oh who can look upon Sion with dry eyes? are
these her stones that lie thus scattered in the dust? Oh it is a thousand
pitties to see Sion in such a sad and mournful condition? Oh that our head were
waters, and our eyes rivers of tears! Come Sirs, what shall we do for Sion? is
there nothing we can do by our counsels, our prayers for the repairing of these
breaches? Oh thus it should be with us at this day: Non sunt ista litigandi sed
orandi tempora, as Mr. Perkins said of his day, These are not times of
striving, but praying; it is no time now to strive with one another, but to
unite our strength, and like the true generation of Jacob, to be striving with
our God. To be minding the world, and seeking of great things for our selves
now, is no small evil: God expects his Saints should now be clothed in Black,
and walk as true Mourners under the great and sore rebukes of their Father:
should we now make mirth? Ezck. 21.10. It contemns the rod of my Son, as
every tree. God brings it in as an heavy charge upon the People, Amos 6.6. that
they are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph; or as the Hebrew, over the
rentings and tearnings in pieces of Joseph, that is, the Church. It is a lively
Allusion to the sad Lamentation that old Jacob made over the supposed renting
of his dear Joseph, Genesis 42.21. Joseph is not, I will go down to the grave to
my Son mourning: but his Brethren saw the anguish of his soul, and pitied him
not. And may not many of the Lords own People, charge the same thing upon their
hearts at this day, that they did upon themselves, We are verily guilty (say
they) concerning our Brother Joseph. Ah! have we not heard of the anguish of
Sion, and the sore distress upon many of her Children at this day, and yet have
not been so tenderly touched with the due sense of it? Oh write that man
bowelless, that has no compassion in his spirit now for Sion: you may promise
to your self immunity from the common calamity, but God has said, Amos 6.7.
You shall go captive with the first that go captive. Ah! is this a time, as God
said to Baruk, Jer. 45. to seek great things for your selves, it is enough if
you have your life for a prey: are you now building and feathering your nerts,
when the Axe of Judgment lies at the root of that tree you build in, to cut it
down? Surely we may say of such designs now, as Hushai did of the counsel of
Achitophel, It is not good at this time. In that day did the Lord call to
mourning; and is there not as loud a Call at this day? The Voice of the Rod
cries to to the City, Micha 6.9. Oh he not deaf to that Cry: now go to the
Lord with an holy importunity, under a quick sense of Sions misery, and give
him no rest till he arise and have mercy on her. And among many other, there
Arguments may persuade to it.

The gracious Nature of that God to whom you go for help and mercy; Arg. 1.
Oh remember you lie down at the feet of a tenderhearted Father, willing to be
overcome by you: Amos 4.12. Therefore thus will I do unto thee, and because I
will do thus, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel, (i.e.) in a way of humiliation
to prevent him: So Luke 18.7. And shall not God avenge his [own Elect] that cry
unto him day and night, though he bear long with them? mark the motive [his
own;] q.d. Can a Father shut up the bowels of mercy from his own flesh? how
much less God, to whose compassions, the most dear and tender affections of all
the Parents in the world, is but as a drop to the Ocean. This Jonah well
understood, Jonah 4.2. Was not this my saying when I was yet in my Country,
therefore I fled before unto Tarshish, for I knew that thou art a gracious God,
slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest thee of the evil; q.d. yea
Lord, I knew beforehand what it would come to; I must go to Niniveh, and
denounce thy Judgments agains it, and then if they do but humble themselves a
little, thy Mercies and Compassions are so tender and abundant, that thou can
not smite them; if they do but come upon the knee, the rod falls out of thy
hand; I knew it would be so, I was persuaded before hand, that Free Grace would
make me appear as a liar to them, therefore I fled to Tarshish. Oh what a
Motive is this, to bring you upon the knee before God at this day!

Consider how dear an Interest it is that you espouse and plead for, Arg. 2.
dear to God, and therefore the greater probability of success; you may say to
God, as Mary and Martha did to Christ concerning their brother Lazarus, Lord,
he whom thou love is sick. Ah the Interest of his Son, which I persuade you
to plead with him, lies near his heart; and dear to you, if you be real Saints:
for alas, what joy can you have to survive Sions prosperity? would you not in
such a case say as the Prophet, 1 Kings 19.4. Ah Lord God, it is enough, take
away my life also. O therefore strive with God for it.

Consider how much you have contributed to the provoking and procuring cause of
its present misery; Arg. 3.
it is Sions own Sons and Daughters that have procured this unto her; and shall
there be none among all the Sons she has brought up to take her by the hand,
and comfort her? it is our contests and wrangling one with another, our
barrenness under the Gospel, our abuse of Deliverances, and most precious
Gospel-Enjoyments, that have procured all this: Ah Sirs! will you not strive to
pray back the Mercies, you have helped to sin away?

Those that are most deeply humbled, Arg. 4.
and do most fervently intercede for Sion now, shall have a peculiar share in
her Joy when the Lord restores it: When the Lord turned again the Captivity of
Sion, we were like them that dreamed, then was our mouth filled with laughter,
and our tongue with singing, Psalm. 126.1, 2. But who were these that laugh and
rejoice at Sions mercy? were they not such as had mourned for her; yes, yes,
they that thus reap in joy, are such as had before sown in tears, ver. 5, 6. to
such indeed the Promise is mader, Isa. 57.18. and 66.10. Rejoice for joy with
her, all ye that mourn for her. Let these things affect your souls.

COUNSEL VIII.
* That seeing a Day of great trouble is approaching, and all outward comforts
ready to take their farewell of you, you would now give all diligence to clear
up your title to Christ, and interest in that Kingdom that cannot be shaken.
If ever we had need to make all honest haste to Heaven, and to clear up our
interest in it, this is the time; what have we besides this to oppose to all
our troubles here? what will you do when all earthly comforts are fled? and are
they not upon the wing? when it comes to resisting to blood, and giving up all,
can you fadge with such work as this, while your spirits are dubious and cloudy
in this point? O my friends believe it, its nothing but this that can make a
Saint triumph and glory in Abasures and Tribulations, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18. Heb.
10.34. Romans 5.1, 2, 3. And little do you imagine how insupportable troubles are,
when the spirit is low and dubious in point of interest. The Devil, like a true
coward, falls upon a poor Saint, when he is prostrate in his spirit, and under
trouble, then he pours in discouragements from all hands; he loves to fall upon
them, as Simeon and Levi did upon the Shechemites when they were sore, Genesis
34.25. Satan knows men will hardly part with their present sensible comforts,
till they be assured of better: It Is easier without doubt, for an assured
Christian to lay down his neck for Christ, than for another to part with a
piece of his estate, or bear a reproach for him: and truly whether we consult
safety or comfort, whether we consider the ineffable sweetness of that Peace
and Joy begotten by assurance; or the Misery of being subjected in a day of
trouble to the misgivings, doubts and fears of a perplexed spirit, you will
find that all these considerations do put a necessity, a sollemnity, a glory
upon this work: But oh the difficulties and dangers attending it! what
judgment, faithfulness, resolution, watchfulness does it require! such is the
darkness, deceitfulness, inconstancy of the heart; and such the malice,
policy, and diligence of Satan to improve it, that he who attempts this work,
and need both to watch his seasons for it, frequently to look up to God for
guidance and illumination; and to spend many sad and serious thoughts before he
determine this business.

To the end therefore, that this most weighty and important Work may not
miscarry in thy hands, I entreat thee carefully to observe these six Dirextions
following.

Be sure thou try thy self by sound and approved Marks of Sincerity, Direction
1.
and not by such as are only probable and common to hypocrites, for these will
fail when any stress is laid upon them, and like the Reeds of Egypt, pierce
into thine hand.

To help thee herein, I have collected the best Scripture-Marks illustrated and
prepared for thy use, by the labors of some of our most skilful
Heart-Anatomists. The substance of which I shall here transcribe, lest you
should not have the books at hand.

Four Signs of a sincere Heart, by Mr. Gurnal, in the second part of his
Treatise on Ephesians. 6. p. 127, etc.
1st. Mark. A sincere heart, is a new heart, Ezekiel. 11.19. whereas it was
formerly divided among the creatures, now it is gathered into God: it has but
one design, which above all it pursues; and that is to approve it self to God;
As one that having many pieces of old silver lying by him, which he intends to
put into one bowl; he first resolves to cast it a new, and to that end throws
it into the fire to melt, and so at last shuts up all in one piece.

2d. Mark. A sincere heart, is a simple plain heart; 2. Cor. 1.12. and this
Simplicity appears in three things. (1.) In ransacking it self, in which it is
exceeding diligent, and fearful of a mistake, willing to know the worst of
himself; in judging it self, when the sin is found, he proceeds to sentance a
lust, as well as to search diligently for it. (2.) In plain dealing with God as
well as with it self: An hypocrite asks what he would not thank God to give
him, but a sincere soul is deeply affected, when his prayers are not answered,
and uses the means to obtain his desires. (3.) In plain dealing with men, he
will not subject his conscience to fleshly interests, nor shape his course to
the times.

3d. Mark. The sincere Christian is uniform; and that (1.) As to the object;
(2.) The subject; (3.) The circumstances of his obedience. For the first, his
heart lies close to the whole Law of God, Psalm. 26.11. has respect to all the
Commands: as for the subject, the whole man (so far as renewed) moves one way;
judgment, will, affections, move uniformly: as to circumstances, he is holy in
all times, places, etc.

4th. Mark. The sincere Christian, is progressive, is not content with any
measure of Grace, Phil. 3.13, 15. never at his journies end, till he get to
Heaven, Psalm. 17.15.

Five Marks of Uprightness, by Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick, in his Anatomy of
Uprightness, p. 202, etc.
1st. Mark. If a man be upright, he will mostly strive for an inward
reformation of his heart, Psalm. 119.10. Jam. 4.8. Romans 1.9. it is not
sufficient his outward actions look well, unless his heart were better: Oh,
says he, that this heart were better, more holy, more humble, more believing:
the principal regard of the hypocrite is to externals.

2d. Mark. If a man be upright, a little holiness will not serve his turn,
Phil. 3.12, 13, 14, 15.

3d. Mark. A person may know his uprightness by the conscionable disposition of
his heart about all sins, Psalm. 18.23. Job 1.1. Hypocrites have still some way
of wickedness. Such a soul as is upright, will make conscience of secret as
well as open sins, Job 31.26, 27, etc. Prove. 12.5. yea, of the least sins.
David's heart somote him for cutting off the skirt of Saul's garment: yea, of
sins, which are in a sort more connatural to him, Psalm. 18.23. In a word,
Uprightness appears in nine things about sins. (1.) It will endure Trial, Psalm.
139.23. (2.) It will often try it self. (3.) It scares it self, and is
suspicious. (4.) It will bless God for being kept from sin; as David did for
Abigaels Counsel. (5.) It is more severe against its own sins, than another.
(6.) It condemns sin in all; in Parents, as Jonathan in Saul: in Children, as
Jacob in Simeon and Levi: in great ones, as John Baptist in Herod. (7.) It
grieves for its own sins, and the sins of others also. Rivers of water ran down
David's eyes upon that account. (8.) It Is more moved for sins against God, than
injuries done to it self: As David cannot bear Goliahs Blasphemies, yet can
bear Shimeis railings. (9.) Abstinence suffices not without hatred; and hatred
suffices not without mortification.

4. Mark Uprightness is known by a man's disposition about holy Duties. And in
holy Duties, five things manifest the uprightness of the heart.

1. Universality. Psalm. 119.6. Acts 24.16. Heb. 13.18. An hypocrite's obedience
cannot be universal, because his grounds and motives are but particular.

2. By its constancy, Job 2.3. still he holds fast his intregity. There are
three times in which an hypocrite may express great forwardness; (1.) When
straits of conscience are on him, Isa. 26.16. (2.) When duties are not
dangerous, Mat. 13.5, 6, 20. (3.) In the presence of others; as Joash, while
Jehojadah lived.

3. By simplicity of obedience, when a man looks not at himself, but at God's
Command, 2 Cor. 1.12. and 5.14.

4. By the spirituality of obedience, when the very heart and soul, the spirit
and affections act themselves, and cooperate with our services, 1 Cor. 14.15.
Romans 1.9. Ephesians. 6.5, 6.

5. by the humility of obedience. Hypocrites are proud of their work. When God
enlarges the heart, a Saint may rejoice; but the Hypocrite will boast. A Saint
gives all to God, 1 Chronicles. 29.13, 14.

5. Mark. A fifth trial of Uprightness is, if the bent and purpose of the heart
be unto God, Psalm. 119.5. Psalm. 40.8. 1 Chronicles. 19.31. Acts 11.23. and this bent
or purpose of the heart, implies three things. (1.) An inward desire, joined
with love, Psalm. 119.5. (2.) An habitual inclination, not a sudden pang, Psalm.
119.20. (3.) An active purpose, Acts 24.16.

Six Trials of Sincerity, such as no hypocrite in the world can have; By Mr.
Sydenham, in his Treatise of Hypocrisy.
Trial 1. To hate sin as sin, to hate it in its whole nature, in its first
motions, not because it troubles the conscience, or brings me to hell, or
renders me unsuitable to my designs and relations in the world, but as it is sin.

Trial 2. No hypocrite can delight to be made ashamed by God in its duties, to
be made purely nothing in its own eyes, and the eyes of others. This a sincere
soul can do, he can take pleasure in the Lords humbling of him. An Hypocrite
cannot endure to be outshined; the principle that acts him, is self-love: but a
Saint loves to be laid low before God.

Trial 3. No Hypocrite can bless God, and love him from his heart: when God
smites him in his deaerst enjoyments, or nearest lusts; strike him in any thing
that the eye or heart of him is upon, and he secretly hates Christ. Now a Saint
in such a case, will cling to Christ, he cannot but love him for all that.

Trial 4. No Hypocrite can love the person of Christ, nor a Saint, as a Saint;
he only loves to be pardoned by him, and have some comfort from him; but never
finds his heart to work in love to Christ, and have union with him, as the
ground of all his comforts. And so, for a Saint, loves him not as such, but as
so and so tempered and qualified.

Trial 5. No Hypocrite can go on in any spiritual work or service for Christ
with any contentment, without sensible comforts, or outward respects, the wind
of men fill his sails: But a Saint can take pleasure in the poorest work of
Christ, wherein he is least seen.

Trial 6. No Hypocrite in the world can long to be like Christ, as to be
respected by Christ; he cannot love the Holiness of Christ, as the good things
he gets by Christ: But a sincere heart, if he have never so much comfort, yet
if he be not like Christ, is not pleased. -- And this is the first Direction,
try by sound evidences of sincerity.

Make choice of the fittest seasons for this great Work, Direct. 2.
and set about this, when you find your hearts in the most quiet and serioust
frame; for as he that will see his face in a glass, must be fixed, and not in
motion; or in the water, must not disturb or make any commotion in it; so is it
in this case; Psalm. 4.4. Commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be
still.

Endeavor to cast out and watch against Self-love, Direct. 3.
lest thy heart being prepossest thereby, thy judgment be blinded, and become
partial in passing sentence upon thy estate: labor to bring thy heart to be
willing to know the worst of it self; yea, and if thou have all this while been
deceived, to bless the Lord, that now at last thy mistake is discovered, and to
be willing to lay the foundation new again. This you must do, for he that will
put on the person of a Judge, must put off the person of a friend.

Labor to keep upon thy heart a deep and lively sense of the approaching
Judgment, Direct. 4.
throughout this work, knowing what a potent influence this has upon the
conscience to make it deliberate, serious and faithful in its work; and
therefore demand of thine own conscience, upon the resolution of each Question,
whether it will own and stand to that it now speaks in the great day, when the
counsels of all hearts shall be made manifest.

Go to the Lord by prayer when thou art going about this work, Direct. 5.
and earnestly beg guidance and assistance from him therein: it is the work of
the Spirit to seal and assure thee; and he has promised him to that purpose to
such as seek him, Luke 11.13. John 14.26.

Condemn not thy self presently for an Hypocrite, Direct. 6.
upon the discoveries of thy many weaknesses and imperfections in obedience;
these should humble, but not discourage thee; it is not thine inevitable
weaknesses, thy sensible dullness, thy lamented roavings, thine opposed
distractions, thy mistaken unbelief (as one well notes) that argues thee
Christless, or excludes thee from the Promises, Numb. 15.27, 28, 29, 30. Heb.
5.2. these break not the bond of the Covenant: the Lord expects not Angelical
perfection from you in this estate, but looks at your sincerity, and knows, as
a father, how to pity your lamented infirmities, Psalm. 103.11, 12, 13, 14.

CONCLUSION.
ANd now I have given you my best advice and counsel to preserve you from the
snares and evils that are, and are coming upon the world; what use you will
make of it, I know not. I doubt not but it will find a welcome reception among
humble and hungry souls, though the full and wanton soul despise it. He that
hearkeneth unto Counsel (says Solomon) is wise, Prove. 12.15. And if thy heart
be shut by pride or interest against it, it is an omious sign to thy soul, 2 Chronicles. 25.16. and presages ruin. Which sad event, I shall beg the Lord in
Mercy to avert.

FINIS.

