An ANSWER TO THE Cities Representation Set forth by some Ministers of the
Gospel, within the Province of London. Concerning The Proceedings of the ARMY.
BY A Presbyterian Patriot, that has Covenanted TO Preserve the Rights and
Privileges of Parliaments, and the Kings Majesty's person and Authority; In
the preservation, and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the
Kingdoms; and not otherwise.

Acts 5.38. If this council or this work be of men, it will come to naught.

Ver. 39. But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be
found even to fight against God.

February 7. 1648.
Imprimatur

Gilbert Mabbott.



LONDON Printed by Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfield, near the Queenes-head
Tavern, 1649.

AN ANSWER To the late REPRESENTATION OF THE Ministers of LONDON.
I Desire not to make the breach wider betwixt the ministry and the Army, its
an ill time to have the word and the sword of the Lord to differ, when both
should help him against the mighty. That which is subtly fastened upon the
Army and their Counsels, to wit, that they are Jesuited, I wish it were not
applicable to all sorts of opposers in this age, who have too little of Jesus
and too much of the Jesuit in their transactions, savouring too much of
calumny and policy.

Not to take up every thing, but to touch upon those that are of most weight
and concernment in this Representative, which coming from a College of
Divines, may therefore carry credit to the discrediting the good work in hand,
of settling the Kingdom in safety and peace, hitherto so vainly promised and
contrarily endeavored, that the hearts and hands of those concerned in it, and
by it, may be upheld, and the Kingdom no more rendered miserable, with vain
hopes, nor peace impossible, which were a work worthy of a Jesuit indeed.

These London Ministers first relate upon what terms they would have consented
to a conference, and tell us what opinions they would have delivered on the
case, it seems what reasons soever might appear to the contrary, for a
conference supposed, the result is conclusive, that the Armies courses are
unwarrantable, page 2. against the direct rule of the word, and as they
conceive, out of their sphere, p. 3. wherein they speak as if never any thing
had been or could be spoken in the Armies justification, where as such reasons
have been already given, and such authorities shown, both humane and divin, in
treatises to that purpose, that are not satisfyingly refelled with bare
affections, though from never so many; nor never so worthy men, whose
disjunctions from the Army are not of yesterday, procured indeed by the Armies
unadvised encroachments upon their calling, and some disparagements cast
thereupon, which were just provocations, but not to be had in everlasting
remembrance, 2 Cor. 14.20 specially when the public peace is concerned in
their love and union.

Then they reckon up the several late proceedings of the Army, against (as
they say) lawful authority, especially by their Remonstrance (a sober,
rational, and convincing piece, not answerable by abrationall man, for I count
Mr. William Sedgwicke none) imprisoning the King without consent of Parliament
(meaning the secluded Members) and the late unparaleld violence offered to the
Members. Had these Divines condemned the Londoners, for imprisoning the
Parliament (not some Members) making a prison of the Parliament House, and
driving the Speaker etc. thence; they might then with much more candor have
blamed the Army now, but some may better steal a horse then others look over
the hedge, if that was not a crime (as I never heard it laid to their charge)
then this is no error. Many of which Members they say, are known to be men of
eminent worth and integrity, and have given ample testimony of their real
affections to the good of this Kingdom. It had been well they had always
continued of that mind; then had they been neither imprisoned nor hindered, but
if they be so good, and bear so good affection to the public; they will take
it the less ill, to be hindered from doing so ill offices, as to hazard the
Kingdom in the hands of the King in freedom, honor, and safety, whose hands
they could not bind by restraint. Next thing is, the Armies contriving of a new
moddell of Laws and Government, and the Representative. Its much, such men
should stumble at Reformation, only for alteration sake, as if old things,
because old, were faultlesse; whereas our Laws are (as they are made) our
greatest burdens, insomuch as a man had as good take wrong, as seek right, and
our Government serving for little other then to furnish the times with news,
by doing and undoing, tossing the poor people between hopes and fears. Why
may not alterations of Government be as necessary in State as Church: Bishops
were too old to be good, and so may many things else, and therefore not for
that reason to be insisted on. All which practices they judge to be against
Authority (so are Pulpits too when they are disposed) Oaths and Covenants,
though they are sworn absolutely to the safety and liberties of Religion, and
the Kingdom and to the Parliam and King, but relatively and in order to these;
So that these Divines should either have forborne to cite those words of the
Covenant, as the Scots were wont to do or have demonstrated how Religion and
Liberty could have been preserved without taking these courses: If they think
the Treaty sufficient, let them speak out; and show how a man of that perfidie
and policy the King is off, could with safety to either, have been restored to
freedom, honor and safety, that notwithstanding all bonds of Morality and
duty, has from time to time thrust at them, and hazzarded them, as he has
done: If we must have yielded our selves to slavery and ruin, better have done
it at first then at last, we should have had more mercy then now we can look
for. To let a Bear loose from the stake with his chain hanging on him, such
loose restraint is the way to make him the more fierce; If the Army should
surcease, as they advise, the Members be restored, and peace settled, as was
voted, and the King restored, (neither Episcopacy abolished, nor Delinquents
punished) were the Covenant kept, and the Kingdom secured? These Divines would
then be unsatisfied with themselves, when by their means, such horrid effects
would follow, as would make both their ears to tingle, I would gladly know how
the Army, into whose hands God has put the power of prevention, could without
breach of Covenant, have suffered all to go to ruin (which they are sworn to
preserve) by preserving those things (King and Privileges) which inavoydably
conduced thereunto, and were become inconsistent therewith. Besides, their own
safeties, who else must always have been fighting, or sure of hanging: Besides
infinite honest men, who probably ere this had been crying woe worth the
Parliament, if not these Divines themselves, considering the party in the
Kingdom, that waited for the Kings Freedom, Honor, and Safety. Giving out,
that what he granted in restraint, he might lawfully break at liberty.

In the next place, page 4. are several Scriptures cited, which are all true
in a Scripture sense, but misapplyed, like that in the frontise-peece, Prove.
24.11 If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto death, and those that
are ready to be slain. Such wrestings of Scripture from Innocents to nocents,
will make Ministers in as bad a name as Lawyers.

After the naming of which Scriptures, they say, they are afraid of meddling
with those who without any color of legal Authority shall attempt such
changes. We have had too much colorable authority, under the cloak whereof
has been acted so much wrong and injustice to the public, and infinite
particulars so that its high time to see it native, and naked. With what
colorable Authority did the Divines in Scotland take part with the Minor
against the Major part of the Parliament there, and protest against the Acts of
Parliament, but because they saw them fraudulent and destructive,
notwithstanding all the specious Declarations of the Parliament to the
contrary, and wherein do the proceedings of the Army toward our Parliament
differ from theirs; whose service in protecting the Minor, and inabling them
against the Major was in Scotland counted a virtue, and commendable, and the
self-same thing in England, to the self-same purpose counted a vice and
damnable; How Doctors differ? Put case his Excellency the Lord Fairfax having
power in his hands, should have attempted to have set up the King in freedom
honor and safety, and a considerable part of his Army should have opposed it,
knowing they were raised to a quite other end. I doubt not these Divines would
have thought well of and commended this their opposition to such a design,
though acted by those under Authority against their chief Commander, without
color of Authority, only upon the equity of their intentions and justness of
their cause. Such is the case of the Army toward the Parliament, who not
contrary to their trust as is after asserted, but in discharge of their trust
and engagements have against their wills taken these courses, for though they
were raised by the Parliament, yet for the Kingdom, and its safety, His
Excellencies Commission is the Card and Compass that he must sail by, and not
be turned out of his course, by every wind of Parliamentary Doctrine, for so he
should not have been the servant of the Parliament, but of this or that
Faction, and wrought about at last, by turning round, to fight for those he was
Commissioned to fight against, and against those he was commissioned to fight
for, well knowing that those of the Parliament which were against the Armies
raising, were for its destroying, though with the ruin of the Kingdom and
restoring of the King, which was therefore labored as the aptest means for it.

In the next place these Ministers compare the Act of the King in relation to
the five Members, and this of the Army, in relation to the Secluded Members
together, page 5. A comparison ill beseeming the candor of such and so many
worthy Divines, knowing the different Actors, and their different ends, they
may as well compare the Execution Phinehas did, with the Murders Joab
committed, or Moses his zeal, in slaying those of the family of Ahab, for his
own ends.

Next they say p. 6. both Houses of Parliament (who are jointly together with
the King, entrusted with the supreme Authority of the Kingdom) an observable
Parenthesis at the latter end of a seven years war betwixt the King and
Parliament, though they saw cause to take up Arms against the King, yet that
does not justify the Army to usurp an authority over King and Parliament. If
either the defense of themselves or the preservation of the Kingdom, or both,
justified the Parliament, then do they also justify the Army in what they do,
for they have both those apparently on their side; the Plots and practices of
the King and secluded Members being above all things to level this Army, and so
to make way for the Kings restoration, or the Kings restoration to ruin the
army: The consequence of which two is undisputably the Kingdoms (I mean all the
well-affected) destruction, and if defense be allowed to a private man in
behalf of himself, it is much more allowable to a considerable community of
men, lawfully put into arms in behalf of the whole whereof they themselves are
a part.

In the next place they say page 7. the Parliament when they took up arms did
not intend to divest the King of his authority, as appears by their
Declarations, much less to overthrow the frame of Government. The Parliaments
chief intention was, according to their trust, to preserve the Lives and
Liberties of the people, and that in an orderly and unaltered course, if it
were possible, and therefore did they make so many supplications to the King to
return to them, and rule by their advice according as he ought to do, and
accompanied them (the more to move him) with those Declarations, all which
hardened, in stead of softened him toward them, and thereby thinking them to
doubt their cause, and himself to be unresponsible: sets up his standard and
commences first one War, proclaims them Traitors (the insolentest and
treasonablest act that ever was committed by a King of England) yet they offer
again and again, to be friends upon conditions of peace and safety tendered, he
refuses and will have no friendship but upon his own terms, so ended the first
war, by a defeat of his purposes and restraint of his Person; and then began a
second, after which never issued out any more of those Declarations spoken of,
but seeing him incorrigible, they resolve in pursuance of their trust and
discharge of their Consciences to the Public weal, to settle the Peace of
the Kingdom without him, which they saw could never be settled with him:

In order whereunto they vote no more addresses, as a necessary expedient
thereunto, which upon a recruit of Lords, and secluded Members was unvoted
again, and all new to seek, the King as bad as he was, and had been, must be
trusted, and his own terms granted, against Covenant, and Publick-Faith, to
ground a Peace upon in order to his restoration, as the only probable means to
ruin the Army, by putting him into a capacity to raise another against them,
an attempt of that nature having been put in practice at London, but not
effected for want of the King, and thus is necessity brought home to our doors
of doing what is done, both to the King and present government, by Lords, and
secluded Members. These things considered, it shows how well they by this their
Representation, do appear for maintenance of Liberties, as they say they do
against malignant designs of an arbitrary tyrannical power in the King, and
introduction of Anarchy by private persons; but it is not enough to say so, it
is not wise men's parts to cry up the ends, and decry the means, how to
suppress tyranny, and not Tyrants is a hard lesson. The most excellent
Mathematicians are to seek when they go to Sea; Theory and Practice are two
things, one may better make a Vtopia, then manage a Commonwealth: Book learned
men are apt to think it as easy for others to do, as for them to think. But
Statesmen and Soldiers know better then Students what belongs to settlement,
and find it not so easy to bring both ends together, as these Divines
imagine, and therefore are forced to do like Alexander, cut the knot when they
cannot unlose it, for the peace and safety of the Kingdom, must not always
hang in the briars. It is to be hoped, that though the House be pulled down,
there will be provision made we shall not lie out of doors, but a mean be found
out betwixt Tyranny and Anarchy, and more then mere private persons to bear
rule.

The next thing insisted on, is the obligation that lies upon us by Oath and
Covenant, Page 8. To preserve the Rights and privileges of Parliaments, the
Kings Majesty's person and authority, in the preservation and defense of the
true Religion, and liberties of the Kingdom. This last conditional clause, In
preservation of Religion and Liberties, is made to serve but as a cipher in the
Covenant, the Scots Commissioners were wont to leave it out, the better to
blind the people, and cite the preceding part without it: These Divines do
tant', amount, for though they cite them jointly, yet they urge the other
abstractly, and as superior to this, never telling us how these may be
provided for, in case the other should not be granted, notwithstanding the
apparent inconsistency of them both. For the King (in whom the present
Government of Lords and secluded Members are involved, they voting a settlement
upon his non-concessions, and refusing that of non-addresses, and bringing him
to justice; thereby to put a period to delays) both in liberty and restraint,
has twice put Religion and Liberties to such an hazard, as had not God
miraculously preserved them, they had perished irrecoverably, and we with them
in lives and estates, and no better can be expected from him, justifying his
ways now at his Trial, at last, as at first, laboring to confront, and not
to relent, which is a mercy of God, that he retains his nature without
dissembling it, lest the hypocrite should reign, and so the people be ensnared.

These Oaths were never intended by maker or taker against the Laws and duty of
God and Nature, which indeed no oaths can violate: The reason is rendered why we
swore the preservation of his person, to wit, to express our Loyalty, that
those wars were not undertaken upon any rebellious or personal purposes, but
of necessity in respect of Religion and Liberty, upon the point to be utterly
subverted, and that we were ready to lay down Arms, and receive him with
those respects belonged to him, whenever it did appear that those might be
secured, which never did yet since those oaths were taken, and therefore
notwithstanding them, the Parliament went on to fight him, to the just hazard
of his person, and now judicially to proceed against him, as not otherwise able
to discharge that great trust that lies upon them, touching the welfare of
this, and succeeding generations.

Page 9. They say, They dare not by the violation of this oath provoke the
wrath of God. But put case your advice should be followed as to the King and
Parliament privileges, dare you thereupon affirm the oath to be kept, if
Religion and Liberties should suffer, and the Kingdom be undone thereby, our
Oath is not categoricall, but hypotheticall, so that if the keeping of the one
part, be the breaking of the other (for so is our case) then the question is,
which must be kept, and which must be broken; whether to satisfy you we should
keep it on the Kings part, or to satisfy our own reason and conscience, we
should keep it on the Commonwealths part; and if in your sense, it do bind so
strictly for the Kings preservation: why did you suffer war to be made upon him
without like advice, wherein his person might have perished, nay did perish as
to the oath, he running the like hazard with other men, without difference or
distinction, so that rationally in the use of means (though not actually) his
person was destroyed, notwithstanding the Parliament it self had sworn to
preserve him, and no fault found.

In the same Page, they dehort the Army from proceeding any further (I will not
say a Jesuit is in it) and tell them they were once Honorable with them and
others, whilst they kept in Gods way, and within their sphere (there lay their
fault indeed) but they have eclipsed their own glory, and brought a cloud over
all their excellencies. It seems these Divine thinks the Country to be spirited
toward the Army like the City: Indeed the Malignants and Newters think as
hardly of them for this, as they can wish; but the godly and sincere (I mean
those of no faction, and without byasse) who in conscience to God, and with
public spirits, undertook this cause for Religion, Liberty, and to bring
Delinquents to condign punishment; do bless them in the Name of the Lord in
this, and for this, as a deliverance equal to the first or second War, and
are not a little afflicted in spirit to see you to be become the rejoicing of
the Cavaliers, and the lifter up of the heads of those profane wretches, in
the day that God has humbled them, and glorified himself upon them. God keep
your own glory, and the Gospel engaged in you, from being eclipsed, and your
excellency from being beclouded in the ways of contradiction that you are in,
neither helping the Lord, nor strengthening them that do. Be more sensible of
the City sins, over-looke not their faults that are under you, their defection
and backsliding from public principles, setting up the worst men in the best
places, pressing the Parliament with clamorous, and menacing Petitions to
destructive purposes, imprisoning the whole House in the House, till they had
voted the King to London, and threatening worse things if they came again,
forcing away the Speaker, and the faithfullest Members, refusing to aid their
honest Major General against the common Enemy, though as it were at Towns
end, and scoffing those few that did, barely looking on, and worse at the siege
of Colchester. Why then beholdest thou the more that is in thy brothers eye,
but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye: Are these and such
like venial in your own Parishioners, and mortal in the Army, judge with
righteous judgment.

The Ministers go on in the same Paragraph, and say, We fear you are opening
a door to desperate and damnable Errors and Heresies: Truly I doubt so too,
but never the more for suppressing the King, and secluding the Members: one
thing I am confident of, that it will not be a crime to be an honest man as it
was heretofore, when the King was King, and would have been so, had he been so
again.

Next they tell the Army, Page 10. What threatenings are in Scripture against
contemners of Magistrates, and judgments denounced on the opposers of this
Ordinance of God.

But they should distinguish betwixt Magistrates and Magistracy, the one may
be disobeyed, and the other not contemned, nor opposed; the first being the
Ordinance of man, the other of God, and who are merely men, and not
Magistrates in those things wherein they prevaricate.

I question whether they did greater contempt in secluding the Members, or they
that own not the remainder (out of a sullen humor) for the House of Commons,
which the Army do with all respect, which shows them not to be against
Magistracy, though against corrupted and seduced Magistrates, that by
falsifying their trust have justly forfeited it.

But for to strike the greater stroke, they afterward vouch the terrible
examples of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, upon their mutiny against Moses and
Aaron, comparing the act of these rake-hells who in ambition and envy against
Gods faithful Ministers and Servants, merely for their horour and preferment
sake, into those offices wherein God himself had set them, and miraculously
confirmed them, mutinied against them, not for any miscarriages of injustice,
or impiety in the execution of those their places, who no doubt might lawfully
have opposed Aaron, when at Horeb he made the golden Calfe, this act I say,
they compare to the Armies secluding the noxious members (as will shortly
appear to those without, and which has long been known to them within the
walls of the House of Commons) and the bringing the King to trial in order to
the Kingdoms settlement. It is wonderful to see so loose and unweighed a
passage drop from the pen of so many learned Divines: But nothing is strange in
this age, but an Orthodox Independent, and a Presbyterian Patriot.

Afterward they protest against (page 11.) these practices of the Army in
opposing Magistrates and murdering the King (so they call their bringing him
to justice) as concurrent with Jesuiticall Principles, it is strange that
Jesuits should be of the plot against the King and Queen, they have deserved
better from them, and no doubt would have done had they been in power, or
against the secluded Members, the best friends to Bishops next to Cavaliers in
arms. Jesuits are not wont to be so good English men as to go against the
interest of Rome, nor to forsake their adherents, a Son and Daughter of his
holiness to strike hands with another party. But doubtless there is great
difference betwixt murtherous massacring of Protestant Princes eo nomine, and
just araignment of Delinquent Kings before the Senate and people. Had the Army
killed the King in fight, would you have abhorred it as a murtherous act, under
a specious pretense? and is it more lawful to kill him violently then
judicially?

Then in the same page they advise the Army to consult themselves (and so do
you your selves of the affirmative) if some other party, whose principles had
not been concurrent with theirs, should have attempted the seizeing of the
Kings person, how they would have construed it, and so for securing and
prohibiting the Members. If the party meant by non concurence of principles be
Cavalerish Londoners, doubtless the Army would have thought very ill of it, or
for any to have done it, that had done it to those public ends they do it
for, fearing whioh, therefore they did it; knowing what desire there was to set
him at liberty to begin the wars again, but if any confiding men would have
eased them of this work for public purposes, I dare answer for them, it would
have been thankfully taken, as you saw it was when they so cheerfully and
humbly, seconded the votes of settling peace without him, seeing it could not
be done with him.

For securing and inhibiting Members, others have done that as well as they, I
mean the Citizens when they drive the Speaker, etc. from the Parliament to the
Army, who indeed restored him, without damnifying the City the worth of one
gold chain.

Afterward they compare again the King and his wicked Instruments, subversion
of Laws, and dissolving Parliaments, with the Armies laudable endeavors of
the peaceful settlement of the Kingdom, in its liberties, and the people in
their Rights, extorted from them by the King, and his Creatures, as
ecclesiastical rights had of long time been by Bishops.

What the meaning is of those words in the 12. Page: If through Gods permission
(for reasons best known to himself) you have had, or may have success in an
evil way, etc. I understand not, I hope it neither means their Victories
against the King or Soots; and therefore they infer Gods Provide nce is no
safe Rule to walk by; and to confirm it, bring the example of David's sparing
Saul when he was in his hands. Providence is no Rule to justify any thing that
is against the Rule rightly understood; for there may be a misunderstanding of
right Rules, according to that of Christ in behalf of his Apostles accused of
Sabbath breaking: Have ye not heard what David did when he was an hungry, to
wit lawfully, which yet was unlawful by the Rule: So when these Divines quote
David's Example toward Saul, they should state the case aright, not of David a
private person, taking up Arms for his own defense against Saul (mark that
by the way) whom he was not to kill, that he might succeed him; upon which
motive they incited him to do it, but to stay Gods time, not to snatch the
blessing like Jacob before it was ripe: I say they should not put the case of
such a David, but they should suppose him in Arms by Authority of the
Magistracy, or people against Saul, declared a Violator of his Trust, and
Isreal's just Liberties, as the King has been by Parliament, to suppress his
exorbitancies, and defend them against him; this is the David that runs
patallell with our Army, and the case thus put, the question is, what David
would have done against Saul toward bringing him to justice, it providence had
favored him? Who it seems though a private person, would forceably have
defended himself (as by taking Arms appears) if he had been put to it by
Providence, for all the promise, which notwithstanding he relied upon to the
uttermost extremity; but in extremity would not have tempted God by a faith
without means: But as I say David was not to come by the Kingdom by
King-killing, that would have cut God short of abundance of Glory, and
therefore he says, The Lord forbid that I (to wit a private person, and Saul's
Successor) should do this thing unto my Master, the Lords Anointed; that I a
servant and subject should for mine own ends and ambition, take away the life
of the King, who is anointed and appointed by God to Reign out his time,
notwithstanding the promise made to me of the Kingdom after him: So I may
come to lose it, which if I wait Gods leisure, I shall be sure of in Gods good
time: But where do these Divines find that when a wicked King of Israel was
by the Magistrates or people for his own wickedness and public good, taken
away (though they also were the Lords Anointed) that ever they were blamed for
it? I am sure neither for Athaliah, nor Amaziah. nor I do not remember any
else; though I know many private persons are condemned for doing so for base
and unwarrantable ends.

And as not by Providence, so nor is it safe they say to be guided by impulses
of spirit against the Rule, to wit rightly understood; and they desire the Army
to consider whether if there be upon Record any example of an impulse of spirit
upon multitudes of persons, putting them to act against moral Precepts: When
the Israelites saved Jonathan against their own Vow, and the Authority of
Saul, this seems something like one; but whether it will be allowed, I know
not: when the Londoners told the Parliament they must take such courses as God
and Nature put into their hands: What call you this, and were they blamed for
it? Then by the way upon occasion, Page 14. They tell the Army, they themselves
confess their ways to be irregular, and not justifiable, wherein the Armies
ingenuity is commendable, and their Cause never the worse; for a thing may be
irregular, and not justifiable by the Letter of the Law, and formallity of
Rule, that yet is lawful enough. Have ye not read in the Law, how on the
Sabbath days the Priests in the Temple profane the Sabbath, and are
blameless? Politics and Judicialls must yield to moralls, municipall Laws to
Religion and safety: Order is good till it become disorderly, and then
corruption optimi est pessima, no such oppression as Authority corrupted and
abused, when Government is poynted at the Governors, and not at the governed,
driving sinister interests by virtue of their Offices, neither fearing God, nor
hating covetousness. In matters of real public concernment, as to
Politics, God will have mercy and not sacrifice, safety preferred above
Forms, and Laws of Nature above those of Art and Policy.

But then it follows, that no necessity can oblige a man to sin, but when by
virtue of necessity it becomes lawful, then it is no sin; as in the
foregoing instances of David's eating the shewbread, and the Priests profaning
the Sabbath: necessity justified our partaking with the minor against the major
in Scotland, which yet was breach of privilege.

Further, Page 15. they say, that if a Precept of God may be dispensed upon a
necessity, yet it must be absolute, present, and clear, not doubtful,
uncertain, and conjecturall, as that which is aledged in your case must needs
be, it being discerned only by your selves, and your own party; it being
apparent to us that there was no necessity, the Parliament (till forced by you)
being full and free, acting what was covenanted for. Do they mean by absolute
necessity, that the Scots must be come as far as Lancashire before we ought to
believe they will invade us? or that Wales, Kent, with the adjacent parts, and
the ships at sea must Rebel actually, and revolt declaratively before we ought
to believe that the King (when in restraint) can do us any harm; when they say
it must be present, mean they it must be Acted before it be prevented; in
matters of war and business of State, if they stay for present and absolute
necessity, it is the way to be deprived of remedy. Though David was hungry and
the Apostles, when the one eat the shewbread, and the other rubbed the ears
of corn, yet neither of them probably was upon the point of famishing, their
necessity was not absolute. Shall the Army never be allowed to be wise, only
valiant, still put to play after games, and God to work miracles by our
imprudence; know we not yet what manner of men we deal with? has not the
King, and his Parliamentary accomplices yet made necessity clear? There are none
but you and your party (as you say by the Army) that thinks otherwise but what
they mean by the Army, and their Party is as little intelligable as are these
three foresaid properties of necessity: do they mean by party the Parliament
now sitting, of whom this Representation takes no notice, or do they mean the
unbiassed godly and true hearted Patriots in the Land, for I think their party
goes no further? The King and his Members, the Cavaliers, and Londoners, being
indeed no Partisans of the Army, nor competent Judges of the Kingdoms
necessity, which is absolute enough if thereby be meant important. These
Divines themselves looking with London spectacles, say, they saw none: its well
for you you did not, and its as well that others did, since you will admit of no
necessity to be clear, but what is absolute and present, that's as much as to say
you will never see till your eyes be out. I am confident had our State or Army
seized on Barwicke and Carlisle, and pleaded necessity for it before the
Cavaleers and Scots were possessed of them, you would have condemned it as
neither absolute, nor present, and so a clear breach of agreement;
notwithstanding the overtures of invasion made in Scotland by preparations
thereunto. Nor doubtless did you see any prevaricating in the Scotch
Commissioners when they were in England, but thought it a mere Artifice to
suspect them, in so much as I have seen a book licensed by -- that says
their memory was sweet for their keeping Covenant, when to others they stunke
above ground for breaking it. Nor did you see a need of the Armies refusing to
disband, it may be that is it you mean when you say this necessity pleaded is
contracted by their own miscarriages: if you do mean so, there are not many
out of London of your mind, except some that came from thence and thereabouts;
for it is absolutely uncleare to others that are not of the Kings party, that
the disbanding of the Army is the securing of the Kingdom. In a word, it
seems you will allow no Eye of Reason, only that of Sense.

They say there was no necessity, the Parliament being free (till forced by the
Army) and not by the Londoners, and Acting what was Covenanted for; to wit, a
settlement of the Kingdoms Peace upon his Majesty's noncon-cessions of
abolition of Bishops, and bringing Delinquents to condign punishment: Then
they tell the Army they engaged themselves by Oath to preserve His Majestios
person, and the Privileges of Parliament; yea, and the liberties of the people
too, but that is not here, and it seems is not worth regarding, compared with
the other two; for its apparent their advice tends to break this by keeping
those several interests at such a distance, and contrariety being impossible
to be preserved; the very preservation of the one being the destruction of the
other. Now say they no necessity can justify perjury, or dispense with lawful
Oaths, and for example instanceth the judgment which befell Saul and Israel
for breach of Covenant with the Gibeonites: But the question is if the
Gibeonites had raised a first and second war, or taken parts and shared in
Councels with the Cavalerish Canaanites their enemies, what then Saul and
Israel would have done, or might have done for all their Covenant. But to
spenke a little to the Position it self, That no necessity can dispense with
Lawful Oaths, not to insist upon the forementioned Act of the Israelites in
saving Jonathan, I answer two things. 1. That no Oath binds, when through want
of foresight, by time or accident it come to cross a morrall duty: as if that
I am sworn to prove, be against my own, or the publicks preservation, and so
a violation of the Laws of nature; nor if it prove an impediment to the
proceed of justice, and so prove a violation of the Laws of Righteousness.
Nor if it prove (though Lawful in itself) a wrong to another, as that of Saul
to Jonathan, for so it is against the Law of Charity. 2. That when the Oath
becomes disputable, then the intent of its giving, and the occasion of its
taking, is to give light in the solution.

Now what was our intent in protesting and covenanting the preservation of the
King? Why, to testify to the World that it was for no sinister end, nor to
drive no design, that the Wars were undertaken, no lack of Loyalty, but mere
necessity to preserve the people, and their Liberties; and therefore was the
Wars prosecuted against the King, notwithstanding the Protestation and Covenant
for him, which loyalty may be and is still the same in giving him up to
justice, the Impulse of necessity, In regard of public safety being the same,
woeful experience having made it manifest that he cannot be, and the Kingdom
safe, nor the Covenant kept in the maine, if not broken in the Branches; and so
of Parliament Privilidges and Authority, as we swear not the Kings safety to
their wrong; so not their preservation to the peoples ruin and destruction;
but the intent of our swearing to defend them, was, that being jointly asserted
by the two Houses, we would maintain them against the King, that then was in
Arms against them; but when they come to be contested betwixt the two Houses,
and the question be, to which we are to adhere, whether to the Commons
affirmative, or the Lords negative? 1. We are not tied to impossibilities, we
cannot make good contradictions. 2. We are to consider in our judgments and
consciences which is most conducing to the ends for which those Privileges
were granted; to wit, the promotion of public good, and accordingly to cast
the scales. But 3. Caeteris paribus, the judgment of the Commons is to be
adhered to, and preferred above the Lords, they being more, more concerned in
the Kingdoms Liberties, the peoples creature, and not the Kings, a
Representative of Trustees, and to be reduced again into a private condition;
for though in the formality of Authority the Lords be above the Commons, yet in
the material and substantial parts, they are above the Lords

The next thing insisted upon in this 15 Page, after an exhortation to the Army
to recede, is some threats from Mr. Peter's, (not unlike his discretion) in case
they persisted to stir up the people to sedition: For so it seems, say they,
our bewailing your sins before the Lord is interpreted: It Is well you bewail
their sins (I hope it is not with a spiteful, but a spiritual sorrow) for
too many of your Parishioners bewail their successes; I hope in the Lord you
do not so, and yet I perceive not a like spirit of jealousy in you over the
sins of your own people (as over the Army;) for I call them sins because
you do so: If your cause were good your resolution were commendable in that
which follows, when you say, that if you must suffer, yet in the discharge of
your duties you will commit the keeping of your souls to the Lord, as to a
faithful Creator: But I hope the Army will be as they have been, as eminent
for their meekness as their valor, and convince their gainesayers by their
own long suffering, and not your suffering; and yet take heed of being the
cause of other men's sufferings though you are careless of your own, either by
your advice to the Army to recede, who I hope will be twice advised before they
take your counsel, or by your instigations, which if it should happen, may
more afflict you then any personal sufferings of your own: But I hope God
will open your eyes, and restrain the Armies hands.

I will end with a saying of Queen Elizabeth to her Secretary Walsingham, when
in a conspiracy against her, but in part discovered, he advised her for further
evidence to delay the seizing on the Conspirators, and to let the business
lengthen out it self: But she refused, lest (as she said) in not taking heed
of a danger when she might, she should seem more to tempt God then to hope in
him.

Febr. 7. 1648.
Imprimatur

Gilbert Mabbot.

FINIS.

