An ANSWER to Unconstant WILLIAM, OR, The Young-man's Resolution to pay the
young Lasses in their own Coin.
Tune is, Here I love, there I love, etc.
Licensed according to Order.





I am a brisk Bachelor, a'ry and young,
who courts the young Maids with a flat'ring tongue,
I k^ss and I squeeze them again and again,
And vow I will Marry, but I know not when.
There Is Bridget ^a^ Susan, young Nancy and Nell,
To each of these ^asies fine Stories I (...)
Soft Kisses I give them a hundred and ^^n,
And vow I will Marry, but I know not when.
(...) to the Tavern with Betty, I go,
And like a true Lover (...);
I Kiss, ^^y I b^^g and I ^u^ble her then,
And vow I will Marry, but I know not when.
(...) a young (...) I (...) to meet
I tell you with (...) that her joy (...)
^
And vow I will Married, but I know not when.
So long as she lines me with Silver and Gold.
(...)ect Charms in her Eyes I behold;
I kiss, and I hugg, and make much other then,
And vow I will Marry, but I know not when.
So soon as her Treasure begins in decay,
(...) it high time to be packing away,
Now if she calls after me, I answer then,
That we will be Married, but I know not when.
Last Week I did walk to the Royal Exchange,
And here amongst Ladies my fancy did range,
I singl'd out one, and I promised her then,
That we should be Married, but I know not when.
Laced Cravats and Ruffles as Presents she gave,
To ^^ck her young Lover both gallant and brave,
With large pro^e a^^ons I promised her then,
That we would be married, but I know not when.
She came to my Chamber one night, and no more,
I taught her a Dance which she never knew before,
Now this being ended, I promised her then,
That we would be married, but I know not when.
I scorn the lewd Harlots that Trade up and down,
To pick up a Living all over the Town;
These p^rty Lasses (...) threescore and ten,
To whom I vowed marying, but I know not when,
To sixteen young Chamber maids love I express;,
Who goes in their Tower, that delicate dress
Love Letters and Sonnets to them I to Pen,
And swear I will marry, but I know not when.
There Is twenty young Nursery Maids in the Strand,
Who every minute are at my command;
But here I live merrily, telling 'um then,
That I will be married, but I know not when.
Each pritty-fac'd Creature, it is very well known,
Will think her self blessed to have one of her own;
At which I saintingly a^swerd 'um then,
That we will be married, but I know not when.
Sometimes from the City of London I ride,
Through many fair Counties to seek me a Bride;
The Country pretty Girid I cuddle then,
And swear I will marry, but I know not when.
If any one has a desire to know
What may he the reason I b^fl^e them so,
Young Women are seven times falser than Men,
Therefore I will marry, but I know not when.
I one loved a Damsel as dear as my life,
I Wooed her, and thought to have made her my Wife;
But she proved a Wanton to all sorts of Men,
Therefore I will marry, but I know not when.
FINIS.
Printed for C. Bates. next door to the Crown Tavern in West-Smithfield.


