The Apothecaries Reply to the City's Printed Reasons against Their Bill.
Humbly Submitted to the Consideration of the Right Honorable the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled.
FIRST, It is alleged against the Bill, That the Ground thereof is False; viz.
That the Apothecaries serving Parish, Ward, and Leet-Offices, takes up so much
of their Time, that they cannot perform their Trust in their Trade, or attend
their Patients according to their Duty.

Answer, This Suggestion had been indeed False, could those several Offices
have been executed without employing any time therein.

It Is suggested, That the Duty of (and the only Trust reposed in) the
Apothecaries, is to make and compound their Medicines, and then to carry or
send them by their respective Servants (as other Tradesmen do.)

Answer, It were for the Ease and Interest of the Apothecaries to wish, that
their Attendance were never required, and that the Necessity of the Cafe did
never dispense with their administering Physic without a Physician's
Prescription: But it is so Notorious in Fact as it needs no Proof, That did not
the Apothecaries in Charity Give to many both their Attendance and Physic,
some Thousands would perish, seeing their unhappy Incapacity can pay for
neither.

This is not alleged to plead for a Liberty of Practice, but only to expose
the evident Falsity of the Suggestion: And it is presumed, scarce any that
oppose this Bill would employ that Apothecary who should only send his Servants
refusing in Person to visit, whilst he was under a Physical Prescription.

Secondly, Whereas it is suggested, That most of the Offices in the Bill
mentioned may be executed by Deputy:

Answer, This is equally, Chargeable with Fining: And if the Personal
Attendance of this Profession in those Offices is not consistent with the
Common Interest, It Is humbly submitted to the Great Wisdom of this Right
Honorable House, Whether it is reasonable that the Professors should be thus
charged; for that is in effect, with humble Submission, obliging this
Profession to buy an Exemption for a General Good. Which (with all due
Submission) it may be hoped this Honorable Parliament will now Grant without
Price. For
in none of those Laws, Statutes, or Customs, that have (for a General Good)
exempted Lawyers both Common and Civil, Attorneys, Proctors, etc. or Physicians
and Surgeons, was it thought equitable to oblige any of those Professions, by
Fines or other Impositions, to buy such Exemptions. Neither was it in any of
the above Instances thought proper (upon giving such Exemptions to any of the
beforementioned Professions) to disable any of those Professors from such
Common Rights (as Voting) in any Election whatsoever; that being depriving men
of a Right which all degrees of men in some respect enjoy.
Neither (with all due Submission) would those Laws have seemed consistent with
themselves, that should in one part have given an Immunity or Privilege to a
Profession, whose very Professors by the same Statute should be punished by
being deprived of a Common Right. And this without any Offense by them
committed; unless it can be said to be a Crime for men to receive such Benefits
as the Legislators (for the Good of Mankind) think fit to give.

It is suggested, That the Apothecaries are Ambitious of several Offices of
Honor and Profit, in which as much of their Time is spent, as in those they
would now be exempted from.

Answer, There are not above Eight Apothecaries Common Council-men; but One (at
present) an Alderman's Deputy; but One in the Lieutenancy; not exceeding Two
Captains in Commission, in the City of London; none of which was by them sought.

As for their spending some Time in Electing Lord Mayor, etc. those Elections
are very seldom, and so but a small part of their Time therein spent: And being
in them a voluntary Act, its never done to the Neglect of their Patients. But
it is quite otherwise in those Offices which positively require their Personal
Service.

Thirdly, it is Objected, That the Apothecaries have not the same Reasons for
Exemptions as the Physicians, whose Personal Attendance is required, and they
cannot act by Proxy.

Answer, It Is confessed that Physicians must Act in Person: And it is as
manifest Truth that the Apothecaries do, even to the spending much more time
therein than the Physician does; and (as before-observed) in a thousand
Instances must, (where the Physicians cannot be paid, and for that reason
generally are not sent for) or the Patients must perish. And which of these two
spend most time on their Patients (with humble Submission) most deserve an
Exemption.

Some of the Learned and Eminent'st Physicians knowing the grounds of this
Bill to be true, have industriously promoted the Passing thereof; for which the
Apothecaries think themselves in gratitude bound to make their public
acknowledgment.

Fourthly, It Is asserted that the Fines for Offices by Act of Common Council
are forbid to be applied to Frasting, etc.

Answer, This very Prohibition proves the before-common Abuses of those Fines;
and it can plainly be proved, that notwithstanding that Act (in the greatest
part of them) they are still misspent in luxurious Treats.

Fifthly, As for the Universal Exemption of all Apothecaries throughout the
Kingdom by those Reasons complained of:

Answer, In this the City seem officiously to Oppose what all other parts of
England (by their silence) may be presumed to desire as a common good; for upon
first reading this Bill, the gromnds thereof, and the benefits thereby, were
thought so reasonable and advantgeous, that a worthy Member of the House of
Commons Moved the Exemption might extend to all Parts of England. This motion
was so well approved of, that the Bill was immediately altered to its now
latitude.

Sixthly, It Is Objected, That the present Exemptions from Offices are already
too many, and that such Immunities tend to the great Oppression of the Subject,
especially the poorer sort.

Answer, There are not above Three hundred thirty seven Apothecaries within the
Bills of Mortality; and modest'y speaking, there are about One hundred and
thirty thousand houses, as is presumed upon a Critical calculation
(notwithstanding what the City Reasons has said to the contrary): So that
there is but one Apothecary to near Four hundred Families, and above Two
thousand persons to an Apothecary within those Limits.

Now admitting that the Apothecaries Abused Fines for Offices, Communibus
Annis, come to One hundred Pounds per Ann. (which is the most they would amount
to) the Forgiving those Misspent Fines would not be One Farthing Yearly charge
to each of the above-Number of Houses: For 130 thousand Farthings comes to 135
l 8 s and 4 d And how very Oppressive this desired Exemption would thus prove,
deserved the Consideration of the Objectors, before they made this Groundless
Suggestion.

But admitting that there were not above the One half of the before-Number of
Houses within the Bills of Mortality, then the Charge would not amount to a
Farthing half Farthing per Annum, to each House: And what Master of a Family
does so little regard his Health, as not rather to pay that Inconsiderable
Charge, than that his Apothecary (by any of those Common Offices) should be
engaged, when nothing less than the saving his own (or some of his Families)
Life, necessarily requires his Attendance.

It is pretended that no Reason can be assigned for Exempting Apothecaries from
Offices, etc. but may with as much color be given for any other Occupation
concerned about the necessaries of Life.

Answ. As for Bakers, Brewers, Butchers, etc. the Masters in those Trades work
very little, their men doing all under them, and so they in their Persons are
much at leisure, and consequently may well (without any public prejudice)
serve in Offices; but otherwise in the case of Apothecaries, where the Master's
Attendance is desired by all Patients, and their own Eyes necessarily required
to see most of their Medicines faithfully prepared. -- Besides if any other
Traders neglect their Trade, the prejudice tends only to their private
Property, whereas by the neglect of the Apothecary the Patients would many
times Perish.

And whereas these Gentlemen allege that the Poorer sort will be most grieved
by Passing this Bill: It Is humbly conceived, That those will receive the
greatest Benefits by the Passing thereof. For the Apothecaries not being
deprived of any part of their Time or Money [by Services or Fines] upon the
account of any of those Troublesome or Fineable Offices, They will be then more
at leisure and the better able to bestow both their Visits and Medicines on the
Poorer Sort.

Now whether the Apothecaries Only should be charged with this 100 l per Ann.
in their Fines for their Exemption, or the One hundred and thirty thousand
Families (that within the Bills of Moatality receive the Advantages of their
due undisturbed Attendance on their Profession), insensibly bear this Charge,
is at present under the mature Consideration of this August and Right
Honorable Assembly: To whose great Wisdom the Premises are most humbly
submitted.


