Aristotle's Legacy: OR, HIS Golden CABINET of Secrets Opened. IN Five
Treatices.

1. The Wheel of Fortune. 2 The Art of Palmestry 3. A Treatise of Moles 4. The
Interpreter of Dreams. 5. Observations on Fortunate and Unfortunate days.
With many other Secrets and Experiments, never before Published. To which is
Added, A Complete Book of RIDDLES.

1. The fortune tellers, or Knowledge of good and bad fortune, by throwing the
Dice on the Wheel of Fortune. 2. By Palmestry, as the Lines or Marks in the
Hand. 3. By Phisognomy, or the several parts of the Face, and Head; as Eyes,
Nose, Chin, Hair, etc. By Metoposcopy, as the several Lines and Marks in the
Forehead, and other parts of the Face: With Marks, and sacred Characters, and
all other matters, relating to long or short life, Love, Business: The Humors
and Dispositions of the Partys, and how they are Inclined. 4. A Treatise of
Moles, and their significations, on the Face, or any part of the Body. The like
of Dreams and their interpretation; more exact than ever. 5. Observations on
Valentines day, St. Agnes day, and upon the first hearing the Cuckoo, as they
particularly relate to Love and Marriage: by which a Maid or Widow may know
whether her sweetheart be true or false, in earnest or in jest; when Married,
and if Fortunate or Unfortunate, in Wedlock. 6. To know whether a pure Virgin
or not: How to make an Enchanted Ring, to make any who wears it, to fall in
love with you. 7. Also the best and most powerful Receipt for making Love
Powder. To which are Added twenty Merry and Pleasant Riddles, with their
Solutions or Explanations: The whole illustrated throughout with Curious Cuts,
proper to each particular: Being the best, most exact, and accomplished Book of
this Nature.

Translated into English by Dr. Borman, Student in Astrology.

Licensed according to Order.

Printed for J. Blare, at the Looking-Glass on London Bridge.

OF THE Wheel of Fortune.
dice faces surrounded by a circle with thirty sequentially numbered divisions,
a sun, a new and a full moon, a man, a woman, a kissing couple, and a
necklace(?) New Moon

full Moon



HERE you must Throw to know your FORTUNE, with two Dice; and, as the Number
comes up, go to the Figure of Men for Men; and that of Women for Women: Suppose
(for Example) you throw two Duces, go to Number Four, and there you will find
these words: You throw unluckily, she that You would Wid,
Unto another gives her Maidenhead.


And so proceed in any other throw, and you will find your fortune; and the
best Luck comes, throwing in the New or full of the Moon; and when you have
thrown, you must not throw again.

How to know Good or Bad Fortune to Men, in Love Matters and Business, by
Changes on the Dice, in the Wheel of Fortune.
(2)
SHE will be brown, and of a middle Age;
A brisk and lively Wench, I will engage:
But in her love, with others you shall share,
yet of the main Chance, she will have a care.
(3)
Despair not yet, though you in love were crossed;
A Fortune comes, Redeeming what is lost;
fair she will be, and in her you will find,
Though not much wealth, contentment of the mind.
(4)
You throw unlucky; she that you would Wed,
Unto another gives her Maiden head;
And if you have her, you will be much crossed,
She Is peevish, proud, and will be better lost.
(5)
Lament no more for (...) that you does slight,
And in one (much be^ you) takes delight;
The next Y^u Court, will be^ prove, and kind;
this (if pursued) will still but vex your mind.
(6)
A luckey throw, the business that is in hand,
You shall go through with, and much wealth command,
The Lucky Planet Reigned, when you begun it,
And you had still lived poor, had you not done it.
(7)
O for a Jovial Dame your Bed's designed;
She ll Guild your Fortune, b her being kind;
She will not spend, but thrive by her Amors;
And bring (with Horns) much plenty to your stores.
(8)
think once again, ever you take it in hand;
You do pursue what you don't understand:
A Maid you think her, but the Stars say nay;
You Will be a Father on your Wedding Day.
(9)
No more be fearful, it is so decreed,
You must go on, and in your love succeed;
What though you powerful Rivals have at last,
You shall prevail, though'twill not be in have.
(10)
Believe not what is said, it is not true,
Those that persuade it are no friends to you;
They would break off the Match; that is their aim,
She honest is, and free from such a blame.
(11)
Consider well, this is a luckey throw,
If your neglecting does not make it low;
Pursue your love, or you will be Circumvented;
And then your sloth will be in vain repented.
(12)
Two Sizes; ah! what shall I say of this?
I fear you will your Expectation miss:
However, give not over, but love pursue,
The blank may turn to them, the Prize to you.
Good or bad Fortune (...) ^en on the Chance of the Dice, in Love and Business,
by (...) Wheel of Fortune.
(12)
O Me, a Red-Hair'd Man will be your lot;
But he to please You, has a good thing got;
You Children will have many, and much pleasure,
Then be content without a World of treasure.
(11)
Well thrown I vow, you now will catch the Fish,
For which you Angle, and so long did wish;
He sees his Error, and he will be kind;
And in your Change, you will much contentment find.
(10)
Leave off your whining; cast away your fears;
The day comes on, you will dry up Your tears:
'twas your own fault that made you so long stay;
You see what is got, by foolish saying nay.
(9)
Lay all Your Scruples by, for this is he,
That must (in spite of all) Your Husband be;
What though he is not lovely to the sight,
He Will give you (in the Dark) Your hearts delight.
(8)
Ah me! how Cross a Throw is this? you will not gain
The Man you seek, though you pursue with pain;
He Is a deceiver, and already Wedd;
He Will leave you when he is Cropped your Maidenhead.
(7)
Well may you blush, You will not Childless die,
Though You in Marriage B^d do never lie;
Your too soon yielding, made him false to prove;
Had You been coy, you had entailed his Love.
(6)
This Cast (if you are wise) does promise you,
You Will soon be Wooed by one that is Chaste and True;
But manage well your business, lest you lose,
What (to your content) you ought to Choose.
(5)
What you have took in hand, does promise well,
And happy it will be, the Stars foretell;
Neglect not then the visits that are made,
Lest (by your folly) your good Luck's betrayed.
(4)
You Have not slay'd too long, this is the time,
Fortune comes to you in her gaudy prime;
She flings her favors on you now at last,
It flowing comes, when you feared it was past.
(3)
Hit upon hit, two comes at once to Woo,
But take the least, the biggest will not do;
He will be Kindest, and most Wealthy prove;
The other not; he has been often in love.
(2)
Duce take it; what a strange turn up is here?
You have your self been too turned up I fear:
It says you are with-Child, and yet I gather,
E're the boy comes, you will get a kind Father.
The whole Art of Palmestry, or telling Fortunes by the Hand; and first of the
Hand to be chosen, and the Planets and Signs Governing the parts of it.
the palm of a right hand, with several major lines noted and its parts linked
to planetary and zodiacal signs

BEfore I proceed to particular Prognostics (in Chiromancy or Palmestry) I
must tell you the Left hand is the most proper to be impected, because the
Heart and Brain has the greater Influence on it; and do this when the Body is
in a good Temper, not disturbed by Passions, or over Eating or Drinking; for
then the Lines will not appear full, nor in their natural color: A Hand, when
the Lines are broken, or much worn by hard labor, cannot be well inspected, to
make a true Judgment.

As for the Planetary Rule in the Hand; Venus governs the Thumb, Jupiter the
Forefinger, Saturn the longest or middle Finger, the Sun the third Finger,
Mercury the little Finger, the Brawn of the Hand is governed by the Moon, and
the Hollow or plain bp Mars, and so the little Mounts or Risings under each
Finger, and the Ball of the Thumb, and the outside Brawn, are under the
respective Planets, that Govern the Fingers, Thumb, etc.

The several lines of the Hand, by which a True Judgment (in telling Fortunes)
must be made.
the palm of a right hand, with several major lines and features noted

THE most significant in Palmestry, are thus described, viz. The Line of Life
reaches from the Wrest, almost to the Root of the Forefinger, the Table Line
is in the middle, or Table of the Hand, and in some Hands runs along the four
Mounts, participating of the Influence, of the respective Planets Governing
them; the middle line running cross the Hand, and sometimes Obliquely it takes
its beginning at the Rising of the Forefinger, near the line of life, ending
at the Mount of the Moon. The line of the Brain, usually called the Liver line,
reaches to the Table line, making a Triangle, thus. The Girdle of Venus begins
near the Joint of the little Finger, and ends between the Forefinger, and
middle-Finger; the line of Death, or great Misfortunes, when it appears plain,
as a Counter-line to the line of life; and therefore is called its Sister line,
ending as it ends; the percussion is between the Mount of Venus, and that of
the Moon; the Wrist lines, commonly called Rescetta, are no other than those
Joints that part the Hand.

Fortune, Good or Bad, known by the Lines, and other Marks and Characters, in
the Hands of Men, Women, and Children.
two right hand palms, marked by various lines, shapes, and symbols

HAving given you an inspection of the Planets governing the (...), and of the
Lines of the Hand, I come now to give you a true Judgm^^^ upon them, as to Good
or Bad Fortune, thereby signified to the Party, as they are more or less
Significant in themselves, or what other matters attend them.

When the Line of Life is fair, well proportioned, colored, and disposed, it
denotes a quiet and peaceable Life, fortunate, and Healthful; but if Crosses or
Stars happen on it, the contrary is threatened: if a double Line of life appear,
it promises long Life, advancement to Honor, and success in weighty Affairs in
Men, in Women much Love, increase of Children, and great Felicity in Marriage
Three Stars appearing in this Line, it threatens the party shall fall into many
Disgraces and troubles by envy and falsehood. Three Crosses, appearing,
denotes misfortunes in Love, and much mischief thereby; when Lines come from
the mount of Venus, and cut the Line of Life, it denotes the Party Unfortunate
in Love or Business, and threatens him or her with sudden Death: if near the
Ligament of the Thumb, a Woman have two Croses, they Crossing the upper part of
the Line of Life, it denotes her to be Unchaste, very immodest, and Lustful, if
the Line of Life cross or twist with the table-line, then Honor and Riches are
promised together, with the love and Favor of Great Ones: if the table-line be
broad, and of a lively color, it shows health, a contented mind, and the party
Courageous and Successful: if there be Crosses in the table-Line, toward the
little finger, they denote the party subject to much Sickness, and often
troubled in Mind: if this Line he forked at the End, extending toward the
mount of Jupiter, it denotes the party shall get Riches; but by Fraud and
Deceit, be full of Doubts, Fears, and Jealousies, and lead a wearysom Life: if
this table-line be crooked, it denotes the party in danger of Life, by some
Furious beast, or Person Distracted, or disordered by drinking: if there be two
Crosses upon the table-line, it promises promotion by Learning: if on this line
three stops; as thus... be found, they denote the Party Prud^nt, and rising to
great preferment, by good conduct, in managing weighty Affai^s: in the middle
or Natural Line, which above the rest has a Communication with the Vital Parts,
has any Crosses on it; it denotes Riches to the Party; but that he or she is of
a covetous sordid temper.

As many Lines as are between the middle line, and the Thumb-line; denote to
some, many Sicknesses, and Casualties; and yet the party escape with life.

If a Cross branch from the Table-Line it denotes the party much addicted to
Devotion, virtuously ^^clined, and rising thereby to great promotion. The
Middle-line cutting in two, and soon discontinuing, of a pale color; denotes
the displeasure of princes, and by offending them, Death, or sharp imprisonment
will ensue: if the Line called the Girdle of Venus, happen to be Dissected, or
divided near the Forefinger, it denotes the party much given to Lustful
desires, that will prove Ruinous in the End: if the Sanctions be under the
Middle finger, it endangers life, by evil courses taken, to satisfy unlawful
pleasure.

Sacred Characters, Marks, or Letters in the Hand, Relating to good or bad
Fortune, in Men, Women, or Children.
THere are many letters often formed in the hand, called, Sacred Characters;
and of these I shall speak briefly, as they Relate to good or bad Fortune; an A
found between the Mount of the Moon, and the hollow of the hand, denotes
Sickness and Losses; but if it appears toward the Mount of Venus, it denotes
happy Marriages, Joy, and Prosperity: if a T be on the Mount of Venus, it
denotes success in love Affairs; but if it comes so low as to cut the line of
life, then it denotes crosses and misfortunes in love, and much mischief: A P
on the ball of the palm of a right hand, its lines and features marked by
letters and numbers the Thumb denotes Honor and Preferment; a Q in the Angle
or Hollow, many Marriages: an X Vexation and Trouble.

Phisognomy, or good and bad ^ortune, told by the Lines of the ^ace; and first
of the Planets, and governing Signs.
PHysognomy, as to the Lines of the face, and other Remarkable things in it,
under the influence of the Planets and Signs, that Govern the Parts of the
Body, are mainly significant, as to knowing good or bad fortune, in Men or
Women; whereby one may, as it were, Read men and women, and understand by the
outward parts, their manners, inclinations, and intellectual faculties; as well
as what shall befall them in the progress of their Li^es: for the face, etc. is
under the Government, and Dominion of the Planets. Thus the forehead is
governed by Mars; the right Eye by Sol; the left by the Moon; the Right Ear by
Jupiter; the Left by Saturn, the Nose by Venus; and the Mouth by Mercury: As
for the signs of the Zodiac, Cancer governs the height of the Forehead, Leo
the right two male faces, one with its features marked with planetary signs,
the other with zodiacal signs Eyebrow; Virgo the right Cheek; Libra the right
Ear; Scorpio the Nose; Sagitarius the right Eye, Capricorn the Chin; Aquarius
the left Eye; Pisces the left Cheek; A^ies the left Ear; Taurus the middle
Forehead.

Good or Bad Fortune known by the Eyes, Nose Mouth, Ears, etc. of Men or Women.
LArge Eyes, denotes the party stout and Courageous, but Deceitful, and of a
Quarrelsome humor. Eyes party color, denotes a Woman much given a male and a
female face with exaggerated forehead lines to Love, but instable and
Unconstant. Greenish little Eyes, standing inward, denotes wisdom and Councils,
Fortunate in success, etc. A large Nose, much hanging down, denotes
Covetousness. A round Nose at the extremitys (...) small Nostrils, denotes, in
a Man Pride and incredulity; in a Woman, much given to Love and lust. A red
Nose, naturally so, denotes a Contentious Turbulent, and Quarrelsome Person If
in a female the Gristle of the Nose seem to part from the Bone* or to be dinted
at the end, she has (undoubtedly) lost her Virginity. A great Mouth, standing
unseemly wide, denotes the party foolish, but a great babbler, and Devulger of
false storys, delighting to make Mischief. A little Mouth, well proportioned,
denotes the party wise, peac^able, loving and chaste. The Ears large and thick,
denotes a defect in Memory, and foolish: little and thin the contrary: A fleshy
Face denotes a merry cheerful person: A thin lean one, a wise, but malicious,
and covetous Person.

Good or bad Fortune known by the Hair, Chin, and Eyebrows, of Man or Woman.
THE Hair of the Head thick and soft, denotes a man of an Affable mild Temper.
Curled, harsh black hair, denotes the Party boisterous, rough, and much given
to anger. Golden hair, denotes the party treac^erous, and covetous; Red Hair,
enclining to black, wise, but crafty and subtle in mischief. A Chasenut
colored hair, signifies the party of fair condition, mild, and well disposed
two faces with exaggerated forehead lines Sudden baldness in youth, denotes
poverty. A long Chin, denotes a woman turbulent and vexatious; and a Man
letcherous and foolish. A little Chin, denotes malice, fraud, and despite: A
round Chin, denotes a Man effeminate, yet haughty and proud. A square Chin
denotes great courage, and agility of Body; A dimpled Chin, roundish, or a
little oval, denotes the party loving, affable, and of a good temper. A lean
wrinkled Chin, denotes the party unfit for Marriage Dutys. Fine little
Eyebrows, denotes affability, love, and constancy; bending and over hanging
Brows, the contrary: Eyebrows short and narrow, denotes the Party of a soft
pliable Temper. Eyelids long, with long-hair, denotes the party clownish, and
morross, yet of great ability of parts.

(...) and Bad Fortune known by the Li^es, Marks, and other Significations in
the Foreh^ad, and other parts of the Faces of Men ^^d Women.
LInes in the Face or Forehead, are exceeding significant, in matter of
Fortune. Three straight Lines, without any Section or Division, denotes the
Party very prosperous A Circle in the Line that passes crooked, through the
Foreh^ad, denotes loss, and much trouble and disgrace. A crooked line between
two three faces with exaggerated forehead lines straight Lines, denotes the
party fortunate. A crooked Line, with a straight line above it, denotes the
party shall be Rich, but it will be gained by fraud and overreaching. Two
lines crossing the forehead, wavering in and out thus th^eatens the party to
be in peril of life, by water. Two lines bending arch-wise over the E^e-brows;
one of them crossed with a cross, or three short lines in a length, in the
extremity of the forehead, denotes the party to be good Natured, and to get
Riches by Marriages. A cross directly in the middle of the forehead, with
s^a^^^^ing lines above it, threatens the party with Violent death: four half
lines, or lines that are not met in the middle of the forehead, with a full
line over them, crossed by two Sections, denotes loss and affliction. A Star in
the forehead, denotes great preferment.

Dreams, as they tend to good or bad Fortune, with their interpretations.
DReam, (though some very ignorant in such rare misterys, have slighted them)
are ^by the ^ages, and wise men of all Ages very significant; and that the
S^ul, when the B^dy Reposes, being discumbred from gross and weighty Cares; for
the flesh (by this Mysterious way) Confabulates, or Converses with Spirits or
Angels, who bring to its Knowledge, future Events, very strange and wonderful
as in Scripture we find it in Pharoahs, Nebuch^dnezzers, and others Dreams,
that exactly come to pass, according to their Interpretation: But not to
prolong the Matter, I proceed (by the Rules of Art) to give the interpretation
of Dreams.

To Dream one is flying in the Air, promises hasty news, To Dream one Swims
with pleasures in a tossing water, denotes overcoming some difficult matter you
have in hand. To Dream you hear Birds Sing Mellodiously, betokens Joy, and to
the Sick Recovery. To Dream one presents you with a Gold Ring, and pulls it on
your Finger, foreshews speedy Marriage. To Dream you are dancing in Jolly a
group of people pointing at two floating heads? Company, signifies much Joy and
mirth. To dream some Furious Beast pursues, and you cannot avoid it, betokens
your Enemies will prevail against you. To dream you are stung or bitten by
^erpents or insects, denotes mischief, to come from malicious and private
Enemies. To dream you meet a Lion and he fawns on you denotes the Favor of
great ones To dream one is in a Field of standing Corn, denotes prosperity. To
dream you meet a black Coffin, with Mourners, denotes the death of some Friend.
To dream one fights, and overc^mes, denotes success in what you are contending
for, or escap^ing dangers that threaten you. To dream you are washing your
hands, and the di^t comes clean off, signifies you shall perform some great
Enterprise. To dream a Friend is dead, denotes he or she is well. To dream your
Eyes or Teeth fall out, denotes, Sickness, or death of Children, or some
intimate friend, or near Relation. To dream ones shoes falls off, or are old
and torn, denotes poverty and distress To dream a horse runs away with you,
denotes unexpected business, not pleasing to you. To dream a Gold Ring breaks,
and falls from your finger, denotes the loss of a Lover, or some dear Friend.
To dream you are sailing in a Calm, denotes a peaceable Life; but suddenly
overtaken in a Storm, trouble and affliction. To dream of Courting a beautiful
Woman, betokens Crosses and Vexation. To dream you put on fine Clothes, denotes
preferment. To dream you hunt a Hare, but cannot ta^^ her, denotes the loss of
some matter you are in pursuit of. To Dream you endeavor to fly, and cannot, a
giant devil or satyr with a broom and candle dancing inside a circle,
surrounded by many dancing people betokens Imprisonment and Restraints. A
Virgin Dreaming she is putting on New Garments, denotes an alteration of her
condition, by Marriage, to dream of lighted tapors, denotes the party shall be
happy in many friends. To Dream of the Chattering of Swallows, denotes
Sickness, or other Infirmitys to fall, For a barren woman to Dream she
prostitutes her self with one of her own Sex, denotes she shall conceive; but
to a Childbearing Woman, it is Miscarriage. To dream you see great fires, is
anger or sickness: For lovers To dream they fall out, denotes constancy, and
affection: to dream one receives a Letter, denotes love and constancy, or that
the party shall have satisfaction in what he desires: to dream one puts on new
white Gloves, denotes the Marriage of Friends; but black ones their Death. For
a Woman to Dream she is with Child, De^^^es Sorrow, and hard Labor; but to
dream she is delivered, the contrary. To dream you see an withered tree,
sprouting out, denotes Chilldren in old age: to dream you are cast away in a
Shipwreck, denotes great losses in goods or estate: to dream you see a small
spring, grow into a great lake, denotes increase of Riches: to dream of
Ribbons, and gay Plumes of Feathers denotes amendment of Fortune.

Other Advantageous ways particularly Relating to Love and Marriage, Approved
and Successful.
a man and woman kiss as another man looks on

On Valentine's Day.
TAke two Bay leaves, sprinkle them with Rose Water; the Evening of this day,
lay them across under your pillow, when you go to bed, putting on a clean
shift, and turning it the wrong side outward; and lying down, say, these words
softly to your self.

Good Valentine be kind to me,
In Dreams let me my true Love see:
So crossing your legs, and go to sleep as soon as you can, you will see (in a
Dream) the party you are to Marry, come to your bedside, ^^d offer you all
modest Kindness, to your ^^eat Contentment.

On St. Agne's day.
Take a Sprigg of Rosemary, and another of Time, sprinkle them with your Urine,
thrice; and in the Evening of this day, put one into one shoe, and the other
into the other; place your shoes on each side your beds head, and going to bed
say softly to your self.

St. Agnes that is to Lovers kind,
Come ease the troubles of my mind.
Then take your rest, having said your prayers; when you are asleep you will
dream of your lover, and fancy you hear him talk to you of love, looking in the
shoes, and attempting to put them on your Feet, with much kindness: If two are
desirous of you, they will both appear, and strive who shall do you the best
Offices, and the party who overcomes in this, is your lot; for you will
perceive the other quickly vanish, sighing and much displeased.

Love Observations on first hearing the Cuckoo.
When you walk abroad (in the Spring) as soon as you hear the Cuckoo, sit down
on a bank, or any convenient place, and pull the Stocking from off your Right
leg; and whilst you are doing it, say: May this to me
Now Luckey be.
then look between your great toes, and you will find a hair which will easily
come off; take it, and look well on it, and you will perceive it to be the
color the partys hair you desire; wrap it up it a piece of paper, and keep it
ten days carefully, if then it has not changed color, the party loved will be
constant, and you will obtain your desire; but if it do, you are flattered, and
will be deceived.

Signs of Love, and speedy Marriage; or the contrary, by seeing or meeting
diverse sorts of Creatures, first in a morning.
cupid

THese Signs of love and marriage, have been greatly taken notice of in their
exact succeeding according to the partys desire.

If a Robin-Red-Brest come fluttering to your window, and sing pleasantly,
pearching near it, it denotes speedy marriage to the party, and a merry
contented life. If a hare sta^ (...) hand, you will have success in love
affairs (...) hand, it denotes you will be crossed and in (...) Swallows
Charter merrily, and Sing in the (...) it denotes you will have many
sweethear^^ (...) at your window, betokens misfortunes (...) thing you hear in
the morning, denotes (...) a morning, carrying straw in its mouth (...)
married, and very fruitful in Children; (...) as you walk abroad, denotes much
stri^ (...)

to know whether a Fem^ (...)
TAke Allablaster; a quarter of an o^ (...) steep it in Aqua Vitae, then dry
(...) liquor the party is to drink, contrar^ (...) her not blush, change
color, she ha^ (...)

To make an Enchanted Ring, to cause one to fall in love with you.
Get a hollow Ring, steep Goats hair taken from the Beard, steep it in the
juice of Night Shade, or Wake Robin, an herb so called, pull it through the
Ring, and whoever wears it, it shall cause them to fall in love with you.

to make the true Love Powder.
Take Ellicumpane, the seeds or flowers Viruine, and the berrys of Mesleto,
beat them, when well dried in an Oven, into a fine Powder, give it the party
you design upon, a dram in a glass of wine, or other liquors, and it will work
wonderful effects to your advantage.

Moles on the Face, their signification, as they relate to Good or Bad Fortune
in Men, Women, and Children.
MOles in the Face particularly, and those in parts of the body, are very
significant as to good or bad Fortune. A Mole on on the left side of the
forehead, denotes the party shall get Riches by tillage, building and planting.
A mole on the right side of the forehead, promises happy contentment of life, a
loving state in matrimony, etc. A Mole in the middle of the forehead, denotes
the party subject three faces with exaggerated moles (...) ^r side the right
temple, denotes to a man increase (...) ^ccess in marriages, and a peaceable
life. A Mole (...) to either Sex, in the first part of their Age; but (...)
^ear the right Eye-brow promises to man or wo^ (...) Reversions, etc. A Mole on
the right side a^ (...) and virtuous. A Mole on the left side the face (...)
thwarting, and unexpected crosses. A Mole on (...) ^ar, denotes loss in goods
and crosses by Children, (...) ^ole on the lower part of the Eyelid, between
(...) ^gnifies a man much to be beloved by women, (...) ^enious, Chaste, and
Faithful. A Mole on the (...) ^oman to be generally beloved, but much af^ (...)
Nostril, promises a man good success in his (...) A Mole in the extremity of
the Nose, be^ (...) the party, man or woman, lustful, but fruitful in Children;
but not extreme long lived. A Mole on the right corner of the mouth, near the
Jaw, promises happy days to either Sex, but on the left side unlawful
Copulation, and much loss thereby: a mole on the middle of the upper lip, or on
the chin, denotes success in love; but no great fortune.

Good or Bad Fortune signified by Moles in the Bodies of Men or Women, etc.
Adam and Eve and the serpent in the Garden of Eden

A Mole on the right arm; denotes Riches and Honor to a man or woman, by great
undertakings, and happy marriages: a mole on the left arm, under the wrist,
denotes the Party to be crossed in his issue, but that he shall attain riches:
a mole on the arm-pit, signifies sickness and hardship by travel: a mole on the
right side, and upper part of the breast, denotes the party to increase in
wealth, by tillage, and other rural employments: a Mole on the back enclining
to the right side, denotes riches and honor, to be gained by the favor of
great Men: a Mole on the upper part of the right side the belly, denotes to a
Man good fortune in marriages; and to a Woman hopeful Children: a Mole on the
left side the breast, threatens a man with disgrace, and loss of friendship, a
woman with poverty, neglect, and disregard of her affairs: a Mole on the left
side the belly, denotes indifferent good fortune to man or woman: a Mole on the
groin, enclining to the right side of the loin, a nude man and woman signifies
prosperity, and fortune to man or woman, by marriage, or other ways: a mole
appearing on the right or left knee, denotes a person will advantage himself by
travel into strange Countries: a mole on the calf of a man's Leg, denotes him
exceeding lustful, and desirous of other men's wives, endangering himself; and
to a woman, loss of honor, not undeservedly: a mole on the middle of the privy
members, denotes great infirmitys, and a continuation of troubles to a man; but
to a woman, to be beloved, and have many Children: a mole on the right side,
somewhat above the lower part of the privy members, declares a man happy in
women's love, and to gain much by marriage: A Mole on the right th^^^ near the
huckle, denotes the party to grow rich, by rural affairs. Two Mol^^ answering
equally on either side the Gullet, threatens untimely Death.

Curious Merry Riddles on sundry matters, to pass away the time in harmless
mirth, and witty Recreation.
Riddle 1.
a knight on horseback

Most swift I am, and most I pride,
When I submit to others Guide;
In bloody Battles often i am seen;
Since time begun my Race has been.
Solution. It is a Horse and his Rider.

Riddle 2.
a fountain

From earths deep womb, I fetch my treasure,
That to Mankind affords much pleasure,
Without what is produced by me,
Nothing could live, but all must dye.
Solution, It is a Fountain flowing with Water.

Riddle 3.
a person sitting in a chair reading a book

Though twenty-four I do contain,
They change to thousands in the main;
Fair Ladys Court me, and dispute
By me, although my self am mute.
Solution. It is a Book, in which are but twenty-four Letters, though
multiplied into Millions, and Read by ladies, out of which Arguments are
raised, etc.

Riddle 4.
an insect

I in Kings Palaces am seen.
And Kiss the hand of King and Queen,
Sometimes I am, sometimes i am not,
Yet never im of men forgot:
I being near, they gather store,
But being gone, earth's bare and poor.
Solution, This is a Fly that gets away before winter, and in spring or summer
returns again.

Riddle 5.
a flower

Though low I am, yet I am fair,
Fine I adys me about them wear,
They Kiss me, lay me in their Breast,
When Gallants are not half so blessed.
Solution. It is a Pink, or July-Flower, much coveted by ladies.

Riddle 6.
a kneeling king is crowned by another figure

What Fortune gives I wear in state,
A little thing does make me great;
All do admire me when I wear it,
Yet Cares attend all those that bear it.
Solution, Is is a Crown on a King's Head.

Riddle 7.
a flower

When my beloved looks on me,
Then I always cheerful be;
But when it ceases to do so,
Drawn in and veiled, I mournful grow.
Solution, It is a Marigold, opening in the morning to the Suns rising, but
closes at its setting.

Riddle 8.
a fox

Wisest of Creatures Men me call,
Though many times they seek my fall,
But when they most do Envy me,
I then fare best and fattest be.
Solution, It is a Fox, who, as the old Proverb is, the more he is cursed, the
better he fares.

Riddle 9.
an elephant with a castle on its back

I am esteemed, though i am not fair,
Buildings upon my back I bear,
in War I terrible am known,
And a whole Squardron have overthrown.
Solution, It is an Elephant, with a Castle on his back.

Riddle 10.
a salamander

What all consumes, best pleases me,
I court that from which others flee;
Strange thing to tell, unhurt I lie
And thrive, where all things else would die.
Solution, it is a Salamander bred by a violent heat, and living in fire.

Riddle 11.
a griffin

Both Bird and Beast I am together,
Yet separated I am neither,
With terror I over Citys fly,
And by my fury many dye.
Solution, it is a Griffin, the fore part like an Eagle, and the hinder part
like a Lion.

Riddle 12.
a garden

When I my White Robes have put on,
My friends from me then all are gone,
But when in Green I do appear,
They haste with pleasure to draw near.
Solution, it is a Garden, the white Robes is its covering with Snow in winter,
the Green is pleasantness in Summer to walk in.

Riddle 13.
a snail

Though others waste, and spend their store,
I have no means, yet am not poor,
By providence I still am fed,
And have a House to hide my head.
Solution, It is a Snail with her Shell on her back.

Riddle 14.
a man unlocks a door as a dog(?) watches him

What force and strength can scarce get through*
I with a touch you see can do;
A many in the street would lie,
Were I not to befriend them high.
Solution, It is a key, with which a man unlocks the Door to get into the house.

Riddle 15.
a woman nursing a child on her lap

Little and big sits on a stone,
Yet once they both of them was one;
Of tongues alike they do partake,
And yet but one of them can speak.
Solution, It is a Mother sitting with her Child in her lap.

Riddle 16.
a pair of crossed scepters

We useless are till took in hand,
And then we have a vast Command;
No sooner seen but we are adored,
And large Protections do afford;
We Are coveted both far and near,
And for us bloody strifes appear.
Solution, These are Scepters in the hands of Monarchs, and are much strugled
for.

Riddle XVII
a rooster, with a farmhouse in the background

A Bloody Crown upon my head,
In Plumes well armed I strike a dread
In Noah's Ark our voice was heard.
I fight, but wealth I don't regard;
I precious Jewels spurn, and would
Forsake gold Mines for little food.
Solution, It is a Cock with Comb or Crown on his head, his Arms are his Spurs,
etc.

Riddle XVIII.
the sun

I View the world in little space,
Am always restless changing place;
No Food I eat, but by my power,
Procure what Millions do devour.
Solution, It is the Sun in perpetual Course, whose influence makes all things
fruitful.

Riddle XIX.
a horseshoe

Though sense and motion in my self there is none,
Yet those that have, it metheir safeguard own,
Dragging me over hills and mountains sleep,
Whilst I with railing st^^^^^ a Coil do keep,
in swiftest Races and in Warlike deeds,
Without my help the bravest seldom speeds.
Solution, it is a Horse-shooe, that accompany the Horse, and saves his Feet.

Riddle XX.
a ship

I spread my Wings to foreign Regions fly,
Over the Living pass, and yet have I
The Living in the Womb, I Thunder bear,
Combat with storms, and Elements make war,
My going and returning makes some glad;
But Losing me, the merriest soon grow sad.
Solution, it is a Ship, her Sails are here termed Wings her going over the
Living, is the Fish, her men within her her Living, her thunder her Guns.

(...) Reader, I have made all as plain and easy as may be, these (...) ^ing
to the placing of the Cuts, to which they answer, (...) ^not mismatch them: So
not doubting this Book take (...) ^lease you.

FINIS.

