AN APOLOGY, Vindicating the CAVALEERS from a partial, or rather a passionate
aspersion too rigorously put upon them for making Churches Prisons and Stables.
Wherein is discussed, disputed, ( although not the lawfulness) yet (at this
time) the unavoydable necessity of it.

London Printed in the year, 1643.

AN APOLOGY, Vindicating the Cavaleers, etc.
MAny of this Kingdom, have seemed of late to be much troubled, (I cannot say
in conscience, until it better appear by their conversations; that they make
a conscience of any thing, therefore, let it be trouble in their thoughts,) and
trouble others with their silly discourses, about the throwing down of Organs,
silencing of Cathedral Roarers, and Squeakers, battering of Images, defacing
the Popish paint, and gaudery of Churches, and assaulting immodestly forsooth,
and irregiously, not only that sacred smock of the whore of Babylon, the
Surplice, but also the formalists grand Charter for Heaven, the Common prayer
Book: all this while these devout men have not been at all perplexed, or moved
at that piacular insolence, and more then heathenish impiety of the Cavaleers
at Oxford, Kingstone upon Thames, and Cirencester, have not only made prisons,
but by the inhumane restraint of their Prisoners, Jakes, and in Devonshire, and
Cornwall stables of Gods houses; so reverentiall and devoutly tender of the
honor of Gods houses, have these Bishops white boys been, who yet in the
account of some half witted Guls, are the only Patrons both of Church men, and
Churches, and the truly zealous advancers of the Protestant Religion. The
serious consideration of which premises, calls to my remembrance, that no less
true then famous axiom of Divines, quicquid propter Deum fit aequaliter fit
(1) what is done to Gods glory, is always done upon the same occasions, for he
that honors God upon true Grounds will honor him impartially, and at all
opportunities alike; by the help of which substantial ground I shall at once
confute both the practice of the dissembling Cavalier, and also the opinions
and discourses of those formal Protestants, who upon all occasions decry the
Brownist and his practice, and yet have not an ill word for these cursed
Cavaliers, who far transcend the Brownist in that very particular, whereof
the Brownist in their misguided partial judgment stand guilty.

First then, if the Cavalier in good earnest dislike the rudeness of the
Separatist, in laying violent hands upon these sacred Utensills, appointed by
our holy Mother Church, for the setting forth of Gods worship with more luster,
and a stronger Influence upon the dull affections of the vulgar, why does the
same Rake-hell so far forget his own discourse, as to unhallow not only the
sacred implements, but the very Churches themselves, if his eye were all on
Gods glory, in his accusations of the Separatist? he might see as just cause to
condemn himself, who does the same thing in a more notorious manner, if any
love to God set his tongue on work against the Separatist, it would teach his
hand to abstain from that which he so deeply censures in the other.

Secondly, tell me, thou lukewarm, or rather key-cold Protestant, who art
always snarling at these poor despised Christians, whose practice think
thou is more scandalous, the Brownist's, who out of conscience labors to purge
our Churches of these Babilonish Relics, or the Cavalier (who at least
without, if not against Conscience) transformes the very Churches themselves
into Prisons, Stables, Jakes? did thou adore these stinking Cavaliers only
(as thou say) for their zeal and Religion to Gods houses, then could thou
not hold also from defilng them for their unexampled polluting of them: either
then spare the lash of thy venomous tongue toward the one, or else spit thy
venom also at the other.

Our Savior thou know (if I may without offense mention that sacred name,
when I talk of these varlet) tells us that the temple is greater, and holier
then either the Altar, or gold upon the Altar, and accounts of the Scribes, and
Pharisees, as of blind buzzards, who thought otherwise Mat. 23.17. If it be so
then I hope the blind formalist by the same force of reason will be convinced,
that the churches themselves deserve more reverence from us, then Organes or
other Popish trumpery; if therefore thou have any heart (thou besotted ignorant
formalist) to put in practice the former golden rule above mentioned, fail not
to remember that when thou disgorgest thy rancor against Separatists for
dishonouring Gods house, thou ought at the same time to bespatter the
Cavalier, who much more dishonours it; if thou forget this thy duty enforced
upon the same ground, then take it not amiss, if thou be herafter accounted by
every wise man that heats thee a shameless Censor; and that thou rather
discouerest thy malignant humor then any judgment, when thou severely
reprehendest the one, and sparest the other, who more justly deserves thy
bitterest reprehensions.

But notwithstanding all that has been said, or (it may be) can be said, are
there not some so impudent as to palliate and varnish over this cursed fact,
who yet keep on barking at the poor separatist? nay are not some grave Doctors
of that University, where this fact was committed who have had the foreheads
not only in their private discourses, but (I would I could not say it) in the
pulpet, as it were in despite of all that which has hitherto been preached
and written, by that practice to the contrary, to legitimate that base action
and proclaim it not only lawful and seemly, but laudable? and now here I
beseech you upon what learned grounds these grave beasts have so determined it?
because forsooth the Cavaliers were necessitated to what they did, wanting
other convenient receptacles for their prisoners. Eye upon that foul mouth
that said it, fouler I wis then those profane Churches after a months
defilement: for were there in all Oxford no unsanctified Colleges, which might
with more convenience and less scandal have been converted into Prisons and
Jakes then God houses? to my apprehension, rather then you should have so
thwarted your Episcopal doctrine, by such an unheard of president at such a
time, when your zeal for Churches and their ornaments should have been most
conspicuous, had it not been much better, and more advantageous to your cause
that your selves had wanted for a time the convenience of houses, then that
Gods houses should be so foully dishonored. Vobis ipsis spectantibus and
plaudendentibus, whilst your selves were lookers on, nay applauders and
collourers of so shameful an action? especially since you cannot, but have
fresh in your memory, that at the reedifying of St. Paul's Church at London,
good St. Gregory's was demolished by the Command of your then great
Metropolitan, that so St. Paul's might have the more elbow-room, for no man
has yet heard of any other cause, whence I thus reason; If God himself may be
cashiered of a Church merely out of a silly complement to St. Paul, your
selves might with patience have layen in the streets (a decent lodging for such
Atheists) for the preserving Gods house from such unexpiable dishonor.

Yea but another Reverend beast said that this disuse (how finely the man could
phrase it) of these Churches, was only for some short time; he that said so,
might as well excuse a son that ravisheth his Mother, by saying he did it
only for a time; can the beggarly circumstance of i am excuse that tedious
practice which should not so much as lodge in your thoughts, the least minute
of time? Moreover the people of Oxford know for how long time this Sacrieledge
was continued, and how ready the same men are (should God permit them any more
to conquer, which the base use of their past victories will, I doubt not,
avert) to do the like or a more impious and scandalous act at any time

But it has been gravely answered: that the Prisoners, good men had their
option, at least deserved no other place of their restraint then Churches. Had
these Caytifs known so much, they had questionless found prisons some where
else; least in any thing these poor Saints should by their means have had
their desires; again these poor men though they most of all love Gods houses,
yet know, that to love them for such uses, had been to have loved the abuses of
them which were not to love them.

Another incarnate Devil said aloud, that such Puritans deserved in that house
to be purnisht, where by their precisenes they had so often offended; which is
all one as if he had said, they deserve there to be punished, where God had
been by them so devoutly served. What reward waits for thee thou Helish
tongue? similis labra luctueas, a blasphemy well beseeming a Court divine;
nevertheless the truth is, what ever pretenses they have sought out for the
palliating this unparalleled piece of Atheism, for so it would have been
accounted three years since, even by the whole rabble of these Cathedral
Sycophants, the true cause I say of this vile fact was none other then the base
esteem (however they have seemed to carry it) that party has of Churches of
which as formerly they speak with reverence, and entered them with great show
of devotion, and at other men's charges adorned, and set them forth with all
manner encomioms of holiness, so now the tide of things being somewhat turned,
and Policy coming in the room of shewfull Pageantlike devotions, as a more
helpful assistant to the present exigences: now I say the same men whose
thoughts were wholly possessed with Popish projects of attiring Churches;
thereby to approve themselves to their (...) man Idol, are as well content
that the same Churches should be (...) vilest offices: Nay most confident I am,
and so I believe are (...) who have with discretion looked into their
disseumbled outward (...) that so their cause may be advanced by it, the best
of them care not, if all the Churches in England were converted into synagogues
for Jews, or Mosques for Mahomet, nay their height of joy it would be, if all
our Churches were turned (as of late some of them you know have been) into
Prisons, so Puritans and Roundheads filled them: and if all manner of service
of God were for ever laid aside upon condition the title of their Lordly
revennues were changed from frank Almoygne to fee simple, whereby they might
durably entayle their pride and luxury upon their licentious brats and
posterity.

Had not some such christian thoughts and desires as these, lodged in the
breasts of our Court-Clergy-Parasites at Oxford, it is impossible but that upon
view or notice of that Public Profanation of their Churches, either some
Archbishop, or Bishop or Doctor, especially that Ceremonious Master of Baliol
College Do. Laur. who wore the consecrated slippers, and spent most of his
stock of learning upon that empty discourse of his, touching the holiness of
churches, should not have made way to his Majesty, and after this or the like
manner have eased his couscience, and expressed himself to his sacred person.

Most gracious Sovereign, defender of the truly anncient Catholic faith, and
the great protector both of Churches and Churchmen.

I humbly crave your Matesties gracious pardon that I your Majesty's most
unworthy servant, yet truly loyal subject dare adventure to open my mouth
before your sacred Matestie, having not first received your Majesty's commands
for the unloosing my infant tongue.

Your all knowing Majesty cannot but exactly know and it has been a subject
frequently stood upon and gravely pressed in your Majesty's audience, by your
Majesty's most faithful subjects and servants the Archbishops, Bishops and
other of your learned Clergy, whose happiness it has been to perform their
duties before your Majesty in the house of God. That the material Churches or
Temples are places set apart and consecrated to Gods peculiar service. That God
himself whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain, delights to dwell in these
houses made with hands, vouchsafes a special presence unto them, and conferrs
at the instance and devout importunity of his pious servants are all though
ineffable holiness upon them, and therefore in all ages of the Church, more
especially in the purest times when the seemly worship of God most flourisht, a
singular care has been always taken to preserve these sacred fabrics from
common uses, especially from Prosanation; in imitation whereof (for your divine
Majesty cannot fall short in any point of the most renowned Christian Princes)
there is, at least has been of late years under your Majesty's most religious
Reign, the beauty of holiness so far forth to be found in your Matesties
Churches, that in despite of these ignorant peevish malcontents who care not
or rather desire that Gods houses should be as undecently or sluttishly kept as
their shops or Barnes? Churches have been to admiration adorned, Altars
erected, Copes, Tapers, Crucifixes and other comely and holy ornaments brought
in use again, and by your Majesty's countenance, and the vigilancie of the
Reverend Fathers of your Church, the ancient and soule-ravishing worship of God
so settled, not only in your Churches but also in the affections of your
subjects, that a proportionable reward thereof in this life, the choysest
blessing of Heaven surrounded your royal throne, the maligners of your
Majesty's Diadem and the sacred Miter, find few, at least, no considerable
advocates. Indeed it cannot be dissembled that of very late days by the mighty
working of Setan, these coutemptibe mushromes (but now touched at) discovering
a discontented party though from different grounds from them) amongst the
Nobles and Commons in the late Parliament of your Majesty's own most Gracious
calling, who envying the happiness of your Majesty's meniall servants, and
some select Ministers of state, whom the beams of your Majesty's Grace had
most instly made glorious, or (which is nearest of all the truth, lowering at
your Majesty's royal scepter, and Prerogative, a tribe of Politics destitute
of all deserts, or else your omniscious Majesty had certainly taken notice of
them) yet highly conceited of an indiscoverable, worth and eminency in
themselves, and a suitableness to high employments, which God knows they
eminently want; unto this seed of evil doers permitted by the Divine
Providence in your Kingdom, only to exercise the virtues of your accomplished
Council, have this only reserve of turbulent Cartwrights Geneva novelty
applied themselves, and in requital of their crasty simpathizing with their
Rebellions ends, have been admitted into their confederacy, who so gracious
with them, as these Church-racking, tumultuous spirits, these every where
unprotected and baffled Sectaries, who again the better to gratify their new
masters, and to approve themselves, and (which is their meat and drink) to do
mischiefs, upon apprehensions of their new patrons design fell speedily, and
furiously (as their manner is) to work, blew the coules most zealously to their
Rebellious enterprise, disparaged the Crown: blemished that intaminate
Peerless Consort, in nothing inferior to that greatest saint of her name in
heaven, but immortality, threw dirt in abundance upon the sacred Miter. buzzed
impure notions of license, and independency into the credulous vulgar, in a
word so played their parts in scurrilous libells, Sermons, discourses, that in
short time, they which set them a work had nothing almost left for themselves
to do, but only to admire the dexterity, and successefullnesse of these
formerly contemned instruments Whereupon their new masters abundantly sensible
of their sufficiency began to unfold themselves more freely unto them, nay
threw open a wide gap to their familiarity solas't each other in their low
ungrac'd condition as Caius Marius and Carthage did of old in the Historian
prayed together for the confusion of the Churches and Kingdoms glory. *
Velleius Paterculus.
Prerogative and Prelacy; indeed by Gods connivance in Process of time, so it
came to pass, that this mongrel monstrous beast begotten between a sectary
and an envious Peer, so thrived and gathered strength whether thorough the
novelty of the project (for the Vulgar are usualy ravished with new fangles) or
the activity and zeal of these cursed incendiaries, who left no stone unroll'd
to bring about the design; your Majesty's Cathedral subjects were put into a
bodily fear, that their fatal period and desolation was drawing near, and
that Prelacy (which I tremble to relate) was either to be devorsed from
Prerogative, or else both as they had long stood, so in a trace were to fall
together, and the glorious Church and Monarchy of England to run the same base
fates with Democraticall Scotland. This unexpected hurli-burly (as there was
just cause) soon put your Majesty's sacred Clergy out of these devout offices,
which held the peoples hearts unto them, and we became a sort of men cheap and
contemptible, until at length it pleased God by a new assession of Martial
vigor to strengthen your Majesty's sacred arm, and to rouse up the sleepie
courage of your liege people so far that the greater and better part of your
Kingdom were animated to declare to fight for your majesty's rights (a large
portion of which have no other fountain then your Clergies height, and
nearness to your Majesty) since which time (your Matestie and we all cannot
but with exultation acknowledge) by the Cathedral prayers of your Clergy as
well as by the swords (...) these sonn^ of Mars, the heroic Cavaliert many
glorious victories have been obtained as at Keinton, Branford, Marleborow,
Cirencester and in the North, all which and the rest, which are yet to come are
under God, wholly to be attributed to the special respect the Allmighty bears
to your Most Religious Person, and to the Canonical, Cathedral Prayers of
your upper Clergy so that now your Majesty's, and your Churches glory, seems
only to have been Eclipsed for a time that it might shine forth again in fuller
strength and gain new beams by that disconsolate interruption. Yet after all
these testimoates from heaven of the truth of your Majesty's cause, one
particular there is, by the demerits whereof without early prevention we may
chance to hazard all our happiness in the very haven, and that is it, which
with submission to your Majesty's divine judgment I shall now take the
boldness in a few words to discover, and it is none other then that most
unhappy accident cast in of late, no doubt by the impure hand of Satan, nay to
blast our budding, nay almost flourishing hopes, that unparalelled profanation
of Gods and your Majesty's Churches, which I began to look at, at the entrance
of this my address to your Majesty, but was diverted and thrust aside by those
uncivil justlers of Monarchy it self, whom I could not but for a time let
fly at, even in the presence of your Majesty; returning therefore from whence
I have so long digressed, I shall now by your Majesty's pardon and patience,
cloze this humble tender of my duty and conscience in a brief representation
of this horrid fact, and the inconveniences, or mischiefs rather; which either
have already, or will in reason infallibly attend it. The fact such, that I
fear those so effectual Cathedral orisons of your Clergy, without some
special miracle of mercy from heaven upon them, cannot expiate, and therefore
the mischiefs which must attend, will correspond to the deserts of such a
Cause, if a timely humiliation ward them not off from us; I cannot then (dread
Sovereign) longer dissemble that, which is the joy and hope of your enemies,
and a rasor upon the hearts of your most faithful Subjects, That too well, and
too far violation of two of our neighbor Churches here in Oxford, that of
Saint Giles, and Maudlins Parish, into which your Provost Marshall (no doubt
for want of other convenience, but that satisfies not) thrust that Rebellious
crew which a late Victory brought from Cirencester: I have heard the like was
done at Kingston, but I will not believe it, oh that no man knew or believed
this, it is the best wish I can breathe out, next unto that, it had not at all
been done, but done it is, I would there were an Act of oblivion past upon it,
at least I would we could as easily gather up the infamy of it, as it might
have been prevented: Your Majesty I know is clear and innocent from this great
offense, may the punishment fall upon that head which first conceived it, and
may your sacred Majesty be untoucht, better your Church, your Kingdom fall,
then your sacred person feel but one twinge of the toothache: How loath me
thinks I am to speak out all, how officiously my fancy stirs my tongue to
other matters, but my thoughts will not, out it must, lest it burst in the
delivery, your Churches (gracious Sovereign) your Churches are dishonored
defiled, become an abomination in the sight of heaven, your Churches only
dedicated to heavenly uses, are made to serve the vilest offices. Neither the
sacred Font, that fountain of spiritual life, nor the blessed Altar, that
heaven upon earth, where Christ vouchsafed us more then his spiritual
presence, can say I am not polluted, I am not vile and contemptible, can the
enemy say less, where is now their God? Certainly he will say, what is become
of that reverence, that prostration, that opinion of holiness, used and said
to be in Churches, was all that service but a frolic, but a toy, but a scene
made to serve the times, and Churchmens turns, will the next course of serving
God be thought other then another frolic, a humor, a base accommodation to
the times? Will your Reverend Fathers be hereafter believed, When they shall
gravely tell that too much reverence cannot be used in the house of God, where
God has a special residence, is more present then elsewhere in the world who
can with silence, with patience, see God himself put out of his possession,
and nor be Martyrs in the vindication of such Sacrilege? Were there not houses
to be found in your Majesty's territories capable of these miscreants, besides
your Churches? Let me once speak with freedom to your Majesty, better had it
been that these Rebels had yet remained unquelled, that these enemies of your
Scepter had yet exalted themselves, then that your God should have been thus
dishonored, better had it been to have fled before our enemies, then that our
God should have been put to flight, and chased from amongst us, and that in
time of need, when Monarchy, nay more, Episcopacy is so boldly assaulted. I
fear dread Sovereign, I would this fear were groundless, that Wallers late
Victories, and the consternation of your Subjects, owe themselves to no other
cause, then the profanation of these Churches, those enemies of your Crown and
heaven, though no friends to Churches, were yet so modest, or so politic, as
not to adventure upon this way of incensing heaven, until they saw Gods
justice engaged against your party in some notable stroke of vengeance, so
religious they were, as not to be leaders in the crime: I have done, and my
hearts desire it is, that future misfortunes makes not your Majesty too
sensible of the truth of that which is the silence of others who better might
have spoken, Command of conscience only bad me say,

Vivat Rex Carolus.


Such a Homily as this would, whether you respect the flattery, the blasphemy,
the superstition, or the spightfull excursions not amiss have suited with the
grave managing of a Cathedral beard, and I wonder that none of all that rout
of Cathedral fugitives which now embase the Court, had not remembered to bestow
on his Majesty one cast of their wonted zeal in this argument, but the truth
is, the bouncing of Guns, the prauncing of Horses, the rattling of Arms, the
pledging of healths, and the cursing of Schismatics and Parliaments have
disfurnished our Cathedral Droanes of all thoughts of the holiness of
Churches; alas, when Episcopacy it self is so fiercely struck at, nay wounded
in a vital part, can a Bishop have the leisure, in such a time when all
thoughts and industry is too little in seeking plasters for the wounds of
Episcopacy, to trouble and distract his mind about the service of God, and
holiness of Churches; indeed a time of deep peace was seasonable for such
thoughts, a time hewne out for the advancement of Churches and Churchmens pomp,
was now indiscreetly allowed to the ungratiating of Churches both with King and
People: but the depth of Cathedral miseries now it is, that it can only be
said, such times lately were, when the wheel of Fortune is turned, and the
robustious soldier sits uppermost, and at the next whirle the inexorable
Seperatist may chance to perk up, Cathedral men may commendably leave off
tithing Mint and Cummin, leave off talking of Altars, and holiness of
Churches, and sadly meditate on those weightier matters, of maintaining wives
and children, of securing their Carkases from the Parliament, and their houses
from that terrible word Plunder: Me thinks I hear a Cathedral Humble Be
buzzing out some such doleful strains as these, Oh that there had been so
much providence in our Velvet Nodles, as to have thought there might have been
a Parliament, and such shrewd heads in it, that the rewards and Grace of a King
cannot purchase such as can overmatch them, which yet seems very strange,
especially since such care was taken to bring idleness and licentiousness in
fashion both at the Innes of Court, and Universities, so that it had been (one
would think) an easy matter for a Prince, in whose hand was the staple of all
preferments, to have had choice of instruments for any service, especially by
the concurrent assistance of the Law and the Gospel, but yet which way soever
it came about, improvident we were, and irrespective of afterclaps, else we
might have laid up friends in Bank, even amongst the Seperatists themselves,
which now would have besteed us in time of need, somewhat in prudence might have
been abated in the rigorous exaction of Ceremonies, the Canons in force might
have been executed without spightfulnesse and delight, in the punishment of
such as were found tardy, Churches might have been adorned like Matrons, not
tricked up like strumpets, like the Idolatrous Temples of Rome, enough might
have been done to draw on devotion, though all had been omitted which served to
erect a wanton love to Churches, it might have been said, and scarce gainsaid,
that Churches were fitly both raised and used for the public service of God,
it needed not to have been added an unexpressable holiness was impressed on
the walls, by means of consecration, and then if an urgent necessity, as since
has happened (but then I believe had never been) had turned a Church into a
Prison, it might fairly have been said, that Church had lost its use, not lost
that holiness it never had, and then this vile practice of the Cavaleers had
not thus stuck like a bur of infamy in our Cathedral throats, shall I say, or
upon our consciences, if any such thing we have hardlier, to be removed then
taking up Arms against our Prince, from the tender Conscience of an honest
Brownist, neither then (say I) had there been occasion to have raised or
resolved these two questions mentioned in the frontispeece, which in the last
place call for a dispatch, and the first was this: Quest. Whether the
Seperatist (as he is called) who makes his house, or (as it is said) his Barn
a Church, be more scandalous, or the Cavalier (who looking another way in his
discourse and profession) has at Oxford, where his Majesty resides, turned
Churches (with reverence be it spoken) into prisons, and Jakes, and in Devon:
at many places into Stables.

This Question seems to be, and is, I believe, in some men's apprehensions, a
Case of Conscience, yet, I fear me, little will be contributed either from the
Popish, or Protestant Casuists toward the decision: for, as I guess, they
have not heard of it, much less handled it; nevertheless fear not, Gentle
Reader, but that it may be fairly determined, for I have heard a wise man say,
that a tolerable understanding best states a point of Conscience, when there
is least of these Casuists both directions and judgments in it. Give me leave
first to explain some things in the Question, and then thou shall have my
judgment, such as it is, in this weighty matter. First then, by the Seperatist
I mean all those people of new or old England, who either will not, or else
have no great heart to join in the outward worship of God, with any, be their
learning or esteem what it will, who make a conscience of the Ecclesiastical
policy, or Discipline of the Church of England, as it was lately managed by
the Archbishops, Bishops, etc.

2. Secondly, I add that Parenthesis (as they are called) to imply that in my
judgment, though they are usually so called by the adverse party, yet they are
ill called Seperatists, for (good men) they agree throughout with the formal
Protestant, in the maine of Gods worship, and in the whole Doctrine of the
Gospel, but Seperatist only in that, wherein they are in conscience persuaded
they ought not, and the adverse party cannot, in the judgment of any
indifferent man convince them, that they ought to join unto them: Indeed when
it shall be made clear, or certain, that they ought to join with the
Cathedral party, and then they shall stand off, I also shall be well contented
to have them Christened Seperatists.

In the mean time I wonder that any, at least judicious men, should fasten a
term of disgrace (for so it is accounted) upon men both upright in their
lives, and Orthodox in their tenets, merely for not according with them in a
humor, for not complying in a point of outward uniformity, when variety (for
ought has been said to the contrary) has both as much decency, and might
have for its companion, as much charity, in my poor judgment (which I
profess in Gods sight is impreiudiced for ought I know in this cause) men may
as well call him a Seperatist, that betakes himself from one neighborhood to
another, or from one Corporation to another; for as such a man may be as good a
Subject to his King in both places, though he observe not the same Customs,
and should be accounted so; in like manner the other whom heedlesse men call a
Seperatist, keeping the Relation to God, and his people inviolable, so far as
God Commands him, at least sincerely endeavoring it, is capable of, and should
have our Charity, and good opinion (though he differed from us in these
outward Ceremonies) as cordially, as he that most of all complies with us, nay,
more many times, if reason may be heard, for many agree with the Cathedral men
merely out of fashion, and this man differs out of conscience, and what man,
who is sound in the Headpeece, likes not a man better than a Jacke-an-Apes, at
least each wiseman should do so.

3. Thirdly, when, I say, [ That the Seperatist makes his house or (as its
said) his Barn a Church] I speak it again in the words of his Calumniators,
for it has not yet been made apparent that he does either, at least, not the
latter, how ever it is not their constant opinion (who bear that name) that
Churches should be disused, and Barnes, or private Houses serve in stead of
Churches, only this much is true, that in regard they are offended at the
Customs and humane impositions in our public worship, they choose rather to
serve God in their private houses, or it may be any where, then omit the
performance of so necessary a duty, so that what they now do is only In casu
necessitatis, and whilst our public places of worship are not open, at least,
for the foppish Ceremonies used in them are offensive to them.

4. Fourthly, the burden of the Quere resting upon these words [More
scandalous] It is but convenient that this phrase of comparison be well
weighed: First then, I would not have any man hence infer, that the practice
of the Seperatist is at all scandalous in propriety of speech, because I am
about to prove the practice of the Cavaliers is more scandalous, for the
scandal which arises from the practice of the Nonconformist (for so may he
most fitly be called, unless you please to call him, what in very truth he is,
an honest man,) is only Scandalum acceptum, a positive Scandal, a scandal in
fancy and opinion only, whereas that of the Cavalier is Scandalum datum an
active scandal, a scandal in truth and reallity: Secondly, I would thus be
conceived that to any man that makes a conscience of his ways, the Practice of
the Cavaliers upon supptfition of their own principles touching the holiness
of Churches, which the Seperatist conceives, and that truly most false, is, at
least ought to be ancounted more offensive, even to the men of their own party,
as having in it a just cause of scandal, then the practice of the
Non-conformists; suppose all true which is objected, can be either to the
Cavalier, or any Christian whatsoever, the former being truly scandalous, the
latter in a groundless opinion only, and therefore the former is more
scandalous; nevertheless leaving the indifferent Reader to his own judgment
touching what is scandalous, or more scandalous, I shall, I doubt not, by the
Reasons following make it evident ad hominem, at least that the practice of the
Cavalier is most scancaious, and that out of the notorious Position of their
own party.

First, then one point of their Divinity is, that Irreverence in Churches is
scandalous upon this ground; they condemn all such as bow not at the Name of
Jesus; all such as receive not the blessed Sacrament Kneeling, all such as bow
not at the Altar, or stand not up at Gloria Patri, etc. as scandalous persons,
whence I subsume, that if these men are upon these titles scandalous, then a
fortiori, much more the Cavaliers, who by dishonouring, by polluting, and
unhallowing whole Churches, at once casheeres all those observances, the very
neglect whereof in others they cry up as scandalous.

2. Secondly, another principle of theirs is, That throwing down of Organs,
silencing of Cathedral Roarers and Squeakers, overturning of Idols, battering
of Paint and Images, pulling up railes, assaulting of Surplices, and
Common-Prayer-Bookes is scandalous, whence I likewise infer a fortiori, that
thus violating of whole Churches, and profaning and unhallowing all the sacred
Utensils of Churches is much more scandalous, which is the known gracious
practices of the holy Cavaliers.

3. A third Position of theirs is, that by virtue of Consecration there is
impressed an holiness on Churches, and therefore such as unhallow them in any
kind are eminently scandalous, yet the Cavalier (whose Doctrine this is)
notwithstanding this holiness of Churches, converts Churches into Stables,
Prisons, Jakes, a worser unhallownesse then which cannot be immagined, unless
the Cavaliers themselves quartered in Churches, and by their blasphemous
Oaths, Execrations, ribaldry, made their Church (which their conscience would
not startle at) their hell.

4. Fourthly, and lastly, they Vote unanimously that the Seperatist, who makes
his House or Barn a Church is truly scandalous, and if so, then let any man
of conscience or judgment, tell me whether the Cavalier be not much more
scandasous, who in stead of making his House and Barn a Church, transformes
his Church to what was said before. That this last Argument may have (as its
fit) its full weight and emphasis, consider with me (good Reader) for a short
time; First, the Fact of the Seperatist with the aggravations of it. Secondly,
the Fact of the Cavaliers and its aggravation.


And then by an equal ballancing or comparing them together, any man may
eastly discern whether of the twain is more impious and scandalous, the
Seperatist or the Cavalier.

For the first, the Separatists Fact is, that he makes his House or Barn a
Church, for let that also for once be admitted, which yet has not been
proved, but by Fame, which is usually a Liar, now what it is to make an House
or Barn a Church? and wherein lies the heinousness and offense of him that
does so? I answer, to make a private House or Barn a Church, is either to do
the Offices which are proper to a Church, or to allow the Offices which are
proper to a Church to be done in a private House or Barn; what these Offices
are, those of the Cavaliers who come to Church cannot be ignorant of, and they
are chiefly; 1. Preaching or Expounding the Scriptures. 2. Administering the
Sacraments; unto which you may add, if you please, (...) secondary things; 1.
Prayer. Secondly, Marriage. Thirdly, Burying, and then either all, or most, or
some at least of these must be done by the Seperatists, or any other that makes
his House or Barn a Church.

2. Secondly, the aggravation or crime of the Seperatists fact is this. 1. That
he [the Seperatist] who possibly, or probably, or certainly is not in holy
orders, that is, has not been sanctified by any Bishops sacred Clutch, now
appointed solemnly to the performance of such holy duties, yet usurpes and
dares to do the office of him, that has been thus consecrated or hallowed
unto them. 2. That he the Seperatist, a laymean, and not of the Clergy, dares
do these offices in a private house, or which is more, in a barn, in the
audience of Rats and Mice, which should only be done. 1. By Clergy men. 2. In
consecrated hollowed places. 3. His fact is aggravated by the Law which he
violates in so doing, which is first the Statute Law of the Laud, as they say,
Secondly, The Laws and constitutions of the Church of England. Thirdly, the
Canon Law, or the Popes Law (which Luther called merdam Papalem) and which yet
sticks upon, and lays hold on us, where it is not against the Laws of God, or
of the Land; as they say, Fourthly, his fact is further aggravated, 1. By the
time, for he is generally said to do these offices at an uncanonicall time, as
in the night, or when he lists, when the Spirit (as the Cavaliere Phrases it
sweetly) moves him. 2. By the manner of doing it, which is, they say, 1. In
spite and opposition to the Hierarchy. 2. Without these holy weeds, and
customs of Vestments, as Surplice, Cap, Cope, Crosier, Rochet, Gown,
Canonical Coat, consecrated slippers, without cringings, prostrations,
stations, or conversions to the East. 5. All this he does out of conscience,
and full persuasion that what he does is more acceptable to God. And are not
these, my friend, heinous things, and unsufferable in a Church, and Christian
commonwealth, and offensive to all that hear of, and see it?

In the next place consider with me the fact of the Cavaleer, with its
aggravations.

His fact is, that he converts the Churches of God into Barnes, Stables, Jakes,
that is, he either does himself, or causes to be done (which is not an hairs
breadth to choose) the same offices in Churches which are proper to Prisons,
Stables, Jakes. And now hear the aggravation of his fact: He [The Cavalier]
who maintain that Churches are not to be defiled, who holds that there is an
holiness in Churches, who condemns, and would gladly destroy the Seperatist
for his rudeness even toward Church-implements, he the major part, nay the
total of whose devotion and religion it is to have God alone served in
Churches, and with those Ceremonies which the Seperatist abhors, in short, he
who had rather be a Papist, then part with such ceremonies. Secondly, yet he
[The Cavaleer] not only unhallows the Utensils of Churches, but profanes the
Churches themselves, and for the manner and measure as bad, if not worse then
the Goth, or Turk, for can a Turk or Goth do more vilely then make a stable
or jakes of a Church? Thirdly, his fact is aggravated by the time, and what is
the time when the Cavaleer does thus dishonor Churches? even when he fights to
maintain the honor of Churches, when he kills the Seperatist for tampering
with something in Churches. Fourthly, He does all this where his Majesty
resides, in an University, in the sight of the Reverend clergy, who have so
constantly preached and written in the defense of the holiness of Churches.
Nay, fifthly, he is not only content to do, and approve, and applaud this vile
fact himself, but has likewise corrupted the judgments of the grave Fathers
of our Church, has drawn them into the society of this crime, he has got the
lights of our Church to legitimate his black impiety. Sixthly, by his fact he
has violated all the Laws, and Canons in this bahalfe like an arrant
Seperatist. And lastly, all this he has done, even whilst he is thoroughly
resolved, and persuaded in conscience, that he ought to have done the contrary,
nay when he knew that all his party are scandalized at the rudeness of the
Seperatist, which yet is not to be named the same day with this prodious
Gothique.

And now (my friend) what think thou, how many bows short is the Cavaleer
off the sin against the Holy Ghost?

In the last place, let us ponder and balance (as I promised to do) these
facts thus qualified as you have heard.

First, then the Seperatist offends out of silliness and ignorance, and at
least pretends conscience for what he does, but the Cavalier in regard of his
wisdom and knowledge does all this even against conscience. Secondly, the
Seperatist by his rudeness offends only the Cavalier his mortal enemy, but
the Cavalier his own party, his friends of whom he should be most tender.
Thirdly, The Sepreatist is offensive only for not joining with the Cavalier in
some outward, and as the Seperatist is persuaded an indifferent part of Gods
Worship, but the Cavaliers in that which he judges most necessary.

4. The Seperatist is offensive for running in Common with the Cavalier, but
the Cavalier takes in horses, and lets them run in Common with the Grooms in
Gods House, as at Kingston, etc.

5. The Saperatist cannot be persuaded that he violates any Law of God or man,
but the Cavalier knows that he violates all Laws.

Lastly, the Seperatist is frequent in the service of God at home, and at
Church he will hear Sermons, but the Cavalier serves the devil at home, and
his revenge and his horses at Church; and now let my Cavalier, who is not
drunk or mad (if any such may be found) judge whether is more profane and
scandalous, He, or the Seperatist.

How gladly would I learn what the most profound Cathedral Doctor in Oxford
could Answer to these Reasons, what evasions they could excogitate, for
reconciling the practice of their Patrons with their acknowledged Doctrine.

But alas! what reason has any man at this time, of all times, to expect
subtilties from Oxford, where before the King came thither, when Sack abounded
in their Tavernes, the height of judgment was but some frothy Nonscence
raptures of wit, but since (God knows) by reason of that long unhappy divorce
between their brains and the spirit of Sack, nothing has flowed above the
sad complexion of dull Ale, and College Taplash.

Nevertheless though I utterly despair of satisfaction from them, I will be
so courteous as to lend them a word of Counsel, and to wish them capable of
it, and it is this: That since the world is so offended with this beastly fact
of their Minions, and disappointed of all just and reasonable Apologies for it,
from themselves, they would exhort very earnestly the Cavaliers, and others
whom it may concern, to play an after-game of Repentance and Reformation, so
that at least they might skin over that wound which they cannot heal.

The Church Story not impertinently to this purpose, makes mention of a
Mor^^ssian Prince (as I remember) called Cabares, who pursuing the Goths and
Vandalls with an huge Army, still in his passage as he went, cleansed all those
Churches, which that impure Nation had desired; and would it not be an
exemplary piece of piety, and much tending to the honor of your party with
posterity? First, if the Cavaliers would in their hands, or mouths, or any
other more fitting way carry out the filth of those Churches, which by a more
than Gothish impiety they have desiled; and then secondly, if the Lordly
Clergy would humble themselves so low as to come after the Cavaliers, and with
their Cathedral Beesome-like Beards sweep them; and so much be spoken
touching our first Question: the second was, Whether Churches thus profaned,
and fallen from Grace and holiness are not by the Bishops to be consecrated.

Of which Question with all manner of expedition: First then the Puritans here,
so much he is for holiness, would, I warrant you, go near to hold they
ought, if he thought, 1. First, That there were no need of consecrating
Churches. 2. Secondly, that any holiness were stamped on Churches by the
Ministry of Consecration. 3. And thirdly, that Churches could fall from Grace
or holiness, once received, but holding neither of these, its probable that
his judgment stands for the negative.


Secondly, on the other side the Cathedral Doctors maintaining with one
consent; 1. A necessity of Consecrating Churches. 2. Undiscernable Characters
of holiness impressed on Churches. 3. Falling from Grace in the best Saints of
God, much more inanimate Churches must in reason be thought to hold the
affirmative, and that Churches thus desiled ought to be reconsecrated,
especially considering,

First, That Consecration of Churches is an holy and heavenly Work, which
begets an high and reverend esteem in the people; for say the people, the
Bishops must needs be eminently holy men, who can make dead Churches holy, and
therefore at this time when Bishops have been much vilified, all occasions
should be caught at, for a reingendring in the people a reverentiall conceit of
these holy Fathers; and therefore reconsecration not to be past by.

Secondly, Considering that it may chance to be scandalous, and to their
brethren of the Church of Rome, not to have these unhallowed Churches (though
in policy made so at their instigation) reconsecrated, of whose consciences
they ought to be very tender, in requital of their bowels of compassion
toward the Bishops cause lately in much ieopardy to have been consumed by the
fiery zeal of the Schismatics, had not that holy man of Rome and his agents
bestirred their stumps, and brought more than holy water for the extinguishing
of that flame.

3. Thirdly, considering that the Consecration of a Church, which is no great
labor, and brings no benefit at all, either to Auditors or spectators (which
is at length to be thought on, least the People by the Bishops means grow too
Holy, and too knowing, as of late it sell out, both to their shame and smart)
will save the good Father a Sermon for that week of Consecration, which is
well saved, especially since experience has atught the Church of late, that
Sermons have done so much mischeese.

4. Fourthly, considering that at the reconsecrating of every Church, there
ought to be a consecration Dinner at the charge of the Parish, which will be
comfortable both to his Lordships old corpse and no false Latin in his purse by
saving a meal after these hard pinching times, which had almost exhausted all,
and tantum non, brought rem ad repem, that is, brought his good Lordship within
a close or two off the Beggar.

Lastly, considering that so few Churches are in these peevish times erected,
and therefore though there be no great need (supposing Churches cleansed and
swept as was above advised) of reconsecration of them, yet least the holy
Father should forget the trick of it, and so the Country People, in case there
be at any time an occasion of consecration, and the boys shoud have matter
ministered unto them to laugh at his Lordship, when possible he should be
(through disuse) to seek what to do next.

Yet notwithstanding all these strong reasons for the reconsecration of
Churches, it seems not only expedient but necessary not to reconsecrate them.
1. In case the Kings Majesty or the Queen, or the Privy Council, or the
Chief Prelate then in highest place, do not approve it. 2. In case there can
be no consecration dinner, or a poor one. 3. In case the Church of Rome
declare to the contrary, and Lastly, in case his Lordship be decrepit, and
cannot trample about all the time without danger of having a fit of the gout,
or stone, and then it shall be thought sufficent that his Lordship either omit
the duty, or conse crate only the new Boards, Poasts or other Utensills, which
were not before consecrated, that so a greater good may be consulted. viz: his
good Lordships ease, and indeed were I freely to give my Judgment, this much
(if any thing at all were to be done) would be enough, for my private opinion
it is (gentle Reader pardon me that I tell not from whence I had it, until I
know my Authors pleasure from whom I had it, whether I may reveal it) that
consecration is a kind of Baptism, and therefore should not be iterated,
least we simbolize too far with the cursed Anabaptist, and therefore only
the new parts of a Church should be conscerated, no part reconsecrated, and yet
in this new way there are new difficulties, not a few, as if Consecration be a
kind of Baptism, why should not a man, who has been Baptized in his infancy,
be rebaptized when he is grown a great Lubber, and has gotten much new flesh
about him, as well as a Church receive consecration in the new parts of it; and
many more such difficulties I could with more ease conjure up then put them
down again, but I believe such are niceties, which a man may be ignorant of,
or else Holy Church will hereafter resolve them, if we can have the patience to
wait her leisure, and so I shake hands with this perplexed Case touching the
reconsecration of unhallowed Churches.

FINIS.

