AN APOLOGY FOR Mr. John Goodwin: Who having Subscribed Proposalls to be
presented to the Magistrate concerning matters of Religion; after that, Makes
30 Queries, whether it be the Magistrates duty to interpose his Authority in
matters of RELIGION.

Ephe. 4.14. Be no more Children tossed too and fro, carried about with every
wind of Doctrine.

Joh. 9.41. If ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye say, We see:
therefore your sin remains.

Optat. Lib. 3. Ille [Donatus Schismaticus] solito furore succensus, in haec
verba prorupit; Quid est imperatori cum Eclesia?

Idem. Ib. Constat [Macarium Proconsulem] in eos vindicasse, a quibus jussio
divina contempta est; Nam, non tibi facies sculptise, Dei vox est.

London, Printed for John Wright, at the Kings Head in the Old-Bayley, 1653.

An APOLOGY for Mr. John Goodwin.
Men's judgments are as various as their Pallats; and Books and Dishes seldom
come to two persons with one and the same relish: For as Elihu speaks in Job,
The Ear tryes words as the mouth tastes meat. It were therefore no wonder if
Mr. Goodwins thirty Queries met with thirty times thirty censures.

But the main Querie and wonder is, How the same hand could subscribe the
Ministers Proposals for advancement of Religion presented to the supreme
Magistrate, and yet propose this Question.

Whether the Civil Magistrate stands bound by way of Duty, to interpose his
Power or Authority in matters of Religion, or worship of God: and upon the
basis of this proposal, raise a fabric of Queries thiry stories high.

But to Vindicate Mr. Goodwin from the mistakes of those, who upon this last
account may be apt to censure him as inconsistent with himself; The Reader
(with his good leave) shall have this Apology for him, that among the thirty
Queries propounded by him, there is not one to be found, but is either, 1.
Impertinent, or 2. Impotent, as to the insinuating any scruple against his own
and the Ministers Proposals.
And therefore as he prosesses, so he has really dealt modestly in the
business, and not at all destroi'd the things which he had builded.

To evince the Impertinency of Mr. Goodwins Queries, as to the creating any
doubt against the Ministers and Mr. Goodwins Proposals, and consequently that
Mr. Goodwin in the one, and Mr. Goodwin in the other, are not Antagonists as
some would fancy. First, It is to be premised; that Mr. Goodwin may justly
expect this Right from the Reader, not to be interpreted as setting his hand to
the maine Querie, (which is the Root upon which his thirty questiuncles as so
many Filaments depend) against his hand to the Ministers proposals, nor his
hand to those against his heart in this; provided such a sense may be given of
his words as will fairly and without violence accomodate both. And that such
may be given, need not be doubted: for if the interposition of the civil
Magistrates power, which Mr. Goodwin scruples in the prementioned Question, be
understood of a Coercive Power in matters of Faith and Worship; a Power that
like a Spanish Inquisition, or an English High Commission Court, would compel
to a conformity unto the public profession and practice; with such a power
the Ministers hold as little correspondencie as Mr. Goodwins Queries, and
consequently, Mr. Goodwin in his Queries, quarrels not with Mr. Goodwin in his
Proposals, but there is a mutual harmony in the one and the other; Etres
conjurat amice.

But to take the confidence to advance one step further, It is affirmed in the
second place, that Mr. Goodwin not only may, but indeed must be so understood;
at least, if the Vote of the major part of his Questions may carry it. Let them
who think it worth their leisure, examine the particulars, since of twenty
eight; that is, of all, all but the two last Queries, may without wrong to
Justice, be acquitted of being guilty of suggesting any pertinent scruple
against the Power of the Magistrate in matters of Religion, save what concerns
a constraint (by Mulcts, Fines, Imprisonments, etc.) to a conformity unto the
public profession in matters of Faith: Ex ungue leonem. Take a taste instead
of all, of his sixteen Querie. In this Querie, he cites Tertullian in these
words: That it is palpably unreasonable, that men who are free, should be
forced against their wills to sacrifice; when as it is the willingness of the
mind that is required in all divine Services. Yea, it may be well judged
ridiculous, that one man should be compelled by another to honor the Gods;
when as he stands bound at his perrill to render those propitious to him of is
own accord, etc. And Ambrose thus: The Law of God has taught us what we are
to follow, the Laws of Men cannot teach us this.

They may extort from persons a timorous change, but they cannot inspire
belief. Upon these Authorities, Mr. Goodwin infers, That the Sense of
Antiquity was, that matters of Faith did not at all appertain to the
Cognizance of the Christian Magistrate, as a Magistrate: That is, (as the words
of the Authors themselves expressly carry it) as to inspriring Faith, extorting
a change of Profession, and compelling to sacrifice; in which sense only, as
he has Antiquity with him, and his present quotation, and inference are
pertinent and sound; so the Ministers and Mr. Goodwins Proposals hold a
friendly compliance with Mr. Goodwin and his Antiquity, in this and the rest of
his Queries, and Mr. Goodwin with himself, in His and the Ministers Proposals.
And consequently the general impertinencie of Mr. Goodwins Queries, as to
casting any scruple upon the Ministers Proposals, or any blemish upon himself,
as counter-querying and quarrelling himself in subscribing them, has thus
far been vindicated from the mistakes of those that would needs judge
otherwise.

The next thing to be shown in Apology for Mr. Goodwin, is the Impotencie of
his Queries, to infirm the Proposals affirmed by his subscription. And here
his two last Queries do only keep the field, all the rest of the Brigade
being justly cashiered upon the Article of Impertinencie, in respect of any
service done by them, against Mr. Goodwins and the Ministers Proposals. The
truth is, these two last Queries seem to lay the Axe to the Root of the
Magistrates power in matters of Religion, and charge Mr. Goodwin home against
Mr. Goodwin. But to relieve Mr. Goodwin from this Charge of himself against
himself, by weakening the stroke and blunting the edge of this Axe; the best
way will be first, to lay down the grounds, upon which Mr. Goodwins Queries
scruple his proposals --

And then to discover the sandinesse of those grounds by the light of a few
principles, to which Mr. Goodwins own assent is not altogether despaired.

The first of the two last Queries, bottoms is self upon a Jam sumus ergo
pares. A paritie of Reason why the Civil Magistrate may no more intermeddle in
things of a religious nature, then the Ecclesiastcall person in Civil. But
this Stone is so ill squared, that one way it will be found to narrow, and the
other to broad to, prove an adaequate foundation whereupon to raise, a Battery
that may annoy the Ministers and Mr. Goodwins Proposals. For things of a
Religious nature are absolutely such, or mixtly. The Proposals plead not for
the Magistrates intermedling in the former, and it is presumed, Mr. Goodwin will
not plead against in the latter. Such are the public Circumstance of Time,
Place, and Revenue, and some opinions amongst Papists or Ranters. For it is
credible, some Papists would never have sacrificed their lives in pursuance of
some treasonable practices, were it not upon the account of a religious
Conscience, though miserably misled. Tanlum Religio potuit suadere malorum. Let
Mr. Goodwin resolve, whether a Christian Magistrate were obliged to suffer a
Heathen under his Jurisdiction to Sacrifice his Child to Moloch etc.

In the last place, as the foundation of the grand scruple and Top-stone of
thirty Queries, comes in the considerable question, whether the Civil
Magistrate be not a kind of Bat, that is confined to the twilight of Nature;
and whether the Child may adventure to take a lesson out of any Book but
natures Primmer; But least the Reader be mistaken, he must remember, that the
Book of Nature according to Mr. Goodwins Edition, comes forth in a just volume:
the light of Nature in his Astronomy, is a Star of the first magnitude: And
therefore whilst he allows the Magistrate a power to punish offenders, against
the light and law of Nature, he out-vies the Proposals if he be true to his
own principles. For what cannot the light of Nature see, if it looks with Mr.
Goodwins eyes, which by the Light of Nature can discover the way to Faith and
Salvation. But to spare the sharpning any weapon at this Forge, it shall
suffice (by way of conclusion) to Vindicate the Ministers Proposals from all
just ground of scruple by a few Corollaries, whose Truth the light of Nature
may discover, or at least being discovered must assent to.

1. The light of Nature teaches all men, and among others the Civil
Magistrate, that there is a God, and that God is to be worshipped.

2. Never was there yet (it were no audacious assertion to add, nor never will
be) any Commonwealth in the world which publicly owned all Religions, or
none.

Its true indeed, the Scripture seems to hold forth a promise of a Time wherein
all shall own but One, when it speaks of a Day, in which all shall serve the
Lord with one consent, and the Lord shall be one, and his Name one.

3. In all Commonwealths, where there are (as it is believed there are in all
civilized Commonwealths this day in the World) public places and Revenues
set apart to Religious uses, the trust of the disposal of both, is in the
Civil Magistrate.

4. In disposal of both according to this trust, the Civil Magistrates duty
is to use (at least) as much wisdom and faithfulness as men are obliged to use
in things that concern their own private.

5. The wise and faithful Christian Magistrate, may be assured of some truths
in the Christian Religion, and their opposite errors.

6. The Christian Magistrate can neither discharge his trust concerning such
places and revenues with wisdom, nor faithfulness in the disposal of either to
persons, either wholly unknown or known to be enemies to such known truths, or
friends to their opposite errors. It were no vain confidence to presume on Mr.
Goodwins assent to this position.

For it is to be supposed Mr. Goodwins Church neither would, nor indeed could be
obliged upon any rational account, to administer to him of their temporal
things, if they were not satisfied in the spiritual things which he
administers to them, at least as to the maine, however in other things
dissenting. And why should it be accounted unreasonable in the Magistrate to
expect the like satisfaction in the like case?

Besides, 2 John 10
who can deny it to be the privilege and duty of a Master of a Family, to
admit such only to Teach in his House as his Conscience shall be satisfied in,
and warrant him to receive? Or, to come yet a little nearer; will the Churches
distinguished by the names of Independents and Anabaptists (suppose Mr.
Goodwins Church) admit of any person either wholly unknown, or known to be
grossly ignorant or scandalous (suppose a known Mahemetan, or one of their own
judgment, and without scandal but wholly unknown) to Teach in their
Congregations without their approbation, and assent first obtained? if not, (as
it is presumed they will not) let no man scruple to allow that thing to be the
right of the Magistrate, as a public parent, in the disposal of public
places and revenues, to persons to be approved by himself, or such as he shall
think meet to be trusted therein, which is claimed as a right by every private
Parent and Congregation. And whereas Mr. Goodwin in the last Querie has
appealed to the Law of Nature, as to his Caesar, to Caesar he shall go; and
therein let be remembered: First, that so far power is granted by him to the
Magistrate in Religion, as the Law of Nature does dictate. And secondly, That
his Contradistinction is unsound in that Querie, where he distinguishes the
worshipping of God in a false manner, from evil doing against the light of
Nature, for here he may see, that Idolatry and false worship are against the
light and law of Nature: yea that the law of Nature teaches the Magistrate to
make laws against false worship, and Idolatry;
And Indeed the Apostle Paul might serve in stead of all proofs; who clearly
shows, that men by the light of Nature might see this truth, that God was not
like unto Birds nor Beasts nor was to be worshipped under such Images; but that
in so doing, they did deteine the Truth (even the evident Truth) in
unrighteousness: yet ex aebundanti, here shall be produced (concerning the
light of Nature, directing Magistrates to make Laws for Religion) The
testimonies both of Gentiles and Jews, which terms commonly comprehend all
mankind; and it may serve for an universal Testimony. And first for the
Gentiles, lets hear what Plato says. Plato de Repub. lib. 2. and lib. 4.
Let the first Care in every well constituted Commonwealth be, for setting up
the true (not a false or fabulous) Religion, in which let the chief Magistrate
even from his Childhood be instructed. Lib. decimo de legibus.
Ignorance of the true God is the greatest plague of all Commonwealths.
Therefore he pulls down the foundation of all humane Society; who takes away
Religion, or abolishes it out of the minds of men. Whence it is that all
impiety is to be punished with the greatest and most grievous punishments, etc.
Therefore in no wise are there to be tolerated in a Commonwealth well
ordered, so much as Disputation against God and his Providence, etc.

Moreover the speeches of them are to be restrained, who say, that Religion is
but a devise and appointment of men, that through fear of a greater and
venerable power, men may be contained in their duty. Thirdly, All Impiety is to
be punished, and that is of three sorts: The first denies that there is any
God. The second, denies that God governs these things, especially mankind,
etc. The third sort of impiety, is of them, who counted that God by Gifts,
Offerings, and Prayers, is appeased and brought to indulge men's wickedness.
This opinion also is blasphemous: He disturbes Religion who speaks or writes
impiously of the nature of God; therefore he is to be punished, and truly with
death.

And in the very first founding of Rome, Romulus, and Numa, Dron. Halic. l.
secun.
Pompilius, the first Kings, laid the foundations of their Law-making, in Piety
and Justice; and of Romulus particularly it is said, that before all things he
began with the divine worship; and of Numa, Pietatem ante omniae docuit
homines; He taught men piety before all things: and it is also well known,
that Images were not a long time admitted into the Romance Religion. 170 years.
Clem. Alex.


And now for the opinion of the Jews concerning the light of Nature,
condemning Idolatry, and making laws against it. Seldom de jure Natura Hebid.
lib. 1. cap. 10. p. 118.
Mr. Seldom with whose Learning and Judgment, perchance Mr. Goodwin will
think fit to comply, rather then to contest; does largely and evidently show,
That the Hebrews held there were seven Heads of the Law of Nature commonto all
Mankind [the offspring of Noah] Among them, too were between Man and the most
holy God: And of these two, a first was Idolatry or strange worship: A second
was, the Cursing or Profanation of the name of God.

And the Gentiles that inhabited among the Jews were FORCED to make a
profession of observing them. Adige bat. p 127.


Under the Name of strange worship forbidden to the seed of Noah; that is, to
all mankind (according to the Hebrews) was not only the worship of Stones,
Statues, images, but of Angels, heavenly bodies, the Elements or any other
Creature, etc.

And whenever in the Courts of Israel, strange worship was punished with
death; there for the like worship the Gentile, or Son of Noah, was executed
by the Sword. P. 132.
And he not only shows that these offenders were to be punished, but that
there was one Head among the seven (imprinted also in the law of Nature) for
settling Judges and Judgments for punishing offenders against these Heads. And
he gives a reason of his own: For (says he) Who does not see that is would be
altogether vain and fruitless, Lib. 7. cap. 4. pa. 801
to make precepts and prohibitions, except there be also Judicatories, by which
the violation of them might be restrained, and punishments inflicted for the
same? And to the like purpose he speaks his opinion again. Page 806.

He said further. That against this Head of Judicatories, Cap. 6. p. 812
not only those offended which opposed the settling of Judicatories, but those
also which concealed the offenses committed against the other six Heads [among
which was Idolatry, and Profanation of Gods Name] and they were to be punished
with the same punishments, to which the offenders themselves were subject. This
then is the sum of Mr. Seldens Doctrine out of the Hebrews. Idolaters and
Blasphemers were to be punished by the Law of Nature, even with Death. That
Judicatories by the Law of Nature were to be set up for this end: That those
which opposed these Judicatories, were liable to the same punishments, with the
offenders themselves.

Now let Mr. Goodwin look, whether by any of his Queries, he become subject to
these Penalties.

FINIS.

