The ARK, its LOSS and RECOVERY; Or, some Meditations on the History recorded
in the beginning of 1 Samuel in Meeter.
THe Ark in Shiloh rested many a year; 1 Samuel 1.3. Chapter 2.12.

Hophni and Phineas Priests of God were there:
Though Priests of God, yet Sons of Belial;
The causers of their own, and fathers fall:
Their ignorance and scandal did disgrace
Their holy function, and that holy place.
To such, their linen Ephods but pretense.
It signifies, nor light, nor innocence;
But whited Sepulchers; when that, which borders
On Atheism, is clad with holy Orders. Chapter 1.12.

Their ignorance was gross, they knew not God,
Though in his house they had their whole abode: 15.

Their scandal gross; rapacious gluttony, 16.

And, its vile offspring, brutish lechery, 22.

The women at the Tabernacle doors;
This place a stews, those votaries made whores; 17.

Wherefore their sin was great before the Lord;
And men the offerings of the Lord abhorred:
It was so then, and will be so, where e're
A blockish, brutish Clergy, domineer.
Their reverend father Eli's made acquainted, 22.

With what debaucheries his Sons were tainted:
Sons of the Church; whose blazing-vices will
No more be hid, then beacons on a hill.
And what says he? alas he is very old; 22.

And in this cause of God is very cold:
A feeble [why do you do so? with a why 23.

Hear I this evil to your infamy?]
Away my Sons; for it is no good report, 24.

I hear from all, that to me do resort;
Not only evils, that your selves do do,
But that you make the People wicked too:
By vile persuasions, and by viler deeds,
The Vulgar is corrupted: He proceeds:
The Judge shall judge the man, whom men implead;
If God's offended, who shall intercede? 25.

'Twas good, and grave reproof: but it was less,
Then what was meet for such vile wickedness.
Oh! that but half so many sav'ry words
Might drop from any of those Spiritual LORDS,
Who cannot but know the common fame's relation,
And hear the groans of a whole mourning Nation.
But thus their gentle father could not stay them 25.

From sinning; 'twas because the Lord would slay them.
God hardens whom he means to break: thus steel
Is poud'red: and his hand they will surely feel
Emptying, and overturning, whom he sees, Zeph. 1: 12.

And does permit, to settle on their lees.
Mean while does That is, Asked of God.
Samuel grow; that child of tears, 26.

Child of a gracious Mothers Vows and prayers;
(That, when this cursed crew should be removed,
He might succeed) of God, and men beloved.
He needs must prosper, whom the Lord does blessed:
Needs must be loved, where God plants loveliness:
He needs must thrive, that has a portion, where
It cannot be lost, as it is often here:
Prayers put to interest in heaven are better,
Where God by Promises becomes the debtor.
Asked, and received of God; returned; accepted;
For, and from, such a child, what may b'expected?
And in a dark, and doleful day, it is well,
God can raise Samuel's for his Israel.
A man of G^d to father Eli came; 27.

Did his Sons vileness, and his mildness blame:
In Gods name thus bespeak them: Did I choose 28.

Your Fathers for my Priesthood you abuse?
Did I appear in Egypt to relieve them?
And after, Isreal's Offerings did I give them?
Did God by Forsan^^rum st^^ and Titu^
Providence, or by Permission,
Advance, and put them in so good condition?
Not only save them, when they were so low;
But by his bounty made them over flow?
Why kick ye at mine offering? (like the teaching 29

Of those who often preach against often preaching).
Which I commanded have:why are preferred 29

Thy graceless Sons before me? thou have erred:
You feed your Selves, and not my Flock; you snatch
What Is not your share; you live upon the catch:
Things inharmonious are, and out of tune,
Where Priests are fat, and sacrifice Jejune.
Who honor me I Will honor in men's eyes; 30

Lightly esteemed shall be, who me despise.
It Is not proud looks, big words, can men exempt
From just disgrace, from a deserved contempt.
The swelling Toad did burst (if tales say true)
And then his loathsome garbage came in view.
Is not the empty chaff lift up (I pray)
In winnowing only to be blown away?
It Is not the slippery hight secures at all: Psalm. ^ 18.

Only procures (when it comes) the greater fall.
The proudest plumes must down, when God disgraces,
By loss of reputations first, then places.
Thine arm of strength I will cut off, behold 3

In all thine house shall not a man grow old.
My precious time they shall not idly spend;
But end their lives for living to no end.
Thou bringst an enemy where I do dwell, 3

In all the wealth I give to Israel.
These are the true state enemies, that fall
Like angry Sampson, ruin selves and all:
That by their wickedness do mischiefs bring,
Upon themselves, their Country, and their King:
Those are the real Rebels that are so, chapter 1

Both to their King above, and him below:
These do, not only call in enemies.
But make them prosper in their enterprise:
These weaken hearts, and hands; divide, confound
Councels, and actions; run a State on ground:
Not only do their own Estates let fly,
But turn a Nations wealth to beggary:
And yet (that they may still pass unsuspected)
Cry out of others; Oh they are disaffected.
If any man of thine I do reprieve, 3.

Thine eyes he shall consume, thine heart shall grieve:
The spreading branches of thine house I Will lop,
Thy buds, thy blossoms, in the flower I Will crop: 4.

And take this for a signal from on high,
Hophni, and Phineas, in one day shall die.
Thus men of greatest Comforts are deprived,
When not returned, from whence they were derived:
Thus greatest hopes are dashed, by God confounded,
When upon ought, beside himself, they are grounded.
After which, I a faithful Priest will raise, 5.

Shall do, what is in my heart, unto my praise:
He Will mind my mind; his house shall be secure,
Before my Christ for ever to endure. ^^nted

Yea, that is a faithful one indeed, that still
In all his Ministrations, the will
Of God reveal d in's Word does mind; the fashions,
Inventions, humors, fancies, pride, or passions,
His own, or others, never yields unto:
He Will thrive with God, though men do him undo,
The face of God for ever shall he see;
How e're unfix'd on earth his station be.
Then every one, that of thine house remain, 6.

Shall crouch a petty pension to obtain;
Shall beg a piece of Silver, bit of meat;
Shall beg an Office, he may have to eat.
Such hireling Priests will for a piece of bread, 13.

Handfuls of Barley, that they may be fed, 19.

Condemn, whom God acquits, and by a lie
Encourage souls, whom God condemns to die.
But see, pride, avarice, to what it tends;
Lust, riot, rapine, see but where it ends.
Samuel, the Gracious Child, unto the Lord Chapter 3.

Did minister; then precious was the word:
The word, when plentiful, had in derision,
Grew now esteemed; there was no open vision.
God can inhance his truths, and make men prise
His Gospel Light, by hiding't from their eyes.
He can make proud despisers, lofty scorners,
That slight his word in the streets, go seek't in corners, 7

Rais't by depressions; free it by restraints; 3

By wicked shakings, can make settled saints: 4

Thus counterplots he Satan, and his tools: Isa. 29.12, 13.

Thus Noph, and Zoan, Counselors are fools.
When Elies lamps were dim, Gods lamp had light; 2.

His Candlestick not yet removed quite, 3.

Samuel lay down to sleep, whom God does wake; 4.

And unto Eli ran he through mistake: 5.

Thrice thus mistaken, he to Eli ran; 6.

Nor could discern 'twixt voice of God and man: 11.

Poor novice! yet he knew not well the Lord; 7.

Nor fully was revealed to him the word.
O would too many were not to be found
Of riper years, that cannot discern the sound
Of words of worthy men (unto this hour)
From spiritual Gospels mighty saving power!
But to old Eli, it Gods call appears; 8.

Who bids him say, speak Lord, thy servant hears: 9.

He does so: then the Lord does farther tell, 10.

How he would do a thing in Israel,
Should make their ears to tingle, who should hear it, 11.

He Would Judgment bring, and Elies house should bear it. 12.

Their ears to tingle, that would tickled be?
Judgment on those, that hope yet to go free?
On Elies house? who is on this message sent,
By Elies bouse will certainly be shent:
Rough preaching will rough handling meet; suspended
At least he will be, till Elie's power be ended.
When I begin (says God) I Will make an end;
For I have told him, I will Judgments send,
For his Sons unrestrained Villainies:
I Have sworn, it shall not be purged by sacrifice. 4.

It Is sad! but just: Priests heinous crimes do cry
Louder, than others, for severity.
If you (by place) draw nigh him; know, he is nigh you.
Trembling remember Nadab and Abihu. ^^t. 10.15.

Samuel lay til the morn; was then afraid
To tell old Eli, what the Lord had said:
And well he might, expecting naught but scorn:
(I know, by whom, the like would never be born.)
But Eli will hear all; and does submit: 17.

It Is the Lord: let him do what he sees fit. 18.

A good Submission: let it pattern be
To us in feared or felt calamity:
God was with growing Samuel: none of all 19.

His words to ground did unregarded fall:
Him an established Prophet Israel knew: 10.

11.
To whom in Shiloh God himself did show.
By God he is owned; to Israel he is known:
His Call who will call in question? who will disown?
It Is bold to slight confessed reality,
For want perhaps of some formality.
Idle drones, angry Wasps (we know their honey)
They Will part with wax to those, will part with money:
But Gospel-calls, though they are not legal ones,
Will serve for Gospel-ministrations.
He need not care, whom Heavens broad-seal confirms,
To get earths purchased seal, on dirty terms.
Now Israel would forth in battle go 4. 1.

To fight the Philistines their ancient foe:
But Oh alas! it was with little gain;
Israel is smitten, and four thousand slain.
In have they went, without their God; their loss
Returns them back again by weeping-cross.
Hot spurs may easily begin a fray,
Who, not so easily can win the day.
The Elders pause upon it, and thus advise;
Why has God smote us by our enemies?
Affliction makes men serious; then they will think,
Who it is, that bores their keel, and why they sink:
They now discern, whose arrows 'twere that smot them
Although they were Philistian bows that shot them.
Come; let us have the Ark among us; then
God's hand will save us from the hands of men.
The Sons of Eli to the Camp it bring; 4.

All Israel did shout; the earth did ring: 5.

When Micha got a vagrant- Levite, he Judge. 17 13 Jer. 7.4

Forthwith expected great Prosperity;
The Temple, Temple of the Lord are these,
Were idle words, did idle people please:
The Church, the Church, is such an empty noise,
Wherewith some vaunt, that vaunt themselves of toys:
Even such was this poor Ark; an empty show
When God of the Covenant himself withdrew:
Could less be looked for, when such Priests were by?
When It had such Cattle in its company. 6.

The Philistius the noise and news did hear:
Thinking the Hebrews God was there, did fear.
Did the Philistines fear? fear all ye slighters, 7.

In any case, against God, to be found fighters.
Woe unto us they cry; 'twas never thus;
They Are mighty Gods; who shall deliver us?
'Twas never thus? Extravagancies use
The inconsiderate vulgar to amuse. 8.

Those are the Gods, that them from Egypt brought;
That in the Wilderness such Wonders wrought.
Have none, but these, heard Egypts Prodigies? 9.

Wilderness-works? (Open, O Lord, men's eyes!)
Now quit your selves like men, lest they be seen
To be our Lords, that have our vassals been.
Like men! like devils: for what mortal he
Dares to oppose, where God but seems to be?
But Tyranny is loath to lose its profit:
They Will try to hold their slaves, what e're comes of it.
They fought like men indeed; for Israel 10.

Were smitten, fled, and thirty thousand fell;
And (which was worst) the Ark of God they gain; 11.

And (which was just) the Sons of Eli slain.
Thus the poor Ark (an Idol made) is taken;
Nor helps it self, nor them, of God forsaken.
Thus threats are proved in their most sad conclusions,
Nor Melancholy fancies, nor delusions.
A Benjamite that day to Shiloh fled, 12.

With Garments rent, and earth upon his head.
Sad news comes Thundering home, and rending hearts;
As lightning quick, or feathred wounding darts.
He came, where Eli by then way did sit, 13.

Who for the Ark was in a trembling fit:
Not only for the danger, which appeared,
But conscious of the cause, of what he feared.
He told the Citizens, they all cried out;
Eli does hear; demand what means the rout: 14.

In have the man comes in; the story told
To him (who now was ninety eight years old.) 1.

Israel is fled; that could not but affect him: 17.

With a great slaughter; that must more deject him:
Thy Sons are also dead; that is nigher to him:
The Ark is taken; that quite overthrew him:
For then he fell, old, heavy, and dime-ye'd, 18.

He backwards fell, he brake his neck and died:
He fell from off the seat, where he had sat
Forty years judging Israel in the gate.
There lay a Judge condemned, and executed:
There lay a Purifying Priest polluted:
Slain like a sacrifice: one in disgrace.
Of reverend age, and honorable place;
As man (we may believe) good in the main;
As Father; by his fondness justly slain.
God gave him raynes, but (as is sadly shown)
Throwing them on the mad Colts necks; he is thrown.
His grace, and bad-good nature long contended;
When this o'recame, it Tragically ended.
When Phineas pregnant Widow heard of all; 19.

The Arks loss, her Fathers, and her Husband fall;
She cried, gone is our glory with our God: 21.

She died, and named Posthumous That is Where is the Glory
Ichabod 22.

The glory gone from Israel does she cry?
Wast with the brethren in iniquity?
No; though they rufftled if, yet infamous
Were they in life, in death calamitous.
Or did old Elie's loss their glory dim?
Alas! his glory's losts, e're they lost him.
No, no, it was the Ark; for it was there,
God's glory shone upon their Hemisphere.
She died regardless of her Progeny,
Crushed in the ruins of her Family:
Her breath shortn'd by death, short'ns the story;
She breaths all in a word, GONE IS OUR GLORY.
The Second Part. THE RECOVERY.
THe joll Philistines do homeward hie, Chapter 5.1.

With th'Ark, a Trophee of their victory:
From Chapter 7.1
Eben ezer (other while, it is true,
A stone of help, now none, when God withdrew.)
To Ashdod, there, their house of gods to stock; 2.

In Dagon's house they set it by their block.
The God of Israel does much abhor it:
In Dagons house? Dagon must tumble for it:
For, when they early came (perhaps to see 3.

How well the Ark and Dagon could agree,
They found their Idol fallen; before the place,
Where stood the Ark, Dagon lay on his face.
Lets turn our thoughts a while, and view the damp
Is cast upon their triumph; see them stamp;
Tear their hairs; beat their breasts, perplexed to see
Their captive-present conqueror to be:
Lets view the secret power, and equity,
That moves the work of this Catastrophie.
The Ark was Gods appointment; man's conceit
Was Dagon, and his worship but a cheat.
Humane inventions on the ground must lie,
Though shouldered up by power and policy,
If this be seen in a Philistian land, ^zek. 43.8.

Can post by pillar in the Temple stand?
They set him up again, and on the morrow. 4.

They find him down again, more to their sorrow,
Without, or head, or hand, there lay the lump:
Only to Dagon now was left the stump.
If one fair fall does not make them give over
Their Wrestlings with the Lord, he will give them more.
The former downfall gently did bespeak'em,
And warn them to submit; the next will break 'em.
Therefore, nor Priests, nor Worshippers, will tread 5.

Upon the threshold, where he lost his head.
And what is done for men of like conditions,
To cure them, does augment their superstitions: ^er. 51.9.

Thus Babylon will not be healed at all.
Therefore shall irrecoverably fall:
Without advising-head, or helping-hand
Was now their God; but heavy on the Land.
The hand of Israel, s God, the Lord of hosts, 6.

Was upon Ashdod, and on all its coasts;
With Emerods smote he them. -- he so thinks fit,
While the Ark's detained, they shall not easy sit.
They may sow pillows, cushions, to be eased; ^zek. 13.20.

But 'twill not do, while God remains displeased.
The men of Ashdod, when they saw 'twas so; 7.

When they perceived the cause of all their woe;
They said, let us keep the Ark of God no more,
Whose hand on us, and Dagon, lies so sore.
The eyes of Dagonites are opened, who
Discern for what they are plagued, and what to do.
Would others, that have felt the hand of God,
Would learn of Philistines to hear the rod: 8.

They call their Lords, their Lawgivers, to tell,
What should be done with th'Ark of Israel:
Who ( loath as yet to let it go) consent,
Such was the wisdom of that Parliament)
To have it had about to Gath; they will try
Experiments, if there 'twil quiet lie.
Thus were the Syrian privy Counselors wise, 1 Kin. 20.22.

When they their King so gravely did advise
To try the Plain, and promised him success;
When in the event they found it nothing less.
Nothing does more against men God's anger fix,
Then when they think to baffle him with tricks.
Their law is put in Execution, 9.

To Gath it is carried; see what comes thereon:
See if the laws of men will bear them out,
And justify their tumbling it about:
A very sore destroying whipping-rod
Of an avenging, of an angry God.
With Emerods also did he smite them all,
Princes, and People, high, low, great, and small.
Who share in sin, must sorrows also share,
What state, or quality, soever they are.
Whilst in their secret parts those Emerods be,
The Afflicted felt, what others could not see:
Much like the secret smarts, and inward twinging
Of seared hearts, when they are further singeing.
The men of Gath, thus wearied with it, would have it 10.

To Ekron sent; the Ekronites do wave it.
They would not have the stone so burdensome, Zach. 12.3. Mat. 21.44.

The builders breaking, grinding stone to come
Within their quarters, for that they had seen it
Hurtful to others; they will not meddle in it.
They all cried out, With us it shall not stay:
They Have brought the Ark to us, that us will slay.
What if it do? their Lords seem to reply;
Die Martyrs of our Laws, your loyalty.
It Is four to one; the major part out-vote you;
If you obey not, factious we must note you.
On the other hand, the Ekronites do seem,
For all this talk, much otherwise to deem.
We think it neither faction, nor treason,
TO appeal from you to common sense, and reason.
If 't be a law, repeal't; there is naught, but need;
And make another better in its stead.
They congregate their Lords, and them petition, 11.

Oh send it to its place with expedition.
For if it here with us do longer stay,
The hand of God will sweep us all away:
Many were dead; the rest were sick; the cry 12.

Of all the City mounted to the sky.
The sky does Echo 't back unto the ground;
And all their neighbors hear the doleful sound.
Sev'n months by them the Ark had been restrained: 6.1.

(But if seven years with them 't had been detained,
What work would it have made? sure at this rate
They Had all been gone, and their land desolute.)
And that it is not so in other places,
Where the Ark's exposed to manifold disgraces;
The appointed worship of the Lord forbidden,
And many of his useful talents hidden;
Where the Ark, and Samuel are separated;
That such a people are not desolated,
It only can ascribed be to this,
That God long suffering, and patient is.
Priests and Diviners next to Convocation 2.

(To save the remnant of a ruined Nation)
Are called and asked; How shall we do (we pray)
In sending of this Ark of God away?
We cannot keep it longer, needs must send it:
Tell us, but how we may not more offend it.
It seems among the Lords they had no places; 3

No Voters, but advisers in the cases
To them proposed: they are demanded now,
Not what is to be done; but only how.
In any wise let it not empty go,
(Say they) but with a Trespass-offring: so
You shall do, what in justice does become you;
And know why's hand is not removed from you.
Five Emerods, and five Mice of gold, for all
The five Philistian Lords, on whom did fall 4.

The common Plague; and peradventure these
The offended God of Jacob shall appease.
Give Glory to the God of Israel, 5.

and peradventure then shall all be well.
Why then like Pharaoh, and the Egyptians are ye? 6.

Who could not force the Israelites to tarry;
Their God wrought wonders on those stubborn-hearted;
Made them to let them go, and they departed.
It Is strange, and w at could never be expected
From such Idolaters, unless directed,
As Balaam the VVitch: such good advise,
Such sober words, whence could they have their rise?
Do but observe the principle within;
You Will find it fear, not faith, and therefore sin:
On Peradventures only they proceed;
They could not hope, that God would do it indeed
Make a new Cart, tie to it two kine, from whom 7.

Unused to draw, shut up their calves at home;
Lay the Ark on it; therein let it ride: 8.

The Jewels in a coffer by its side:
Then let it go; and let us trial make; 9.

If the way to Bethshemeth then it take,
Then 'twas indeed their God, did thus undo us:
If not; then 'twas a chance did happen to us.
A chance? blind VVizards! Is not yet the hand
Of God above perceived against the Land?
Shall Fortune rob wise, and just Providence?
If you want Faith, where is Reason? where is Sense?
When men will still for Signs and Wonders call,
The last experiment's their final fall.
^ll this was done according as instructed; 10.

And God himself homewards the Ark conducted:
The unaccustomed heifers do not stray; 11.

^ut to Bethshemeth keep the ready way.
(...) brutes, that act only by ivstinct, may
^earken to God, and nature disobey;
No wonder, men of conscience do prefer
Gods laws, before the laws of men that err.
Nor doubt I, if the Gospel might go free,
'T would run its own course, and most glorious be.
Lowing back to their Calves they onward go,
To see, if possibly it could be so.
The Philistines do follow to the borders:
See Nature's God inverting Nature's orders.
The Bethshemites were reaping in the Fields, 13.

When th'Ark to them a joyful object yields.
Harvest's a joyful time to all; then more,
When God his Ark to Israel did restore,
But it is as sad to them, that think, and say,
The Ark in Harvest-time was taken away.
The food for bodies will not much delight,
Where there wants food for spiritual appetite. 14.

The Cart came into Joshuah's grounds, and stood
At the great stone: even there they clave the wood
Of The Cart; therewith the beasts to God they burned
This seen, the Lords of the Philistines returned: 16.

Left Mice, and Emerods, for each City one; 17.

Gath, Ekron, Gaza, Ashdod, Askelon.
Mice marred the Land, and Emerods hurt the men;
They left Memorials of both; and then
Returned, returned? methinks they should have staid,
And with the Israelites to God have prayed,
Whereas they only saw't; it is poor to see
A sacrifice, and not partakers be.
They Had joined in worship, been with Israel one;
Had their Conviction been Conversion:
But dogs will to their vomit; swine to mire; 2 Pet. 2.22.

Philistines to be Philistines desire.
They care not to be priviledg'd by God;
They only care how to escape his rod.
Where the Cart stayed, they sacrificed; the place
Their holy thankfulness does not disgrace;
But rather dignifies; such quick address,
Suitable to their present thankefulness
Is better than thanks-givings in disguise.
Of fine conceited for mal pageantries.
Thus far 'twas well; but wrath (at last alas) 19.

Against the Bethshemites enkindled was;
For that into the Ark irreverently
They looked; for which 'bove fifty thousand die.
Irreverence will be punished in professors,
As well as irreligion in oppressors.
Too hot the Ark was for its rude bereavers;
Too beavy likewise for its rude receivers.
They greatly do lament their loss, and cried;
Who can before this holy Lord abide? 20.

How jealous is our God! Can any tell?
Who can with everlasting burnings dwell? Isa. 33.2

To whom shall he go up from us? they sent
To Kiriath jearim and represent,
How the Philistines brought the Ark again: Chapter 7.1

Pray them to fetch it, with them to remain.
They bring it up, where Twenty years it rested:
Eleazar for its keeping is invested.
There with Abinadab it stayed, until 2.

David removed it to its holy hill.
Rest, O rest, thou Ark of strength,
After tossings to and fro;
Quietly repose at length,
After storms do over blow.
Noah's Ark thus quiet sat
After the flood on Ararat.
Now thy wicked Priests are outed;
Dagon's fallen to the ground;
Wearied Philistines are routed;
Bold Peepers have a mortal wound;
All thine enemies are crushed;
About thee all the noise is hushed.
Only, let poor Israel's
Lamenters for thy privacy
Have access to him, that dwells Chapter 7.2.

In thee: (and yet remains on high.)
True Worshippers can never be
Content, without approach to thee.
The manuscript of God on high, ^eut. 10.^, 5.

The copy of his Sacred Will
Is treasured in thy cavity:
Glories of heaven do thee fill.
The emblem of his presence lies
In thee the type of Mysteries.
The Mercy-seat is placed aloft; ^xod 37.^, 7.

On that the (...)
Cherubims do ride;
From thence the Oracles are sought;
For that the Lord does there reside.
How can a soul, that is devout, ^uitare.

Such heavenly glories be without?
O thou God of the Covenant
The Ark of the Covenant us restore;
Vouchsafe therewith such grace to grant,
That we may forfeit it no more.
Let Covenant-mercy Covenant-servants free
From those, that Covenant-contemners be.
Now sing to the praise and glory of God, a part of the 2 Psalm. beginning at
the 10 verse. Now O ye, etc.

As it is meeter'd by Simple Honesty, use this old translation well; if you
will not, use a better.

FINIS.

