The Armies Petition: OR A NEW ENGAGEMENT Of many in the ARMY, Who are yet
faithful to the PEOPLE: Being a perfect Relation of the Late Proceedings of
the Agents of diverse Regiments of Horse: With the manner of their imprisonment,
by some Officers; with the PETITION of Col. Riches Regiment to the General for
the Release of their Agents.
May 3d 1648 Contrymen,
LEast you should be weary with inquiring, who w^^l show you any good? I have
expended some time to search out an Answer: but I cannot but first justify you
in your mournful plaint, and I could bemoane your unhappy fate in depending
upon false friends: your hopes were once raised by the Parliaments promises to
deliver you from an Arbitrary Government, and to secure your native Freedom,
and to study always to increase your happiness; and your expectations I know
were big when you had conquered the Common Enemy: but the War being ended,
their promises appeared to be but wind, and their fruit to you was but a
whirlwind, your Government was then by no other rule then the wills of men;
Parliament Committees, and Country Committees were your absolute Lords, and
your burdens were doubled and trebled, and no other use was made of this
opportunity put into the Parliaments hands then to continue themselves sitting
at Westminster, and to devide your Treasure amongst themselves; as for your
freedom, it was made a crime almost to name it, your very Petitions were
burned, and Petitioners imprisoned.

In this extremity the Army interposed in June last to redeem you from your
intended Vassalage, they gallantly challenged your Freedom as your due, and the
price of their blood; they promised to see your Liberty cleared and secured
according to the Parliaments Declarations, and solemnly engaged to you, and
each to other on June 5. 1647. not to Disband until they had sufficient
security for your freedom; but alas, how has pride, covetousness, ambition,
or affectation of an absolute Dominion, blasted all the promising buds of those
fair engagements! how is your hopeful remedy the Army become an aggravation
of your slavery, they have made your yoaks heavier, and your burdens more
grievous.

But Contrymen, Let not your hearts fail you, suppose not the whole Army to
conspire in your slavery; take an impartial view of all passages since the
Armies first Engagement at Newmarket, on June 5. 1647. and learn to
distinguish between your friends, and your oppressors.

You must understand that some private Soldiers in the several Regiments,
which engaged in the late War, conscientiously for your freedom, were the
sole actors which engaged the whole Soldiery to stand unanimously to vindicate
your native Freedoms, these were called Agitators. The grand Officers opposed
the Soldiers first Petition, as long as it was for their advantage, and never
concurred with them until all danger was past; but having interested
themselves in the same Cause, although they solemnly engaged, that all things
should be done by a Council constituted of two Officers and two Soldiers to
be chosen by every Regiment, yet their spirits could not bear any Copartners
with them in power, and therefore they first discouraged the Agitators as
meddling with matters which did not concern them, then they questioned their
power, by whom indeed themselves were settled in the power they had; and then
they introduced all Officers into the Councels, when there was Councels, and at
last, they quite dissolved the Council, and some few (if not one alone) drew
up a short Declaration contrary to their first Engagement, and would have
enforced all at the Rendevouz at Ware and Kingstone to subscribe it; so that by
the Grand Officers wresting all power out of the Agitators hands, this
settlement of your Freedoms, and the removal of your grievances has been
prevented; yet the same honest Soldiers in November last, attempted the same
settlement as at first, but the Grand Officers imprisoned the Agents, and
threatened them all with death.

Yet so restless are the spirits of the honest Soldiers, and so dear is the
Freedom of their Country to them, that the Officers threatenings of death
cannot daunt them, and therefore they have been and are again endeavoring to
fulfill their first Engagements, and to prevent obstructions, they resolved to
proceed in the most humble way of Petitioning, and to that purpose, drew that
Petion which you may hereafter read in this Paper; having prepared their
Petition, they desired a meeting of some Soldiers of several Regiments of
Horse, to consider of the most speedy way to offer the Petition to all the
Soldiers for their Subscriptions, accordingly some met at S. Allians about the
24 of April, and Collonell Riches Regiment chose one of every Troop to meet
there and give them an account of their proceedings, but being met together,
Cap. Brown, Cap. Cladman, Cap. Packer, and other Officers rushed violently into
the place, where they were met, and imprisoned all their persons, and carried
them to Windsor, where they remain Prisoners.

Now ye people of England, whether these Prisoners be your friends, I refer
to your own judgments, let the Petition which they were promoting, and joining
in with the Eastern Association, let that speak for them.

The true Copy thereof here follows.

To the honorable the Commons of England assembled in Parliament. The humble
Petition of many Officers and Soldier in the Army.
Shows,
THat first we engaged in Judgment and conscience, to oppose the King in
assuming to himself a power Superior to yours, declaring all your Orders to
be void and null without his consent, in his clayming an absolute power over the
Militia, and in his endeavors to make the Government wholly Arbitray, and
himself unaccountable; and you for your parts were engaged to restore us to
our native Freedoms, if God gave good success to that war, that when the
common enemy was subdued they should thirst after our native Freedoms,
prevailed with us to concur with you in a new engagement, in opposition to a
potent party in the house which invaded our liberties, and endeavored to
perpetuate this Parl, and inslave us again to Arbitrary power; and you were
pleased then to give us hopes by diverse Votes, that the happy ends of our
former and latter Engagements should be made good to us, and the whole Nation;
that nevertheless we see the oppressions of the people as far from being
removed or lessened, as if our ransom cost no blood, and yet we find our
selves to be rendered the burden and disturbers of the Nation, by the daily out
cries against us for not standing up for lustice and Freedom, according to
your and our promises and Declarations; and although we do gratefully
acknowledge these hopeful Votes that no more addresses should be made to, nor
received from the King; yet hitherto we see no Justice or common freedom has
followed those Votes: that the sense of our duty to the Country, and that fear
of compulsion which threatens the Common Wealth through the general discontent
of the people provokes us to solicit in their behalfes: that the engagements
first and last, and the many pretenses of this house to make the Nation free,
may at last be fulfilled and performed; We humbly represent our former desires
with a more full explanation of our intention therein. As first that a period
of time be prefixed when the Parliament shall certainly end. 2. That of course
every second year there be a free and equal election of representatives by
the people, to make their Laws free without obstructions or interruptions, by
the pretenses of any man whomsoever, to a negative voice or check upon them:
that so no English man may be bound but by his representatives without which
there is no freedom. 3. That there be a known and certain rule between the
people and their representatives that are chosen and entrusted with that
supreme power of making Laws; as first, that the time of their continuance of
trust be certain, and that their meeting be dissolved of course at some
prefixed period of time. And 2. that it be declared, that their power extends
not to enforce and compel the consciences of any in the matter of Gods
worship: wherein none can without wilful sin consent, remit, orexceed one
title what their consciences dictates to them to be the will of God. 3. That
their power extends not to press or enforce any man's person to serve in War.
And 4. that it be declared to be intended by the people in their trust, that
all Laws to be made by them may be equal and alike, binding unto every English
man, without respect to Birth, Tennor, Pattent, Place, Office or any other
pretended privilege, and that they shall not make such Laws as shall be
clearly and evidently distructive to their lives, properties, and liberties.
And 5. that for security of all persons engaged in the public difference since
1640. It be declared that no representatives of the people after the end of
this present Parliament shall have power to intermeddle with those matters of
public difference; otherwise then in execution of their judgment: And we
desire that this rule between the people and the representarives, may be
inserted into a contract to be sealed between the people and all their
representatives, upon the days of their several elections respectively; and
that all the foregoing particulars being essential to freedom, may be settled
by an Agreement among the people.

4. That there be a regulated course of justice settled, and all arbitrary
powers abolished as far as may be.

5. That all dangerous Presidents of preventing the people from, and
imprisoning of, and declaring them as enemies to the State, for pet^tioning may
be taken away, and that undoubted right of theirs publicly cleared. 6. That
accounts be given to the people of their disbursments of the valle Sums of
money leavied and paid; and that hence forth all public charges be exactly
computed, and only moneys proportionable leavied, and that the accounts be open
to the view of all men, and frequently published: 7 That all Prisoners
according to the intent of the Law be brought to a speedy hearing, and just
trial. And that such as are unjustly imprisoned may with their liberties have
due reparations. 8. That the ancient and almost antiquated badge of slavery,
that is, all base Tenures of Lands, as by Copyes and Fines at will, by oaths
of fealty, homage etc. (the Conquerours brand upon the people) may be taken
away, and to that end, that a proportionable value be set, at which the
Possessours of Land so holden, may purchase themselves freeholders, which if
not willing, or not able to do, that then after a prefixed period of time, all
such duties and services may descend into, and from that time become a certain
rent, that by this means persons disaffected to the welfare and freedom of the
Nation may be prevented from drawing men to a War against themselves, by virtue
of an awe upon them by such dependant Tenures.

These things we humbly pray may be done, se led, and provided forthwith, that
so speedy proceedings may be made to redress the other common grievances of
the prople; that our Laws and all proceedings therein may be in English, and
the innumerable abuses thereof remedied, and the places for ministration of
justice and justice it self may no longer be bought and sold, that Monopolies
may be abolished and care taken to renew the decayed trade of the Nation, that
the poor may be provided for, and none suffered to beg their bread; that
public d^bts may be computed and put into some probable way of being
satisfied; the burdens of tithes, excise, and whatsoever else is justly
grievous may be removed: And unless these prudent foundations of freedom and
just Go^ernment may re^st^^l^shed, we conceive that neither you nor we can
satisfy our consciences, that so much blood has been shed in the prosecution
thereof, or in continuing an Army, who c^nt^ary to their own desire are
constrained to live upon the labors of others for naught, and therefore desire
that sufficient indemnity may be prov^ded for all o^^^^ engagements
whatsoever, with either Parliament or Army, in all things done in order to our
utmost prosecution thereof; that accounts may be justly stated, that some
considerable part of the Soldiers arreares may be given them, and good
security for the remainder; and that we may be discharged from this present
employment, either to return quietly to our several callings, if we can bear
the yoke of our slavery, or otherwise to depart the Nation, to seek our
freedom in some wilderness.

THe imprisonment of the Agents for preparing this Petition, much affected the
Soldiery of Col. Riches Regiment, and with all speed they framed a Petition to
the General for the release of their Agents. The Copy thereof here follows

To his Excellency Thomas Lord Fairfax Captain General of the Forces under the
Command of the Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Soldiers of Colonel Rich his Regiment,
Shows,
THat as in Judgment and conscience, we first engaged in the late war, for
our Native rights and freedoms, so likewise upon the same account, we refused
to Disband, and entrea^ ^o a solemn Engagement at New. Market, when our
freedoms were invaded, and the fundamental right of Petitioning denied us.

That upon the same ground, after much patience in waiting for the securing our
commer. Rights according to the Engagement, we entrusted several of our fellow
Soldiers to meet with some of other Regiments at S. Albans, to give us an
account of their proceedings.

That while they were proceeding in a most unquestionable just way of preparing
a Petition, they were violently seized upon, and imprisoned, all which (if it
were done by Order from your Excellency) we hope did proceed from a
misunderstanding of our, and their meaning and intentions.

That our fellow Soldiers being employed by us as Agents in our behalf, we
esteem our selves obliged both in conscience and honor to be Copartners with
them in whatsoever condition they are, or shall be involved by reason of that
employment: and our resolutions are to adhere faithfully to them, in the
vindication of their innocent intentions, in prosecuting our solemn Engagement,
or to suffer equally with them.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray, that our said Agents now under
restraint may be forthwith released, according to the present urgent
necessities, and without further descanting delays, which have already made us
odious to the people, we may all join together, and effectually endeavor to
fulfill our first engagements to the people, and each to the other, by settling
and securing the Nations common Rights and Freedoms.

And they shall pray etc.
THe Regiment employed two Soldiers to present this Petition, and after the
Grand Officers had long consulted, they called in the Messengers, and descanted
strangely upon the Petition, and examined them upon Interogatories, as who
delivered it to them, and whom they see subscribe it; but the messengers
refused to betray their liberties in answering Interogatores, and told them
they were employed by the Regiment to deliver the Petition and their
Subscriptions wree annexed, and they had no other message, then they threatened
them with death severally, but yet they said at last they would show them
mercy, and so released them.

Now Contrymen, consider how deeply you are concerned in the imprisonment of
these your friends, judge whether your Freedoms can ever be secured, unless
the foregoing Petition be granted, and judge how desperate your condition is,
if once your Liberty of Petitioning be lost, if it shall be a crime to meet and
consider how to beg for your Right, unto what lower degree of slavery, can you
be reduced? The Parliament have declared it, to be their duty to receive
Petitions though against established Laws: These are their words in their
Declaration of Sept. 2. 1642. 1. book Decla. p. 532. We acknowledge we have
received Petitions for the removeall of things established by Law, and we must
say, and all that know what belong to the course and practice of Parliments,
will say, that we ought to do so, and the Liberty of Petitioning, being the
lowest degree of freedom; the invasion of that was the first occasion of the
Armies refusal to disband, and engaging against Hollis his Faction; therefore
I say again, consider whether necessity do not now require your speedy
assistance of these your Friends, who have thus constantly endeavored and
hazarded themselves for your freedom; and observe good people, it is not the
Soldiery that enslave you, but they are enslaved equally with you, they are
denied the common right of petitioning, and for your sakes they suffer.

Object. But it will be objected that the grand Officers oppose not the
Freedom, which the Soldiers thus prosecute, but the irregular manner of their
prosecution of it.

Answ. Wherein can it be said they have been irregular, is it in Petitioning
without their Officers; was there ever such a band upon the Soldiers, either
by the ^^w or Reason, that they should not Petition without their Officers?
shall not the Soldiers beg for what they want, unless they please? but
suppose there be some irregularity, in riding from one Regiment to another
without license from their Officers or disputing such Commands, yet who could
have imagined that the Officers of this Army should dare to object it against
the Soldiery: will not the necessity of such actings justify the seeming
irregularities; was not that all their plea in June last, when they were
irregular in the highest degree, and rejoiced and applauded the Soldiers for
their being irregular; and was it not upon the same ground that they opposed
the Parliament, because they made an Order to suppress a Petition amongst the
Souldery, and declared those Enemies to the State that promoted it, and though
that Petition was promoted contrary to the Officers minds, and C^l. Rich and
others sent express Orders to suppress it, and though the Parliament
proceeded not to imprison such as act about it; yet when they were interested
in it, they declared, in their Representation of June 5. that that President of
the Parliaments Order to suppress the Petition, if it should stand good, did
tend in the consequence of it, to render all Soldiers under this Parliament
the worst of slaves, and all subjects little better: and the like they declared
in the Remonstr. of June 13. but besides, is it more irregular to dispute an
Officers Command then to dispute the Parliaments Orders, and did not the
General, and the Lieutenant General countenance the Soldiers, and approve
them, when they resolved a Rendevous without the General, if he would not
Order it, and were any of the Soldiers di^countenanced when they dismounted,
beat and houted out of the field such Officers as would have obeyed the
Parliaments Commands? and surely, none will say there is not now the same
necessity to justify these actings as was then; nay, is not the necessity
far greater? the Liberties of the people are neither cleared nor secured, the
very right of Petitioning, is in a higher manner invaded, more are now
imprisoned for Petitioning and meeting about Petitions, then ever since England
stood, and not only the Parliament, but the Army is now so odious to the people
for breaking their first promises and engagements, that the people are ready to
out the throats of all Soldiers without distinction, and the whole Nation is
ready to perish with distractions and discontents through want of a settlement.

Now set all English men and all Soldiers consider, whether they may not bid
adieu to Freedom, if they suffer their friends to want assistance in
prosecuring their first Engagements. Col. Riches Regiment have been constrained
to rescue some of their Agents from Prison, and therefore they expect now the
immediate assistance of all honest men in every Regiment.

FINIS.

