A MOST NOBLE SPEECH Spoken by the LORD CAMBEL OF LORNE. One of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Counsel of SCOTLAND.

Moving the Lords HOUSE in Scotland, in his Majesty's presence, for the
prevention of such Advantages; whereby Incendiaries may in the vacancy of
Parliaments, any way extort from his Highness Proclamations, to enforce the
bringing in of Innovations into the Kirk; or confirming of Monopolies, that so
all Oppressions may be removed from his Majesty's Subjects of both Kingdoms.

As also, an Honorable REPLY Made by the Lord Lowden, against such, who
objected against his former SPEECH.

London, Printed by B. Alsop, 1641.

A MOST NOBLE SPEECH SPOKEN BY THE Earl of Argile, Lord of Lorne, etc.
Competitour for the Chancellor-ship.
MY LORDS,
WHat was more to be wished for on Earth, then the great happiness, this day
we enjoy? viz. To see his Royal Majesty, our Native Sovereign, and his
loyal Subjects of both Kingdoms, so really reconciled, and united: that his
Majesty is piously pleased to grant unto us his Subjects, our lawful demands
concerning Religion and Liberties, and we his Subjects of both Nations,
cheerfully rendering to his Majesty, that duty, affection, and assistance, which
he has just cause to expect from good People, and each Nation concurring in a
brotherly amity, unity, and concord, one toward the other?

O what Tongue is able to express the Honor and Praise due to that great and
good God, who in those late Commotions, suffered not the prudent Counsels of
either Kingdoms to despair of the safety of either Commonwealth: but through
his blessing to their painful and prudent Endeavors, has wrought such a
happiness for us, that after the great toil and trouble, we have so long on
both sides endured, we may now each man, with his wife, children, and friends,
under his own Vine, and Figtree (and all under his Majesty's Gracious
protection) refresh himself with the sweet fruits of peace: which I beseech
the Lord of Peace make perpetual to both Nations.

Now my earnest desire is, that our best studies and endeavors, may be spent
in contriving, and enacting such wholesome Laws; whereby (as much as in us
lies) the opportunity and occasion of producing such Calamities, as lately
threatened to fall upon both Nations, may be prevented, if in any Age hereafter
such miscreants shall go about to attempt it.

It is notorious, that the late Incendiaries that occasioned the great
differences, betwixt his Majesty and his Subjects, took much advantage and
courage, by the too long intermission of the happy Constitution of Parliaments.

In the vacancy of which, they by false Information, incensed his Majesty
against his Loyal subjects; and by their vile insinuations extorted from his
Highness Proclamations, for obedience to their Innovations in the Kirk, and
Pattents for Proiects: whereby the poor Subject was both polled, and oppressed
in his Estate, and enthralled in his Conscience.

And thus by their wicked Practices, his Majesty was distasted, and his
subjects generally discontented: in so much, that had not the great mercy of
God prevented them, they had made an obstruction betwixt his Majesty, and his
liege People, and had broken those mutual and indissoluble bonds of Protection
and Allegiance.

Whereby J hope his Majesty, and his loyal subjects of all three Kingdoms,
will be ever bound together: to which let all the subjects say, Amen.

My Lords, The distaste of his Majesty, nor discontents of his Subjects, could
never have grown to that height they did ( nor consequently have produced such
effects) had there not bin such an interposition by those Innovators and
Projectors, betwixt his Majesty our glorious Sun, and us, his loyal
Subjects: that his goodness could neither appear to us, nor their disloyalty
and our obedience to him.

For no sooner was that happy Constellation, the Parliament in England raised,
and those vaporous Clouds dissipated; but his Majesty's goodness, his subjects
Loyalty, and their treachery evidently appeared.

Our Brethren of England finding the Intermission of Parliaments, to be
prejudicial and dangerous to the State, have taken a course for the frequent
holding of them; whose prudent Example, J desire may be our Pattern: forthwith
to obtain his Majesty's Royal assent for the same.

By which means, his Majesty may in due time, hear, and redress the
Grievances of his Subjects, and his subjects cheerfully (as need shall
require) aid and assist his Majesty: and not only the Domestique peace, and
quiet of each Kingdom preserved;

But likewise all National differences (if any happen) by the wisdom of the
Assemblies of both Kingdoms, from time to time, reconciled and determined, to
the perpetuating of the happy Peace, and Union of both Nations.(...)


