INSTRVCTIONS ABOUT RIGHT BELIEVING: SEVERAL SERMONS Leading unto Christ,
directing unto Faith, and encouraging thereto. Showing the Nature, Measure, and
necessity of the sense of Sin. Christ the bread of Life, a sufficient Remedy
for Man's misery; with the way and means to obtain him; as also encouragements
to come to him, from his ability and readiness to give full
soule-satisfaction. By JOHN ARCHER, Master of Art, sometime Preacher of
All-hallowes Lumbard-street. London.

ACTS 2. 39. Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart. MAT.
11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest. JOHN 4. 14. Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him,
shall never thirst: but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well
of water springing up into everlasting life. LONDON; Printed for Benjamin
Allen, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley. 1645.

TO THE READER.
GOOD READER;
COnsidering the state of most people to be, either wholly insensible of their
miserable estate, and go on securely, not minding the precious and
soule-saving Remedy tendered, or some others who are sensible, who are often
discouraged, (both, through the malice and subtlety of the Devil,) these
ensuing Sermons, in a plain and profitable way, tending to help, in both
these respects, are here presented for a far more public advantage, then
they could be in the preaching of them; They are not corrected and fitted for
the Press, as it were to be wished, but near the matter, and way of his
delivery: and the experience had of some men's Sermons so printed, has
encouraged to these, conceiving they will be profitable, hoping all will be so
charitable as to put good constructions, and not by the contrary, prejudice
themselves, or others from the good intended: Some things are but briefly
propounded, in the Close, but there are sevcrall things profitably opened, to
direct sinners to Christ, and encourage sensible ones to come to him, with
encouragements so to do, showing his fitness and sufficiency for their help,
and readiness to it, and the Soule-satisfaction to be had by him: All which is
here commended to thee, for thy good, in desire, and with desire of which, and
of thy amending what escapes thou meetest with, I leave thee, and it, to the
blessing of God.

CHRIST IS THE BREAD of LIFE. A SUFFICIENT REMEDY, FOR MAN'S MISERY.
John. 6. 35. And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life: he that comes
to me shall never hunger; and he that believes on me shall never thirst.
THESE WORDS, are an Answer to that Desire or Demand of the People in the
former Verse, Lord, evermore give us this bread: Wherein Christ opens to them,
What is that Bread, which they seemed to desire; Which Words of Christ, I will
Consider absolutely in themselves; and pass what may be observed from their
Coherence, and Dependence; and will not stand on every thing which may be
Collected from the Verse, but so much as may serve for my purpose; Which is
This:

Having showed you the Misery you are in by Nature, and how far you must be
humbled with the sense The Su^me of the Words.
of it; Now I shall show ye the Remedy, and by what Means it may be attained:
For which purpose this Verse is very full. In which you have:

Description of Christ: Which is done Metaphorically by Bread; I am the Bread
of Life.

Means by which this Christ may be had; Viz: By coming to Him; That is (as
its expounded) By believing on Him.

Persons who may do this, and so make Christ their own; Viz: Any One whoever;
as is employed in the indefinite propounding of it; He that comes, He that
believes. (as ye shall see more clearly hereafter)

strong Motive to persuade to labor for this Christ, taken from the Benifitt;
Shall never hunger, Shall never thirst.

FIRST, The Description of Christ; which is Metaphorically; The Bread of Life.

DOCTRINE.
CHRIST is the BREAD of LIFE. Opened by answering diverse Questions.
This is often repeated in this Chapter: And for ope^ing of which. Consider these
Questions.

What is meant, By Bread of Life.

A Sufficiency of Means. To Free from Misery, And Bring to Happynes: As is
more fully expressed (though in other Metaphors) In Verses 53, 54. of this
Chapter; Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye
have no life in you etc. And therefore Christ culls out a Metaphor, that is one
of the chief to support Man's mortal Life; Viz: Bread; And therefore adds this
Epithet; Of Life, That as Bread is specially useful for our Life; So is
Christ for the Spiritual and Eternal Life; The Bread of Life, That is the
Remedy of Man's misery, in which he is by Nature and Sin.

Whether this be proper to Christ, Or common with him to some other?

Him; Nothing else, nether in whole, nor in part, has any share in it (except
as his Instruments) These Words [I am the Bread of Life] are not only
declarative of what He is, but impropriative, and restraining this, to Him
only; This is the meaning; That He, and He only is the Bread of Life:
Therefore, that Verse. 53. Except ye eat Him ye have noe Life; Therefore, He
only, is the Bread of Life. And Gen: 3. 15. The seed of the Woman (that is
Christ) shall break the Serpents head; That is, recover Man out of Misery; God
never promised it should be, but Only by Him, Therefore by Him only it shall
be; And so much is expressed by that, John. 6. 67. 68. Jesus said unto the
twelve, will ye also go away? Then Simon Peter answered him Lord, to whom
shall we go? Thou have the Words of Eternal Life; If Eternal Life could have
been had by any other, then they might have gone away from Christ; that reason
had not been strong; And this is express by that, Acts. 4 12. Neither is there
Salvation in any other: For there is none other Name under Heaven given among
men, whereby we must be saved. As the Israelites in the Willdernes had noe
help from the deadly stings of fiery Serpents, but by the Brazen Serpent.

By what Means; Christ comes to be bread of Life.

I Answer, by His Incarnation, and all that He did and suffered, till He sat
down at Gods right hand in Glory: All this, was for the fiting and making Him
bread of Life; How Christ comes to be Bread of Life.
as Christ came into the World for this end, to become Bread of Life; So all He
did and suffered, in coming into, and being in, the World, till He was
translated out of it, and set down in Glory, was for this end. As:

Divine and Humane, in One Person was for to make him fit to be this Bread of
Life; Therefore Christ, being about to show Nicodemus, that Eternal Life might
be had by Him, John. 3. 15. That is, that He was the bread of Life; He first
shows him his Incarnation, and double Nature; Verse 14. That as Moses lifted
up the Serpent in the Wilderness: Even so must the Son of man be lifted up:
For as Bread is not made of one single substance, but of several, joined
together; So Christ, the Bread of Life; the Manhood of Christ, could not be
effectual to bring us to Life; without the Godhead; being neither of Power
enough to stand under, and come forth, from that Wrath it must undergo; Nor of
Virtue enough to make its Actions and Sufferings of infinite worth without which
an infinite debt could not be paid; And the Godhead, though in it Self its a
Fountain of Life, and very Communicative, being infinitely Good, Yet by Sin;
Its sealed up, and becomes terrible and a consuming fire, So that It Conveyes
nothing but Wrath and Destruction; But the Manhood, makes it an Open
Fountain, satisfying and appeasing of It Heb. 10. 19. to 23. Thus; Christ's
Incarnation and Union of two Natures, Viz: The Godhead and Manhood in One
Person; prepares and fits Him to be Bread of Life. And:

Meanness, and all His Sufferings, were to fit Him for this; As Corn, is
threshed, ground, baked in the Oven, before it makes Bread. Col. 1. 14. 21 22.
These, appeased Gods Wrath, and satisfied His Justice, for our Sins, by
which, we were Condemned:

And so, His Obedience and Fulfilling of the Law; This prepared a Robe to cover
us, by virtue of which, We might appear spotles in Gods sight, Rev 19. 8. And:

Bread of Life; 1. Cor. 15. 17 And if Christ be not raised, your faith is
vain, ye are yet in your sins. As Bread comes out of the Oven in which it is
baked, Or else cannot preserve our Life. And:

Bread of Life; This indeed was the last preparative Thing he did, and but an
Introduction, or letting Him into that place and Condition, wherein He might
do the Work of Bread of Life, who was now by former things, made fully,
Complete Bread of Life: Yet this also was done as a Concurrence to His being
Bread of Life; For before He could be given as Bread, and work as Bread, He
must be ascended Heaven and set down there; Therefore he says He must ascend
That the Spirit might come, John. 16. 7. And Ehp. 4. 8. Ascending up He gave
Gifts unto Men; As Bread, descends into the Stomach and so sends virtue and
strength into the Body, before it can nourish and preserve Life.

Thus ye see, how Christ comes to be Bread of Life; And how many Things were to
be done, to fit Him: And though before he dyed; He said all was finished; He
means not every thing, (for then why dyed he) But all that was to be done,
before He gave up the Ghost; And therefore he proceeded to do that, And
therefore, None but He can be it, because none else Two Things to be gathered.
have, nor can have all these necessary Quallifications. And hence ye may
farther gather Two Things.

Christ is actually The bread of Life; namely in his state of Glory, then, when
he is exalted and at Gods right Hand; All the time and state of his Humiliation
was to fit and prepare him to be bread of Life, Heb. 7. 25. 26. Now he is made
higher then the Heavens, he is able to save to the uttermost; And John. 14. 19.
Now he lives (Viz: that glorious Life in Heaven) they shall live. And whereas
He gave Life to many, before he had done these things (namely, to all Believers
before he came) yet it was by virtue of all these, done in Gods account
(because surely to be done) and in Gods sight to whom all things to come,
as well as past, are present; Acts. 15. 18. Known unto God are all his Works
from the beginning of the World. Rev. 13. 8. The Lamb slain from the
foundation of the World. And:

Christ, Is the Bread of Life; Or how Christ must be considered and applied for
Bread: Namely thus; The Manhood of Christ, furnished with all that which it
has Done and Suffered, and consequently out of Merit received as into a store
house; Is the bread of Life; Therefore he says His Flesh is meat and his
Blood is drink indeed John. 6: 35. It is true; that the Manhood singly
considered without Personal Union with the God head, is not This bread of Life
(for then it is not of virtue enough, as ye heard before) But, the Manhood, as
it is in Personal Union with the Godhead; and so made of Infinite Worth and
Virtue; So, the Manhood is the Bread of Life; 1, Cor. 1. 30. He of God, is
made; that must be meant of his Manhood (though as it is in Personal Union
with the God head) For the God head cannot be made a Communicated Wisdom,
Righteousness etc. as that is; God joined in Person with Christ's Manhood, has
by the Doings, Sufferings, and Merrits of the Manhood, to which it was enabled
by the Godhead; furnished that Manhood, with all Sufficiency, to free from
Misery and make Happy: Its not Christ's Godhead but His Man hood which is in
Union with His Godhead, and so a Virtue and Effect of the Godhead, and that
which is in His Manhood, that is the Bread of Life: Here be Two Errors to be
avoided.

One when the Godhead of Christ shall be made the Errors to be avoided.
Bread of Life; and that which is applied by Faith, and made One with us.

Another, when the Manhood shall be simply Considered, and not as it is in
Personal Union with the Godhead, and receives Virtue from it, to make its
Acts of Infinite Worth.

And thus by Faith we eat this Bread; whilst we receive, apply and trust in
Christ's Man hood, that which he did and suffered in and by it (through Union
with the Godhead) for our Justification, Sanctification, and Salvation; and by
Faith, we eat not his Godhead, but Manhood, and the Virtue of the Godhead,
that is in his Manhood; And thus, that Question; John. 6. 52. is resolved, How
Christ can give us his flesh to eat.

1. USE,
To teach us; How much we owe to God and Christ; who has provided Bread for
our Souls; as the Egyptians did to God for that Gen: 50. 20. For by this he
saves many Souls alive: God was often magnified for the Manna he sent for the
Israellites when they were ready to perish for hunger: This is more Mercy:
Therefore, that, John. 3. 16. God so loved the World; So, as cannot be
immitated; So, as cannot be expressed; So, as cannot be conceived.

This Mercy farther appears; If we Consider, that (which also this Doctrine
teaches us) it cost God and Christ somewhat before they helped Souls; Christ
must be bread; That is not his up and doing it; But much must he do and
endure, before he was fited for it; As Bread does before it become Bread;
Therefore, we are the more bound to Him for his undertaking the Work of Our
Redemption: And to God the Father, For Giving Him to that Work; If a King
should appoint his Son, and his Son undertake, to save Traitors, only by
coming to the Prison and fetching them out, it were worthy of much Thanks;
But much more, when the Son, by much pains and cost, shall do it; Joseph
procured Bread for Egypt, But Cbrist was made Bread.

2. USE,
For Encouragement to Such as droope in the Sense of their Misery, and want of
Life; I may say to such of you, as be amazed with the Sense of your Misery by
Sin; As Jacob to his Sons, Genesis 42. 1. 2. Why do ye look one upon
another? Behold I have heard that there is Corn in Egypt etc. Whatever you
want, whether Gods Favor, Or Image, The Life of Comfort, Or of Grace, despair
not; For God has provided Bread for you; I, and ye need not be afraid to come
to this Bread, and take it; For he loves to have People eat of Him; as will
clearly appear by this, which also follows from this Point, Viz: That Christ
Came from Heaven for this End, To recover Sinners out of their Misery, And to
help them to live; For that is the End of Bread; It is not directly for any
other use; It is so of Christ's Coming, Math. 18. 11. For the Son of Man is
come to save that which was lost: John. 3. 17. For God sent not his Son into
the World to condemn the World. but that the World through Him might be saved:
And Chap. 12. 47. I came not to judge the World, but to Save the World:
Therefore they that feel their need of him, need not fear Coming to Him, or
question his helping of them: It was the End of His Coming, and the Use God
chiefly put Him to: Therefore he will not be averse from it; Hence it was in
that, Math. 18. 11. Having told them that this was the End of His Coming, to
Save; He, by a Parable shows them what Joy it was to Him to save any one; How
can He but joy in making good the End of his Coming? Therefore, they that
droope in a Sense of their Misery, and dare not go to Christ for help, do
not know Christ, Nor the Mystery of his Incarnation, Nor the End of his
Coming; That it was to Relieve the Afflicted; Learn it now therefore, and
come confidently to Him for Help; He cannot but with all readiness entertain
thee, and the Opertunity of making good the End of his Coming; Therefore in
Scripture, Christ was greedy of any opertunity to relieve a distressed Soul;
And did not quench the smoking flax etc. Math. 20, most meek, and gentle, and
easily entreated; therefore a Dove sat on him, in His first Instalement into
his Office; This is a maine thing, that is taught in the Gospel; and may be
observed through the whole Story; that Christ with abundance of gentlencs and
willingness, entertained and encouraged all that in sincerity came to him for
help; Fear not then Christ's rejecting thee, so thou have a right desire to
him, but press him, if he seem to deny thee, as the Woman did Mark. 7, 27.
28. Let not want of Life, or Weakness hinder thee, for he came to help such;
as bread is for the empty and weak, Therefore say ye as Moses, Exodus 16. 15.
16. This is the bread which the Lord has given you to eat etc.

3. USE.
To teach us, how much we should esteem and prize Christ, and Labor for Him;
even as hunger starved people do for Bread; Israel desired a cruel Bondage
for Breads sake, Exodus 16. 3. the Egyptian bondage from which they were freed;
And they Ioh. 6. 24 26. How did they follow Christ, from one Coaste to another,
for Loaves? What did Egypt do for Bread-Corne, (not Bread, nor fitted to their
hands) Gen: 41. 55. They cried to Pharaoh for bread; And Cap. 47. 14. They
parted with all their Money for bread; And Ver. 17. They parted with all their
Cattle; And Ver. 20. They parted with their Land; And Ver. 23. They sold
Themselves; Would ye so do for Christ, ye should have him, Isay. 55. 1. Ho
every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money:
come ye, buy and eat, yea, come; buy wine and milk without money, and without
price; and why should ye not, since He is Bread, not bread corn, but ready
fitted to your hands? How did all Nations flock to Egypt, Gen: 41. 57. Because
Bread Corn was there? And why, flock ye not to Christ, since He is the Bread
of Life? Do ye not manefestly give him the lie, who calls Himself Bread? And
ye who so much care for Bread (as if ye call it to mind) ye did lately in the
Famine; yet prize not, not care to get Him: Though it may seem, not desirable,
as Bread often does to Children, therefore when it is given them, they cast it
away, Yet consider, the case of your Souls, hunger-starved; And He; the Bread
of Life.

That I may quicken ye up to prize and esteem Christ Christ is better the^ any
bread in many perticulers
more, Consider, in how many Perticulers, He is better then any other Bread.

Christ is a Bread that gives Life to them that be dead, and therefore is
called the Bread of Life, John. 6. 53. 54. 57.

Gen: 3. Eat it till thou turn to dust, It does but repreive as it were till
an other Sessio^s; It Corrupts, and keeps not the Body from Corrupting; But
this Bread, gives Eternal Life. John. 6. 50. 51. This is the Bread which
comes down from Heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not dye; But live
for ever; Therefore, Christ by this Argument persuades them to prefer this
before other meat, John. 6. 27. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but
for that meat which endures unto everlasting life, which the Son of man
shall give unto you:

Soul and Body, and that in a Spiritual Life.

Man lives not by bread alone, Therefore ye have Sampson, not complaining of
danger of Death, for want of Bread, but Water; But this Bread is Allsufficient;
It alayes Hunger and Thirst both, (as is in the Text) Yea, Its Wine, Milk, and
fat Things, Esaias. 55.

which be full in Winter, when we need no Water, but dry in Summer, when Water
is most needed; But this Bread, None can keep, nor take away, Its Ever free
and plentifully to be had.

Price of This (as ye shall fee hereafter) is only the Receiving it, the
Coming, Taking, and Eating, (as its in our Text) and Its free for any, without
restraint or limitation of Persons.

Bread, can only help our Souls, None else can but this, as ye heard in
opening the Doctrine. So that without this, There is no Life to be had; Now
Considering all these Super-excellencyes in Christ, Why should ye not prize
Him, and labor for Him more then for Bread? remember what you did for bread in
the dearth, and do more for Christ.

4. USE.
To teach us, That Christ is only for hungry Souls Such as be sensible
thoroughly of their Misery by Sin and so Pant after a Remedy; For, therefore
he is called Bread, because Its only for the hungry: God has provided him
only for such (as ye heard before from, Luke 5. 31 32.) as the Table is spread
for the empty, not for the full; For indeed none else desire, prize, or will
receive him; pleasant food is slighted by the full (even the honey comb) much
more this, which is hard of digestion, and very gross to Flesh and Bloods
pallat and eye: Therefore, observe in Scripture, who they were that so Prized
Christ; they were Souls, hunger bitten with the sense of their spiritual
Misery: And, who did slight him? Who were they to whom God never gave him? the
Pharisees and blind People, who were not hungry after a spiritual Mercy, as
not being thoroughly sensible of a spiritual Misery: And this is the very
reason, why Christ is so little regarded in the World; When one looks in the
Scripture and sees what Excellent Things are spoke of Christ; and on the
longing desires, the Saints of old had after Christ, and their abundant joy in
Christ; and look now how slightly and by how few he is esteemed; one would
think that which is writ of them is fabulous; or they were foolish, or our
Christ is not the same Christ; or why should he then be longed for; and now,
being come and offered is despised? But he ere is the truth of it; He is Bread,
and they were hungry; But now most are full; Full with their Sins, their
Honors, Profits, Contents of this World; and therefore care not for Christ;
And mervaile at the hunger bitten Souls, which keep such a do for Christ;
But let all such know, that Christ is not as yet for them; God never prepared,
appointed, or sent him, for such, but for the hungry; as the Shewbread was not
for David himself but in case of great hunger, Math. 12. 3. 4.

If God had immediately and suddenly conveyed Christ to sinnfull Souls, then
might he have been enjoyed by you, without being first hungry; But since he
gives him as Bread, you must so take him; that is first being hungry; This is
the reason why many eat this Bread, Christ, and be never the better, because
they eat him without hunger first; and so digest him not; but fill their
Souls with crudy Humors, Security, Presumption, etc. which kill the Soul: Let
an hungry Soul eat of this Bread; it exceedingly strengthens him to all
Obedience, filling the Soul with good Nourishment and Spirits, of Love, Peace,
Hope, Joy: But if any that be not hungry do eat of Christ; that is, apply
him; He is to them, but as the food to the Angels who were without stomachs
Gen 18 8. they see (...) eat, but eat not, and so were never the better for
it though the food was good. Hence the Souls of People be so starveling like,
though they often enjoy large Meals of this Bread, (Viz: the Word often preached,
Sacraments often administered) because, wanting Stomachs they only seem to eat,
but eat not. If therefore, ye How to get a hunger, after Christ.
would be the better for Christ, ye must get an Hunger, which that ye may the
better do.



Christ; Which is done, Partly by drinking down the Vinegar of the Law, eating
the sower Herbs; By the Law laboring to see your Sinnfullnes and Misery
thereby; And partly by looking into the Gospel, and Christ's Beauty, and
Desirablenes; as Eve by Considering the Fruit, was drawn to take and eat it:
But I will not press this, because I have lately done it, and showed you how
far you must be Humbled and the Signs and Means of it: All that I now say is
this:

That as it was with the bitter Water in another sense, So is it with Christ;
If they that hunger, take and eat him, they are saved by Him; If they that
hunger not, meddle with Him, It is their bane and ruin: Therefore think not
those Preachers your enemies, who labor to humble you by pressing on you the
Law, and your miserable Estate by Nature, for it is but to make you hungry, and
so fit for Christ, the Bread of Life; We are your Pastors and Nurses, and must
seek to get you Stomachs, that ye may eat, and not tread under foot this
spiritual food; therefore, thus, and for this end to seek to humble you, is
a part of our Duty and Love to you; should Preachers only preach Christ to
you, it would but delude you, for till you be hungry, God will not give him,
nor will ye accept him, because He is Bread.

Thus much for the First Thing in the Text; The Description of Christ; as the
sufficient Remedy of Man's Misery.

THE SECOND THING, in the TEXT, Is The second Thing in the text.
the Means by which this Christ, This Remedy of our Misery, may be had: That
is by Coming to Christ: He that comes to Me shall never hunger:

This, is farther expressed in the Text, by an other word, Viz: Believing in him:
So that coming to him, and believing on him, is all one and the same, and he
that comes to Christ, or believes in Christ, shall obtain Christ, and get him,
for else he could not be kept from hungring and thristing, as the Text says he
shall be; And in other Scriptures, This (which is the Means by which Christ
may be had) is expressed in other words; As John. 1. 12. A receiving Christ; for
there, receiving Christ and believing on him, is made all one, and receiving
Christ, is the means of geting Christ; (or else, he that receives him could
not have prerogative to be Gods Son; as that Verse affirms of him) And else
where; it is called a taking, Reve. 22. 17.

So that, the Means by which Christ (this Remedy of Man's misery) may be had,
is Coming to Him, Believing on Him, Taking or Receiving of Him: Hence observe.

DOCTRINE.
The all and only MEANS of, and that GOD requires for, the Obtaining of
CHRIST, and Salvation by CHRIST; Is the Coming to HIM, Taking, Receiving of
HIM, or Believing on HIM. This is express in the Texts, whence we now raise
it, there is no more to be done, and Christ is enjoyed, If God required more,
or more must be done; Then this Verse of my Text, does not fully direct how to
get the Bread of Life, But that it does; Therefore, let a Man come to Christ,
and he shall have Christ; This is all that God requires for the obtaining
Christ; and therefore our Savior, expresses Christ by a Feast, ready
prepared, and to be pertaked by all that come; Pro. 9. 1. 2. 3. Wisdom has
builded her House, She has killed her Beasts: She has mingled her Wine: She
has furnished her Table, She has sent forth her Maidens, She cries: Who so
is simple, let him turn in hither, She says come eat of my Bread, and drink
of my Wine which I have mingled. Luke. 14. 17. He sent his servant at supper
time to say to them that were bidden; come, for all things are now ready; And
they that eat not of it, miste it because they came not, Verse 24. And however
there was One that came, and yet was not permitted to eat at the Feast; Math.
22. 11. 12. 13. yet it follows not, that there is some what more required then
Coming; for he miscarried because he came not, had he come indeed; he had
obtained; but he did but seem to come, though it is called a Coming, for the
want of the wedding garment, was only a want of Coming, (as ye shall see
hereafter, when we show what Right coming is) This also is farther proved by
these Scriptures, John. 5. 40. Chap. 6. 37. Chap. 7. 37. and Math. 11. 28.

And as the Scripture is express for the proof of this; under the expression
of Coming; So also, is it as express; under the Phrase of Believing; Math.
21. 31. The Publicans and Harlots go into the Kingdom of God before you: Why?
For Verse. 32. Ye believed not, but they did; Therefore Faith is the Way:
Therefore when the People asked Christ; What they should do to work the Work
of God, that is to get Salvation, He prescribes them this only, John. 6. 39.
This is the Work of God, that ye Believe: Hence; that, Mark. 16. 16. He that
believes shall be saved.

This is taught by our Saviors making Faith the Instrument and only Means of
Curing, and Helping all them He cured in the Gospel; and where He found not
Faith, He did no great Cure; Math. 13 58.

Also, hence it is that Unbeleefe is made the only Ground and Reason of Men's
Damnation; John. 3. 18. 36. and Chap. 8. 24. Though Men shall be punished for
all other Sins, Yet not Believing is the Ground and Reason why they perish by
their Sins; Because Believing is the only Means of Salvation:

And this was typified by the Isralites not entering Canaan, because of their
Unbeleefe, Heb. 3. and last.

And hence also it is, that Believing, is in Scripture made the Fruit, Sign
and Pledge, of Gods ordaining People to Eternal Life, Acts. 13. 48. And not
believing is made the Fruit, and Sign of Gods not purposing to Save People
John. 12, 39, 40. Because, Believing is the only Means of obtaining Salvation.

Lastly, It is hence also, that all the Requisites to Salvation, are made in
Scripture the Consequents and Works of Faith: Namely: The Righteousness of
Christ for our Justification, Rom: 3. 22. And the Spirit of Christ for our
Sanctification: Gall. 3. 14.

Thus ye see, how the All and Only Means of, and all that God requires for,
Our obtaining Christ and Salvation by Him is to Come to Him, Or Believe on Him.

And this was typified by the Brazen Serpent; as it is expounded and applied by
Christ John. 3. 14. as All that God required, and was the Means for obtaining
Cure from the Brazen Serpent, was the Looking on it: as you may read, Number: 21.
8. 9.

There are two Propositions, of necessity to be known by all that would be
saved: One is, that Christ is the All and only Remedy of our Salvation; The
other is, that Coming to Christ, or Believing on Him, is the All and only
Means, whereby Christ saues us: There is no Salvation but by Christ only; and
there is no having Christ and Salvation but by Faith only: As God conveyes
Salvation only by Christ; So Christ and Salvation are had only by Coming to,
or Believing in Christ: The former of these, has been taught you in the former
Point; and now, the latter is as clearly taught.

For the better understanding, and making use of this Doctrine; It is fit to
open and show; What this Coming to Christ, Receiving, Taking, and Believing on
Him; is. They are (as ye heard before) several Words expressing one and the
same Thing: And that is this.

The Act of the whole Man (that is of every part and faculty of Man)
entertaining Christ offered in the What coming to, and believing on Christ, is.
Gospel, and resigning up himself to Christ, in all the Offices of Christ, as
a King, Priest, and Prophet, to be saved by Him through those Offices. To
Believe in Christ; is not in General to phansy and conceit that I shall be
saved by Christ and he dyed for me; as the Worlds Faith is.

Ye shall find Divines giving other descriptions of Faith. As namely, a
persuasion of the forgivenes of my Sins and Salvation of my Soul by Christ:
Or a Confidence, and Trust in Christ for Salvation; which (with all other
descriptions of Faith) I conceive to be Venire ad Christu^ est cum servatorem
recipere; and se illi consecrare totum. Bucer in hunc locum. And see Bucer on
Rom: 4. 3. in Malorets Comment.
the expressions of some higher Degrees, Effects Consequents of Faith; and not
to be the first act of Faith; But, as for this; which I have now given, so far
as I can find by Scripture, it is the first act of Faith, and that which truly
gives title to, and interest in, the Lord Jesus and Salvation by Him; And being
the first act; it may be, where other and farther acts and degrees of Faith,
cannot presently be found; This is it; which Bucer explaines the Coming to
Christ, to be; To Come to Christ (says he) is to receive him for a Savior,
and to resign and give up his whole self to him; The eateing this Bread, is
by Faith to receive him, Calvin.
And therefore, I think, Believing is expressed by the phrases of coming to
Him, taking receiving of Him; because it is a so doing as is before described;
For then (as any one in reason knows) is Christ come to, took, and received,
when he is entertained as He is, and as He is offered by God A King, Priest,
and Prophet; for the Ends for which God tenders Him; Viz: To be saved by Him.

And whereas it may be objected; that the Word, Believing, in or on Christ;
implies a Confidence or Trust in him; a relying on him; I Answer it is most
true; and therefore, the phrase is extreordinary, not to be found (as some have
observed) in any Writers, but the Scriptures, (and Such as take it from them)
Others using only this phrase, to believe a thing; and not to believe in it,
or on it; So that the phrase implies relying on it with a Confidence and
Expectation of the Thing. And so I think, that there never is, nor can be, a
Coming to Christ, or Receiving him, without a Trust, Confidence, or Relying on
him: And the Coming to Him, or Receiving of Him, is the Effect of this; (for
therefore, they Come to Him and Entertain Him, because they Trust to be Helped
by Him) but this may not always be Evident, as the Cause is often more obscure
then the Effect, And so, a Man may Entertain Christ, when he thinks he cannot
Rely on Him and Trust in Him:

But yet there is a double Trusting or Relying on Christ; The one is, at a
Venture, without a Persuasion of an Interest in Him; grounded on Gods free
offer of Him to all Sorts of People; this is the Ground of coming to him, and
entertaining of him, (for if this were not, People would never receive Him)
this seems to be no more then a confidence in his ability and willingness to
save all that come unto Him, and in the truth of Him, gives record of Him:

The other is, a more Certain Thing, grounded on the Knowledge of an Interest
in Christ; Because a Soul knows it has Christ for Its own; Therefore it
rests on Him confidently for Salvation: This follows the Knowledge of our
Believing, and is a farther act and degree of Faith, and comes after our
Coming to Him and Receiving of Him. The former may not appear, though it ever
is, where Christ is believed on; and is weaker according as the the act of
Faith is weaker; And that makes some Divines make Faith to be a resting on Gods
Authority, or a trust in the Truth of God that speaks; for this ever is, where
Faith is:

Thus, all Things considered, we see, Faith, may be so defined, as I have
done; Viz: The act of the whole Man etc. It is an Entertayning Christ, and
Resigning himself to Christ; Therefore, it is called an acknowledging Christ,
2. Pet. 1. 3. as it is in the Greek (...). And therefore, expressed by a Woman's
marrying a Man, Romans 7. 4. which is an entertaining by covenant of a man,
resigning up her self to him; And it is expressed by Ingrafting, Romans the 11.
whereby the Science embraces the Stock for its Root and Means of Life and
Fruit, and is given up to the Stock to be preserved and furnished with Sap,
and made fruitful by it.

Only in this, there is this difference; The Fruit follows the Science and
Impe, and not the Stock: But the Believers Fruit is Christ's, the Stocks, and
not Its own: And this seems to be Paul's believing; For, Acts. 9. 6. when he
perceived that Jesus was God in Heaven, and so raised from the dead etc. (as
appeared by that Vision and Voice) then Paul, entertaines him, and resignes up
himself to him, in those Words: Lord what will thou have me to do? as if he
had said Lord, save me, and rule thee, I become thine etc. And this seems to
be Faith; for the Fruit of Faith is found in him Verse. 11, He prays (says
the Lord of him) and Verse. 17. Ananias calls him Brother; and together with
this sight, he was to receive the Holy Ghost, which was a sign of his
believing; And in the 22. Chapter. where the Story is repeated, Verse. 16.
Ananias hastneth him to be baptized: therefore, he took it for granted that He
believed, or else he would have said as Phillip Acts. 8. 37. to the Eunuch, If
thou beleevest with all thy Heart, thou may be baptized: And thus it is a
Particular application of Christ, to a Man's self; for one cannot entertain
him and resign up ones self to him; but we do perticuletly apply him; as the
marrying a Man, or ingrafting an Impe, is, a particular application of them: So
there is a particular application of Christ, that is not ever with the first
act of Faith: and that is an assurance that Christ is mine (for this follows
the reflect act; whereby I know that I believe) There is another, and that is
a taking Christ for mine, and giving up my self to Him; and this is ever,
where there is Faith.

Again, as it is an entertaining Christ, and resigning up ones self to him;
So it is an entertaining and resigning up to Him in all his Offices: whole
Christ, not some part of Christ: Therefore, John 1. 12. a receiving him, not
some part of him, Psalm 2. 12. a kissing Christ. As the Woman in marriage takes
the whole Man; as Exodus. 12. the whole Lamb was to be roasted and eaten.

This is the difference twixt falce Faith and true, And the reason of so many
Peoples miscarriage: They rereceive and apply Christ, in some one Office, as to
be a Priest, But not in all his Offices, to be a King and Prophet; whereas God
has joined them altogether, and they cannot be parted: God conveyed Help to
Israel, by all those three Offices, Kings, Priests, and Prophets. So does he
Salvation to Souls: Therefore, that Isay. 33. 22. Christ must be entertained
and resigned up to; As to our King, to be wholly ruled by his Laws: As to our
Prophet, to be only taught by his Directions; As Well as to our Priest, to be
only reconciled to God, and enabled for performance with acceptance in all
Services, by Him: This was it that he wanted, who is said to want the wedding
garment: Indeed, none can be actually, and perfectly subject to Him as King and
Prophet, but this must they be willing, and covenant, and endeavor to do; and
so to expect Salvation by Christ through his execution of all those Offices;
when he shall be in us as well as for us, a King, Priest, and Prophet: This is
to Believe.

Now the Ground of thus doing, and so of Faith, is Gods free offer of Christ,
on these Terms, thus to be had, with his promise of Salvation by Him to all
that so entertain Him; therefore, the doing this, is called the setting to a
Seal that God is true; and the not doing it, is called the Making God a liar

THE REASONS of this DOCTRINE. Reasons of the Doct.

Why thus to do, as has been explained, is, All that God requires, and the
only Means of obtaining Christ, and Salvation by Christ: Are.

Christ and Salvation, are Gifts of God, John. 4. 10. Romans 6. last. (for in
them God seeks the praises of his Grace; Ephesians 1. 6. and so they must be Gifts
and free Things) Now a Gift, must not be deserved, for then it is a Debt, Nor,
have any thing done for it, but the receiving it; for else, it is an Exchange,
no Gift: And indeed this is one maine reason, why God so magnifies Faith, as to
make it the only Means of obtaining Christ and Salvation; Because Faith only
magnifies Gods free Grace; For if any thing were done; then Christ and Heaven
could not be Gifts; And this also shows that Faith only as it is a receiving
Christ (and no other way, not as it is an Obedience, or Deed done) is the
Means of obtaining Christ and Salvation by him: Because else, they could not
be Gifts, nor of Grace, Romans 4. 16. Therefore it is of Faith, that it might be
by Grace.

Man should be abased, and stripped of all boasting; for whilst that nothing is
required of him for having Christ and Salvation, but receiving and taking it,
he can attribute nothing to himself; Romans 3. 27. Where is Boasting then? It is
excluded, by what Law: of Works? nay: but by the Law of Faith

Salvation sure to us; Romans 4. 16. It is of Faith, to the end the Promise might
be sure; for that it is grounded on God his Truth and Faithfullnes, and not on
us, as it was in Adam.

There are two Things by which some abuse this Doctrine; which must be removed.

1. Some be ready to think; If all that God requires to Salvation be the
Believing in Christ, then may we live in Sin as we list; and yet come to
Christ, believe in Him, and so be saved.

I Answer, but this is prevented by the description of Coming to Christ,
receiving of Him, or believing on Him; It is (as ye heard) the entertaining and
resigning up one self to Christ in all things, to be taught and ruled by him,
as well as to be saved by him; and they that do not this; do not come to
Christ, nor receive, nor believe in him; So that the very nature of Believing,
and a carnal Heart, and Life, are incompactible. Faith unites to Christ, and
so from Christ there is communicated, Death to Sin, Resurrection to newnes of
Life. Faith affords many holy reasonings, whereby the Heart is stirred against
Sin, and to Obedience, Romans 6. 10. 11. Likewise reckon ye also your Selves to
be dead indeed unto Sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord. 1.
Peter. 4. 1. For as much the^ as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm
your selves likewise with the same mind etc. They that believe, are married to
Christ, and therefore bring forth fruit by Him to God, Romans 7. 4. Christ Lives
in them that believe, Gall. 2. 20. And dwelles in their hearts, Ephesians. 3. 17.
Faith works by Love, Gall. 5. 6. And Love makes us keep (that is,
Evangelically; in desire and endeavor) all the Commands.

2. Some be ready to think; If all that be required to get Christ and
Salvation, be to come to Christ, receive and believe in Him, then it is not so
hard a work to be saved, as it is made to be, for that it is an easy and short
work, to do this.

I Answer but this is a gross mistake, for that there is nothing in the World
harder then to Come to, Receive, or Believe in Christ; therefore Christ says;
No Man can come to me except the Father draw him Ioh. 6. 44. he must be drawn,
and that by an Allmighty Hand; or he cannot come: Therefore when so many were
invited, None came, Luke the. 14. they all made excuse; and they that came,
were compelled, Verse. 23. and therefore the Perfecting of Faith is attributed
to Power, 2. These. 1. 11. and the Disciples pray for the Increase of Faith:
There is nothing that conduces to Believing, but it is all above the Power of
Nature, and contrary to Man's inclination; As to go wholly out of ones self,
and rest on an other for all good; To apprehend Sin and its misery; Therefore
the Spirit must come from Heaven to Convince of Sin, John. 16 8. And then to
apprehe^d a way of being Justified from Sin; the Spirit must likewise come
from Heaven to Convince of Righteousness: which needed not, if any thing but God
could do it; And so for a Man to renounce his own will and ways, and give up
himself to Christ, whose Laws be so contrary to Man's will; this is above
Nature: Also the Devil is most strongly against this; hence so many
discouragements and subtle tentations are put on them that endeavor to
believe; for Satan knows that this only gives Christ the Kingdom and turns
him out. To conclude, therefore is it so hard to be saved, and so few are
saved; because it is so hard to believe, and so few do believe.

But it is farther objected against this Doctrine; thus, The Scripture calls
for many Things besides Faith of them that be saved; as legal Humiliation,
Mortificacion, Holiness, Obedience etc. Therefore it seems that Believing or
Coming to Christ is not all that God requires.

I Answer, The Legal Humiliations, and all woundings of Spirit, with the sight
of Sin, are required, not as Means by which we partake of Christ and
Salvation; (for many have them that never obtain Christ or Salvation) but as
Preparations whereby People are fitted, and inclined, and drawn, to Come to
Christ, to Receive, and Believe on Him; and they be one Means by which the
Father draws and the Ministers compel People to come; And Mortification,
Holiness, Obedience etc, are only the Fruits and Effects of our Believing;
that, which Christ does in them, he means to save, after they have believed in
Him; These are the beginings of Salvation and Glory which Christ begines and
perfects in them that come to Him for Salvation; So that allthough these must
be in all that be saved; Yet there is no other Means required of God for
Obtaining Christ and Salvation, but only Believing.

USES.
Use, may serve for Instruction, in Three Perticulers. Instruction.


Man's Salvation, Viz: Free Grace, Certainty, and that God is All in All, in
Itt; These (as ye heard in the Reasons of the Point) are manifested abundantly
in Gods requiring no other Means of getting Christ, and Salvation by Christ,
but only Believing: Therefore let us see these in God his saving of People;
This is indeed the sweetness of the Gospel, and that which makes it so much
glorify God and encourage miserable Man; that it assures us, all Happynes is
to be had in Christ, for receiving it.

Error, that labor most for Pleasure, Wealth, Honor, Content etc. Whereas
these neither are Means, nor are required by God, for our getting Christ and
Salvation: Therefore folly it is to labor for them more, then to Believe.

Errors, both, Of Papists, who seek Salvation by Works also, and not by Faith
only; and so make it neither Free Grace and Gift, nor sure; nor shutt Man out
from all beasting. And also, the Error of many among us (even that have some
good thing in them) who, to the end they may get Christ and Salvation, labor
most for Humiliation, or for Holiness, and least of all, to Come to Christ, and
believe on Him; whereas only Faith is the Means, and All that God requires for
our obtaining Christ and Salvation.

There are Two Snares, which the Devil sets for People.

One is, when they hope to be saved by Christ, and never look to be humbled,
nor to be sanctified; (thus the Profane are caught) which is a most silly
thing, to think that any can be Saved, that be not regenerated and sanctified;
or to think that one can believe, and not hate all Sin, and study all
Holiness, or that any one can be brought to Heaven by Christ, and not to Holiness
first; It was a good speech of Francis Spira, lying in the distress of Spirit;
I will not (says he) detract from the Gospel, it is most true, that by Faith
in Christ, we be only saved, but yet, take heed of resting on Faith, and
neglecting the Works of Faith, Faith requires not that we be Christians in
word only; Believe me (qouth he) who have fully tried the matter; and
therefore he much commended to them, the Epistles of Peter, which press
Sanctity and Chastity etc. This was good Counsel, and very useful against
this Snare, by which Satan intangles the most of People, who rest in a Conceit
that they believe, and never care for the Works of Faith; but the Error of
this has been opened before.

There is an other Error, which is a second Snare of Satan; Viz: To labor for
Humiliation, Mortification, Holiness and Obedience, and not to labor to
Believe; this is the Snare in which many well disposed People are caught: And
the Error of it appears by this Doctrine; Because there is no other Means
required by God for our obtaining Christ and Salvation, but only Faith: Indeed
some measure of Humiliation must be had, before we can believe (as ye have
heard before) Viz: So much as may make one hunger after Christ, and be willing
to receive Him on any Conditions; But when thus much is obtained; (which is,
when there is a serious labor after Mortification, and all Obedience) Yet then
to labor for more Humiliation, or Holiness, and not first and chiefly to labor
to believe in Christ; this is a great error; for there is noe other means to
get Christ and Salvation but Faith; So that all the other Labor is in vain,
and for that, which never can bring Christ or Salvation; (as if a Man that
desires to bring his dead Friend to Life, should only labor to bring him to
the acts of Life (as to speak walk etc.) and not to the only Means of Life:
to have his Soul joined again to his Body) and that Satan knows, and
therefore putts them on it, to make them spend time and pains to noe purpose;
To such therefore, I may say, as Elisha in an other case, to the Syrians; 2.
Kings. 6 19. This is not the Way; Ye seek Salvation and Christ, but by farther
measure of Humiliation, (having enough already to make you willing) or by
Holiness, you can not get them; there is but one Way, one Thing that God
requires, and that is, to Believe; Therefore as Christ said to Martha in an
other case; Luke. 10. 41. 42. Ye are careful about many things, but one thing
is necessary Viz: to Come to Christ, and Believe in him; to Entertain him, and
Give up your Selves to Him in all his Offices; do this and you shall be saved;
When this is done, then shall ye be able to attain Mortification and Victory
over your Lusts Sanctification and Ability to Duty, and not before, These be
the Fruits and Effects of Believing; and you must Believe, before you can have
these; As the Woman must be married to the Man, before she can have lawful
Children by him; And the Science must be ingrafted into the Tree, before it can
bear Fruit: Were it not a simple thing, for a Woman to expect Children
Legitimate by a Man and then she would marry him; Or to expect that a Science
should first bear Fruit by the Sap of a Stock, and then ye would ingraft it
to it; Or to expect that a Room should be first enlightened, and warmed in the
cold Winter, and the^ ye would bring in a Candle and Fire; As absurd is it, to
expect first to be Sanctified and then to Believe in Christ; For Faith in
Christ, is the Cause, of all Mortification and Holiness; It is Christ that
sanctifies People, Heb. 2. 11. And of His Grace conveyes to us, John. 1. 16.
and he never does it, but by our Faith in Him; (for it is by Faith that He
lives in us and dwells in us, as ye have heard) Holiness is the Means by which
Christ after he is believed in, brings them that believe in Him, to Salvation:

It is therefore, a most preposterous, and wholly unprofitable way, for People
to labor for Holiness, or Heaven, or Christ; and not first and chiefly to labor
to Believe in Christ; The Right and only Way is: being so far humbled, (as I
said before) as to hunger after Christ, and be willing to have him on any
Terms, the^ to labor to Believe, and after that is done, to labor for
Mortificatio^ and Holiness, By, and From Christ to get it, Whom thou have made
Thine own by Faith: Wherefore, I beseech you see your Error, who will not
believe, till first you have the Spirit quickening you, Grace strengthing you to
Duty, and subduing Sin in you, if you could thus find it in you, then you
could believe and not else; This is the inverting Gods Order, and a way, that
will never bring you to Christ, or Heaven.

Indeed (and I pray observe it) there is an Act of Faith; which cannot be had
till this be had, and that Divines calls a reflect Act; where by a Soul
believes that it does believe: Before this can be, there must be Repentance,
Holiness etc. This is a knowing that we have Faith; this is not the necessary
Means to Salvation but to Assurance and Comfort; But there is an other Act of
Faith, Viz. the direct Act; which is Believing; not a Believing that I do
Believe; but a Believing, and this must be, before we can repent, or have, or
do any good; this is the Means and only Means to be saved.

Now consider the absurdity of your Error; before you labor to Believe, you
labor to know you do Believe; you will be sure you do Believe, before you
will Believe, you labor for the Evidence of Faith, before you labor to have
Faith it Self; you more and first, care for the Means of Assurance and
Comfort, of your Salvation, then the Means of being Saved; And one maine
Ground of your doing thus, is partly Pride, that ye will not have all ground of
Hope and Mercy to be in God, and none in your Self; For observe it, you will
not go that way, which makes you ground your Salvation only on Christ, and
not at all in your Self, but you must see somewhat in your Self, before you
will believe; And partly it is not daring to venture your Souls on Gods bare
Word, but you must see somewhat done by him in you, before you will credit him;
For though He says, that Whoever comes to Christ, and believes in Him, shall
be Saved and Sanctified; yet you will not believe, till you find he has
sanctified you; and so dare not trust his Word; and therefore it is that the
Scripture makes every Unbeliever, to make God a Liar; Consider that 1. Ioh. 5.
10
of Thomas John. 20. 25. The Disciples said we have seen the Lord; But he
said, except I shall see the print of the nails, and put in my fingers I will
not believe; then Verse. 29. Jesus said because thou have seen me thou have
believed, blessed are they that have not seen me and yet have believed.

Yea farther: By this means: you hinder the shining forth of Gods free Grace;
For whilst that you will not First believe; but first will be able to do
somewhat, you make not Christ and Heaven a free Gift; nor can it be free Grace
in God; and so not seeing Gods free Grace, ye do not so magnify Him as else
you would; nor find such sweetenes in the Gospel, nor be so encouraged as ye
might be; but sink, perplexe, and wound your Souls by fears and
discourageme^ts, which indeed be grou^dles, Also, you hinder your own
Certainty and Assurance; For whilst you ground your Believing on somewhat in
your Self, and not only on Gods free Promise and Word of Truth: It being
grounded, (partly at the least) on your Self who change; it is uncertain and
cha^geable. By all this I beseech you see your Error, who being so much humbled
as is requisite; labor for Humiliation, Holiness etc. and do not first and
chiefly labor to Believe.

Objected by some; But I have indeavored this Way as you teach, and have
believed, and yet I find not Christ and Holiness follow after.

to Believe, in the least measure or degree, but Christ and Salvation must be
had, because God has absolutely promised it to Believing. And the Spirit and
Sanctification must be had, for these be as inseparable as Light from the
Sun; but these things be not ever sensible to them that Believe.

1. Because, they do not know and consider the first, least and weakest
works of Christ, in the believing Soul, but only judge themselves by the
more full and strong workings of Christ in the Soul; In trying the truth of
Faith, take the weakest Evidences so they be sure, (though rest not there, for
that, true Grace will never do) as if a Man judges Life, only by walking,
and eating, he may think a Man that sleeps is dead.

2. Because the Act of Faith is not strong enough to put forth it Self very
sensibly, as the Acts of the Soul in a Swound; inasmuch as there is not a
frequent accustomed acting and exercising Faith, till by practice the Heart is
settled in it.

3. Because there is not a reflect Act, a Considering what it is to Believe,
and that thou have so done, and then a drawing the comfortable Conclusions to
thy Self that flow thence; and from Faith, a reasoning to quicken thee up;
for Faith produces its Effects by reaso^ing; As thus, If Christ has suffered
in the flesh, then must I make the flesh suffer in me; If Christ rose again,
then must I rise to newnes of Life. If Christ loved me so as to give Himself
for me. Then shall not I love Him so as to give my Lusts for Him etc. Let these
Things be observed, and there is none that do in the least measure truly
Believe, But they shall find Christ and Salvation made theirs.

Believe, and yet obtainest not Christ; It is not, because this is not the way,
and the only Way and Means to get Him; But because thou have not Believed,
thou have not gone this Way, nor used this Means rightly: Therefore thou must
not give over this Way, but labor to find it out, If there be many Paths in a
Field and but one that leads to the House a Man is going to, and he have gone
to the end of one Path, and finds not the House, It is a good reason why he
should think that is not the right Path, and so seek it out, but no reason
why he should leave that Field and betake himself to another for in that Field
only is the Path; So it is no reason that thou should cease striving to
Believe, and take to some other Course; but labor to find out what it is to
Believe, and then care to do that.

And as this Doctrine shows their Error who labor to Repent, to be Holy etc.
and not first to Believe. So it also shows their Error; who finding a decay in
their Souls of Grace; and an increase of Sin; cease their Faith, and lay it
aside and take to some other Course: Whereas, the only way and means for them
to recover themselves, is to recover, strengthen and increase their Faith, for
Faith is the only Means to Christ and Salvation.

2. USE.
For Exhortation, To exhort ye all to labor above all things, to Believe; that
is, To entertain Christ, and resign up your Selves to Christ in all his
Offices to be saved through them: Mind this Work most of all, for it is the
all in all to your Salvation; Thus did Paul Phill. 3. 8. 9. Yea doubtless I
count all things but loss for the excelency of the knowledge of Christ; and do
count all but Dunge that I may win Christ; And be found in him, not having
mine own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the
Faith of Christ: This is a work I commend to you, and Command you in Gods
Name: It is Gods Work that which he most charge on you under the Gospel,
John. 6. 29. do ye make it your chief work:

You that take up your Thoughts and Hearts most with the World, with the
Honors, Pleasures, or Profits thereof; I might exhort you to believe (for till
you do it you cannot be saved) but you are to far off from Faith yet; You are
to be exhorted to get Preparations for Faith; your Hearts to be so affected by
the Law, with a sight of your Sins, and Misery by it, that ye may be brought
to thirst after Christ, and willing to entertain him on any Conditions; Mind
ye this above all, because without this, ye cannot come to Faith, that only
brings Christ and Salvation: This Worlds Honors, Pleasures, and Profits,
cannot give you Christ nor Salvation, and why then shall they be prefered and
minded and sought after more then Faith, and that Humiliation which fits for
Faith?

But I will not address my Exhortation to you; But to Such as be humbled and
troubled with their Sins, and Cry out, What shall we do to be saved? To you
I say, as Luke. 8. 50. Fear not, only Believe: Ye have but one thing to do,
there is but one thing God requires of you, and you shall have Christ and
Salvation: And that is to Believe: Oh do it! this will certainly, bring you
all you desire: Acts. 1^. 3^. What must I do to be saved, Ver. 31. And they
said believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved; And although
Peter pressed them to Repent, as Acts. 2. 38. Yet that is, but as if he had said
Believe, Which in and by Repentance will show forth it Self and work in you;
If ye fear Hell and desire Salvation, then Believe. This is the one and only
way, All other Things that be good, come after this; All other Labor of thine,
is in vain till this be done; Therefore this is so called for, and pressed in
Scripture; It is charged on People by a Command. 1. John. 3. 23. This is his
Commandment: that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ; And
so is in that Call to Repent, Acts, 17. 30. for till they Believe, they cannot
Repent; And it is required with the greatest reward promised, and threat
annexed, Mark. 16. 16. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, but
he that believes not shall be damned.

To persuade you to this duty, Consider the evil of not Believing, And the
Benifite of Believing.

The Evil of not Believing is very great; Its very Injurious to God, Christ,
and your Selves.

To God; It makes him a Liar, whereas Believing, setts to your Seal that God
is true; therefore it is called a Justifying of God, Luke 7. 29. 30. His truth
and faithfullnes, And not Believing, is a condemning God, as not true and
faithful; You also wrong God in not obeying his Command (which is to Believe)
and in not regarding his Feast: nor valueing his Dainties: which made him say
they that did so should not taste of them; for he that believes not, is expressed
by them that refused to come when the Supper was prepared Luke, the 14 And so
ye wrong him in not receiving his Son (for that is Believing) when he
proffers and sends him to you.

It also is Injurious to Christ; Its a slighting him, as if he were not worth
the taking, It is a refusing to kiss Him, and to let him reign over you, and
a Hating Him, Luke. 19. 14. It is as much as to say he is not worth the taking
up, he is not sufficient, or not free to help.

It is also Injurious to your own Souls, Luke. 7. 30. against themselves
(that is not believing they did wrong themselves, John. 3. 19. It is The
Comdemnation; many Co^demnatio^s ye have viz. Oaths, Lying etc. but this is
The Condemnation; Ye do keep your Selves from Salvation, because this is the
only Means, and ye will not use it; Ye do that, Acts, 13. 47. Judge your
Selves unworthy, and make the Preachers of Christ be turned from you; And for
you that by discouragme^ts are kept from Believing, ye keep your Souls, from
that pertaking of Christ, and his Benifites which ye might attain to; And so
also, such as do believe but weakly, they wrong God, Christ, and themselves
very much; as if their food which God provides were not good enough; as if
Christ the Second Adam were not as good to help them, as the First Adam was to
hurt them; and keep themselves from that measure of Grace from Christ, which
they might attain to.

As the Evil of not Believing is great; So is the Benifite of Believing; Its
as effectual as doing was with Adam, With him it was, do and live; Now it is
Believe and Live: Not that God loves a fruitles Faith, but because it is Faith
that must help to do, and that is better esteemed with God then doing, Romans
4. 21. 22. Because Faith brings Christ's doing, which is Perfect, and Ours is
not; Believing it is the very Key which opens Christ: in whom are unsearchable
Riches, and gives entrance into Heaven: It is the Bucket by which we fetch
Water from that Well of Life; And all that have this Key and Bucket, may take
thence: And therefore it is, that many have noe Grace from Christ, because they
have no Faith in Christ: And others have so little Grace, because they have so
little Faith, for as we Believe, so is it unto us; Matb. 8. 13. It is the
turning the Cock, which sets all a flowing from God, both Mercy and Grace; It
is in the least degree, a sure Evidence of Heaven, gives Title to Christ, and
all Promises, brings Justification, Sanctification, and Salvation, affords
Adoption and Sonnship, John. 1. 12. Now then Considering the Evil of not
Believing, and the Benifite of Faith, What can thou do that is of so much
Consequence as to Believe.

To help thee to Believe: Observe these Directions. Helps to Believe.


First labor to understand and be clearly convinced 1. Observe these
Directions.
of these Perticulers.

Alsufficiency, to help thee to all things, needful to Salvation.

Offer, and tender of Christ to all People, where the Gospel comes, without
respect, or limitatio^ of Persons but only of Conditions (which is the next
Point to come in our Text.)

Is most true and able, and most sincere and willing to give. what he offers.

Christ, or before we do seek for him, God requires nothing, but so far to
see our Misery, as to desire Christ, and be willing to take Him on His own
Conditions, and that then we be fittest for obtaining Christ, when we see in
our Selves nothing but emptines of all Good, and fullnes of Sin and Misery.

Believing brings Christ and all Grace, and must be the first thing we do, to
get Christ or Grace. (which is the Point in hand)

readily imbraceth, and sweetly incourageth all; that attempt, and endeavor to
believe in Him.

express Command of God, is upon All, where the Gospel comes, That they do
believe; These are undoubted Truths express in the Scripture, 2. Practice
these Things.


Secondly, Practice these Things.

Pray to God for help and grace to believe, for it is his gift.

Preaching of the Gospel, Faith comes by hearing Romans 10. 17.

to it, sit not still, give not way to Doubtings, and Tentations, and Carnal
reasonings, but reason from the above premised Propositions, and press your
own Heart, with the Conclusions that must follow thence; Also ponder and
consider of those Propositions, and resist all that furthers Doubting, and
hinders Believing; Thus make it your work and trade, to work your Heart to it.

To venture upon that which the Word sets before you, even above Reason and
Hope, and without Sense; studiously search out, what it is to Believe, in the
first and least act of it; and then do that at a Venture, and commit your
Soul to it, doing it, what ever rises against it in your own reason: And
thus Faith begines.

Thus much for the Second Thing in the Text: The Means by which this Bread of
Life: The All sufficient Remedy of Man's misery may be obtained.

THE THIRD THING in the Text is the The Third Thing in the Text.
PERSONS that may use this means, and so obtain Christ: In those Words: He
that Comes, He that Believes. That is, Any One by these Means may obtain
Him; It is an indefinite Proposition and is equivalent to a universal; It is
as much as to say; Who ever Comes: (as it is else where put) John. 3. 15. That
Whosoever believes in Him, should not perish, but have Eternal Life; upon the
use of this Means, any Person whoever may obtain Christ, and Salvation by him.

DOCTRINE.
CHRIST, and Salvation by CHRIST, are free for any PERSON whatsoever, to
obtain by Believing in CHRIST. The meaning is not, only, that Christ is for
all sorts of People; for all Sorts of People shall actually have him, because
God has Elect of all Sorts; both Men and Women and Children, Young and Old,
Poor and Rich, Wise and Foolish, One Nation and Another etc. But the meaning
is this, that there is no particular Person in the World, which may not by
Believing have Christ, and Salvation by him; Christ is so freely tendered to
all Comers, to all Receivers, to all that Believe in him; that there is no
person of any Sex, Age, Country, Condition, or Sins whatever but by
Believing may have Christ and Salvation by Christ; This is express in the
Text; whilst our Savior says, He that comes, He that believes; that is,
Whoever comes and believes:

As it was in the type; the Brazen Serpent cured only by being looked on, and
it cured all that looked on it, so that whatever stung Israelite looked on it,
by that means was cured; which tipyfied, that what Person soever, Came to
Christ and Believed on Him, should be Saved; for allthough, the Serpent helped
none (as it is like) but the Israelites; yet Christ is larger then that type,
being for all whoever, one or other, that come to him; as Himself applies, and
expou^ds it John. 3. 14. 15. and in other Scriptures: And therefore, Mark. 16.
15. 16. He appoints His Disciples to preach the Gospel to every Creature, (that
is to every one of Mankind) and then adds, He that believes shall be saved;
that is, whatever Creature of Mankind, whoever among them does Believe, shall
be saved; Indeed where the Gospel is not preached, the People are not Commanded
to Believe; and so the Obedience cannot be exacted from them, nor they punished
for the want of it; Yet the Commission of Mercy, and Pardon given out; is no
way limited in regard of Persons, but tenders Mercy and Pardon without
limitation of Persons, upon Believing, and therefore where ever it comes, and
is preached, it offers Christ and Salvation free for every Person of them
whatever, to be obtained by Believing; And it may be truly said that Christ is
free to be had, by any Person, by Believing; even as it was with the Jews, in
the Proclamation of Cyrus, 2. Cron last, two last Verses. and Ezrah. 1. 1. 2.
3. any Jew might have liberty and freedom from Captivity, upon the terms of
accepting it, for it was granted to all whoever, to depart that would depart.
Now though it is true all did not take it, and so were not delivered, yet
Freedom was Free for every one, to be had by accepting it; So is it with
Christ and Salvation by Him; although not every one, nor the most do obtain
it, because they use not the Means, accept not the Terms and Conditions.

And this was typified by the Years of Iubile (which typified Christ; as is
clear by Luke. 4. 19. Christ is to preach the acceptable Year; that is, the
Iubil; He is to Preach it; that is, in and by Him, it is performed and
declared) In those Years any Servant of the Hebrews might go from his
Master, and if he would go, and so accept of Freedom, he was to have it,
Deuteronomy. 15 12. 13. any Hebrew was to have Freedom in this Year, if he would
accept it (though if he would not accept it, he was not to have it as we shall
see hereafter) which taught, that any Person (for though the Tipe was limited,
yet the Antitipe is not, because the Wall of Separation is removed) I say it
taught, that any Person whoever, upon these Terms by these Means, Viz:
Accepting Christ and Salvation, that is, Believing in Him, should have it: And
this seems to be employed in Romans 3. 22. 23. That as there is no difference
among People till they believe, (they are all Sinners) So there is no
difference in Gods offer of Mercy in the Gospel, Its on the same Terms; to be
had a like by All; and therefore with Christ, The Angels said glad Tidings came
to all People, Luke 2. 10. Now if Salvation might not be had by All, on the
same Terms, then were it not glad Tidings to All, But this makes it glad
Tidings to All; That All whoever, by Believing may have Salvation; therefore is
that Luke. 2. 30. 31. Mine eyes have seen thy Salvation, which thou have
prepared before the face of all People:

This is another maine thing to be known; as, that Christ is the All and only
Remedy; and that He is to be had by Believing; So that any Person whatever, by
Believing may have Him; As a General Pardon, offering Mercy to all Traitors
which submit and come in; any Traitor whatever upon those Terms may have
Mercy; Indeed Christ does actually afford help to none, but to them that
Believe, but his help is freely tendered all, upon their Believing, So that
any One whatever Believing, shall have help by Christ; this is express,
Revela 22. 17.

Neither let this Point be perverted, for it shows not that any Person may
have Christ and Salvation, on any terms (for so it should justify and
encourage carnal Libertines) Nor that all, or the most shall have Christ on
these terms; that is, actually enjoy him by thus doing, for the most shall
not have Grace to do so, though by so doing, they may have him; But the Point
shows, that any Person may have it, on Christ's terms; and that every Person
(where the Gospel is preached) may and should endeavor to Believe, and
Believing, shall have Christ; And this is most clear, by those Scriptures
which express Christ by a Feast; Prove. 9. 1. Luke. 14. 16. etc. where all are
invited, and upon coming might eat of the Feast; and the most unlikeliest of
all to be permitted to come, are instanced in; Viz: The Simple and Fools, the
Poor, and the Hedge and High way Persons, to show that None be excluded; out
of the Offer, but on the same Terms any one whatever may come and injoye
Christ.

REASONS.
Gods Grace, and Free-Mercy; whilst that Christ and Salvation, may not only be
had for taking; but also may be had by any One whatever, for taking. So freely
to offer Christ and Salvation to a few were great Mercy, but to offer it so
freely to every one, that is Wonderful Mercy; As it is great Mercy for a
Prince, to offer Pardon to one or two Traitors, upon the terms of accepting
Pardon; but to tender it to all Traitors on the same free terms, is
wonderful Mercy; even as it was wonderful Riches in Solomon in the 2. Cron.
1. 15, to make Silver at Jerusalem as Stones; that is that any one whatever may
have for taking up, if he desires them (for so are Stones;) Even thus is the
Riches of Gods Mercy, set forth: inasmuch as Christ and Salvation (Things of
more worth then Gold and Silver) are to be had by any whoever, if they accept
the^, that is, Believe in Christ.

Incourageth every one to obey the Gospel, and believe in Christ; inasmuch as
Christ is not limited, nor are any sequestered and shut out from having Christ
by Believing: Therefore there is good Encouragement for any one, so for every
one, to endeavor to Believe.

And this is a wise Administration of God, for, by this means, they who live
under the Gospel, and yet believe not, are left wholly without excuse, even as
that Man Math. 22. 12. speechles; for it will be clear (even their own selves
being Judges,) that they missed Mercy, because they cared not for it, but loved
other things better, for when it was free to be had by any one; by Receiving
and Believing, they would not do that; even as the Traitor, who receives not
the free and general Pardon, has no plea nor excuse left him, when he comes
to receive the Sentence; And this seems to be employed in John. 3. 19. The
Condemnation to them that have heard the Gospel^, will be this, That Light came
into the World, (which must be supplied) and might have been had by every one
of them if they would have received it, but they would not so much as take it,
when they might have had it, because their deeds were evil; This free tender
of Christ, It discovers the wickedness of their Hearts, the evil Deeds of the^
(for therefore they will not love, nor receive the light) and leaves them
without all Plea, and makes their Destruction to be of themselves, their own
wilful ruin, who do perish under the Gospel: And as there is this effect.

So also, by this means, the Persons (as the Apostle speaks 1. These. 5. 9.)
are appointed by God to obtain Salvation by Christ; they are brought on to
Believe, and so to be saved by Christ; For God, does not first, show People
that he has Elected them, and then and thereby persuade and bring them to
believe, but Election is concealed as a secret thing, and by Gods offering
Christ freely to every one to be had by Believing His free Offer incourageth
them to labor to Believe, and they finding themselves not shut out of Mercy,
they labor to Believe, and God helps and gives them the Gift of Faith, and so
they Believing, come to know that they are ordained to Life Eternal, Acts.
13. 48. This is a wise course and way to bring in the Elect, and discourage or
hinder none.

USE.
Incouragment.
For special Encouragement to every one of you To come to Christ and believe
in Him; I now in Gods Name, as his Messenger and Ambassador; Tender and Offer
Christ to every One of You, on these Terms, that ye Come to Him, Receive Him,
Believe in Him, and assure you, that so doing, Ye shall be saved by Him: I
tender Christ to you All, only annexing these Two Cautions least ye should
mistake or abuse this Doctrine: Cautions.


Christ, but they who be willing to have him on His own Terms Viz. To be
Lord and King to them as well as Priest.

do get Christ, they are surely Changed by Him, and made New Creatures.

These being premised; I do this Day, Offer Jesus Christ to ye All, and
assure ye He is to be had by you if ye Come to Him, Receive Him, Believe in
Him; that is, If ye Entertain Him, and give up your Selves to Him in all his
Offices; upon these Terms, He may be had by any of you; It is most probable
there be Some of You to whom God intends good; where He so freely sends his
Gospel; Now let every one hope it is he. And endeavor to make it so; as men do
at a Dole: and let Heaven Suffer Violence.

Oh Receive Him then! Give up your Selves to Him in Covenant; Accept Him for
your King, Priest, and Prophet; Resolve this Day, The Lord Jesus Christ, shall
be my Prophet, I will in all Things labor to be Taught and Guided by Him; And
he shall be my King; I will in all Things care to be Ruled by his Laws: And he
shall be my Priest; I will rest on Him for Atonement and Satisfaction to
God-wards.

I must address my Self to Two Sorts of People among you.

1. To such of you as are Willing that Christ should reign over you, but dare
not, or cannot trust in Him for your Salvation; be ye encouraged, for there is
none such but be welcome to Christ, that is all he seeks, to reign over you,
it is all the terms he stands on, ye having granted him his own Conditions,
why should ye question his Mercy; This I say to you, 1. that if ye be made
willing to give up your Selves to Christ in all things to be guided by him, and
covet his Kingly Office in your Souls, and study and seek for Holiness, And 2.
If ye find, that hope of Mercy, makes ye fear to offend, and care to please
God in all things, and does not make you presumptuous, secure and bold to
Sin; Then you may, and should apply Christ for Mercy, and expect it from him;
And do it now, Now He is offered to you this Day, as a Priest to save you, and
reconcile God to you, accept it, in that Office and put your trust in him, Is
he not free for every one upon these terms, and why will you neglect so free
Mercy? You have sinned against it hitherto, in doubting and questioning of it,
Oh now sin not any longer! but boldly venture thy self on Christ; fear not
thy Welcome, or being permitted to apply Christ, the free general Pardon is
given out; and sue it forth, whoever lays hold on Chrst must be saved: Christ
puts this out of doubt: John. 6. 37. He that comes I will in noe wise send
away; Limitt not, where God has not limited; do not shut out thy Self,
where God has not shut thee out; do not inquire whether thou art chosen or
no, but look to the Gospel, in which Christ is freely tendered to every one on
the terms of believing, and labor to believe; Therefore against all
malicious suggestions of Satan, and against all carnal reasonings of thine
own Heart, boldly endeavor to rely on Christ's Merit for thy Justification
and so doing thou shall be saved; Thus reason with your Self; Does God freely
offer Christ to save all that entertain him, and requires nothing but our
accepting him, why then should not I venture my Soul on him, and rest
Confident? How can the God of Truth but be as good as his Word? And if he be
so, how can I but obtain Salvation by Christ, if I trust in Christ? I would
believe a Man whom I thought honest upon his word; and shall I not God, when I
have his Word and Oath?

2. I am to speak to another sort of People; Viz: Such of you, as mind not
Christ at all, or if you do, yet not so much as to let him reign over you,
but are still bent on your Lusts, and your old and former Ways; Ye are they,
who yet mind some thing in the World, to much, and are not willing to
entertain Christ for your King; Be ye now exhorted to receive him, and let him
reign over you; He may be had upon these Terms even by you (for he is free
for every one on these terms) therefore entertain him, let the World and
your Lusts go, and choose Christ; Reason thus with your Selves; Is not the
Love of the World enmity to God, so that He that is a friend to the World, must
be Gods Enemy? The Things of the World they are but perishing, uncertain,
insufficient Helpers, and Comforters; And as for my Lusts and Ways, are they
not deceitful, vanishing, and damnable? Is not the Fruit of every Sin,
Shame; and the Wages Death? must I not leave them, and get Pardon for them, or
go to Hell? Why then shall I prefer the World and Sin before Christ? And (as
the Jews in an other case) choose Barrabas a Murderer, and let Christ go? At
the Day of Judgment I shall need Christ; But how can I think, Christ will own
me hereafter, if I now will not own him, and let him rule over me? Will he not
one Day, bid me depart, and say He knows me not, if I be a Worker of Iniquity?
Wherefore since Christ is so free, that I may receive him as well as any other,
so that I will but renounce all my sinnfull ways, and give up my Self to Him;
I will so do: What Is the World and my Lusts to Heaven and Christ; which thus I
may have?

Oh! that ye would be persuaded this Day, to abandon the World and your Sins,
and Entertain Christ for your Lord and King; Do it, when as you hear, that
if you now accept Christ, ye shall be wellcomed; and though hitherto ye have
been great Sinners; Yet now if ye abandon your Lusts, and embrace Christ; ye
shall have him given, and all that is past freely forgiven: Oh! why will ye
neglect so great Salvation? Do not so, but do this; Receive Christ; and now
do it; do not defer the doing this, But now make this Covenant with Christ,
even this Day, at this Time: Covenant in your Spirits with Christ; that you
will accept Him in all his Offices to be yours, and give up your Selves to be
his, and rest on him for your Salvation; Now I say do it, whilst it is called
too Day, and defer not; if now you will endeavor to do it, Christ will help
you forward; Incline to this happy work, and the ministry of the Gospel shall
promove and farther you; It is the Ministry of the Spirit, and not of the
Letter; Gods Spirit accompanyes it, both to work in you a Will to do thus,
and to Help them that are willing and do endeavor it; But if ye shall defer
Christ; and excuse your not Coming, and put him off, ye can expect no other
return but that, Luke. 14. 24. For I say unto you, that none of those men
which were bidden shall taste of my Supper: and ye may well fear, it shall fare
with you, as with the Israelites, who because They would not accept Gods offer
and enter Canaan, when he tendered it, allthough a while after, they would have
done it, and did endeavor, yet God would never let them come into it: Where
Gods Mercy is most free; he is usually most quick and severe; and they that may
and will not go free, are served, as the Servant that might, and would not.
Deuteronomy. 15. 16. 17. No after Years of Jubilee, could free them.

Remarkable is the Speech of Francis Spira, (one of whom I told you before)
when he languished under the torture of his Conscience, for preferring the
World, before Christ: Oh says he! that I could but hope in Gods Mercy; Oh!
what would I give for one of those sweet Motions of Gods Spirit, to incline
me, which I have had before and slighted; A pitiful Case; and yet the like
and worse may yours be, if ye neglect or defer to take Christ, now that he is
offered to you all; Therefore, if ye have any sense or apprehension of Things
Spiritual, Eternal and to Come, If ye have any fear of Hell, or desire of
Heaven; If any respect or reverence to God who thus condescends and stoopes
low, so as to Offer Christ and Salvation to you, and Invite you to come and
take it; Be Exhorted to Come and Believe in Jesus Christ.

But if all this will not move you, then briefly Consider what the Lord says
in his Word; where Christ is offered, and not received; Oh! how fearful is
that Peoples State?

1. They are in a more Special desperate subjection to Sin then others; For
Light is come into the World, and such Men Loved Darkness, rather then Light,
because their deeds are evil; John. 3. 19. Christ, Who is set for the rising
again of many, is set also for the fall of others; Luke. 2. 34. 35. And for a
sign which shall be spoken against, that the thoughts of many Hearts may be
revealed; And herein the Iniquity of Sin is discovered.

2. They must Perish; you heard before, how they that were Invited, and Came
not, should not taste of the Supper, Therefore 2. These. 1. 7. 8. The Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming Fire, to
take Vengance; But on whom? On them that know not God, and Obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. And the same Apostle tells us, If the Gospel
be hid, it is to them that perish 2. Cor. 4. 3. Such shall call for Christ and
Mercy, as Pro. 1. 24. etc. but shall be answered, Him ye would not have; Such
shall have in them as much fear of Christ, as of God, and as much danger from
Christ, as from God; For Christ will be Wroth, and will certainly Have those
his Enemies, which would not that he should reign over them, brought, and
slain, before Him, Luke. 19. 27. Christ the Lamb, will be wroth, and such
shall be the day of his wrath, so great, and terrible, as that men shall say,
who shall be able to stand? and therefore unbeleevers of all ranks, Kings,
Great men of the Earth, Rich men, and the Chief Captains, Such as now dare
look Death in the Face, shall then Call to the Mountains and Rocks to fall
on them, to cover them from that Wrath, Revel. 6. 15. 16. 17. And how can Such
want ruin, When the Gospel shall Judge them; as Christ tells you it shall do
those who hear it and do not believe, John. 12. 47. 48. The Word that I have
spoken, the same shall Judge them at the Last Day:

And Such shall not only perish, but Perish worse the^ Others; The Gospel is a
Savor of Death unto Death to them, 2. Cor. 2. 15. 16. They are dead already,
but shall dye worse; They are fallen in Adam, but shall fall farther Luke. 2.
34. Therefore that Place is very Considerable, Math. 10. 12. to. 16. And when
ye come into an house, salute it. And if the house be worthy, let your peace
come upon it, but if it be not worthy, let your peace return to you. And
whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words: when ye depart out of
that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet. Verily I say unto you; It
shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of
Judgment, then for that City.

Thus much for the third Thing in the Text; Viz: the Persons that may use these
Means, and so obtain Christ: Now the Last follows.

THE FOURTH and Last THING in the Text is The 4. Thing in the Text.
the MOTIVE by which People are persuaded to use this Means, and so get
Christ, This Bread of Life, The Allsufficient Remedy of Man's Misery: That is
taken from the great Benifite that by so doing, will redound to the^: As
appears by these Words; Shall never Hunger, Shall never Thirst; Whoever Comes
to Christ, or Believes in Christ shall never Hunger nor Thirst: As Bread alayes
Hunger; So does this Bread; This Christ; And that in a better manner then Bread
does; For, 1. Bread alayes Hunger and not Thirst; But Christ alayes Hunger and
Thirst, more appetites then Bread does. 2. Bread alayes but for a while, Christ
alayes for ever; Parallel to this latter is that John. 4. 13. 14. Whosoever
drinks of this Water, shall thirst again: But whosoever drinks of the
Water that I shall give him, shall never thirst: Where the Comparison is made,
and Christ in this Respect, is prefered.

For the understanding this; Ye must know, that although in some regard (as
ye shall see hereafter) this may be taken Literally, and in some regard of the
Body; that they that Believe in Christ, shall never hunger nor thirst; Yet
Chiefly this is to be taken Metaphorically, and so largely, and so including
the Litterall and Corporal Sense, and the meaning is this:

That all their Wants shall be supplied, and all Desires alayed and satisfied.
But this is expressed by not hungering and thirsting, because of following the
Metaphors of Bread and Water, by which Christ is expressed: Hungering and
Thirsting, are painful Desires of some necessary good Thing that's wanting, the
one of Meat, the other of Drink, for the good of the Body; Now every Person
having a reasonable and immortal Soul; has many and great Desires, which be
as so many Hungerings and Thirstings; Now by Christ, all these Desires shall be
alayed, by supplying all his Wants, and Christ is had by Believing: This is the
Meaning: The Doctrine arising hence is.

DOCTRINE.
Whoever Believes in CHRIST, shall have all his WANTS supplied, and so, all his
DESIRES alayed; and his SOVLE fully satisfied. He shall be sent away with a
Complete Satisfaction, as the hungry Man when he is filled with Meat, or the
thirsty Man with Drink.

The Point is plain and express in the Text; If there were no other Proofs,
we might build our Faith on it: But there are Diverse

This was Prophesied off, under the same Metaphors; Isay, 49. 9. 10. That thou
may say to the Prisoners, go forth; to the^ that are in darkness show your
selves; they shall feed in the ways, and their pastures shall be in all high
places; they shall not hunger nor thirst, neither shall the Heat nor Sun
smite the^: for he that has mercy on the^, shall lead them, even by the
springs of Waters shall he guide them. To which Christ has reference; Revel.
7. 16. 17. Tbey shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more etc. And is in
express words promised, Ier. 31. 14. 25. And I will satiate the souls of the
Priests with fatnes, and my people shall be satisfied with goodness, says the
Lord; And Verse. 25. I have satiated the weary soul, and I have replenished
every sorrowful soul; And so Ier. 50, 19. I will bring Israel again to his
Habitation, and he shall feed on Carmel and Bashan, and his soul shall be
satisfied upon mount Ephraim and Gilead. And therefore, it is affirmed, as made
good by, and in Christ; Luke. 1. 53. He has filled the hungry wih good things;
therefore Psalm. 34. 8. 9. 10. The Believer (who is after expressed by the effects
of Faith) fearing and seeking God; is said to be Blessed, and why? because He
shall want no good; for that is Blessedness: Thus much is also inplyed in Isa.
55. 1. 2. 3. by Believing in Christ, (which is meant there by Coming Buying
etc.) they shall come to enjoy all good things, that be requisite to their
welfare, and so Consequently shall have All desires alayed: Therefore it is,
that as all our Desires are in the Text expressed by Hu^gering and Thirsting, so
Christ is expressed by a Feast in Scripture and tipified by the Manna and Rock,
that yielded Rivers of Water in the Wilderness; to show, that as by coming to a
rich and full Feast, there is a supply, of all the wants, and an alaye, of all
the desires, of an hu^gry and thirsty Man; So by Believing in Christ, all the
Wants of People are supplied, and all their Desires alayed: Therefore, Math. 5.
6. They which Hunger be Blessed, because they shall be Satisfied, If not
Satisfied, they be not Blessed.

REASONS.
Reason is grounded upon a two fold Proposition. First, That Believing
possesses a Man of Christ: He that Believes in Christ, has, Christ, and is
one with Christ; Therefore, (as ye heard before) Believing is compared to a
Marrying, and to an Ingrafting into Christ: That look as a Woman married to a
Man, injoyeth him as her own; and a Science grafted, injoyeth and possesses
the Tree for its own; So, Whoever believes in Christ: Injoyeth and Possesses
Christ for their own: Christ is the Gift of God John 4. 12. and Faith is a
receiving of this Gift John. 1. 12. Now as a Man that has received a gift does
possess and injoye it as his own. So Believers receive Christ given of God,
and so injoye and possess him as their own, Faith makes us the House of
Christ; Christ dwells in the Heart by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. even as a man dwells
in his House, and so he has Possession of the House; So have Believers of
Christ: Hence when Thomas believed; he says my Lord, my God; Therefore David
Psalm 144. 1. 2. Challe^geth God to be his, and why? He trusts in Him; in the
end of the Verse. So that Believing possesses a Man of Christ.

Having Christ makes God to be ours; Christ brings to the Fruition and enjoying
of God; which may be gathered from his very Name; which is Emanuell, that is,
God with us Math. 1. 23. which not only implies, that in him God is come in
our Nature, because he that is God took our Nature into Personal Union, but
also that in and by Him God is enjoyed by us, even by so many as have Christ:
For by Christ, all is removed, that kept us from God, and all is supplied that
may bring us to God, and make us enjoy God; The Sufferings, Obedience, and
Intercession of Christ; appease Gods Wrath, and satisfy Gods Justice, and so
brings the Person into full Favor with God, Math. 3. 17. he says not with
whom, but In whom I am well pleased; And the Spirit and Holiness of Christ,
works out Corruption, and works in Holiness; and so there is brought about a
Communion with God, and Fruition of God, and so God walks in them, and is
their Father and God, they his Children and People, 2. Cor. 6. latter end. And
so in Ephesians. 2. 13. Having by Faith got Christ to be theirs, though before they
were affarr off, yet now are made near; and so in the 19. Verse. You are no
more strangers and foreiners, but Citizens with the Saints and of the household
of God: Hence is that Romans 5. 11. Not only so, but we also joy in God through
our Lord Jesus Christ by whom we have now received the atonement; there is Joy
in God through Christ, therefore by Christ God is enjoyed; Now, where God is
enjoyed; All wants must be supplied, and All desires allayed; For God is an
Infinite Goodness, therefore, they can want nothing, that have him; As they
cannot want Light that have the Sunn, or Water that have the Ocean, because
there is a sufficiency of Light in the Sunn, and of Water in the Ocean:

Now God is Alsufficie^t, Genesis 17. 1. This God has clearly proved, by his
Works of Creation and Providence, He of Nothing made several Things; and
filled them all full; He gave Perfection to every Creature at first, so that it
lacked nothing, and to the whole Creation, that is meant by seeing it was good
and very good, that is every Part was perfect, lacking nothing, and the Whole
was very Complete and Full; He that filled the whole World that it lacked
nothing, Cannot he fill Man's desires? And so by his Providence he fills and
satisfies, as Psalm. 107. 9. and 145. 16. And he had not made all Mankind to
seek him, (as he did, Acts. 17. 26. 27.) if he could not satisfy them; for
then he had made so^thing in vain; all the infinite desires that are in
Mankind, after a chief Good; by enjoying which they may be happy, as they
show there is a God, so they teach that, that God can fully satisfy them all;
and this is express; Psalm. 16. and last. Fullnes of Joy, Joy; therefore
Fruitio^ and Satisfaction of Desire, else noe Joy; and full Joy; therefore
there is supply of all Wants, and alaye of all Desires; God himself is
satisfied in himself, else he were not God, and being able to satisfy
himself, who is an Infinite being, he can much more satisfy Man that is but
of a finite being; Since therefore Christ brings us into Gods Presence as Ephesians.
3. 12. By him we have access, that is he is Gods Emissary, sent from God to
bring Believers into Gods Presence and so to enjoy God (as the word signifies
in Greek) it must needs follow; That Every one that injoyeth Christ, must be
Satisfied, and have All desires alayed; Because with Christ, God is had, and so
All fulness.

For the better clearing this Point; Consider we in In what respects, or how a
Believer never hu^gers nor thirsts.
What Respects, or How this can be true; That the Believer never hungers nor
thirsts.

It is true, in some degree in this Life; and fully and compleately in the Life
to Come.

First in this Life, it is true, in some degree; That he that Believes in
Christ; has all his wants supplied, and so all his desires alayed; And that in
a Threefold Respect.

1. In respect of Sin; He that believes in Christ, shall not hunger nor
thirst after Sin. This is the greatest Hunger and Thirst of an Unbeleever;
Therefore Sins are called Lusts, because they are the appetites and desires of
Unbeleevers; The Unbeleever, as truly wants and desires after, the Commission
of Sin, some or other, according as he is carried by Constitution, Condition,
Custom, Company, or Tentation, as the hungry or thirsty Man does after Meat,
or Drink, Pro. 4. 16. They sleep not except they have done mischeife;
therefore it is, that they are so eager upon Sin, Pro. 1. 16 Their feet run
to evil; so 1. Pet. 4. 4. For there is a Nature in every Unbeleever; that is
satisfied and upheld by commiting Sin, as our Nature is by Eating and
Drinking, therefore It lusts, after evil; James. 4. 5. But now, He that
Believes in Christ; is not thus to Sin; The Body of Sin is destroyed in
him, Romans 6. 6. therefore, he serves not, and so seeks nor Sin; For he is
said to be Dead to Sin Verse. 7. therefore he desires not after Sin; Hence,
Romans 8. 5. The Believer (who is described by his inseparable Property to be
after the Spirit) minds the Things of the Spirit, that is, and not the Things
of the Flesh; The Unbeleever minds fleshly things; as a Woman that is with
Child her eyes are still on it if it be present, or else her Phant'sy runns
after it; But the Believer, lives the Life of Christ; and has Christ dwelling
in him, therefore he must do as Christ did; that is, not desire Sinning, but
to suppress it as 1. John. 3. 8. and Verse. 9. He is made pertaker of the
seed of God, therefore cannot sin; that is, so far as he is pertaker of
that, there is a Nature in every Believer; which is contrary to Sin, He
pertakes of the Divine Nature 2. Pet. 1. 4. therefore wants not, nor seeks any
satisfaction by Sin; but the Contrary; He lusts after Holiness (as in the
former Place is said; minds the things of the Spirit; and lusts against Sin;
as Gall. 5. 17. for it makes the Soul see misery, in the Sins it desired;
and that happynes it sought in Sin; to see it and seek it in God and
Holiness: Now in respect of this the Doctrine is true; That in every Believer
there is no Hunger; because the Nature is destroyed and so the appetite:
Indeed there is an old Nature remaining in part in the Believer, and shall be
in him as long as he lives, and that desires after Sin, which is meant by the
Flesh its lusting against the Spirit, Gall. 5. 17. but there is another Nature
which is in him, that does not lust, in which regard he is said not to desire
Sin; So that the alaye of these desires, is but in part and some degree in
this Life. As this is true in Respect of Sin; So is it true:

2. In Respect of the lawful things of this World; as Life and things tending
there to, Pleasures, Honors, Profits, etc. He that believes in Christ, shall
not hunger and thirst after these, As is clear in Zaccheus; who so thirsted
after Riches, that he defrauded, oppressed, withheld unjustly; yet having
believed in Christ; he gives away half to the Poor; and tenders to restore
fourfold to all that he had wronged, Luke. 19. 8. Therefore the Believers
Acts. 2. 44, 45. sold their Goods and Lands, and committed them to the
Apostles dispose in good uses, Thus Gal. 6. 14. The World is crucified to me,
(says Paul) and so not coveted nor desired, as a withered flower is not;
therefore Paul had all appetite to this Lyfes Content alayed; only for some
spiritual respects, Viz. the Churches good, he desired to abide in this Life
Phillip, 23. 24. for all his overweaning opinions of their excellency, are
rectified, and he is made see, the Emptines, Uncertainty, Insufficiency of
them; that he cannot much regard them. 2. Cor. 5. 16. Know (that is esteem
and regard) no man after the flesh, that is in regard of Carnal Excellencies,
and he sees so much Satisfaction and Excellency in God, that he cannot much
desire them, as He cannot the Candle light, that has the Sunns light; As Peter
by the Glory of Christ's Transfiguration, was taken off from the Contents in the
World, and therefore desired to stay in the Mount with Christ, therefore, 1.
Tim. 6. 6. Godlynes with Content, (with Selfe-sufficiency as the word is) is
great gain; there is a Selfe-sufficiency in Godlynes, and therefore there is a
moderation in desire to all outward things, for he knows they be not of much
concernment Luke. 12. 15. and he knows that they are not gort by our caring
for them, but rather by our not caring; But God cares and gives sufficient,
Verse. 25. 30. Indeed Believers have and may have some desires after the^;
Christ teaches us to pray Give us this Day our daily Bread; But it is nothing
such as it is in Unbeleevers, Its not the Principal and Chief Good: But as
the bait and refreshment at an Inn, which one that travailes to an other
Place, takes for his necessary refreshment, therefore Believers are expressed by
Their leaving their Country and not returning when they might, Heb. 11. 13. to
17. This Alaye of Hunger, comes from the former, for the same Nature that had
appetite to Sin, sent forth inordinate appetites to the things of this World:
which Nature being destroyed the Desire cease. As it is true in these
Respects; So:

3. In Respect of Grace and true Happynes: The Believer in Christ, in this
Life, shall not hunger nor thirst after Grace, and true Happynes: For the
understanding this, Ye must know that none do so desire Grace and true
Happynes, as the Believer does, 1. Pet. 2. 2. 3. and he never desired it before
he believed; so much as he does after; as is clear in David, so in Paul who
had strong earnest Thirsts after Grace, as appears by those expressio^s he
uses, I beat down my Body: I so run tbat I may attain etc. And this God
would have us do; he has Commanded to follow or hunt after Righteousness etc.
But the Believer is said not to hunger and thirst after it; In these Four
Regards.

First, Because He that believes in Christ, shall never finally or totally
loose Grace and true Happynes Viz: Gods Favor, Image, and Fellowship which he
has got by Christ; These things shall be in him as a Spring living and
springing up for ever, John. 4. 14. and not as a Pond which may in time be
quite dried up: and so the Believer shall never hunger and thirst after these
things, as we do after Meat and Drink, who though we have had it, yet over a
while, are as destitute of it, and as fully want it as ever we did.

This Not hungring, excludes not every desire, but such an one, as springs from
a total want of Grace; That this is true of the Believer, is most clear in
Scripture, by many Places Viz: Psalm. 89. 33. Nevertheless my loving kindness
will I not utterly take from him; nor suffer my faythfullnes to fail. Some may
say this is meant of David for the Crown; that his Seed should never be wholly
stripped of it for ever: true; but not only so, for Esaias, 55. 3. every Believer
is promised The sure Mercyes of David, Ier. 31. 3. I have loved thee with an
everlasting Love: Ro^. 11. 20. The Gifts, that is the gift of faith, and so of
Christ with faith, and the Calling, that is, Vocation, and so the drawing to
believe; is without repentance; that is on Gods part: Where God has begun a
good work he will perfect it, Phill. 1. 6.

Secondly, He that Believes in Christ, may in this respect be said not to
hunger after Grace, Because he possesses, and has in himself, and of his
own, that which is abundantly able, to supply all his wants, and satisfy all
his desires; there is a spring in him John. 4. 14. however he may stand in
need of Grace, yet he has as his own, what may give a full supply; and all
his desires are virtually satisfied, in that he cannot desire, what, he has
not to satisfy; He has Two Storehouses, First Christ, In whom are hid all
the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Coll 2. 3. and in whom dwells the
fullnes of the Godhead bodily Verse 9. And Secondly he has All the Promises,
wherein there is All fullnes, and wherein God has given him. All things that
pertain to life and godliness 2. Pet. 1. 3. 4. He is said to have Rivers in
him, John. 7. 37. that is a continual Stream of Satisfaction, able to fill up
all wants; He cannot be said to hunger because he has that in him, which is
able to alaye his hunger; and when ever he will, he may take what ever his
Soul can desire. as Paul Romans 7. 24. had desires, which he presently satisfies
himself in Verse. 25. and gives thanks to God; And that there is ever a
supply, appears in this; that in his very want and desire, there is some
Content, and stay to his Soul, therefore there is some supply.

Thirdly, They are said not to hunger, because there is a Fullnes, Viae, not
Patriae, such a Fullnes, as suites their present Condition; a Comparative,
though not an absolute fullnes; Therefore the Saints speak of a Fullnes Psalm.
36. 8. 9. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatnes of thy house, and
Psalm. 63. 5. My Soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatnes; Such a
fullnes, and satisfieing, as they are capable of in this Life; For instance, a
Child may be said to be a lusty strong Child, whose strength is nothing, in
respect of the strength of a Man, to which he may after attain; So Believers,
have Satisfaction suitable to their Condition, proportionable to the State
wherein they are, a fullnes of Grace in regard of parts, though not of degrees,
a Satisfaction according to their Capacity, though not so absolute, as they
shall one Day be capable off.

Fourthly, They are fully satisfied in this Life, Because they have All Things
actually in Christ, and really by Faith; whoever Believes in Christ, has all
things actually in him: Coll. 2. 10. They are Complete in him, There is in
Christ a Fullnes of Grace and Glory, and All that is in Christ is theirs, and
they have it in him; He being full, they may truly be said to be full: Christ
not hungering and thirsting, they may truly be said not to hunger or thirst;
Christ being fully satisfied, they are said to be fully satisfied; For Christ
stands in their stead, and possesses all things in their name and right;
Christ was their Substitute, and that which is done to him, may be truly said,
to be done to them; as a Man who has his debt fully paid to his Substitute,
though he receive it not by his own hand, yet may truly acknowledge
satisfaction, because the other is his Receiver on his behalf; So Believers
may be said, to have for the supply of all their wants; because Christ has
received a fullnes, that they out of his fullnes, may receive a full supply.

And further, as they have actually a complete fullnes in Christ, So they
have really that fullnes by Faith; In Christ, He that believes, has
everlasting Life; John. 3. 16. 36. everlasting life, admitts not of hunger and
thirst, having co^pleate satisfaction, so faith brings in really a supply of
all; as God has all things to come, present, by reason of his Infinitnes and
Eternity; so has a believer by faith, which is the evidence of things not
seen, Heb, 11. 1. as Abraham had Christ's day present to him; And they are
growing up to Perfection daily; as the Child increases daily; for by Virtue of
their Union to Christ. they receive of His fullnes, in the use of the Means;
John. 1. 16. growing up by the Ordinances toward Perfection; not only a
perfection of Parts (for that is at first received) but of Degrees, Ephesians. 4. 12.
13. As the Branch from the Root, sucks more and more Sapp, or the Child from
the Nurse, or Body from the Head and Stomach by which it grows up to full
Stature; so that they be going to that Fullnes, which is in Heaven; wherein all
desires shall be satisfied.

In these Respects it is true in this Life; in some measure and degree.

Secondly in the Life to Come, it is Perfectly and Compleately true; Every
Believer then shall have All wants supplied, all desires, alayed: All the
abundance of Good that the Soul is capable off, shall be there, fully
supplied; and so, all desires must cease when there is a full Fruition;
Therefore it is called Joy, Math. 25. 21. because it is a full fruition of all
desirable Good, and they be said to enter into it; to show that it is so full
and large that it cannot enter the^, but they enter it, and so they are every
way filled with it: As the Sea cannot be Contained in a small Uessell which
may enter into it and be filled as full as it can hold, yea swallowed up of it;
so shall they be fully supplied, and have more then they need or can receive,
and he that enters into an infinite Satisfaction, must needs have his finite
Appetite fully satisfied; as Psalm. 17. last. When I awake (that is, am raised
up out of the Dust, at the last Day, for Death is called a Sleep, and so
Resurrection an awaking) I shall be satisfied, therefore, no Hunger, no Thirst;
and it must be so, because of that where with we be satisfied; Viz: Gods
Likeness, that is, God Himself and his Glory; Gods Face (as in the former
words) it shall be veiwed; that is, there shall be a full and clear fruition
of God, 1. Cor. 13. 12. Then I shall see Face to Face, and know even as also I
am known: Therefore if God can give full Satisfaction, it shall then be had;
for then shall that fully be made good, Ephesians. 3. 19. That ye might be filled
with the fullnes of God; All the fullnes of God, so far as ye are capable: If
therefore there be enough in God, there then shall be enough: Thus, in the Life
to Come, He that believes in Christ, shall have all wants supplied, and all
desires alayed; because he shall fully and perfectly enjoy God, and so perfect
Happynes: Then all desires to Sin, shall be perfectly quelled, (for that all
Sin shall be compleately purged out) Then all need and desire of the
Creature in this World, shall be quite removed; because God shall be in stead
of all, as the Sunn is in stead of a Candle, and the Ocean in stead of a Dropp
1. Cor. 15. 28. God shall be All in All; Meat, Drink, Clothing, Honor,
Wealth Pleasure Friends, and All, Mark. 12. 25. Then all desires after Grace,
shall be fully satisfied; because there shall be a Perfection of all Grace, in
regard of measures and degrees, so much Grace shall be enjoyed, as is desired,
or needed: Thus he that Believes in Christ, shall never hunger nor thirst;
because God begines to alaye his desires so soon as he believes, and never
leaves till He has brought him to the full Fruition of all desirable Good in
the Heavens.

USES.
First, for Instruction and Comfort to all that truly believe 1. For
Instruction and Comfort.
in Christ (What it is truly to Believe? I opened in opening the Second
Doctrine; where I showed, It is not a groundles and slight Conceit that Christ
dyed for us; but an entertayning and receiving Christ in all his Offices a full
resigning ones Self to Him; Covenanting to be ordered and Comfort for
Believers in two perticulers
guided by Him in all Things) to such here is Instruction and Comfort; and
that, In these Two Perticulers.

You that believe in Christ; shall never totally or finally fall away from God
and Grace, so as wholly, or for ever to loose them; (a Comfortable Point in
these dangerous seducing and declining Times) For he that once believes in
Christ; says Christ in my Text, shall never hunger nor thirst; that is, shall
never be wholly without God and Grace, Christ and Happynes, (as ye have heard in
opening of the Point) Therefore, whatever appearances there may be, through the
Subtilty of carnal Reason and Satan's Suggestions. Be thou assured, that having
once believed in Christ, thou shall never be wholly destitute of God and Grace;
for then thou must hunger and thirst; which Christ says, shall never be:

Neither is that of weight against this Co^mfortable Truth that Some object: So
long as one believes he shall never loose wholly God and Grace; But one that
believes may loose his Faith; and then loose God and Grace wholly: This I say;
is of no weight; For, though one may loose the use of Faith for some time; Yet
None that Believe, can ever wholly loose Faith, nor any other saving Grace, as
has been showed in the opening of this Point; and so as, he can never wholly
loose Faith, so neither can he ever loose Christ or Grace; If the Covenant did
run thus; That he that believes, so long as he believes, shall never fall away;
But yet he might loose all Believing, and so fall away; then were not that
true; Isay. 55 3. For with Every Believer God makes an Everlasting Covenant;
Even the Sure Mercyes of David; Now how were the Covenant Everlasting, or the
Mercy Sure; if that he might wholly loose Faith, and so loose God, and all
Grace? Surely that Place expressly teaches That when any one Believes; God
makes with him a Covenant, that shall Last for Ever; and bestows on him Mercy,
that is Sure; and therefore he cannot be disappointed; He that once believes
must be for ever Gods, and never so fall as to miss Heaven; For Christ has
prayed for All that believe, that They should be with him, and see his Glory,
John. 17. 20. 24.

The Sons of God (and so is every one that Believes, John. 1. 12.) must be
Like Christ, when He appears at the Last Day, 1. John. 3. r. 2. Therefore, He
that believes, must be saved, and can never wholly loose God or Grace; And
therefore it is, that He that once Believes can never wholly loose his Faith,
because to the end He may never loose God or Grace, God preserves Faith in him,
and by that Faith preserves him in Grace and Favor with God, till he come to
inherit Glory, 1. Pet. 1. 4. 5. Who are kept by the Power of God through Faith
etc.

You that believe in Christ; shall have All your desires alayed, All your wants
supplied, and your Souls satisfied fully in this Life: 1. Your sinful desires
to Sin, and the Worlds Vanities; these shall be alayed, by removing the Cause
of them; Viz: Original Corruption, the Vanity of your Minds and Hearts: Your
Souls shall be purged from those ill Humors, which make you Hunger after this
Trash; and shall be put in right frame, and you made to Hunger after good and
wholesome Things; Viz: Gods Favor and Holiness, Gall. 5. 24. and Chap. 6. 14.
Examine your Selves well, and ye shall find, that ye do not so hunger after
these Things as ye did, and be ye sure that ye shall do it less and less,
till at last, ye shall be quite freed from that vain Desire: For those many
Exhortations in Scripture, to Mortify those Affections, and to Lay them down;
as Ephesians 4. 22. 23. 24. and Coll. 3. 2. 5. do include Promises (upon your
endeavor) that it shall be done; as may be gathered from Romans 6. 12 14. where
God promises that shall be, which he exhorts to: Yea Gods Exhortations to
Believers, are as his Word in Creation was, Operative. and working that which
he Calls for, and Commands to be: Therefore do ye but Exercise your Faith, and
use the Means God has appointed, and you shall have your sinnfull and
troublesome Desires alayed.

2. So also, Your good and commendable Desires after Grace and Holiness; Those
shall be satisfied; Christ will fill you as full as ye can desire, or contain;
Already, ye have in you, the Storehouse and Treasury of all Grace, the Spring
is in you; Christ, in whom is all you need, and therefore it is in him, that
you may have it; He is yours, and from him ye may have whatever you need do
but let down the Bucket of Faith and draw what Water ye desire; He will never
withold any Grace ye thirst after, if ye trust in him, and use the means,
Psalm. 81. 10 He will fill the Mouth that is opened, and according to your hope
in him, will he do to you, he may defer you a while, to try the strength of
your Desire, and of your Faith; but he will not withold ever, but satisfy
your Desire; Yea, he cannot with hold; for what you seek by Faith in Him, and
in the use of His means, he must give you, His Promise and Office do tie him
to it; for He is your Spring of Grace to satisfy your thirsty Souls: And as a
Man's own Spring cannot with hold Water from him, when he comes to it, no more
can Christ.

Some wants ye shall have so long as ye live here; but yet there shall be a
satisfieing, and filling up, though not filled up; as the Child is growing,
though not fully grown, till he comes to Age: And ye shall have that fullnes,
and satisfaction; that is needful and requisite for this Life, so much ye
shall have: Therefore be Comforted; and sink not under the sense of your
wants; It is good to be sensible of spiritual wants, so as to seek for
supply; but it is folly and unbeleefe, to be discouraged under them, since that
ye have in hand and do possess as your own, that which is able and ready to
supply them all, if you use the means, Viz: Christ and the Promises; Would not
one think them Fools, that complain of Thirst, and had a Spring of there
own, at their Door?

Yea farther Consider; that ye have actually all Fullnes; Viz: In Christ and
the Promises; there is All Fullnes, what can you desire that is not there? and
it is all yours; So that in your Substitute, Treasury, Srore house, Wardroope,
there is actually all that you need or desire, and it is all yours; For all is
yours (as ye heard before) 1. Cor. 3. 21. and therefore the Apostle speaks of
Calvin on this Scripture says well: Si eges no^ habes fidem, Si habes fide^
non eges.
Believers as possessing all things 2. Cor. 6. 10. and Iam. 2. 5. styles the^
rich in faith; that is not meant of abundance of Faith, (as sometime the word is
taken) but that by Faith they be Rich; So that every one that Believes is Rich
by Believing; therefore possessed of abundance (else none are called Rich) for
the present enjoying all that is needful; and Heirs of a Kingdom; for in the
Life to come ye shall have a Satisfaction of all your Desires: There ye shall
have an absolute Fullnes; all sinnfull and worldly Desires shall be quite
extinguished; all Holiness and Happynes shall be perfectly administered; there is
nothing necessary or desirable for your Happynes, but ye shall enjoy it
actually in the highest Degree; ye shall have your Wills to the full, no Want
or Cross in any Desire. God will say to you, as Herod to Herodias her Daughter
Mark. 6. 22. 23. and better; not only ask what you will to the Half of the
Kingdom, but to the Whole, and it shall be granted you; Whatever Christ,
Heaven, God can give, to fill you, you shall have so, far as you can receive.
In a Word Ye shall be as Christ is 1. John. 3. 2. So that if Christ is full, Ye
shall be full; Wherefore be ye Comforted with these Things.

2. USE.
For Trial; Ye may by this try, whether ye Believe or For Trial
no: If ye Believe: ye do not hunger and thirst: Thou that art not thus
alayed in thy Desires: Thou either do not Believe; Or do not exercise and
use Faith, Or Cbrist says not true: Ye that have gaping wide Desires after
Sin, that feed on Sin as an hungry Man, and drink down Iniquity as Water;
ye do not believe: Ye that as fully admire, seek, and delight in the Things
of this World, as ye did formerly, and hunger and thirst chiefly after them, Ye
Believe not: If your Desires, go out constantly, in an inordinate Way, to any
of these Worlds Contents; Its a Sign you have not Faith.

Hence also a Discovery may be made; Both concerning the Measure, and Exercise
of Faith; The stronger your Faith is, the less is your hunger after the World
and Sin etc. and according as you exercise Faith; will be the alaye of your
desires after such things; You want the exercise of Faith, who cannot supply
your wants, as you feel them; For Faith if exercised will draw from Christ and
the Promises such a fullnes as is convenient for this Life; It will show you a
Complete fullnes in Christ as your own; And where this is not, there Faith is
weak, or not exercised as it ought to be.

3. USE.
Shall be for Exhortation to Believe; Because of the Benifite For Exhortation.
that comes by it; This is Christ's aim in this Place: And this Use belongs,
First to such of you, as yet never Believed: Secondly to such as have, and do
in some measure Believe.

First to you that yet never Believed; That is never entertained 1. To
Unbelievers.
Christ in all his Offices, and never gave up your Selves to whole Christ, as
to your King, Priest, and Prophet; But the most ye have done, is in a General
manner to phansy Christ dyed for you, and you shall be saved by him; which is
not true Faith, as ye heard before: You, therefore that yet never rightly
believed; be ye persuaded to do it, and that above all things: For why! what
can do you so much good as this? Is there any Thing in the World, can satisfy
all your Desires? Sin does not; Sinning alayes the Desire of Sin, no
otherwise, then casting on Oil does alaye the Fire, it increases it; the more
ye sin, the more ye desire to sin: It is like the administering Wine in a
Dropsy, Riches satisfy not, Ezekiell. 7. 19. Eccle. 5. 10. He that loves
Silver shall not be satisfied with Silver, nor he that loves abundance, with
increase, he spoke it that had fully tried it, and therefore the more to be
regarded, And as it holds in Riches, So likewise in Honor, Pleasure, or any
Thing else, ye seek after, and neglect Believing.

That which is reported of Alexander, is to be found in every ones Heart, which
a Philosopher discovered in his, by this Question to him, When thou have
Conquered Greece what will thou do? He answered, I will Conquer Asia and the
whole World; When that is done what will thou do? I will (says he) wish for
another World to Conquer; thus unsatisfied was he by all his Honor: And thus
is it with Men, both for Honor, Pleasure etc.

Our Souls are made to enjoy God, therefore Covet an Infinite and Eternal
Good; which is meant by that Groping after God, Acts. 17. 27. Not that they
seek God as God, for so, that is true, Romans 3. 11. There is none seeks after
God, but in that they seek blindly after an Infinite and Eternal Good (which
only is God, though they think not so) they be said to grope or feel after
God and therefore rest unsatisfied, in any finite or mortal good, real or
seeming: Our Souls are like the gapeing Earth, full of Chinckes, and great
Crannyes, which nothing in the World can fill and satisfy, but the Ocean or
Showers of Heaven, God Him self; hence is that restlessnes that is in all
Hearts: Whatever they have, even in this sense, they are tossed up and down,
as the Sea, and not quiet: For so long as the Soul is in Desire, it is in a
restlessnes, and troublesome Motion. And hence it is there be such shiftings
from one thing to another, from Coveteousnes to Prodigallity etc. (though ye
never have the wit to shift from the Creature to God, for then ye would be
satisfied) because in nothing ye be satisfied: yea, and God often lets you have
your Desires, so much Wealth, Pleasure, or Honor, as ye seek, and yet ye be
not satisfied, that so ye may know, there is nothing can satisfy but God.

And this I assure you, if ye Believe not, (Mark it, for ye shall one Day
remember, ye were told of it) ye shall ever hunger and thirst, and never be
satisfied, and that is a great Misery: as He that believes shall never, so you
that believe not, shall ever hunger and want, and never get Satisfaction, Pro.
13. 25. Therefore such a Condition is discribed in Scripture by them that
labor in the Fire, and for Vanity, Habuc. 2. 13. That feed on Ashes, Esaias.
44. 20. Follow the East Wind, Hosea. 12. 1. Labor wholly in Vain; as Esaias.
55. 2. Consider the Difference twixt them that Believe, and those who do not
Believe, Esaias. 65. 13. Gods Servants, that is, Believers; shall have Joy,
because full Satisfaction; and so no hunger: Ye, that believe not, shall want,
and so be ashamed, because ye have not got that ye sought:

In this Life, ye shall not be satisfied, and much less in Hell; there is
Paena Damni, ye shall be punished with loss and want of what ye seek: Dives;
who was full of Honors and Riches, and enjoyed a fullnes of all outward
Contentments, while he was in the World; yet this Dives, because he was not a
Believer, he thirsted after a dropp of Water; and could not have that Thirst
alayed: There shall be continually Renisus Voluntatis, your wills shall ever
incline unto this and that good which ye want, but shall ever desire, and never
attain to; It is a painful thing, to hunger and thirst, and not to have to
satisfy; the Poor know this: Oh! what is it the^ to hunger and thirst, a
Year together and never be satisfied? and what is it to do so Ever? yet this,
and all this is, and shall be your Case, who believe not in Christ; that is,
do not so receive him in All his Offices. as has been opened.

But on the other side, if ye will Believe in Christ; ye shall never hunger
nor thirst, what would a hungry Man do for this? will he not venture his Life?
If ye will Believe, ye shall have a supply of all good things, and be as Deuteronomy.
33. 23. Satisfied with Favor, and full of the Blessing of the Lord. Ye need
not go out as I may so say, but shall have of your own, whatever you need
for Soul or Body: Ye may have outward Things, and yet want more, or loose them
again: But Believe, and ye shall have all Good, and never loose it: Ye desire
Joy, Here is the Way to Full Joy; ye must have full fruition of all Good, and
that is only had by Believing: Your desires to Sin shall be alayed; and new
Desires given you, and satisfied; and that is all one, as if ye had them of
Sin, satisfied:

Therefore Consider what the Prodigal says, Luke. 15. 17. 18. In my Fathers
House is Bread enough; and I dye for Hunger: In God there is Fullnes enough of
Satisfaction, and I am distracted through want of it: Reason then as the
Prodigal did; Allas! I am here, ready to famish, for want of Bread; How
unsatisfied is my Soul? I follow after Wealth, Honors, and Pleasures, and yet
my Soul hungers and thirsts; Why should my Soul be famished here; and perish
hereafter? There is Bread enough in the Gospel; In Jesus Christ, I may have to
supply all my wants, a Complete Satisfaction: Why should not I renounce my
Self; Forsake my Sin; and Go to Christ? I will go to Him, and Believe in
Him: How great a Benifite would it be to have Meat or Drink that would alaye
Hunger and Thirst for Ever? This is had by Faith: This Argument persuaded the
Woman John. 4. 14. 15. Let it persuade you.

Ye have heard in the former Doctrine; That Any one, what Person soever, may by
Believing get Christ: God in his Gospel shutts out None, therefore be not kept
from indeavoring to Believe by a Conceit, that such a Sinner as thou shall not
be accepted, for any that come are Welcome; Labor thou the^ to Believe: and
know that on these Terms, Perfect Happynes, is offered thee; For it is that
only which can satisfy all Desires; and therefore, above all, Labor to
Believe in Christ; If thou will not, thou refusest Perfect Happynes; and shall
have perfect Misery.

Secondly, This serves also for Exhortation, To You 2. To Believers.
that have Believed: Get more Faith, and exercise Faith more, So shall your
Wants be supplied, and Desires satisfied, and this is the Way to have more
freedom from sinnfull and worldly Desires, and to have your fill of Grace,
God, and Happynes; you want so much, because you actually believe so little;
For Believing brings Satisfaction, and the more ye Believe, the more full
Satisfaction: Be always then in the use and exercise of Faith, abound there
with; Satan above all things, labors to hinder your growth in Faith; because
by that means he would keep you in want; But learn you above all things, to
labor to abound in Faith, for then shall you want nothing: Hence are there so
many Exhortations and Prayers made by the Apostle in Scripture for Believers
abounding in Faith; For as they exercise and increase in Faith, so all Fullnes
is farther conveyed to them:

Faith is as the Bucket, which let down fetches Water; and the oftener you let
it down, the more Water you have; The Exercise of Faith is as the turning of
the Cock, which if turned, letts in Water; So Faith exercised, letts in all
supply, and the more it is exercised, the greater is the supply; The more
Faith, the more fullnes; If we want, the want is not from Christ, but from our
want of the exercise of Faith: Exercise Faith then, and you will never be
pincht with Hunger or Thirst, or be so perplexed, as often ye are; But you shall
enjoy a Heaven upon Earth; you shall have a sweet Influence of all Grace, as
fast as your Souls can receive it; you shall enjoy the Spirit of God, and the
Favor of God, and be fully satisfied; All Supplies are to be had only from
Christ; and all to be had from Christ, only by Believing.

Faith Exercised does Three Things. Faith exercised, does 3 Things.


It Conveyes the Thing that is sought; Therefore so often in Scripture, It is
made the Instrument of Conveyance of all Gods Blessings; By Faith Sarah
received the promised Son: Heb 11. 11. So Gall. 3. 14. The Promise of the
Spirit is received by Faith: It is Faith brings it: Therefore the Scripture
makes Faith to Conveye the Pardone of Sin, the healing Diseases: and whatever
it believes, Math. 8. 13. (as ye heard before) For, whatever Faith lays hold
on, it makes it thine own, be it ever so much: And.

Until it has Brought and Conveyed the Thing, It gives Assurance that it
shall be had, and so it gives Content and Satisfaction in some measure as if it
were had; As it did to Abraham for his Isaac, Genesis 17. 17. it made him laugh,
that is Joy, (for it was another kind of laughing then Sarahs was; who laughed
out of scorn of the thing spoken, as deeming it impossible and therefore was
she rebuked) I say, Faith made Abrahamlaugh; that is Joy in the Assurance of
the thing: And so it made Hanna quiet, and eased her of her perplexity, 1. Sam.
1. 10. 18. upon Her praying, she Believing was Satisfied, until she had it;
For Faith exercised, does assure the Soul, the Thing desired shall be had, in
the best time and manner.

It presents all fullnes and desirablenes, as that which shall be in due time
possessed, and enjoyed; It gives a glimps, of all that God has Promised, or
thou desire; Faith leads thee to Heaven, and shows thee the many
Mansions, the Crown of Glory, the glorious Roabes, the immortal Inheritance,
the Kingdom that shall never be shaken, whatever is to Come, Faith gives the
sight of it before hand; look as God did to Abraham, Genesis 15. He showed him
that full Posterity, and Possession that in due time, he should have; So does
Faith; Heb. 11. 13. By faith they saw the things promised afarr off, and were
persuaded of them, and embraced them (or saluted them) that is as things
present and enjoyed by them.

Now Faith doing thus; the more it is; the more it does thus; as Fire heating,
the more the Fire is, the more it heates; and the more it is exercised, the
more it does thus: For it is with Faith, as it is with any Skill Power, or
Habit; if it be not used and exercised; it does nothing, he that has it is
never the better, there is no difference twixt him and another, that has noe
such thing: And this is the great folly of Believers that they grow not in, and
exercise not their Faith; did they so, they could want no good thing: Therefore
Consider, what Increase can yield ye so much Benifite, as the Increase of your
Faith? what Exercise can do ye so much good, as the Exercise of your Faith?
Therefore, above all things, mind this: Do ye as Hab. 2. 4. Live by your
Faith: Let that be it whereby ye do All Things, and pass All Time, let it be
in Continual Action in you, on All Occasions: And I Assure you, Ye shall
never Hunger nor Thirst; But be free from all the Pinches and Pangs,
Perplexities, and Troubles, that now ye under go.

Thus; Ye have had the Pith and Substance of this Text, In these Four
Doctrines.

1. That Christ is the Bread of Life; that is, The only and alsufficient
Remedy of Man's Misery.

2. That the all and only Means appointed and required by God, for the
obtaining this Christ; is Coming to him; that is, Believing on Him.

3. That Every Person without any limitation or secluding, by Believing on
Christ, may certainly obtain Him.

4. That whoever Comes to Christ, or Believes in Christ, shall never hunger nor
thirst; that is, shall have all his Wants supplied, and his Soul fully
satisfied.

I Conclude all, with that of

Hosea Chap, Last. Verse. the Last. Who is wise, and he shall Understand these
Things.
FINIS.
A TABLE of such Scriptures, as receive Light in the precedent Matter.
THE FIRST PART.
CAP. VERSE. PAGE. Gen: 3. 8. to 12. 4 15. 1, 2. 13 Deuteronomy: 4. 30. 38 5. 23. to
29. 5 Judge: 15. 18. 13 Ruth: 3. 18. 32 1. Kings, 8. 4. 24 2. Kings, 17. 13. 37
Psalm: 41. 4. 26 51. 3. 24 90. 11. 13 119. 59, 128. 37 Pro: 30. 12. 19 Ecles: 7.
26. 13 9. 1. 25 Esaith, 1. 16, 17. 39 55. 1, 2. 12 59. 30. 27 Ier: 2. 19. 13 4.
3. 20 6. 14. 1, 9 26. 3. 37 Lam: 3. 40. 24 Mich: 7. 19. 38 Math: 4. 17. 40 11.
28. 12 21. 32. 29, 37 22. 3. 14. 36 Mark, 6. 12. 4 10. 21, 22 17 Luke, 1 71,
to 74. 38 4. 18, 19. 11 13. 1, 2, 3. 22 14. 16. 17 15. 7. 39 11. 10 John, 3. 8.
21 6. 29. 34 60, 66. 17 16. 8. 7, 9, 21 Acts, 2. 37. 22 39. 36 3. 19. 26 13.
39. 16 16. 29, 30, 34. 16, 32 17. 30. 40 26. 20. 38, 40 21. 38 Rom: 1. 6, 7. 39
3. 22, 25, 27, 28. 32 24. 7 5. 20. 30 7. 9. 11, 23 8. 15. 5, 10, 21 9. 24, 25.
36 11. 26. 37 1. Cor: 1. 30. 38 11: 31. 24 2. Cor: 4. 4. 23 Gall: 3. 22. 8 23,
24. 6 Ephesians: 1. 6. 31 5. 14. 21 1 These: 4. 7. 39 1. Tim: 1. 13. 23 16. 36 6. 12.
39 2. Tim: 1. 9. 39 Titus, 2. 14. 38 Heb: 6. 1. 37 11. 1. 33 12. 18, to 22. 6
21. 15 Iam: 4. 9, 10. 20 1, John, 4. 1. 25 Rev: 22. 17. 12, 16, 31

THE SECOND PART.
Gen: 3. 15. 3 17. 1. 55 17. 75 41. 55, 57. 10 47. 14, 17, 20, 23. 10 50. 20 7
Exodus: 16. 3, 15, 16; 10 Deuteronomy: 15. 12, 13. 41 33. 23. 72 1. Sam: 1. 10, 18. 75
2. Cron: 1. 15. 43 Psalm: 16. 11. 56 17. 15. 63 34. 8, 9, 10. 53 36. 8, 9. 61
63. 5. 61 81. 10. 67 89. 33. 60 107. 9. 56 145, 16. 56 Pro: 1. 16. 57 Pro: 1.
24. 50 4. 16. 57 Ecles: 5. 10. 70 Esa: 33. 22. 22 44. 20. 72 49. 9, 10. 52, 53
55. 1, 2, 3. 53, 65, 72 65. 13. 72 Ier: 31. 14, 25. 53 50. 19. ibid Hab: 2. 13.
72 Math. 1. 23. 54 3. 17. 55 8. 13. 37, 75 10. 12. 51 18. 11. 9 21. 31, 32. 17
22. 11, 12, 13. 16, 43 25. 21. 63 Mark, 6. 22, 23. 69 16. 15, 16. 40 Luke, 2.
10, 34. 41, 50, 51 4. 19 41 7. 29, 30. 36 12. 15, 25, 30. 59 14. 16, 17, 24.
16, 36, 42 19. 14. 36 John, 1. 12. 15, 22, 54, 56 3. 14, 15. 18, 39, 40 16, 36.
62 19. 36, 44 4. 12, 14. 60, 54, 73 6. 50, to 57. 6, 11 44. 25 67, 68. 3 12.
39, 40, 47, 48. 18, 50 14. 19. 6 16 7, 8. 5, 25 Acts, 2. 38. 35 9. 6, 11, 17.
21 13. 47, 48 17, 36, 44 16. 30, 31. 35 17. 20, 27, 30, 35, 36, 71 22. 16. 21
Rom: 3. 11. 71 22, 23. 18. 41 4. 21, 22. 37 5. 11. 55. 7 24, 25. 61 8. 5. 57
11. 29. 60 1. Cor: 1. 30. 6 13. 12. 64 15. 17, 28. 50, 64 2. Cor: 2. 15, 16. 51
5. 16. 58 Gall: 3: 4. 18, 75 5. 6, 17. 25. 58 6. 14. 58 Ephesians: 2. 13, 19. 55 12.
56 3. 17, 19. 54, 64 4. 8, 12. 5, 63 23, 24, 25. 67 Phil: 1. 23, 24. 58 3. 8.
9. 34 Col: 1. 14, 21, 22. 5 2. 3. 9. 10. 61, 62 3. 25. 67 1. These:. 5 9. 44 2.
These: 1. 7, 8. 50 1. Tim: 6. 6. 59 Heb: 3. 19. 17 7. 25, 26. 6 10. 19, to 23. 4
11. 11. 75 13, 17. 59, 76 James, 2. 5. 68 4. 5. 57 1. Pet: 1. 4, 5. 66 4. 4. 57
2. Pet: 1. 3, 4. 57, 61 1. John. 3. 1, 2. 66, 69 8, 9. 57 Rev: 6. 15, 16, 17 50
7. 16, 17. 53 22. 17. 42

FINIS.

