THE APOLOGY OF THE Common Soldiers Of his EXCELLENCY Sir THO. FAIRFAXES
ARMY.

To him their Noble and Renowned GENERAL, and to all the rest of the
Commission-Officers.

About which Apology the said Armies Commissioners were questioned, and
imprisoned about two hours, by the House of Commons, the last of April, 1647.
for delivering this Apology to their General, and other of their chief
Commanmanders in London.

London, Printed May 3. 1647.

The Apology.
Right Noble and Faithful General,
WE who have for these two years past bin by your Excellence conducted
through many dangers, and by providence hitherto protected, who have often seen
the devouring Sword of a raging Enemy drawn forth against us, threatening
destruction to us, and now see them vanquished, and our selves seemingly settled
in peace and safety, are yet sensible of another more dangerous storm hanging
over our heads then ever the malice of our open enemies could have contained,
or their fury caused to fall upon us; which unless diverted, strike not only
at our liberty, but our lives also; To whom next to our Maker shall we fly for
shelter, but to your Excellency the Patron and Protector? From what secondary
means shall we expect our Deliverance, but from that hand that has so often
been engaged with us, and from that heart that has as often being tender ever
and careful for our security? Can we suffer, and you not sympathize? Can we be
proclaimed enemies, and your Excellency remain secure? O dear Sir, let your
wonted care for us be further demonstrated, cease not to speak for us, who
together with your self and in obedience to your Command, have adventured all
that is dear to us for the Kingdoms safety. Has any thing been desired by us
that has not been promised, or then we have just cause to expect; if there
has, then let both it and the Authors thereof perish? but can the Parliament
upon misinformation pass us for enemies, and we not therein percieve our
enemies design? Can we be satisfied with a Complement, when our fellow
Soldiers suffer at every Assiize for acts merely relating to the War? Is it
not our lives we seek? For where shall we be secured, when the mere envy of
a malicious person is sufficient to destroy us? Were our enemies in the Field
with their Swords in their hands, we should expect no more then a bare command,
and a divine protection in our endeavors to free our selves, but it is another
and a far worse enemy we have to deal with, who like Foxes lurk in their
Dens, and cannot be dealt withal, though discovered, being protected by
those who are entrusted with the Government of the Kingdom. It is the grief
of our hearts, that we cannot desire our own security without hazard to your
Excellency, if but in speaking in our own behalf, when shall we see Justice
dispersed without partiality, or when shall the Weal of the public be singly
sought after and endeavored? Can this Irish Expedition be any thing else but a
Design to ruin and break this Army in pieces: Certainly reason tells us it
can be nothing else; otherwise why are not those who have been made instruments
in our Countries deliverance again thought worthy to be employed? or why are
such who for their miscarriages have been cast out of the Army, thought fit to
be entrusted, and those Members of the Army engaged and preferred to that
Service, when they are for most part such, as had they considered their just
demerits, might rather have expected an ejection then employment: We are
sensible, yea far more sensible of the bleeding condition of Ireland, crying
aloud for a Brotherly assistance, then those forward undertakers in this
present Design manifest themselves to be, and shall willingly contribute the
utmost of our abilities toward their relief, when we shall see this to be the
only thing sought after and endeavored; but we are confident that your
Excellency cannot but perceive this plot is but a mere cloak for some who
have lately rasted of Sovereignty; and being lifted beyond their ordinary
Sphere of servants, seek to become Masters, and degenerate into Tyrants; we
are earnest therefore with your Excellency, to use the utmost endeavor, that
before any other or future Propositions be sent to us, your expectations may be
satisfied, which if they are not, we conceive our selves and our friends as
bad as destroyed.

And shall your Excellency, or any other faithful servant to the State be
appointed for the Service of Ireland, and accept of that employment, we must of
necessity, contrary to our desires, show our selves averse to that service,
until our desires be granted, the just Rights and Liberties of the Subjects
vindicated and maintained.

Then as God and our own consciences bear us witness, we shall testify to
the Kingdom the integrity of our hearts to the service of Ireland, and our
forward actions in that employment shall demonstrate the sincerity of our
expressions. Once more we are earnest with your Excellency for your assistance,
without which we are like to be wholly ruined; and having obtained it, may be
enabled as in duty we are bound to express our selves your Excellencies and
the Kingdoms most faithful and obedient Servants.

Edward Saxby Commissioners for the Generals Regiment. Tho. Moore
Commissioners for the Generals Regiment. Samuel Whiting Lieutenant Generals
Regiment. Will. Allin. Lieutenant Generals Regiment. Anthony Nixon Commissary
Generals Regiment. Tho. Shepherd Commissary Generals Regiment. William Jones
Colonel Fleetwoods Regiment. John Casby Colonel Fleetwoods Regiment. Nich.
Lockler Colonel Rich his Regiment. Joseph Foster Colonel Rich his Regiment.
H. Geathings Colonel Sheffields Regiment. Edw. Star Colonel Sheffields
Regiment. Tho. Kendole Colonel Whaley his Regiment. John Thomas Colonel
Whaley his Regiment. Elias Box Colonel Butler his Regiment. John Willowby
Colonel Butler his Regiment.

28. April. 1647.
A Second Apology of all the private Soldiers in his Excellencies Sir Thomas
Fairfax his Army, to their Commission Officers.
SIRS,
WE your Soldiers, who have served under your Commands, with all readiness,
to free this our Native Land and Nation from all tyranny and oppressions
whatsoever; and that by virtue and power derived from this present Parliament,
given not only to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, our now present General,
but likewise under all the late Generals his predecessors, under whom we, even
the whole Souldierie, have served both the State and you faithfully and
diligently: By which means God has been pleased to Crown us with Victory,
in dispersing our common Adversaries, so that we hoped to put an end to all
Tyranny and Oppressions, so that Justice and Equity, according to the Law of
this Land, should have been done to the People, and that the meanest subject
should fully enjoy his right, liberty, and proprieties in all things; which
the Parliament have made known to all the world in diverse of their
Declarations, to which they have so often bound themselves to perform, by
their Oaths, Vows, Covenants, and Protestations: Upon this ground of hope,
we have gone through all difficulties and dangers, that we might purchase to
the people of this Land, with our selves, a plentiful Crop and Harvest of
Liberty and Peace; but in stead of it, to the great grief and sadning of our
hearts, we see that Oppression is as great as ever, if not greater, yea, and
that upon the cordial friends to the Parliament and us, and to the just Rights
and Liberties of this Nation, that they with us are slighted, abused, beaten,
and dragged to Jayles, yea, to the utter ruin of their estates, and loss of
their lives; yea, the best and most candide intentions and actions of theirs
and ours grossly and foulely misconstrued, even to such a height, as deserving
no less then to be declared as troublers of, and enemies to the State and
Kingdom; and such as have and are now the enemies of the Parliament and
Kingdom, are countenanced and honored, to be in places of greatest trust, and
are made Judges of them and us, for our lives and estates; yea, and in the
great affairs of the Kingdom, sitting in the House of Commons, though still
under Sequestration, they are made high Sheriffs, Majors, of several Counties
and Towns, Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, as in Cumberland, and the
County of Durham, etc. From whence we believe springs all our miseries, and
that so many of our fellow Soldiers, that have been disbanded, have been so
rigorously dealt withal, as The high Sheriff of Kent, a man that was in the
first Rebellion against the Parliament, and by his means last Assize indicted a
Colonel for taking of Horses.

Exeter 2 At Northampton ^ Warwick 2 Alisbury ^ And this Assize at Salisbury 9
London condemned ^
All these will be proved, with many more instances.


imprisoned, indicted, and hanged, for things done in time and place of War,
and necessity of the Parliaments service required, in their low condition; and
without which, they could not have safely sat in the House of Parliament with
their heads on^ and the reason of all this we judge is, because our very
enemies are made our Judges. Yea, such is our condition, though we be
oppressed, we may not cry: as it is too apparent, when of late we did in a
humble and petitionarie way seek to make known our grievances to our
General; such was our offense, as that we must presently, without being
heard, be declared Enemies to the State: though notwithstanding, by these our
enemies, even such as have been Cavaliers in Arms, have promoted and framed
diverse Remonstrances, Petitions, and Representations, of dangerous consequence,
to the Parliament and Kingdom, and that against their most real and cordial
friends; yet these have been accepted, and great thanks returned them: which
holds forth to us a clear design to enslave all the honest party of this
Kingdom, and in them we and you also.

Therefore, brave Commanders, the Lord put a spirit of courage into your
hearts, that you may stand fast in your integrity, that you have manifested to
us your Soldiers; and we do declare to you, that if any of you shall not, he
shall be marked with a brand of infamy for ever, as a Traitor to his Country,
and an Enemy to his Army. Read, and consider; was there ever such things
done by a Parliament, to proclaim us Enemies to the State, as they have done
about the late Petition? The Lords and they could quickly agree to this, though
they will be very tedious when any thing is offered that is for the good of the
Commonwealth; and to keep the hirelings As that of 26 months, the Horse are
behind 13 months pay, and now to have but two months pay: judge Heaven, and
free people; God judge of this great evil.
Wages, and not to give them that which they have so dearly bought with their
bloods and lives, even his pay; and not only so, but to leave them to the
merciless malice of their wicked enemies?

Is it not better to dye like men, then to be enslaved, and hanged like Dogs?
which must and will be yours and our portion, if not now looked unto even
before our disbanding: so you may plainly see by this, their malice is great,
yea, against our most honored General; as that in the Lords House they did
more then whisper, he was a Delinquent: If they do so now, and that to him,
what will they not do, not only to him, but to you, if a course be not taken
for our and your security, before we be disbanded, we leave to you to judge.

We have been quiet and peaceable in obeying all Orders and commands, yet now
we have a just cause to tell you, if we be not relieved in these out
grievances, we^ shall be forced to that, which we pray God to divert, and keep
your and our hearts upright: desiring you to present these things to the
General, as our desires.

1. That the honor of this Army may be vindicated, in every particular,
especially about the late Petition, and reparations given, and justice done
upon the fomenters. 2. That an Act of indemnity may be made for all things
done in time and place of War. 3. That the wives and children of those that
have been slain in the service, and maimed Soldiers, may be provided for. 4.
Our Arreares under this General, to be paid us, our Arrears under other
Generals, and to be audited and stated, and security given for the payment. 5.
That we that have served the Parliament freely, may not be pressed out of the
Kingdom. 6. That the Liberty of the Subject may be no longer inslaved, but
that Justice and Judgment may be dealt to the meanest Subject of this Land,
according to old Law.
Now unless all these our humble requests, be by you for us your Soldiers and
your selves stood for to be granted, it had better we had never been born, or
at least we had never been in Arms, but that we had by the Sword been cut
off from the misery we and you are like to undergo: So we rest, in hopes of
your faithfulness:

Your Soldiers.

FINIS.

