THE Apprentices of Londons PETITION Presented to the Honorable Court of
Parliament.

Humbly showing unto them the manifold Abuses of their Apprentiship, how the
Frenchmen, Dutch, and Walloones, do deprive them of their ancient Customs,
and former Liberties in their Trade.

Describing also the Bloody proceedings of the Papists in IRELAND, and to
vindicate their Masters losses by the Protestants there persecuted.

Likewise in devoting the Prelates; and Lordly Bishops, which insult too much
over the whole Clergy, as the whole Kingdom besides.

As also speaking of the Jesuits, that were Condemned.

Subscribed, and presented with the Names of above 30000. Apprentices.

map of part of the Thames and its tributaries relevant to London trade London.


LONDON, Printed for John Greensmith, 1641.

The Apprentices of LONDONS Petition.
Humbly shows,
THat the injuries, and abuses done unto us are many, and the grievances, and
oppressions which hereupon we have suffered at sundry times are manifold:
wherefore we in the general, and universal name of Us all, do presume to
present our pressures, and impendent injuries to your Honors, of whom only we
can expect redress, and of none other. For whereas this City has bin renowned
in the gazing eye of the world, and the magnificent enemies thereof applauded
(both to the glorious fame of this State, and Kingdom) of all other Neighbor
Countries, and Nations: Yet the Rites, and Liberties thereof being somewhat
detracted, and abused, as also the Laws and ancient Customs thereof being
extenuated by some malignant, and ill-affected persons, it now becomes as much
deplorable in the sight of all men: and whereas this City should have been a
Pattern of Piety, and goodness (regularly embraced) to the whole Kingdom
besides, it is now (by the means of diverse ill-planted members hereof) become
an example of Schismatic disturbances, and distractions. We therefore
implore your Honors withal humility to restore our former Liberties, of which
lately we have been deprived and to regulate in an exact ratification the
Laws, and pristine Statutes of this City to the preservation of them (of which
there is a requisite necessity in these perilous and confused times) in
confirming the said ancient custom hereof.

And first we beseech your Honors to take into consideration the intolerable
abuse of our Apprentiship: for where, we by coerion are necessarily compelled
to serve seven, or eight years at least, before we can have the immunity and
freedom of this City to trade in: Those which are mere Strangers do snatch
this Freedom from us, and pull the Trades out of our own hands, so that by
this means when our times are fully expired, we do then begin in a manner to
suffer a second Apprentiship to them, who do thus domineere over us in our
own Trades.

This is the cause that so many break every year, seeing that their Trading
is stolen out of their hands to the great discomfort, and confusion of us all.
Moreover when we are out of our times, and should then begin to trade in the
world, we can get neither House, or Shop for our money, in regard that these
Forraigners, and strangers (as there are many French, Dutch, Walloones, etc.)
will give any money to snatch them from us: and this is the chiefest cause,
that houses are so excessive dear in this City, and by this means many of us
loose the loss of years, trade, and time, and are compelled to turn
Journeymen. Wherefore we solely depend on your Honors favorable, gracious,
and auxiliary opitulation, beseeching you to re-erect that, which lately have
been pulled down. And notwithstanding this abuse: there is a second danger
hangs over, viz. the fearful dangers, perilous plots, and conspiracies which
have, and are still pretended by the Papists against us, which causes a
promiscuous muting in this Kingdom. Their exulcerated envy (I confess^) have
been oftentimes kindled in a sp^rke ^her^ but (thanks be to God) their m^lice
could never take fire here in England, until now they are come to a full flame
in Ireland, whose Rebellious Actions are so inhumane, that it would draw tears
from an adamantine eye, to think of their bloody, and Tyrannical proceedings.
Wherefore we humbly beseech your Honors to take their groaning misery into
your Christian, and charitable consideration, that the flourishing root of
Protestants be not suffered to be fully eradicated to the great discomfort of
all men in these Kingdoms.

Moreover we earnestly desire your Honors, that you would be pleased to send
some speedy aid, and auxiliary assistance unto them: for otherwise it will be
a great detriment and damage to diverse in this City, in respect that most of
your Petitioners Masters have great sums of money, which many of those
Protestants do owe unto them. In that regard they will be great loosers
thereby, unless they be restored unto their former estate, which will be a
means to break and undo many in this City, to the great discomfort and
loss of your Petitioners. Therefore we beseech you to revolve the manifold
abuses, which they have done, and unless you that are the real Physicians of
the state (to purge this Kingdom from those Sores that does contaminate it)
do lay a restoratiue plaster to those mortal wounds, that are given by the
Papists, they will suddenly canker, and turn to Phlebotomie.

Alas, it is unknown what danger we are involved in, neither can we receive any
comfort in our trade, in respect of these manifold perils which your
Petitioners Masters are in, both in danger of their estates, and fear of their
lives.

Omit not there fore we entreat you, so heavy, and weighty an importance,
seeing that our necessary dependence waits on your Honors, to relieve us.
That after ages, and late posterity may en-chronicle so famous a deed, to your
perpetual Fame, and the immortal glory of this Kingdom.

But that we may consummate all our greivances, and necessities in one bundle,
and that you may give your Verdict to each particular of our pressures in one
contract, we will proceed to our third grief, expecting herein your favorable
reflection on us, viz, the insulting Domination of the Lordly Bishop of
Canterbury and some others, who triumph with too much arrogant insolency over
us, and their poor Brethren of the Clergy, and if please your honors to
look back on their misdemeanors, you may easily conceive how many great and
unsufferable crimes they stand guilty of, wherefore on bended knees
(expressing the humble allegiance of our hearts) we your Petitioners entreat
your Honors with a favorable aspect to view the just desires of this oppressed
Jsarel, let not we beseech you these Absoloms that in the time they had
Pattents for their persecution) made it no scruple to persecute their own
fathers, let them not linger protract not time, but let not their punishments
be any longer deferd, for they have oppressed the whole Kingdom, they were the
first cause of that Commotion in Scotland. But now (thanks be to God)
concluded in an exact peace, and universal Pacification: Yea they have been
generally acknowledged to have been the chief, and sole cause of this
Rebellious insurrection in Jreland, to the Epidemicall danger of both
Kingdoms, and the particular grief of each Subject. Your Petitioners
therefore, bearing the quotidian cries of the people in what lamentable
deploration they exclaim daily against these Lordly Bishops and Archbishops,
do beseech you to revolve their insultations, and what general danger they
have brought into the State, and woeful perils to the whole Commons; and do
therefore request your Honors to clip off some of their illimited power, and
extended authority. And that they would be devoted out of the house of Peers,
for they hinder and procrastinate the establishment of Religion, which have
been a long time expected to the universal grief of this whole Nation.

Moreover, we interpose with them the Romish Jesuits, that sting the Common
wealth with their seducing allurements to the extenuation of our Protestant
Religion, and the advancement of the Court of Rome: wherefore in respect that
the Rebels in Ireland being their Confederates, do so persecute the
Protestants there without any humane partiality, we beseech you not to be too
clement unto them, in sparing them, especially when the sentence of the Law is
gone upon them.

We beseech you therefore favorably to consider of our Petition, and we will
forever labor with our full force, and power to defend your Honors to the
uttermost of our might. Thus we humbly desire your grave and judicious Counsels
herein, hoping your general ascents, and consents hereunto; which will be
great service done to God, great fame to the Kingdom, and especially great
credit to your Honors.

And we shall be bound to pray, etc.
FINIS.

