AN HONORABLE SPEECH Made in the Parliament of Scotland by the Earl of ARGILE
(being now Competitor with Earl MORTON for the Chancellorship) the Thirtieth
of SEPTEMBER 1641.

Touching the prevention of National dissension, and perpetuating the happy
Peace and Union betwixt the two Kingdoms, by the frequent holding of
PARLAMENTS.



LONDON Printed by A. N. for I. M. at the George in FLEETSTREET, Anno 1641.

MY LORDS,
WHat was more to be wished on earth then the great happiness this day we
enjoy, viz. To see his Royal Majesty our Native Sovereign and his loyal
Subjects of both his Kingdoms so really united, That his Majesty is piously
pleased to grant unto us his Subjects our lawful demands concerning Religion
and Liberties, and we his Subjects of both Nations cheerfully rendering to his
Majesty that duty, affection, and assistance, which he has just cause to
expect from good people, and each Nation concurring in brotherly amity, unity,
and concord, one toward the other.

Oh, what tongue is able to express the honor and praise due to that great
and good God, who in these late Commotions suffered not the counsels of either
Kingdom to despair of the safety of either Commonwealth, but through his
blessing to their painful and prudent endeavors has wrought such an
happiness for us, That now after the great toil and trouble which we have on
both sides so long endured, we may each man with his wife, children, and
friends, under his own Vine and Fig Tree (and all under his Majesty's
protection) refresh himself, with the sweet fruits of peace, which I beseech
the Lord of peace to make perpetual to both Nations.

And to that end my earnest desires are, that all our best studies and
endeavors may be employed (for some time) in contriving and establishing such
wholesome Laws in both Kingdoms whereby (as much as in us lies) the opportunity
and occasion of producing the like calamities as lately threatened both Nations
may for the future be prevented, if in any age hereafter such Miscreants shall
go again to attempt it.

It is (my Lords) notorious, that the late Incendiaries that occasioned the
great differences betwixt his Majesty and his Subjects took much advantage and
courage by the too long intermission of the happy constitution of Parliaments,
In the vacancie of which they by false informations incensed his Majesty
against his loyal Subjects, and by their wily insinuations extorted from his
Highness Proclamations for to yield obedience to their innovations in the
Kirk, and Patents for Projects, whereby the poor Subject was both polled and
oppressed in his estate, and enthralled in his conscience: and thus by their
wicked practices, his Majesty was distasted, and his Subjects generally
discontented, in so much, that had not the great mercy of God prevented them,
they had made an Obstruction betwixt his Majesty and his liege people, and had
broken those mutual and indissoluble bonds of protection and allegiance,
whereby, I hope, his Royal Majesty, and his loyal and dutiful Subjects of
all his three Kingdoms, will be ever bound together. To which let all good
Subjects say Amen.

My Lords, the distaste of his Majesty, nor discontents of his Subjects, could
never have come to that height they did (nor consequently have produced such
effects) had not there bin such an interposition, by these Innovators and
Projectors, betwixt his Majesty our glorious Sun, and us his loyal Subjects,
that his goodness appeared not (for the time) to us, nor our loyalty and
obedience to him. For no sooner was that happy Constellation (the Parliament in
England) raised, and thereby those vaporous clouds dissipated, but his
Majesty's goodness, his good Subjects loyalty, and their treachery, evidently
appeared.

Our Brethren of England (my Lords) finding the intermission of Parlaments to
be prejudicial and dangerous to the State, have taken care, and made provision
for the frequent holding of them: whose prudent example My Motion is may be our
pattern forthwith to obtain his Majesty's Royal assent, for doing the like
here in this Kingdom. By which means his Majesty may in due time hear and
redress the grievances of his Subjects, and his Subjects (as need shall
require) chearefully aid and assist his Majesty, And nor only the domestique
peace and quiet of each Kingdom be preserved, But likewise all National
differences (if any happen) may be by the wisdom of the Assemblies of both
Kingdoms, from time to time composed and reconciled to the perpetuating of the
happy peace and union betwixt both Nations.

FINIS.

