AN ARGUMENT Showing that it is Impossible for the NATION TO BE Rid of the
Grievances Occasioned by the great Numbers both of Quacks and Empericks in Law
and Physic, without an utter Exterpation of both.

WITH Proposals for a New Constitution.

Written after the manner of the Argument against the Marshal of the
King's Bench, and Warden of the Fleet.

By way of Letter to a Member.

Cuncta prius tentenda. Metamorph. Lib. 1. Read but his Book and Stool will
follow,
As if you did his Bolus swallow.
Saffold's Epitaph. LONDON, Printed, and sold by C. D. in T. M DC XCIX.

TO SIR JOHN BASHFORD OF Brass-Hall, Bar.
SIR,
THOUGH I have not the Honor of an Acquaintance Ded. p. 3.
with you, yet since I found I. B. to an Argument in Print, that seemed to Aim
at nothing but the Public good, besides considering the softness of the style,
the strength of Argument, and the Masculine expressions in it, I could conclude
nothing less than that your Polite Pen drew it.

It was because you were so great an Instance of Ded. p. 3.
the Oppression which the Gentry of England, as well as the Tradesmen and
Commonalty Labor under; that I presumed to Affix your Name to these Papers,
which I am sure are wrote with no other Design than to Advance the Public
Advantage, by endeavoring to suppress a Nest of Pestilent Vipers, who have
stung, and been equally pernicious to all Ranks and Degrees of Men, except only
those who have nothing to lose.

You know that the Glory of England consists in their Liberty and Property, I
mean their Persons and Estates, which are the Pillars of the Government, and
must be maintained and supported, Ded. p. 3.
but both are weakened and terribly shaken, the one by Quacks in Physic, and
the other by Empericks in Law; of which I Question not but your own Experience
can give the World same lively Instances.

-- Pudet haec opprobria dici.

I shall not Instance in Trade or Credit, you have so feelingly described both,
that I must concur with you in that Axiom you have laid down; That Credit is
Necessary to Trade, especially when the Emptor wants Money to buy with, and
Ded. p. 5.
if one shall happen to Trust a Knave (as Modestly speaking it is two to one
but he does) who will not pay, not only his Profit, but his Prime cost is lost,
as it was the case of a Periwigmaker that Trusted a Bar. of the Inner Temple;
and the Wounds of Friends strike deeper, and are more fatal than those of Open
Enemies.

What I hear shall Endeavor to expose (and Ded. p. 6.
I hope the Parliament, that August Assembly, will Apply a Remedy) is those two
public Nusances of Quacks in Physic, and Pettifoggers in Law; who by Color
of Practicing the two Noblest Professions and Sciences, are the greatest
Oppressors, or Invaders of our Liberty and Property (the greatest Blessings of
the Subject) by their Villainy, Ignorance, Extortion; and Impudence.

I hope your goodness will Apologize for this Confidence of mine, but I could
prefix no other Name, considering that it was your Penetrating Judgment that
Dissipated those Opacous Shadows that clouded our Courts of Justice, and
blindedt he faculties of our Patriotical Lawyers; it is your Corinthian
Countenance alone that could Confront that Leviathan, that eat up the Laws as a
Scholar would a Commons; 'twas you alone, that out of a Public Spirit in this
Noble field, Summoned to our Aid all the faculties both of your Body and Mind,
your Wit, your Judgment, your Law, your Manly Strength and Courage, against
this Great and Common Enemy.

Sir, It is you alone may properly be said to have discovered these Mysteries
of iniquity, and given us a Key to these secluse and Inscrutable Mysteries of
Marshals and Gaolers, and Clipped the Wings of these Dragons.

In a Word, it is you alone, that have effectually Employed your Incomparable
Cerebellum in Diving into these Obstruse Dunghills, and Raking into those
Noisome places, with your penetrating Judgment, like a Mathematical Tellescope,
for one born in a Dungeon could not have gone deeper, or bred up in a Goal,
discovered their Villainies and Exactions better.

I could wish, and really the World may justly expect, it from your Mercurial
head and Calcined Brain, that since you have afforded the public this Project,
you would likewise assist the State with your Politics; whereby they will be
convinced, that you are a Great Projector, a Profound Politician, as well as a
Patriotical Lawyer.

I am, Sir, Your Humble Servant. Johannes Ponteus.

AN ARGUMENT Showing that it is Impossible for the Nation to be rid of the
Grievances, occasioned by the great Numbers of Quacks and Empiricks, both in
Law and Physic, without an utter exterpation of both.
SIR,
SInce I am informed that the Grand Inquest of the Nation has resolved once
more to take into consideration the public Abuses and Grievances, I thought it
my Duty, as an English Man, (who by Birthright am Entitled Arg. p. 1.
to all the Benefits of the Noblest Constitution, if I had not been deceived by
Wh -- rs, and what is worse, afterward abused by Clap-Doctors) to offer my
sentiments in order to have those Grievances redressed, for there can be no
greater scandal to a Government than to suffer it self to be thus Wounded in
the Vital Part, I shall not entertain you any longer upon a Subject which is so
obvious to common View, when there are so many Decollated Members, and flat
Faces, that I think you need no other Demonstration; I shall therefore only let
you see what a late Act of Parliament does expressly set forth in the Preamble;
Stat. 14, 15, H. 8. Cap. 5.

And forasmuch that the making of the said Corporation is Meritorious and very
good for the Commonwealth of this Realm, it is therefore expedient and
necessary to provide that no Person of the said Politic Body and Commonalty
aforesaid, be suffered to exercise and practice Physic, but only those Persons
that be profound, sad and Discreet, groundedly Learned, and deeply Studied in
Physic.

And, Sir, I am sorry to say that such a fatality Arg. p. 2.
should attend the persons of great Numbers of his Majesty's Subjects; that
even the good intent of the Statutes, seems to be wholly Eluded. The weekly
Bills of Mortality do abundantly testify the truth of this Assertion, so that
all the mighty advantages, which that Act was thought to produce, prove
imperfect and abortive, and our great expectations dwindled into air; for if
the pretended Physician does but subscribe himself of the College of
Physicians and Graduate in the University, he is expressly excepted out of that
Statute, and by this means, and Posting up their Bills at every Corner, how
many pretty young Gentlemen are drawn into their Powdering Tubs, that never get
whole out again.

I cannot omit to let you know, that before this time the Morbus Neapolitanus
was got into these Kingdoms, for it succeeded the British Pox, our Legislature
thought it high time to Apply a Cataplasm to so inveterate a Canker by erecting
a Barrier against so Potent an Enemy, which they did by the Statute, 3 H. 8.
Cap. 11. The Preamble of which says,

That for as much as the Science and cunning of Physic and Surgery, is daily
within this Realm exercised by a great multitude of ignorant Persons, of whom
the greater part have no manner of insight in the same, or in any other kind of
Learning, some also can no Letters on the Book Read, so far forth that common
Artificers as Smiths, Weavers, and Women boldly and accustomably take upon them
great Cures, and things of great difficulty, in which they partly use Sorcery
and Witchcraft, etc.

I shall not need here to Comment upon the Text, to tell you how Women are
common Artificers within the Letter of this Law, or what it was that did so
much conduce to the great Infamy of the faculty, but describe the Grievous
hurt, damage and destruction of many of the King's Liege People, which the
Statute chiefly complains off.

It happened then with many Young Gentlemen as it happened lately with a Bar.
at Law, who having the Misfortune to light on a Frigot, which he had in his
Cruize picked up, and brought to Port, through the Straits of Mytre Court, and
laid her up in his Cubicle, and had all that Night the satisfaction of Solacing
himself in the Cabin of his Prize, but Proh Dolor! about Ten Days after, it
proved a Fireship, that set fire to his Boltsplit, and he to secure his
Tarr-barrel, presently applies himself to Famous Dr. W -- a Disciple of
Saffolds, who had a Panacea that Cured all Distempers; but whether mistaking
the Constitution of his Patient, or for want of Skill, Sadness, and Profundity,
or whether he used Sorcery and Witchcraft, as the Statute describes (for had
you see him Poor Gentleman, you would have sworn he was bewitched.) The Lawyer
grew worse and worse; for notwithstanding his Purging, Vomiting, Smoking,
Scraping, Injecting and Salivating, the Fire increased, and every part began to
be in a Flame: In short all the Aqua Tetrachimagogon, between Waping and
Westminster, was not able to Wash it out, so that it was with his Body Natural,
as it was with your Body Politic, page 2. where the Malignant distemper which
had long raged in the Arg. p. 3.
Bowels was not now in its Infancy; It was grown up, and was arrived at its
full strength and Vigor, and was radicated in the blood, and now does maintain
its Post, Bravado like; and bids Defiance to the feeble Arts of Vulgar Physic;
what then is to be done to stop the Progress of this Inveterate Cancer, why
they must pursue P. 3.
the same Methods in this mighty Cure, as some Physicians use in Chronical
Diseases, where all the Nervous Juices, and the whole Mass of Blood is
Corrupted (viz.) A Thorough Flux, that the whole Malignancy may be rooted out,
and a new stream of blood run in fresh and untainted Channels; for I am of
Opinion, that all other Remedies will be but patching; we may be eased a While
from Pain, but the rank Poison still remains, and will soon get head again, in
spite of all these Temporary Applications.

Pardon me if I have used your own Words, for you have described it so
naturally, that the best Physician, who wanted your Experience, unless he had
it by instinct, could not have done it better.

But now, Sir, I shall want your Pen, your Parts, and your Experience, to
display all the mischiefs that attended the Ignorance of this Quack; I will
only mention three or four, and first by this means he was confined of his
Liberty against the express Words of the Habeas Corpus Act, and what was worse,
it was thought by the most Judicious, that a Writ de Homine Replegiando would
not lie in this Case, but only a Corpus cum causa.

Secondly, He was not only forced to swallow ten dozen of your Pilulae Auriae,
your Mercurius dulcis, Calomeli Salvitriale, sal volatile Oliosum, but also to
apply Cataplasms, Fomentations, Unctions, Injections, Cum Multis aliis, etc.

Thirdly, He lost a whole Terms practice, and was strangely worsted in his
Circuit, being disappointed at Winchester, slighted at Salisbury, rejected at
Dorchester, repulsed at Exeter, and Laughed at in Taunton; he was forced to
retire to Bath, to be Cured of the Scab, where we will leave him for a while
making Court to a young Lady (but with his Gloves on.)

Now, Sir, to come to the main point, in order Arg. p. 3.
for redress, I take the first step toward it, to be an Inquiry into the cause
that prevents the good designs of those Statutes, which I take to a clause in a
subsequent Statute, viz. Stat. 32. H. 8. c. 42.

And be it further enacted, that no manner of Person, within the City of
London, or Suburbs, of the same, using any Barbery, or Shaving, or that
hereafter shall use any Barbery, or Shaving, he, nor they, nor none other for
them, to his, or their use, shall Occupy any Surgery, Letting of Blood, or any
other thing belonging to Surgery; (Drawing of Teeth only excepted.) And
farthermore, in like manner, whosoever uses the Craft or Mystery of Surgery
within London, as long as he shall fortune to use the said Mystery or Craft of
Surgery, shall in no wise Occupy, nor exercise the Feat, or Craft of Barbery,
or Shaving, neither by himself, nor by none other for him, to his or their use,
etc.

It would admit of a Dispute, whether the Use mentioned in this Statute be
within the Statute of Uses, but I leave that to the Learned Mooters, before
Littleton, and Cook; but to return to our business, after this small
Digression, for I labor to be short, This unfortunate Act of Parliament
commits Arg. p. 21.
a Violence on it self, seems to be a felo de se, and by a fatal Contradiction
gives its own Heart a Mortal Wound, besides, it renders the former Acts
Ineffectual: For suppose that the Malignant Distemper should get head (as you
know it is Possible) so as some, or one Member is so Mortified, as its necessary
to have his Nose, or Penis, saved, or suppose the Prepulium must be Circumcised
an Inch deeper, than the Levitical Law did require, how can this be done, if a
Surgeon must not shave, nor a Barber use Surgery, Sed Immedicabile Vulnus ense
recidendum est, certainly a great Mist clouded P. 12.
their understandings, for every Vulgar Eye might with the first glance have
discovered the Weakness of this Act which is made in direct Opposition of its
design; this is the reverse and Antipodes of the other Statutes, and are no
more P. 7.
reconcilable, than the North and Southern Poles; But (as you Wisely Observe)
Acts ought to be ground upon the most solid and refined reason imaginable; a
Reason acquired by a long Study, Observation and Experience, and I may boldly
say, that had our Gentleman, we left last at Bath, had the Penning of this Act,
he would have Omitted this Clause. Now for the redress of this mischief, I
think that it is fit the Legislature P. 3.
should be called on for aid, to repeal this Clause, and in the next place,
that some Law may be made to promote that Righteous P. 5.
and Holy Act of Marriage, for what for want of a Settlement, many good Matches
are broke off, and it is hard a Man should be punished for having no Estate; I
will give you a lively Instance of what difficulties a Gentleman had in his
Amors, and notwithstanding he was a Man Active indeed, and pushed forward for
P. 5.
Matrimony, wanted neither Assurance nor Personal Endowments; for from the
Crown of his head, to the Sole of his Feet, he was observable; his Hat was of a
Rotund Figure, and the Crown of it Capacious suitable to the Contents, his
Forehead was lofty, and indeed he was all Effrontery, his Eyes were Quick and
Lively, and Mathematical in their positions, the one Rect, the other Oblique
(as a late Learned Author looked when he was Characterising the Judges of the
last, and the present Reign) his Nose Oblong, his Mouth Opacous, his Chin
Obtuse, and in a Word his Face Oval, his Arms long, his Hands Brocarded, or
rather Imbroidered, his Body Erect, his Legs equal, and his Feet exact, and did
watch the Motions of his Eyes; besides he was well proportioned, his Wig puffed,
his Face painted, his Cloths perfumed, his Anteriors powdered, and his
Pedestals Polished. Thus Accomplished and accoutred, he sallies into the City,
and makes an Attack upon a Fair Virgin, and carries with him, as his great
Artillery, a Grant of the Office of Custos Castri de T. wherewith to Jointure
her, after many soft Expressions, Winning Looks, and pretty Passages, he had
prepared his Battery, he fires upon her, and tells her, he was Custos Castri de
T: This so frighted her at first, that she apprehending he had said he was
Agnes de Castro, that he was forced to use all his Eloquence to stop her, until
he had undeceived her; but she told him she would consider of it, and so
dismissed him, with a Gracious Congee, and he was not wanting to Return it
(having Learned to Dance) with an Obsequious Devoir. The Lady Consulted in the
mean while a Patriotical Lawyer, who told her, Custos Castri was Latin for a
Jailer, and that if it should be settled on her for a Jointure, there would be
a double danger, the one in Case she should be a Widow, she could not Marry the
Man she had a Mind to, if he happened to be a Prisoner, but the Law would
adjudge him out of Prison, for he cannot Arg. p. 5.
be in Ward to his Wife (as he ought to be) for there would be an escape in
Law, and a forfeiture of her Jointure, the other is in case this Office should
descend to her Son and Heir, being at that time P. 4.
Imprisoned there; Now the Law adjudges him to be immediately at large, though
he has fetters on his Feet, because he cannot keep himself in Prison, Plowden
fol. 37. For these and other weighty Reasons, this young Gentleman, the next
approach he made, was repulsed notwithstanding he was Active and pushed forward
for Matrimony. And is it not hard that he should be punished for a Righteous
and Holy Act.

Now as it is necessary to repeal this Clause, so it is as highly necessary
that the Assistance of the Legislature should be employed to correct the Daring
insolency and Villainy of other Arg. p. 28.
Men, as well as the ignorance and Impudennce of the former: and though it is
necessary that a Surgeon should be a Barber; yet it is not necessary that a
Barri. should be a Beau, a Pleader a Physician, an Attorney an Apothecary, for
I could wish we had that Parliament you so ingeniously describe, page 12. that
Immortal and Prophetic Parliament. And since I chance to mention that Generous
and Heroic Senate; I cannot forbear making this short Observation. It was
Cassandra like; theirs and the whole Nations Unspeakable Calamity, not to be
believed, for which stubborn and vastly Pernicious, and only not fatal
Blindness of the Church (for there it went) what a Chain of Horrors, Darkness
and Confusions, did ensue; what a Scene of Tragical Tyrannies and Depredations
were every where Displaied throughout the British Isle. Our Civil Rights were
lost and entirely swallowed up by that voracious Monster called Prerogative of
the Crown, and our Religious ones were reduced to the very Brink and Precipice
of destruction; but when the Church looked down and saw the great Abyss in
which they were Eternally to sink, then they cried out for Help, and Providence
brought them an Assistance, which has ('it is true) redeemed us, but not without
the expense of Millions of Sacrifices offered up, not of beasts, as those of
the Ancients were; but of the Noblest Humane Blood and Treasure, This was such
a Rapture of thought that one would have guessed you had been as high as ever
St. Paul was, for it goes a Bars length beyond all the Phantasms of Patmos;
for you have described it in a more Noble and Divine Style. Pardon me if only
for my own better Information, I only ask of you two or three Questions; for
that our Sublunary Judgments and Understandings are not able to penetrate into
these sublime and lofty Inspirations: And first, Sir, will you let us know, in
the second part of your Argument, by way of Appendix, what is become of that
Immortal and Prophetic Parliament, that Heroic and Generous Senate; for I
cannot guess where their Immortality is put, unless in that Etetnal Abyss in
which the Church was to have Dropped, or what do you mean else by the Parenthesis
(there it went). Next, Sir, what was that stubborn, vastly Pernicious, and
Fatal Blind Church, that you intend? The Church at Corinth, or any of the seven
Churches of Asia. And lastly, if that Voracious Monster called Prerogative of
the Arg. p. 13.
Crown, or that Terrible Leviathan, that cracks the Sinews of the Body
Politic, or Daniel 's Dragon did eat Most. Sir, if you would but be pleased to
satisfy the World in these particulars, by Printing them apart, or together,
with your Judicious Argument made against that voracious Monster; in the Case
of le Roy and Tucker, it would wonderfully satisfy the World, divert the
Ingenious, and profit the Judicious.

But to pursue the Thread of my discourse; Arg. p. 13.
after this small Digression, I am of Opinion, that more Millions of Sacrifices
have been offered up, of the Noblest Humane Blood and Treasure, to those two
Impudent Monsters, Quacks in Physic, and Empericks in Law, than either of the
three Monsters above mentioned. And now I will give an instance of the Latter.

The Triangular Case that you put, page 21. of Johnson, Boulter, and Norwood,
etc. is something like a West Country Man that has two Sons, and many
Daughters, who may be included in the etc. But the Father, in his Castle, is a
Jailer, in the Town an Attorney, in the Country a Knave; his eldest Son in the
City is a Beau, in the Temple a Barrister, and in the Country a Beau Pleader;
his Youngest in the City is a Cully, in the Country a Bully, and in Practice a
Booby. Now is it not intolerable, nay insufferable, that one Family should have
so many Professions, whilst other honest Men starve for want of that Stock of
Assurance which these have, and of which they have made a Monopoly; and besides
see the Consequence of this, the Father brings a Writ de Libertatibus Castri
sui Allocandis, the eldest Son he Advises, Directs, Draws, and in short, is
Council in General; the Youngest he Sollicites and Manages it, and it had done
much Mischief, if the Lawyer had not happened to sue out licentia de Malo Lecti,
and lost a Term, and so it was discontinued.

I instance in this, because it is Posterity I am Arg. p. 14.
Laboring for; what if in Process of time a Deluge of Oppression and Tyranny
should again overwhelm us? What if such a precious set of Judges and Gaolers
should be Trumpt up, as the late Reign produced? Why then a Custos Castri would
have been as good as a Colonel of Foot, and a Council, or Sollicitor's place to
the Gaol, not less than a Chaplains, or Surgeons.

But to return to our Blade at Bath, he between Bathing and Sweating, Mercury
and Sulphur, Corrosives and Cataplasms, looked like a Cynocephalus, or
Scrofulus, some thought he resembled the Bird on Bough, thin-favoured and
Sharp, others the Cokotoe of Surinam; but for my part, I thought him most like
Rablais his Goose-Neck, or that which the Ganzas dropped, when they carried Don
Roderigo from Tenariff, to the Moon; yet notwithstanding this, he still pursues
his Amors, and the Relations of the Young Lady, fearing he should
Basilisk-like kill her at the first sight, sends for her home, he not
discouraged with that, took it for a Modest Invitation to follow her, which he
was not wanting to do, but found so cold a Reception, that he was forced to
Retreat, but left such Symptons in the Sheets, as put the Servants to the
trouble of a separate Wash; upon this he retires to Mortify himself, and lives
upon the slender nourishment of Calomels, Panis Porcinus, Olibanum, Hypocystis,
Mummya, Sassafras, Sarsaparilla, Radix Contrayerva, Rosalger, etc. and is not
seen, until at last he appears in Print.

To Conclude, I verily believe, that your voracious Monsters called the
Prerogative of the Crown, has more puzzled the Politicians, and your Terrible
Leviathan, the Patriotical Lawyers, then the P-x has the Physicians, or the
Red-Dragon in the Revelations (that had seven Heads and ten Horns) has the
Casuists, to solve how many Horns he had on every Head.

Having thus made the way clear, through Arg. p. 21.
untroden paths, and I hope given you convincing proofs, from some Repositories
of our Law, that the Managment of these Professions is Diametrically opposite
to the design and Reason of them, and wholly inconsistent with the Noble Frame
of this our Constitution; I come now to offer my Humble Proposals for a New and
Regular Establishment of these Professions, which are an Essential Part of the
Commonwealth.

1. First, That every one that has been Clapped or Fluxed shall not set up for a
Doctor; no, though he has been thorough Fluxed, yet that shall not Entitle him
to be a Saffold, or a High-German Doctor.

2. That Physicians shall distinguish between the Welsh, and the French Pox,
and between the Itch and the Scurvy.

3. That none shall expose, or vend the Famous Aqua Tetrachimagogon, or presume
to Print or Publish Bills, or Affix them either to Post or Pillory, but such as
are Graduates.

4. That a Habeas Corpus cum Causa shall be allowed to bring up the Party, in
case he shall be restrained of his Liberty, or confined to the Powdering Tub
above a Month, especially if it be Term time, and the Party be either Bar. or
At.

5. That there shall be a distinction in point of Honor between Custos Castri,
and Custos Gaolae.

6. That no Castles, Gaols, or Prisons, shall be settled by way of Jointures
for fear of Escapes.

7. That though Surgeons may be allowed to be Barbers, yet no Bar. to be
Beaus, Fortune-Hunters, Projectors, or Quack-Doctors.

Sir, I shall sum up all with this short Addition by way Arg. p. 28.
of Corollary, That it is visible to the World, what Prodigious Mischiefs accrue
to the Commonwealth by these Catterpillars, and I hope we shall have another
Antaeus rise to Correct the Ignorance, Insolence, and Villainy, of this
Infernal Crew, that seems to grapple with the Almighty Power of this Infernal
Orb. And I am clearly of Opinion that the Mischiefs and Destructions, which
daily arise from them are not less Dangerous to our Constitution, than a
standing Army: and as the one is to be Disbanded, the other will be dissipated
and confounded.

FINIS.

