A TREATISE OF Carefulness; Wherein is set forth The Symptoms of Dangers by
Arguments against Means to prevent
overcharging Cares.

By the late faithful Preacher of Gods Word, HENRY ARCHER, Sometimes Preacher
in London.

1 Cor. 7.32. But I would have you without, carfulness.

LONDON, Printed by R. Bishop for Francis Coals, at the half Bowl in the Old
Baily, 1641.

To the Christian Reader.
ONe generation passes, and another generation succeeds (says the Wiseman.)
In the revolution of a few years, the earth is delivered of her former burden,
and another crop of men and creatures spring up. Neither natural parts, moral
gifts, nor spiritual graces will avail against that peremptory sentence, Dust
thou art, and to dust thou shall return. Even the Prophets, as the Prophet
says, Where are they? Moses, though a man of God, a meek man, and a Prophet,
yet he must go up into the Mount and die; and then, Arise Ioshuah, (says God)
Moses my servant is dead.

This servant of God, and Minister of Christ, having some years since tasted of
mortality; though he left a name behind him, as the smell of Lebanon, (being
in his life time faithful and painful in Gods harvest:) yet things committed
only to memory, being in short time forgotten, I thought it not unfit (partly
for the preservation of his memorial, and partly for the benefit of the
present and future times) to erect this little monument (as it was hewed by
himself) upon his grave.

This present Treatise, among many of his fruitful labors, as it is not unfit
for any time, so it may be esteemed most exquisite in these anxious days,
wherein the hearts of men are generally eaten up with immoderate cares about
future events, both national and personal, whereby the lives of men become
wholly uncomfortable, and they become selfetormentors. The worthy Author
herein has clearly and fully discovered, the causes, symptoms, dangers, and
effects, with the remedies of this needless, bootlesse, pernicious evil of
carking cares, which as a lethall spring, dries up the strength of the spirits.

I will not wrong the Author so much, or detain the Reader so long, as by a
perfunctory commendation, to set forth a thing of such worth. I rather refer
the Christian Reader to the Treatise it self, wherein thou shall find the
scope to disburthen thy heart of wordly cares, and to bring it into perfect
tranquillity; which as it is the intent of the work, so it is the desire of

Thy Christian friend, T. S.

A TREATISE of CAREFVLNES.
LUKE 21.34. Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and
that day come upon you unawares.


And Cares of this life.
OUr Savior in this Verse, by way of exhortation, prescribes a notable means
by which his Disciples might be prepared for the time of judgment, whenever
it should come; that is, by taking heed of the overcharging of their hearts
either with surfeting, or drunkenness, or the cares of this life.

And thus it is set forth by the time wherein he exhorts them to avoid this
overcharging, that is, at all times, Lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged.

And also it is expressed by a motive, Lest that day come upon you unawares. If
your hearts at any time be overcharged, then might the day of Judgment come
upon you unawares. As therefore they desired that the time of judgment should
not come upon them unawares, so they must be careful that at no time their
hearts were overcharged.

The overcharging that should be avoided, is of two sorts; First, surfeting and
drunkenness. Secondly, the cares of this life.


First, they must be careful that their hearts were not overcharged with
surfeting and drunkenness, which by a Synecdoche does imply and import all
kind of pleasures and contentments of this present world, whether lawful or
unlawful. The point that we might observe hence is this, that The people that
would not have the time of judgment come upon them unawares or unprepared,
must be very careful that at no time their hearts be overcharged with any
contentment or pleasures of this world, either lawful or unlawful.

But that which I mean to stand upon, is the second thing, that people must
take heed they be not overcharged withal, that is, The cares of this life. It
is not enough for people to take heed that they be not overcharged with
pleasures, but also to take heed lest they be overcharged with cares.

In the opening of this you may consider what cares are in the general. Care,
what.
Care, it is the applying of the mind to think upon some object with regard
to it, as you have it, Matthew. 12.14. Mat. 12.14.
Master thou carest not for any man, neither regardest thou the person of any
man.

Or if you will, Care is an earnest intention of mind, or of study for the
obtaining of somewhat. When the mind is earnestly bent and employed upon the
obtaining of something, it is fitly called Care.

Distinction of cares
Now Care in Scripture is distinguished by the object of it; as here in the
Text, The cares of this life; it implies that there are cares of another life:
So in Mat. 13.22. Mat. 13.22.
it is called the cares of this world; it supposes that there are cares for
another world. When Care is about the things that concern this present life,
then it is called care of this life, or care of this world. When the Care is
about the things of the world to come, then it is called heavenly Care, or Care
of the world to come.

That that is here meant in the Text, as the Text it self shows, is the Care
of this life. Now our Savior dehorts them not from the Care of this life, but
from being overtaken with the Cares of this life, Take heed lest your hearts be
overcharged with the cares of this life.

Care prohibited, what.
Care for this life simply is not prohibited, but the overcharging Care, that
Care that overchargeth the heart. And by this we may be able to understand the
meaning of those Scriptures that seem to prohibit all kind of Care, as in
Mat. 6. Matthew. 6.
Take no thought what you shall eat or drink, etc. So in Phil. 4. Phil 4.
be careful in nothing And that in 1 Cor. 7. 1 Cor. 7.
I would have you be without carfulness. Many such Scriptures there are that
prohibit all kind of Care seemingly. But this will help us to understand the
meaning of them; for it cannot be meant of the prohibition of all Care, for
the Scripture in another place gives us command to care for the things of this
world. So in 2 Cor. 12.14. 2 Cor. 12.14.
The fathers should lay up for the children, and not the children for the
fathers. So in Prove. 6.6. Prove. 6.6.
we are bid to learn diligence and care of the Ant or Pismire, that in Summer
provides for Winter. And we find diligence, and care, and painfulnesse, to be
abundantly pressed, and abundantly blessed in Scripture, therefore it cannot be
meant of a prohibition simply of all care. But I say the Text helps us to
reconcile these Scriptures: Some Scriptures say, Care not for the things of
this life; others say, care for them; that is, Care not too much for the things
of this life; Care not so as to have your hearts overcharged with the cares of
this present life. This I note by the way in the exposition of the words,
because it is a good explication and reconciliation of these texts. Let not
your hearts be overcharged with the cares of this life.

Not only caring for overmuch, but overmuch care for outward things forbidden.
Our Savior seems here to bid us take heed of being overcharged with the Care
of the necessaries and conveniences of this life present: for in that he says
the cares of this life, he seems directly to express such things as are
necessary and very convenient for this present life. He says not, Let not
your hearts be overcharged with care for superfluities and abundance of this
present life; but Let not your hearts be overcharged with the cares of this
present life, with the care of those things that are necessary and very
convenient for this present life; take heed that your hearts be not
overcharged, no not with those cares. It is not enough for a Christian that he
be not overcharged with care for superfluities, but that he be not overcharged
with care for necessaries.

And that this is the meaning of it, it seems to be expressed in Luke 8.14.
Luke 8.14.
where our Savior speaking of Care, he mentions Care and Riches together,
making them distinct things. Those which fell among thorns, are those which
fell among Pleasures and Riches, and Cares of this life. Christ makes a
distinction between Cares, Riches, and Pleasures, intimating that Cares as
well as Riches choke the Word. Care for necessaries and conveniences, as well
as care of abundance, and the having of it; the laboring to get much: the one
as well as the other choke the Word. And thereupon, Matthew. 6.25. Mat. 6.25.
our Savior prohibiting the overcharging care, he instances in necessaries,
not in abundance and superfluites; take no thought for your life, be not
overcharged with care and thought concerning your life, what ye shall eat or
drink, and wherewith ye shall be clothed. He not only bids us take heed that
we be not overcharged with Care for abundance, but for necessaries, even for
our life, in regard of necessary food and raiment: And this I take to be the
meaning here in the Text, Let not your hearts be overcharged with the cares of
this life: take heed of being overcharged with cares for necessaries, and with
those things that are very convenient for this present life.

I pray observe it, it is not only the duty of people, that they care not for
too much, but to have a care that they care not too much for any thing. Not
only must they be careful not to care for abundance, how to heap up gold and
silver as the sands on the Seashore; but they must take heed of caring too much
for the necessaries and conveniences of this present life. There is not only
an error, when they overcharge their hearts with caring for abundance; but
though that they care for be never so little and convenient or necessary, yet
notwithstanding if they care too much for that, they overcharge the heart, they
unfit and unprepare themselves for the time of judgment; this I take to be the
meaning of this exhortation, Let not your hearts be overcharged, no not with
the cares of this present life. The Doctrine the words afford us is thus much;
Doct. Too much care for necessaries unfits for judgment.
The people that would not have judgment come upon them unprepared and
unawares, must be careful at all times that they never be overcharged with too
much care for the necessaries and conveniences of this present life.

How ever it be lawful to care for the necessaries and conveniences of this
life, yet it is not lawful to overcharge the heart with care for them. It is
lawful for a man to eat meat, but it is not lawful to overcharge his stomach
too much. It is lawful for a man to drink drink, but not to overcharge
himself too much. It is lawful for a man to lay upon his servants back a
burden, but not to overcharge his servants back with too great a burden. So,
however it be lawful for people to care for this life, for the necessaries and
conveniences of this present world, yet it is not lawful to care too much to
overcharge the heart with too much care for the things of this life. That is
the Doctrine.

To overcharge the heart, what.
For the opening of it, we may consider what it is to overcharge the heart.

It is a metaphor taken from overcharging of the stomach with more meat and
drink than the stomach can take or digest well. Or to overcharge the back with
a heavier burden than it can well bear. So when there is more care for outward
conveniences and necessaries than the heart can well demean it self under as
befits and becomes it: this is the overcharging of the heart.

Now that you may the better understand what this overcharging of the heart is,
you shall know it by these evidences and symptoms. Symptoms of overcharging
the heart.
The heart appears to be overcharged with too much care, when these things
follow.

When they perplex and disquiet it.
First, when the heart is oppressed and distracted, perplexed and disquieted
with care, when it sinks under care, and is overburdened, and the spirit comes
to droop under the care, that is a sign the heart cares too much, that it is
overcharged, what ever the things are for which it cares. Though they be never
so convenient and necessary it is no matter, it is a sure sign that the heart
is overcharged with too much care, when care comes to distract and disquiet,
and perplex the soul. So indeed the word in the original signifies a kind of
dividing and cuting asunder of the soul; as by the dissolution of any member
of the body there comes to be pain, and dolor, and anguish in the spirit.

This is expressed to us in Eccles. 2.23. Eccles. 2.23.
For all his days are sorrow, and travel, and grief, his heart takes not
rest in the night. This also is vanity. Here is a heart overcharged with care,
when in the day time he is full of sorrow, and in the night time his spirit
takes no rest. Now there are two things by which usually the spirit is thus
perplexed and overcharged.

1 By fear of want.
The one, when it is disquieted with distrustful fear of want and necessity
into which it may fall in hard times, and in time to come. When the heart so
cares for provision of food and raiment, or other necessaries, either for it
self, or those that belong to us; as that for fear of want and misery, and
necessity that may come upon us, it is perplexed and disquieted.

2 By doubting of success.
Or else when the heart is perplexed with solicitousnesse, and anxious
suspense, doubting about the event and issue of a lawful course that a man
takes for the providing of necessaries. This is it you have in Luke 12.29. Luke
12.29.
Seek not what ye shall eat and drink. Is that unlawful? No; but seek it not
so as to disquiet and perplex your spirits with doubt, whether the means, and
the pains and labor you take, will have so good effect as to provide
necessaries for you or no. That that is the meaning of it, appears by the next
words, neither be of a doubtful mind, that is, in careful suspense. When the
heart of man so cares for necessaries, and labors in the use of lawful means
that God has appointed, that it is in doubtful suspense, and so anxious and
distrustful, and solicitous about the event, whether this or that course will
take effect, whether it will have such an event and effect as he expects; when
the heart perplexeth it self about the issue, and issue of its labor and
means, this overchargeth the spirit.

It is a very bold thing for any heart to take careful thought about the event
of things that belong to God. It is our duty to use the means to walk in the
way of God, and in so doing, to commit our selves to the blessing of God. That
is the meaning of that in Psalm. 37.4. Psalm. 37.4.
Commit thy way to God. Use the means that God has appointed, but leave the
issue and event to God. And that also is the meaning of those Scriptures, both
in the Philippians, Phil. 4.
Be careful for nothing: And i^ 1 Pet. 5.7. 1 Pet. 5.7.
Cast your care on the Lord. Use the means and leave the event and issue, and
blessing to the Lord.

Thus did Saul err, when he was about to prepare his Army to go to battle
with the Philistines, he was anxious and solicitous about the event, and so
cared for the victory, that he perplexed and disquieted his spirit with
distrustful thoughts what the issue of that battle would be. And it was the
sin of that King, in 1. King. 2. 1 King. 2.
when he was sick, he sent to enquire of foreign gods, whether he should recover
of his sickness. He was solicitous about the event, and thereupon his spirit
was perplexed and disquieted. Here is the first symptom of a heart overcharged
with care, even for necessaries: when it so cares that the heart is divided,
that the spirit is perplexed, that the soul droops under thought, with
suspense and anxious solicitousnesse about the event.

2 Too much care for the future.
A second symptom of a heart overcharged with care, is this; when the heart
not only cares for necessaries for the present, but for the future: When the
heart cares not only for to day, but for to morrow. The object of our care is
to day, the present time, Give us this day our daily bread. He that cares
though but for necessaries, not only for bread to day, but for bread to
morrow, he takes more care than God has appointed. How speaks our Savior,
Mat. 6.34. Mat. 6.24.
Take therefore no thought for the morrow. He then that takes thought not only
for to day, but for to morrow, he takes thought too much, and his heart must
needs be oppressed and overcharged with care. For why, observe our Saviors
reason, sufficient for the day is the evil thereof. The care of the present
day brings sorrow and burden, and weight enough. Who ever has but the care of
the present time upon his back, has as much as he can bear: he that therefore
takes in care for the future time also, he must needs overburthen his back, and
lay too great a load on him.

All care for the future not unlawful
Not (beloved) that it is altogether unlawful for a man to provide for the
time to come. Solomon sends us to the Ant, to the Pismire, Pro. 6. Pro. 6.
that in Summer lays up for Winter. And you shall find Joseph's wisdom in
Egypt, in the years of plenty he provided for the years of famine to come
after. And in Act. 11. the three last verses, Act. 11.
when the Churches were told by a Prophet that there was a famine coming, they
made a collection, a treasure, a stock for the poor against the time of
famine, and sent to them; so that it is not altogether unlawful for a man to
care for the time to come. But it must have these three cautions.

1 When things necessary for the future, cannot be had but for the present.
First, there must be caring for the future, when those things that are
necessary and convenient for the future cannot so well be had after, as they
may for the present. Hence is the care of the Ant and Pismire. The Ant lays up
in summer for winter: because then it is convenient; necessary food cannot be
had in winter. So Joseph treasured up in the years of plenty because in famine
nothing necessary, or convenient could be had.

2 When it is without distrusting Gods providence.
Secondly, there must be no distrustfulnesse; no careing for the future out of
distrust of the providence of God, and therefore not over abundant laying up for
the time to come; not to endeavor to fence in all places; to stop all holes,
to prevent all possibility of hazard and trouble, we are not thus to distrust
the providence of God.

3 When others necessities are not neglected.
Thirdly, we must not care for the future as to neglect the present necessities
of our brethren: we must not so lay up for the time to come, as that we care
not how it be with our brethren, and neighbors, those that we have relation
to, or dwell with. This is the careing for to morrow that overchargeth the
heart; when there is careing for the future, When there is care for excess and
superfluities; for more than is convenient: when things may be done as well
after as now, yet we will do it now. When there is distrust of the providence
of God that men care not how much they lay up against the time to come, Or by
what neglect of these whose necessities they should supply. This is the second
symptom, when the heart takes up this kind of care for to morrow, as well as
to day; for the time to come as well as for the present; that heart is
overcharged.

3 When it hinders care of better things.
Thirdly, the third symptom of being overcharged with care is when there is so
much care for the necessities and conveniences of this life, as that there
cannot be so much care for other things as God requiers. Then a man has eaten
too much when he is disabled to do the other works of nature or of his
calling. So when a man takes so much care for the things of this life that he
cannot care so much for God as for them; that he cannot care so much for his
soul as for them; that he cannot care for his family as he should, not for the
poor as he should: when men cannot discharge that care that lies on them
toward all others for the care they have of their own necesaries, this care
is a great deal too much, 1. Cor. 7.32. 1. Cor. 7.32
I would have you without carfulness, that is, without being overcharged with
carefullnesse, 1 To be distracted in Gods ser^ice.
He that is unmarried cares for the things of the Lord; but he that is married
cares for the things of the world. It is the argument by which the Apostle
would perswad^ them if other things concur to keep from marriage; the reason
is this, because in the state of marriage we are over much ready to care too
much to please husband or wife, and provide for our family, and we care so much
that we care not to please the Lord.

The Apostle makes it not a sin for married persons to please one another;
but this is the sin they are ready to fall into, to overcharge their hearts
with that care, and so to please the Lord too little: therefore if other things
concur keeping from marriage keeps from this inconvenience, pleasing of men
more then God. So that care overchargeth when there cannot be so much care for
the Lord as the Lord requires, and is due to him. Thus when care for
necessaries causes distraction in the worship and service of the Lord: when
there is such care for the necessities of this life, that the Lord cannot be
worshipped and served without distraction here is too much care. In 1. Cor.
7.35. 1. Cor. 7.35.
that ye may attend upon the Lord without distraction. When your care is so
much for food, and raiment for wife and husband, and children, and family, that
you cannot attend on the worship and service of the Lord without distraction,
your hearts are overcharged.

2 To neglect Gods service.
So when you are made to neglect the worship of God, and to slight that
service, either for matter or for the manner of it that is due to God, this
much care is too much for this life. The wishing of the Sabbath to be gone that
they might sell Corn; It is observable they were people that had some
conscience, they would not trade upon the Sabbath day, there was some Religion
and conscience: but their hearts were overcharged with the cares of this life;
for why; they were distracted, and weary of the Sabbath: Oh that the Sabbath
were gone that we might be getting of money to provide necessaries.

So we find it was the fault of Martha in John 10. John 10.
she was careful to provide conveniences for the inviteing of Christ, but
notwithstanding she over charged her heart with care as appears by this,
because she did not give attendance to the Sermon and Doctrine of Christ:
Martha, Martha, thou cumbrest thy self with many things. The thing in it self
is lawful, and convenient: but they overcharge thy spirit; for they take thee
off from that attention that Mary lends to my Doctrine.

This also is that in Ezekiel. 33.31. Ezekiel. 33.31
they come to thee, and sit before thee as my people, they hear thy words, but
they will not do them. They attend the worship of God, they frequent his
ordinances, they give ear to the Sermon, yet they observe not to do the
things that thou preachest: why so? Their hearts are after their covetousness,
their hearts are careing for the things of this life, and they are distracted
in my worship, they do not give that attention, and subjection to thy doctrine
as they should. So this is a sign that a man's heart is overcharged. In Luke
12.13. Luke 12.13.
Christ was preaching, and on a sudden a man in the company breaks out, Master
(says he) I pray thee speak to my brother to divide the inheritance. Here was
care for the things of this life: but this man's heart was overcharged with this
care. How does it appear? by this, because he did not give so much attendance
to Christ's preaching, but even then his thoughts were upon worldly things. So
when there is so much care for the things of this life, that better things are
vnder-vallued, as Esau for a mess of pottage sells his birthright: so when
the heart is spent with the cares of this life that the heart is dulled, and
deaded, and straightened, and made untoward, and unserviceable, and weary in the
service, and worship of God. Any of these ways, when we cannot care so much
for God, for the glory of God, for the worship, and service of God, in the
matter, and manner of it as God requiers; when it is so, the heart is
overcharged.

2 When we neglect the care of our own souls.
And as it is thus when we cannot care so much as we should for God, so when
we cannot care so much as we should for our own souls. When people so much
care for the necessaries of this life, that they cannot allow their souls the
time they should have to build them up in knowledge and grace; for private
prayer, for self examination and confession, for reading of the Scriptures,
and meditation: when there is so much care for the things of this life, that we
cannot have so much as is fit for our souls, that heart is overcharged.

3 When others are neglected.
And so for others, when there is so much care for our own necessaries, that
we do not care for the souls of our families; we do not care to instruct
them, to Catechize them, to examine, and exhort, and reproove them, to
discharge all duties of our families toward children, and servants* then also
the care of necessaries overchageth us. Then a man has overcharged his stomach
with drink when he has taken so much that he reeles: then a man has
overcharged his back with a burden when he cannot walk upright, but staggers
in his way: and then the heart is overcharged with too much care and thought
for necessaries, when we cannot uprightly discharge our duties in all
perticulars. This is the third symptom when the heart is so charged with the
necessaries of this life, that we cannot Care so much for others as she should,
not for God, nor our own souls, and for others, and our families as we should.

4 When we use unlawful means
The fourth symptom of a heart overcharged with care, is when the heart so
cares for the things of this life, that it breaks out into the use of
unlawful means. Or cannot stay Gods leisure.

When we break out into unlawful means; As when a man desires so to thrive,
and his wife and children, that he makes no conscience of fraud and deceit of
lying, and overreaching. A lawful care is ever content with lawful means:
and that care that makes a man now and then break out into unlawful means, is
not lawful.

And so for the time, when men so care to provide nenessaries for this life,
that they cannot stay Gods time, but they must have it presently within such a
time, or else they will wait no longer. In 2. King 6. 2. King. 6.
That King, when there was a great famine; he did so care for supply of
necessary and convenient food: that because the prophet bid him wait a while,
and made him stay longer then he would have done, he breaks out, It is of the
Lord, why should I wait any longer? He would take his own course, and use his
own means, he would no longer be dependant upon God. This man overcharged
his heart with necessaries; he cared too much, because he would not stay
patiently till Gods time was to give him answer.

5 When it hinders thought of judgment
Fifthly, the last sign, and evidence of a heart overcharged with care for
necessaries, is when the heart so cares for the things of this present life,
that it cannot take in the thought of judgments, and calamities that have
been threatened (to the place where he lives) in the word, and by the
ministers: when the heart is so solicitous about meat, and drink, and
providing for himself, and his family that it thinks not at all of judgments
threatened by the misters. Or else does not think of them as they should to
prepare themselves, and expect calamities coming. This especially is Christ's
meaning in the text: Take heed lest your hearts be overcharged with cares. How
shall I know that? If that day come upon me unawares then it is an overcharging
thought for necessaries. When the judgments you are told of, are out of your
minds, or so little regarded, that you prepare not; but suddenly unawares
judgment comes upon you. This is that overcharging care that is charged upon
the old world, and upon Sodom, Luke 17.26.30. Luke 17.26.30.
they are charged that they did eat and drink and were over charged with
pleasures. They builded and planted, there was overcharging with Care. Care is
lawful in it self: but they cared too much for these lawful things. And it
appeared by this they so minded providing of necessaries, and getting of
conveniences for themselves and others, that they utterly forgate, or never
fitted themselves for the judgments they were forewarned of. Then in the last
place you may know whether your hearts be overcharged with care or no. If you
find you are so careful, and take such thought what you shall eat, and what
you shall drink, and how you shall be clothed, how you shall provide for your
families, and children, as that you either think not of judgments threatened,
or are not so mindful of them, or not careful to prepare for them. By these
five symptoms you may know, whether your hearts be overcharged with care or no.

Now then the sum of the Doctrine comes to thus much; how ever care and
diligence be very lawful for things necessary, and convenient; so that it be
without distraction, and oppression of our spirits: Either with distrustful
care for the event, or perplexity of heart with fear of want for the time to
come: Or so that it be not careing for to morrow as well as to day, sinfully
for the time to come as well as the time present: And so that there be not so
much care for necessaries that we cannot give other things their due care: and
so that there be not so much care that we use unlawful means, that we cannot
wait Gods time, or think of judgments threatened: though a care that has not
these flawes in it be lawful, and comendable; and the more diligent and
painful, and the more careful, the more commendable. Yet for people so to
care for the things of this life solicitously, as to be perplexed, etc. This is
to overcharge the heart: and they that would not have judgment to come
unprepared they must be careful that they do not over charge their hearts
thus. Thus the doctrine is opened.

For the proof of it, it lies in the text: Matt 6. Matthew. 6.
Take no thought for too morrow. And Peter directly expresses it to us, 1.
Pet. 4.7. 1. Pet. 4.7.
The end of all things is at hand be therefore sober. As if he should say, if
you desire to be prepared for the end that is come then be sober, sober in
pleasures, not overcharged with surfitting and drunkenness, sober in Care even
of necessaries, be not overcharged with the cares of this life.

Neither is it enough for people to be careful that they be not overcharged
sometimes, but they must be careful that at no time their hearts be
overcharged with any of these cares.

The reason is plain, because the time of judgment may come at a^y time, at
the morning, at evening, at noonday, or at midnight; and it is uncertain
when the time of judgment shall be. And it is certain that Christ shall then
come to judgment, when people least of all expect him. Considering all these
things, who ever would not have judgemnt to take them unawares, must take heed
that their hearts be not over charged with the cares of this life.

To come to application,

Use 1. instruction
First, This doctrine serves for instruction, to teach us two lessons,

1 Their error that take care for abundance.
Frist, How exceedingly they err that ouercharge themselves with care for
abundance, with care for superfluity. If it be so great an error to
ouercharge the heart with care for necessaries, how great an error is it to
charge the heart with care for superfluities? If it be a great error to care
too much for necessaries, how great an error is it to care too much for too
much? Yet notwithstanding this is the error of these times, and of this City
Men never content themselves, they never have enough. It may be said of a great
many people (that are yet professors of the Gospel) as Habakkuk speaks of the
King of Babylon, he transgresses by wine, there is overcharging of the heart
with pleasures, he is a proud man, he keeps not at home, he inlargeth his
desire as hell, and as death: he cannot be satisfied. He gathers to him all
nations, and heapeth to him all people.

You have a generation in this City, they are never satisfied, but as so many
horse-leeches they cry give, give: they gather to them all the trade and
custom, they would if they could gather together all the wealth of the City,
and of the Kingdom: Those that Solomon speaks of Pro. 1.10. Pro. 1.10.
That are gla^ of gain. So (...) Pro. 28.22. They make haste to be rich; and
not only care for necessaries, but for too much, for abundance. This must needs
be an intolerable error, when it is so great a fault for a man, too much to
care for that which is necessary and convenient.

2 Those that take care for unlawful things.
The second instruction is to show us how great an error it is to care for
unlawful things too much. If it be so great a fault to care so much for things
lawful, how great is it to care for things unlawful? This is the fault of
many sinners that drink iniquity as water, that never have their bellies sull
enough, that draw sin as with Cart-ropes; that gallop in the ways of
rebellion: and as Peter says, think it strange that others also do not run
with them in the same excess of riot. These are the instructions that we may
collect hence.

Use 2. Reprehension to such as overcharge themselves with care.
The second use is a use of reprehension, namely to all such, as over-charge
their hearts with care for this present life. Such of you as perplex your
spirits with care, that lay so much care upon your souls, that your hearts
stoop under it; such of you as take too much thought for the time to come, as
care so much for the things of this life, that you give not God his due care,
nor your own souls, nor your families their due care; such of you as care so
much how to feed your bellies, and to cloth your backs, and to provide for
your family, that you do not use Gods means, nor stay Gods times, nor have
no leisure to think of, and prepare for those judgments that have been long
threatened: To you I speak; you are sharply to be reproved. It was Christ's
charge upon all his Disciples, that they should take heed that at no time their
hearts were overcharged with care: your hearts are overcharged, you demean not
your selves as the Disciples of Christ.

Mistake me not, I blame not them that overcharge their hearts with caring for
too much, that are grossly covetous, that belongs to another place; but such as
overcharge their hearts for things necessary, convenient things, that might be
cared for; only they are not to be cared for too much. You are the persons that
I speak of, you that overcharge your hearts for food, and raiment, and
convenient things: let me tell you, this caring too much for things necessary,
is as truly covetousness, as the care for other things. Covetousness is not
only a desire of too much; but it is also covetousness when the ^eart too much
desires any ^utward thing. Not only he is covetous that cares for too much, but
he that too much cares for necessaries. That his is so, we see it plain in
Matthew. 6.24,25. Mat. 6.24.25.
No man can serve two masters, he cannot serve God and Mammon. Will you not
say, he is covetous that serves Mammon, and not God? he that makes mammon his
God? Observe Christ's inference in the next verse, Therefore I say, take no
thought, no overchargeing thought, take not thought for your life, what you
shall eat and drink. Does not the connection of the words imply, that he that
takes thought for his life, that is, too much care, that overchargeth himself
with care though it be but for his life and livelihood, he serves mammon, and
is covetous?

So in Luke 12.13.15. Luke 12.13.15.
there a man breaks out, and desires Christ to speak to his brother to divide
the inheritance: this was but a lawful care; a man may care for his
inheritance, and for the equal division of it, and for peace between him and
others that are joynt-heires of it; the care is not unlawful, it is a thing
necessary: yet notwithstanding you shall find that Christ upon this very man's
action, he exhorts against covetousness. After he had answered the man and
checked him, verse 14. in the fifteenth verse, take heed of covetousness. What
was the occasion he breaks off his Sermon, and exhorts his Disciples and
others from covetousness? because this man speaks to Christ to divide the
inheritance: Teaching us that that man's caring too much for those things that
in themseves were necessary and convenient, was as truly covetousness, as if
he had cared for too much.

Consider this, when people overcharge their hearts with c^res, it is as truly
covetousness as they that care for too much. That you may also gather from,
Heb. 13.5. Heb. 13.5.
Let your conversation be without Covetousness. I, but what is that? be
content with such things as you have: for he has said, I will never leave
thee, nor forsake thee. The words seem to imply a double covetousness. First,
desire not superfluities; be content with what you have. Secondly, do not too
anxiously charge your hearts with necessaries, for the Lord has said, I will
never fail thee, nor forsake thee. This testimony that is brought answers the
error in the heart, the care for necessaryes, rather than the other, the care
for superfluityes.

By this we may learn that it is coveteousnesse, to overcharge the heart with
care for necessaryes. And indeed it must needs be so; for it is evident, there
is a love of money: if there were not a love of money, as money, thou would
never care more for that then for God, and grace, and the keeping of a good
conscience. If thy soul did prize God, and grace above money, and above the
necessaryes of this present world, thou would have enough, so thou could
enjoy them: and so thy desires and cares would be moderate to other things.
Therefore it is an evident sign, when the soul cares too much, though for
necessaries, that that soul is immoderate in its desires.

Observe, wheresoever there is immoderate care, there is immoderate desire:
Care is the fruit, they that care too much, desire too much. Where there is
immoderate desire, there is a corrupt opinion: where a man desires a thing too
much he has too high an opinion of that thing. Well, thou that carest too
much for necessaryes, thou desire them too much, and think too highly of
them: thy understanding is poisoned, thy judgment corrupted, carnal
Principles keep the stern of thy soul, and act it as well as the souls of
others. If thou did not think too highly of money, and of the necessaryes of
this life, thou would never desire them too much, or care too much for them.
It is an evident sign, where any soul cares for the things and necessaryes of
this world, they think too highly of the God of the world, Money. If thou
did not think that money were a good thing, thou would never desire it too
much. If thou did not think that a man's life consisted in these things, thou
would never be too careful for these things. If thou did not care more
for having the things, than for using of the things of this world, and giving
account for the things of this world, thou would never desire, or care for
them too much. In a word, if thou were not deeply guilty of Ignorance, and
unbeleife, if thou were not Ignorant of the alsufficiency, of the
faithfulness, and providence of God; or distrust in the allsufficiency, and
faithfulness, and providence of God, thou would never overcare, thou
would never overcharge thy soul with the cares of this present life.
Therefore you shall find that Christ in Mat. 6.30. Mat. 6.30.
If God so cloth the grass of the field, shall he not much more you, O ye of
little faith? they that care too much for food and raiment are of little faith,
if of any.

Therefore apply it to your selves, such as are guilty in this, of caring too
much, and overcharging your hearts with caring for the necessaryes of this life;
know your fault, and error, you are guilty of coveteousnes; that very sin that
the scripture so much condemns. Thou art guilty of that sin that the Apostle
calls Idolatry Coll. 3. Col. 3.
Coveteosnesse which is Idolatry. A coveteous man makes an Idol of his money;
he makes it his God: why so? he sets his heart upon it, his hope and
confidence, his trust, his love, and desire, and joy is upon his money:
Therefore coveteousnesse is Idolatry. In a measure thou art guilty of this,
thou put too much hope, and confidence, and desire, and joy upon outward
provision of necessaries, or else thou would never care too much for them,
thou would never over-charge thy heart with care, if thy heart did not pitch
too much upon these outward things.

Covetousness is that sin that the Apostle would have Christians to separate
from. All such as professing Christianity, yet notwithstanding are covetous, 1
Cor. 5.11. 1 Cor. 5.11.
If any that is called a brother be covetous, Eat not with such a one.
Covetousnes is such a sin as habitually reigning in the soul, and a man dying
in that estate, it shuts him out of heaven, 1 Cor. 6. 1 Cor. 6.
This is the danger of covetousness, and this thy soul is tainted with, that
art overcharged with the cares of this present life.

And beloved, if you be Gods people (I put this supposition, because it is
possible that the children of God may be tainted this way, to overcharge their
souls with the cares of this life) if thou be one of Gods, and art
overcharged with care, thy sin is not the less, but the greater: It is a
drunkenness, a surffetting: thy soul is a glutton, a drunkard, that is
overcharged with cares. Now what a shame is it for thee to be drunk, to be
overcharged with cares, that art not of the night, and of the darkness, but
art a child of the day? How does S. Paul reason, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 1 These. 5.
They that are drunk, are drunk in the night, though now drunkards be
shameless: yet in those times men that were drunk, would be drunk in the
night, that they might not be seen, that their shame might not be commonly
known; that was the fashion of these times: there was more modesty and shame
then, than in our times: But, says the Apostle, You that are of the light and
of the day, etc. that is, as it is a great deal more shame to be drunk in the
day than in the night, because more eyes see a man, and look on him; there are
more that take notice of his folly: so it is more shame for a Christian to be
overcharged with cares, than for worldlings: they are children of the night,
and of the darkness; there is none minds them, or looks for other things at
their hands. But Christians are in the light, nay they are lights, Cities set
on a hill; and if a Christian be drunk with cares, every one sees his shame, his
reeling, his drunkenness and reproach; all the world takes notice of him.
Therefore if you be the people of God, and hope you are, and yet find your
hearts overcharged, the more is your shame, considering that you are of the day.

Nay, the more is your shame, because you have ears to hear; and you have
often heard, the Lord has warned you of the day of judgment, which for ought
we know, should have come upon us long ere now; if not national judgment, yet
God might have summoned thee by any of that that is past, to the great day of
judgment; and thou have been told, that the day of judgment shall come ere
thou art aware; and yet thou that have had ears to hear these instructions,
should thou be unprepared, and unfitted for the day of judgment? so long
as thy heart is overcharged with cares, thou art unprepared for the day of
judgment. If that judgment should come, then thou would be took napping,
thou would be unfitted. This serves for the sharp reproof of those that
overcharge their hearts with cares. So much for the second use.

Use 3. Exhortation not to be overcharged with cares
The third use now remains, that is a use of exhortation, that is, that you
look to your selves, lest at any time you be overcharged with cares; lest this
evil of covetousness prevail upon you. Covetousness is that that we are all
prone to, Ier. 6.13. We are all prone to it, Ier. 6.13.
From the greatest to the least, they are all given to covetousness. Great
men, they are prone to covet too much; and poor men are prone too much to
covet things necessary. One way or other we are generally addicted to
covetousnes, all sorts, all kinds of us. Even Gods own people are prone to this
error, therefore David prays against it, Psalm. 119.36. Psalm. 119.36.
Incline my heart to thy testimonies, and not to covetousness, Would David
have prayed against the bending of his heart to covetousness, if he had not
found himself inclined that way? Therefore we see our Savior Christ here
exhorts his Disciples to take heed of being overcharged with cares; this he
would never have done, if they had not been prone to have been overcharged as
well as others. So Timothy, a man that was more than ordinarily moderate, yet 1 Timothy 3.10,11. 1 Timothy 3.10,11.
Thou, O man of God, flee these things: What things? The love of money, and the
coveting of that evil covetousness; do thou look to thy self, to flee these
things.

We are inclined to it.
As we are all prone to this error, to have our hearts overcharged, and so
tainted with this evil covetousness; so we are strongly inclined to it. It is
not a moderate, or ordinary bent of spirit in us all this way, but more than an
ordinary strong bent of spirit. Thereupon you shall find our Savior, Luke
12.15. Luke 12.15:
Take heed, and beware of covetousness. He adds a double caution, take heed,
and beware of it, see to it, watch and ward, the words imply both; every way
with heart and hand look to your selves, that your hearts be not overcharged
with this evil of covetousness. Therefore in Matthew 6.25. Mat. 6.25.
to the end of the Chapter, Christ three times in those few verses, does repeat
one and the same exhortation, which is that I now give you, that you take no
thought what you shall eat or drink, or wherewith you shall be clothed. Three
times our Savior exhorts his Disciples to take heed of being overcharged with
cares for the necessaries and conveniences of this present life. And why all
this, but because there is a strong, and a more than ordinary inclination, and
bent of spirit, to this overcharging of the heart?

The devil, it may be, cannot draw many of us to covet too much, to that
pleonexy, and superabundant desire of the things of this world, but yet easily
he draws us too much to covet those things that seem necessary and
convenient: Especially, beloved, is this exhortation seasonable and useful in
this time, wherein the Lord leads many of his children into straights and
necessities, and brings them, as he did once his firstborn Israel, to the
wilderness, and exercises them with the want of those things that seem
necessary and convenient. In these times, and for such as are exercised with
these straits, this exhortation is seasonable, and much to be listened to, that
you take heed, that your hearts be not overcharged with care for the things of
this life.

To overcharge the heart with care, Overcharging care, a punishment.
is to bring upon us a kind of punishment to punish our selves. We need not
wish a greater punishment to an enemy, then to be overcharged with care. It is
a perplexing disquieting thing, therefore in Ezekiel 12.18,19. the Lord threatens
it as a judgment upon people, Ezekiel. 12.18,19.
They shall eat their bread with carfulness, and drink their drink with
astonishment.

It makes men murmr against God.
The heart being overcharged with care, makes the spirit prone to commit that
great sin of the Israelites in the wilderness, to repine and murmr against
the Lord, to tempt and limit the Holy One of Israel. For what was the ground of
their often falling into that great sin of murmuring against God, and tempting
him? It was this, they were over-carefull for the necescessaries of this
present life: they were over-carefull for bread and water, and for flesh: they
so overcharged their hearts with care for those necessaries, that their spirits
failed and murmured against God; they limited God, and tempted the Holy One of
Israel, as the story records.

This inordinate, too much care for the things of this life, is a branch of
that love of money, that is the root of all evil. It is the root of most sins.
It is the seed, not of murmuring only, but even a womb that is able to
conceive and bring forth almost any sin against the Lord. It hinders grace.
It is one of the greatest dampers and coolers of grace, and of holy and
spiritual affection, that is. Water is not more contrary to fire, than this
over-caring heart for worldly things, is to grace.

And the means of grace.
You shall see how it keeps men much from the ordinances and means of grace,
Luke 14.16,18,19. Luke 14.16.18.19.
Christ he calls them to the means of grace expressed under the parable of a man
that made a great supper, and bade many. Christ invites people to the means of
grace, but the cares of this life, when they care too much for the necessaries
of this life, keeps them that they come not; they all with one consent began to
make excuse: What made them keep from coming? The one said, I have bought
ground, and I must needs go see it: Another said, I have bought five yoke of
oxen, and I must go prove them. These were lawful and necessary things that
their care was about, for a man to look to his ground, to try his oxen: but
they over-cared for these things; therefore they could not find time and
leisure to come to the means of grace.

And put the case people should come to the means of grace, yet
notwithstanding where the heart is overcharged with care, the means of grace
are unfruitful, and ineffectuall; if not altogether, yet so, as that they
bring nor forth fruit to perfection, Luk 8.14. Luke 8.14.
The third ground brought not forth fruit to perfection: why so? It was choked
with the cares of this present life. A heart overcharged with care, is kept
from preparing to hear the Word; it cannot before premeditate, and consider,
and ponder, and pray, and the like. When it comes into the presence of the
Lord, where his word is preached, it cannot be attent and intent; for the heart
is after covetousnes, distracted with care and thought about this and that; so
it calls off the mind, that it cannot lend that attention, at least, give that
intention of mind to the Word, as is needful.

After, it cannot so meditate on that Word; it has not that leisure and
freedom to recall the Word, to consider it, to apply it. Nay, hardly can it
believe the certainty, the truth, and promises of the Word. Thus I say, the
heart overcharged with care, if it keep not from coming to the means, yet
from receiving benefit by the means; if not from all benefit, yet from so much
profit as is needful to bring forth fruit to perfection.

It pierces the heart.
In a word, the overcharging the heart with cares, is as it were a piercing the
soul through with many darts, as the Apostle Paul expresses it, 1 Timothy 6.10.
1 Timothy 6.10.
The love of money is the root of all evil, which while some covet after, they
have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.
Many darts go into the soul of that man or woman that is overcharged with
care. And in this respect, and the former, our Savior compares cares to
thorns, because they choke, and prick, and pierce the soul.

But I cannot better persuade you to this duty, to take heed of being
overcharged with care, then in our Saviors words and arguments, who preached a
Sermon upon this very purpose, Matthew. 6.25. Mat. 6.25:
to the end of the Chapter, there is the exhortation laid down that I now
give, Take no thought, be not overcharged with care, not for necessaries for
life, What you shall eat or drink; or for the body, What you shall put on: And
you shall find diverse arguments, Arguments against too much care.
whereby Christ presses this exhortation.

1 God has given better things without our care.
The first argument is in the end of verse. 25. Is not life more than meat? and
the body than raiment? As if he should say, God, without your care, has given
you the better, and do you not think, that without immoderate care, he will
give you the worse? what care did you take for life? yet God has given it you;
What care did you take for a body before you had it? yet God has given it you.
If God has given you the better without care, life, and a body, will not God
give that which is of less worth, with moderate care, namely, means to
preserve the life, and to cover the body? There is the first argument.

2 The Lord provides for meaner creatures.
The second argument is in verse. 26. Behold the fowls of the air, they sow
not, they reap not, they gather not into barnes, and yet your heavenly father
feeds them; are you not much better than they? And this argument is repeated
in verse. 28, 29, 30. Why take you thought for raiment? consider the Lillies of
the field how they grow, they toil not, they spin not, and yet I say, Solomon
in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these: Wherefore if God so cloth
the grass of the field, that to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven,
shall he not much more you, O ye of little faith? The sum of the argument
comes to thus much, The Lord provides for meaner creatures, that are of less
worth and account with him, without their care and perplexing of themselves
with care. If God take care for the meaner creatures, will he not provide for
you that are nobler creatures, of more account and esteem with him, without
your perplexing of your selves with care? What care do the Lillies take for
themselves? or the fowls of the air for themselves? they have no means at all
to provide for their being, or for their well-being; they take no thought or
care at all; they have no means whereby they may provide for themselves; yet
for all this they never want, God provides for them. If God provide for them,
which in comparison of you are but base creatures; the grass that to day is,
and is gone to morrow; you are lasting creatures, your souls are immortal,
your bodies endure longer than the grass; though they may die, yet they shall
be raised again. Does God then take care for them that are so inferior to you
in worth, and that have no kind of means of provision of necessaries for
themselves at all; and do you not think that the Lord will care for you that
are better, to whom he has given some means and ability of helping
yourselves? There is the second argument.

3 Overmuch care useless.
The third argument is laid down, verse. 27. Which of you by taking thought* can
add one cubit to his stature? This is taken from the uselesnesse of our care,
that is, overcharging care, distracting care. Let a man care never so long, and
break his heart with care, what good can it do? can he help himself with one
bit of bread, or with one drop of water, with the meanest covering for
himself, with all his carking care? No more than a man by his care can make a
gray hair black; or by his care can make his deformed body straight; or by his
care can make his low body tall: no more can a man by distracting care help
himself with any necessaries in the least measure. Psalm. 127. Psalm. 127.
Riches come from God, It is in vain for man to rise early, and to eat the
bread of carfulness: God gives wealth, and he alone; Prove. 22. Prove. 22.
The poor and the rich meet together, and God is the maker of them both. No
more than a man can make himself, can a poor man make himself rich, or a
rich man make himself richer, God makes them both. There is no sillier thing
in the world than for men to distract themselves with care; all the fruit of it
is this, they wound their hearts, and distract their spirits, and do not the
least good to themselves, no not in the point wherein they care.

Overmuch care hurtful.
Nay, not only this care is useless, it helps nothing; but it is
prejudicial, it hinders much. To use the means lawfully that God has
appointed, that is our work; but the addition, the effecting of the thing by
the means, that is Gods work. If we do thing aright, do our task, we must
use the means, and leave the issue to God: But when we take that upon us that
belongs to God, and not only use the means, but oppress our selves with
care, about the event and success; God withholds the success, that else he
would give to the use of the means: and because we perplex our selves with
care about things, therefore God many times withholds the things. This is the
third argument.

4 Overmuch care used by heathens.
Again, the fourth argument is laid down, in verse. 32. For after all these
things do the Gentiles seek. The people of God must be unlike heathens, they
must not overcharge their hearts about necessaries; Christians must not do so.
But thou, O man of God, flee these things. Christians are men of God: There he
speaks in a special relation, because he was a minister: but it is true in
general; we are men of God, we must not do as the heathens do. They that
know not God, and Providence, and better things, they overcharge their hearts
with care for necessaries. It is a shame for Christians to be like heathens, to
be hunting as eagerly after the things of this world, as heathens.

5 GOD knows our wants.
The last Argument is in the end of verse 32. your hevenly Father knows that
you have need of all these things. The Argument stands thus; It is a folly for
children that have a father, a father that knows their necessityes, that is
able to supply their necessityes, that is ready and willing to minister
according to their need, it is folly for them to perplex themselves with ca^e
about necessaries. So for Christians, they have a father, why should they then
oppress themselves with care? They have a father that is better able then
earthly fathers; for he is an heavenly father. They have a father that knows
their necessityes, that knows better than they do that they need food and
raiment, that is able, and willing, and ready to do it: Then for these children
of God to oppress themselves with care, is to charge God, as if he were not a
father, or not a loving father, or not knowing, or not an able father. It
discovers either a great deal of Ignorance of God, or of the relation we stand
in to God, or else a great deal of Impiety in thy opinion concerning God.
Whenever the heart is overcharged, and distracted with cares, it is as much,
as if a man should proclaim to the world, I have a father that knows not my
need, that cares not for it, or minds it not, or is not able to supply it.
These are the Arguments by which our Savior presses this exhortation that I
am now upon, that ye at no time be overcharged with cares.

Means to keep from overcharging care.
But it may be asked, by what means shall we be able to come to fence
ourselves, that we be not overcharged with care about the necessaries of this
life.

The means are these:

I To work our carnal principles.
First, to work out of your minds those carnal Principles that make your hearts
prone this way; and to possess your minds with those spiritual Principles,
that may ease your hearts of this overcharging care. Care, as you heard before,
is the application of the mind with regard to somewhat; or the earnest bending
of the mind to obtain something: Therefore according as the mind is Principled,
so lightly it is ordered for care. That as the ship is ordered as the Pilot
pleases; so the mind in point of care is ordered by that Principle, that is in
the mind: If therefore there be a Principle in the mind that presents the
necessaries of this life over-desirable, then the mind must needs be
over-carefull. If there be a Principle that presents the necessities of this
life in a right manner, then the intention of the mind is rightly on these
things; and so is not overcharged with cares.

The Apostle James speaks of a double minded man, Iam. 4.8. Therefore men are
double minded, because they are double Principled: there are some Principles in
the mind, that present these outward things, as most desirable; therefore
sometimes those men are most for the world, most for sin. There are some things
that present God, and the things of God, as most desirable; therefore
sometimes (it may be for a fit) they are most for God, and most for grace. The
double mindedness comes from the contrariety of the Principles, that are
strong and prevalent in the mind: That look, as in a ship, if there be two
contrary Pilots, and one would carry the ship one way, and the other another;
when one Pilot prevails, the ship is ordered this way; when the other
prevails, it is ordered the other way. Double mindedness comes from contrary
principles, that both at several times work. Then the first means to prevent
the heart from being overcharged with care, is to dispossess the mind, to
work out such carnal Principles as make the mind care for necessaries too
much; and to work in contrary Principles.

First carnal prinples. 1 That outward things are absolutely good.
As for instance, one carnal Principle to be wrought out of the heart, that it
be not overcharged with cares, is this: That principle that is intimated, Psalm.
4.4,5. Psalm. 4.4,5.
Who will show us any good. This Principle, that these things are a good, an
absolute good, wherein there is a true contentment and happiness to be sound:
this is a Principle in most men's minds, and a root of overcharging the heart
with care.

It is true, these outward things are the good blessings of God; but
notwithstanding in themselves they are not a good; that is, not such a good as
ministers any true contentment, as yields any true happiness to the spirit:
Therefore we see by experience, many have these things, and yet they want
contentment, they are most miserable: Many want these things, and yet they have
contentment, and are most happy. Here is the first Principle you must set your
selves against that over-high conceit of the things of this life, as if there
were in them an absolute goodness, the fountain of contentment and happiness.

2 That we cannot enjoy our life without them.
A second principle to be rooted out of the understanding, it is this; that
there is no enjoying our life without the possessing of these necessaries. This
was that, that Principled the Jews in the wilderness: they had this conceit,
that they lived by bread, and water, and flesh; and if they had not present
possession of these outward necessaries, they must needs die presently:
therefore when they wanted bread they fall a murmuring, Would God we had died
in Egypt. And when they wanted water, Would we had died in Egypt: And were
there not graves enough there to bury us, that the Lord has brought us into
the wilderness to slay us? Whence came this overcharging care? because of this
Principle, they thought if they did not possess enough to maintain them, they
could not be maintained. Get this principle out of your minds. Therefore
remember that rule that Christ gives, Luke 12. Luke 12.
A man's life consists not in the abundance of outward things he possesses: No
nor in the competencie; a man's life stands not in food and raiment.

We see the children of Israel lived, and might have come to Canaan, had it not
been for their murmuring: however they were always exercised with the want of
these necessaries, yet they were preserved and maintained. That was a lesson
that the Lord set himself to teach his Church, Deuteronomy. 8.3. Deuteronomy. 8.3.
All the forty years that God led them about the wilderness, was to teach
them that lesson, contrary to this Principle; he humbled them, and led them
about, to teach them, that Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds from the mouth of God. That is a second principle, that must be
wrought out.

3 That a certainty is a great benefit.
A third Principle that we must dispossess our minds of, is this, that there
is a great benefit by a certainty, and by having a competency, and convenience
of maintenance for this present life. This conceit runs in most folks thoughts,
that there is a great deal of benefit by having a certainty of outward
provision, and a competencie, that we be not in straits, and put upon
dependency; this is a Principle, and a false one. Indeed it cannot be denied,
but that where God gives a certainty, we have cause to thank him; where he
gives a new dependence, and provides a competencie, we have cause to bless
him. Yet there is no such great matter in a certainty, or in having a
competency.

First, for a certainty; No certainty in this world.
when thou have got a certainty, what have thou got? where is this certainty?
Is it in this world that thou possessest so much goods and money, and lands, is
this a certainty? I say there is no certainty in this world. All that is under
the Moon, is more changeable and uncertain than the Moon. As soon may thou
perish for want of necessaries, that have a certainty, as they that have none
at all. Do not men as often perish as beasts, and birds, and Lillies, which
notwithstanding have no certainty at all, no, not for the next day? There is
nothing certain here. Prove. 23 6. Prove. 23.6.
Why will thou set thy heart upon that which is not, riches? take the wings of
an Eagle, and flee away: there is nothing so uncertain as these things, that
when we possess we think are certain. So for competency; thou think it is
excellent to have provision of a competency. But consider, when God sets
himself to bring up his own Church, as it were in an immediate manner, God
brought them up with out present provision of a competencie. The children of
Israel, that were ^ods first born, his dearly beloved: he had newly fetched
them out of the fire, and his affection was then strongest toward them; yet
what was Gods manner of dealing with them, when he set himself to do them
good, and to prepare them for Canaan he gave them not an independent estate and
supply of provision, and competency; no, they were feign every day to depend on
God for bread and water, and so he exercised them.

Beloved, great advantage comes by a dependent estate upon God; I confess
through the sinfulness of man, ther^ are many inconveniences in depending upon
men: but to depend on God, which we should do, whether we have a competency,
or no, there are many Benefits come by this dependence, by not having a certain
competent Provision. Many experiences of the love of God, of the power of God,
of the providence of God, of the truth of God, of the mercy of God, do they
get that are not furnished with a competency every way. Therefore I say, work
out this principle also, for it is a very false one. I give but some instances,
by which you may see what I mean. Whatsoever principle you find that makes the
heart prone to take too much care for necessaries; take care to work out that
principle.

2 To possess the heart with spiritual principles
Again, as you must dispossess the mind of these principles; so labor to
possess the mind with contrary principles, such spiritual principles as the
Word affords us, that we may fence our hearts against overcharging care. To
instance some of them.

First, root in you that Principle of Gods Providence, Of Gods providence.
that there is a Providence, a certain all-sufficient Providence. That this
Providence reaches to all things that God has made, and in a special manner
to mankind. Possess the soul with this Principle; It is continual.
God he is a faithful Creator; that is, he after he has made the Creature,
diserts not the Creature. The Carpenter builds a house, but never takes care
for it afterward; God does not so, he is a faithful Creator says Peter; that
is, after he has made the creature, he has a care of the creature, and
faithfully watches over it, and holds it in his hand to preserve it: And
therefore the Schoolmen well call, and express the providence of God by this
name and term; the holding of things in his hand. This is the nature of God, he
holds all things in his hand that he has made: My Father, says our Savior,
Christ, Ioh. 7. Ioh. 7.
works hitherto, God did not cease working, when he ceased creating, but he
works hitherto: Then he ceased the work of creation; but hitherto he works
the work of providence; God knows all things that he has made. God upholdeth
all things that he has made. God provides for all things he has made. God
orders all things he has made, to that proper end himself has appointed them
to. There is a providence of God, a certain providence.

2 Universal
It is grounded upon the fidelity of God, for he is a faithful Creator. The
providence of God is universal to all things he has made, as in Mat. 5. The
Lillies, not only of the garden, but those of the field: The birds, not only in
the cage, but in the air: the beasts of the wilderness; God provides for all:
for Sparrows, for Ravens, for Lions. His providence is over all things; it is
an all-sufficient providence; it is fully able to uphold and provide for all.
That providence is the same that made all; the same love, the same goodness,
the same wisdom, the same power that made all, upholds, provides for all: it
is therefore an all-sufficient providence.

3 Especially to mankind.
Nay, it is a providence that is especially to mankind. The goodness of God,
and the love of God, has mankind for its special object. Therefore the
providence of God also has mankind, even all mankind, for a special object.
Now then considering all these things, what need the heart be overcharged with
care, when we have one so able, and so faithful to care for us. So says
Peter, Cast your care on God, for he cares for you: what need we then perplex
our selves with care? Thus root our selves in this Principle, the doctrine of
Gods providence: study this, and be thoroughly grounded in it.

And to help this, take notice of the passages of divine providence, whereby
God has provided necessaries for mankind. How did the Lord provide for the
widow? he sent Eliah to her: Eliah comes to her, and asks her something to
eat; Alas, says she, I have nothing but a little oil, and a little meal, and
I am gathering two sticks, that I may make a cake for my son and I, and then
eat it, and die. She was now at the last, she had no more to save her own life,
and her child's life; and in this nick of time, the Lord sends Eliah to multiply
the meal and the oil, till the famine were ended.

How did the Lord after provide for Eliah in the wilderness, when he ran away
and hid himself, that the Lord checked him himself; he was there through his
own error and default, yet the Lord made the Ravens to feed him.

How did the Lord provide for the^ of Rochel, in the siege before this last
fatal siege, when they were ready to be famished, by making a company of
fishes to come and deliver themselves up into their hands, that were never
there before, nor never since, and to abide till the siege were ended. There
are many passages of Gods providence, sometimes by ordinary means, sometimes by
extraordinary; whereby the Lord shows, that he cares for us, and will not
suffer us to want, if we cast our care on him. This is the first Principle; we
should be possessed strongly of this, that God provides and cares for us.

2 Gods covenant.
Secondly, possess our selves of this, that God by promise has bound himself
to provide necessaries. If we be his people, and in the Covenant of God, not
only the providence, but the promise of God, ties him to provide whatsoever is
convenient. The new Covenant wherein the Lord has tied himself to pardon our
sins, to subdue our iniquities, to sanctify our natures, in that very Covenant
the Lord has tied himself to furnish us with all outward conveniences, as we
read, Ezekiel. 36. from verse. 25. to the end of the Chapter. There are three
branches of it, Justification, Sanctification, and the supply of all
necessaries. Godliness has the promises of this life, and of that which is to
come. God is tied by his Word, and by his oath; he is bound by that Covenant
that is ratified by the Blood of Christ, that is sealed by the Sacraments of
the New Testament; God in that Covenant is tied as well to provide for our
bodies as our souls: he is the God of our bodies, as well as of our souls:
Christ died for our bodies, as well as for our souls: he has undertaken for
our bodies, as well as for our souls: and every time we receive the Sacrament,
we receive the Seal of that Covenant, wherein God is tied to provide
necessaries for us

Thereupon Gods children never want enough, i^ they have faith enough to depend
on God. God never stays his hand in the distribution of outward comforts, till
there come enough for his children. Therefore in 2 Samuel 12. 2 Samuel 12.
when God reckons up the things he had bestowed on David, I gave thee (says
he) the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah, and thy Masters houses and wives, and if
that had not been enough, I would have given thee more. Wheresoever God stays
his hand in the distribution of outward things, it is because there is enough
for that man or woman. This is the second Principle.

3 Outward things not to be cared for, but expected.
The third Principle which we should possess our minds with, is, that the
outward necessities of this present life, they are not properly to be cared
for, but to be waited for; they are not to be taken thought for, but to be
expected. So Christ expresses it, Matthew. 6.32,33. Mat. 6.32,33.
Seek the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and other things
shall be added: I pray observe it, Seek heavenly things, expect outward things;
labor for the one, look for the other.

This is the rule that God gives us concerning outward things; we are not so.
much properly to care for them, as to cast our care upon God for them; for so
you shall find, Psalm. 37.4 Psalm. 37.4.
Roll thy self upon the Lord, commit thy way to the Lord, trust in him, and he
will bring it to pass. We are to cast our care for outward things upon God,
and to expect and wait for the things from God, and not strictly to care for
them, to toil and drudge, and labor for them.

Not (beloved) that we must be idle: he that does not labor, must not eat. We
must use the means that God has appointed, so as God has appointed: what
means God has appointed for the getting of these outward means, we must use,
and no other means: but use them so as God has appointed, without distracting
cares, without perplexing cares. We must use lawful means lawfully, but not
expect the things from the means, or by the means, but use the means in
obedience to God. And having used the means, we must look for the things from
God; this is the rule of Christians; this is the way whereby God would have us
seek for the necessaries of this present life, Psalm. 37.4. Roll thy self on
God; trust in him, having used the means, because God has appointed them. Then
trust to God for a blessing.

Thirdly, pray to God for them, Phil. 4. Being careful in nothing, but in all
things make your requests known to God. This is the third Principle wherewith
we should possess our minds; outward things are rather to be expected, than
cared for: we must use the means, and cast our care for them upon the Lord.

4 The hazard that comes by outward things.
Again, a fourth Principle is this, (possess your minds with this Principle)
that there is more hazard and trouble comes to us by enjoying these outward
things, than benefit: the care about the right use of them, about the improving
of them, about the account that is to to be given for them, is more than the
benefit that comes by them. This in other things makes men not affect some
kind of offices. A Steward in a house has money enough, he has it in his own
power to dispose, but yet because he is a Steward, and must give an account of
every penny, many wise men had rather be without the Stewards purse and place,
than have the trouble and the hazard of the account of it. If you consider
this, you would not so much care for the things of this life: If you did
remember what hazard there is in the use, and in the improvement, and in the
account that must be given of them.

5 Christians are possessors of all things.
Lastly, in the fifth place, possess your minds of this Principle, if you be
Christians, you cannot but be rich, you cannot but be possessors of all things,
1 Cor. 3.21. All things are yours, for ye are Christ's. So in Iam. 2.5. God
has chosen the poor of the world to be rich in faith, and heirs of the
Kingdom. And in 2 Cor. 5.10. As poor, yet making many rich; as having
nothing, yet possessing all things. Thou art a Christian, thou art the
possessor of all things, the Lord of all things: thou can not but be rich,
and in the best things, in faith, and toward God. What need thou charge thy
heart with care? Here is the first means to be used, to keep the heart from
being overcharged with care. Study these Principles, and work out the other.
Consider them, digest them, meditate on them, that your souls may be acted by
them. This is the first means.

The second means, to be content with a present condition.
The second means is; To be content with our present condition. Whatsoever we
have, be content with it: This is the means the Scripture prescribes, Heb.
13.5. Let your conversation be without covetousness: Covet not too much,
neither too much covet any thing. But how shall this be attained? in the next
words, Be content with such things as you have: what your present condition is,
be contented with it. Though you be in straits and necessities, though you be
worse than your neighbors, be content with your present condition, and then
you will never overcharge your hearts too much. For the overcharging the heart
with too much care, comes from overmuch desire; and overmuch desire comes from
want of contentment. Therefore men desire much, because they are not contented
with that that they have. Therefore labor to be content with your present
condition, whatsoever it be.

And to persuade this, consider, that all, whatsoever we have or enjoy, is
freely given us of God; there is nothing due, nothing deserved. And we are
angry with those beggars, that are not content with our allowance, when we give
them freely; nay, if we give them nothing at all.

Again, It is the will of God, that thou should be as thou art; it is Gods
doing, it is Gods decree and appointment, it is his will, and we pray, That the
will of God may be done; shall we not then be content when the will of God is
known? Whatsoever thy condition be, that thou art thus, and thus, in never such
straits, by the effect of it, it is plain, it is the appointment of God from
eternity, that thou should be so. Now the will of God is known, therefore be
content, seeing thou prayest it may be done. This is the second means.

Exercise faith.
The third means is, to exercise faith, Mat. 5.23. Why take you thought, oh ye
of little faith. It is want of faith, or want of the use of faith, or weakness
of faith, that causes the heart to be overcharged with care; labor therefore
to get faith, and labor to exercise faith. They have it of faith, and the use
of faith is one of the most notable means to preserve the soul from being
overcharged with care. Faith in the providence, and in the promises of God;
faith in the power of God, faith in the wisdom of God; the acting of faith in
these things, preserves the soul from being overcharged; the reason is, because
faith quiets the heart in the want of any thing, by making it sure, and making
it present. Heb. 11.1. Faith is the evidence of things not seen. Thou want
meat, thou want drink, thou want provision for thy family; faith will
make meat and drink, and provision of necessaries evident to thee: though they
be not seen, faith will make them present to thee. Faith in Gods providence,
in Gods power, and truth, and goodness, and the like; these make present those
things thou want, and these will keep thee from care. Faith gives a man
assurance of the things in due time and measure, therefore in the mean time it
makes the heart quiet and content, and careless; therefore I say, labor for
faith. We must live by faith (beloved) not only in regard of our souls, but
in regard of our bodies: not only in trading for the world to come, but in the
business of this present world. In all things live by faith, walk by faith,
do every thing by faith, or else it is impossible to keep the heart from being
overcharged. That is the third means.

4 Turn care another way.
The fourth means of keeping the heart from being overcharged, is to turn thy
care another way. It is the practice of some, when men bleed too much at the
nose, to open a vein, and draw the blood to another current, they turn the
blood and stop it; and it is a notable means to keep the heart from care of the
things of this life, when we grow more in care for the things of another: For
therefore the heart is too careful for this life, because it is too careless
for a better life. The stream cannot run strongly two contrary ways; and the
heart of a man or woman cannot run strongly to heaven and earth. Seek thou
strongly the things above, and thou shall never too strongly seek the things
below. Therefore in Psalm. 119.36. Psalm. 119.36.
Incline not my heart to covetousness: how shall that be? Incline my heart to
thy testimonies, and not to covetousness. Be careful of Gods testimonies, and
thou shall not be overcarefull for the things of this life. But thou, O man of
God, flee these things, 1 Timothy 6.11. 1 Timothy 6.11.
Flee covetousness: how is it done? follow after righteousness, hunt after
it, pursue it, grow eager after the things of God, and of a better life, and
thou shall be moderate to the things of this life: therefore often think of the
betternesse of spiritual things above earthly, and outward things. The things
of God are a great deal more necessary than the things of this present life.
Grace is more necessary than the possession of meat, or means to get meat, and
drink, and apparel. Thou can not be happy without grace, thou may be happy
in the want of all these; these are not necessary, the other are; these are not
certain, the other are; these are not everlasting, the other are; these cannot
bring grace, grace will bring these. Whatsoever Principles there are to enlarge
thy desire, and increase thy care for the things of God, possess thy soul of
them, and turn the stream strongly upward, and it will be weak downward.

5 Not to entangle our ^elves with outward things.
A fifth means is, take heed of tangling our selves as little as may be in any
thing in this world: whatsoever it be in outward necessaries, in outward
conveniences, tangle your selves as little as may be in any. It is a strange
thing to see what a secret power there is in any thing in this world, to draw
our hearts too much after them. We cannot touch pitch but we shall be defiled;
we cannot meddle with any thing in this world, but we are ready to be over
shoos, and over boots, (as the Proverb says) in it. Therefore since there is
such a bewitching in all the things of this wo^ld, keep from them as much as is
possible.

Upon this ground, 1 Cor. 7.32. 1 Cor. 7.32
the Apostle persuades them not to marry, without simple necessity; and his
reason is given, because I would have you with out carfulness, that is,
without overchargeing care; as if he should say, it is impossible almost for
the heart to meddle with any of the things of this life, but we shall care to
much; therefore if it may be without greater inconvenience, keep from marriage:
for however the cares of marriage be lawful, yet notwithstanding when you are
in those things, it is hard not to care too much: so we may say of any thing
else; as much as we can, let us keep our selves free. They wrong their souls
in worldly businesses and affairs, that care not how deep they dive in those
things; it is impossible they should keep from being overcharged.

6 To cast our care on God.
The last means whereby we may be kept from overcharging care, is, as soon as
we perceive our hearts to be burdened with care, that it grows a little too
strong for us, presently we begin to ease our backs of it. Accustom not
yourselves to carry the burden of care, but as soon as by the former signs you
find they begin to grow heavy, cast them off; turn your thoughts upon those
things that may kill and cure this care.

Nay, let us cast our care upon God: that as a wise man, as soon as he
perceives a burden that he carries is too strong for him, if there be another
that is able to bear it, he will presently ease his own back, and lay it upon
his friend: so, as soon as thou find thy heart begin to be burdened with
care, take it at the first, ease thy self of it at the first. God is ready and
well pleased when thou castest thy care upon him: it is the very command of God
(as we see before) that we should cast our care upon him. God would have you
without care, therefore at the first, before overcharging care have got to
great a vent, and has had too long a custom upon thy soul; at the first
labor to cast it upon the Lord.

As it is with the body, when the humors have took to a head in one place, and
find a vent there, it is a hard thing to turn them: so if thy soul be
accustomed to bear the burden of care, to be overcharged with care, thou will
find it a hard thing to turn them off thy back again; it will grow to thy back.
It is not with this burden, as it is with other burdens; when a man carries a
burden never so long, it is as loose as at the first, and no weightier; but
there is a double inconvenience in cares; care, if it lie long, grows to the
back: for care is to the soul, as weeds in the natural soil, wherein they
grow, rooted, and the longer they stay, the bigger they grow: so care will grow
to the soul, and it will be impossible almost to remove it; and the longer it
lies on, the more it increases, the stronger it grows: And therefore at the
first, as soon as you perceive care to overcharge you, that there is more care
than there should be, that it begins to burden your spirits, disburden your
souls, cast your care upon the Lord: as soon as you perceive care to sink
your spirits, go to God, and cast it upon his back. The way how that is done,
you heard before.

First, by using the means he has appointed, but as his means.

Secondly, by trusting in God for the easing you of that burden.

Thirdly, by making known your requests to the Lord; Be careful in nothing:
how shall that be? In all things make known your requests: tell God of your
burdens, make known your cares, and when you have done so, with confidence lay
them on him, and ease your own spirits. If thus you take your selves at the
first, when care oppresses you, it will be easy to disburden your spirits; if
once you be accustomed to bear this burden, it will be so rooted in you, and
lie so hard on you, that you can scarcely remove it.

The sum of the Text.
The sum of all the Text is this, I told you that these verses were a
direction that Christ gave to his Disciples against the times of judgment,
either universal, the end of the world, or else any national judgment
whatsoever: The time of judgment unknown.
It is a direction to them how to carry themselves, that they might not be
prejudiced in the day of vengeance, and in the time of calamity. First, Christ
lays down two grounds on which he fasteneth his exhortation; the one ground is
fetched out of Mat. 24.44. Mat. 24.44
where there is the same exhortation that is here, In such an hour as you
think not, the son of man shall come: there is one doctrine; that the time of
judgment shall come when it is least thought of, when people least expect it.
Another ground, which was the reason of this, is that Luke 21.35. Luke 21.35.
For as a snare shall it come upon the face of the earth. The time of judgment
shall come as a snare, as a full, unavoidable destruction to the generality.
That is the reason that the coming of judgment is unknown, and brought upon
the earth in a time when people think not of it, because it is to be a snare to
the generality. These are the two doctrines that Christ la^s down, as the
ground of ^s exhortation.

Therefore we should be prepared.
Upon this supposition, that the time of judgment shall come unknown, when
people least think of it; and therefore it shall so come, because it shall be a
snare to catch the generality in unavoidable destruction. Therefore the
exhortation of Christ to his Disciples, and to us, is this, that we be ready,
Mat. 24.44. Mat. 24.44
be ye ready: and in Luke 21. verse 36. Luke 21.36.
Watch and pray always. Here is the exhortation that he gives: considering
these things, his counsel to his people is this, that they be always ready,
always watch, and always pray.

To be ready, what.
First, that they be ready always, it stands in two things: Having all needful
graces, and having the use and exercise of them. It is not enough to have all
graces; but to use and exercise them. The grace of faith, the grace of love,
the grace of hope, the grace of repentance, the grace of uprightness; an
ability to every duty, in our general and particular calling; a zeal after
every good work; these are the graces that must be had. It is not enough to
have these, but we must be in the exercise and use of these. This is to be
ready.

To watch always, what.
Again, to watch, there must be a keeping from security and slumber, and a
heeding our selves in all particulars, lest we be overtaken in Doctrine and
Manners, that always foregoe times of judgment; there must be a watching in
all things, and in all times.

To pray always, what.
Thirdly, praying always; that is, first of all a praying often upon all times,
and occasions, and opportunities we can pick out.

Secondly, constant praying in times appointed, morning, and evening, and the
like.

Thirdly, instant, continued prayer, not to give over praying, acording as we
have command and opportunity. This is the duty that Christ teaches all his
Disciples, considering that the time of judgment shall come unawares, when
people least look for it, and as a snare; therefore it is wisdom for his
people always to be ready, always to be watching, always to be praying.

Now to the end they may be able to do this, he exhorts them to take heed of
being overcharged. A man that is overcharged with meat and drink, he cannot
watch, he cannot discharge his duty and office. So it is with the spirits of
people that are overcharged, they cannot watch and pray, and so the time of
judgment may come upon them unprepared and unawares. They must take heed of
being overcharged, whether with the pleasures of this life, lawful or sinful.
And also with the care, even for the necessaries and conveniences of this
present life. This is the wisdom that our Savior Christ taught his Disciples,
concerning the latter times: and this is the wisdom that in them Christ taught
you: And this is the wisdom that in these times you must labor to practice.
We have great cause to expect Christ's coming to judgment in this Kingdom: he
has warned us of it beyond Sea, by late fearful experience. We see all Gods
wrath beyond Sea is not yet quenched, it has broken out fearfully, and of late
worse than ever, therefore the times of judgment are coming, the times you
have long heard of, and that shall come in a time that is least thought of.
When this land least thinks of judgment, it shall come; for it shall come as a
snare to the generality; therefore if you have ears, hear what the Lord says;
therefore be always ready, watch and pray. Which that you may do, take heed
that you be not overcharged with the pleasures, and contentments, and cares of
this life. Thus much for this Text.

FINIS

