COMFORT FOR BELIEVERS ABOUT THEIR SINS and TROUBLES.

IN A TREATISE SHEVVING.

That true Believers, how weak soever in Faith, should not be oppressed, or
perplexed in heart; By any thing whatever befalls them; Either in Sin, or
Afflictions.

Together with diverse other comfortable Observavations; Gathered out of that
Counsel, given by Christ to his Apostles: And in them, to all Believers.

In JOHN Chap. 14. Verses 1, 2, 3, 4.

By JOHN ARCHER, Master of Art, sometime Preacher of All-hallowes
Lumbard-street. London.

ISA. 57. 19. I create the Fruit of the Lips, Peace.

LONDON; Printed for Banjamin Allen, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Crown in Popes-head-Alley.

1645.

TO THE READER.
COURTEOUS READER;
THis Author having some years before his death, writ, and given to some of
his friends, for their help, and comfort, some MEDITATIONS grounded upon John
14. 1, 2, 3, 4. Many desiring they were printed, conceiving them profitable for
the Saints and people of God; There coming to hand one of the Copies, and that
of some things more enlarged then the first Copy was, (yet by the same Author
to other friends) they are here presented to public view, for a more general
good of the Saints and people of God. This Discourse is seasonable in this age,
which is full of troubles, somewhat specially, (though always useful to
Saints) the scope and drift of it being to show [how that believers should not
be oppressed, or perplexed in heart, by any thing what ever befall them, either
in sin, or affliction] which subject is profitably and comfortably opened;
directing to the use of Faith for ones advantage in these cases greatly; and
several there pointed, some opened, some but named, which are worthy thy
Meditations: Do the work this right; as to conceive, had it been intended for
the Press, it might have been much otherwise writ, but it was only for
special friends, and it is not purposely altered, though mistakes may be, and
some are, which be pleased to mend (happily some may hereafter.) And if in this
Discourse some thing at first view seem strange to thee, (it being expressed
perhaps in too plain terms to pass with many,) yet neglect it not, nor judge
rashly, but seriously consider the truth, and take the distinctions and
directions given, that so thy says (in all points) may be directed, to fetch
in, by acting of it, such comfort as is intended to thee: surely for all those
who are believers, (or shall be by another Discourse of this Authors upon Ioh.
6. 35. helped and encouraged to believe) it is and will be (as their duty, so)
their wisdom to take in this counsel given to them by Christ, and here
sweetly explained to them, with desire of which I leave thee, and it, to the
blessing of God.

COMFORT FOR BELIEVERS ABOUT THEIR SIN and TROUBLES.
John. 14. 1, 2. 3. 4. 1. Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God,
believe also in me.

2. In my Fathers house are many mansions; If it were not so, I would have told
you: I go to prepare a place for you.

3. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive
you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also.

4. And whither I go, ye know, and the way ye know.


THESE words are part of our Saviors last words, and farewell to his believing
disciples; (as he acknowledges, The words are part of Christ's last words.
saying: Ye believe in God) even to the eleven; for Judas, was sent away by
Christ, and hurried away by Satan: Chapt: 13. 26. 30. So that there were left
only the eleven; Now to them, Christ speaks these words: Chapt: 13. 31. and
Chapt: 14: and 15. and 16. as a word of exhortation, and then prays Chapt: 17.
and this was a very little while before his passion: as appears, by that:
Chapt: 13. 33. Yet, a little while and I am with you; that is, I am presently
to be taken from you: So that its evident, that these words are part of his
last and farewell words to his beloved and believing disciples, after that
Judas was cut of, and separated from them: For opening whereof we will consider.

First the occasion, or ground, and so, the coherence of these words with the
former; which is this; Our Savior had discovered a 1. The occasion or ground
and so the coherence of the words:
close hyppocrite; one, who eat bread with him, and was of his nearest
society; not only one of his followers, but one of the twelve, whom he had
called to be Apostles: one who was never before discovered, or any hint by
Christ, given of him, to any of them; in so much, that none of them suspected
him; but rather, every one suspected himself: (as Luke. 22: 22. 23.) John. 13.
21. to 31. Again; our Savior had told them that he was presently to be taken
from them; Joh: 13. 33. and now they began to mind it, though heretofore when
he had told them, of it, they considered it not.

Also, our Savior added; that they could not come to him, whither he went,
John. 13. 33. and made their state, in that point, as the common Jews: and
upon Peter's reply, and his answer; which had comfort: verse. 36: that he should
come afterward to him; he yet foretells his fall, which might hinder his
coming to Christ afterward, John 13. 36. 37. 38.

Yea, and that they all should be offended because of him, (as Mark: 14. 27)
Now these things began to trouble their hearts, with fear and grief:
wherefore Our Savior speaks to them, these words of my text, Let not your
hearts be troubled.

Indeed; all of them, knew not as yet, the hipocrisy and treason of Judas,
John. 13. 28. 29. but some of them, did know it; namely John, the beloved
disciple: verse 23. to 27; and its likely by him Peter came to know it:
however, they all should quickly know it, by the breaking out, and acting of
his treason against Christ: Wherefore Christ arms their hearts against the
trouble of it: This is the occasion, and ground, and coherence of these words.
2. The patts; 2


Secondly, consider the parts of them: which are two.

First, the duty charged by Christ on his believing disciples (Let not 1. The
duty charged.
your hearts be troubled.)

Secondly, the means by which, he fenceth their hearts against this 2. The
means implied or expressed.
trouble: partly implied in these words; partly expressed, in the next words, and
so along unto the 5. verse.

First, The duty charged by Christ; on his believing disciples: [Let 1. The
duty charged, is: That their hearts, should not be troubled.
not your hearts, be troubled] Trouble in the flesh, he not only allows but
appoints them John. 15. 20: and Chapt: 16. 33. Through many afflictions, we
must enter heaven (Acts: 14. 22.) but he would not have them be troubled in
heart: The heart indeed may be touched, and feel, when objects of fear or
grief, present themselves; Christ him self was sensible of such things; and,
without it, a believer should What kind of trouble is meant, and what not.
become a Stoicct, or stock, and cease to be a Man; nor would it be any
exercise, or trial of grace, if the matter of fear, and grief, were not
perceived, and felt by the heart, for it then, was to them, as if there were no
such thing; wherefore he would have them be touched, and feel the objects of
fear and grief; but would not have an inordinacy in those affections; Which
arose.

Partly from the excess; in that they were to much touched and sensible, so
that their hearts were perplexed and disturbed, which appeared, both by the
interruption of the exercise of their faith, hope, and peace; in that they did
not so quietly and confidently cleave to him, when he was in his passion: but
doubted; as: Luke. 24. 20. 21. As also it appeared by their being disinabled
to duty, for their hearts were so oppressed with heavines, that they were so
sleepy, as that they could not watch with him one hour: Luke. 22. 45. Now, its
an excess of affection, and an in ordinacy, a surfeit, or drunkonnes of heart;
when the heart is so taken with a fear or grief, as that it cannot give its
due to every one; and do its duty in every kind to God and man, in the calling
general, and particular.

This was an inordinacy, Jn excess.

Partly there was an inordinacy in the Object; in that they feared, and greived
about what they needed not: For though they might be troubled, at Christ's
departure, as he was a man, and their friend, companion, master; etc: [a good
ground for a morrall greife] and as he was their Jesus: [a good ground for a
Spiritual grief; in that they loved him, and so, his presence] Yet there was
no ground, or cause to fear a loss, by his departure, or that they should be
now totally left to the wide world; as if, all their safety, and comfort had
bin entailed to his bodily presence; this trouble on wrong grounds and causes,
he forbids: (as we shall see more fully here after.)

So that, the meaning of this charge of Christ; is: that they should not be
troubled with more fears, or greifes, then there was true ground, and cause
for,; nor yet be so troubled with what was truly, as to hinder the exercise of
their peace, hope, and faith; or to be so oppressed, as unfitted to every duty to
God; and man, in their callings gennerall; and particular: All which: we may
express in this: An oppressing or perplexing trouble: Hence: Learn:

DOCTRINE. True believers should not be perplexed in any thing.

True believers, how weak so ever in Faith, should not be oppressed, or
perplexed in heart, by any thing whatever befalls them, either in sin, or
affliction.

There cannot be weaker Faith, then this of the disciples; who had indeed, some
little faith: but so little, as, sometime, it is called none: (Math: 8. 26.
with Mark. 4. 40) and therefore Christ, did after wards, upbraid them for
their slownes to believe (Luke. 24. 25.) There cannot be a greater affliction;
change, or loss; befall any, then this was: For Christ, was to be taken from
them by a shameful death; when they had enjoyed him but about three years,
and some months; Now, what fears, of falls, and troubles, might they have,
when Christ was taken from them, who was to them, more then an hen, to new
hatched chickins.

Again they had one of twelve, of them, proved, a vile and rotten hyppocrite,
who yet had so lurkt, as that they could never discover him.

Also, they had upon them the guilte of much unfruitfullnes under Christ's
ministry, for which he had often reproved them.

Also, they had either now, or presently after, the breaking forth of a base
lust of pride, and ambition, for which, Christ had often reproved them: Yet at
the passover and institution of the Lords supper; they instantly fell into it
again: Luke. 22. 24.

Also, Christ had foretold them of a great, and foul sin, for the future;
which, afterward, the stoutest of them, should commit: namely Peter, to deny
him thrice: Yea, and all of them, to be offended at him (as ye heard before)
Behold, a concurrency of all, at once, as can befall any believer: a weak
faith, an unparraleld loss, and change: unfruitfullnes under means which were
now to be removed, many sins formerly committed, and sharply reproved: a
return and relapse into the same sin again, at present; a foresight, of a
dangerous fall into a grievous sin, in the future: a discovery at present, of
a most close hyppocrite among themselves, of whom none of them had the least
suspicion more then of themselves; Yet, Christ charge them not to be oppressed,
or perplexed in heart, with any fear or grief: Thus: Gen: 45. 5. though their
sin, in selling Joseph was very hanious containing profaines, For they hated
him for his goodness Gen: 37. 2, and envy, because of his Fathers love, and Gods
oracle by dreams, of his preferment: which they knew, was a way of God, to
reveal himself by: and barbarous murder was in it, toward Joseph: and cruelty
to their Father who so loved him: Yet he bids them neither to be greived, or
angry with themselves: that is, so as to perplexe themselves, with gteife or
indignation.

FIRST REASON. 1. Reason. B^c: such trouble arises from an evil root.

Because such trouble, arises from an evil root, and cause: Namely
ignorance, or unbeleefe: For, either they understand not, or believe not; the
work of God for them, in the three persons: The Fathers everlasting decree
about them: The Sons union with them, and headship to them, and his merrits,
and intercession: The holy Spirrits; inhabitation in them and office toward
them to work all their works for them, till he has made them meet for glory:
All which is expresst in the covenant of Grace; in which they be assured; that
nothing shall befall them but for their good: that the corruption of their
natures shall be so ordered and overruled, both before and after conversion, as
that it shall end in, and turn to Gods glory and their eternal good; and that
Christ has made atonement for all sin, past, present, and to come, (though
it is gradually applied to them) in as much as all believers sins, were laid
on him, or met in him as it is read, (on the margent) Isai: 53. and 6.

And that the holy Ghost shall dwell in them for ever, and they shall never
fall away finally, and totally; but that the things which concern salvation,
and are better then the best things in the gloriousest hyppocrits, are wrought
in them: Heb: 6. 4. to 10.

I say: these things are not understood or not believed; or else, they never
could be oppressed with any fear, or grief: so that, it arises from an evil
root: and therefore should not be in true believers.

SECOND REASON. 2. Reason Bec: such trouble has evil effects as: 1. It
troubles Gods heart.

Because such trouble has evil effects upon believers: Namely.

First, Its trouble some to Gods heart; as a friends trouble, is to his
friends; for every believer, as he is Abraha^s son, so he is Gods friend as
Abraham was: Iam: 2. 23. a friend to God the Father: So to Christ: John. 15.
15. So to the holy Ghost; as appears, by his dealing with them: in that he
comes into them (and he only immediately; for Christ, and the Father, dwell in
them, only by and through him) I say, he comes into them, to dwell in them: to
reveal secrets to them 1. Cor: 2. 9. 10 and is greived when they do amiss
Ephesians: 4. 30.

Secondly, It frustrats Christ's works, in a great part; for Christ^ 2. It
trustrates Christ's work in a great part.
works, tend not only to save believers from hell, when they dye, and at the
day of judgment; but also for present, to carry them through this world: with
out all oppressing, or perplexing fears or grief Luke. 1. 74. 75. hence, said
to be called to peace, 1. Cor: 7. 15. and Phil: 4. 6. charged to be careful in
nothing: for since believers be in good terms with God; and have Christ for
their head; and partake of divine nature. 2 Pet: 1. 4. and are clothed with
Christ's righteousness, and are Gods sons: Christ has so wrought: that as God
and Christ are in heaven, in an unmixed, and undisturbed state of joy: so should
believers be in a measure; so that, though they be touched with troubles, yet
they should not be borne down by them, as they be led captive by sin, but no
sin reigns in them: and as there is a seed of God in them which sins not
1. John. 3. 9. so their may be a touch of trouble, but not a subduing by any
trouble: this has Christ prepared: now whilst they attain it not, they do
frustrate Christ's work for them.

Thirdly, It unfitts them, for their Christian service; which is to eat 3. It
unfitts for their Christi an service.
the holy things, and keep a continual feast, all their life long: 1. Corinthians: 5. 7. 8. that is: to feed by faith with joy continually, on the
righteousness passion and merrits of Christ: which were tipified by the holy
sacrafices and feasts: Now, as none that were sad, were to eat of those
things: Deu: 26. 14: wherefore Hanna eat not: 1. Sam: 1. 7. so none do so
enjoy Christ, and his good things, as they ought, who are perplexed with any
sin or trouble whatsoever; they do not as becomes believers in Christ.

Fourthly, It brings a consumption and weakness upon their spiritual 4. It
brings a Consumption upon the spirrituall strength:
strength, (even as it does on the natural strength) for, as the joy of the
Lord: (that is, joy in the Lord Christ) is our strength: Nehe: 8: 10. and
strengthens loins, as a girdle does: Psalm: 30. 11. So, is sorrow and fear,
our weakness; and does disinable to every work; it puts the soul out of
joynte, so that it cannot do.

And as joy, is as oil to wheels, or wind to sails, or wings to birds, so
sorrow and fear, are as waights, which depresse; or as fetters. which manacle,
and make weak and unable to do; such oppression contracts and streightneth
the heart (as joy does enlarge it) and maks it listles and unwilling to any
work; as weakness of spirrit does the body. 5. It casts an evil report on God.


Fifthly, It casts an evil report on God: for its language is; that either Gods
providence is not in and over every thing, which believers do, or befalls to
them; be it sin or sorrow: or elce God overrules and orders it not, the best
way for them; for if it were so; how could they be oppressed? 6. It gives
occasion to corruption and the Devil,


Sixthly, It gives occasion to the corruptions of believers, and to the Devil,
to send forth diverse filthy fumes of impatiency, and discontent, and pride, and
envy, and unbeleefe; and to hinder our submission to God: for if, the heart be
oppressed, it cannot so submit and be quiet, as becomes:

Information, to such as are not believers, and are prejudiced against the way
of faith and holiness, with this; that Of Information to them that judge the way
of faith a sad state.
its a sad state, and they must for ever bid adieu to all mitth, when once they
embrace that way:

Now, I confess that many believers, give too great an occasion and
confirmation to this cavil, and it is an aggravation of their folly in such
perplexityes, that they strengthen the ill opinion of the way of Faith, which
the world has; but let all unbeleevers, and unholy ones know; that the way of
faith and holiness, is the only state of joy and quietness, and that in it
only, is the heart armd against all sorrows and fears; yea, it is contrary
to it, and a sin for any in it, to be oppressed, or perplexed, with sin, or
sorrow, or fear whatever; where as it is a duty for unbeleevers and unholy
ones, to mourn and cry, as Iam: 5. 1. and it is their madness, and folly to
laugh and be merry Eccle: 2. 2.

Indeed faith, at first, sadds the heart, more then any thing, because Faith at
first sadds more then any thing.
it letts in the Spirrit of bondage, and presents the reallity of sins evil
and Gods wrath; but it heales again the wound, and gives sollid and
everlasting grounds of peace and joy; and the Spirrit of bondage, never
returns again Rom: 8. 15. Sometimes they may fall into trouble by Satan, and
their own unbeleeving Spirrits, but its a groundles trouble, and but a dream
of bondage; in truth by the Spirrit of God, they never are again led into
bondage; but now, the unholy unbeleever, is ever a child of sorrow and fear,
though he be for a while senceles of it; as a stone which lies up in the
bladder, though it be not felt, yet it grows and falls down at last into the
neck of the bladder, and torments and kills; Sorrow and fear, is their duty
and their due, and they shall have it; yea, though they are elect, yet being
unbeleevers, they shall be pricked at the heart, and have a spirrit of bondage,
before they can be saved; but the believer may and ought, never to be oppressed
or perplexed:

Exhortation unto true believers, how weak and little soever, their faith be;
that they would not be oppressed, or For exhortat^on, not to be perplexed with
sin or sorrow.
perplexed what ever sin, or fear, or sorrow, by any change may beset them:
not raise false and groundles feaces, and greifes to themselves: I acknowledge;
that God may leave believers to greater falls and sins (for the matter of
them) then many unbeleevers, (though yet God may leave believers, to greater
falls and sins (for the matter of them* then many unbeleevers: Yet with
great difference.
there is a great difference; the one, sinning with his whole heart, and the
other having a seed in him which sins not 1. John. 3. and serving Christ with
his mind; and sin, but with his flesh Rom 7 25.) Yet I say; for the outward
bulk of sin, a believer may have as great, and greater then some
unbeleever. As David's pride in numbering his people against counsel; and in
adultery and murder; were as great and greater then Saules not staying till
Sammuell came; and sparing some Amalekites; for which, God rent the kingdom
from him: Yet, believers should not be perplexed with any sins; Godly sorrow
and true Godly sorrow becomes believers: Yet they are not to be perplexed or
troubled, with any Sin, change or loss, not immaginary losses.
shame becomes them, and till they have it, God will not own them; but so to
be perplexed, as is before discribed, they ought not to be: So, neither with any
change or loss, which God brings upon them, should their hearts be oppressed;
For, if not with sin, then much less with losses, should they be troubled.

So neither should they trouble themselves with surmised and imaginary losses;
as believers for most part; do in all their troubles, they either think that
to be, which is not; or that it is, much greater then it is: this is usually
the Spring of all their excess in grief and fear: thus the disciples
thought, when Christ should go away in body; that all their hope and help,
was gone; whereas indeed, Christ with drawing his bodily presence, made way for
all their hope, and help: Thus Jacob thought when Joseph was lost; that he was
dead; where as in that his absence God prepared greater good to Jacob by
Joseph, then he ever else* could have had; and more advantage to Joseph:
Believers judge Gods dispensation by sense and carnal reason; and not by faith;
and God carries things in contraryes; and usually lays foundations of greatest
good and comfort, in greatest appearances of the contrary (as we shall see
hereafter) therefore they fear what they needed not, and greive for what is
not, and trouble themselves with mistakes; and so cause passions to swell up to
inordinacy, and over flow the heart: Now I exhort An in^^^^ing (...)
exhortation
believers not to do thus, but to take heed, of perplexing fears and
greifes, and of fearing and greiving on their own surmises and dreams, and
mistakes, taking things for that which they are not, or for much worse then
they carry with them; this is a dronkonnes: Passions increase your darkness of
mind, and your darkness of mind increase your passions: and whilst by these
inordinacyes your souls are darkened; Satan, the prince of darkness gets in, and
captives you miserably: Wherefore consider that this charge, not to be troubled
in heart: was given by Christ's own mouth, and that, not only to the eleven
believing disciples, but in them, to all that shall believe through their word
(as his prayer was; John. 17. 20.) and it was given to you, when he was near
his death: and pressed with large arguments and exhortations, throughout this
Chapt: and the next: which argues, both the great consequence of this duty; and
Christ's desire that ye should observe it; in that, he spent so much time about
it, when he was at point of death, and had so much to do himself; and also
the great love of Christ: who would so vehemently mind our quiet, then; when he
was entering upon his own horrid Passion: Had Christ, when he was about to The
Second Part of the Text is: The means to sense Believers hearts agt. Trouble.
Which are partly implied, and partly expressed.
dye for you, commanded you an heard thing, would you not have done it; how
much more, when so earnestly he charge you, not to let your hearts be
troubled whatever befalls you?

Thus much for the First part of the text. The duty exhorted unto.

THE SECOND Part of the Text, Is.
The Means by which, he fenceth their hearts against this trouble; which are
partly employed, in these first words: Let not your hearts be troubled; And
partly expressed in the following words.

FIRST MEANS. 1. Means implied, Is that believers put themselves under the
Command.

Which is implied, in these words (Let not your hearts be troubled) Is; that
believers put themselves under the command, and set it before them. and labor
with themselves, to keep from the trouble of heart forbid: So much, Christ
implies; when he lays the command before them; saying, be not troubled.

Gods words are operative as well as imparative: they carry a power to do that,
which they command believers: as in the Creation: let there Gods Commands are
operative.
be light, and there was light; and though it is God which helps, Yet he will
have believers bestir themselves; he helps in and by, their putting forth
themselves [up and be doing, and the Lord will be with you] For believers have
an understanding; and a will; and a principle of grace; which God will have
improved, that none of his gifts may be in vain; and in the use of them, he
comes in: he is the Creator, and applies himself to every creature according
to its nature, so as to improve and not to destroy it.

Wherefore he helps reasonable creatures in and by their use of reason and
will; and Grace by the exercise of Grace: Wherefore believers, must bestir
themselves to keep of, and get of, trouble of heart: Ye must not, as some in
an ague, who when the fit is coming, run to the fire, drink, stretch
themselves, and help on the fit; but ye must shake of sloth, and strive
against it; trust not to your own indevors, but yet endeavor: Consider and
provoke your selves.

Affections of fear and grief, are as winds to a shipe: which a well ordered
judgment, should raise, and lay, and manage, as is best: ye must therefore, as
Psalm: 42. 5. consider the reason why ye are troubled (this is to find out the
cause of the disease) and then ye must consider the reasons against the trouble
(this is to find out the remedy of the disease) and then ye must provoke your
heart, to use the remedy and quitt the passions:

SECOND MEANS. 2. Means implied: Is to gather up grounds* of Comfort

Which is also implied: (in the latter part of the first verse, and in the
following verses;) being indeed, the general scope and sum of them all: is to
gather up and present to our judgments, grounds of comfort, which are stronger
then the grounds of our present trouble; For it is comfort, that is the only
Antidote against trouble, joy may be with out trouble, as a well about a city,
though there be noe enemy: But comfort suppotteth and guards against trouble,
as a bulwark does against an enemy.

Comfort by the holy Ghost, immediately What
Now nothing can comfort the heart but it is either through a sense, by a
presence; as when the husband present, comforts the wife who is in some
trouble; Now thus to comfort believers, is the immediate work of the holy
Ghost, and his presence; it is not any work of the believer:

Comfort discoursive, what.
Or elce the heart is comforted discoursively; when such strong things are
presented by the understanding, as weaken, and exceed the causes of trouble: As
when the wife is comforted by considering her husbands love, his promises,
faithfullnes, ability to right her etc. though now absent from her. Now this is
partly the holy Ghosts work; Partly the holy Ghosts work-
whilst he irradiats and enlightens the grounds of comfort, and assists us in
acting on them; Yea, and sometimes putts fresh grounds before us; And partly, it
is our work, whilst we use our memory and judgment Partly ours.
and will, to consider of them: For as in raising, so in suppressing passions,
we must use our faculties, to present grounds stronger then those of our
passions, and so to comfort the heart, and allay the passion.

Thus Christ, lays before his disciples, diverse grounds of stronger comfort;
then they had any of trouble: as Himself, (believe says he, in me) that is in
his person, merrits, etc. verse 1. So the end of his going away which was for
their good: verse. 2. 3. So their knowledge of all this, that he put them not on
blind hopes, but on what they knew, and knew to be so: verse. 4. Wherefore ye
are but miserable comforters, like brooks of water dried up by drought, or
frost; to thirsty passengers, If so be, ye present not grounds of comfort; and
those stronger then grounds of trouble be; But muster together, the scattred
grounds of comfort in Scripture and experience: especialy such as are most
proper to the trouble ye conflict with: and lay them before you, and consider
them: This is a means not to be troubled.

And thus much for those means, which are employed in the text.

THIRD MEANS. 3. Means expressed: Is to believe in Christ as, in God.

Which is expressed in the text; Is to believe in Jesus Christ, which is
illustrated by its antecedent, and preparative: their believing in God; this is
express in the text; wherefore we will insist on it more largly: and first
explain its meaning: Ye do believe in God: (the indicative mood) and do ye
believe in me (for the word may be indicative, or imparative) for, if it were
both imparative: he would repeat To explain it:
the word (believe) but once: and so if both were imparative; and it is an
hebraisme: in the first part: a particle of similitude is understood: as ye
believe in the Father so do it in me, as verse. 19. I live, and ye shall, that
is; as I do: ye shall. He directs them to believe in himself, as they did in
God; not so much, in respect to himself, as his due, and their duty to him,
(though it be so) but in respect to them, as aspecial means and help to them,
against trouble: As, if he should say though ye believe in God, and that will
help you some what, against trouble: yet proceed to believe in me also, for
this will help you much more: Now by believing in God; he means, the Father,
not excluding faith in Christ: as by believing in Christ: he excluds not faith
in Believing in God, What.
God the Father, and holy Ghost also: but by believing in God: the Father is
meant: the faith they had before Christ's incarnation; which is called believing
in God the Father.

First because though; they had some knowledge of, and respect to, the Messiah,
yet it was so dark, and with such want of distinct knowledge why meant of faith,
before the incarnation
of him, as that it may be counted, as if they had not known him, but God
only, therefore the disciples hitherto, were said to have asked nothing in his
name; they did not understand so much of him; so, their Faith was rather in
God, then in him, For how could they believe in him, of whom they had not
heard?

Secondly because till Christ, did come, and finish the work: he was but the
Fathers promise; and so the faith which looked on him, was footed only on God
the Father, inasmuch, as there was nothing of Christ, but God the Fathers
promise: and so, it is fitly called, a believing in God.

Now by believing in Christ; is meant the faith, which is since Christ's
Believing in C^^^^t What.
incarnation; which is called believing in Christ; both because he is now
clearly known in his Person, Natures, Offices, Works, Merrits, which all are
such as may be believed in; as also, and chiefly, because he is come, whom the
Father promised; and so now, we believe not in the Father for him promised, but
we believe in him whom the Father promised. Before we believed in God the
Father, who promised a Redeemer should come; but now we believe in Christ, who
is come, and has redeemed.

Now these disciples, are directed to believe in Christ; not, because they had
not at all, done it yet; for they had faith in Christ before now: but because,
as yet; their knowledge of, and says in Christ; was but dark, and weak: they
had but slender and general knowledge and faith of him: Wherefore they are
directed to increase their knowledge and says in Christ; as a means to keep
them from trouble of heart:

So that one notable means to fence the heart against trouble; is faith: For
though it is reason which by discourse comforts and so cures Faith a notable
means against trouble and how.
trouble (as ye heard before) Yet it is Faith which presents to reason, those
grounds of comfort; Without faith, reason often cannot see any grounds so strong,
as those of trouble; but Faith shows them: as that It presents grounds of
Comfort.
which the eye, cannot see, being far of; a prospective glass, shows
plainly: Wherefore the comfort which believers had by discourse, it is called
the act of faith Heb. 11. 17. 19. 24. 26.

Now says presents greater things then any of those which trouble us: It
presents Gods being our God; his eternal love; his ordering all greater then
any of Trouble
things for the best: his kingdom and glory, as ours, 2. Cor. 4. 16. 17. 18.
though these things be absent and far of, yet faith makes them Present, and
nigh: (as a prospective glass does) and it shows them, in their life and
glory, by their own proper colors and show: and not as in a picture: For it
shows them in a glass: 2. Cor. 3. 18. in which, we see a thing by a presence
with and by its own species and colors, though With the best veiw.
not directly but by reflection; Whereas in a picture; we see not a thing
present, nor its life, nor by its own, but by other colors and species;
Wherefore, as a thing seen in a glass, affects more, then seen in a picture;
So Faith shows the most glorious things, most gloriously: and so exceeds all
grounds of trouble.

Again: faith shows things, with more certainty, then any thing Most
certainty.
elce can; Reason, and Sense may be deceived, because grounded on man; and
Satan often deceives them both: He deceived Eves reason in Faith in Christ gives
the strongest grounds of comfort, For diverse Reasons.
innocence (for she is said, to be beguild) because she fled not to faith: But
faith is grounded on God, and so, is as sure as God is: Wherefore nothing can
give such strong grounds of comfort, as Faith: and no faith, like faith in
Jesus Christ: And that for these Reasons.

FIRST, Because it gives more boldness toward God, Ephe. 1. Because it gives
more boldness toward God.
3. 12. the word translated boldness, signifies an appearing in glorious
liberty, lifting up the face and having liberty of speech and an undanted or
open and uncovered face. as 2. Cor. 3. 18. not only as opposite to Moses under
the Law, whose face was covered, to show obscurity and hiddennes of his
Ministry: or opposite to convicted persons, whose faces are covered for shame,
but also it is opposite to that abashment which is in holy Angels. Isa: 6. 2.
3. expressed by covering their faces, and all this because they have access or a
manuduction by Christ, he leads them by the hand to God, and therefore they
come with all boldness, whereas Adam was shut out of Paridise and Israel at
Sinai stood afarr off, and trembled, but believers by Christ come nigh with
boldness, and faith in Christ gives this boldness upon these Six grounds. Upon
six grounds.


First, It presents them nearer to God; in that they by Faith, are 1. By it
there is nearnes to God.
made one with Christ, who is Gods natural Son, and so they come to a nearer
Sonnship, then is obtained only by Adoption or Creation: which the Angels
have; and Adam had in innocence; as a woman married to a Kings natural Son,
is in a nearer relation, then one only adopted; because she is one with his
natural son: thus, John. 1. 12. prerogative to be Gods sons, By faith in
Christ, may be meant, that they have a nearer sonnship, then any that are
created, or barely adopted (though believers be also adopted, and regenerated)
because they be one with him who is Gods natural Son: Thus by faith in
Christ; we are nearer in relation to God, and so have more boldness: For it is
nearenes of relation, which gives boldness: A Son is bolder then a Servant,
and a lawful Son then a Bastard.

Secondly, faith in Christ, presents God, nearer to them: For it 2. By it God
is beheld in their own nature
shows them God in their own nature; God whom they may see, hear, handle, 1
John. 1. 1. 2. And so they may be more familiar and bold: For it is likeness, or
nearenes of nature which make bold.

Thirdly, By faith in Christ; there is hold laid on Gods Justice, 3. By it
there is hold laid on Gods Justice as well as on his Mercy.
as well as on his Mercy; God in Christ; is just, and a justifier of the
believer: Rom: 3. 26. that is: he does not only declare his mercy in a free
pardon of sin, but he also declares his justice, in a full satisfaction for
sin; Wherefore as by Christ, believers may plead with his mercy, So they may
also with his justice; in that there is not only a way opened unto mercy, but,
Christ has merited and of justice purchased divine favor; for he has
satisfied the Covenant of Works, both in suffering what was due for its
transgression, and also in fullfilling of its righteousness, and all this on
their behalf, and for their use, who believe in him; So that, whatever
boldness, an Angel that stands, can have; or Adam could have had, if he had
stood righteous, by virtue of Gods Justice, and the Covenant of Works; all that
boldness through Christ, a believer has; because the Covenant of Works, is in
Christ, kept by him; and so, the Laws righteousness, is fullfilled in us,
through Christ; who believe, and show our faith, by walking after the Spirrit,
and not after the Flesh: Rom: 8. 3. 4.

Insomuch that believers in Christ, may appeal to Gods Justice, It holds God
by both hands.
as well as to his Mercy; and hold God by both hands, having as clear a title
to him in justice, as in and by mercy; holding their interest in him, by virtue
of his Justice and the Covenant of Works, as well as by virtue of his Mercy and
the covenant of Grace; for allthough to believers in their own persons, its
only grace and mercy, and justice with a covenant of works, cannot stand with
a covenant of grace, and mercy; Yet in a person of another, who undertakes for
them; both may concur; he may satisfy justice, and merit mercy: which cannot
but give great boldness.

Fourthly, By faith in Christ, there is an access with boldness to Gods 4. By
it there is an access to Gods holiness.
holiness: holiness, is the brightness, and beauty of God, which dazzles the eyes
of the bravest creatures: Isa: 6. 2. 3. the Seraphims, not only cover their
feet, because they are base, being creatures made of nothing but they cover
their faces; even their best excellency; which is their perfect righteousness
according to the covenant of works; compared with Gods glorious Holiness; for
therefore he is thrice called holy; not only to show Trinity of Persons, but
gloriousnes of holiness, as Exodus: 15. 11. with which holiness, their perfect
righteousness, is abasht; and Job. 4. 18. with 15. 15 explained.
so they cover it; Wherefore Job. 4. 18. repeated again, Job. 15. 15. he is
said to put no trust in his Saints, or Servants; that is his holy Angels, as
the next words explain; who are by a figure called the heavens, because they
are the inhabitants, of the heavens: which Angels, or heavens inhabitants, he
charge with folly, and they are impure in his sight: Now this cannot be meant,
of the Divils, who fell; both because; in Chapt: 15. 15. he speaks of them in
the present tense; that they now are his Saints, and now are, the heavens, that
is inhabitants of heaven, which the Divils, now are not; As also, because in
both texts, man's baseness, is inferd much more; in the following verses, which
implies that he speaks of such as are better, and less impure then men; which
Devils are not: For the conceiving this therefore: Consider that all-though For
the conceiving of which, Consider.
God has tied himself by a covenant of works, to accept of, and reward, such
a righteousness, as shall fully answer that covenant; which righteousness is
found in Angels, and they are accepted and rewarded in justice, according to
the compact twixt God and them; so that, not in justice, or dispeasure, does
God find them impure, or charg them with folly: Yet the Holiness of God: which
is an attribute What holiness in God is.
by which God, seperates himself from every thing else, and is devoted to
himself, to seek himself, and love himself above all (for holiness is a
separation from all other things with a dedication to some one thing) this
Holiness of God, was not satisfied in the righteousness of the covenant of works,
which was in Angels, but desired an higher righteousness; even such an one,
which might be Gods own righteousness, Which was not satisfied in Angels.
a righteousness done by one that should be God, as well as a creature, that so,
a mere creature should not boast, but God might have the glory, and be the
worker of that righteousness, and so, it might taste full to his pallet, inasmuch
as himself was in it, the worker of it, in a created nature, joined to the
Godhead; which is in Jesus Christ; But is in Christ.


Now, compared with this, the righteousness of Angels, is impure, and folly;
though, to justice, through a covenant of works, it is satisfactory; insomuch,
as they may be justified by it, and yet God, behold it, as a low and poor
thing in comparison of what Christ's righteousness is: which Holiness of God, they
considering, they also are ashamed of their righteousness, and cover their
faces: But now, by faith in Christ, we pertakeing of Christ's righteousness,
which is Gods, and so, does fully reach, and answer his holiness, as well as
justice: we come into his presence with faces uncovered, or undanted, as ye had
before, the words expounded Ephe: 3. 12. and 2. Cor. 3. 18. not only in regard
of a just, but though he be an holy God, open face; not only expressing, the
remove of obscurity, and shame, but also of that abashment in Angels; for we
have Christ's righteousness which is better then Angels, and gives boldness with
Gods holiness, as well as with his justice's The full conformity to the law, and
the absence of all sin, gives boldness with Gods justice, by virtue of the
covenant of works: which Angels have, and believers also have it by Christ his
righteousness; but, there must be a righteousness of Gods own working* in which,
he himself only is, which must give boldness with Gods Holiness; which the
Angels have not, but believers have in and by Christ his righteousness: which
cannot but give the greatest boldness.

Fifthly, By faith in Christ; there are raised unlimited expectations 5. By ^
there is unlimited expectation from God.
from God; For whilst that God is set before us, married to our nature, and in
our nature, working righteousness, making atonement for Sin, merriting
blessedness for us; what may we not expect? what Sins are to great to be
pardoned? what blessedness, or love so high, as may not be conveied to us?

Lastly, By faith in Christ; there is set up for us, a middle one, or 6. By ^
there is set up a mediator.
Mediator between God and Us, who equally pertaks of Gods nature and ours, and
so, is equally interessed in both; whence cannot but arise much boldness; for
twixt God and us, there is such infinite distanc as that, allthough there were
no breach, yet there could not be such boldness, and free access, as now is by
one who is a middle person between both, therefore, it is not a mervaile, that
popish faith, yields so little settling and comfort, since they make so little
use of Christ.

Thus in these six respects, Faith in Christ gives great boldness toward God,
and so, the stronger grounds of comfort: which is the first reason.

SECONDLY, Because Faith in Christ; unites and joins the 2. Reason Bec. Faith
in Christ, joins the Soul to Christ, the fountain of all Comfort
Soul immediately to the spring and fountain of all comfort; For faith
emptyes a man of himself, and takes him of from every thing in the world, and
joins him unto, and makes him one with, Jesus Christ: Faith not so much gives
an union with the promises and word of God, as with the Son of God, Jesus
Christ: Wherefore believing, is called a receiving him John. 1. 12. and they
are said to be rooted and built up in him, stablished in the faith Colos. 2. 7.
It is a mistake to think that faith lays hold on, or joins to, the word or
promise immediately and Not first on the promises
first; for there is no promise which pertaines to any, until they are one
with Christ: as appears by this, that all the promises are Christ's, All
promises made in Christ.
even his own, and his alone in the first place; all the treasury was on him
only bestowed by the Father: Gala. 3. 16. not to many seeds. but to one; and
that was Christ only: as to Abraham only, and so to David only were the
promises made: therefore, it is said of Abraham, that he had received the
promises: Heb. 11. 17. he and he only: and the sure mercyes are called David's:
even so, are all the promises, Christ's only; who was represented in those men
whom God singled out, to make the promises unto: and therefore Christ is the
testator, who dies, by his death to ratifye and make good the promises: Heb. 9.
16. 17. which implies that the promises were his proper possession, in which he
only was seizd and instated, or else he needed not have died, to confirm the
bequeathment of them to others: and therefore also; he is called the Covenant
of God with believers: Isa. 49. 8. because, not only his person, was the maine
of the Covenant, (inasmuch as it is a Covenant of Persons, as well as of
Graces) but also because, all the promises of the Covenant; are his and in him,
and through him only to be conveied to believers; even as all the promises
were intaild to Isaac; and put in him Heb 11. 18. and therefore it is, that the
sum of all promises, even that of eternal life, is said to be made before
the Before the world began
world began. Titus. 1. 2. that is before all time, and so from everlasting;
for, whatever was before all time; must be eternal and without beginning.

Now, this is not called a purpose, for that, one may take up in himself,
without another; but a promise; which ever supposes another distinct person:
which was the second person in Trinitye, to whom the Father promised; that he
becoming incarnate, should inherrit such and such things; and though his
incarnation through which he was to inherrit all; were not in act, from
everlasting; yet in as much as his person was, which was to be incarnate; the
promise might be made to him, but could not be made to any creature, inasmuch
as it was not a person subsisting from eternitye: but now; though the promises
be all his, and made only to him in the first place, and rank; yet, through
and by him, they descend also to others; so Yet to believers also but, in him.
that, though they be only to him, in the first place; yet they are not only
for him: as the promises to Abraham, and David; were not only for them, but
for them, and their seed: and the promises which Isaac was endowed with, and
were only in him; were not only for him, but for him and his seed; but yet
they were their seeds by descent.

And in the Second place; even so, the promises are not only for Christ, but
for him, and his; namely all the Elect, whom God chose in him, and gave to him
to be his offspring, and spowse; and so through and from him to be endowed with
all the riches of the promises: though God loved, and chose them all, to enjoy
the promises, yet in Christ, and through, by, and for him, to inherit; Ephesians.
1. 4. he did not choose us, with him, but in him: Wherefore, as the Isralits
must come to enjoy the promises, not by laying hold first on them, but by being
First borne of Isaac, and having that union of flesh, with him: And as a woman
has right to the man's estate, not immediately, but by being first made one
with him: even so, must people be first of Christ, married to him, borne of
him, drawn out of his loins: which is by believing. (therefore borne of God,
and believing, are conjoined John. 1. 12. 13.) before they can lay hold of, or
claim title to, any promise.

For, as the Covenant of Works was made with Adam; and in, and The Covenant of
grace made with Christ, and in him, to his leede.
through him, with those who came out of him: So the Covenant of Grace, is made
with Christ (therefore called the Second Adam) and in, and through him, with
all that come out of him, and by faith are borne of him: and it is more
necessary to be first made one with Christ's person, before we can have claim
to the promises: then it was to be one with, and of Adam, before we could
inherit from him; because the promises of Grace, are more confind first to
Christ's person, and that without the person of the Elect: then the Covenant of
Works, was to Adams person, without respect to his offspring; For Adam and his
offspring were only considered in a priority of time and order, differing: Adam
before them; but not in different state of dignity, or favor with God;
wherefore Adam did noe more then they did in, and with him: but Christ's person
is more excellent, and more loved of God, then believers; and did more for to
enjoy the promises then they: his Person, becoming incarnate, clayming them as
due, and merriting them for the Elect: Therefore much more must it be, that we
must first lay hold on Christ's person before we can, on any promise; then we
need be borne of Adam, before we can have title to any of his estate.

So that, it is a dangerous error: not to pitch by faith, on Christ, first; and
then in the second place, on the promises: Christ, in his Pitch faith on Christ
first, then on the promises.
Person, Natures, Works, Merrits, must be first laid hold on: Indeed, it is
true, that faith cannot lay hold on Christ, but in, and through a word, and
promise: Therefore my meaning is not to carry ye to Christ, without, or not by
the word, and promise; for without this, ye never can come to him, but meet
with Satan, as an Angel of light: Ye must first close by faith, with such a
word, and promise in Scripture; as carries, and exhibits Christ to you; but you
must not first, before, through the word and promise ye have closed with Christ
by faith; lay hold on and apply the promises of any good things; as Heaven,
pardon of Sin, the Spirrit, or any Grace.

Thus ye see how faith gives immediate union with Christ himself: Christ the
fountain of Joy in 2 Respects.
Now this Christ; I say, is the only, and immediate fountain of all Joy: And
that in Two Respects.

First, because, all the promises are in him only, he is that one Sea, First,
Bec. all promises are in him.
out of which do issue all the springs of promises; wherefore in him must be
all the springs of joy and comfort: as they are all said to be in the Church,
because of his presence there: Psalm. 87. 7. Yea, and the promises are better in
him, and much more strong to comfort, then they are out of him; not only
because he is the chief, and best promise himself: his Person is better then
all the promises, but also.

1. Because, the promises in him, are in their root, in him they live, 1. In
the Root.
and so are best in him: as the Sun beams in the Sun, and the streams in
the spring, are better, and live more then in themselves, having indeed, no
being, but in and from him.

2. Because, in him, they are Eternal: as was before showed, and have 2.
Eternal.
bin promises actually existing from Everlasting, and so they are in no other
respect; and so cannot be disanuled by the Law and Sin, which came in, but in
time: as the Apostle reasons in a less regard Gal. 3. 17.

3. Because in him, is their efficacye toward us, they being his only, 3.
Having their efficasye.
were not sure to us, till he had confirmed the bequeathment of them to us,
upon his death; for on that supposition were they bequeathed to us: (as ye
heard before.)

4 Because in, and from Christ, they are exhibited, administered, and performed
4. In him exhibited to us.
to us: as he is their owner, and testator, who by his death, ratifies them
unto us; and makes them surely ours; So he is the executor and administrator of
them, who dispenses them to us: John 14. 14. He does it: and therefore he
says all power, that is, of administation; and of execution; in heaven and
earth; is put into his hands: Therefore the promises; and through him streams
forth, the most sweet comforts, In which respects, he is the immediate spring
of all joy.

Secondly, he is the immediate spring of all joy, in an higher and greater
respect. Secondly in respect that Christ is the Seat of that Joy which is
communicable.


Because, Jesus Christ, is the seat and receptacle of that joy which is
communicable from God, to the creature; whatever comfort, or joy, God intended
to make the creature pertaker of; he put it all into Jesus Christ; (as the
light of the world, is in the Sun) as in him dwells the fullnes of the
Godhead bodily: Col. 2 9. so, with it dwells in him, all the fullnes of joy
and comfort: For it being all from God, it must be all in him, in whom dwells
the God-heads fullnes, and thence, come to us; as, because all our light is
from the Sun, who conveyes his light to us, through the air; therefore all
the light we have, is in the air; as in Christ are hid, all treasures of
wisdom and knowledge: Colos. 2. 3. so are, all treasures, of joy and comfort;
as he is the light that inlightens every one, John. 1. 4. 9. so is he the
comfort that comforts every man, with any true comfort, God is indeed; the
first original whence; but Christ is the immediate fountain in which, is
Christ the immediate fountain of all Joy.
all joy: Colos. 3. 3. our life, is hid in God, but with Christ: So that
indeed, Christ, is not only the root of all promises, but of a better comfort
then the promises yield; For, Christ is nearer to God, then the promises are,
for he is of his nature, and the of spring of his person; Whereas the promises
are the issue of his mind, and will: he is the express image of the Fathers
person; whereas the promises are but the expression of his purpose: wherefore
faith joining the Soul, immediately to Christ: must needs greatly strengthen
against trouble, in that it derives the sweetest, strongest, and most pure
comforts.

Thus much for the Second Reason.

THIRDLY, Faith in Christ, is such a special antidote against 3. Reason. Bec.
Faith in Christ, brings the holy Ghost.
trouble; because it brings the Holy Ghost into the heart; in that it joins
the Soul to Christ, as to an head, or root; whose Spirrit the holy Ghost, is;
and so conveyes him into them; as the ingrasting an impe or science, into a
stock, derives the sapp of that stock, into the science: Gala. 3. 14. Now the
holy Ghost, gives strength to the Soul; as bancks do to water, which of it
self is weak, and Which strengthens the Soul.
yields, and falls asunder; but strenthened with bancks, becomes strong, and
mighty: Therefore Ephesians. 3. 16. he beggs, their strengthening by the Spirrit, not
only in the natural spirrit; but in the Inner man; the regenerate spirrit,
needs strengthening from the holy Ghost; in that, it also, is a creature; yea,
and besides, or over and above; the holy Ghost, sometimes vouchsafes such a
presence, and real sense of himself, and of the things of Jesus Christ's; as
fills the heart with glorious, and inexpressible joy (as the Sun does a room
with light, when it arises) which is a joy, very differing from, and better
then that which faith gives (of which, we spoke before) being a glimpse; and
first fruits of heaven, a presence of God: whereby the heart is lifted up
above the reach of any fears, or grief: which so bore up the Apostles, in all
their sufferings: as in the Acts.

Thus Faith in Christ; upon these grounds, gives stronger comfort, Thus faith
in Christ gives etc.
then any thing else, can do: And faith in Christ, does it more, then faith in
God: That is; faith in Christ, as come in the flesh, yields stronger comfort,
then faith in God promising Christ: because through Christ come; is that
actually done, which is the meritorious cause and ground of conveyance of all
communion with God, and comfort from him; Wherefore more must be conveyed, then
when, this was but to be done, and in the promise; Therefore now, God
dispenses more of the Spirrit, and gives clearer revelations of Christ; then
ever he did before.

So that, as it is said of the Gentiles, that their conversion was an hiden
misterye before: though it yet was known, darkely; Even so the misterye of
Christ his Person, Righteousness, Merrits: etc. was not known before his
coming, in comparison of what, it now is,; nor the privileges by him;
wherefore there could not be so much comfort then, as now may be:

Christ in the flesh (come) is called Gods arm Isa. 53. 1. because he,
thereby, strengethneth himself to give us more grounds of comfort; and
strengthens our hearts, to take more comfort, then every any, before Christ's
coming, could have: Therefore the Arc (which did tipify Christ, is called the
Arc of Gods strength Psalm 78. 61. and 132. 8.

Wherefore, when ever troubles assail you that are believers, fly presently to
Christ, even to him in the word, and promise, In troubles. fly to Christ
which holds him forth in his Person, Natures, Works, Offices; and lean
thereon; And fly not first, or only to the particular promises, of good
things; to these in the second place, go by faith, but to Christ, in the first
place.

To pitch faith on God, and the promises, is so to do, as they did that were
Jews, before Christ's coming: but to pitch your faith on Christ: is the
Christian way: It is folly and unkindnes, since God has given us his Son, to
lean first on; and his word in the second place: which they had not of old:
that yet we do it not, ye do Else you slight him, and Gods mercy in g^ving
him.
slite him, and Gods mercy in giving him: if you do not pitch your faith on
him, Indeed before Christ came; faith was to be pitched on God and his promise
of Christ; but now Christ is come; ye must pitch your faith on Christ himself,
and then on particular promises; wherefore the New Testament makes Christ the
object of our faith: and this indeed is to honor the Son, as ye did the
Father John. 5. 23. that whereas before Christ his coming; the Father was
believed in; Now, the Son should be believed in: and therefore it is, that
believers are so heart-eaten and heart-broken with troubles, because they fly
not presently by faith to Christ; and why, though they put forth in particular
promises, they often, get noe stay, because they trust not in the promises in the
second place, in, from, and through Christ: Now because Directions how to use,
and improve faith.
faith in Christ, is so prime a means of help against all troubles; I will
give you some directions how to use and improve your faith in Christ, so as it
may preserve your hearts from trouble.

First, Set before you the objects of your faith, namely Christ, and the 1 Set
before you the objects of faith
promises; rest not content with your knowledge of them, or that you have looked
on them heretofore: but when ye are freshly assaulted with trouble: set them
afresh before you again; Christ, in his Person, Natures, Offices, and Works;
and if you can find out particular promises for your present particular case;
for particulars best help, and come most home; and since God has condescended
to speak to particulars, we should also look into them, and find them out;
but if you cannot find out particular promises for your case, then set the
general promises before you: as Heb. 11. 13. see them, look on them; and gain
your hearts to be persuaded of them; that is of the reality, and truth of them;
and then embrace them, that is, rely on them as yours: I say, put forth all
these acts afresh, as ye have fresh occasions: for faith is to be from faith to
faith. Romans 1. 17 and believing in Christ; is called eating and drinking; John.
6. because, it is to be renewed, as strength decays, or now strength is
required: new and fresh veiwings This gives fresh vigor.
and acting upon those objects, gives new and fresh vigor.

Secondly, make your reason, and discourse, work upon those 2 Make reason
work on those objects.
objects which your faith setts before you: even as when an object is before
the eye, the Soul rests not in viewing it, but the phansy, and understanding
work upon it, and about it, and deduceth and draws diverse conclusions from
it; even so when Christ, and the promises are by faith, set before you: ye must
use reason, and discourse, to infer and draw thence such forces of
co^clusions, as may arm the heart, against the assaults of troubles; or else
ye are like a City which has armies in her, and looks on them, but not
drawing them forth, and marshalling of them, they do not defend her against
the enemies assaults; there is a fight by faith, and of faith, which we must
make, through our own reasonings, and discourse, whereby to withstand fears,
and greifes; which believers not doing, they are foild, though they have faith:
want of it a cause of being foild.
this is an hard work to our slothful hearts, we are loath to take pains by
discoursing and inferring from the principles which faith lays before us; it
is, as the digging for the gold, after the mine is showed to us; and we are
abused by Satan, who perswads us, that our faith is to work, without labor of
reason and discourse, which it is not, for then it should not work suiteable
to a reasonable creature: indeed the work is attributed to faith Heb. 11. 17.
19. because faith lays down the principles, and guides reason in discourse:
yet faith works and improves its work by reason, and discourse: yea, much of
the Scripture; especially the argumentative part, is deductions, and
conclusions drawn from other Scripture: as Heb. 12. 27. and often in that
Epistle. So that, ye can never make use of your faith in Christ, and the
promises to comfort you against troubles, except by reason and discourse, Faith
works discoursively.
ye draw conclusions from it: as water cannot serve you, except by buckets ye
draw it out of the deep wells. Isa. 1. 2. 3.

Ye must use your reason by way of Sillogisme; as Romans 6. 11. If Use reason by
way of Sillogisme.
we be united to Christ, and have communion with him in his death, and
resurrection; then are we dead to Sin, and alive to God, But we have union
with Christ, and partake with him in his death and resurrection; Therefore we
are dead to Sin, and alive to God, through him: This reasoning by Sillogisme,
and drawing out a conclusion: is that which the Apostle means; by reckoning
themselves: and so: Romans 8. 18

Thus did Abraham: Romans 4. 19. to 22. compared with Heb. 11. 17. 18. 19. his
trial was not only in this: that he must kill his own, Instances.
only Son whom he loved; but his Isaac: that is, him in whom, and to
whom, all the promises were intailed; and so he must cut of his hope:
wherefore he is said to hope against hope, Rom: 4. 18. and Heb. 11. 17. 18. he
that received the promises offered up him of whom it was said, that in Isaac
shall thy seed be blessed: so that, it was not so much, the loosing an only
Son: for he might have more Sons: but the straight was this: That if he
killed this Son: he cut of all his hopes and promises, in that they were all
intaild to that Son: So that, that Son must be; or else the promises could
not be: For Abraham's faith, did not conflict so much with his natural
affection; for then he had noe word to foot his faith on, for the raising him
up again: but he should have set his faith on this only; that God was able to
give him another Son: But he conflicted with the ground of his faith and
hope, shaken now in this trial: His faith was tried, and his hope of all the
promises, and of eternal life; and not so much his love to an only son; In
that he must be killed, in whom living and begetting children, all the
promises were to be fullfilled; and therefore he by reason considers Gods
power, that he could raise that very Son Isaac up again; and this helped him:
For he thus reasoned: Isaac must live, or I can have no promise performed; Now,
if I slay him, God can raise him up again, and so I shall not loose my hopes,
though I kill him.

This is the wisdom of a believer, to draw forth out of God, Christ, and the
promises such particular conclusions as overthrows This is wi^edome.
that particular reasoning which causes fear, or grief: or else ye cure not
the heart: It was this fear of loosing the promises, which assaulted Abraham;
Wherefore he did not draw conclusions of Gods giving him another son, but the
same son: and so overthrew the assault: Thus then reason by faith, and use
discourse: ye The contrary is folly.
are ready, to consider and use reason, to make ye waver, by considring what
flesh, and blood, suggest; but that ye should not Romans 4. 19. but consider
Christ, and the promises, and draw thence, what particularly opposes your
present trouble.

Thus Martha did not, about Lazarus his resurrection; she by faith considred
that he should be raised at the last day: but considred not: that Christ, who
was the resurrection could raise him then: Wherefore she was not comforted.

But let us learn, wisely to improve our reason, to draw from Christ, and the
promises, such conclusions, as are directly opposite to the grounds of our
present trouble: and take pains to draw in comfort: and not sit still, or lie,
as the sluggerd, and say: A Lion is in the way: This is indeed a labor, but it
quitts cost; and how can we better use our reason?

It is brutish to sincke under a presence or appearance; A reasonable creature,
should consider, and infer, and draw in conclusions which may support: Yea,
and we may use our wit, in deducing things to encourage us: As that woman did,
Mark. 7. 27. 28. From Christ's calling her a dog: wittily drew an argument to
enforce him to regard her. Now because, this is a work of our own; we must be
advised with these two Cautions.

First, that it must not be a sudden, transient work; when ye set Causions.
1. Dwell on it.
the objects of faith before you (as the first direction was) ye must not
glance on them and away; but stay and dwell on them for some while; As a
plaster must abide on; and a potion abide in, awhile; or it will not work:
And when ye discourse, and draw conclusions, it must not be sudden and away,
but ye must stay on these things; till they be soaked down into your heart,
and strengthen it, as the passions of fear and grief, be in the heart, as the
Be abides on that flower whence it sucks honey: Wherefore ye must dwell on the
things, till ye find your hearts warmed with them; or bubling as the word
signifies, which is translated; inditing: Psalm. 45. 1. alluding to the
drying pan offering; which bubled up with the heat of the fire: which fire
indeed, is the holy Ghost: who will not rise up into your heart, if ye stay not
for him a while; as the fire does not into the frying pan, if it be not held
some time, over it: This therefore is one Caution; that ye stay so long on
these things, till ye find fire come into your heart.

Second Caution is this; that though ye use your selves, and put forth 2. Trust
not in your selves.
your own reason; Yet that ye trust not in your selves, and reason; but that,
in the whole work, ye expect nothing from your own work; but being emptied
of all sufficiency or fitnes in your selves; ye do wholly and only expect the
fruit from the holy Ghost his assistance, as Failing in some of this, a cause
of not having help
he is the Spirit of Christ; pertaining to you, as united to Christ, by faith:
The failing in some of this, is the reason why believers do consider, and
discourse on the objects of faith: and yet have no help, or strength, come
thence: Wherefore be careful. Wherefore


1. Not to lean on your own spirit, memory, wit, no nor on your grace; but
know that ye must have a fresh influence from the Spirit, 1. Know the Spirit
must assist.
and his assistance: As your faith cannot act it self; for natural things
cannot work with out a fresh concurrence of God (in him we move) Wherefore his
suspending, and not assisting the fire caused it not to burn the three
children, though he put no impediment, in its way.

And though grace be stronger then nature, yet it cannot act, or move it self,
without the concurrence and assistance of the holy Ghost; for, it comes from
Christ, as light from the Sun, by an effluxe Mal. 4. 2. which ever supposes
a fresh act to every shining: The grace, is in Christ, though it work in us,
as the light is in the Sun, though it shines on us; 2. Tim, 2. 1. Wherefore
Christ must by a fresh act, put it forth, if it work in us. Wherefore all
things are said to be done, by Jesus strengthening: Philip. 4. 13. not only by
strength which he had given, but which he is at the present, in a continual
giving; Every act of faith requiers the power of God, afresh administered; 2.
These. 1. 11. fulfill the work of faith, with power: that is, Gods power: for
one act of faith, is to evidence things, which to do, he begs strengthening by
might from the Spirit Ephesians. 3. 16. 17.

And as the holy Ghost, must assist the grace of faith, before it can act; so
must he do some what to the objects of faith, before they can work upon
faith: as the light must shine on colors, before they can move the eye; that
is, the Spirit must show them to the Soul, which is called a revealing of
them, 1. Cor. 2. 10. 12. not only at the first, but every time that they draw
forth faith: he must reveal them; which is done, by giving in convincingly,
his own testimony of those things; which presents them to the Soul, as light
does colors to the eye: Wherefore he so prays Ephesians. 1. 17. 18. that by the
Spirit they may have revelation to know the things they believed, and hoped
for: So that, without the Spirits aid; nothing can be done in believing; as in
praying; it must be in the holy Ghost: Jude. 20. that is, in his strength and
assistance: So also must it be, in believing; therefore he joins building up,
in faith, and praying, because, without praying, we cannot make progress in
our believing.

2. Consider, That the holy Ghost, assists, only as he is Christ's 2. As
Christ's Spirit.
spirit; that is sent from him, and merited by him; as he is God, and man, and
the head of the Church; For, in no other way, or respect, does the holy Ghost,
assist: Wherefore, all that he does, is said to be of Christ's: John. 16. 14.
and it is called Christ's strengthening, Phil. 4. 13. 19. whereas it is the
Spirit which does it, Ephesians. 1. 17. and 3. 16. and if thus he be not considred:
he is taken under a wrong notion, and Christ is wronged; for he glorifies not
Christ: John. 16 14. and he will not assist.

3. Ye must be careful to consider that the holy Ghost assists 3. As members
of Christ.
you, as members of Christ, by virtue of your union with Christ by faith; for
how can the spirit of the head, come into one, but by its union with the head?
and how comes the sapp to flow from the root, into the branch, but as it is
joined to the root? Ephesians. 4. 15. 16. from the head, being joined to it, is
edified.

4. And lastly: Ye must be careful, to look up unto the holy 4. Look up to
the holy Ghost.
Ghost, to assist you; cast an eye on him, as ye do on that, whose help you
expect: and in the expectation thus of him, must ye set upon the work of
acting your faith; This is the second direction, how to improve Faith.

Thirdly get your Faith to be evident, add a reflect act to the 3. Direction
Get says to to be evident.
direct act of faith: That is, labor to know that ye do believe: as well as
to believe: For Election being evidenced by Faith: and a title to Christ and
all promises, depending on believing: the soul cannot be persuaded of its
propriety, and interest in God, and Christ, and the Promises, and so, cannot be
comforted against troubles, till it knows, it believes: Faith may save, but it
is evidence of faith, which only comforts: Wherefore this is one maine end of
the evidence of faith comforts.
first Epistle of John, as is expressed Chapt. 5. 13. these things I have writ
to you that believe; that ye may know ye have eternal life, and believe; (that
is, and believe) that ye believe.

This reflecting act whereby we can look on what we do, and consider it, and
take comfort in it, is a maine excellency of a reasonable creature, by which we
excel brute beasts; and should be exercised by us: Unto the doing whereof, we
must labor. For which


1. To know the act of faith, what it is, and to know that it is 1. Labor to
know the act of faith, what it is.
not the strength, but the truth of faith, which evidenceth election: Acts. 13.
48. those ordained to life believed; some with more, some with less faith, but
every degree of it, betokened life eternal, and gives title to Christ and
happiness; for faith is but an hand or eye, which touches, or looks to Christ,
that he may work all its works; which a small faith does as truly, as a
strong; wherefore we never find in Scripture, that Christ rejected any for the
smallnes of their faith.

2. Labor to view your own hearts, and see if you have not put 2. See if you
have done it.
forth that small act of faith, faith may be seen, in its self, and its own
act, as well as in its fruits and effects, (though these also may, and must be
considred;) Wherefore John, putts believers much upon signs, and By its self:
fruits of faith; in his first Epistle, which was writ to help to the
evidence of faith; and sometimes, faith is best perceived by its fruits; By
its fruits


Yet some times it is best seen, by its self, and its own act, of relying on
Christ; and a careful search into the heart, whither such an act, be put
forth, or no; would often, discover it; but neither by it self, nor by its
fruits, can it be discerned, except the holy Ghost; assist and help us to
perceive it. Therefore:

3. Ye must labor for the help of the Spirit: Who, as he only, 3. Labor for
the help of the spirit
reveals these things to us, 1. Cor. 2. 10. 12. So he, only can reveal them,
or show them to be, in us: He is the Lords candle in the innermost parts, or
chambers of the belly: Pro. 20. 27. he in this sense, as well as ours in that,
because he only can show to us, the grace that is in us: As light only can
discover to a man, the things that are in his house: Who only shows us the
grace, that's in us:
He must shine on our faith, and its fruits; before we can have evidence of
them; he must give his divine testimony to us, of them, that they are right,
before we can believe it, as he must of God, and Christ, and the Promises,
before we can believe them; our own spirit, though renewed by grace, cannot
witness alone to us, except the Spirit of God, Not our own spirits alone.
do join with it in witness Romans 8. 16. which is the ground of those sayings
Romans 9. 1. when he was to witness.

But here, the Question is; Whither in this coeworking of the holy Ghost; with
our spirits, to make evident our grace: It is requisite, A Question resolved.
that he should be, as clearly known to be the holy Ghost, who warrants our
grace, as we know it to be the Sun, when it shines?

Indeed in the immediate assurance; which is grounded on his divine testimony
alone; it is certain, it must be so: or else, it cannot give full assurance,
and put out of all doubt: But that in this assurance; which is mediate, and
only witnesses with our grace, and shows that to us; That it should be so
evident, that it is the holy Ghost; that is the question; if it be not enough;
that the grace be made so evident, as that according to the Scriptures, the
heart is confident it is true: though it be not most sure that it is the holy
Ghost who says, it is true: Now that ye may have this witness of the Spirit; ye
must.

4. Labor unto all obedience; to shune every sin, and do every 4. Labor
unto all obedience, out of love to Christ.
duty, and that out of love to Christ; John. 14. 21. then will he, manefest
himself to you, that is; by his Spirit, he will then give you evidence of
himself, and of his love to you, and of your interest in him, and happynes by
him: General obedience, and fruitfullnes, accompanied which carries with it
much evidence and comfort.
with growth and increase, carries with it, much evidence, and much comfort;
John. 15. 8. 9. 10. And besides, it brings in, by way of a meetenes and
preparation, more of the witness, and evidence of the holy Ghost; for though the
holy Ghost, be given to believers absolutely, and not with respect to their
obeydience (on which condition he abode in Adam in innocence) yet his
manifestations, in comfortable evidences, are dispensed according to their
obeydience, growth and fruitfullnes; for such comforts are wages, and respect
working; As.

The Apostle. 2. Peter. 1. 5. to 12. exhorts them to a constant diligence, to
increase graces (therefore he says giving all diligence) because, The 2. of
Peter. 1. 5. to 12. expounded.
it will make them fruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; verse.
8.

That is, in the comfort, and evidence of their interest in Christ, and
happiness by Christ; whereas, the want of these things; verse. 9. deprives of
assurance, and comfortable evidence; He that lackes these things, is blind;
etc. that is, he cannot behold his evidence, and assurance; nor can he see a
far of; that is he cannot comfort himself in thoughts of his happiness to
come; So neither can he be comforted, by that, that is past, He forgets that he
was purged: that is, he loses the assurance of Justification; (Therefore, 1.
John. 1. 7. we must walk in light, and then Christ's blood, sensibly cleanses
from guilt;) Whereas, else (though he remembers that there was such a thing,
and so, in that sense, forgets it not, yet) he cannot be comforted by the
remembrance of it; and therefore is said to forget it; as they are said in
Scripture; to forget Gods Commands, who (though they remember that there are
such, yet) are not ordered by them:

And this Exhortation to provide for their comfort, by this means; the Apostle
Peter, yet inforceth farther: verse. 10.

By expressing what it is, in its effect: It is a making sure their Calling and
Election, He that gives all diligence to add to Faith, Virtue; and to Virtue,
Knowledge: etc. as was before exhorted to; does but diligently make sure his
Calling and Election; whence will follow, that they shall never fall; namely
into dispairing doubts and questions about their estate; nor into a state of
darkness, and loss of comfort; because as he adds verse. 11.

By this means they shall have an abundant entrance ministered to them; into
the everlasting kingdom of Christ; that is (not meant of a local entrance
into heaven: For heaven is no where called, the Kingdom of Christ; but the
Fathers Kingdom; Christ resignes his Kingdom at the last day of this World,
1. Corrinth. 15. 24.) and the opposition, verse. 9. shows that, it is meant of
assurance, and a making sure our Calling and Election:

Wherefore it is thus meant; that by thus doing; ye shall have a filling measure
of the joy of assurance of your eternal salvation; which Joy, is so vaste, as
ye must enter it; it cannot enter into you, but yet ye shall have an abundant
entrance into it; wheread if you do not thus, ye shall be debared entrance
into it; which joy of assurance, is the kingdom of Christ; as Romans 14. 17.
called indeed, Gods kingdom; that is Christ's (as the next verse shows) given
him by God the Father; who is also God, as well as his Father.

And this Kingdom of Christ, though in this world, and resigned at the last
day, is yet, as here, so often else where, called everlasting, in Why Christ's
Kingdom called everlasting.
many respects, and here especially in this, because, its joy and happiness,
shall be perfected, and swallowed up, in the everlasting happynes of heaven:
Wherefore, though ye cannot ever grow sensibly yet pursue after growth and
fruitfullnes; humble your souls under the want of it; give not over, but make
it your business, to press to it; renew upon a failing, your purposes and
indevors after it; (this is evangelically to do it) and you shall obtain the
evidence, and seal Evangelicall obevdience, what.
of the holy Ghost, the joy whereof, will abundantly strengthen your hearts,
against all trouble.

Thus I have enlarged my self unto the helping of you, to improve Faith In
Christ his choicest medicine agt. heartakeing himself being the matter of it:
Therefore slight it not
your faith in Christ, so as to keep you from trouble of heart; on which, I
have bin the larger; because Christ in the text, makes it a prime remedy: And
(to conclude) indeed this remedy against heart-akeing; is Christ's choicest
medicine: (he himself being the matter of it) and therefore, not to prize, and
practice it, is greatly to slight Christ himself.

Thus much, for the Third Means, to prevent heart trouble.

FOURTH MEANS. 4. Means Is contained in the 2. 3. 4. Verses. An unfolding the
true grounds of Christ's departure.

Is contained in the following Verses. 2. 3. 4. in the scope and drift of them;
Namely an unfolding to them, the true grounds; and reasons (and so the issue
and effect) of that change, and trouble which was upon them, in his departure;
whereby he overthrowes, all the causeles fears and troubles, which thence, or
from ought else, arose in their hearts.

The force, and aptnes of which means, will be best manifested, in a
paraphrase upon the words: Thus. The words Paraphrased


My departure from you, need not trouble you on my behalf; For I go away
from you to my Father: Neither am I lost, nor forced Christ goes to his Father:
away, by the will, power, or malice, of mine enemies; but of my own accord I
go; and for my advantage, so that on my behalf, ye So its no ground of
trouble on his behalf.
have cause to joy rather, because I go to my Father, as John. 14. 28.

Neither need ye be troubled on your own behalfes; For on your business, and
for your good, do I withdraw my self; For, there Neither on his disciples
behalf, For he goes about their business.
are in my Fathers house, diverse receptacles, for many such as you are; which,
if it were not so I would have told you ere now, in as much as my Office (the
faithful Witness) and my friendship to you, binds me not only to speak
nothing but truth, but also to reveal to you all needful truth, and not to
suffer you to be misled with false hopes; Yet, though To prepare a place for
them.
there are many rooms in my fathers house, in which ye may inhabit; ye cannot
yet possibly get in there, till I have made way; wherefore I said even now to
you, that as the Jews so ye, cannot come, whither I go: John. 13. 33. But the
end of my going away from you now; is to make way for you to come into, and
have a place in, my Fathers house: Ye think that my departure is for your
loss, and ye shall be, as young chicks without the henn, a prey to your
enemies; and that your hope in me, shall be frustrated; and that for your
unfruitfullnes under me, God removes me, to punish you; but it is not so:

The ground of my departure, is for your great gain; For if I go away to
prepare a place for you; then surely I will come again to you to he will come
again and fetch them. to that place
fetch you to that place; If I go, much more will I come, for your sakes; ye
fear that your sins foredone, and foreseen by me to be done, may keep you
from heaven, or my heart from you; and that I show it by thus leaving you; and
that we shall be ever parted; but it is otherwise, I do go, and I will come,
in love to you, that ye and I may be together; and my departure makes way for
it, with out which, (and therefore for present) ye cannot go, whither I go:

Nor, is this which I say to you, altogether unknown to you (for, it were a
slender ground of comfort, to discourse wholly, on things Which place and us way
they knew, So the more Comfort.
unknown) but ye know the place and way I go to: Indeed, they did not
distinctly know (as they object in the next words) but seminally and vertually,
they knew it, in that they knew Christ; Who was the Way, the Truth, the Life;
and had the seeds of the knowledge in them, and wanted not many days to the
punctual knowledge thereof by the holy Ghosts coming on them: Thus our Savior
applied himself to prevent their heart trouble, by setting before them the
true grounds, and ends of those things which troubled them; which all were
good, and for their profit, and so necessarily must dispell the false, and
supposed grounds, and ends, which raised trouble in their hearts.

And this means is as helpful in all troubles; for there ever are such This
means helps in all troubles: For in all troubles* there is ground of comfort,
if found out.
grounds of all trouble, as may quiet, and comfort the heart, of believers; or
else this command, (not to be troubled in heart) were unjust: Wherefore the
finding out the grounds which may quiet and comfort, is but the finding out the
true real grounds, and so, dispelling, and over throwing all the grounds that
trouble; which must be false, if the other be true.

This means, Joseph uses with his brethren; who had only veiwed Cleared by
Joseph to his brethren
the less, and inferior grounds and ends of their sin against Joseph, in
selling him: Namely their pride, revenge, envy; etc. whence arose perplexing
troubles: which he cries down; Gene. 45. 5. to 9. be not greived, or angry;
that is, perplexingly for other grief he allowed them) which, to help them
to, he shows them other and more chief, ends, grounds, authors, effects, of
that their act; then they considered: Namely, God, for good ends, who was in
the business, more then they, So that, in comparison, he and not they, may be
said to do it; whereas, they only looking on themselves, as authors, and
Joseph's hurt, as the end, and effect of it, were inordinately troubled.

Every Change or Trouble which befalls Believers, either by Sin, or
Afflictions, is like the cloud twixt the Isralits and Egiptians; It has a
black, and a bright side; God and themselves or the creature, in it; now they
should not only behold the black, but also the bright side; Which that ye may
do; Ye must search out the promises, and experiences, Also by promises and
experiences
In the one God says, and in the other God, does, that which opens the true
grounds, ends, and effects, of all that befalls believers by any Sin, or
Sorrow:

Take one Promise in stead of many: (which also conteines, an experiment, and
so has both:) 1. Cor. 10. 13. No tentation: that is, 1. Cor. 10. 13. expounded.
either by a sin, or an affliction, and rather by sin, is here meant; for
both the verse before and after, speaks of sin; and the whole discourse, is
of sin, and afflictions for sin; and so, surely is that meant: James. 1. 12.
Blessed is he that indures tentations; that is, by afflictions, or sins; as
appears by the next verses, which prevent an abuse, which might arise from
that saying; Viz. Since it is blessed to endure tentation, though by sin,
therefore surely it is God who tempts to sin: which inference, shows, that
the Apostle meant tentation by sin; as well as otherwise; and surely so he
means James. 1. 2. 3. 4. For, there is no tentation, does so deject, and
exercise every grace, as those of sin do in believers: Wherefore, to
proceed; Noe tentation (says Paul in the 1. Cor. 10. 13.) has taken you,
but what is 1. Cor. 10. 13. expounded.
common to man (or moderate as the margent reads it, but) the word in greek,
is (...) humane, or after man's manner: By man, meaning not all men, but
believing man; No believer shall be tried with any sin, or sorrow, but is
incident to believers, and so, is that which may stand with their Grace, and
Salvation; For it were no consolation to a believer, to tell him he should not
be tried as a Devil is; but only as a Man may be tried: And, the scope being
to encourage them; for as he warned them; in the former verse, (to the end,
they might not presume) So he does here, encourage, that they might not,
despair; And this they needed; For they had bin far tempted, and fallen to
Idolatry, whose dreadful plagues, he had set before them; yet, to keep them
from despair, he shows them, how that, they should not be tempted, but as
believers; and this would encourage; but to be tempted as a man in general, may
be, that is so, as to be ruind; does not encourage, therefore he intends it not
so general; as also appears by what follows; that it should be so as to bear
it, and escape: which is only the portion of believers; and this shall but
take them, as a tentation; that is, to try them, and do them good; and bless
them with a reward; as it is more fully, James. 1. 12. the chief ground, and
end of it, is their benefit.

But they may be over borne, and ruind by it? No, for there is none shall
befall them, but what is fitted for believers, to do them good, and not hurt,
(as the tentations do, which take unbeleevers; as Saul and others) and God is
engaged to it in his faithfullnes; and therefore, will not permit a stronger
tentation, then ye can bear up under: and will, as certainly order a way for
you to escape ruin by it, as he will order to you the tentation: with the one,
he will do the other: That is, he will so lay in the tentation, as that, it
shall carry with it, something where by you may escape, (not the tentation, but
ruin, by the tentation) and so get good by it: For the greek word (...), may
as well imply an escape with a success (as barely an escape) an issue
succesfull: Heb. 13. 7. God, gives in with the tentation, that which shall
bring about a good issue, and fruit of it; as the physician, when he means
good by his poison, gives in with it, that which shall do the party good:
Therefore, it is added, that ye may be able to bear it: Why, is not this, a
needles repetition? Had he not said before, that they should not be tempted,
above that they were able, able to bear up under, and endure? Yes, but this is
added, as a more full explication of his mind; in that he would have it taken
notice of; that they should not be pressed above strength: and so says it
again: or else in that the knowledge and sense of Gods making way for an
escape, does strengthen the heart of them who are temped, to bear it, and not
sincke under it.

This, ye see is a full Promise, showing that good only is intended, by all:
Wherefore, I will set before you, no more promises: But Cleared by Instances.
show you a few Instances among many that are in Scripture:

For the right judging whereof, observe this Rule; That whatever is the issue
of a trouble, and upon it, brought about by God, as the end A Rule of judging
them.
thereof; That was the chief ground and reason of Gods bringing on that
trouble; For the end of a thing, is the ground and moving cause of that whereby
it is brought about: Now the Scripture is full of Instances of Sins and
Sorrows, which befell Believers, the end and issue of all which, was their
good and gain; Therefore, in all those Changes both by Sins and Sorrows,
Gods chief ground and end of bringing them on, was that good and benefit of
theirs.

See it First, in some Trials by Afflictions: Abraham was sorely tried, by Gods
calling him to offer up Isacc; but the end of it was, not the In case of
Affliction.
stripping him of him in whom was all his hope of the promise, but the
ratifying twice, and by an oath, the promises to him: So that, in stead of
Instances.
loosing (as appeared) the promises, he had them thereby, more surely Abraham:
then ever, settled on him:

Jacob was often and sorely tried, but the issue of every one, was a farther
revelation of God, and ratification of the Covenant to him: Jacob:


Joseph was cast into desperate hazards, when sold by his brethren, Joseph:
but the issue of all, was his great glory, and happiness:

Job had sharp losses and troubles, but the end, was, the doubling his Job:
estate, honor, children, with a length of days, and seeing God with the eye,
who had before, but heard of him by the ear:

The Elect in Adam had a great change, from incomparable happiness, The Elect in
Adam:
to as great a misery, but it brought forth a greater happiness instantly in the
seed of the woman, then they ever had in Adam:

The Church had a great loss, in Eliah his untimely taking away, The Church in
Eliahs death:
who might have lived much longer; but it brought forth an Elisha on whom his
spirit was doubled, who did twice as great, and many things for Israel:

Galile, and those parts, had a great loss in the sudden imprisonment The
imprisonment of John Baptist:
of John Baptist, whose ministry was eclipst, yea extinguished, before he had
preached a year; (for he was but six months elder, and so began to preach but
six months before Christ, and was quickly after Christ's preaching,
imprisonned) But Christ, instantly came upon his imprisonment, and dwelt and
preached in all those places, where John had; John's going, made way for Christ's
coming, as the setting of the day Star, does for, the Sunns rising: Math. 4.
12. 13. Zabulon, Naphtaly, and those Sea Coasts, had the first captivity of all
Israel: 2. Kings. 15. 29. and this paved a way for their having first the
Gospel preached to them, by John and Christ: Math. 4. 12. to 17:

Again, Christ was taken away in his bodily presence from his Disciples,
Christ his death:
and that made way for his spiritual presence, which was much better to them:

The Witnesses slain, shall be raised again to more glory and power The
slaying the Witnesses:
to the Churches, then ever: Reve. 11. 7. 11. 12. Sometime God takes away, and
gives again, as Joseph to Jacob: David's Wives and Goods at Ziklag; and so they
are enjoyed more sweetly then ever: Sometime God stripps of all comforts to be
a comfort himself; 2. Tim. 4. 16. 17. For he will never leave his people
orphans (as the word, in greek, is) John. 14. 18. he will come to them.

And as the Changes by Afflictions; So they which come on believers In case of
Sin:
in Sins, are for their good.

The Elect committed a great Sin in Adam; And that brought in Instances. In
Adam:
Christ's Righteousness and Life Eternal, of which Adam in sinning was a tipe or
figure: Romans 5. 12. 14. 15. 16. etc.

Joseph's Brethrens Sin, in selling Joseph, broughts about the saving Joseph's
Brethren:
them, and all their familyes from famine:

David's great Sin of killing Vriah (because he had defiled his David:
wife) and marring her; brought him that Solomon; whom God had, long before
promised by name, to succeed him, and build the Temple: 1. Cron 21. 7. to the
11. verse. And that great Sin of numbering the People, gave him to know the
very place where the Temple should be built, which he so longed after; as
appears by comparing together. 1. Cron. 21. 18. to the Chapters end. and Chap.
22. 1. 2. with the 2. of Cron. 3. 1.

Hezekiah came by his Sin, to be humbled, and to know all that Hezikiah:
was in his heart: 2. Cron. 32. 31:

And the Jews were saved by their killing Christ. Christ's murder.


I Confess, that Sins make way, for Afflictions, (as all the former
instances show) but the Afflictions are but subordinate, and means to those
great ends of good, which God by their sins, aims at, and brings about: And
the greater the Changes have bin, the greater good has bin brought to them, as
all the former instances, do show; Therefore the general and chief end of
all that discipline of Israel, for forty years by afflictions, and sins; is
said to be to try, and humble, and do them good at last: as Deuteronomy. 8. 2. 3. 4.
14. 15. 16. Yea the sins of damned ones, who have bin near believers, and so
may seem to hurt them; do tend to their good; as Judas his treason against
Christ, served to prove to the disciples that Christ was he, who was promised,
and so might confirm their faith in him: John. 13. 18.

Now, the Reason of all this, is the Rice and Root, whence all Changes The
Reason whence all Sins, and Afflictions, tends to Believers good, Is from
their Rice being 4 fold
by Sins, or Sorrows, arise upon Believers: Which is Four fould.

First, It is from God: Secondly, It is from God through a Powerful Decree:
Thirdly, It is from God, through a Decree Everlasting: Fourthly, It is from
God, through a Covenant of Grace: Wherefore it all must tend only to Their
good.

FIRST, All Changes, by Sins, or Sorrows, comes upon Believers 1. They all
come from God.
from God, and his hand, I say all Afflictions come upon them from God; This is
easily and generally granted, according to the drift of Scripture, to raise us
up to see, and acknowleg Gods hand in every Affliction; as Amos. 3. 6. Job. 5.
6. whatever instruments thereof Afflictions.
have bin, it comes from God: And it is, as evident by Scripture. And Sins.
and reason; that all sins come also from God, and his hand, and yet he is no
way defiled, or dishonored their by, neither is Sin extenuated, Yet ^e not
defiled, or dishonored.
or the Sinner excused by it, in the least:

The fear of some of these inconveniences, has made Divines, not acknowledge
so much of God in sin, as is in sin, and out of a An error of some, about
Sin confuted.
fear of falling into that error, dissuaded from, James. 1. 13. 16. They have
erred on the other hand, and made Sin, more of the Creature, and its self,
and less from God, then it is: They grant that God is willing Sin should be,
and that he permits it, and orders circumstances about its production, and
overrules it, and has an hand in, and is the author of the phisical, or morral
act, in, and with, which, sin is; But in the essence of Sin; that is, the
pravity, and atazy, the anomye, or irregularity of the act, which is the
sinnfullnes of it, God has no hand, neither is he any author at all thereof;
Which opinion, is safe enough from the error it shunns, and to avoid danger it
keeps so far of, that it goes wrong another way, and because it would not give
to God to much, it gives him not enough in this, not so much as he takes to
himself in Scripture: and tends, yea, is necessary, to his glory, and the
comfort of his people:

And what though Pelagians, Arminians, and carnal hearts, will abuse this
Doctrine, and bark against it, with pretense that it dishonours God; whereas
they do not hate it therefore, if it did so; but because, it undermines their
carnal buildings: Yet let us embraco, and profess Believers are to profess
the truth which is after Godliness:
the truth which is after Godliness; and not fear to say that of God, which he
in his holy Book, says of himself; Namely, that of him, and from his hand,
is not only the thing, that is sinnfull, but the pravatye, and sinnfullnes of
it: Gene. 45. 5. 8. Be not greived, or angry with your selves, that ye sold me
hither, for God sent me; and it was not you, but God; This is not meant, of some
good thing besides, or diverse from their Sin; or only of the overruling of
their Sin; but, of their Sin it self, the pravitye and wickedness, of that
their act, in selling Joseph.

For though indeed, their selling him, is called Gods sending him; yet That
case of Joseph's Brethrens selling him, explained.
it is made one, and the same thing; that which in them was selling, that is,
was sin, that in and of God, was sending him: and that which greived them,
and made them angry with themselves; which was their sinnfullnes in doing it,
that he says was Gods sending him, and so was it not they, but God; That is,
God had more hand, then they, in that their sinnfullnes; or else it had not bin
reason enough to take them of from being greived and angry with themselves, if
they had bin the sole authors of the evil, and God only of the good.

So 2. Sam. 24. 1. God was angry with Israel, and moved David 2. Sam 24. 1.
explained
against them to say, go number the people: It must be the sinnfullnes of
David's act, which God had the hand in, because he had the hand in that, which
was against Israel, (that is brought misery on Israel, and that was only the
sinnfullnes of that act) and it was that which God moved to, out of anger
against Israel, to bring on them an Affliction, and that could only be the
Sin: Nor is it more expressly said, that Satan did it, 1. Cron. 21. 1.
Because in some respects, he only, and not God, was the author of it; then
here, it is said that God did it, because in some respects, God was the only
Author of it, and not Satan.

So that we may safely say; That God is, and has an hand, in, and is the
Author of, the sinnfullnesses of his people.

For the evencing whereof; Consider these Arguments. (besides the Arguments to
prove it.
Voice of God, in Scripture:)

First, Gods Will and Pleasure, is the Womb that conceived, and I. Gods will
is the womb that conceived every work of the creature
whence springs, every work of the Creature, whatever it be, whither it be
good, or bad; as they are (that is, continue) for his pleasure, Reve. 4. last.
So they so do and work, because it is his pleasure, they so should do; the
first reason (and that which determines all,) why the Creature Sins, must be,
because Gods will was, that it should sin: That willed the creature should
sin
For who hinted to God, or gave advice by counsel to him, to let the Creature
sin? was it not his own device, counsel, and will, that it should so be?
did any necessity arising upon the creatures being, enforce it that sin must
be? could not God have hindered sin if he That ploted it, before* the creature
was.
would? might he not have kept man from sinning, as he did some of the Angels?
Therefore it was his device, and plott, before the creature was; that there
should be sin; And what incongruitye is it, that Ye^ without incongruity
Gods Will and Pleasure should first lay a ground work to bring forth sin?
For what is Sin but an effect and discovery of the weakness and mutability of
the reasonable creature? Wherefore, Gods Vnchangablenes, is alleged in
oppsition to the creatures sinning, and sinnfull tempting to sin, James. 1.
13. 17. (as we shall more fully show anon) because Sin, as it is sin,
arises from mutability and weakness: Now what incongruity is it, for the
Creator to will, and order it, that the Creature Its necessary, to give God the
first hand in contriving.
shall show its self, and its own shame? Yea, is it not necessary thus to
give to God the first hand in contriving, and willing the Creatures sin;
Because, most of Gods greatest works in this World, and the everlasting World,
to come, depend on the Creatures Sin; and it is by Sin, that most of Gods
glory, in the discovery of his Attributes. does arise; wherefore must it not be
said and thought, that his Will first and chief, was in the providing this
means and way for all those his ends? Is there any thing by which, God so
serves himself, (except Christ) as by Sin? Therefore certainly it limits
him much, to bring in Sin by a contingent accedent, merely from the Creature,
and to deny God an hand and will, in its being, and bringing forth.

Secondly; there is much good comes by Sin; yea, the greatest good; 2. The
greatest good comes by Sin.
either in Gods glory (the manefestations of God) or the Creatures happynes (in
all that eternal glory through Christ* in heaven) it is all, only brought
about by Sin: Which good effects, however Either in Gods glory, Or the
Creatuers happiness.
they excede their next cause, namely Sin, and the Creature, they are no
thank to them; Yet they are level with, their chief and first cause, God, and
his Wisdom, Power, Love; and do show, that he, Gods Attributes shows his will
in Sin.
with those his Attributes, had an head, will, and hand, in Sin; or else they
could never have wrought such good effects: Thus Joseph, seems to reason; in
the place forenamed: Genesis 45. 5. 8. because good came of their sin, therefore
it was God, that was the author of it; The Creature separate from God (as it is
in sinning) can produce no good; yet the Creatures Sin does produce good,
therefore God has also an hand in the sin of the creature, as well as the
creature:

And however, God may be thought, to take up the Creatures Sin, after it is
committed, or foreseen to be committed, or bring about, or decree to bring
about good by it, without having a Will before hand unto the being of it; Yet,
(if we well consider) this cannot be in God, who so is in his Will, the ground
of every thing, in the Creature, both its standing, and falling; as that he
must first will, the Creature shall Gods will, is the ground of the Creatures
standing or falling.
stand, or fall, before the Creature can do either; and the Creature therefore
falls and sins, because his Will before was, it should so do; and this he
willed, as a means to all those great, and good ends, which thereby he did
bring about; and what is it but the pravity, and sinfullnes of the act, and not
the act it self, as it is good, naturally, or morally, whereby God brings
about those his many, great, and good ends? therefore he must will the
sinfullnes itself, and be its author, as a wise man, is of the choycest
means, by which he brings about his chiefest ends.

Thirdly, its as incongruous, and inconvenient, to make God have an 3. Its as
incongruous, to make God have a hand in afflictions as in sin.
hand, and will, and be the author of, the afflictions of the Creatures, as of
the sins, only there is a gradual difference: Sin is indeed worse
infinitely, then Afflictions; yet both, are truly alike inconvenient to be
fathered on God:

For, what are Afflictions in respect of the Creature? They are disorders of
the Creatures second well being, which stands in peace and happynes, and an
eclipse of that his glory, And what are Sins, in respect of the Creature? but
a disorder of the Creatures first and chief well being, which stands in
righteousness, and an eclipse of that his glory; both of them, a sickness, and a
disturbance of pure nature; the one in Both a di^sturbance, to pure nature.
morrals the other in naturals; the one hurts more (namely Sin) in that, it
cutts of from God; the other hurts less (namely Afflictions) in that, they
cut of from some particular good, yet they both hurt the Creature.

Again, Consider what are Afflictions in regard of God? they reach him not,
they impeach not his eternal blessedness which from himself, arises to
himself, though the creature be ever so miserable; God is as happy, as he ever
was; as the Sun is as glorious as ever, though the Earth, it shines on, be
ever so distressed) yea, and God getts glory by the creatures misery, for
thereby, as by a foil, his Immutable Blessedness, is better set of, as also his
Holiness, Justice, Truth in threats etc. But yet, all Afflictions are against
Gods heart, because against the Creatures Afflictions are against Gods heart.
good, and their disorder is in it: It is a disturbance of his work, and it is
against, and unsuitable to, that mercifullnes which is in, a Creator to his
Creatures, so that, there is an eclipse of Gods luster and glory though, not
he, but the Creature, loose thereby (as not the Sun, but the Earth, loses
by the eclipse of the Sun) his goodness, and his Creators parentlike (even
Father and Mothers) bowels are obscured, and not manefested; so that his
manefestative glory; the Glory which he should have by a manefestation from the
Creature, is obscured; Wherefore, the Lord in Scripture professes, even of
Afflictions (as well, as of Sins) that they are not with his will, or from his
heart as the word is interpreted after the original; on the margent, Lam. 3.
33. so else where: He wills not the death of a Sinner: and he confirms it with
an oath: to show that he is serious, real, and deep in it: and that his
heart, is in very deed, not for, or with the Afflictions, of his Creature; and
yet, the Scripture, making God, to have an hand, and Yet he the author of them.
Then why not of sin.
will, in Afflictions, and to be the author of them; It is readily granted of
all hands, that he is so; And why may it not be so granted, that he is of Sin?

For Consider now also, what are Sins in respect of God? Let me What sins
are in respect of God.
now, nullify Sin, and make it nothing, but triumph over it, as a shadow of
great appearance, whilst I discourse of it in reference to believers, and in
compare with God; as he is in, and of himself, without the Creature; though
else, in other respects; it is as real as any thing, and as infinitely
monstrous, in fowlenes and misery, as God, so as he stands in reference to
Creatures, is in beauty, and goodness, so far, as an offspring of a Creature,
can come in a parallel with a Creator (as the abasement, and torment, which
Christ, who is God man, endured, plainly shows) yet may Sin be triumphed
over, as nothing: both as compared with the Works of the Three Persons in
Trinity, about it (as we shall hear hereafter* as also compared, in its own
being, with Gods being in, and of himself: whom sin cannot hurt, as Job. 3
5. 6. For Hurt him not, but he is better (as by a foil) ^e^^ o^.
Sin, is but the weakness of Gods creature, its mutability; by which his
strength and unchangablenes, is as by a foil, better set of; Can it be any
thing to God, his impeachment, that his Creature is frail? Can he be a God,
and impeacht by any thing? Yea, does not Sin occasion the manefestation of
many, yea most, of his Attributes? Indeed Sin does eclipse Gods manefestative
glory: That Glory, which he Sin does eclipse Gods manefestative Glory, that
should arise from the Creature.
should have from the Creature rise up to him, upon his manefestation of
himself, that is much lost by sin; It buryes, and hides that glory of God;
it fights against it; sins against Gods heart; as contrary to his own image;
and the disorder of his whole worke-manship; and the ruin of his creature; and
the thief which steals away his glory: And in this is Sins vileness, and
herein, it is incomperably worse, then Afflictions; But yet, it hurts God no
more, then an eclipse of the Sun, hurts the Sun; which is nothing: The
Sun shines as gloriously, but the Earth beholds it not, and so has not the
comfort and benefit of its influence: So that, all the evil of Sin toward
God, is not at all to him, in his own Essential Blessedness, but in his Yet
not his Essential Blessedness.
Glory which should arise to him from the Creature, for the good of the
Creature: Which Glory, as he is Creator, is his end, and most dear to him (as
a wise man's end is, because else, his work is in vain) Wherefore he
professes his hatred against all sin; and that he has no Will to it, Hand
in it, nor is the Author of it; And yet, he may, as truly and safely have a
Will, and Hand in, and be the Author of, Sins, as of Afflictions.

And it may be readily granted: Namely in a diverse respect, and different How
it may be granted, That God wills, and is the Author of Sin, as of
Afflictions.
consideration: Even as they say, to distinguish Justice, from Revenge, in one
and the same punishment, inflicted: Justice does it, as it is good (Sub ratione
Boni) and is moved to will it, as it is good; has good effects: But Revenge
does it as it is evil (Sub ratione Mali) and is moved to will it, as it is
bad, and has ill effects, namely hurts the person; Justice also respects a
public good; but Revenge looks only Cleared by the distinction that is
between the nature of Justice, and Revenge.
to the particular hurt of that person; So God wills, and is the Author of
Afflictions, and wills not, nor is the Author of Afflictions: He wills not
Afflictions, simply, and absolutely, as they be the Creatures hurt: For that is
against his Nature (which is Mercy) and his Relation; who is their Creator and
Patent, both Father and Mother.

Neither does he inflict them, till he is moved by some end, and consideration,
which presents greater good, both in regard of his own Glory, and his peoples
good, then there is hurt, by the Affliction: Therefore, (as was said before) He
swears he desires not the Sinners death; That is, only as, and because, it is
his death; having no other or greater moving cause, then the Sinners ruin; (As
the cruel Tirant, who desired the death of the Vestal Virgins, only as a
death, and their misery, and for that end, appointed them to be ravished, and
then put to death, because he could not put them to death, unles they were
deflowred) Wherefore the destruction of Sinners, considered thus; as it is
evil to them, is of themselves: That is; their weakness, and mutability
working them to sin; they expose themselves to ruin; Which ruin God wills
and works, as it is good, for his glory, and his peoples good: Yea, better then
if the Sinners were not ruind: And thus God, is brought on to Afflict, by a
further end then the misery it self: Wherefore as to Christ in a more
transcendent way: as he was his Fellow, and no sinner in himself, he would
not, nor could, afflict him; wherefore his Sword flept: Yet, on other
considerations, as he was the representation of all his Elect; and a Sinner by
imputation: he willd to stricke him, and therefore awakt his Sword: Zach: 13.
7. So, is it, in regard of all Afflictions; He wills and works them; And he
wills and works them not; in several respects: As Evils simply, and on no
other considerations, he wills them not, nor works them, but it is the
Creatures own harvest which he sowed; But as they tend to, and produce high
and great good effects: There is no evil of misery, but God does it.

Even thus, is it in regard of Sins: In some Respects, and Considerations, In
what Respects, God wills not, not is the Author of Sin.
God neither does, nor can, will Sin, or have any hand in it, or be any
author of it: Namely as it is evil, or a good only in appearance, answering
only the humor of a weak, and mutable Creature; Thus, and in these respects
only, God wills not, works not Sin; but abhors it infinitely, for it defiles
and is most contrary to his Nature; And thus the Creature wills it, and works,
and on no other respects: Or (to express the thing, more fully and plainly)
God neither has a Will, or Hand in Sin.

1. As it only springs from an evil Root, and rises up on a weak 1. Not,
as it comes from an evil root.
or evil Ground; That is, as the mind is moved to sin, out of an evil
inbred principle of inhaerent Lust, or from a concomitant weakness, and
mutability of Nature; So God, is not moved to will, or work Sin, for that
argues an imperfect, and polluted Nature; But thus, the Devil and Man, wills
and works Sin: And this is the true scope and sense of that; James. 1. 13. to
18. God does not so, or Jam 1. 13. to 18. explained.
on such grounds and respects, tempt or move any man to sin, as to be moved
thereto from an inward principle of sin, or of weakness, and mutability;
therefore he says; Verse. 13. God cannot be tempted with evil, nor tempt any
man: That is, as it is evil, and suites an evil principle within him; so God
is not tempted, nor tempts; But thus; man tempts himself Verse. 14. 15. being
moved from an evil principle of lust, within him; which shows that this is
the Apostles scope, to show that on these grounds, and respects, God is not
moved to will and work Sin; So that he denies it not to God absolutely, but
on these grounds; which farther appears; Because, Verse. 16. 17. the error he
confutes is, That God should tempt to Sin, as it is Sin, an evil and
foolish thing, pleasing out of an inhaerent weakness, and mutability; For thus
to will and work Sin only; he prooves God cannot, because all good is of
him, as a Father, therefore he cannot send forth evil: and he has no
Variablenes, whereas all Sin, as Sin, rises from the mutability of the
Creature: Hence our Savior refers Sin as it is an evil, to an evil rice,
and ground, and root: Mat. 5. 37. all that is of Evil, and so Evil: But now
if there be a Ground on which Sin may be willd and wrought, that is not from
Evil, or a Weakness, and Mutability, moving God to Will and Work it; God may
Will, and Work it, notwithstanding this saying of James.

2. God neither has a Will, or Hand in Sin; As Sin is moved 2. Nor as it
is effected, by naughty means.
to, or effected by a Means that is Naught, namely by telling a Lie, or any
such way; for this is evil in the doer: Therefore; when God willd that Ahab
should sin, in going to Ramoth Gilead; he would not by lying persuade him to
it; but asked who of his evil ministers would do it, and one of the Devils
undertook to do it, by filling his Prophets with lies, so as to be a Liar in
them (I will be a lying Spirit;) Thus God neither does, nor can act any ill
means to bring about sin; As the Devil did to draw Eve to sin by beguiling
her with lies: Though God may will it shall be done by them that are evil.

3. As Sin only respects some appearing Good, but real Evil 3. Neither as
it has evil ends.
Ends; Namely Gods dishonor and the Creatures hurt: So God neither can, nor
will, either Will, or Work it, for then he should be Evil; For the end of an
action, in morrall things gives the name: Thus in these Respects; God Wills
not, Works not, is not the Author in the least degree of any Sin; But it is
of Satan; as 1. Cron. In these respects. Satan is:
21. 1. Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David to number the People:
That is; Satan from an evil mind; by evil means, to an evil end, namely to
hurt Israel, as they were Gods People, provokt David to that Sin: In these
respects, it was Satan; and not God.

And so also, it is of our own hearts (wherefore David charge the And our
own hearts
Sin wholly on himself, and not on God: 1. Cron. 21. 17.) as was before
showed, James. 1. 13. 14. 15. But now; all this notwithstanding, In what
Respects God Wills, and is the Author of Sin.
as there are good Respects on which, Sin may be willd and wrought, so God
may be, the Author thereof, As.

1. Sin may be willd and wrought, from good Principles, and Grounds, 1. From
good Principles.
of Wisdom, Power, Sovereignty, Holiness, to set up only himself: etc.

2. Sin may be willd and wrought by good Means, namely, a wise and 2. By
good Means.
holy ordering things so as shall draw forth and discover the Creatures
mutability and weakness, and a leaving the Creature to it, being no way tied to
superadd an assistance, and strength against it, as Sin was brought about in
Adam and Eve; and after Sin is in; then by leaving the heart to its own
lust, and by wise and holy dispensations and providence, to stur up those
lusts, not by any thing in the providence, but through the lust it self
abusing such providence; as Sin is brought about now, since the Fall.

3. Sin may be willd and wrought, for good Ends: Viz. The showing ^. By good
Ends.
the Creatures weakness, as by a foil to set of the Creators glory; and the
gaining more glory to God, and good to his People: Thus God is said to move
David to number the people, 2. Sam. 24. 1. in these respects, as in the other;
the Devil is said to do it: and under these considerations, Sin is good (as
poison may be for physic, and as the killing a malefactor by a law) and as
good as other things; and may as comelily be willd, and be brought about by
God, and have him for its Author; as any thing else:

Yea, in truth, it is most Congruous that He should be its Author; And thus it
is most Co^gruous for God to be its Author
For whom becomes it so well, as the Chiefest Good, to bring about the
Greatest Good, by the Greatest Evil; and who so fitly, as the Immutable,
Strong God, can bring out, the Weakness and Mutability of the Creature? Thus ye
see, that true Reason, and the Scripture; exclude not God from being in any
respects, the Willer and Author of Sin; But from being it in Evil Respects;
And as it has Good Respects, it is fathered on him, the Father of all Good:
Therefore when Joseph carried his Brethrens Sin to God; he instanceth only
in the good ends and effects, which their Sin had: For so, and only so, it
belongs to God: And God may glory as much, in this his plot, and handy work of
Sin, as in any thing that is from him (except Jesus Christ) it does so become
him, and advance him, and his people.

And thus, I have showed the First Ground of every Change, which befalls Gods
People, either by Sins, or Sorrows, It is God, his Hand, and Will, are in
it: Yea, let me add this, before I end this Consideration.

God is more in their Sins and Sorrows, then they themselves are; So God is
more in Believers Sins and Sorrows, then themselves.
much that implies Gene. 45. 5. 8. Not you, but God; That is, not so much You,
as God: God, on good considerations, had a greater will, and hand in it, then
you: Therefore in David's numbering the people, God, and not He, is made the
ground of it, 2. Sam. 24. 1. God on good Grounds, though he also, in evil
Respects was in it as he confesses: Yet God was so much more, that he drowned
him in comparison: For.

God first willd, and brought it about.

He might have prevented it, but they could not, though yet, as it was evil,
they did it freely, and of their own accord, and against his revealed will.

God had more, and greater, and more general ends of their Sin, then they,
who only aimed at a particular satisfying a lust of Envy and Revenge: But God
aimed at much Good, for them, and many: and moved more stones to effect the
work, then they who wrought in a small compass.

Gods good end, swallowed up their little evil end; more good, then bad came
of it to Joseph, themselves, and others: Therefore, it was God more then they;
for of him is all good: Wherefore let Believers, be humbled godlily for their
Sins; and then be quiet without perplexing grief, or anger with themselves,
For Gods hand, and good ends, are in their Sins, and Sorrows, more then
their evil hearts, and shall prevail To Gods glory, and their good.

Thus much for the First Rice and Ground of all Changes, which befall Believers
through Sin or Sorrow; They all are of God, and his hand.

2. Ries.
SECONDLY, All Changes by Sin or Sorrow which befall Believers, come from God
by a Decree Powerful; That is, a working They all come from God on the^ by a
Decree Powerful.
Decree; he has so resolved and decreed it as that his hand and power concurs,
to effect it.

In regard of Troubles and Afflictions, this is said expressly Zeph. 2. 2.
There was a Decree pregnant; which conceived, and bred Trouble Afflictions.
for them; and was strong and able, to bring it forth, and not miscarry.

So also; For Sins; Acts. 4. 27. 28. That sin of theirs in crucifiing So
Sins
Christ: All that which they did sinnfully against Christ; is said to be
determined before, by Gods counsel and hand; That is, a Decree that was
concurring in Power to effect what it determined: Yet is not this any excuse to
the Sinner or extenuation of the Sin; For, as it is said of Assyria Isa. 10.
7. he thinks not so: he eyes not this Decree of God in his sinning, nor is he
moved by a respect to it; but he does it out of his own evil heart.

3. Ries.
THIRDLY, All Changes upon Believers, by Sins, or Sorrows, come to them from
God, by an Everlasting Decree; Even by that Eternal Love, and Counsel, in and
by which they were ordained to Life Eternal: They all some from God on the^,
by an Everlasting Decree.
Therefore, Habac. 1. 12. the Prophet incourageth himself against the great
Affliction of the Babilonian Captivity, by this, that Gods Decree had ordained
them for that end; and therefore the issue should be their good; and not their
ruin (we shall not dye) and setts God before him, as a God from Everlasting;
and his God; that is, His God from Everlasting; And why does he instance in
this Attribute Afflictions:
of Everlasting? But to intimate; that God being from Everlasting, and so all
His Decrees being from Everlasting; among which, this was one, of that their
great Affliction by the Babilonians; therefore they should not be hurt, or
ruind by it: And when Christ, is called the Everlasting Father: Isa. 9. 6. It
seems to be meant, not only that from Everlasting Decree had desingd the
Second Person, as incarnate, to make all things; and as it were begett them;
but more specially, to be a Father to the Elect; and so as a Father to chastise
them with afflictions; Heb. 12. 5. 6. 9. which Afflictions also must be by the
same Everlasting Decree appointed out to them: Wherefore, Christ; Isa. 63. 16.
is called their Father, who from Everlasting had this Name; their Redeemer: For
so it is read on the Margent, and seems to be meant; Now, as their redemption;
so their miseryes must be Decreed from Everlasting: for so surely, Christ as a
Redeemer, has bin in Gods account; from Everlasting: Even those goings forth,
Mica. 5. 2. and not only, his Godheads; but those Works of his, as Incarnate,
toward the Creature: Works without; as the phrase of goings forth; implies.

And as all Sorrows, So all Sins of Believers, are determined by Gods
Eternal Decree; How often, How many, How great; For, if Christ So all Sin^es How
often, How many, How great.
from Everlasting be their Redeemer; and went forth to Save them; It was first,
and cheifely from Sins; then must from Everlasting the Sins be set down
from whence he should save them; as it is certain they were, because when he
accomplished the Decree, and by dying on the Cross, actually redeemed them;
then All their Sins met on him, as For all met on Christ, upon the Cross.
Therefore were before decreed for him to remove.
it is Isa. 53. 6. read on the Margent; Now none met on him there, but what
were Decreed for him to remove, when he was destinated to that work; which was
from Everlasting: For Adam in his fall, and sinning, was a Figure, or Tipe of
Christ, taking away Sins Romans 5. 14. to the Chapt. end: Therefore Christ's
taking away Sins, was decreed before Adam, or the World was, (and so from
Everlasting) or how could Adam tipifie him, if he were not before intended to
that work? And if Christ were from Everlasting; Decreed to take away Sins,
then were the Sins he should take away, Decreed from Everlasting: This also
appears by Deuteronomy. 32. 32. to 37. where it is said; that both the Sins of Gods
people: Verse. 32. 33. 34. And their Afflictions Verse. 35. And their
Deliverance: Verse. 36. are all before hand, laid up in store with God, and
sealed among his treasures: That is, in the Eternal Decrees, of his Wisdom,
and Knowledge, in the deepest secresy, and hiddennes, has God set down his
peoples sins and punnishments; which in a set time he will avenge, and at
the end, do his people good.

And the Reason, and Ground, and further Evidence of all this, is: A further*
Ground.
Because, by the same Decree that setts down the End, are all the Means
thereto set down; Wherefore that Eternal Good Will and Wisdom of God, which
Decreed Believers to Eternal Happiness, Decreed all the Afflictions, and
Sins, how much, and long, God would leave them to weakness, and let loose
corruptions; as the ways and means by which, he would bring them to that
Glory appointed them: For every thing which befalls Believers in this World, is
a Means to that great End of Eternal Glory to which God has ordained them;
and therefore was fore-ordered for them, in and by that Great, and Eternal
Love, and so cannot but be in Love, and for their Good.

FOURTHLY, All Changes upon Believers by Sins, or Sorrows, 4. Rice. They all
come from God, on the^ through A Covenant of Grace.
come on them, by and through A Covenant of Grace made with them; This follows
from the former; For the Covenant of Grace, is nothing else, but the gathering
together, and revealing with an obligation to them, to perform, what ever
were his Eternal Purposes in Himself, concerning Believers; Wherefore, all
that is Decreed concerning them, is exhibited to them, through A Covenant of
Grace; which cannot but season it, and make it wholesome to them; however
pernicious it be to others.

Thus all Afflictions come through A Covenant of Grace; and are Afflictions.
expressed in it, Psalm. 89. 32. 33. 34. For they be fatherly chastisements for
good, and tokens of Love, to which the Covenant binds God Heb. 12. 7. 10.
Whence it is that God is called the terrible God, keeping Covenant and Mercy,
Nehe. 1. 5. Because his Covenant for Mercy, is to Afflict.

And so, all the Sins which Believers are left to, they are through So all
their Sins.
and because of the Covenant of Grace, left to them; and the Covenant implies a
dispensation of sinning to them, as well as other things: For though the
Covenant, express not their being left to Sin: Yet, it imples their sinning;
for its scope is; that God as a Father will Educate and Nurture them up so, as
shall fit them for his Inheritance of Glory: Now by Sins are they as much
nurtured, and fitted for Heaven; as by any thing else: Wherefore, by virtue of,
and through his Covenant By which he nurtures and fitts them:
of Grace, does he leave them to, more, or fewer, less, or greater, Sins, as
may best nurture them up, even as he fitts them for service in this World, by
leading them into Sins; as he did Peter to confirm For Service
the weak; by leaving him to that Sin, Luke. 22. 32. with 34. 57. And David
to bear out to the World, his sure mercyes in Christ: Isa. 55. 3. by leaving
him and his house, to many and great Sins: as 2. Sam. 11. because else the
surenes of the Mercy, had not appeared; had they not sinned extraordinarily:

So he fitts also for the Glory in Heaven; by their various sinning For Heaven.
here: Not only as Sins make way for Afflictions, but also as they make way
for Gods free Grace, Christ's Mercy, and the exercise of diverse Graces; As that
Sin of the Church of Corrinth did 2. Cor. 7. 10. 11. And who ever observes
Gods manner in nurturing up his Children for Heaven, he will find that the most
usual ways of his Art, therein lie in leaving them to Sins or Afflictions,
or both; For,

First, Sins and Afflictions, are a trial of Faith; Afflictions try our 1.
They try their Faith:
Faith in Gods Love, that he should Afflict and Love; as Jobs Faith was tried;
Though he Kill me, yet I will trust in him: And they try our Faith in
Afflictions does, in, Gods Love. Mercy. Justice.
his Mercy, when he so takes vengance on our iniquities, to believe him
merciful, and that he has forgiven: Psalm. 99. 8. And they try our Faith in
his Justice; whilst he so afflicts the good, and letts the wicked prosper; as
it is in the Psalms. So Sins much more In Christ's Blood. In Gods
Unchangeablenes


And as Afflictions are a trial of our Faith; So are our Sins; and that much
more then Afflictions: They try our Faith in Christ's Blood, for an Atonement,
Psalm. 51. 2. 7. They try our Faith in Gods Vnchangablenes that he will not cast
us of though we sin; according as the Covenant runes, Psalm. 89. 31. 32. 33.
They try our Faith in the Promises In the Promises.
of Perseverance, and Victory, over Sin, when yet we find it captive us; as
Paul's faith showed it self, Romans 7. 23. 24, 25.

Now this Trial of Faith, by manifold tentations; as 1. Pet. 1. 6. 7. that is
both by Tentations through Sins, and Sorrows; is for a season needful:
Even, whilst we are in nurture; in as much as it tryes Faith; As the fire does
the gold, that is to be used in special things: Which trial of Faith over,
and above besides the Faith it self; will be profitable, at the last day; and
therefore, is at the present of more price and virtue to us, then gold, which
perishes in this World.

Secondly, Sins and Afflictions, are as seeds of an harvest of Joy at the 2.
They tend to a harvest of Joy to come.
last day: Afflictions are the ground work of Joy, Psalm. 126. 5. 6. as the
Babilonion Captivity (their spoke of) was of that great joy: and so Heb. 12 11.
even though they be inflicted for Sins, as the forementioned were; For God
forgives and removes the Affliction: Psalm. 103. 3. Isa. 38. 17. Yea, and they
Comfort, at the last day, as the hardness of the Sea voyage, does in the haven;
and the danger of the fight, does in the triumph: Reve. 7. 13. 14. And Sins,
however, for the most part, they first occasion trouble, yet they tend to, and
in the end, bring forth the more Joy,; both here, whilst God forgives them,
and sheds abroad his Joy with his Forgivnes; giving not only ease, by setting
again the bones he broke, but also making them to rejoice Psalm. 5 ^. 7. 8.
David never joyed more, then after his reconsilement to God. upon those horrid
Sins of Adultry and Murder; and that of numbering the People: For after the
former he had Solomon given him (whom the Lord sent, and called beloved of the
Lord 2. Sa^. 12. 25. and was he whom God had named to build the Temple as ye
heard before; and after the other sin he had the place of the temple; showed
him; and liberty to prepare for its building which greatly joyed his soul;
there being nothing to which his heart went forth in so much desire as to Gods
house.

And indeed Gods people need more Joys after Sins, then after Gods people
needs more Joy, after sinning, then after afflictions.
Afflictions, because they are more cast down by them; and therefore God uses
Sins, as means by which he leads in his Joys unto them in this World: And
also in the World to come; their Sins yield them great Joys; Indeed, in some
respects, they shall joy most at the last day, who have least sinned; But in
other respects, they have Which they have here, and more heereaftor.
most joy who have most sinned, (For sin they little or much, they all shall
enter into Joy, at last) whilst the free Grace, and rich Mercy, of God the
Father; the Merit, and Love of God the Son; the Power of the indwelling holy
Ghost in them; shall the more shine forth, how much the more Sins have bine
within them; and Faith will the more Tryu^ph in and with the Trophes of so many
the more Victoryes over the guilts of Sins, and keeping up under the more
continued assaults of powerful Sins.

3. By Sins and Afflictions, God is the more made manifest to them; 3. God is
thereby, made more manifest to them. In all his Attributes.
Even, all his Goodness is made to pass before them Exo. 33. 19. That is, all
his Attributes: as Exodus. 34. 6. his Soveraignity to do what he will, with
whom he will; whilst he leaves them to any Sorrows, or Sins, 1. Sam. 3. 18.
Exodus 33. 19. alleged, Rom 9. 15. He hardens whom he will: So his Justice and
Mercy: more Justice, in that the more they sin, the more he takes of Christ:
Romans 3. 26. he is Just, as well as a Justifier: And more Mercy, in pardoning
more to them. And so his Truth is manifest; in a more full making good his
threats in punishing them for Sins; or his Promises, in pardoning more Sins.

Now this seeing Gods back parts, does greatly nurture, and fit for heaven,
many ways, which I need not mention, they are so obvious: Which does greatly
nurture them for heaven.
Thus then, the Changes through Sins and Afflictions, serving for a nurture
and education of Believers unto heaven, it is, matter of Joy to them, when They
fall into diverse temptations, James. 1. 2. Yea, all Joy; Its a phraise, I find
not again used in Scripture; It is more then So that tentations, is matter of
all Joy, as: James. 1. 2. explained.
to say; much, or great joy; for it implies that what ever kind, or degree of
joy there is, we should take it up to joy in this thing; (as the like phrase,
is used in the like sense, for Prayer: Ephesians. 6. 18.) which shows that there is
more then ordinary cause of Joy, in these Trials of Believers, some of which,
he instanceth in: Verse. 3, to 6. For these Trials, are of their Faith (as ye
heard before) which yields a future gain, and a present proffit also: for
Faith tried, brings forth Patience; and do but let Patience have her perfect
work, and ye shall be entire, and lack nothing: Entire; the greek word (...).
I find not else where used in Scripture; but 1. These. 5. 23. that which is
intregal with all its parts, which has all that is allotted it which is
possessed of your whole lot, portion, or inheritance; Yet there is added another
word (as if this were not full enough) and lack nothing; or rather lacking in
nothing: As if by the Trial of Faith through several Tentations, Patience may
be wrought up to such a perfection; as that they should have their full portion
of Grace and Glory given them into their hand:

And whereas, they may say, but who is wise enough so to improve patience; he
prevents it; saying to this effect: Thus to do is indeed wisdom, which any
man may lack, but if he ask it; he shall have it, and so may do the things,
and become fully possessed of all his portion, and inheritance; and therefore may
well joy with all Joy, when he is fallen into diverse tentations; This indeed
is not a matter of sense; therefore says the Apostle count it; or suppose, and
think it so (...), Let this be your leading thought of all other thoughts, and
let this thought lead your affections; so much the word may implye (...)
Wherefore, Verse. 12. he says, They are blessed that endure, that is endure
Verse, 12.
so as to stay it out, and not give over; For he when he is tried (or as the
words in greek are) being become one tried, as metal in the furnace, shall
receive the Crown of Life; which implies that till he is thus tried, he is not
meet; and this trial makes and discovers him to be meet to receive the
Crown; which Crown though it be the same for substance: Yet it is diverse in
degrees, and circumstances, unto which severals, they are fitted by several
trials; God being served on them, in pardoning more to them; or in their being
more sanctified, or afflicted.

And thus ye see, how God the Father has made us able to triumph The three
Persons in Trinity, severally, inables Believers to triumph over Sin.
over sin, as nothing: Even as the other Two Persons also in able us to do,
in a several way; For compare we Sin, in its working, and indwelling in us,
in which respect, it is nearest us; Yet compare it with the power and purpose
of the Holy Ghost, who dwells also in us, to subdue it all; and compared with
him; It is less then the force of a Fly, to a Giant; it is nothing: So
compare we Sin in its guilt, with Jesus Christ, his Righteousness, Blood, etc.
It is not so much as a Cloud compared with the Sun, in his strength; it is
nothing: So also compare we Sin, in its being, with the Counsel, Decree, and
Intent of God the Father; and it is nothing: Yea more; there is all good, and
much good comes of it, to Believers, and to God: Thus the Three Persons in
Trynity; have each of them, severally put forth their power, to nullify Sin,
on the behalf of Believers, that it should not dismay them: And God the
Father; has taken it up, and ordered, it for much good, unto Believers: In
that He, and his Decree, and Covenant of Grace; is the Channel by which all
Sins befall them.

Now then, to sum up all; Since all Changes by Sins, or Sorrows The Su^me
of this last Means.
which befalls Believers, come from God, and from his Decree Everlasting, and
are dispensed to them, as a nurture through A Covenant of Grace; It must needs
be that they must all work together, to their good, Romans 8. 28. It may be, to
them that view but particulars, and asunder, their general good end, and their
conducement to it, may not be perceived; But put them all together, and ye
shall see, in their utmost maine end, they all work together for good, to all
Believers; And by the Coherence, the Apostle there seems to mean, sinnfull
Infirmityes against which the Spirit helps, as well as other more outward
Troubles: Wherefore, there cannot be any true reason or ground, why any thing
should perplexe them.

Troubles either by Sin or Affliction, are to be looked on two ways; Both as
Sins are our own, and come from our cursed nature, and dishonours God,
crucified Christ, greive the Spirit, transgress the Command etc. And so
Afflictions may be considered, either as coming from our Sin; or at the
least; our sinnfullnes exposing to them: And thus, with hope in Christ, for
pardon; Believers are to greive and humble themselves, for Sins and
Afflictions: And from this, anger and grief, Joseph did not take off, his
Brethren; Nor Christ his Disciples in my text; This is a Trouble, that is good
and profitable for them; But as Sins or Afflictions are beheld, only as our
own, in their bad effects, and roots, and God, and his Will, and Hand in
them, and their good effects, through him, are not considered; hence comes
sinnfull and pernicious troubles; which Joseph to his Brethren; and Christ to
his Disciples diswads from; And noe course is so full to remove or prevent it,
as this looking on God the Author of it, and the good which he brings about by
it: Which is rarely done by believers, yea, hardly known, and therefore I have
enlarged it:

Yet, let me close this Means against all Troubles, as our Savior does;
Namely that ye know (who are Believers) all this: Ye know these true grounds
of Consolations, though not so distinctly, or perticularly; yet there is that
in you, which conteines all these consolating Grounds, if ye would stir it up,
and gather it together; and not brutishly give way to sense and present things,
and to the passions of your own supposed false grounds of Gods hand on you in
leaving you, to Sins, or Sorrows: Wherefore stir up the knowledge that is in
you, and use it that so whatever Changes befall you by Sins or Sorrows, your
hearts may not be troubled.

And thus much for the Fourth Means against perplexing trouble of Thus much,
for these Words, as a Dehortatio^, and Means, against Trouble.
heart; included in the 2. 3. and 4. Verses; and for those Verses as they stand
in reference to the former, and their scope, to Comfort the Disciples against
Christ's with drawing his Corporal presence: And so we have handled these
Verses as they are a Dehortation from Trouble of heart, and Directions of
Means to help against it.

Now let us Consider them again; and observe what may be deduced The Words
considered absolutely. And so they ^eild many ^^ch Truths
and drawn by Consequence from them, or found positively, and absolutely in
them: And thus, these Verses Contain many rich, and pleasant Truths.

FIRST OBSERVATION. 1. Obser. Christ has tender bowels toward Believers in
troubles.

That Jesus Christ: has extraordinary tender bowels toward all Believers in
Trouble.

This is demonstrated in Four Perticulars.

First, Christ could not bear that these Believers, should be troubled: but
forbids it, and by many Directions, and Arguments, fortifies For 1.
them against it: So soon as he perceived trouble begine to arise in the^; He
could not bear their being troubled. But is much troubled about it.
He abounds and ouerflowes with care to prevent and remove it: Even as a tender
Mother, who is restles in carefullnes to ease her Child so soon as it is any
way troubled: And this in Christ, fatther appears in the rest of this, and the
following Chapters: In which by many words; again and again he discovers,
that his bowels greatly moved whith the sight of their trouble: He indeed
showing much more trouble of Compassion for them, then they had trouble of
perplexity; as the tender Mothers troubles for the Child, are often greater, and
more, then the Childs, which cause them, because of her abundance of bowels:
Yet farther.

Secondly, He was thus taken up with trouble about their trouble, then 2. And
this* when he was entering on his own great Trouble.
when he was entering into his own great Trouble, when it was so near him,
that it troubled him with its gastnes, and greatness; John. 13. 21. It was his
own Personal trouble; which uses to ingrosse all the care, that is in man,
for himself, though men can be troubled for others, when they are free
themselves, yet hardly when they are in trouble themselves: Yea, and this
trouble of Christ's own, was greater, then theirs, for theirs was much of it
groundles, and immaginary, and such as might be escaped (as ye have seen
before) but Christ's was all, real, and such as must be endured; and it was the
heaviest burden as ever was, or could be laid on a creature; also it was at
hand, he had set foot on its borders, and touched the brime of that Sea into
which he was to be plunged; it was nearer then theirs, for theirs was but to
follow on his: Now the presence and approach in sight of so great a trouble to
ones self, how does it use to ingrosse an whole man, that he can mind no
friends trouble else; as the Disciples were so overcome with their own loss
by Christ his departure from them, as they could not mind him, and his trouble,
not for an hour: Yet farther.

Thirdly, He was thus taken up with trouble about their trouble, 3. And that
though he found much sin^e in them
though he found at present, much sin in them, and offensivenes to his
spirit; and foresaw that they would play false with him, and forsake him; and
this contrariety of disposion, and unkind dealing, so weakens men's affections
in each other, as that they can scearsly continue love, much less such love,
as to be troubled for their troubles: Yet further.

Fourthly, He was thus taken up with their troubles, though he knew 4. And
though he knew it should not be long.
it was not long to the ending, and vanishing of all these their troubles;
Namely by his resurrection; which he believed fully, though they did not: Yet
for so small a time could not he behold them in trouble, but every vein in his
heart was moved, and he most industriously applies himself to remove, and
prevent it, for the present; Thus also, for all other Believers, though he
knows the rule God goes by; That if Sorrow be in the Night, yet. Joy shall be
in the Mornning; Yet is he troubled greatly with their present troubles, even
as one is with the least, and shortest touch on the apple of his eye; Zach. 2.
8.

REASON. Reason, of all is: From his Nature.

The Reason or Ground of all which tenderness of bowels toward them; Is, from
his Nature; For, he has the fullnes of the Godhead (all the divine Nature)
bodily; working in an humane Nature, and so as a man; Now the divine Nature, is
Mercy and Love 1. John. 4. 8. and all mercy, is but some dropps of that Nature;
which being put forth in him, a Man; inlargeth after man's manner, his bowels
infinitely; So that he has more bowels, then all Angels, which yet work in an
humane way, to move and touch him as a Man: Heb. 4. 15. with feeling as a man
may have, though not in an infirm way as it is with us; but as is co^petible
to a glorified nature: Now this his Nature, is drawn forth toward believers;
partly by his Fathers love to them, He knows how greatly his Father loves
them, and loves to have them loved, and therefore in obedience and love to his
Father; He gives vent to the whole ocean of Compassion that is in his Nature,
to flow out upon them: John. 14. last. and that seems to be the connection John
10. 15. I know the Father; and lay down my life for the sheep, because I
know it is his mind, I so should do; for the original motive of Christ's love
to Believers, is because the Father so loved them; they were his John. 17. 6.
yea, and continue to be his, though given to Christ: Verse. 9. And partly his
Office and Relation to them, draws his bowels toward them: He is a Brother,
Head, Husband, Father, (all that may indeare, he is made to them) he is their
Savior, their Guardian etc. they are given him (as the former places show) he
has a propriety in them also; they are his own, John. 13. 1. Yea, he is made
one with them, in a stricter nearenes, then one flesh and bone, one spirit they
are with him 1. Cor. 6. 17. therefore he cannot but so love; even self-love
begetts love to them; near relations among men, begett affections.

FIRST USE. Instrustio^ That God is most tender to Believers, in troubles.

For Instruction; First, That God is most tender to Believers in all their
Troubles: For what Christ is, that very same God is, inasmuch as he is his
express image Heb. 1. 3. The Character, and so carrying a full express of
him: Which Christ is; not as the Second Person barely, for so he is as
invisible as the Father, but as the Second Person incarnate; and though his
incarnation fit him to express after our manner; God the clearer to us; yet it
adds nothing to him beyond what is in God: In God is the same degree of Love;
which is in Christ; but it is made evident to us in and by Christ: Yea, it was
in God, before it was in Christ: For, he raised up Christ, and filled him with
it, that he might convey those Compassions to us; and him he charged to do it
in all their afflictions: He whose Angel of presence (which is Christ) saves;
He is with them afflicted; and that is God the Father: Isa. 63. 7. 9. Therefore
by all the evidences of Christ's infinite Compassions, assure your hearts, that
God is so, every whitt so (though He be Great, High, Holy, Just, Independent)
and go to him in your miseryes and infirmityes, with boldness: For assurance of
great mercifullnes, makes bold to come, though it be a desperate venture:

Not only, Christ's mercifullnes, and mediation, should bring us boldly to God,
as Heb. 4. two last verses. But Christ's mercifullnes, should so convince us of
Gods, as that upon Gods mercifullnes, we should bear up, and imbolden our
selves, though it is to flow to us, only through and for Christ; or else we
do not enough honor God: In which way, I fear many Believers wrong God;
forgetting his mercifullnes, and looking on Christ, not only as meriting and
moving Gods mercy, but as only having mercy.

Second Instruction, That all Believers (but especially Church members 2.
Believers should be co^passionate, Especially Church Members.
and of them most especially Church Officers) should show forth abundant
co^passions in being moved with the troubles of others, even more then with
their own; For else they show not forth Jesus Christ: All Christians are
anointed with the same spirit: Therefore should have the same bowels, that
Christ has: And Church Members are not only; one Body, in aspeciall respect;
But they are Christ's in a special relation; a new, and superadded relation, by
virtue of their particular Church fellowshipe; and therefore they should more
especially resemble Christ: Hence that Exhortation, Col. 3. 12. Therefore;
Because Verse. 10. 11. ye have put on the new man, after Christ etc. Therefore,
put on bowels of mercyes, and kindness; Mercyes, that is the most mercifullnes,
as can be; and take in kindness also; and not some acts, but the very roots,
the bowels of these; and content not your selves of getting such habits in your
hearts; but put them on, as a garment; be seen in them: Thus was also Paul,
as a Church Officer, 2. Cor. ^. 2. their sorrow, so took up his heart, that he
could not be eased, till they were: And Chap. 11. 29. if any Believer (and not
only some of his choicest) were weak, as being pressed with any burden; he
also, for their sakes became weak also: And if they were hurt, by any fall
into Sin (for that is meant in Scripture phrase, by being scandelized or
offended) though he could not in this become like them, to be so also; yet he
was tortured with trouble of it: as if he were in the fire, and burnt; which is
a very sensible pain: For therefore Church Officers should thus resemble
Christ, because in a special manner they represent Christ; who is the great
Officer and Minister under God, especially when he was on earth; Romans 15. 8.
But alas! where is this conformit to Christ, to be found? I am, (now I compare
others with it) ashamed, and amazed; self-love, so prevails in us, that we
have not any compassions to be troubled with the troubles of others, as if our
own; as their duty is: But I say the merciful shall find mercy; and this
drought of Compassion to others, will restrain though it cannot dry up,
Christ's springs of pity to you.

SECOND USE. Exhortation. To get assured of Christ's tenderness.

For Exhortation, to all Believers, to tell their hearts in every trouble; that
Christ is more troubled then ye are: As sometimes ye see a Mother more touched
with the Child's illnes, then the Child is: Though ye see him not troubled, yet
by Faith be assured it is so; and as he was at this time, in his Disciples
troubles, so is he, and ever will he be, in every Believers trouble; Nor has
he left his sensiblenes of our troubles, by his being glorified, for, since
that, the Apostle says of him He is not one that cannot be touched with
feeling: That is, He is touched with feeling of our infirmityes; in as much as
he was once tempted as we are; and those impressions by his experience, remain
so that he is now touched with feeling; though ye cannot conceive how, yet know
it is so, for the Apo. says it; he feels more then you; and is eased by your
ease, more then you (the head feels most, in it is the seat of sense, more
then in the members that are touched) Therefore, if it comfort you to have one
suffer with you, though no member do it; yet know, that Christ your Head does
it, and cannot but be as ready to ease you, as you are to be eased, so soon as
it is fit.

Again from the manner of Christ's speaking we may observe:

SECOND OBSERVATION. Obser. 2. As we must believe in Christ, So we must
continue faith in the Father also.

That allthough, since Christ is come, we should not only believe in God the
Father, but in Christ; Yet, we should not cease believing in the Father, and
do it in the Son only, as it was formerly done, only in the Father; But we
should continue our faith in the Father also.

For he says not, cease your believing in the Father, and place it only on
me; But as ye do believe in him, do it also in me, but cease not to do it in
him; Therefore, in diverse Scriptures, Faith is given to God the Father: Romans
4. 24. Heb. 2. 13. He proves Christ a Brother verse. 11. because he trusts in
God; that must be God the Father: So, 1. Pet. 1. 21. and 1. John. 3. 21.
Confidence toward God the Father; as the 22. 23. ver. show.

REASON. Bec. though God put the Promises into Christ, Yet he reserved them
also in his own hands.

The Reason is; Because, though God put the Promises into Christ, and gave him
them, yet he reserved them also in his own hands and power; For God the Father
did not only promise Christ, and that Christ should do every thing; But He
promised Christ, and promised that He by, and through Christ, and for Christ,
would do such, and such things: As that he would justify them that believe;
Romans 3. 26. It is the Father that is just, in taking satisfaction from Christ;
and yet is the justifier of them that believe in Jesus; So Romans 4, 5. Our Faith
now, since Christ, is made, (in this respect) the same with Abraham's, even as
he, to believe on him, who Justifies the ungodly, not materially meritoriously,
as Christ does; but judicially, to acquit in judgment; which is the Fathers
work: For it was on the Father promising this, in Isaac: That Abraham
believed: Verse. 3. And this is the same Person who is meant Verse. 5. for that,
it is a continued speech; which is more plain, Tit. 3. 6. 7. He that shed
Mercy on us, through Christ; justifies us by his Grace, through Christ; and
this must be the Father; Also the Father promised by Christ, to give the
Spirit, who is therefore called the promise of the Father: Acts. 1. 4. and the
progress, yea, and whole work of Sanctification, is given to the Father:
John. 15. 1. 2. and Jude. 1. Not because he works it immediately (for it is
more specially appropriated to the holy Gbost) but because he has purposed and
promised it: as Ephesians. 1. 3.

Nor by this believing in the Father; do I only mean, in general to
Believing in the Father mu^t not only be in general, But most specia^l
believe in him: For so, Believing being a duty of the first Command, and a
natural Worship, it is a due of all the Three persons in common, as God; and we
are to believe in the Father, Son, and holy Ghost: But, the Three Persons
have pleased to select, and more especially, to appropriate to each of them
(yet in the name, and for the honor of all three) some particular Works about
Man; even such as more specially suites with, their distinct and Personal
opperations:

Thus the Holy Ghost; has more specially appropriated to him, the Work of
Revelation, Sanctification, Inhabitation, and Comfort: In as much, as these
Works are lowest in Order, and nearest to the Creature; as He is lowest in
Order of the Persons Divine, and so nearest to the Creature: Though yet, as He
is one God, equal with the other; So, those his Works, are as infinite, and
glorious, as any of the other.

And the Father, and Son, have more specially appropriated to them; The
promising the good things which the holy Ghost reveals, and works: Because in
Free Grace; a Purpose and Promise, must go before the revelation, and
exhibition of them; As the Fathers Person, and the Sons, are in Order of
Subsistence, though not in Time, before the Person of the holy Ghost:
Therefore, I say, Promising is more specially appropriated in Scripture, to the
Father and Son; And as Promising, on their parts; So Believing, on our part;
is more specially appropriated in Scripture to them Two: To the Father;
because, the Promises, are but expressions, and obligations of himself, to
perform, his Purposes: In as much therefore, as He, who is the First Person of
the Three; assumes to himself, the Purposing or Decreeing of all; which is the
First root and rise of every thing; there is a fittnes, that He also should
assume to Himself; the promising of them; in as much, as they are his own;
the issue and of spring of his own good will.

And the Son, being Heir to all his Fathers; Is also Heir to His purposes
and promises, and had them all first made over to him (as ye heard before) and
was appointed to purchase them for us; and so they also are his own; and He,
with the Father, appropriate more specially to themselves our believing in
them, unto the performances of the Promises: And the Father, though he made
over all Promises to the Son, and appointed him also, to purchase them; Yet
he put not him self, out of possession, though he put his Son also in, with
Himself, and gave his Son another proper title, by purchase; Yet the Father
kept his own title to the Promises, and so to our believing in Him, as well as
in the Son: Which, is intimated in this; that he retains in his own hands
that Promise of making Christ's ennimyes his footestoole; Psalm. 110. 1 Which
conteines in it also, the consummation of all Promises to Believers, both of
Justification, and Sanstification, and Resurrection from Death: 1. Cor. 15. 25.
26. which God the Father assumes to Himself though yet he executes, and
performs it, by Christ, (as ye heard before) Therefore Christ himself (though
he is at Gods right hand) trusts in God: Heb. 10. 12. 13. and so must all
Believers.

What is the difference twixt believing, in the Father and the Son.
But it may be asked; What difference is there, twixt our believing in the
Father, and in the Son? I answer in Four Things.

1. Believing in the Father, is as in the orriginal Author of our good
First, our Believing is in the Father, as in the original Author, and
undertaker, for our good, who sent, and gave Christ for us; and raised him up
from the dead; and therefore Romans 4. 24. our Faith is so placed on him; But our
believing is on the Son as the Person appointed by the Father, to convey all
good to us; John. 6. 27. 29. so Math. 12. 18. to 22. He is believed in. as Gods
Servant, fitted to the work; as the meritorious and working Means, of all our
good; as the bread of Life, John. 6. 35. therefore the proving him to be the
Christ, helped them to believe; Acts. 18. 27. 28. because they believed in him,
as the Means or Instrument anointed, and fitted by God, to Save: Hence it
follows.

2. It is more med are.
Secondly, Our believing in God the Father, is more mediate, and remote; it is
through and because of Christ: 1. Pet. 1. 21. By Christ we believe in God: That
is not only by Christ, as the Efficient working Faith: But as the Means
through whom, we come to believe in the Father: For so, the greek word (...)
as well signifies the Instrument by which, as the Efficient; The Efficient 1.
Cor. 1. 9. And the Instrument Acts 2. 22. so 1. Cor. 8. 6. Ephesians. 2. 18. For,
when God (that is the Father) is opposed to him; He then is taken as the
Instrument of God: For as God chose us in Christ; and adopts us by Christ Ephesians.
1. 4. 5. So he brings us to believe in Him through Christ: The distance is so
great twixt God and us, that we cannot immediately trust in God; but now our
Faith in Christ, is immediately in Him: And therefore our clossing is closser,
and more immediate with Christ's Person by Faith, then it is with the Fathers
Person: We by Faith, close with the Fathers Person as with a Father by
marriage: But with the Sons Person, as with an husband with whom we join
immediately; and therefore we believe in the Son, as in a Gift given to us
able to help us; John. 4. 10. and in the Father as the giver of it: In the
Son, as in the Mediator twixt God and us 1. Tim. 2. 5. And in the Father, as
he that is made one with us, through the Son; Therefore the Son is called
Emmanuell Math. 1. 23. not in respect of the Union of his Natures: But because,
God the Father, in him, is at one with us, and on our side, who else is not one
with us; Neither, as we once were Righteous by the Covenant of Works, in that
He is to much above us in Holiness, nor much less, now we are sinnfull; and as
a Ground of this.

Thirdly, We believe in the Father only, as a Divine Person; But in the Son;
as the Son of God and Man: Therefore Faith in Christ, is given to 3. Its in
the Father, as a Divine Person.
him, as Gods Son, John. 3. 18. And as Man, to his Blood: Romans 3. 25. And
thus is Faith on him to be pitched as God-Man, for thus only he does the Works
we trust in Him for, to Merit, Mediate etc. Hence.

Fourthly, He being believed in, as lesser then God, being God-Man; 4. It rests
not in Chr^^t. But rises up to the Father.
Faith rests not in him, but rises up to the Father, as its utmost propp:
John. 12. 44. Not in Me; that is Not only in Me; but rises up to My Father
also: That so, as the Father is the Original of all Good promised; So He should
be the bottom of our Faith; in which it is terminated; And to Whose Glory, it
shall lastly Work: Ephesians. 1. 12. and 1. Pet. 1. 21.

USE. Exhortation. To shun an Error.

For Exhortation to shun an Error in the Object of your faith: one Error we
have before discovered: Namely, the not taking in the Person of Christ, but
pitching only on God and his Promises: Now I show you another to shun: Namely,
when ye pitch your faith only on Christ; and not also with him, on God the
Father: Many are so ignorant in this that they think, God the Father is not
the Object of our Faith now: But ye see it is otherwise: Wherefore give the
Father also, with the The difference twixt the Jew^s, and Us in believing.
Son his due of Believing in him: The difference twixt Jews and Us, lies not
in this that they had the Father, and we have the Son Incarnate, to trust in;
But in this, that they had only the Father; and the Son but in a Promise;
whereas we, have the Son actually come, and the Father also, to believe in:
So that we have a double propp for our We have a duble prop to our faith,
Therefore should have a do^ble strength.
Faith, and therefore should have a double strength in believing: It is true;
that implicitly, we believe in the Father whilst we do it in the Son as he
that sees the Son, sees the Father, though he know it not; because They are
one: John. 14. 9. Yet, till it is done explicitly* distinctly, and knowingly,
it is not so honorable to the Father, nor so comfortable to the Believer; Its
not so honorable to the Father, because professedly and knowingly, ye give him
not this his due of believing in him, which he challenges: An unwilled
respect, is not counted an honoring a Man: Nor is it, so comfortable to us;
for the knowing and using Two, must needs yield more Comfort of Faith, then the
knowing, and using One only; God has therefore, as by giving Two; His Word,
and Oath: Heb. 6. 17. 18. So by giving Two; His Son and Himself: abundantly
provided for our securitye, and comfort: And indeed; as in some respects; we
are much helped in our faith; by Christ being its Object (as ye have heard) So
in some respects, are we much helped, by the Fathers being the Object of our
faith: For in Him, we have the Root of all: our faith goes to the bottom, and
in this, the deeper, the sweeter, and the stronger: For we trust on Electing
Love, Free Grace, Everlasting Mercy; that which, disposes of Christ, and his
Riches to whom it will, and in what measures it will: Math. 20. 23. And so
that Objection is prevented, which may arise from their being one before
Christ, who in his Sovereignty orders Christ, and his Merrits as he will: But
ye have his Promises, Him fast, to trust in, as well as the Son: Yea, and ye
should be stronger in the Faith in the Father, then the Jews were (who only
believed in him) because by Christ, ye have not the Father, more obscured, but
much more revealed then he ever was before.

THIRD OBSERVATION. Obser- Believers are prone to sin in those affections,
which be lawful.

That Believers are prone to sin in those Affections, which be lawful; and
in some sense necessary.

As here; Trouble for Christ's Death, Judas Sin, and Their own Apostasy, was
so necessary; that they had sinned if they had not bine moved with it; and yet
they sinned in being moved with it; as appears, because Christ forbid them the
trouble; He forbid it to them: And the Sin was (as ye have heard in the
explication of the Words) both in the Object, fearing to much, even more then
was to be feared: And in the Passion; to much being moved with what was truly
apprehended.

USE. Information. Not onelyto care to set affect^ons on lawful things, But
to care not to exceed.

For Information to true Believers; Not only to care, that their affections be
set on right, and lawful things, but to care that they exceed not in the^;
Which, we are the proner to, and more hardly sensible of, because the substance
of the thing is lawful: Jonah was right in his desire to be found true in his
sayings, to Niniveh, because he was a Prophet of God to Israel 2. Kings. 14.
25. But this little rightnes in him, in the maine; advantaged the flesh in him,
to much sin against God, in running away; (thinking Gods Mercy would prevail
against that peremptorye Message of Ruin to Niniveh) and against Mankind; in
wishing rather the Ruin of so many Thousands, then His words shall seem to
fail.

So David's error, in his strong affections to Gods house, having some good in
it: As Solomon says of it; 2. Cron. 6. 8. made him err, in attempting a part
of Gods worshipe without a warrant, for which God reproves him, 2. Sam. 7. 5.
6. 7. yea, and Nathan also the Prophet; not being infallibly assisted, was also
misled in jugdment verse. 3. Wherefore the better the thing is in it self; the
more circumspect ye must be, that ye err not about it: Surely the Disciples
thought they could not err in being troubled about these things, Christ's death,
their own Sins, Judas treason, etc. The Poet observed licitis perimus omnes*
that in things lawful, lay our most dangerous snares; let us therefore look
to our selves, that we exceed not, unto sin; in such love, grief, fear,
pleasure; as in a degree, and some kind, are lawful and necessary.

FOURTH OBSERVATION. Obser- Believers. are prone to be much troubled, ^ the
a^^^^^ch of Affl^ctio^s.

That Believers hearts, are prone to be to much, and sinnfully troubled, with
the approach of Afflictions.

It was losses, and tentations which the Disciples perceived coming which cast
them into this distemper, of which Christ labors to cure them: This
industriousnes of Christ, to remove and prevent their Trouble; not only
argues, His Compassions toward them (as has bine observed) but also, their
aptnes to be oppressed with trouble: Hence the Scriptures so abound with
Encouragements against Troubles, and Exhortations not to be dismayed with them;
and our experience of our selves, and others, does abundantly show, how prone
we are to be dismayed with Troubles.

FIRST REASON. Bec. T^^y cro^^ the wo^ki^gs of self-love

Because Troubles, do so exceedingly cross the workings and will of our
sinnfull Self-love; which is all for Ease, Pleasure, Life etc. Therefore
denying our Selves; is put before the taking up our Cross.

SECOND REASON. 2. Bec. T^e^ estrange us from this World.

Because Troubles, do so much cut off, and estrange us from this present
World: The delicacyes of this World; are banished from us, by troubles:
Therefore Christ, discribes Troubles; By hateing Father; Brother; dispising
Houses, Lands etc. And other Troubles by Sickness, Pains etc. is expressed by
being dead; and so also, Persecutions, for he means both; Psalm. 31. 12. Now
the Love of this World, is much in our hearts; in that, the things of it are
sencible, and suite our appetites.

THIRD REASON. 3. Bec. They are contrary to a good principle with in us.

Because Troubles, are contrary to a good Principle of Nature; that is left in
us (as well as to the fore mentioned bad ones) viz. That desire to preserve our
selves, and so to avoid all evil; which was in Christ, and made him be
afraid, and pray against his passion; professing that his Will, as Man, was
against his Sufferings, considered in themselves, though He subjected that his
Will, to Gods; and so sinned not: But our Corruption getts strength from this
good Principle, to oppose Troubles sinnfully; and so Christ's troubles at
Afflictions, is distinguished from ours.

FOURTH REASON. 4. Bec. Selfe-flattery promise the contrary.

Because Self flattery, makes us promise our selves, the contrary; Luke. 12.
19. and carnal confidence with Atheism; makes us build our rest on the
present good; as Psalm. 30. 6. by which inexpectency of Evils, when they
appear, our Spirits are the more dismayed, and being unprepared, are the
weaker, to bear.

FIRST USE. Exhortation. To take pains, to be fitted for Troubles.

For Exhortation to Believers, To fore-think and take more pains about fitting
your selves for Troubles: Even Believers do to much put of the evil Day; and
do not let the Words fore showing Troubles, and preparing for Troubles, do as
Luke. 9. 44. Which either respects troubles fore told verse. 22. or the things
which might fit to bear Troubles, as that miracle verse. 43. But Believers do
so dream of prosperity, and are so unapt to suffer; that they shun to
fore-think it seriously; as the Apostles did these Troubles, by Christ's
Passion, or else they had bine fore warned, and armed. But Job did otherwise
Job 3. 25. 26. he feared before; Therefore he so well endured Job. 1. 22. till
it grew inexpressible: It confirms your hearts in well doing; whilst ye
fore-think Troubles; Acts. 14. 22. and they come never the sooner, but the
easier, for your fore-thinking, and preparing; Nor need they bitter, but only
temper from surfeting on your present sweet: So only is that meant Job. 3. 25.
26. and implies that it is an Argument why Evil should not come when it is
fore-feared: And they keep away never the longer, nor fall on, the less, for
your not expecting them; but hasten, and seize more heavily: It is a shame for
Believers to be touched with that trouble, they before feared not; since the
Scripture gives them such warning; and it is made the Lot of the Wicked, to
have Calamityes suddenly and unlookt for.

Secondly, To exhort Believers, when Troubles come, to look out for 2. in
Troubles to look out for help to bear.
help to bear, fearing and watching against their own weakness: To suffer; is
a gift; not only carrying favor, but new superadded strength; and a Gift
superadded to Faith; Phil. 1. last. though in it self, not better then Faith,
yet that which Faith helps not to; except assisted with fresh supply:
Sufferings, are Christ's baptism Math. 20. 23. and must have his presence: It
is Christ's Life, to bear them, and come out of them 2. Cor. 4. 10. 11. As it
is Christ's Death, to be under them; Wherefore, ye must have help from Him:
Even the small sufferings by fastings and mourning; was to much for the
Disciples at first; as new wine is for old bottles, or new cloth is for old
Math. 9. 16. 17. Any denying Nature, is a strong work: The Disciples could not
bear Troubles, till the Holy Ghost came on them: Therefore Christ, preserved
them from all; and God gave them to Him, to be saved from Troubles (which would
have lost them) as well, as from Sins; so long as He was with them and the
holy Ghost, not yet come on them; which is meant in part, by that John. 17. 12,
compared with 18. 9.

FIFTH OBSERVATION. 5. Obser- Believers sh^u^d renew their Faith when Troubles
do assail them.

That Believers should renew, and increase their Faith, when Troubles do
assail them.

The Disciples being in Trouble are exhorted by Christ, to Believe; That is, to
renew their Faith, and to make progress in it; that must be its meaning, for
they had already believed in Him, as well as in God; and yet he now exhorts
them to do it; that is to renew, and increase it: Faith is as a shield, which
though we have it by us, yet if we do not take it up, it secures us not;
Therefore Ephesians. 6. 16, taking the shield of all; it is spooke in the present
tense to show our continued act of Faith on every occasion; and above all; that
is, above all the pieces of armor, rather and better, not exercise, any then
not this; if a man use his shield though he should not use his helmet, or
brestplate, he may be safe; The Just live by Faith Habuc. 2. 4. it is spooke of
times of trial, even as that whereby we live must be continually renewed, as
our breathing, our eating etc. so must our Faith be renewed in all troubles.
Therefore we find David, and Paul, in their troubles, still exercising, and
putting forth their faith; they not only had it but they used it at that time;
which when David did not he was near a fall Psalm. 73. 2. and had the Disciples
at this time* renewed their faith in Christ, they had not bine so troubled:
When Peter brought Faith with him, it bore him up upon the Sea, and when he
began to sink, it was because his faith first suncke Math. 14. 28. to 32. Of
little Faith; That is, so little, as that it now works not: For so it is meant,
as appears by comparing Math. 8. 26. with Mar. 4. 40. So also you must
increase your faith: It is called Faith to Faith Romans 1. 17. or from Faith unto
Faith as Psalm. 84. 7. they go out of strength, unto strenght, or from company
to company, over taking the former, as in a journey; So must ye grow up out of
a less unto a greater degree of Faith; Not only upon new and farther
Revealations, to have more Faith; But when the same Objects only are before
you, yet to grow stronger in the Acts of Faith, and that not only in the
Righteousness of Christ, to Justification: as it is Gal. 3. 11. meant by the
Apostle; But also, in the Person of Christ, and his Privileges and Promises,
unto the bearing up under all troubles: Wherefore the Apostle, refers this
living by faith, which implies a Progress (as we shall show by and by) unto
Afflictions Heb. 10. 38. (as it is meant chiefly in the Prophet, whence he
quotes it) as well as he does there, unto Justification: And this Progress in
faith, proved by that saying, (the Just shall live by faith) because what we
live by, must have a continuance and progress, if we grow up, that must
continue and grow up: Therefore, 2 These. 1. 11. he prays for the fullfilling
the work of faith; It is therefore to be labored, that it should be filled up,
and added to, more and more; and by this means, is all the good pleasure of
Gods goodness fullfilled in us, and without the filling up of Faith, it cannot
be filled up in us: That though there is inexpressible Freenes in God (which to
express, he calls it good Pleasure, and Goodness) Yet it is not fullfilled in
us, but by the fullfilling of faith in us.

USE. Exhortation. To re^ew and exercise Faith.

For Exhortation to Believers, Not to rest in having faith; But keep this
sound in your ears; Believe in God; Believe in Christ; use, and renew your
Faith, exercise it; else Christ will count ye to have no Faith, Mark. 4. 40.
It is the same, not to have, and not to use; And it is a sign your faith is
little, if it work not, as it is clear by comparing Math. 8. 26. with Mark. 4.
40. Also increase your faith; by every Revealation, of Gods Righteousness (as
Christ, and His Righteousness, are more clearly made known) our Faith unto
Comfort, and Boldness should Increase: Romans 1. 17. By that clearer Revealation
of Righteousness; should their Faith go on from degree to degrees higher; Heb.
10 19. to 24. So, by every Sealing Ordinance; and Token of Favor; our Faith
should Increase; unto Assurance; Judges. 13. 23. 2. Cron. 30. 21. 23. 26. And
so by every Trial, and Affliction, our Faith should grow; in that it is
tried; Iam. 1. 3. and Increases other Graces; Therefore it Self First
Increases.

And we should Labor to Increase it; Because, when ever Troubles assail us;
our First Work should be, to Increase our Faith; As they do their
Fortifications, when the Enemy approaches: More strength is required, when
Troubles assault, and all our strength is in Believing; Isa. 30. 15. a quiet
waiting on God; which, therefore must be increased: Therefore, the Afflictions
and Growth of their Faith are conjoined; 2. These. 1 3. 4. Therefore the
Disciples, being told what offenses they must meet with, and forgive injuries
to their Brethren; they pray for Increase of Faith, Luke. 17. 1. to 6. Because
Faith, is to be Increased, when ever we enter Trials, and Troubles: Yea, and
usually the latter Troubles, are strongest, as supposing more strength, (as
David's were, by his Sin of Adultry and Murder, and Numbering the People, and
the Punnishments thereof, which were his last, and greatest:) Therefore Faith
had need be Increased, which only bears them.

This Exhortation, I will only press in the Apostles Words: Jude. Enforced
from the Apostles words, Jude 20 21
20. 21. Beloved, building up your selves on your most holy faith, praying in
the holy Ghost; keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of
our Lord Christ, to Eternal Life: The Apostle having provokt them to contend
for the Faith against base opposits: whom he discribes, from Verse. 2. to 17.
and exhorts them not to be discouraged or turned out of the way, by all their
base courses Verse. 17. 18. whom he again sets forth in their ougly colors;
as a means to help Believers to do this duty, in withstanding: He exhorts
them to proceed in the Work of their Faith; and says that their Faith is
their Foundation (for that on which we build up is the Foundation) Christ is
called the Foundation, 1. Cor. 3. 11. and so are the Prophets, and Apostles,
Ephesians 2. 20. and here Faith, is also so called; and nothing else that I can
find, is so dignified: Christ, is the Original, and Principal Foundation of us;
Yea, the only Foundation, Properly, and Striktly; as the Apostle says, none
other then He, can be: But the Apostles and Prophets, are remotely, and
ministerially outwardly called the Foundation: Because they first and only
revealed Christ; And Faith is the Foundation, but Instrumentally also, yet much
more nearely, and intimately, then the Apostles, and Prophets, in that Faith,
is the immediate bond and union of us, unto Christ, the Foundation; Col. 2. 7.
stablisht in the Faith, is a being rooted, and built up in him: So that all our
Strength is in our Faith, Instrumentally, as in Christ, Originally; yet not
conveyed from Christ, to Us, but through our Faith: Therefore, if we would have
any Progress. it must be by our Faith, and as that goes forward the whole
building goes forward.

Not only at first, do we build on our Faith, but all the while (as not only
do we at first, but all the while build on Christ) Therefore, of all things,
our Faith is of greatest Consequence, there is neither Beginning, nor
Progress, can be without it: And this Faith is Faith the most holy Grace.
holy, yea, and most holy, no Grace is like it, not only in that, beyond all
others, it emptyes a man of himself, and setts up God (which is to be holy)
but also because it only, of all Graces, gives Union, and Communion with
Christ, as an Head; in whom, and from him only, is had full Holiness (as ye
have heard before) in that his Person is God. Therefore there is nothing so
good, as Faith to labor about: which Labor upon our Faith, must be constant,
and continued: Therefore he speaks in the present tense: (building up) And a
Progress in this Faith; will help us on to every thing else.

We shall be still able to pray in the holy Ghost, for so much the co^nection
Growth in it, helps to be still able to pray in the holy Ghost.
may implye (as well as that Prayer helps Faith as was before observed) and
this Praying, stre^gthneth against Troubles; therefore it is annexed, as that
which gives use and efficacy to the whole armor, Ep. 6. 1. 3. 18.

Also it will enable us, to keep our selves in the Love of God; for it To
keep our selves in the love of God.
is Believers duty to keep themselves in it; they may loose, though not the
Everlasting Love of God; yet that actual manefestative delight of God in them,
which arises from their obedience, as it did from Christ Joh. 10. 17. (who yet
was loved with another love, on an other ground) and so, John. 15. 10. out of
which they may depart; But Progress in Faith, helps them to keep in this
Love, because it keeps up the influence of Christ's strength into them.

And it also inables them unto a continual Looking for the Mercy To a
continual looking for the mercy of Christ.
of Christ unto eternal Life: which is a duty most profitable and comely for
Believers: And Faith growing up, inables to, because it maks those things which
cannot be seen, to be more, and more real, and evident, and so to draw in the
mind to a continued fixtnes on them, and expectation of them; as the clearer
manefestations of glorious Objects does; especially when it is with an
assurance of interest, and propriety therein: Now then, Faith thus being, and
working, it must needs, greatly help to strengthen against assaults; For the
more we are built up on the Foundation, the stronger we are: And the more we
keep our selves in the Love of God, looking for the Mercy of Eternal Life
from Christ: The much more able shall we be to endure Trouble: Therefore, be we
persuaded, as Troubles come, to exercise, and renew our Faith.

SIXTH OBSERVATION. 6. Obser- Now Christ is come to, use spiritual
considerations to stre^gthen against Troubles.

That now Christ is come, Believers should chiefly use spiritual and heavenly
Considerations to strengthen their Spirits against Trouble.

Namely, such as are taken from Gods Electing Love; Christ his Work for us in
Heaven; our Glory their to come etc. For, These Christ setts here before his
Disciples; not only, as most proper for the present case in hand; but as now
most comely and helpefull to Believers in all Troubles: Indeed before Christ's
coming, the Consolations were some outward Privileges, or the coming of the
Messiah, or some general Promises of good things in this Gospel; but now we
find the Apostles, in all their course, armeing and comforting the Spirits of
Believers, by These forenamed spiritual and heavenly Consolations.

FIRST REASON. Bec. now is the season of th^se Comforts.

Because, Now is the season of these Comforts; former ages were not the season,
wherefore though they were seen in the blossom, and bud, and much desired;
yet they might not be gathered, 1. Pet. 1. 11. 12. Wherefore, though they had
some hints now and then, of them; Yet they were not so generally, nor so fully
revealed, as now they be:

The Revealation of the Glory, is that which was reserved to our age; as the
text says: The things reported to you, as well as the Glory it self Ep. 3. 5.
9. 10. For now Christ is come, and has made known his Fathers bosom, and
heart, and ascended heaven, and opened it to us, John. 3. 12. 13. He first
preached the Gospel, in his own flesh Heb. 2. 3. it was never before revealed:
some shadows or hints of it, were before, but it self, in Its Clearnes and
Glory never was preached till He began it, and since: Rather Promises of the
Gospel: then the Gospel, was it which was before Christ: Romans 1. 1. 2. For the
Gospel implies tidings of things done, and not to be done, and this was only
begun to be in act, when Christ came and preached:

Therefore Mark. 1. 14. 15. he preached the Gospel: and said the time is
fullfilled: and because in Christ's Life, all was not actually done; there fore
he is said but to begine it; and the Apostles perfected the Gospel, for they
reported all to be actually done: So that this is the season of its
revealatio^. and so the time of the fruition and vision of these heave^ly
things Mar. 1. 15. is at hand; This therefore is their season; as former Ages
were the season of the Tipes and Promises of them: These are the better things,
reserved for us of this last age of the World, Heb. 11. 39. 40. Now every thing
is most fitly used, in its season, it is most comely, and most effectual then:
There is a kind of absurditye in unseasonablenes.

SECOND REASON. 2. Bec. the life of Christianity is in these.

Because, The life of Christianity is in these: Not only as it is distinguished
from that Life which was in Innocence, through the Covenant of Works, from
which, this differs specifically, and more then the Sun from a Candle, both
which though light and fire, yet greatly differs:

But also, as it is distingusht from that Life by Faith, which was before
Christ; From which, this differs gradually, as Infancy, and Childhood from
Full age: Gal. 4. 1. 2. 3. 4. Wherefore it obtaines another Name, (as a Child
is called a Man) and is called Christianity, which it never was before Christ:
Acts. 11. 26. And its Name shows its Nature: It consists in such Revealations
of Christ by Faith apprehended: As were not at all, in Innocence, nor in any
such measures, before Christ came: Gall. 3. 23.

The sight of Christ's Glory, and our Union, and Communion with him: This is the
Christian Life: By Faith to see the Things that are Invisible; Is the Life:
Heb. 10. 38. Live by Faith: Which Faith is discribed Heb. 11. 1. Which though
it also reveal things which once by reason might be seen; as the Creation
Verse. 3. Yet, it also (and that which it chiefly aims at;) reveals what
never was or could be seen in Innocence, by Reason: As Gods Electing Love in
Christ, Heavens Glory, Our Perticipation of all Grace, and Glory from Christ,
by Union with him: And on these Considerations to Love, Obey, be Patient etc.
This is the Life of a Christian; 2. Corrinth. 3. 18. Seeing by Faith and a
Divine Revealation, Christ's Glory, and be turned into it, is made the Sum of
all Christianity: Gal. 2. 20. Christ lives in him; And he lives by Faith in
Him: So, Ephesians. 1. 17. 18. 19. Increase of Life is all put in the apprehensions
by Faith of Revealations of Christ, and the Glory with him: and so Ephesians. 3. 16.
20.

Now the Life of Christianity, lying in this: The Consolations fetched hence,
must needs be most effectual, and most lively, and most proper, as humane
Consolations are most proper to a Man: These breed the best Spirits, in that
they carry the best Spirits with them; even the Life it Self.

USE. To Blame For not using. And Exhort.

Wherefore Believers, are to be Blamed, for not Using; And to be Exhorted to
Use more, These kind of Antidotes, and Cordials:

These are the proper Physic of this State of the Gospel; Christ has come,
and opened to us His Fathers Bosom, and shall not we study To use more these
Antidotes.
and bear up our selves by them?

The Prophets who did but fore see, and fore hear them, were so much taken
with them, as that they exceedingly labored to prye into them 1. Pet. 1. 10.
11. The Words are significant; enquired, scearcht; intimating 1. Pet 1. 10.
^^^dained.
both great desire, and labor to find out; the one Word (...): signifing a
seeking out by inquirye or question, persuing by Questions, till it is fully
found out: And the other Word (...), implying an exact seeking, as for hid
things, until one has every hinte, or doite; 1. Cor. 2 10. both which implye
the utmost exactnes in seeking: And the Glory they sought to find; is in the
greek Verse. 11. latter end, expressed in the plural number, emphatically showing
its transcendency; Yea, and the Angels desire to look into these things Verse.
12. latter end (...) by bowing down to prye in, an industrious, and most
heedfull pryeing alludeing as it is thought to the Cherubs about the Arc; who
bowed or turned their Heads and Faces to the Arc, which signified Christ: Now
we have them spread open before us, Can. 5. 1. and seldom cast our eyes on
them, to comfort us by them: I appeal, In Gods Name before Whom we now are,
Who knows all your course; When did you, fetch These heavenly Consolatio^s are
more general, and more strong Comforts then any.
in Comforts againsts Your Fears, and Troubles, by revolving these heavenly
and spiritual Treasures of Yours? But have ye not still, by some other way
sought to bear up your Spirits? What ingratitude? yea what folly, is this?
These Heavenly Consolati^ns, are more General, and more Strong, Comforts then
any, ye can take in.

First, They are more General; For they contain All Comforts, whereas 1. More
General, For they co^te^ne all Comforts.
as other Consolations, carry in them but some particular Comfort; and serve
against but some particular Affliction; But These equally help against All
Troubles; and so are much better; as the Paraselsian Physic, or that which
repaires and strengthens whole Nature; and repells all Weakness, is beyond your
other Physic, which topically is applied only to some particular part, for
some particular disease: And as They are more General; So.

Secondly, They are more Strong Comforts, then any: though they 2. More Strong.
For they comfort in every particular.
serve all turns, yet they do comfort in every particular, much more full and
through, then others, which reach only to the particular: As the Light and
Heat of the Sun; though it serve every Creature in the World, yet it better
serves any particular, then a Candle does; Psalm. 4. 7. The Light of Gods
Countenance, putts more Gladness in; then abundance of any worldly thing; For
these Comforts are Spiritual and Immortal, Being immortal: So reaching the
Spirit.
and so reach the Spirit, as it is in it self; other Comforts, only refresh
in such a case, and as the Spirit is in and by the Body subjected to such or
such a state, and indeed therefore never soake into the intimacy of the Spirit,
solidly to comfort that; they sprinckle Comforts about the Heart, but never put
Gladness into the Heart; there is noe suiteablenes twixt them and the Soul: But
These heavenly spiritual Comforts, are suited to the Spirit reach it to the
full; therefore do most strongly refreshit. Also these spiritual Comforts,
are so vast, and great, that they take up and fill the Soul; all other
Comforts are to small for the Souls Filling the Soul
great Capacity; but these fill every corner of the Heart: Also these Co^forts,
do present to the Soul such great Gloryes and Happynesses, as her own;
Presenting great Gloryes and Happinesses.
as that they greaten the Soul: For, such as are the Objects with which the
Spirit converseth, such is the Spirit: Therefore Kings have high and great
Spirits, because they look on great and singular things, as their own,
Wherefore the Soul looking on these heavenly Things, it raises the Spirit, so
that it becomes to bigg and high, for troubles from below, to bring under;
whereas all other Co^forts being but from things of the Earth, are below the
Spirit, and may enfeeble and abase it, but cannot greaten or strengthen it:
Yea, and these heavenly, spiritual Comforts, are the Comforts which spring from
the chiefest Good; from the Perfection, End, Issue of all: Therefore are much
Stronger then other Comforts, which are but the refreshment of the Way to our
End.

And as These heavenly Comforts are more strong: So they are more strengthening,
and nourishing to the new Creature in us, then any other Co^solations;
Strenthening and nour^shing the new Creature.
These, (as ye have heard) carry the very Life of Christianity in them; and
therefore must most of all revive and cherrish the Inner Man; These at first
bred, therefore do best feed and nourish, the new Creature; as was said
before in another case; ordinary physic, removes the cause of a disease, and
so the sickness; but no way repaires or strengthens Nature, but the Paraselsian
Physic, cures by reparing and strengthening Nature: And so do these
Consolations, help the Soul against Troubles, by strengthening the Inner Man:
The best Christian may observe, that the new Creature in them, is never so much
renewed, as by the meditation on these heavenly and spiritual Considerations.

Wherefore I beseech you resolve it, and hold to it, to use more The Use
further pressed.
these kinds of Cordials when your Spirits droope in any Trouble: Why should ye
rather choose to drink down the extracts of Farth, then of Heaven? of the
Creature, then of God and Christ? Oh do not so; but labor to know, and
understand these kinds of Consolations, and to acquaint your selves better with
them, and to make them more familiar with your spirits; and to grow into more
assured persuasion of your interst in them; Which that ye may do, ye must both
obtain the holy Ghost, to reveal them to you (for he only knows them, as a
man's spirit, does the things of a man: 1. Cor. 2. 10. 11. and ye must use that
Faith, which is the evidence of things not seen: Heb. 11. 1. which Faith
helps your Soul, as the prospective glass helps the eye, to see these
heavenly things, which else are so far off, that the Soul cannot perceive
them; and this act of Faith, which makes these heavenly things evident to you,
will draw in your Soul unto an appropriation, and application of them.

It is a mistake to think, we may see them by true Faith, and not A mistake.
about Faith in heavenly Comfortes, C^^^^^
apply them to our selves; or that we first apply them, and after that see
them; No, No, the evidencing of them by true faith spiritually, will draw in
the Soul to apply them; Every Man, and Creature on whom the Sun shines,
takes in the blessing of his influence, for his share, as pertaining to him;
The Apostle discribes that Faith which applies, and justifies, of which, he
gives many instances, throughout the 11. Chap. to the Hebrews; he discribes
that very Faith, to be an evidence of these things; Because, where there is
such a seeing these things, the Heart is brought to embrace, and apply them;
therefore he joins, the evidencing these things, and hope together; because
this evidencing them will bring forth hope: and Verse. 13. the seeing them, and
the being persuaded of them, and embracing, or saluteing them as their own;
are conjoined, for they ever go together: because indeed; the holy Ghost
never reveals them spiritually, and as they are, to any, but to them, who have
bine chosen to them, and shall have a propriety in them: Yea, it is the same
Grace, of true holy Faith, that makes them evident, and shows them to us; and
that applies them to Justification; though it be a diverse act of the same
Grace of Faith: yet it is the same Grace; For, what Faith can the Apostle
describe Heb. 11. 1. but that Faith of which he speaks before Chap 10. 38. by
which the Just live; and that which he exemplifies throughout the 11. Chap.
both which are Justifiing Faith; Therefore it must be; that the Faith which
Justifies, and Sanctifies; does show evidently spiritual things to us, though
by a several and distinct act from that by which it Justifies: Therefore, being
the same Grace; when it has showed us spiritual things, it will go on to
draw us to apply them to our selves; Wherefore, get, and exercise that act of
Faith which makes ye see evidently heavenly Things; and this will make ye
apply them, and draw Comfort from them.

Now in this Work; it is the Gospel; which setts the Objects, or the heavenly
Things before us: Then the holy Ghost his Work; in convincing, or persuading
of the reallity of those Things to our Understandings; Is as the Light which
shines on those Objects, and makes them visible: And Faith; by His Conviction
or Persuasion, is as the prospective glass, which inables our understandings,
to perceive the reallity of them, which else it could not: Wherefore with this
Light of the holy Ghost, and this prospective Glass of Faith; with your
Spirits and Understandings; view in the Gospel again and again, the Things of
Heaven, and of Christ; and thence fetch Comfort in every Distress.

Now to the end, ye may be helped to do thus: I shall in the following
Observations open to you diverse Things about Heaven, and our Glory there; which
Christ revealed to His Disciples, in this Text: By doing of which: I shall set
the Things before you: Which are able abundantly to Comfort your Hearts; But
they will be as glorious sights in darkness, to them that cannot see; except ye
obtain the holy Ghost, to shine on them, as the Sun, on Colors: And get
that Act of Faith, which is the Evidence of Things not seen, to lift up, or
enable your Souls Eye, the Understanding, to look on them: Which Favor I
desire the Lord to afford you: And so I proceed.

THE Description of HEAVEN, And the heavenly Condition of true Read the
Epistle.
BELIEVERS at the last: CHRIST Reveals in this TEXT: Thus.

FIRST, It is Discribed by the Place it self; Heaven, is an House, so called
in opposition to a Tent or Tabernacle, to show its Stability, and the Stability
of their State who live in it: Wherefore, it is said to have Foundations Heb.
11. 9. more then one, many, and yet one gives Stability: And, 1. Pet. 1. 4. It
is said to be Incorruptible, Undefiled, that fades not away: This Stability is
for Ever, and without all Change: As appears both by the Time in which it was
Created; In the Beginning: Genesis 1. 1. That is, in the First of all Time, and of
all Creatures: Now all that God first made, He made Immortal, as the Angels,
and Chaos and these Heavens: As also, by the Manner of Gods making it, for he
did not extract it out of other things, as he did all visible things, in this
World, he made and drew them out of the Chaos: But he put them forth
Immediately from himself, as he did the Chaos, the Angels, and Man's Soul: Now
all that God Immediately puts forth, and makes of Nothing, is Immortal:
Whereas, all other things return unto their first Principles.

SECONDLY, It is Described by Its Relation to God; It is Gods House so called,
Both because He made it: Heb. 11. 16. As also, because, He dwells in it; That
is, in it, he puts forth His chiefest Glory, (as a Prince does in his Palace,
where he dwells, much more then in a Tent, or other part of his Kingdom) So
that Its Glory, must be as much above any of this Worldly kingdoms; As Gods
utmost Power, Majesty, Wisdom, Riches, which he can put forth, are above man's.

THIRDLY. It is Discribed, by Its special Appropriation, to the First Person
in Trinity, the Father: It is God the Fathers House; Both because he made it;
For Creation being the first Work done on the Creature, is specially
appropriated to the First Person the Father; Also, because it is to be His: The
Sons and holy Ghosts being in this World and resigned at the last day, that
God the Father may be All in All; (as He is First in the Motions about the
Creature) 1. Cor. 15. 28. The Fathers People; That is, the Elect are to dwell
there, and His Love in Election to be showed forth there: Therefore it is
called The Fathers; Math. 13. 43. though yet the Son and holy Ghost are
included in it.

FOURTHLY, It is Discribed, by Its special Relation to Christ, though it be
God the Fathers House, yet He is Christ's Father, and so it is Christ his
Inheritance, and Believers Inheritance; As 1. Pet. 1. 4. in that, They be One
with Christ, Sons, and Heirs; Insomuch that these Disciples, had they loved
him as they should, would be glad of his departure, since he went but to his
Father; John. 14. 28.

FIFTHLY, It is Discribed, by Its Capeablenes of Them, and so of All Believers
(for He speaks to these Eleaven in the Names of All, as ye heard before) there
are in it many Mansions: It were noe Comfort, to hear of its Excellency, if it
could not receive us, though God dwell there, yet the Creature also may; For He
is now Emmanuel, God with Us: And many, not a few, (though Comparatively they
be a Little Flock Luke. 12. 32.) and many for some, not for all, and that a
set number, for it is Prepared for Believers, Heb. 11. 16. Therefore for so
many as shall believe, and for no more: Now these their dwelling places are
called Mansions, to express their abode in them, they be Sons with Christ,
and shall abide in that House for Ever:

Now the Truth of all this Description of Heaven, is ratified by an Argument
taken from Himself (If it were not so I would have told you) He was their
Friend, came from Heaven to Reveal its Secrets, He is the faithful and true
Witness, therefore could not, but deal truly with the^.

Further, Heaven is Discribed in referrence to Believers; By the Means of
their access and entrance into it, which is Christ: Who

First, Prepares a Place for them their; The Father prepares it: Math. 25. 34.
Both by a Free choosing them to it, and their particular Portion or Place in
it, before the World began: As also, by Creating it for them from the
Foundation of the World: But Christ prepares it; By Meriting, and Bringing
about their Fruition of it: Both by Removing Impediments: And Purchasing the
Fathers Favor.

Now, Christ prepares a Place; By Going; (I go to prepare a Place) He came
from Heaven to prepare a Place in Heaven; by His humiliation And then He went
from Earth; To prepare a Place: Both by His dying To satisfy Justice for
Sin; and to ratify the Promises: (Heb. 9. 15. to the end) And by His rising
from Death, in that if He had bin held under Death, He had not bin quitt from
our imputed guilt, nor could we have bin, nor had he lived to bring us to
Heaven; 1. Cor. 15. 14. 17. Romans 4. 25. and 5. 10. Heb. 7. 25. Also by his
Ascension, in that he thereby opened heaven door, which was before shut Heb.
9. 8. 12. and dispensed gifts to gather the Elect. Ephesians. 4. 8. 11. 12. Also by
his Session at Gods right Hand; where he pleads his Merits, which is called his
making Intercession for us; Romans 8. 34. and thence sends down the holy Ghost
to do all in us, that is requisite to our meetenes for that place: And
administers the World for our good: And possesses the Heaven in our Name, and
as our Head and Root: So that Christ as a Meritorious cause, an Exemplary
cause, and an Efficient cause, prepares a Place in Heaven for Believers by his
going: And this is further.

Secondly, Amplified by his Consumation of this his Preparation: As he prepares
a Place for them; So he will bring them into that Place: Which that he may do,
being now gone, he must come again: Christ will come from Heaven, to fetch
Believers unto Heaven; he will not send for them, but come for them; which
makes their access to Heaven the more glorious, in that they shall be fetched
thither by Christ; Which is done, both in regard of Himself, that he may have
the Glory of judging the World, both Believers, and Unbeleevers; And in regard
of them, because they are his body and spouse; and he will come to them
therefore to marry them, and join them to Himself; this is another
description of Heaven, by the manner of their Entrance into it, Even by Christ
his glorious Coming from Heaven, to fetch them thither.

LASTLY, He further Amplifies it, by a Description of the heavenly Place, by
Its Communion with Him; They shall be taken to him, to be one with him, as the
Body with the Head, the Spouse with the Husband, and they shall be where he is;
That is, in the same Place, State, and Condition; Heavenly happiness, is a being
one with Christ, and in his place, and state; John. 12. 26. Thus these Words
are a Description of Heaven, and the heavenly Condition of true Believers: And
show us, That Christ is the Way, Truth, and Life, as John. 14. 6. [The Way,]
For by Him they come, [The Truth,] For if every thing were not so, He would
tell it; [The Life,] Not only as a Meritorious Cause; But as the Root:
Heavens Life, is in Him: Col. 3. 3. 4. A being taken to Him, and with Him.

SEVENTH OBSERVATION.
That Believers Glory in Heaven, is a Fellowshipe in the Fathers Glory.

It is a dwelling in his House, and so a sharing in that Glory, which the
Father there has, arising to Himself; There is great Question about desires
of Salvation, and not Gods Glory; But the Truth is, Salvation is the Fruition
of Gods Glory; a being in, and so pertaking of the Glory of Gods house, as they
are pertakers of the Divine Nature, So of His Glory; That is Their Salvation;
And it being the End of all things, it is the Fathers glory, who is the
Beginning of all things.

EIGHT OBSERVATION.
That Gods Glory in Heaven which Believers partake off; Is a Created Glory: Or
a Glory which arises from Creatures to God, and had a beginning.

For it is the Glory which He has, since he made him an House, and dwelt in a
Place; And so it is nearer to the capacity of Creatures; Whereas the Glory that
is in, and of Himself, and Eternal; Is Incomprehensible, and Incommunicable.

NINTH OBSERVATION.
That Believers Glory in Heaven, Is in a Communion and Vnio^ together.

Many together, dwell in one House; It is a being One, as God and Christ are
One; John. 17. 22. as the Glory of this World, and so of Man's body is in the
union and compact of many parts together: It is also a being with Christ, (as
is expressed in the Text, and has bin showed before) And it is a being with God
also, As John. 17 21. One with Us.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
THE Words are part of Christ's last Words, spoken to the Eleven Apostles.
Page. 1. The Occasion, or Ground, And so the Coherence of the Words. 2. The
Parts, which are Two. ibid. FIRST, The Duty charged by Christ, on His
believing Desciples That their hearts should not be troubled. And what Trouble
is meant, what not, 2. 3. DOCTRINE. That true Believers, how weak soever in
Faith, should not be oppressed, or perplexed in heart, by any thing whatever
befalls them, Either in Sin, or Afflictions. 4. REASONS. First, Because such
Trouble arises from an Evil Root and Cause, Viz. Ignorance, or Unbelief. 5.
Secondly, Because such Trouble has Evil Effects: Showed in Six Perticulers
1. It is Troublesome to Gods Heart. ibid. 2. It Frustrats Christ's Work, In a
great part. 6. 3. It Unfitts them for their Christian Service; Which is to eat
the Holy Things, and keep a Continual Feast. ibid. 4. It brings a Consumption
upon their Spiritual Strength. ibid. 5. It Casts an Evil Report on God. ibid.
6. It Gives great Occasion to Corruption, and the Devil. 7. USES. First, For
Information, To them that jugde the way of Believing a sad way, Showing it is
the only Way of Joy and Quiettnes. ibid. Secondly, For Exhortation To
Believers, Not to be perplexed with Sin or Sorrow. 8. THE SECOND Part of the
Text. Is the MEANS, To fence Believers hearts against Trouble: Which are
partly Implied, and partly Expressed. 9. FIRST MEANS Implied, Is that
Believers put themselves under the Command. ibid. SECOND MEANS Implied, Is
that Believers gather up and present to their judgments Grounds of Comforts,
stronger then them of Trouble. 10. THIRD MEANS Expressed, Is to believe in
Christ, as in God; both which explained. 11. 12 Faith in Christ gives the
strongest Grounds of Comfort; For diverse Reasons. 13. First, Because it gives
more Boldness toward God; Upon Six Grounds. ibid. 1. It presents them nearer
to God; Being made one with Christ Gods natural Son. ibid. 2. It presents
God nearer to them: For it shows them God in their own Nature. ibid. 3. By it
there is hold laid on Gods Justice, As well as on his Mercy. 14. 4. By it
there is an access with boldness to Gods Holiness; explained. 15. 5. By it there
is raised unlimited expectation from God. 16. (...) REASON. It is from His
Nature. 54. USES. First, For Instruction, 1. That God is most tender to
Believers in Troubles. 55. 2. That Believers should be Compassionate,
especially Church Officers. ibid. Secondly, For Exhortation, To get assured of
Christ's tenderness, toward them in All their Troubles. 56. SECOND OBSERVATION.
That as we must believe in Christ: So we must continue our Faith in the Father.
57. REASON. Because, Though God put the Promises into Christ, and gave him
them; yet he reserved them also in his own hands. 58. Question, What the
difference is, twixt Believing in the Father, and the Son? 59. Answered, In
Four Things. ibid. USE. For Information, To shunn an Error, of pitching our
Faith only on Christ: and not with him on the Father. 60. THIRD OBSERVATION.
That Believers are prone to sin in those Affections which be lawful, and in
some sen^e necessary. 61. USE. For Information, Not only to care to set our
Affections on lawful things; But to care not to exceed. ibid. FOURTH
OBSERVATION. That Believers hearts are prone to be to much, and sinnfully
troubled, with the approach of Afflictions. 62. REASONS. First, Because
Troubles do cross the workings, of our sinnfull Self-love. ibid. Secondly,
Bec. Troubles, do estrange us from this World. ibid. Thirdly, Bec. Troubles,
are contrary to a good principle within us. ibid. Fourthly, Bec. Self
flattery, promise the Contrary. 63. USE. For Exhortation, 1. To take pains,
about fitting our selves for Troubles. ibid. 2. In Troubles, to look out for
help to bear. ibid. FIFTH OBSERVATION. That Believers should renew and
increase Faith, when Troubles does asayle. 64. USE. For Exhortation, To Renew,
Increase, and Exercise Faith. 65. 66. SIXTH OBSERVATION. Now Christ is come, to
use spiritual Consideratio^s to strengthen against troubles 67. REASONS. 1.
Bec. Now is the Season. 2. Bec. the Life of Christianity is in these. 68. USE.
To Blame for not using, And Exhort to use more these Cordialls. 69. 70. 71. 72.
The Description of Heaven etc. with Three Observations. 73. 74. 75. 76.

FINIS.

