AN APOLOGY For Purchases of Lands late of Bishops Deans and Chapters.
THere is no Institution to no end; but whenever the Reason thereof cease,
Bishops.
the Law or Institution it self does in proportion relax its force. The end for
which the Bishop-pricks were endowed with such ample Revenues, was to support
the state and splendour of Barronage and Session in Parliament, wherewith the
Bishops were dignified, as with Lay-^ees, the Honoraria of such their
employment. Work and Wages are relatives: If the employment fails, so does the
reason of the reward; but by an Act of King, Lords and Commons 17. Car. c. 28.
17 Car. c 28. their being Barons, Lords of Parliament is taken away, and so
the reason of their greatness.

The Bishops had several capacities, viz. Spiritual and Temporal, and
several Revenues distinguished by the names of Spiritualties and Temporalties.
The Spiritualties of a Bishop (in the words of Dr Cowell Dr Cowells Interpreter
of Law-words, dedicated to the late Archbishop of Canterbury.
) be these profits which he receives as he is a Bishop, and not as he is a
Barron of the Parliament. Stawnford Pl. cor. fol. 132. The Particulars of these
may be the duties of his Visitation, his benefit growing from the Ordering and
Instituting Priests, Prestation money, that subsidium charitativum, which upon
reasonable cause he may require of his Clergy; Johannes Gregorius de
beneficiis, cap. 6. number. 9. and the benefit of his Jurisdiction; Joachimus
Stephanus de Jurisdict. lib. 4. c. 14. number. 14. for these reckneth Exactionem
Cathedratici, quartam Decimarum and mortuariorum and oblationum pensitationem,
celebrationem Synodi, Collationem viatici vel commeatus cum Episcopus R^mam
Proficiscitur, Jus Hospitii, Litaniam and Processionem. There are none of these
sold.

The Temporalties of Bishops in the same Doctors words, be such Revenues, Lands
and Tenements, as Bishops have had laid to their Seas as Barons and Lords of
the Parliament.

In former times when Parliaments were holden frequently almost every 4. Ed. 3.
c. 13.36. Ed. 3. c. 10.
year, and uncertainly at several places, as at Rutland 10. Ed. 1.
, Acton Burnell 11. Ed. 1.
, Winchester 13. Ed. 1.
, Exeter 14. Ed. 1.
, York, Gl^ster, Carlisle, and other remote parts, the Bishops and Mitred
Abbots who were Lords of Parliament, could not, without their great estates of
Baronies, defray the charge of so great journeys as became their dignity. The
4. Institut. 35.45. Doderidge of Nobility. 61.
Abbots of Leicester and Northampton being summoned as Lords of Parliament, and
setting forth by Petition, that they held not per Baroniam, sed tantum in pura
Eleemosyna, were discharged; but the Bishop of Winchester Crompton. 4.
holding by Barony and departing from the Parliament without license, was
arraigned in the Kings Bench.

That they held their Lands as Temporal Estates, appears. Rott. Patent. 18 H.
3. m. 17. Mandatum est omnibus Episcopis, etc. Sicut Baronias suas diligant,
nullo modo praesumant consilium tenere de aliquibus quae ad Coronam Regis
pertinent, vel quae personam Regis, vel statum suum, vel statum concilii sui
contingunt, scituri pro certo quod si fecerint Rex inde se capiat ad Baronias
suas. The King did frequently upon their 21. Ed. 3.3.5. Rep. f. 12, 13.
contempts, seize the Temporalties of Bishops into his hands. In time of
Vacancy, the King leaving the Spiritualties to the Ordinary, seized the
Temporalties into his hands, and granted them during the vacation to whom he
list; see Sr Rob. Cottons Abridgement.
Rot. Parliament. 8 H. 4. number. 91. The Temporalties of Durham granted to John
of Lancaster the Kings Son, and the Temporalties of the Bishop of London farmed
out, rendering to the King a Thousand pound per ann.

The King sometimes held the Temporalties a long while in his hands, by delay
of the Popes allowance of their Elections, or of the Pall, or of Consecration;
sometime there were double and treble Elections and Suites thereupon in the
Court of Rome, Lamberts Perambulation of Kent in Canterbury and Rochester.
134.217.270.
as upon the voidance of the Sea of Canterbury, upon three pretenses of Reynold
the Subprior, John Gray and Stephen Langton; at another time the Monks of
Rochester chose one Sandford for their Bishop, the Monks of Canterbury opposed
the Election, challenging that the Pastoral Staff or Crosier of Rochester
ought of very right to be brought to their house, after the death of the
Bishop, and that they ought to make the Election. The difference was once
compounded by Hubert de Burgh chief Justice of England, but afterward followed
afresh at Rome three years together. The King in such cases lackt a Lord in
Parliament, took the Temporalties to himself, and left the Spiritualties to
their proper Guardian; but Lands are no Spiritualties.

Odo Bishop of Bayeux was Earl of Kent, Osmond Bishop of Salisbury was Earl of
Dorset and Seez, Cambden. 252.215. and in Scotland. 11.
and Robert Steward Bishop of Cathnes was Earl of Lenox and March. When the
first of these was in displeasure of the King, and privileged as a Bishop, he
was yet imprisoned as an Earl, lost all his goods, and was abjured the Realm.
The Bishop Cambden. 744. and 820.
Pudsey and Walcher were Earls of Northumberland. The Bishop of Durham 4.
Instit. 218, 220. 27. H. 8. c. 24.
was a Count Palatine within his Bishopprick, where he had Jura Regalia, (that
is Temporal Courts, Writs, and Process in his own name, a Power to make
Justices to pardon offenses, and to have Royal Escheats.) The Bishop of Ely
also had a Royal Franchise within the Isle of Ely. The Bishop of the Isle of
4. Inst. Isle of Man.
Man had neither, nor was he a Lord of Parliament. So a Bishop may be a Bishop,
and no Earl or Lord partaker in the Sovereign or Legislative Power, and then
being allowed his Spiritualties, has all that is due to his Spiritual office.

By what divine Right or Pretense Deans and Chapters challenge so great
Estates, Deans and Chapters.
Non constat. Were it so that the Gospel were now first planting here as in
the Indies, and a Bishop set up to advance the conversion of Infidels within
such a Circuit, it might be prudentiall while there were but few Ministers,
Seldom of Tithes. c. 6, 7, 8.
and before the distribution of his Dioces into Parishes, to associate diverse
Ministers together, who should as Itinerants travel from place to place, for
the gaining and confirming of Believers, as anciently in Boothes or Tents of
hurdles, occasionally set up in the fields, G.M. on Doctor Ridleys view of the
civil Law. 197. Fullers Ecclesiastical History. 7.
or at cross ways, or other public places of resort. And in such case their
maintenance being brought into a common stock, at the Sea or residence of their
Curator or Bishop in whom they centered their correspondence, those who thus
labored in the Ministry, should out of this common stock have their portions.
It is not unlike by the Trace of Antiquity but that it was so in England, when
a Diocese was but as one great Parish, and Preachers sent about as Messengers.
And after interior or Parochial Churches were founded at great distance, the
Parish Priests had not all the Tithes to themselves, but a man might pay his
Tithes to what 4. Instit. 641, 642. Seldom of Tithes. c. 6, 7, and 9. Dr
Ridley. 153.
Priest he would; and incase he neglected to pay any, the Bishop and not the
particular Curate of his Precinct recovered them, the Bishops being treasurers
of the Community, their making dividends or Praebenda of such common stock, to
the encouragement of such Ministers as went up and down Preaching, and were not
otherwise provided for, was not without Reason. Now if Deanes and Chapters be
such an association as make it their business to supply places void of
Ministers, and enlighten our dark corners, they are worthily to be encouraged;
but if they claim shares or dividends out of a common stock, Lands, or Tithes,
only as companions to the Bishop, or living in another Diocese, or for vain
pomp and grandeur, they have no interest in this Reason.

It seems that the Names, Numbers and Functions of Deans and Chapters were not
alike but various, ad libitum of the founder. For as to Names, at St David's
Cambd. 651.
they were called Canons, at Salisbury Cambd. 248.
^rebends. As to number, at Chichester Cambd. 307.
, Wells Cambd. 232.
, etc. they were thirty or more; at Hereford eight and twenty; Cambd. 619.
Cambd. 337.
at Canterbury twelve; at Bristoll and Rochester but six. And in their
Functions there will be no less difference; Cambd. 238.
if besides that some of them were Elective and some Donative. Cambd. 333.
And besides the differences of Names and Numbers, the meaning of Petty-Canons,
Petty-Prebends, Residents, and Non-residents be considered; it seems some of
them were Dignitaries sine cura, by their ^liles of Non-residence, for whom the
Church might be as little the better, as for Italians and other aliens. who had
benefices here, whom the flock never saw or heard any thing of, but by their
Collectors Cellerers and hard Names; the Lord Cardinal of Agrifolio, the Lord
Cardinal Viverino, etc.

Besides some of the Chapters were anciently Seculars and some Regulars; the
Seculars were Presbyters, and as such by their Preaching and conversation,
might aid the Bishop in the cure of souls; but Regulars, (viz.) Moncks, were
locked up in Cloisters, and seldom or never went abroad. 4. Inst. 222. Camb.
741.161. Fuller.
How could such an Institution of a Chapter of Moncks contribute to the
oversight of the Dioces? Yet Prior and Covent of Monckes were the Chapters at
Ely, Durham, Winchester, Worcester, Carlisle, etc. and these Chapters were
dissolved with other Monesteryes, and their Lands vested in the King, who
keeping part of the Lands, or converting them to other uses, Erected Deanes and
Prebends of a fewer number in their places, and in the New Sees of Chester,
Gloucester, Peterborrough, etc. What have these New Chapters to do more then the
Moncks? in some things not so much. For the Moncks could by Election fill up
void Seats in the Covent, and choose their Bishop and Prior, but many of these
can neither choose Bishop or Deane, the New Elections having advisedly made
them 1 Inst. 95. Davis Reports 45.
Donative, at the Kings pleasure, and under his immediate Rule and Order,
exempt from the Jurisdiction of the Bishop, who could neither deprive nor visit
them.

Some Bishoppricks had no Chapters particularly, the Bishop of Mead Cambd. in
Ireland 95.
in Ireland, the Bishop there acts by the Counsel and Advice of the Clergy of
his Diocese. The Bishop Britania 755.
of the Isle of Man, seems to have had no Chapter, for he was anciently chosen
by the Moncks of Fournesse in Lancashire. On the other side, as these Bishops
had no Chapter, some had two, Leonards Rep. 235. Dier. 58, 283, 12. Rep. 71.
as Coventry and Litchfield. The Bishop of Dublin had sometime two Chapters,
viz. Christchurch and St Patrick's, in one Town. A Diocese of one single
County, has sometimes had two Chapters, as Bath and Wells, Waterford and
Lismoore; whenas the Bishop of Lincoln, before the late Erections of Oxford
and Peterborrough, had but one Chapter for his Dioces of eight Counties, and
part of more.

Upon this whole matter, if some of them had special Functions which others had
not, if some of them were incapable by their Order of Overseeing the Dioces, if
Jus Divinum sail in the necessity of their Constitution, and if some Diocesses
have none, they may be looked upon as voluntary Institutions of several times,
and in several manners, that might have been or not been at all. And it will
follow, that there was no Moral everlasting Obligation of continuing Bishops,
Deanes and Chapters, just in this or that fashion or altitude: witness the
Judgment of the late Primate of Armagh, Former Alienations.
in his Sheet lately Printed of the Reduction of Episcopacy.

The Lands of Bishops and their Chapters, were not more sacred than the Tithes
of Preaching Ministers, but such Tithes by their own old Law have been alien'd:
witness Cambden 161, 162. Seldom of Tithes.
3845 Vicaredges in England, whose Incumbents had nothing but the Minutae
Decimae and altarage, or some Arbitrary Salaries, when the Gleab and greater
Tithes were appropriate to Bishops and their Chapters, and in some places to
Nunneryes, (though Nuns were incapable of the Ministry.) In other places, to
houses of Moncks, who seldom or never went without the walls of their
Cloisters and Sanctuaries, who possessed not the Tithes as any part of the
Evangelical Clergy or Priesthood. In other places, to the maintaining Soldiers
in the Wars: witness the Gleabs, Tithes, and Exemptions granted to Orders of
Knights employed in the holy War: witness also hundreds of Vicaredges, whose
Curates very well know, that the Bishops, Deanes and Chapters took the Tithes
of their Parishes, but came not at the people. And no doubt, but if Tithes
might be thus aliened, much more might Lands. Bishops, Deanes and Chapters,
might and anciently did alien their Lands themselves, as well as any other
Corporations: witness Dorset House, Essex House, Arundell House, York House,
Lincolnes Inn, and many other great Houses about London, formerly belonging to
the Bishops of Salisbury, Bath and Wells, Carlisle, Norwich, and Chichester,
etc. And witness the Mannours of Sherborne and Kirton, as by Mr Fullers
Histories of Abbyes 270. and his 17 Century 27.

Sometimes the Kings have Resumed Lands from the Church, or Religious Houses so
called; as when the Abbess and Nuns Cambden 362.
of Barkley were with Child, their Nunnery was dissolved by Edward the
Confessor, their Personal faults punished in their order, and their Lands
conferred upon a Lay Earl; when the same King had given the County of Cambden
526.
Rutland to St Peter's Westminster, his Successor resumed it. In Edward the
Seconds time, the Lands of the 2. Inst. 432.
Templars were bestowed upon the Hospitallers; in Hen. 5. time, the Estates of
Priors Aliens, some of which were before frequently seized upon, were all
vested in the King. In Hen. 8. time, Cardinal Woolsey, by license of the King
and Pope, Camden 163.
suppressed forty small Monasteries to lay their Lands to his two Colleges in
Oxford and Ipswich. The Stat. 27. Hen. 8. cap. 28. gave the Lands of 375
Religious Houses, not worth 200lb per annum, to the King; shortly after, he
obtained all the Abbeys and Priories, and with them the Lands of the Chapters
of diverse Bishoprics, consisting of Prior and Covent. The Satutes 37. Hen. 8.
cap. 4. and 1 Edw. 6. cap. 14. gave the King the Lands of all Chanteries,
Free-Chappels, and Colleges, whereof there were great numbers, as at Plymton,
Kirton and St Mary Ottery Cambden 101.203, 206.
in Devon, St Marie's and St Chad's in Dambden 596.
Shrewsbury, Resembling some Deanes and Chapters. These would call their
Possessions as sacred and Inviolable as others. Besides the dissolutions of
Chapters, and of Deanes and Prebends, a Bishopric also, has been dissolved by
Act of Parliament, and the Lands vested in the Crown. See Rastall, Title Durham.

After all these suppressions, when at Queen Mary's coming in, the Sea of Rome
was again embraced, Common Peace.
and the Queen had voluntarily restored some of these Lands, not a foot was
taken from the Lords or Commons, but all their Possessions, notwithstanding the
Objections of Schism and Sacrilege, established. And which is very
remarkable, the Convocation of the Clergy in the first and second of Philip and
Mary, present them a Supplication in Latin, Printed at large, 1 and 2 P. and M.
c. 8.
in the Stat. cap. 8. Premising, That though they ought to labor all that
might be for the Recovery and Revocation of all Rights of the Church, lost in
the Pernicious Schism, yet having maturely deliberated, they do ingenuously
Confess, that they see the Revocation to be difficult and Quasi impossible,
for the many and almost inextricable Contracts and Dispositions thereof had,
and that if it should be attempted, the quiet and Tranquillity of the Kingdom
might be easily disturbed, and the unity of the Catholic Church would with
difficulty attain its Progress and End. Therefore preferring the Public good
and quiet, and the saving of souls, before worldly wealth, and private
advantage, and not seeking their own, but the things of Jesus Christ, they
supplicate their Majesty's in their Names, to intercede with Cardinal Poole,
then Legate, from the Pope, Utin hijs bonis Ecclesiasticis elargiendis and
relaxandis, Publicum bonum Privato ante ponere velit. Whereunto as they give
their own consents, so they pray that he will not be hard or strict.

The Cardinal (by a Dispensation Printed in the same Statute) does remit and
release them to all Persons to whose hands they are come, (Licet indebite,)
Willing and Decreeing, that the Possessors should not, in respect thereof, be
molested upon any Decretalls, General or Provincial Councils, etc. and that no
Censure or Pain should be inflicted on them, for the detaining or not restoring
thereof; and the Statute Ordaines, that whosoever should inquiet or molest any
of the Possessors, contrary to the meaning of the Act, should incur the
Pains of Praemunire. This Supplication, Dispensation and Act, may be instances
of Moderation and Judgment in the Clergy, Resolution and Wisdom in a
Parliament, which would not destroy a Family for the holiest Friar in a
Province. Whatever inconsideration or thirst, may otherwise warpe the
Ingenuities of such as are led by their private Benefits, to regain what others
have thought best to quit, and what fruits of content Charity and good will,
the Experiment will afford them, time will show.

There has been a little skill shown, by superstitious men, in frighting
others from intermeding in these Sales, by stories of misfortune and
unluckinesse, in the Lay Possessors of Church Lands. There are few Gentlemen,
who know their Counties, that cannot give Instances of such Lands still
remaining in the Families to which they were first given. Witness great
Estates of such Lands in the Lord Marquess of Hertford, of the House of
Rutland, and most Eminent Families; and if they have known one Estate in such
Lands sold, can say the like of other Estates as great as they. If the Duke of
Sommerset, and Marquess of Northampton were shortly attainted, and their
Monasteries of Glasconbury and Winchombe returned to the Crown On the other
side, the Earl of Westmoreland, and his partakers in the North, among other
things; for the restoring of such Lands, (though they escaped with their lives
beyond Sea,) became, wandering Monuments of as great misery and ruin. For the
better Test of so many great Estates by Instances of one sort, let the Mitred
Abbots be examined, and from thence a judgment made of the rest. These were
twenty six, and had no great change till of late; for by Mr Fallers History of
Abbeys, it appears that diverse of them remained in the Crown, viz. Crowland,
Selby, St Mary's in York, etc. Others in the Private Families on which they
were conferred, viz. Thorney in Russell, Q. of Tavestoke.
Earl of Bedford, Battle in Brown, Lord Mountague; Midleton in Tregonwell,
Ramsey in Cromwell, St John's in Hales, St Albans in the Heirs of St Ralph
Sadler, Waltham in the Earl of Carlisle, Heir of the Lord Denaye. And others to
other uses; as St Bennet de Hulmo united to Norwich, Westminster to the Deane
Prebend, and School there; Gloucester and Peterborrough to the Bishops, (Quaere
the rest.) And if five or six, out of twenty six, have in an hundred years
changed their Masters, so have other Estates. And let men beware of saying,
That those upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell, were greater sinners then they.

If it be granted, that these Institutions of Bishops, Deanes and Chapters,
were Prudentiall simply; if they have swarved from some, omitted others, and by
Law been outted of more parts of their Intrustment, though their whole being
were not taken away, by that Act of 1641. there was yet Reason, that they might
be abated in the Exhibitions allowed them for such parts thereof, as they no
longer performed. And so far there may be just ground, of otherwise disposing a
considerable part of their Estates.

The Sales, besides the less Public and General use of Bishops, and the
taking away of all coercive Power from them by another Statute 17. Car. cap.
11. were brought on by other most important Reasons: The Nation groaned under
vast Debts, under the burden of a Scotch Army, under a great Army of English,
and supernumeraryes (more then they;) under the intolerable eating Moath,
Free Quarter: And beside all this, a War in Ireland, that could not feed it
self, but with Supplies from England. All these would be Provided for, but the
Taxes, which yet were greater then England ever knew before, were as nothing to
discharge them.

There is no such measure of ill consequence, in the Sale of these Lands, as in
keeping up two Armies, supernumeraryes, and Free Quarter, or as in continuing
Sequestrations upon the Estates of such as were under hardship, or as in such
Excess burdens, as would have destroyed Private men's Estates. If ever
necessity lay upon an oppressed People, of resorting to unusual ways of ease,
our times have seen it: And constraint goes far in excusing, what otherwise
were not warrantable. Mariners (the Governors of a Ship) may, in extreme
Tempest, throw any man's goods overboard, to save the rest.

The same thing may be just or unjust, punishable or not punishable, upon
Circumstances. It is the part of an Accuser, rather then a Judge, to determine
of Crimes, and not to admit Excuses, and Extenuations. Christ Jesus, the great
Pastor and Bishop of our souls, has taught us, that man was not made for the
Sabbath, but the Sabbath for man: The like of Laws. David and his followers,
were Excused for eating the Shewbread, in extreme hunger, though before then,
it were not lawful for him, or any to eat it, but only for the Priests.

Restant Multa.


