THE APPREHENDING of Captain BVTLER At Portchmouth in the County of
Southampton and his followers, who were bound with bullets and ammunition for
Ireland, in the Shipp called the Olive.

As also The true relation of a terrible Sea fight by the States of Holland,
against a Fleet of the Spannish being furnished with men and ammonition for
assistance to the Rebels in Irland

Wherein was taken 23 sail of their Ships, as also their Vice Admiral Don
Eaustans son to Cardinal Saint Low the King of Spaines Nephew.

With a copy of their Commission against the Protestants, signed unto by the
greet Signet.

With the names of the Rebels now in Newgate.

London Printed for F.C. and T.B. 1641.

depiction of a sinking ship

The true and real description of the apprehending of Captain Butler and his
followers, being bound for assistance to the Rebels in Ireland.
THe Papists have often made bold adventures to show their malicious and
spleniall intents, toward the Protestants, but always covering them with a
veil, that their treacheries might be concealed, and not appear, whereby they
might incur the punishment due to their political designs, but the all
seeing eye of the Almighty knows the hearts, and he discryes the ill meaning
adversary unto his people, as will appear by the Sequel.

On the six and twenteth of February last, the wind and weather being extreme
foul there was beaten in upon the the Roads of Tarmouth diverse ships laden
with wines, amongst the rest one of them was a French shipp called the Olive
bow which was heavy laden and the men thereof seeming rather Soldiers, then sea
men which giveing just occation of suspicion to the country, they forth with
offered to search the Shipp but being denied the ame with out a Commission to
that effect, it was left undone for that time, with in two days after the said
Shipp set to Sea, which gave the more suspicion of fear, insomuch as
inteligence being given to one of his majesty's Ships called the Rambow, who
set forward after them but could not close with the said shipp, until they came
eto Porchmouth where they found the Sipp Ballast with bullets and Ammunition
and and their Commission as bound for Ireland, thus being discovered they were
forth with brovght to London and commicted to Newgate till it should be further
determined by the Parliament.

Their names are as follows. Captain Butler. Captain John Ryant. Adam Gould
merchant. Thomas Levalen. merchant. Daniell Daily master. servants.
Morgan Quirke Garret Foy. John Ryaut.
Nich Baggot. Darby Ryaut. David Galloway. John Williams. Patricke Furlong.
John Dym. Richard Gallaway. Thomas Mattach. John Butler.


The Ship lies at Portmouth in Hampshire, and was bound for Cork.

THE True relation of a terrible Sea Fight by the States of Holland against a
Fleet of Spanish being furnished with men, munition, for assistance to the
Rebels in Ireland.
THe griefs and troubles of a diseased Kingdom, does not always consist invy
domestic or civil commotions, neither do the distrsses thereof appear in
all places alike, the friends of a state if perpetually, nourisht in it is
breast must needs incur the fear and just apprehension of foreign dangers,
without some freindly informations. I must confess that the viperous brood of
Malignants, are so superfluously plentiful, that it would be no news to
nominate thousands, on whom such a deserved aspersion, might justly be imposed,
nay how is the world of late termed to such a relictancy from united opinions
that their cannot be a motion though never so good and beneficial to a King or
State, but soon it finds many both malivolent and potent enemies to suppress
their good endeavors. The Master must be beholding to his servant for the
performance of his bounden duty, the tenant will not pay his Landlord rent
(though due) without obsequious consideration nay there be subjects, that deny
their King his power and legal authority, by open and plain rebellions, as
that of Ireland, who have not only usurped his Majesty's authority but showed
themselves utter and professed enemies to him, their damnable bloody murders
committed, and daily prosecuted against his loyal Subjects, as also by denying
his supremacy amongst them, making religion a cloak to uphold them, as
blameless in these their pernicious designs, inviting foreign nations as
assistants for their defense against him, turning his former love into open
emnity, such are the contents of the news, I mean to treat on as follows.

The manner of the meetting of both Fleets, the Battle, and issue thereof.
THe Statesmen of war having daily intelligence of the Spanish intentions,
for the ayding of the Irish Rebels, and being chary of the welfarre, safety,
and honor of the English There was Order given that fifty of their principal
Ships should be provided as a guard or victory to oversee and watch upon the
coast of Flanders (to repel such forces if any were) of which Collonell
Royston went chief commander which continued quotedially scouring those scas
to conceive where any danger might be, for the space of six weeks, all that
time the Spanish fearing the worst made no apparition for their intended, But
being (as it afterward appeared) continually egged on and persuaded forward by
the Rebels to take their enterprise of asistance in hand, they set sail from
Mourney near Maligo, with the number of 70. Sail of Shipping, having with
them Don Luc^trese Admiral, and Don Eausteans Son to Cardinal Saint Low
Viceadmirall of their fleet, their ships wherein they rowed carrying with
them, one Saucie Marie Delphos. two Lep^tulcule, both ships of great note, and
therefore most fit for such great personages. They steered their course as for
the West Indyes passing by Malligo Garvier, Landsip, delos Cater, Ligeurud,
Manustrell parts and had almost past Planders, but being discryed by the dutch
men of ware, they hoysed fail to meet them, and sum tenn leagues beyond the
Channel, begune the encounter, the Spaniards proffering parley and diverse
excuses to prolonge the time from battle, which was granted, by the which
means Don leocotrese with tenn ships more stole away by night, to the great
displeasure of the Holander, who perceiving their Cowardice plied them so
soundly with bullets that stayed behind that many of them wear sunk others is
boorded by the duch as the Le Petriscula, where in was Don Eaustance the
Viceadmirall with twenty three more of their ships, the men whereof they took
prisoners, who upon examination confessed their intended Journey for Ireland, as
also they received their Commission, granted to Don Eaustance, the contents
whereof following.

The copy of the Commission granted to Don Eaustans, for his forces to be
transported into Ireland.
Where as we having received diverse petitions from the Roman Catholic;
concerning their present danger by the Protestant party now growing strong
against them, desireing aid and assistance against them, we out of our princly
Clemency, have and do in the presence of my present counsel, give power and
authority unto our kinseman Don Eaustans to bersecute and trouble all
Protestants in Ireland, according as he shall see good reserveing to himself
from the Irish, (for his so deserveing service) such honors as shall be
thought convenient.

Given under our hands Malligo this tenth of January 1642.
FINIS.

