AN APOLOGY FOR BISHOPS OR, A PLEA FOR LEARNING, AGAINST THOSE LYING, RAYLNG,
AND SCANDALOUS LIBELS, SO frequent, in despite of Learning and Learned Men.

DEDICATED TO ALL THE LOVER of Learning and Virtue for the Reformation of the
abuses and corruptions of these Times.

Printed in the year, 1641.

Introduction.
To vindicate the truth, now basely shent;
(But yet not shamed) one mufe is forward bent;
Then give such power and guidance to my Quill,
(Thou truths defender) that thy glory still,
May be the end and scope of all my pains,
Which more delights my soul then worldly gains.
INjurious times I can these latter days,
That should devoutly more and more upraise
The Almighty's honor, whose children should grow
As th'ponderous world grows more and more in age?
Can it and we so much degenerate?
(Oh grief) we do; the world is in no fault,
But horridly she shakes, and stands aghast,
To see fond Mortals desperately and fast.
Gigantikely against goodness wage a war,
And set up Ignorance in Learnings charie.
Bishops whose long and undisputed right,
For hundred years struck error in a fright,
In whose successions still there has been found
Continual props to bear up Englands Crown.
Search Monumentall Records and you will see
In ancient times muzled with Popery,
Still some of them like Atlas, against stern fate
In boystering times uphold our tottering State,
And truly if I might compare, and show
The blessings which from their industry grow
God making them his chiefest instruments
To bring to pass which now is our cheifst contents
Witness grave Morton whose indicions head
Found means to join the white rose with the red
And that good Durham Bishop whose wit did find,
The means by which England and Scotland's joynd.
But some will say, what traiterous Subjects were,
These Bishops, Becket, Bonner, Gardener,
With many more, I grant it verily
Many were bad (but yet) I thus reply,
No order since the world did first begin,
Were It never so strict, but some were full of sin;
I can recite such as no man can blame,
Induced with Learning and Religious Flame:
Especially since time of reformation,
And Pope in England had so sore damnation,
Who like Gods faithful servants full of grace,
Made fire their Graves to see their Makers face,
As Crammer, Ridley, reverend Latimer,
Good Bishop Hooker, zealous Bishop Farrar,
To lead the Armies of the living God,
(Like good Ichoiada's) they Antichrist withstood:
And after that the Marion troubles ended,
Elizabeth, whom God so long defended,
(Seated in tho English Throne) she quickly cast
Blood sucking Tyrants into prison fast,
And in their places placed such shining Stars,
Who governed decently the Church, held wars
With Antichrist, and knocked his triple Crown
To Hell, from whence their Hellish doctrin's flowne,
Since whom, what good men could I name, but I
Hate guiltiness of partiality,
And know full well my praise can little skill,
Since their own works have merited so well.
The Function's so devout, of such esteem
It ought to be, though some sinister deem,
Whose boiling hearts blown up with satan's spirit,
Strike at the Churches Basis, would disinherit
The Lords own Tribe, and let all Ignorance,
Schism and Discord, or other dire mischance,
Come tumbling in, but that high Senates skill
And holy Zeal, that which is fitting, will
Establish and enact, let slanderous pens,
Scrible their hum^d rum stuff, fans right or sense.
Let the foale Co^ comb, Mercuries Messenger,
And that same doughty Ass of Lambeth Fair.
Go on in this mad mood like dog bolt curres,
Who think to overthrow with false demurres,
The Truths just cause; fling Libels all about,
To scandal, rail, to vilify and slout
Grave reverend Fathers, each good Presbyter.
What though Archbishop Laud is prisoner,
Must that same senceles, soul mouthed graceles rogue
Deride and scoff, who would, I Am sure, collogue,
Were Laud in honors, for to get a place,
Of trencher-scraper, or groom unto his grace,
Laud has offended, and it is my wish,
That all offenders taste of Lauds own dish,
But though has done amiss, him to defame
So impudently ti^ a filthy shame.
And to revile him so it is much unfit,
For such a poetasten (devils chit)
To all these rogues associates He say thus,
They ride the devil, not noble Pegasus,
And wish them whipped and stripped, till their strong lines
Make them all halters for their doughty rimes.
Honor gives life to learning, and the Arts,
Honor makes man innobled in all parts.
Honor excites to virtue every one,
Honor persuades to get perfection.
The soldiers fights for honor, makes the ground
His fastened pillow, and his bed of Down,
Will boldly stand against death; look as grim
As Mars himself, over a river swim.
Outface a Canons wide-hell-thundring mouth
Out-dare, out-stare all objects nor so ruth.
All this and more for honor he will paste by,
For honor fight to live, for honor dye.
A willing prentise, be it nere so base,
Will undergo all work, bear all disgrace,
Run, fly, and trot, endure any thing,
In hope of honor, which Liberty may bring.
And shall not we honor that precious Iem,
Learning which bears from all the Diadem;
Which makes a man in spite of spite full death,
Live still renownd, immortal after breath,
By whose fair help all dark obscurities
Are taken away from sacred my steries.
Scripture aright expounded, and whereby
The good profession sacred Theology
Is still more graduated, for unless
Learning be got, all is but emptiness.
And certes then since Learnings so profound,
So dear, so sweet, there must be fuel found
For to maintain it, or twill svffocate
Estate and honor, it is the needful bait
That makes ingenuous wits with courage climb
Up Learnings steepy mountain so sublime.
A shame it is in any Christian state
To see a learned Clergy paupertate;
To see those Academyes, whose renown
So long have flourished to tumble down.
But Heaven be gracious to that gracious Court
Assembled in thy name, be thou a fort
And a defense to them. Let them go on
For Church and Kingdoms reformation.
Reform abuses, beat down slanderers,
Unto the truth that are such batterers.
And then, so long as we have any breath,
VVele praise thy name, and seal it with our death.
FINIS.

