AN APPEAL OF THE ORTHODOX MINISTERS OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND: Against RICHARD
MOUNTAGUE, Late Bishop of Chichester, now Bishop of Norwich. TO THE MOST
ILLUSTRIOUS, High, and Honorable Court of PARLIAMENT. AND TO THE NOBILITY,
ORTHODOX Clergy, Gentry, and Communaltie of England. With the proceedings
against him in Bow-Church. And an Epistle to B. Mountague himself. also, A
Supplication of the Ministers of Scotland against the said Mountague. Wherein
His dangerous Heresies are revealed; and the Character of an Arminian or
Mountaguists is added.

EDENBVRGI. M. DC. XLI.

Most Noble, Honorable, Worshipful and Religious: MEN, FATHERS, BRETHREN.
We the Orthodox Ministers of the Gospel in the Church of England, to the
number of 1000. and more; In most humble and zealous manner, not without
bleeding hearts and on bended knees, do Remonstrate unto You this great and
grave Senate, the Worthies of our English-Israel, now assembled in the high and
honorable Court of Parliament. That (as is notorious, and you not ignorant)
Mr. RICHARD MOVNTAGVE has heretofore written and published three several
Books; the first, entitled, An answer to the Gagger of Protestants; the
second, A Treatise of the Invocation of Saints; the third, An Appeal to Caesar.

In the two former whereof he pretends to answer the common Adversary of
our Church: though indeed he is nothing better than a cunning stickler and
Advocate for them: For the which he was touched by Information in Parliament,
xxjo. IACOBI. But that Parliament ending, and soon after, King (JAMES of
famous memory) dying; he set forth his third Book called the Appeal to
Caesar: wherein he more openly shows himself in his colors, by spitting
forth his venom and spewing forth his gall against King JAMES (of ever blessed
memory) and, whereof he was supreme Governor, the Church of England, and
all the sincere Professors of the Gospel therein: and yet, with an audacious
face, whorish forehead, and accurate ambo-dexteritie, he would seem to pin
these his bastardly Bratts upon the sleeue of our dear and chaste mother the
Church of England: And not resting there, this his third Book of Appeal, he
asw impudently as audaciously dedicateth to our gracious Sovereign King
CHARLES, presently upon his coming to the Crown; and thereby subtly
endeavors to infect the mind of his Majesty, in his tender years, by
unsound Tenants; (how beit we hope his sacred Majesty, as was his royal
Father, is soundly grounded in Orthodox writings and opinions) unsound, said
we; yea, haereticall, savouring one while of old- Pelagianisme, and eft-soones
of new- Arminianisme, and otherwhiles of flat- Papisme.

All which his errors and Haeresies have been publicly displayed and
confuted by diverse of our Orthodox Brethren of the Church of England: Viz.
Reverend Doctor CARLETON, late Bishop of Chichester, (now with God:) Doctor
SVTCLIFFE, Deane of Excester: Doctor GOAD and Doctor FEATLY, late Chaplains
to the most Reverend Archbishop of Canterbury: Mr. BVXTON; Mr. YATES; Mr.
WOTTON; all these, we say, Divines: and besides, (whom we must not forget) two
worthy Gentlemen, Mr. ROVSE and Mr. PRINNE, Orthodox members of our Church: All
these before-named, their Books of Confutation are extant to the World in print.

Now, for the opinion of the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, we are not
ignorant that his last Book of Appeal to Caesar, having been translated and
sent beyond Seas, the Church of Geneva, with all the reformed Churches of
France, (though now under the Cross) have condemned it: the orthodox Churches
of Germany and the Netherlands have done no less. And this knowledge we have
by Letters sent to some of our grave Brethren residing in London.

And now (by order also) O worthy House, you must give us leave to put you in
mind, when Mountagu had published that his last Book, wherein he spared not to
vilify the Synod of Dort; Your religious care in behalf of that Synod,
appeared in an Act you had in agitation (by P)etition) at Oxford, 1. CAROLI,
Against Haeresies and false Doctrine: the Copy whereof we present here unto
your view, exhibited by your House of Commons in Parliament, 1625. which
remains upon Record in Records as follows;

An Act for the repressing and prevention of Haeresies and false Doctrines.
MOst humbly and instantly beseeching your Majesty, your faithful and loyal
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and representing all those your
many Millions of people in this your Kingdom of England, who are not of the
Degree of the Nobility; That for as much as all men know how dishonorable to
God, how dangerous to the souls of men, and to the peace both of Church and
Commonwealth the seeds of erroneous doctrines have ever proved: as has
appeared by that fearful trouble which lately trenched into the Churches and
state of the United Provinces in the Low Countries, by the pestilent opinions
of Arminius and such as followed his party; whereby the state had been
utterly ruined, if our late most learned and prudent King; of happy memory,
your Majesty's most royal Father, had not provided for the repressing of that
Fire, by a grane learned Synod convened at Dort, and consisting of choice and
worthy Divines, not only of the said United Provinces them selves, but diverse
others out of other Countries; that is to say; some out of yours his Majesty's
Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and others out of France and Germany, Geneva
and the Palatinate: In which godly Synod the said opinions of the Arminians,
after a mature deliberation and debate, were unanimously taxed, adjudged and
condemned, as unsanorie, false, and dangerous positions: opposite to the
Apostolical Doctrine and general belief of the reformed Churches: And
whereas also upon the maintainers thereof your Majesty's Royal Father (as a
very able Defender of the Faith) by public writing expressed and stamped his
zealous Censure. That they were Haereticks, or rather Atheistical Sectaries:
And whereas the said Determinations of that learned and general Synod have
been an occasion of much quietness in all the Low. Countries ever since; and
have been also confirmed and approved not only by the National Synod of all
the Reformed Churches of France, convened at Charenton; but in Ireland also one
of your Majesty's own Dominions: It may therefore please your Majesty for the
preventions of great Mischiefs and Inconveniences, which may grow and ensue
within the Church and Commonwealth of this your Majesty's Kingdom of England,
by the divulging of the like pestilent opinions within the same, that it may
be enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, that the said
determinations of the said Synod, consisting of seventeen Articles positive
and nine rejectiue or opposite, may stand and be likewise annexed, received,
ratified and established with in this your said Kingdom, as part of the
doctrine of the Church of England.

Against which, it shall not, or may not be lawful for any to preach, write,
or print any thing: But that such as shall so do, may be censured as the
impugners of the Church of England and disturbers of the peace thereof, etc.

Thus far your religious Act in agitation at Oxford, against Haeresies and
false Doctriue.
And now, in its due place, we also present unto your view, your own more
particular Charge in your Articles exhibited by your House of Commons against
Mountagu, at Westminster, in Parliament, 2. Careli, 1626. which also remains
upon your Records as follows;

MARCH. 1626. Articles exhibited by the Commons in Parliament against RICHARD
MOVNTAGV Clerk.
THat he the said Richard Mountague in or about the 21th year of the reign
of our late Sovereign King James (of famous memory) has caused to be printed
and in his name to be published, one book called An answer to the late
Gagger of Protestants, and in and about the 22th, year of the same King, he
caused to be printed and published one other book entitled, A Treatise of the
Invocation of Saints, And likewise in that first year of his Majesty's Reign
that now is, he procured to be printed and in his name to be published, an
other book entitled, An appeal to Caesar: in every of which books, he
has maintained and affirmed some doctrines contrary or repugnant to the
Articles whereupon it was agreed by the Archbishops and bishops of both
Provinces, and the Whole Clergy in the convecation holden at London, in the
year of our Lord God, 1562. according to the computation of the Church of
England, fer avoiding diversicy of opinions, and for establishing consent
touching true Religion; All which appears in the places hereafter mentioned,
and in diverse other places and passages of the same books, and by his so doing
has broken the Laws and Statutes of this Realm in that case provided, and
very much disturbed both the peace of the Church and Commonwealth.

1
Richard Mountague in several places of his said book called, Gagg. page App.
p. 136.
The Answer to the Gagger, and in his other book called the Appeal, does
advisedly maintain and affirm, that the Church of Rome is and ever was a true
Church, since it was a Church.

2
Richard Mountague does maintain and affirm in his book aforesaid called,
Gag. page 50
The Answer to the Gagger; That the Church of Rome has ever remained firm
upon the same foundation of Sacraments and doctrine instituted by God.

3
Richard Mountague speaking of those points which belong to faith and manners,
hope and Charity, does in the same Book called the Gagger, Gagg. p. 14.
affirm and maintain, That none of these are contreverted, inter parts,
meaning the Protestants and the Papists, And notwithstanding, That in the 31th.
Article it is resolved, That the Sacrifices of Moses in which as is commonly
said, That the Priest did offer Christ for the quick and the dead, to hane
remission of pain and guilt, too, are blasphemous fables and dangerous
deceipts, This being one of the points controverted between the Church of
England and the Church of Rome. The said Richard Mountague in his book called
the Gagger does affirm and maintain, Gagg. p, 14.
That the controverted points are of a less and inferior Allay; Of them a may
man be ignorant, without any danger of his soul at all, A man may resolve or
oppose this or that way within peril of perishing for ever.

4.
against peril of Idolatry) contained in the foresaid book of HOmilies,
approved by the 37th. Article aforementioned, it is declared; That Images teach
no good lesson neither of good nor godliness but all error and wickedness:
He the said Richard in the book aforesaid, Gag. p. 300.
called the Answer to the late Gagger does affirm and maintain, That Images
may be used for the instruction of the ignorant and exitation of Devotion.

5
Dij Tutelares of the Gentile Idolatours. TLhe said Richard ountague has
notwithstanding in the Book before mentioned entitled, Inv. p. 107.
A Treatise concerning the Invocation of Saints, affirmed and maintained: That
Saints have not only a memory, but a more peculiar charge of their friends,
And that it may be admitted, that some Saints have a peculiar patronage, 108.
Custody protection and power, 109.
as Angels also have over certain persons and Countries by especial
deputation, And that it is no impiety so to believe.

Note that he says in his Appeal (108. and 109.) Show me that the Saints
have knowledge of us here, And J will not doubt to pray to them. So that hence
it will be evident, That Mountagu holds it lawful to pray to Saints.

6
length by Gods mercy attain to everlasting felicity.

He the said Richard Mountague in the book aforesaid called the Appcale, App.
p. 30.
does maintain and affirm, that men justified may fall away and depart from
that state which once they had, they may rise again and become new men
possible, but not certain nor necessary, And the better to countenance this
his opinion, he has in the said Book wilfully added falsified and changed
diverse words of the 16th. of the Articles, aforementioned. And diverse other
words both in the Book of HOmilyes as in the Book of Common Prayer. App. p.
29.31, 32.35.
And all the same places so misrecyted and changed, he does allege in his
said book called the Appeal, endeavoring thereby to lay a most wicked and
malicious scandal upon the Church of England, as if it did herein differ from
the Reformed Churches of Ireland, and from the Reformed Churches beyond the
Seas, and did consent to those pernicious Errors, which are commonly called
Arminianisme, and which the late famous Princess Queen Elizabeth and King
James (of happy memory) did so piously and diligently labor to suppress.

2
That he the said Richard Mountague contrary to his duty and allegiance, has
endeavored to raise great factions and divisions in this Commonweal, by
casting the odious and scandalous name of Puritans upon such of his Majesty's
loving subjects as conform themselves to the doctrine and Ceremonies of the
Church of England, under that name laying upon them diverse false and malicious
imputations, so to bring them into Jealousy and displeasure with his most
excellent Majesty, and into reproach and ignominy with the rest of the
people, to the great danger of sedition and disturbance in the State, if it be
not timely prevented.

3.
The scope and end of the said Richard Mountague in the Books aforementioned,
is to give encouragement to Popery, and to withdraw his Majesty's subjects
from the true Religion established to the Roman Superstition: and consequently
to be reconciled to the Sea of Rome. All which he labors by subtle and
cunning ways, whereby Gods true Religion has been much scandalized, Those
mischiefs introduced which the wisdom of many Laws has endeavored to
prevent, the great peril and hazard of our Sovereign Lord the King and of all
his Dominions and loving Subjects.

4.
That the aforesaid Richard Mountague has inserted into the book aforesaid
called the Appeal, diverse passages dishonorable to the late King his
Majesty's Father (of famous memory) full of bitterness, railing and injurious
speeches to other persons, disgraceful and contemptuous to many worthy Divines
both of this Church of England, and of other reformed Churches beyond the Seas:
Impious and profane in scoffing at Preaching, meditating, conferring, Pulpits,
Lectures, Bibles, and all show of Religion: All which do aggravate his former
offenses as having proceeded from malicious and invenomed hate against the
peace of this Church and sincerity of the Reformed Religion publicly
professed and by Laws established in this Kingdom.

All which offenses being to the high dishonor of Almighty God and of most
mischievous effect and consequence, against the good of his Church and Common
Weal of England, and of other his Majesty's Realms and Dominions, The Commons
assembled in Parliament do hereby pray, that the said Richard Mountagu may be
punished according to his demerits, in such exemplary manner, as may deter
others from attempting so presumptuously to disturb the Peace of Church and
State, and that the Books aforesaid may be suppressed and burnt.

And thus far, (O worthy House) your religious charge in your Articles
exhibited, March 1626.
But by the fatal dissolution of those first and second Parlaments, that Act,
and that your Charge in those your Articles, slept; until the last Parliament
called or summoned to begin in March, and continued until July 1628. During
which sitting, That your charge in those your Articles, was awakened and in
agitation against him, as we heard. But by reason of other matters of high
consequence, and the sudden Prorogation of that Parliament, It again fell
asleep.

Now, upon the ending of that Session, and breaking up of the House (And Bishop
Carleton, Mountagu's learned Diocesan and Antagonist dying, during the sitting
of the House) immediately after, Mountagu; by mediation of his potent Patron,
alijsque vijs ac modis, got his Majesty's grant of the Byshopricke of
Chichester; and soon after sued out, as it seems, his Congedelier for the
same Byshopricke: and in August following, according to custom, Proclamation
was was made at St. Mary le Bow Church-dore in these very words following;

All manner of Persons that can or will object against the Election of the
Right Worshipful Mr. Richard Mountagu, Bachesour of Divinity and Parson of
Petworth, Elected Lord Bishop of Chichester, the form of his Election or the
party Elected; Let them now speak and object in due form of Law, and they
shallbee heard; otherwise they shall be precluded.

Upon which Proclamation, 7, or 8. days before the day of Confirmation of the
said elected Bishop, (and all manner of men being thereby invited to object,)
it pleased God to stir up the heart of one honest Christian man to take
Council and get objections drawn, by an ancient Doctor of the Arches: which
Objections were extracted out of the forenamed Articles in Parliament: And upon
Friday the 22. of August, when the aforesaid Elect Bishop came to Bow-Church to
be Confirmed, and the aforesaid Proclamation was again by the Beadle of the
Arches audibly 3. times pronounced in the Church, one Mr. Jones by name (an
honest and ancient Professor of Religion) did object, whereof we hope this
sacred Senate is already possessed, and presented the Objections, in writing
(drawn as is before said, by a Doctor of the Arches) unto Doctor Rives then
substituted Judge for the busineffe, and said, with an audible voice, 3. times,
I object against him, and here are my objections in due form of Law: The
Copy of which his Objections, is here also preented unto your view: (which
chiefly concerns you the Worthies of the House of Commons, because they were
drawn out of your own former Charge:) and it is Verbatim as follows;

22o. Augusti, 1628. in Ecclesia Sanctae Mariae de Arcubus.
In DEi nomine Amen. Coram vobis Reverendissimo and honorando Patre Georgio
divina providentia Cantuariens. Archiepisc. vestrove Deligato, Officiali,
Vicario in spiritualibus generali, ejusve Surrogato ant alio Iudice Iudicibusve
in hac part competen. seu competitur. Willielmus Jones literatus Stationarius
Londinensis, omni quo possit aut debet meliori via modo and juris forma, nec
non ad omnem, quecunque juris effectum exinde quovismodo sequi valen. nomine
accusatorio ac vt accusator. Ric di. Mountagu Clerici nuper in Episcopatum
Cicestrens. vt dicitur electi, accusando querelando obijciendo and excipiendo
contra prefat. Ricardum Mountagu Clericum and ad impediendum juxta Iuris in hac
part exigentiam and non aliter promotionem and confirmationem ipsius Ricardi
in Episcop. sic vt prefertur electi comperuit dictus Willielmus Jones allegando
dicendo querelando accusando and obijciendo articulatim vt sequitur.

1.
IN primis, That you the said Richard Mountagu have caused to be printed and in
your name to be published, one Book called An Answer to the late Gagger of
Protestants, and one other Book entitled A Treatise of the Invocation of
Saints, and a third book entitled An Appeal to Caesar. In every of which
books you have maintained and affirmed some doctrines contrary and repugnant
to the Articles whereupon it was agreed by the Archbishops and Bishops of both
Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden at London in the
year of our Lord God, 1562. according to the computation of the Church of
England for avoiding of diversity of opinions, and for establishing consent
touching true Religion; And by your said Delicts you have broken the laws and
Statutes of this Realm in that behalf provided: And you thereby have very
much disturbed the peace of the Church and Commonwealth, to the high dishonor
of Almighty God. Which your Books are Confuted by the late right reverend
Bishop Carleton and diverse other Orthodox and conformable Divines of the Church
of England. And I Article and object, Conjunctim aivisim and de quolibet.

2
Item, That you the said Richard Mountagu in several places of your said Book
called the Gagger, and in your other book called the Appeal, do and have
advisedly maintained and affirmed, That the Church of Rome is and ever was a
true Church, contrary to the Sixteenth Homily of the second book of Homilies,
and as is declared in the 35. Article of the aforesaid Articles, And I object
as aforesaid.

3
Item, That you the said Richard Mountagu do maintain and affirm in your
aforesaid book, the Answer to the Gagger; That the Church of Rome has ever
remained firm upon the same foundation of Sacraments and Doctrine instituted
by God: Contrary to the Homily last named, and as is declared in the 28.
Article of the said-Articles. And I object as aforesaid.

4
Item, That you the said Richard Mountagu in your book called the Answer to
the Gagger, do and have maintained and affirmed, That Images may be used for
the instruction of the ignorant; Contrary to the second Homily entitled,
against peril of Idolatry; which is approved by the 37. Article of the
Articles aforesaid. And I object as aforesaid.

5
Item, That you the said Richard Mountagu in your Treatise of the Invocation of
Saints, do and have affirmed and maintained, that Saints have not only a
memory, but a more peculiar charge of their friends, and that it may be
admitted that some Saints have a peculiar patronage, Custody protection and
power, as Angels have also, over certain persons and Conntries by especial
deputation, and that it is no impiety so to believe; Contrary to the doctrine
in the Homily aforesaid: And I object as aforesaid.

6
Item, That you the said Richard Mountagu in your said book called the
Appeal, do maintain and have maintained and affirmed, that men justified may
fall away and depart from that state which once they had, and that they may
rise again, and possibly become new men, but not certain or necessary; And
the better to maintain this your opinion you have in the same book wilfully
added, falsified and changed diverse words of the 16. Article of the book of
Articles aforesaid, and diverse other words both in the book of Homilies, and
also in the book of Common prayer, And all the same places are so by you
misrecited and changed in your said book called the Appeal to Caesar, and you
do and have endeavored thereby to lay a most wicked and malicious Scandal
upon the Church of England, as if it did herein differ from the reformed
Churches beyond the Seas, and you did and do consent to those pernicious
Errors which are commonly called Arminianisme, and which the late famous
Princes, Queen ELIZABETH, and King JAMES (of most happy and blessed memory)
did piously and diligently labor to suppress: And I object as aforesaid.

7
Item, That you the said Richard Mountagu in all your three several Books
aforementioned, do maintain and have maintained and affirmed diverse other
unsound and heretical Doctrines and opinions, as is at large proved in the
books of Confutation of your said books; which you have, nor cannot reply
unto; And I object as aforesaid.

8
Item, quod prefati Willielmus Jones and Richardus Mountagu Clericus suerunt
respective and sunt provinc. vestrae Cantuariens. jurisdictionis vestrae
subsiditi in hac part; and obijcit vt supra.

9
Item, quod omnia and singula premissa sunt vera publica notoria publica and
manifesta tam infra Civitatem and Dioc. London and alia loca publica and famosa
infra Regnum Angliae; and obijcit vt supra.

Omnia and singula premissa proponit and obijcit dictus Willielmus Jones
conjunctim and divisim non arctan. se ad omnia and singula premissa probanda
nec ad onus superflue probationis, de quo protestatur, sed quatenus probaverit
in premissis catenus obtineat in petitis sub protestatione de addendo
premissis, eademque magis specifice declarando and specificando eademque
probando pro loco and tempore congruis and oportunius, semper sibi salvo omni
Iuris beneficio in hac part sibi competen. seu competitur eaque protestatione
sibi semper salva petit Articulos Capitula sive Interrogatoria sua predicta ad
omnem Iuris effectum admitti partemque aduersam eijsdem and little cuilibet
secundum Iuris extigentiam respondere compelli and protestatur de expensis. Et
petit Jus and Iusticiam (vestrum Officium Domine Judex antedict. humiliter
implorando.

Per me Willielmum Jones.

Thus far the Objections of the Objectour in due form of Law:
And judge, O judge; ye worthy Judges of the House, whether these objections
were not in due of Law.

But the Judge aforenamed, taking the paper of Objections; first seemed to read
them over silently to himself, and then delivered them to the said Elect
Bishop Mountagu: who seemed also to read them over silently to himself, and
then with an untoward look and trembling hand, gave the paper back to the
Judge; Who, called to him one Doctor Samms of the Arches, advising with him
what to do in the business, and he told him he would run into a
Praemunire if he did not proceed: Who thereupon gave the Obiectour Mr. Jones
an answer to this effect: My friend, you have given here Objections against
this my Lord elect of Chichest or: but your Objections are not in due form of
Law, because they have not a Doctor of the Arches hand unto them, neither have
you an Advocate to plead your Objections; Therefore, nevertheless, by virtue
of this his Majesty's Commission under the Great Seal (which he took in his
hand and turned) I will proceed to confirm him: And so did.

Now Judge, O Judge, again, (thrice Judicious Judges) whether any person be
not invited by the former Proclamation to object, in due form of Law: And
whether any Doctors hand or Advocate are thereby required: And besides, the
Court at that time for Confirmation is not any Court for pleading; What need
therefore had the Obiectour of any Doctors hand or Advocate? He himself
setting his hand unto it and being there, Ore tenus.

Then when the Judge had with a strong hand peremptorily proceeded in the
Confirmation of the aforesaid elect Bishop Mountagu; This new confirmed
Pontifex still with a brazen face and whorish forehead, made an Apology for
himself and his Books, and said most impudently, to this effect;

That he himself had subscribed to the Book of Articles, and the Book of
Homilies, and all other Books of Conformity to the Church of England; and that
if any whosoever could publicly or privately confute those his Books, he
would be the first man that would cause those his Books to be burnt (...).
Whereas, it is most manifest (as before) (...) ^^^inst the Doctrine of those
Books of Articles, and Homifies, etc. And who knows not? his own Books are
confuted by diverse learned and pious men, as in the premises: his Books
condemned by a charge in Parliament, and other reformed Churches as in the
premises also: Natherlesse this Gamaliel, highly applauded with adulation this
his confirmed Bishops (base) Apology, and said: You have well said my Lord:
and he also said, That those Objections were nothing but the blattering of a
Tradesman, who was too busy to meddle with such high mysteries of Divinity:
but indeed it was the disease of the Time now for mechanical Tradesmen so to
do, etc.

Also the aforesaid Doctor Rives,, and one Drake the Register, and one Fish
the Proctour, (all three employed in the said Confirmation) did all jointly use
other disgraceful, scoffing, scornful and geering words, gestures. and
behaviors toward the Objectour, and the Objections: They also checked and
taunted a religous Gentleman who took the Objectours part: Whereof there were
diverse, not a few, we may say, a Cloud of witnesses, and some of them
Minasters, our Brethren, there present, the reverend Rectour of the Church, and
others: So as, We do also complain to this Honorable House, of Doctor
Rives, Doctor Samms, Drake and Fish, who all four we perceive to be
Delinquents in the business: and none so fit as the Objector aforementioned to
produce witnesses to this Honorable and Noble Senate of the same:

The third day after this day of Confirmation, being Sunday, or the Lords day,
Mountagu came to be Consecrated by the most reverend Archbishop of Canterbury,
then residing at Croydon, who, as it seems, had no knowledge of the
Objections: (concealed by Mountagu and his Adhaerents:) And the Ceremonies of
Consecration were performed: Only this happened, as we are informed, whiles
Mountagu and his fautors were sitting at the feast or dinner of Consecration,
the news was brought to the most Reverend Archbishop, that the Duke of
Buckingham ( Mountagu's potent Patron) was stabbed to death at Portsmouth, (and
that on Saturday, the day after and about the same hour that Mountagu was
opposed in his Confirmation;) which for the time as they say, helped to mar
Mountagu's mirth: and espacially stopped the chirping of a certain Wren, which
Bird, coming lately out of an unclean Cage, began to strain high his
lascivious notes to make music against godly Ministers, etc.

Nevertheless, by this time, you may see Mountagu in his Pontificalibus,
Elect, Confirmed and Consecrated Bishop of Chichester, in despite of all
Opposition: and as he is in his Pontificalibus, now to be ranked inter
Dominos Spirituales.

Good Lord! He who by the doom of God, Tit. 3.10.
in his Word, and all good Orthodox men, not thought worthy to live, at
leastwise not to enjoy any further Spiritual promotion in our Reformed Church
of England, nor ever could have the grace of the University to Commence so
much as Doctor in Divinity: and in stead of being censured by Parliament and
degraded from any Ministerial office: He, we say, to become a Bishop and a
Governor in our Church! woe must needs be to that Diocese, especially, that
has such a Bishop, such a Governor. Yea, it is well known, he spares not
already since his Consecration, to say and swear in his Table-talke, he will
plague the Puritans in his Diocese? And they say he has already silenced some
Lecturers) and by Puritans his meaning is always, according to his garb and
writings, all honest Orthodox Divines, that due oppose and will not adbaere
unto his unsound and unsavorie opinions and Doctrines; though they other wise
be never so conformable to the orders and Caeremonies of the Church of England.

And these his Errors and Haeresies are so notorious and manifest, both by his
writings, as in the premises and in his Preachings, when he gets into the
Pulpit, that all the water in the (Pontifician) Sea of Chichester can never
wash off these black stains from him: For, can a Leopard change his spots?

Let us crave leave of this honorable House, a little to digress: And then We
are also not to conceal but reveal unto You, that this notable Mountebank is
familiarly acquainted with diverse known Papists who have resort unto him, he
recourse unto them. and by name which we can prove, he has often private
conference with one Hugh Holland, a professed Papist and sworn slave to his
Lord God the Pope; and some say a lay-Iesuite, (if there be any such order:)
however a ruffianly Locust, and seducer of the Kings Liege-people, a vilifier
of Parlaments: And what this fellow else is our reverend brother the Rector of
Fan-church can can, if he be pleased; inform this House: And so we leave
this base Associate of B. Mountagu, and return to himself.

But how long, therefore, how long Lord, most holy, most wise, most just and
true? Will thou suffer the Grapes of the Vintage to be destroyed, the Corn of
thy Harvest to be spoiled by such a Fex, such a Wolf, and such like Foxes and
Wolves? (For more unclean Birds there be of the same Cage, etc. as will
appear hereafter in our Catalogue of them.)

Pardon, O pardon, our digression and fervent deprecation; since our zeal, in
Gods cause, has transported us so far. And now return we, most honorable
House, out Appeal unto You; and to draw to a Conclusion thereof; A among your
many weighty matters and of high Consequence for Church and Commonwealth, We
most humbly supplicate that this new made Bishop Mountagu, who though he now
raungeth him self amongst the Spiritual Lords and temporal Peers in the
Upper House of this high Assembly of Parliament, may yet be taken into
consideration, that he may no longer Lord it over Gods people and his
Heritage, 2. Pet. 5.3.
us the poor (despised) orthodox Ministers of the Gospel in this Church of
England; And that he having deserved (as we conceive) rather Fire and faggot
than further Preferment, may come maturely to be censured and degraded; if the
House shall so be pleased at the least, by this High and honorable Court, and
his pernicious Books to be at length called-in and burned. The which, again,
we most humbly implore on our bended knees, and That for GOD our Creatours
sake, for CHRIST our Redeemers sake, for the holy Spirit our Comforters sake:
Unto which Almighty and All-sufficient Three in One, We most humbly commend
and betake You all of this honorable Court, and your serious Consultations for
Church and Commonwealth.

By those that daily and incessantly pray for the Peace of Syon and Consolation
of Jerusalem, The orthodox Ministers of the Church of England.
Postscript.
IF this Honorable House (or any other whatsoever) shall doubt of the assent of
our Brethren of the Church of England to this our Appeal or Remonstrance, We
pray, let any by deputation from the House (or other) take the pains to go
and get the hands of Bishops and Ministers in every Diocese of the Kingdom,
and we the exhibiters hereof (being on good grounds well assured) will pawn
our lives, that the major part of Bishops and Ministers will subscribe thereto:
And then we hope it will not be denied but the major part of the Clergy is
the Church of England: Ergo the whole Church of England is against this one man
B. Mountagu.



An Epistle of the aforesaid orthodox Ministers of the Church of England, to
Bishop MOVNTAGV himself.
SIR, although you have betrayed the Truth and wounded our Mother the Church of
England; yet in a charitable hope that you have not committed the unpardonable
Sin, Grace be with you and Peace, 1. Cor. 1.
from God our Father and from the Lord Jesus Christ: We your Brethren, till
you shook off fraternity with us, dee beseech you by the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that you would be reconciled to the Church of England, our
dearest Mother: that you with us, may speak one thing, and there be no
further dissentions between you and us, but let us be knit together in one
mind and one judgment: That in the end, if it be possible, your soul may be
saved.

Which your Reconciliation must be by your public Recantation of your
dangerous and malicious errors and Haeresies, against God, his Truth, and
good men. Away then with and for shame abandon your total Tenants of final
fallings away from Grace: Away with your odious terms against orthodox
Divines: Away with your impious and profane scoffing at Preaching; meditating,
conferring, etc. Away with your Images for exitation of devotion: Away with
your praying to Saints: Away with all other your Trumperies, Opinions and
Doctrines: which your Impieties have wrought higher then the and do cry at
Heaven gates for Vengeance: and which are raked out of the sinkes and puddles
of Pelagianisme, Arminianisme and Papisme: and those your mungrill
Haere-schismes, in fine, will yield you no sound comfort, but be such
miserable comforters unto you in the day and hour of death (when as one dram
of the Truth defended will stand one in more steed than 1000. Tene^ts
sophistically maintained) that they will sink you irrecoverably into the
infernal Tophet, without true and sound Repentance beforehand: And Sir, be
you not ashamed to make your public Recantation, but consider greater Clerks
than your self have made their public Recantations, and have gotten honor
not infamy by it: viz. Mr. Barret at Cambridge, in St. Mary's Church, Doctor
Allabaster, Doctor Sheldon, Mr. Higgons, their spontaneous Recantations from
Popish Priesthood were publicly preached at Paul's Cross, and afterward
printed to the Worlds public view: and diverse others, whom we need not recite.

All which considered; We now adjure you, in the name of the Lord JESUS, to
make your Recantation, without which you can never have Salvation: Sir,
Remember the fatherly Admonitions and Counsel that the most Reverend Father
the Archbishop of Canterbury gave you at your Consecration. Away then with
your private excusatorie Letters to his Grace or other great personages, farced
full of idle apologizing stuff: which indeed is nothing but dawbing with
untempered mortar.

But if for all this, you will not recant nor be reconciled to us, and still
persist peremptorily in your dangerous doctrines, and maintain your impieties,
Know assuredly that as you have labored to be chronicled in Cassaneus his
Catalog us Gloriae Mundi: so you are like in the next edition of
Schlasselburgius his Catalogus Hariticorum to have your name enrolled. When as
our godly and reverend brethren who have confuted your books, we doubt not,
shall be remembered in the Catalogus Testium Veritatis, on Earth, Dan. 12.3.
and shine as Stars in the Firmament of Heaven.

And good Sir give us leave, by the way; to ask you, Of what Religion are you?
The name of Protestant you deny; Papist you will not be: Pelagian or Arminian
you cannot endure: (and yet by your writings you salute and shake hands with
all:) and for the name of Christian, that you abhor, and hold it
Puritannicall. Well, go too Sir, your name Mountagu, (and it is pity you bear
that Name, whereof there is so noble and religious a Family, the Mountagu's of
Northamptonshire:) we trow you will not deny: Your hotch-pot Doctrines and
squint-eyed Divinity shall be Mountaguisme, your Disciples and Adhaerents
Mountaguists: for you affect to be head of a Sect: there is your Ambition, and
that we hope will please you, to be enrolled, (we say) in the Catalogue of
Haereticks, with those damned old Haereticks, Arrius, Sccinus, Pelagius: and
the more modern and little better Arminius, Vorstius, and your old
acquaintance Belga Thomsonius, who did more hurt in the University, by his
Arminianisme, Libertinisme and Epicurisme, than 1000. Drunkards will ever do
good, etc.

And now Sr. saving the Reverence of your Bishopric, Remember your Original,
(for some of us, have known you ab origin,) your mean birth and parentage,
(we say not a Carter or Ploughmans son,) near Okingham in Berkeshire: at
whose Cost you were brought up at Eaton College-Schoole and at the Kings
College in the University; (at either of which places, if God had given grace,
you might have imbibed better things;)

Certes, Sir Henry Sauile, that worthy and learned Knight (deceased,) when he
employed you in his Greek Chrysoftomes Variae Lectiones, had more hope of you
than to have proved such an ill member in the Church. But it is no marveile,
and you may remember that that Reverend By shop of Winton, of the Honorable
House afotenamed; (now with God) when you were his Chaplain, told you
eft-soones (Prophetically) You would never do good in the Church.

And if none of these things will serve to humble you nor to take down the
Pride of your heart, (for all Errors, Haeresies and Schisms, arise through
pride of heart) Remember yet how God has by nature marked you with a
sinistrall or Gotish look, promising no good to his Church and Children, whom
he has promised shall sit on his Right-band: And if this neither will serve to
humble you, We must and do leave you to be humbled and censured by that High
and Honorable Court of Parliament, unto whom we have appealed against you: And
we hope your Errors and Haeresies are so notorious, that your shuffling and
intruding from being Parson of Petworth to be Bishop of Chichester, and so to
be accounted a Spiritual Lord of the Upper House will not serve to protect
you: For, have we not (within the revolution of not many years) seen a
bigger Bishop than your self brought near censure and on his knees to the
House? have we not seen a Lord Chancellor censured and displaced? have we
not seen a Lord Treasurer censured and displaced? and even the last Session or
sitting of the House, have we not seen a Doctor of Divinity censured.

And for your self, we will say no more than we have said: Only Sir,
Remember what that great Doctor of the Gentiles says in the Conclusion of his
first Epistle to the Corinthians, If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ,
let him be Anathema, Maranatha; Your self being so great a Clerk know what
the words signify, Cave, for whosoever broacheth and maintayneth any haeresies
or haereticall Doctrines in the Church cannot love Christ who is Truth it
self. And so Sir, If you (can) love the Lord Jesus, and do belong to his
Election of Grace, The Grace of our Lord lesus Christ be with you, and our
love shall be with you in Christ Jesus,

Amen. By those that wish your Salvation, (if it may be:) The orthodox
Ministers of the Church of England.
Postscript to Bishop MOVNTAGV.
SIR, Whereas we understand that you have procured his Majesty's Pardon under
the Great Scale of England: We deny not but his Majesty may give Pardons to
what Malefastors he pleases; yea though they be condemned to be Beheaded or
Hanged: And we guess your self best knows what ends you have in procuring
your Pardon thus beforehand: and we must leave the consideration thereof to
the honorable House: But good Sir give us leave to tell you, that your
Impieties against GOD and his Church, are of that nature, that an earthly
Princes Pardon will yield small Comfort to your Conscience, unless (besides
your Recantation before men) you labor (which we wish) to get the King of
Kings his pardon under the Great Seal of Heaven, through the only merits of
CHRIST JESUS and the blood of his Passion; If we say again, it be not too
late for you so to do.



Hereunto is annexed an brief Supplication of the Ministers of the Church of
Scotland, to the high Senate of Parliament in England, against the same Richard
Mountagu.
Right Illustrious, Nobles, Knights, Burgesses.
We the Ministers of the Kirk of Scotland, reformed according to Gods ure
Word in his holy Writ, (to a great number,) serving the same God, obeying the
same King, and with an Vnanime Consent, agreeing in matter of Faith, Doctrine
and Discipline, with our welbeloved Brethren the Ministers of the Church of
England. In like most humble and submisse manner, do second the same which our
Brethren, the orthodox Ministers of England have Remonstrated unto this Right
Illustrious Court, against Mr. Mountagu and his Bukes; which have done no good
but mickle hurt and damage to this our Reformed Kirk: For it is not so old as
true a saying; That where God has his Kirk, the Devil has (or labors to
have) his Chapel: And it is well known, that although our Kirk has been
purely reformed according to Gods holy Writ, yet there are many Papists in this
his Majesty's Kingdom of Scotland. And since that false Lowne of the Kirk
Arminius lived and vented his public Errors and Haeresies, we have not been
clear from Arminians, and those of late increased and heartned by Mountagu's
Writings. And yet praised be God, for the most part, we have his Bukes in such
obloquie and hatred, that when we see any of them at the Buthes of any of our
Bukesellers, we hold them fitter to stop Mustard pots, than to give silver
for them. Also, our three Academies of St. Andrews Glasco, and Edinburgh have
condemned them. And certes, we make mickle merveile to hear that sick a man,
whom before, we heard should be censured and branded in your last Session of
Parliament, should immediately be made an Bishop and Governor of your Church:
We daily pray to God for better Brethren, better Governors, in our Kirk.
Though of late we have one of our own Nation come from you, who was Chaplain
to the late Duke of Buckingham, and over with him at the I Will of Ree, and had 2.
or 3. Livings in London; who by the mediation of his mighty Mr. the Duke, is
made Bishop of the Isles with us, and he is come over to us, a Bird of the
Libertine Fether, and we doubt a Mountaguist: And they say he was so well
beloved in his Parish of St. Martins in the Vintree, that they rang the Bells
when he was removed from them, and they of St. Faiths would have done no less,
if they had had any Bells to ring: but they did more; for they gave him mickle
money to be rid of him. But what else is this man? They that came out of
England with him say; That all the way as he came he did nothing but talk
profanely and scoffingly, and did eat and drink freely: and instead of
Prayers, he had constantly the Fiddlers to play and sing obscaene and scurrulus
Songs, early and late, at every place where he came, all the way as he went:
And what does he since he came amongst us, but feast and epicurize and and take
Tobacco? Yea, he does eftsoons open his mouth wide against the Puritans of
London: for so like Mr. Mountagu he terms all honest Orthodox Ministers: We
would therefore if it were the will of God, that you had him back from us, or
else that he were with his great Lord and Master. For we like not such lounes
in our Kirk: And Lord, when it is thy will, remove such Loyterers out of thy
Vineyard. But craving pardon for our digression, to leave him and return to
Mountagu.

We do most humbly supplicate the Honorable House to hearken (if not to us)
unto our Brethren the Ministers of the Church of England, and we hold their
Appeal or Remonstrance good, godly and religious; it being in Gods cause, and
for the Truth; which we are not only bound to labor to defend, but if need
be, to lay down our lives for the same: And we are of unanime-opinion, that
Mr. Mountagu deserves severe Censure and punishment, if it were but for
vilifying King James (of blessed memory) his Writings against the arminians,
his secret depraving our Kirk of Scotland, his more open vilifying the sacred
Synod of Dort, which was so piously procured and highly approved by his said
Majesty, of ever blessed and happy memory. For the whilk his vile doings, we
hope doubtless, when ever it may please God to move his Majesty's heart, or
any other Christian Prince or State, Reformed, to call a Synod again;
Mountagu though now a Bishop, and his Bukes will be condemned and censured to
posterity.

And so the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and Jacobs God be with you, and
all your pious and religious Consults, for his Glory. Your most humble and
submisse Orators, The Ministers of the Kirk of Scotland.

The Publishers Postscript, or Conclusion to all.
FOr this present ensuing Year of Christ, 1629. We will not take upon us to
define or confine the Consummation of all things, within the compass thereof,
as an ancient Scholar did publicly deliver at Paul's Cross, upon a Text out
of the Revelation about five years past: And although we may be persuaded
that the Last-Day is not so far off as the secure World thinks it: Yet
seeing that Year, Day, and Hour, are Arcana Dej, we are content to leave
them locked uppe in Arca Dej, unto whom they belong. We are content also to
pass by the Prench and English Prognosticators Praedictions for this ensuing
Year: But we will not cease to pray and beseech the Lord of Hosts so to unite
the heart of the Kings Sacred Majesty to the Parliament (his Great Council)
that the Higher and Lower House may unanimously agree, and be reciprocally
united to the KING, that matters now much amiss in Church aend Commonwealth
may be so Reformed, that this YEAR may be accounted Annus Aureus, and that
this Parliament (this Year) may be Inscribed and engraven in Marble affixed to
the House, in Letters of Gold, SACRED TO MEMORY AND TO POSTERITY, THE (LONG
EXPECTED) HAPPY PARLIAMENT.

M.DC.XX.IX.

And however, in as much as in the Praemisses, The Mystery of B. MOVNTAGV's
Iniquity is so manifestly revealed, seeing we are enjoined in the Letanie of
our English Liturgy, to Pray; From all false Doctrine and Haeresie, Good Lord
deliver us. So we hope it shall be no impiety to add, From B. Mountagu and
his false doctrine and Haeresie, Good Lord deliver us. Amen.

An Arminian or mere Mountaguist.
IS an Animal, His Study.
scarce rational, whose study, is to read (and applaud) Peter Lombard and John
Duns, before Peter Martyr and John Calvin: and for more modern Polemicks, he
preferres Bellarmine above Chamierus.

His garb or fashion, His Garb.
when he comes from the University, wit affectation, is to wear a long Cloak,
and a correspondent Cassock, short no where but in the wast, which is girt up
with a girdle and a knot or rose almost up to his nose: commonly a
falling-band; because Precisians wear small set-ruffs.

His Religion, His Religion.
is, like a Confection, compounded of many, the least ingredient being
Protestantisme: and to believe as the Church does.

His first Ambition is to address himself to be some great-mans
Trencher-Chaplain; His Ambition.
that so he may not be out of the Path way to preferment, not an Ignoramus in
Court-curtesies, nor a sot in State-affaires.

His Devotion, His Devotion.
is so conformable to the Ceremonies of the Church, that he thinks it impiety
to decline the least particle thereof: and yet he declines the Doctrine of the
Church so much, that he wishes with all his heart, the Praver in the Letanie
of our English Liturgy, From all false Doctrine and Haeresie, Good Lord
deliver us, were obliterated.

He is a mungrell Divine, His Divinity. N. C. his Achitophel.
who, as it were betwixt Hawk and buzzard, can see nicely to distinguish
betwixt a Puritan in opinion and a Puritan in discipline: and has taught the
name, contrary to the first institution, so far to enlarge it self, that a
Protestant must make hard shift to save him self harmless. I.R. his Speech in
Parlame^t, 21. Janua. 1628. His politic part.
And he is one that makes the Grace of God lackey it after the will of men,
the Sheep to keep the Shepherd, and a mortal seed of an immortal God.

He is the spawne of a Papist, and if there come the warmth of favor upon him,
you shall see him turn into one of those Frogs which arose out of the
bottomless Pit: and if you mark it well, you shall see him reaching out his
hand to a Papist: (a Papist to a Jesuit, and a Jesuit gives one hand to the
Pope, and another to the King of Spain:) And so we leave him to get more
Grace, profess and practice more goodness.

His Motto CONCORDIA-DISCORS. Orthodoxus.

FINIS.

