depiction of Captain Vaul Captoine Vaul that cruel Tyrant.


THE APRENTICES ADVICE TO THE XII. BISHOPS lately accused of High Treason, by
the Honorable Assemblies of both Houses.

With Our friendly admonition, to take heed how they falsely Accuse those
innocent Worthies in Parliament, whose lives are more dear to us then all the
25. Prelates, though they were hanged together.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed in the new year of the Bishops scare, Anno Dom. 1642.

THE APRENTICES ADVICE TO THE XII. BISHOPS, lately accused of high Treason, by
the honorable Assemblies of both HOUSES.
1.
THou, thou were the cause, proud Io. Eborac
Why the fell Courtiers did us hew and hack;
By him on thee our blood avenged shall be,
Beginning of thy fall, who lets us see.
2.
What thou on us do charge, (Thomas Durisme)
It Is true in thee, thou second of that scisme,
Which is so great, that cured we thall not see;
Till thou by sword of justice out off be.
3. 4.
After souls and bodies blood, Robt Co. Lich.
You thirsted; and so did you Ios. Norwich;
Most pious men were object of your hate,
Your mischief God turns on your traiterous pate.
5. 6.
You two Io. Asaphen, Guil. Ba. and Wells,
In whom a couple of base spirits dwells;
Our muse does tell you, for your traiterous geer,
You and your brood, are like to pay full dear.
7.
In The heart o'th Treason, now comes Geo. Hereford,
No tongue or pen, his baseness can record.
8.
And next comes he, who will, (who dare, Rob. Oxon.
Of their nature brutish, and) bid A-pox on
All Puritans, in the Parliament and City,
Thirsting to see their blood, without all pity.
9.
Ma. Ely does exceed the rest in Letchery,
Yet does but equalize them in their treachery:
(For Letchery, Treachery, Popery, Pride,
Our sordid Prelates scorn to be out vi'de.
10. 11. 12,
Godf Gonc. Jo. Peterburg. Mor. L. Landaff.
You three like drunkards will carouse and quaff;
And in your healths, upon your cursed knee,
Wish the confusion of all Scots to see.
Go twelve Apostates (not Apostles) view,
Your Arch Guil. Cant. the head o'th damned crew,
Who has his King, Country, and State betrayed,
And to be hanged with you, has so long stayed,
Now lay your knavish pates in the Tower together,
And while you have time, do but consider whether,
It be not best your Treason to confess,
With all your plots, and acts of wickedness,
That mercy find with God, and man you may;
Before your mouldering corpse return to clay:
Mean while, stop your soul mouths, and do not ly,
Saying for want of you Sects multiply.
Whereas by your cursed means, they do increase,
And will do, (while you live) in every place,
For when in you, poor folk such Treason spy,
And in your ways such baseness they do eye,
Alas, (say they) Non wise will be content,
To Abide under such miscreants government:
To any Sect we joined sure will be
Before we will yield to Prelates tyrany.
How is the justice of great Jove dilated,
And Prelates mischief now retaliated?
The Scots by them must counted trayters be,
Prelates (not Scots) are trayters now we see:
Oh height of pride! oh unheard of impudence,
Your King and State, how would you recompense?
Must all the Laws made without you be Null?
Of pride and -- of what not, are you so full?
And so big swollen? that now you needs must vent
To blow up by a trick the Parliament?
You brats of Babylon, must you be King?
Made without you, must no Laws be? a thing
The Noble Peers and Commons never will brook,
Into your wiles more narrowly they will look:
You spawne of Rome, how could you do this evil,
Unless you acted were, even by the Devil?
Let Prelates then by Prentices of London
Advised be, or else they are but undone.
Unfeignedly your traiterous deeds repent,
Else as your bodies now toth' Tower are sent,
So will your souls ere long be sent to Hell,
With Judas, Garnet, Grant, and Faux to dwell,
Which shall (with all the rest) tormented be,
In Hellish woes, to all eternity.
But stay, we Prentices have one word more,
To charge upon this brood o'th scarlet whore;
The limbs of Antichrist, the Sons of Hell;
Who do the powder traitors parallel:
Chieffy in this, their damned treachery,
Upon the Puritans must fathered be:
The like do these by this their hellish reach,
The worthies of the Parliament t'impeach
With treason. Impudent and brazen faces,
How durst you lay on them such foul disgraces?
The wretch that spoke it first, did he not fear,
To swallow him up quick, the earth would tear.
Peace chattering Meg-pies, peace, and cease to chatter,
In these brave spirits lodges other matter;
These are blessed Saints, these stand for Kingdoms good
In their blessed veins there runs no traiterous blood;
There does in their true hearts no treason dwell,
To trayters they are like as heaven to hell;
They adventure their lives for us, we see,
And (as In the Pro^estation.
wee'ar sworn) the like for them will we,
First hyems gellid Ice like fire shall burn,
And blustering Borias to due return,
And m^ssy stones to plumid wings betake,
E're Prentices these Worthies will forsake.
Finis and Funis.

