THE ARGVMENTS UPON THE WRIT OF Habeas Corpus, IN THE COURT OF KINGS BENCH.
WHEREIN, Are learnedly discussed, not only the several Branches of the said
Writ, but also many Authorities as well of the Common as Statute Law: and
diverse ancient and obscure Records most amply and elaborately debated and
cleared. TOGETHER, With the Opinion of the Court thereupon. Whereunto is
annexed, The Petition of Sir John Elliot Knight, in behalf of the Liberty of
the Subject.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for W. Lee, M. Walbancke, D. Pakeman, and G. Bedell.
1649.

ARGUMENTS upon the Habeas Corpus concerning Loans.
Sir Thomas Darnell his Case, Michaelis 3o Caroli, Banco Regis.
SIR Thomas Darnell Baronet, being imprisoned in the Fleet by virtue of a
warrant signed by the Kings Attorney General upon the third of November, by
Sergeant Bramston his assigned Council, moved the Justices of the Kings Bench
to grant him a Writ of Habeas Corpus cum causa directed to the Warden of the
Fleet to show that Court the cause of his imprisonment, that thereupon they
might determine whether his restraint were legal or illegal, and it was
granted by the Court returnable Thursday following the 8th day of November.

On Thursday Sir Thomas Darnell expected that his Writ should be returned, but
it was delaied, and it was moved that the return should be on Saturday the
tenth of November, which made Sir Thomas Darnell the more remiss in suing out
an Alias upon his Habeas corpus.

On Saturday the Writ was not returned, and thereupon the Kings Attorney
General gave order for an Alias upon the Habeas corpus for Sir Thomas Darnell,
returnable upon Thursday morning the thirteenth of November; by virtue of which
Writ the Warden of the Fleet brings Sir Thomas Darnell to the Kings Bench and
returns as follows:

Executio istius brevis patet in quadem schedula annexat' huic brevi.

The Return was this:

Ego Henricus Liloe Miles gardianus prisone Domini Regis de le Fleet,
Serenissimo domino Regi certifico quod dict' Thomas Darnell Baronet detentus
est in prisona praedict' sub custodia mea virtute cujusdam Warranti duorum de
privato Consilio mihi directi, cujus tenor sequitur in his verbis: viz.

Whereas heretofore the body of Sir Thomas Darnell has been committed to your
custody, these are to require you still to continue him; and to let you know
that he was and is committed by the special command of his Majesty, etc.

Et haec est causa detentionis predict' Thomae Darnell.

Sergeant Bramston. May it please your Lordship, I did not expect this Cause at
this time, neither did I hear of it until I came now into the Hall; and
therefore I shall now humbly show you what my Client has informed me since my
coming hither. I understand by him that he expected not his coming to this
place to day, the writ by which he was brought hither was not moved for by him,
but was procured without his privity, and seeing his case is so, and that he
perceives the cause of his coming, which before he knew not, his motion to
your Lordship is, that you would be pleased to let him have the Copy of the
return and give him time to speak unto it, and that this writ being not sent
out by his procurement may not be field.


Heath Attorney General. My Lords, it is true that this Gent. Sir Thomas
Darnell being imprisoned in the Fleet, did heretofore move your Lordship for a
Habeas Corpus, etc. and it was granted him, and his Majesty being made
acquainted therewith was very willing that he and all his people might have
equal Justice, and when they desire that which seems to accord with the rules
of the Law they should have it. But it fell out so that on the day when the
writ should have been returned, the Warden of the Fleet did not return it as it
was his duty to have done; he did forbear to do it upon a commandment, because
it was conceived, there being five at that time to appear, the Court would have
been straightened for want of time, but I imagined that these gentlemen who did
desire the writ before should have again been earnest to renew them, which it
seems they did not. This Habeas Corpus was sent out by special command,
because these gent. gave out in speeches, and in particular this gent. That
they did wonder why they should be hindered from trial, and what should be the
reason their writs were not returned: nay his Majesty did tell me that they
reported that the King did deny them the course of Justice, and therefore he
commanded me to renew the writ, which I did, and think I may do it ex officio.


Sir Thomas Darnell. My Lords, I knew not until now but that I was committed
by Mr. Atturneys warrant only, and thereupon I did desire a Habeas corpus at
the Bar, which you were pleased to grant me, but now I understand that my
restraint is by another means, and therefore I shall crave leave to have some
time to speak to it. And as for the words alleged against me as if I had
spoken them, I humbly. pray they may be no disparagement to my cause, for I do
patiently refer my self to your grave censures, as being accused of a fact
whereof I am no ways guilty.


Hide Chief Justice. You give a temperate and fair answer; and now you may
perceive the upright and sincere proceedings that have been in this business;
you did no sooner petition to have Council assigned you, but you had it
granted to you, for indeed we cannot deny it, and I know not but that any
Council might have moved for you, without having been assigned for you, and
yet have had no blame, for it is the Kings pleasure his Laws should take place
and be executed, and therefore do we sit here: when you made a motion of the
Habeas corpus, that was likewise granted; whether the commitment be by the King
or others, this Court is a place where the King does sit in person, and we have
power to examine it; and if it appears that any man has injury or wrong by his
imprisonment, we have power to deliver and discharge them, if otherwise, he is
to be remanded by us to prison again: now it seems you are not ready to speak
to this return, if you desire further day we ought to grant it.


Sir Thomas Darnell. My Lords, I humbly desire it.


Chief Justice. I know no cause why it should be denied.


Sergeant Bramston. My Lords, we shall desire the writ may not be filed, and
that we may have a Copy of the return.


Attorney General. You cannot deny the filing of the writ, if you desire to
have a Copy of the return.


Chief Justice. Although you be remanded at this time to prison, because you
are not ready to speak to the return, we can adjorn you to a new day upon the
Writ, and so you may prepare your self; but if you will not have this filed,
there must go out a new Habeas corpus, and thereupon must be another return.


Sergeant Bramston. My Lord, we desire some time that we may be advised whether
we may proceed or not.


Lord Chief Justice Hide. Will you submit your self to the King?


Sir Thomas Darnell. My Lord, I desire some time to advise of my proceedings, I
have moved many men, and offered to retain them of my Council, but they refuse
me, and I can get none to be of council with me without your assistance.


Chief Justice. You shall have what Council assigned you, you will have or
desire, for no offense will be taken against any man, that shall advise you in
your proceedings in Law.


Attorney General. I will pass my word, they that do advise you shall have no
offense taken against them for it; and I shall give my consent to any way that
you shall desire, either that it may be filed, or that it may not be filed; for
if you desire Justice you shall have it, and the King will not deny it: but if
it shall be conceived as it is rumored, that there was a denial of Justice on
the Kings part, you must know that his Majesty is very tender of that. And for
the Gent. now he is brought hither, I conceive, but yet I leave it to your
Lordships judgment, that the writ must be filed, and you must either deliver
him or remand him, or else it will be an escape in the Warden of the Fleet.


Sir Thomas Darnell. I would not have it thought that I should speak any thing
against my Prince, and for those words I do deny them, for upon my conscience
they never came into my thought, perhaps you shall find that they have been
spoken by some other, but not by any of us.


Chief Justice Hide. Sir, you have made a fair answer, and I doubt not but Mr.
Attorney will make the like relation of it; you move for the not filing of the
Writ, if you refuse to have it filed whereby it should not be of Record, you
must have no Copy of it, but if you will have it filed, you shall have a Copy
of it, and further time to speak to it, choose whether of them you will.


Sergeant Bramston. We desire to have the return read once more: and it was
read as before.


Sergeant Bramston. So as the writ may not be filed we will desire no copy of
the return.


Chief Justice Hide. Then the Gent. must return back again into the custody of
the Warden of the Fleet, and therefore I ask you whether you desire to come
hither again upon this Writ, or will you have a new one?


Sir Thomas Darnell. I desire your Lordship that I may have time to consider of
it.


Chief Justice Hide. Then on Gods name take your own time to think of it.


Michaelis 3o Caroli Regis. Thursday, 22 November. Sir John Corbet Baronet, Sir
Walter Earl, Sir John Henningham, Sir Edward Hampden, Knights, were brought to
the Bar.
Sergeant Bramston. MAy it please your Lordship to hear the return read, or
shall I open it?


Chief Justice Hide. Let it be read.


Mr. Keeling read the return, being the same as that of Sir Thomas Darnell.

May it please your Lordship, I shall humbly move upon this return in the
behalf of Sir John Henningham with whom I am of Council; it is his petition
that he may be bailed from his imprisonment, it was but in vain for me to move
that to a Court of Law which by Law cannot be granted: and therefore in that
regard, that upon this return it will be questioned whether as this return is
made, the Gent. may be bailed or not; I shall humbly offer up to your Lordship
the case, and some reasons out of mine understanding, arising out of the return
it self, to satisfy your Lordship that these Prisoners may, and as their case
is, ought to be bailed by your Lordship.

The exception that I take to this return, is as well to the matter and
substance of the return, as to the manner and legal form thereof; the
exceptions that I take to the matter is in several respects.

That the return is too general, there is no sufficient cause shown in
special or in general of the commitment of this Gentleman; and as it is
insufficient for the cause, so also in the time of the first imprisonment, for
howsoever here does appear a time upon the second warrant from the Lords of the
Council to detain him still in prison, yet by the return no time can appear
when he was first imprisoned, though it be necessary it should be shown, and if
that time appear not, there is no cause your Lordship should remand him, and
consequently he is to be delivered.

Touching the matter of the return, which is the cause of his imprisonment, it
is expressed to be Per speciale mandatum domini Regis: This is too general and
uncertain, for that it is not manifest what kind of command this was.

Touching the legal form of the return, it is not as it ought to be fully and
positively the return of the Keeper himself only, but it comes with a
significavit or prout that he was committed Per speciale mandatum domini Regis,
as appears by warrant from the Lords of the Council, not of the King
himself, and that is not good in legal form.

For the matter and substance of the return it is not good, because there ought
to be a cause of that imprisonment.

This writ is the means, and the only means that the Subject has in this and
such like case to obtain his liberty; there are other writs by which men are
delivered from restraint, as that de homine replegiando, but extends not to
this cause, for it is particularly excepted in the body of the writ de
manucaptione et de cautione admittenda, but they lie in other cases; but the
writ of Habeas corpus is the only means the subject has to obtain his liberty,
and the end of this writ is to return the cause of the imprisonment, that it
may be examined in this Court, whether the parties ought to be discharged or
not, but that cannot be done upon this return, for the cause of the
imprisonment of this Gentleman at first is so far from appearing particularly
by it, that there is no cause at all expressed in it.

This writ requires that the cause of the imprisonment should be returned, and
if the cause be not specially certified by it, yet should it at the last be
shown in general, that it may appear to the Judges of the Court, and it must
be expressed so far as that it may appear to be none of those causes for
which by the Law of the Kingdom the Subject ought not to be imprisoned, and it
ought to be expressed that it was by presentment or indictment, and not upon
petition or suggestion made to the King and Lords, which is against the statute
made in the 25 Ed. 3. c. 4. 42 E. 3. c. 3.

By the statute 25 Ed. 3. cap. 4. It is ordained and established, that no man
from henceforth shall be taken by petition or suggestion made to the King or
his Council, but by indictment or course of Law; and accordingly it was
enacted, 42 E. ^. cap. 3. the title of which statute is, None shall be put to
answer an accusation made to the King without presentment. Then my Lord, it
being so, although the cause should not need to be expressed in such manner as
that it may appear to be none of these causes mentioned in the statute, or else
the Subject by this return loses the benefit and advantage of these Laws,
which be their birthright and inheritance; but in this return there is no cause
at all appearing of the first commitment, and therefore it is plain that there
is no cause for your Lordship to remand him: but there is cause you should
deliver him, since the writ is to bring the body and the cause of the
imprisonment before your Lordship.

But it may be objected, that this writ of Habeas corpus does not demand the
cause of the first commitment, but of the detaining only; and so the writ is
satisfied by the return, for though it show no cause of the first commitment,
but of detaining only, yet it declares a cause why the Gentleman is detained
in prison; this is no answer, nor can give any satisfaction, for the reason why
the cause is to be returned is for the Subjects liberty, that if it shall
appear a good and sufficient cause to your Lordship, then to be remanded; if
your Lordship think and find it insufficient, he is to be enlarged.

This is the end of this writ, and this cannot appear to your Lordship,
unless the time of the first commitment be expressed in the return. I know
that in some cases the time is not material, as when the cause of the
commitment is (and that so especially) returned, as that the time is not
material, it is enough to show the cause without the time as after a
conviction or trial had by Law; But when it is in this manner, that the time
is the matter it self: for intend what cause you will of the commitment, yea
though for the highest cause of treason, there is no doubt but that upon the
return thereof the time of it must appear; for it being before trial and
conviction had by Law, it is but an accusation, and he that is only accused,
and the accusation ought by Law to be let to bail.

But I beseech your Lordship to observe the consequence of this Cause. If the
Law be, that upon this return this Gentleman should be remanded, I will not
dispute whether or no, a man may be imprisoned before he be convicted according
to the Law: but if this return shall be good, then his imprisonment shall not
continue on for a time, but for ever; and the Subjects of this Kingdom may be
restrained of their liberties perpetually, and by Law there can be no remedy
for the Subject; and therefore this return cannot stand with the Laws of the
Realm, or that of Magna Carta. Nor with the statute of 28 Ed. 3. ca. 3. for if
a man be not baileable upon this return, they cannot have the benefit of these
two Laws, which are the inheritance of the Subject.

If your Lordship shall think this to be a sufficient cause, then it goes to a
perpetual imprisonment of the Subject: for in all those causes which may
concern the Kings Subjects, and are appliable to all times and cases, we are
not to reflect upon the present time and government, where justice and mercy
flows, but we are to look what may betide us in the time to come, hereafter.

It must be agreed on all sides, that the time of the first commitment does not
appear in this return; but by a latter warrant from the Lords of the Council,
there is a time indeed expressed for the continuing of him in prison, and that
appears; but if this shall be a good cause to remand these Gentlemen to prison,
they may lie there this seven years longer, and seven years after them, nay all
the days of their lives. And if they sue out a writ of Habeas corpus, it is but
making a new warrant, and they shall be remanded, and shall never have the
advantage of the Laws which are the best inheritance of every Subject.

And in Ed. 3. xfol. 36. the Laws are called the great inheritance of every
Subject, and the inheritance of inheritances, without which inheritance we have
no inheritance.

These are the exceptions I desire to offer up to your Lordship, touching the
return, for the insufficiency of the cause returned, and the defect of the time
of the first commitment, which should have been expressed.

I will not labor in objections till they be made against me, in regard the
statute of Westminster primo is so frequent in every man's mouth, that at the
Common Law those men that were committed in four cases were not replevisable
(viz.) those that were taken for the death of a man, or the commandment of the
King, or his Justices for the forest; I shall speak something to it, though I
intend not to spend much time about it, for it touches not this Case we have
in question.

For that is concerning a Case of the Common Law, when men are taken by the
Kings writs, and not by word of mouth, and it shall be so expounded, as Master
Stamford fol. 73. yet it is nothing to this Case, for if you will take the true
meaning of that statute, it extends not at all to this writ of Habeas corpus;
for the words are plain, they shall be replevisable by the Common writ, that
is, by the writ de homine replegiando, directed to the Sheriff to deliver them
if they were baileable, but this Case is above the Sheriff, and he is not to
be Judge in it, whether the cause of the commitment be sufficient or not, as it
appears in Fitz Herbert, de homine replegiando, and many other places, and not
of the very words of the statute, this is clear, for thereby many other causes
mentioned, as the death of a man, the commandment of the Justices, etc. In
which the statute says, men are not replevisable; but will a man conceive that
the meaning is, that they shall not be bailed at all, but live in perpetual
imprisonment? I think I shall not need to spend time, in that it is so plain,
let me but make one instance.

A man is taken de morte hominis, he is not baileable by writ, says this
statute, that is, by the common writ, there was a common writ for this Case,
and that was called de odio and acia, as appears. Bracton Coron. 34. this is
the writ intended by the statute, which is a common writ, and not a special
writ; But my Lord as this writ de odio and acia was before this statute, so it
was afterward taken away by the statute of 28 Ed. 3. cap. 9. But before that
statute, this writ did lie in the special Case as is shown in Brooks 9th
Reports, Powlters Case, and the end of this writ was, that the Subject might
not be too long detained in prison, as till the Justices of Air discharged
them, so that the Law intended not that a man should suffer perpetual
imprisonment, for they were very careful that men should not be kept too long
in prison, which is also a Liberty of the Subject; and my Lord that this Court
has bailed upon a suspicion of high treason, I will offer it to your Lordship,
when I shall show you presidents in these cases of a commitment by the Privy
Council, or by the King himself: But before I offer these presidents unto your
Lordship, of which there be many, I shall by your Lordships favor speak a
little to the next exception, and that is to the matter of the return, which I
find to be per speciale mandatum domini Regis 8. and what is, that it is by
this writ there may be sundry commands by the King, we find a special command
often in our Books, as in the statute of Marlborough cap. 8. they were
imprisoned. Rediss. shall not be delivered without the special command of our
Lord the King, and so in Bracton, De Actionibus, the last chapter, where it
appears that the King commandment for imprisonments is by special writ, so by
writ again men are to be delivered, for in the case of Rediss' or Post Rediss',
if it shall be removed by a Certiorare, is by a special writ to deliver
parties: so that by this appears that by the Kings commandment to imprison, and
to deliver in those cases, is understood this writ, and so it may be in this
case which we have heard.

And this return here is a special Mandatum, it may be understood to be under
some of the Kings Seals, 42 Ass. and ought to be delivered, and will you make a
difference between the Kings command under his seal, and his command by word
of mouth; what difference there is, I leave it to your Lordships judgment, but
if there be any, it is the more material that it should be expressed what
manner of command it was, which does not here appear; and therefore it may be
the Kings command by writ, or his command under his seal, or his command by
word of mouth alone.

And if of an higher nature, there is none of these commands, then the other,
doubtless, it is that by writ, or under seal, for they are of record, and in
these the person may be bailed, and why not in this? As to the legal form,
admitting there were substances in the return, yet there wants legal form, for
the writ of Habeas Corpus is the commandment of the King to the Keeper of the
prisons, and thereupon they are to make return both of the body, and of the
cause of the commitment, and that cause is to appear of them who are the
immediate Officers. And if he does it by signification from another, that
return is defective in Law, and therefore this return cannot be good, for it
must be from the Officer himself, and if the cause returned by him be good, it
binds the prisoners.

The warrant of the Lords was but a direction for him, he might have made his
return to have been expressly by the Kings commandment, there was warrant for
it, I shall not need to put you cases of it, for it is not enough that he
returns that he was certified that the commitment was by the Kings command, but
he must of himself return this fact as it was done. And now my Lord I shall
offer to your Lordship presidents of diverse kinds, upon commitments by the
Lords of the Privy Council, upon commitments by the special command of the
King, and upon commitments both by the King and the Lords together. And
howsoever I conceive, which I submit to your Lordship, that our case will not
stand upon presidents, but upon the fundamental Laws and Statutes of this
Realm, and though the presidents look the one way or the other, they are to be
brought back unto the Laws by which the Kingdom is governed. In the first of
Henry the eighth, Rot. Parl. 9. one Harison was committed to the Marshalsey by
the command of the King, and being removed by Habeas Corpus into the Court, the
cause returned was, that he was committed per mandatum Domini Regis, and he was
bailed.

In the fortieth of Elizabeth, Thomas Wendon was committed to the Gatehouse by
the commandment of the Queen, and Lords of the Council, and being removed by
an Habeas Corpus upon the general return, and he was bailed.

In 8 Jacobi, one Caesar was committed by the Kings commandment, and this being
returned upon his Habeas Corpus, upon the examination of this case it does
appear that it was overruled, that the return should be amended, or else the
prisoner should be delivered.

The presidents concerning the commitment by the Lords of the Council, are in
effect the same with these, where the commitment is, by the reason why the
cause of the commitment should not be shown, holds in both cases, and that is
the necessity of suit, and therefore Master Stamford makes the command of the
King, and that of the Lords of the Privy Council, to be both as one; and to
this purpose, if they speak, he speaks, and if he speaks, they speak.

The presidents that we can show you, how the Subject has been delivered upon
commitment by the Lords of the Council, as in the time of Henry the eight, as
in the times of Queen Elizabeth, Queen Mary, are infinite: as in the ninth of
Elizabeth; Thomas Lawrence was committed to the Tower by the Lords of the
Council, and bailed upon an Habeas Corpus.

In the 43 of Elizabeth, Calvin's case.

In the third of Elizabeth, Vernons case.

These were committed for high treason, and yet bailed, for in all these cases
there must be a conviction in due time, or a deliverance by Law.

There be diverse other presidents that might be shown to your Lordship. In 12
Iacobi, Miles Renards. In 12 Jacobi, Rot. 155. Richard Beckwiths case. In 4
Iacobi, Sir Thomas Monson was committed for treason to the Tower of London, and
afterward was brought hither, and bailed, and since our case stands upon this
return, and yet there is no sufficient cause in Law expressed in the return of
the detaining this Gentleman; and since these presidents do warrant our
proceedings, my humble suit unto this Court is, that the Gentleman Sir John
Henningham, who has petitioned his Majesty, that he may have the benefit of
the Law, and his Majesty has signified it, It is his pleasure that justice
according to the Law should be administered at all times in general to all his
Subjects, and particularly to these Gentlemen, which is their birthright: My
humble suit to your Lordship is, that these Gentlemen may have the benefit of
that Law, and be delivered from their imprisonment.


Master Noye his Argument, of Council with Sir Walter Earl at that time.
May it please your Lordship, I am of Council with Sir Walter Earl, one of the
prisoners at the Bar; the return of this writ is as those that have been
before, they are much of one tenor; and as you have heard the tenor of that,
so this Gent. coming hither by an Habeas Corpus, I will by your Lordships
favor read the writ.

Carolus Dei Gratia etc. Iohanni Lylo Milit' Guardian' Prison' nostrae de le
Fleet Salut', Praecipimus tibi quod corpus Walteri Earl Milit' in prison'
nostra sub custodia tua detent' ut dicit una cum causa detentionis suae
quocunque nomine praedict' Walter' censeat in eadem Habeas Corpus ad
subjiciendum and recipiendum ea quae curia nostra de eo ad tunc and ibidem
ordin' conting' in hac part and haec nullatenus omit' periculo incumbent' and
habeas tibi hoc breve, Test' Hyde, apud Westminster quarto die Novembris, Anno
8.

Executio istius brevis patet in quadam schedula huic brevi annexat'

Prisonum Regis de le Fleet.
Respons. Johan' Liloe Guardian' Prison' de le Fleet.

Ego Johannes Lyloe Mil' Guardian' Prison' domini Regis de le Fleet,
Serenissimo Domino Regi, apud Westminster' 8. Post receptionem hujus brevis
quod in hac schedula est mentionat', Certifico quod Walter Earl miles, in eodem
brevium nominat' detentus est in Prisona de le Fleet sub custodia mea praedict'
per speciale mandatum domini Regis mihi significatum per Warrantum duorum and
aliorum de Privato Concilio per Honorabilissimi dicti Domini Regis, cujus
quidem tenor sequitur in haec verba.

Whereas Sir Walter Earl Knight, was heretofore committed to your custody,
these are to will and require you still to detain him, letting you know, that
both his first commitment, and this direction for the continuance of him in
prison, were and are by his Majesty's special commandment, from White Hall, 7
Novembris, 1627.

Thomas Coventree C. S. Henry Manchester. Thomas Suffolk. Bridgewater. Kellie.
R. Duneln'. Thomas Edmunds. John Cook. Marlebrugh. Pembrook. Salisbury. Totnes.
Grandisson. Guliel' Bath and Wells. Robert Nanton. Richard Weston. Humphrey
Mayes.


To the Guardian of the Fleet or his Deputy.

Et haec est causa detentionis praedict' Walteri Earl sub custodia mea in
Prison' praedict'. Attamen corpus ejusdem Walteri coram Domino Rege ad diem and
locum praedictum, post receptionem brevis praedict' parat' habeo prout istud
breve in se exiget and requiret.

Respon' Johan' Liloe milit' Guardian Prison de le Fleet.

My Lord, the first Habeas corpus bears date the 4 of November, then there is
an Alias habeas bears Test after that, and the tenor thereof is a command to
the Warden of the Fleet, quod habeas corpus Walteri Earl coram nobis ad
subjiciendum and recipiendum ea quae curia nostra de eo etc. ordin' conting.
And the Warden of the Fleet he certifies as your Lordship have heard; May it
please your Lordship, I desire as before was defired for the other Gentlemen,
that Sir Walter Earl may be also bailed, if there be no other cause of his
imprisonment: for if there were a cause certified, and that cause were not
sufficient to detain him still in prison, your Lordship would bail him, and if
a man should be in worse case, when there is no cause certified at all, that
was very hard.

The writ is, that he should bring the prisoner coram nobis before the King,
the end of that is ad subjiciendum and recipiendum; now I conceive that though
there be a signification of the Kings pleasure to have this Gentleman
imprisoned, yet when the King grants this writ to bring the prisoner hither, ad
subjiciendum and recipiendum, his pleasure likewise is to have the prisoner let
go, if by Law he be not chargeable, or otherwise to detain him still in
prison, if the case so require it.

I will put your Lordship in mind of a case, and it was Pasch. 9 Ed. 3. M. 3.
I will cite by the placita, because my Book is not paged as other Books are, it
is in the case of a Cessavit.

In that case there were two things considerable, the one that there was a
signification of the Kings pleasure past, and that determined with him: the
other, that though there was a signification of the Kings pleasure, before
which was, yet there comes after that a writ, and that was another
signification of the Kings pleasure, that the prisoner shall be brought hither
ad subjiciendum, to submit himself to punishment, if he have deserved it, or ad
recipiendum, to receive his enlargement, and be delivered, if there be no cause
of his imprisonment.

And if upon an Habeas corpus a cause of commitment be certified, that cause
is to be tried here before your Lordship. But if no cause be shown, then the
proceedings must be ut curia nostra ad mar' contigerit, the Court must do that
which stands with Law and Justice, and that is to deliver him.

My Lord, I shall be bold to move one word more touching this return: I
conceive that every Officer to a Court of Justice must make his return of his
own act, or of the act of another, and not what he is certified of by another.

But in this case the Warden of the Fleet does not certify himself, of
himself, that this Gentleman was commanded to him by the King, but that he was
certified by the Lords of the Council, that it was the Kings pleasure that he
should detain him. But in our case the Warden of the Fleet must certify the
immediate cause, and not the cause of the cause, as it does by this return,
Detentus est sub custodia mea per speciale mandatum Domini Regis mihi
significatum per Warrantum duorum de Privato Concilio; that is not the use in
Law, but he ought to return the primary cause, and not the subsequent cause, as
in 32 Edw. 3. return, Rex vicecom' 87. in a writ De homine replegiando,
against an Abbot, the Sheriff returns, that he has sent to the Bayliffe of
the Abbot, and he answered him that the party was the Abbots villain, and so he
cannot deliver him, that is held an insufficient return, and a new Alias was
granted, but if the Sheriff had returned, that the Abbot did certify him so,
it had been good, but he must not return what is certified him by another.

In one of the presidents that has been noted, as that of Parker, 22 Hen. 8.
there the Guardian of the prison certifies that Parker detentus est sub
custodia mea per mandatum Domini Regis mihi nunciatum per Robertum Pecke; now
our case is by the Nunciation of many, but in Law majus and minus non variant
in spetione, the certification of one and of many is of the same effect,
although in moral understanding there may be a difference.

Trin. 2 Ed. 3. Rot. 46. in this Court in 21 Ed. 3. in the printed Book there
is a piece of it: The Abbot of Burey brings a prohibition out of this Court,
the Bishop of Norwich pleads in Bar of that Quod mihi testificatum, quod
continetur in Archivis, that he is excommunicated; there were two exceptions
taken to this case in this president, and they are both in one case, the first
was, that no case appears, why he was excommunicated: there may be causes why
he should be excommunicated, and then he should be barred, and there may be
causes why the excommunication should not bar him: for it may be the
excommunication was for bringing the action, which was the Kings writ, and
therefore because there was no cause of the excommunication returned, it was
ruled that it was not good. The other reason is that upon the Roll, which is
mihi testificatum.

Now every man when he will make a Certificate to the Court, Proprium factum
suum non alterius significare debet, he must inform the Court of the immediate
act done, and not that such things are told him, or that such things are
signified unto him, but that was not done in this case, and therefore it was
held insufficient: and so in this case of ours, I conceive the return is
insufficient in the form, there is another cause my Lord, for which I conceive
this return is not good.

But first I will be bold to inform your Lordship touching the Statute of Magna
Charta 29. Nullus liber homo capiatur vel imprisonetur etc. nec super eum
mittimus nisi per legale judicium parium suorum vel per legem terrae.

That in this Statute these words in Carcerem are omitted out of the printed
Books: for it should be nec eum in Carcerem mittimus. For these words per legem
terrae; what Lex terrae should be, I will not take upon me to expound,
otherwise then I find them to be expounded by Acts of Parliament; and this is
that they are understood to be the process of the Law, sometimes by writ,
sometimes by attachment of the person: but whether speciale mandatum Domini
Regis be intended by that or no, I leave it to your Lordships exposition upon
two petitions of the Commons, and answer of the King, in 36 Ed. 3. no 9. and no
20.

In the first of them the Commons complain that the great Charter, the Charter
of the Forest, and other Statutes were broken, and they desire that for the
good of himself and of his people, they might be kept and put in execution,
and that they might not be infringed by making an arrest by special command or
otherwise: and the answer was, that the assent of the Lords established and
ordained, that the said Charter and other Statutes should be put in execution
according to the petition, and that is without any disturbance by arrest by
special command or otherwise, for it was granted, as it was petitioned.

In the same year, for they were very careful of this matter, and it was
necessary it should be so, for it was then an usual thing to take men by writs
quibusdam de causis, and many of these words caused many Acts of Parliament:
and it may be some of these writs may be shown, and I say in the same year they
complained that men were imprisoned by special command, and without indictment
or other legal course of Law, and they desired that thing may not be done upon
men by special command against the great Charter.

The King makes answer that he is well pleased therewith: that was the first
answer; and for the future he has added farther, if any man be grieved let him
complain, and right shall be done unto him. This my Lord is an explanation of
the great Charter, as also the Statute of 37 Ed. 3. chapter 18. is a Commentary
upon it, that men should not be committed upon suggestion made to the King,
without due proofs of Law against them, and so it is enacted twice in one year.

We find more printed Books, as in Henry the sixth, Mius de fiacts, Fitz.
182. which is a strong case: under favor in an action of Trespass for cutting
down trees: the defendant says, that the place where the trees are cut, is
parcel of the Manor of B, whereof the King is seized in fee, and that the King
did command him to cut them: and the opinion of the Court was, that this was no
good plea, without showing the specialty of the command, and they said, if the
King command me to arrest a man, and I arrest him, he shall have an action of
false imprisonment against me, although it were done in the Kings presence.

In 1 Ioh. cap. 7. fol. 46. it is in print, and there we leave it.

Hussy Chief Justice says, that Sir John Markham told King Edward the fourth,
that he could not arrest a man upon suspicion of felony or treason, as any of
his Subjects might, because if he should wrong a man by such arrest, the
parties could have no remedy against him, if any man shall stand upon it; here
is a signification of the Kings pleasure, not to have the cause of the
commitment examined, he has here another signification of his pleasure by
writ, whereby the party is brought hither ad subjiciendum and recipiendum, that
he has made your Lordship Judge of that, that should be objected against this
Gentleman, and either to punish him, or to deliver him, and if here be no cause
shown, it is to be intended that the party is to be delivered, and that it is
the Kings pleasure it should be so, and the writ is a sufficient warrant for
the doing of it, there being no cause shown of the imprisonment; and now my
Lord, I will speak a word to the writ of De homine replegiando, and no other
writ, for that was the common writ, and the four causes expressed in that
Statute, to wit, the death of a man, the command of the King, or his Justices,
or Forest, were excepted in that writ before that Statute made, as appears
Bracton 133. so that the writ was at the Common Law before that Statute.

And it apppears by our Books, that if a man be brought hither by an Habeas
corpus, though he were imprisoned De morte hominis, as in the 21 of Edward the
fourth, 7. Winckfield was bailed here, this Court bailed him, for he was
brought hither ad subjiciendum and recipiendum, and not to he in prison God
knows how long; and if the Statute should be expounded otherwise, there were no
bailing men outlawed or breakers of prisons, for they are not within this
Statute, and yet this Court does it at pleasure.

But plainly by the Statute it self, it appears that it meant only to the
common writ, for the preamble recites, that the Sheriffs and other, have taken
and kept in prison persons detected of felony, and let out to plevin such as
were not reprisable to grieve the one party, and to the gain of the other; and
forasmuch as before this time it was not determined what prisoners were
reprisable, which not, but only in certain cases were expressed, therefore it
is ordained, etc.

Now this is no more but for direction of the keepers of the prisons, for it
leaves the matter to the discretion of the Judges, whether bailable or no, not
of the Judges, for when the Statute has declared who are repleviable, who are
not, as men outlawed have abjured the Realm: Proves such as be taken in the
manner, breakers of prisons, burners of houses, makers of false money,
counterfeiting of the Kings Seal, and the like, it is then ordained, that if
the Sheriff or any other, let any go at large by surety, that is not
reprisable, if he be Sheriff, Constable, or any other that has the keeping of
prisons, and thereof be attainted, he shall lose his office and fee for ever,
so that it extends to the common Gaolers and keepers of prisons, to direct them
in what cases they shall let men to bail, and in what cases not: and that they
shall not be Judges to whom to let to replevin, and whom to keep in prison, but
it extends not to the Judges, for if the makers of the Statute had meant them
in it, they should have put a pain upon them also.

So then, I conclude upon these under your Lordships favor, that as this case
is, there should have been a cause of the commitment expressed, for these
Gentlemen are brought hither by writ ad subjiciendum, if they be charged, and
ad recipiendum if they be not charged, and therefore in regard there is no
charge against them whereupon they should be detained in prison any longer; we
desire that they may be bailed or discharged by your Lordship.


Master Seldens Argument at the Kings Bench Bar the same day.
My Lords, I am of Council with Sir Edmond Hampden, his case is the same with
the other two Gentlemen, I cannot hope to say much after that that has been
said, yet if it shall please your Lordship, I shall remember you of so much as
is befallen my lot: Sir Edmond Hampden is brought hither by a writ of Habeas
corpus, and the keeper of the Gatehouse has returned upon the writ, that Sir
Edmond Hampden is detained in prison per speciale mandatum domini Regis, mihi
significatum per War antum duorum Privati Concilii dicti domini Regis, and
then he recites the warrants of the Lords of the Council, which is, that they
do will and require him to detain this Gentleman still in prison, letting him
know that his first imprisonment, etc.

May it please your Lordship, I shall humbly move you that this Gentleman may
also be bailed, for under favor my Lord, there is no cause in the return, why
he should be any farther imprisoned and restrained of his liberty.

My Lord, I shall say something to the form of the writ, and of the return, but
very little to them both, because there is a very little left for me to say.

My Lord, to the form, I say it expresses nothing of the first caption, and
therefore it is insufficient, I will add one reason as has been said: the
Habeas corpus has only these words, quod habeas corpus ejus una cum causa
detentionis and non captionis: But my Lord, because in all imprisonment, there
is a cause of caption and detention, the caption is to be answered as well as
the detention.

I have seen many writs of this nature, and on them the caption is returned,
that they might see the time of the caption, and thereby know whether the party
should be delivered or no, and that in regard of the length of his imprisonment.

The next exception I took to the form is, that there is much incertainty in
it, so that no man can tell when the writ came to the keeper of the prison,
whether before the return or after, for it appears not when the Kings command
was, for the commitment or the signification of the Council came to him: It is
true, that it appears that the warrant was dated the seventh of November, but
when it came to the keeper of the prison that appears not at all; and
therefore as for want of mentioning the same time of the caption, so for not
expressing the same time when this warrant came, I think the return is faulty
in form and void.

And for apparent contradiction also, the return is insufficient, for in that
part of the return which is before the warrant, it is said quod detentus est
per speciale mandatum domini Regis, the warrant of the Lords of the Council;
the very syllables of that warrant are, that the Lords of the Council do will
and require him still to detain him, which is contrary to the first part of the
return.

Besides my Lord, the Lords themselves say in another place and passage of the
warrant, that the King commanded them to commit him, and so it is their
commitment, so that upon the whole matter there appears to be a clear
contradiction in the return, and there being a contradiction in the return, it
is void.

Now my Lord, I will speak a word or two to the matter of the return, and that
is touching the imprisonment, per speciale mandatum domini Regis, by the Lords
of the Council without any cause expressed, and admitting of any or either of
both of these to be the return: I think that by the constant and settled Laws
of this kingdom, without which we have nothing, no man can be justly
imprisoned by either of them, without a cause of the commitment expressed in
the return. My Lord, in both the last Arguments the statutes have been
mentioned and fully expressed, yet I will add a little to that which has been
said.

The statute of Magna Carta cap. 29. that statute if it were fully executed as
it ought to be, every man would enjoy his liberty better then he does.

The Law says expressly, no Freeman shall be imprisoned without due process
of the Law; out of the very body of this Act of Parliament, besides the
explanation of other statutes, it appears, Nullus liber homo capiatur vel
imprisonetur nisi per legem terrae. My Lord, I know these words legem terrae,
do leave the question where it was if the interpretation of the Statute were
not. But I think under your Lordships favor, there it must be intended by due
course of Law to be either by presentment or by indictment.

My Lords, if the meaning of these words Per legem terrae were but as we use to
say, according to the laws, which leaves the matter very uncertain: and per
speciale mandatum, etc. be within the meaning of these words, according to the
law, then this Act had done nothing. The Act is, No Freeman shall be
imprisoned but by the law of the land; if you will understand these words, per
legem terrae, in the first sense, this statute shall extend to Villains as well
as to Freemen, for if I imprison another man, Villain, the Villain may have an
action of false imprisonment. But the Lords and the King (for then they both
had Villains) might imprison them, and the Villain could have no remedy; but
these words in the statute per legem terrae, were to the Freeman, which ought
not to be imprisoned, but by due process of law, and unless the
interpretation shall be this, the Freeman shall have no privilege above the
Villain.

So that I conceive my Lord, these words per legem terrae, must be here so
interpreted, as in 42 Eliz. the Bill is worth the observing, it recites that
diverse persons without any writ or presentment were cast into prison, etc. that
it might be enacted that it should not be so done hereafter; the answer there
is, that this is an Article of the great Charter, this should be granted, so
that it seems the statute is not taken to be an explanation of that of Magna
Charta, but the very words of the statute of Magna Charta.

I will conclude with a little observation upon these words, nec super eum
mittimus, which words of themselves signify not so much, a man cannot find
any fit sense for them.

But my Lord, in the seventh year of King John, there was a great Charter by
which this statute in the ninth of Henry the third, whereby we are now
regulated, was framed, and there the words are, nec eum in Carcerem mittimus,
we will not commit him to prison; that is, the King himself will not: and to
justify this, there is a story of that time in Matthew Paris, and in that Book
this Charter of King John is set down at large, which Book is very authentic,
and there it is entered, and in the ninth of Henry the third, he says, that the
statute was renewed in the same words with the Charter of King John; and my
Lord, he might know it better then others, for he was the Kings Chronologer in
those times: and therefore my Lord, since there be so many reasons, and so many
presidents, and so many statutes, which declare that no Freeman whatsoever
ought to be imprisoned, but according to the laws of the land; and that the
liberty of the subject is the highest inheritance that he has; my humble
request is, that according to the ancient laws and privileges of this Realm,
this Gentleman my Client may be be bailed.


The Argument of Mr Calthrop at the Kings Bench Bar, 22 Novembris, Mich. 3.
Caroli Regis.
Sir John Corbet being brought to the Kings Bench Bar with Sir Edmond Hampden,
Sir Walter Earl, and Sir John Henningham, who were also brought thither by
several writs of Habeas corpus, with the same return, I being assigned by the
Court of Kings Bench, upon a petition delivered to be of Council with Sir John
Corbet, did move that Sir John Corbet might be discharged of his imprisonment,
and put in bail, for I did conceive that the return of this Habeas corpus was
insufficient, both in the matter of the return, and in the manner of the
return, and so there ought not to be a longer detaining of Sir John Corbet in
prison: for as unto the manner of the return it is not laid down precisely
that Sir John Corbet is detained in prison by the special commandment of the
King, signified by the warrant of the Lords of the Council, the which is not a
direct affirmation that he is detained by the special command of the King, but
that the Lords of the Council by their warrant have signified unto him that he
was committed and still detained by the special command of the King.

And howsoever the Lords of the Council had signified that he was detained by
the commandment of the King, yet it may be he was not detained by the
commandment of the King, for their signification of the same by warrant may be
untrue, and the warrant of the Lords of the Council that is returned in haec
verba, imports that the keeper of the Gatehouse rather took upon him to
return, that was signified unto him by the warrant of the Lords of the Council,
that Sir John Corbet was committed and detained by the special commandment of
the King, because if the keeper had taken upon him to affirm it upon his
return, then needed he not to have returned the warrants of the Lords of the
Council, and the warrant it self shows that he had only his information
from the Lords of the Council; for their warrant is to let the keeper know,
that both the first commitment, and this direction for the continuing of him in
prison, were and are by his Majesty's special commandment, and I do not see
as this return is made, that an accord upon the case can lie upon the keeper of
the Gatehouse, if Sir John Corbet was not committed nor detained by the
special commandment of the King, so long as the warrant of the Lords of the
Council be returned as it was made, because he does return the same as the
Significavit of the Lords by their warrant, Register 65. the writ of
Excommunication Capiend' goes, Rex vicecom' Lincoln' S. significavit nob'
venerabilis Pater Henricus Lincolniensis Episcopus per Literas suas Patentes
quod R. suus Parochial' propter suam manifestam contumac' authoritate ipsius
Episc. ordin' excom' est nec se vult per censuram Ecclesiasticam justiciar'
etc. tibi praecipimus quod praedict' R. per corpus suum secundum consuetud'
Angliae justic' etc. and yet no man will say that there is an information of
the King, that R. is excommunicated, but only that the Bishop of Lincoln had
signified unto him that R. was excommunicated: and in Fitz. Not. Br. 663. and
Register 65. it appears that the form of the writ of Excommunication
deliberand' is, Rex Vicecom' London Salut'. Cum Thom' lay allutar' London qui
nuper ad denuntiat. venerabil' Patris Archiep' Eborum pro contumaciis suis
ratione contractus in civitate nostra Eborum habit' ut dicebat. tanquam excom'
and claves Ecclesiae contemnent' per corp' suum secundum confuetud' Angliae per
te justic' praecepimus, donec etc. esset satisfact' eid' Archiepiscop^, ^d
satisfaciendum deo et sanctae ecclesiae, sufficientem exposuit cautionem, per
quod eidem Archiepiscopus offic. Archdiac. London. mutuae vicissitudin' obtentu
scripsit ut ipsum absolvat ab excom' senten' memorata sicut idem Archiepiscopus
per Literas suas Patentes nob' significavit, Tibi praecipimus quod praed. Thom'
cum tibi constare poterit ipsum ab excom' praedict' per praedict' Official'
absolvi a Prison' qua detinetur si ea occasion and non alia detineat' in eadem
sine dilatione deliberari fac'. And yet it cannot be said, that although the
King recited in his writ that the Archbishop had signified unto him that he had
written unto the Official of the Archdeacon, that the King said that the
Archbishop had written, for he does not affirm so much precisely, but only,
refers himself unto the Certificate of the Archbishop.

Plowden 122. Buckley and Rivers case, it is put that if a man will bring an
action of debt upon an obligation, and declare that it appears by the
obligation that the defendant stood bound to the plaintiff in twenty pounds,
the which he has not paid, this declaration is not good, insomuch as it is not
alleged by matter in fact, that he was bound unto him in twenty pound, but the
deed is alleged by recital only, 21 Ed. 4. 43.

Plowden Com' 126. and 143. Browning and Beestons case.

The Abbot of Waltham being appointed collector of a Disme granted unto the
King in discharge of himself, in the Exchequer, pleads, Quo inter recordat'
Ter. Pasc. anno 15. domini Regis Edvardi 1. inter alia continetur quod R. 2.
had granted unto the predecessors of the said Abbot, that he nor any of his
successors should be any collectors of any dismes to be granted afterward,
and it was adjudged that this plea was ill.

For the saying [it was contained among the Records,] it is no precise
affirmation that the King had granted to his predecessors, that they should be
discharged of the collecting any dismes, but it is only an allegation by way
of recital, and not by precise affirmation, the plea may not be good.

2 and 3 Mar. Dier 117. and 118. the plaintiffes reply in bar of all
pleads, that John Abbot of W. was seized of his lands in right of his Church,
and so seized by the assent of the tenant by indenture, 14 Hen. 4. testat' quod
praedict' Abbat' and convent' demiserunt and tradiderunt, unto the plaintiff,
and ruled, that this form of pleading was ill, insomuch as it was not alleged
by precise affirmation, quod demiserunt, sed indentura testatur, quod
demiserunt; which is not sufficient, insomuch as it is only an allegation by
way of recital, that the Indenture does witness, and the same Indenture may
witness so much, and yet not be a demise.

And if in pleading there must be direct affirmation of the matter alleged,
then a fortiore in a return, which must be more precise then in pleading, and
so by all the cases I have formerly touched, it appears that this return is
no express affirmation of the keeper of the Gatehouse, that Sir John Corbet is
detained in prison by the special commandment of the King, but only an
affirmation of the Lords of the Council, who had signified unto him that his
detainment in prison was by special command of the King.

The return which ought to be certain, and punctual, and affirmative, and not
by way of information out of another man's mouth, may not be good, as appears
by the several books of our Law.

23 Ed. 3. Rex vic' 181. upon a Homine replegiando, against the Abbot of C. the
Sheriff returns that he had sent to the Bailiffe of the Abbot, that answered
him that he was the villain of the Abbot, by which he might not make
deliverance, and a Sicut alias was awarded, for this return was insufficient,
insomuch that he had returned the answer of the Bailiffe of the Abbot, where he
ought to have returned the answer of the Abbot himself out of his own mouth.

Trin. 22 Ed. 2. Rot. 46. parent. vill' and Burg Evesque de Norwich, repl' 68.
Not. Br. Case 34. Fitz. Not. Br. 65. and 34 Ed. 3. Excom' 29. the case
appears to be such in a trespass, the defendant pleads, the plaintiff is
excommunicate, and shows forth the letter of the Bishop of Lincoln,
witnessing that for diverse contumacies, etc. and because he had certified no
excommunic' done by himself, but by another, the letter of Excommunication was
annulled, for the Bishop ought to have certified his own act, and not the act
of another.

Hillarii 21 Hen. 8. Rot. 37. it appears by the return of an Habeas corpus,
that John Parker was committed to prison for security of the peace, and for
suspicion of felony, as per mandatum domini Regis nunciatum, per Robertum Peck
de Cliffords Inn, and upon his return John Parker was bailed, for the return
Commiss. fuit per speciale mandatum domini Regis, nunciatum per Robertum Peck
was not good, insomuch that it was not a direct return that he was committed
per mandatum domini Regis.

And for the first point, I conclude that this return is insufficient in form,
insomuch that it does not make a precise and direct return, that he was
committed and detained by the special command of the King, but only as he was
signified by the warrant of the Lords of the Council, which will not serve the
turn; and upon the book of 9 Hen. 6. 44. the return of the cause of a man's
imprisonment ought to be precise and direct upon the Habeas corpus, insomuch as
thereby to be able to judge of the cause, whether it be sufficient or not for
there may not any doubt be taken to the return, be it true or false, but the
Court is to accept the same as true: and if it be false, the party must take
his remedy by action upon the case.

And as concerning the matter of the return, it will rest upon these parts.

First, whether the return be that he is detained in prison by special
commandment of our Lord the King, be good or not, without showing the nature of
the commandment, or the cause whereupon the commitment is grounded in the
return.

The second is, whether the time of the first commitment by the commandment of
the King, not appearing to the Court, is sufficient to detain him in prison.

Thirdly, whether the imprisonment of the subjects without cause showed, but
only by the commandment of the King, be warrantable by the laws and statutes
of this Realm.

As unto the first part, I find by the books of our law, that commandments of
the King are of several natures, by some of which the imprisonment of a man's
body is utterly unlawful: and by others of them, although the imprisonment may
be lawful, yet the continuance of him without bail or mainprise, will be
utterly unlawful.

There is a verbal command of the King which is by word of mouth of the Kings
only, and such commandment by the King by the books of our law will not be
sufficient either to imprison a man or to continue him in prison, 16. 6.
Monstrans de faict si, upon an action of trespass brought for cutting of
trees, the defendant pleads that the place where he cut them is parcel of
the Manor of D, whereof the King is seized in fee, and the King commanded him
to cut the trees, and the opinion of the Court there is, that the plea in bar
was ill, because he did not show any special commandment of the King, and
there it is agreed by the whole Court, that if the King commands one to
arrest another, and the party commanded did arrest the other, an action of
trespass or false imprisonment is maintainable against the party that arrested
him, although it were done in the presence of the King, 39 H. 6. 17. where one
justifies the seizure of the goods of a person that is outlawed by the
commandment of the King, such a party being no Officer may not in an action
brought against him have any aid of the King; for such a commandment given to
one that is not an Officer, will not any ways avail him that is to justify
himself by the return of that commandment.

37. Hen. 6. 10. If the King give me a thing and I take the same by his
commandment by word of mouth, it is not justified by law, nothing may pass
without matter of Record.

10 Hen. 7. 7. and 17. 18. it is agreed that Justices may command one to arrest
another that is in their view or presence, but not one that is out of their
view or presence.

And Keble 10 Hen. 7. 13. said, that where one is arrested by a parroll command
in their view or presence, it is fitting that a record may be made of it,
insomuch that without such a record there can hardly be a justification in
another Term.

Secondly, there is a commandment of the King by his Commission, which
according unto Calvin's case in the seventh Report, it is called by him breve
mandatum non remediabile, and by virtue of such a commandment the King may
neither seize the goods of his subject, nor imprison his body, as it is
resolved in 42 Ass. pl. 5. where it is agreed by all the Justices that a
Commission to take a man's goods, or imprison his body without indictment or
suit of the party, or other due process, is against the Law.

Thirdly, there is a commandment of the King which is grounded upon a
suggestion made to the King or to his Council; and if a man be committed to
prison by such a suggestion by commandment of the King, it is unlawful, and
not warranted by the law of the Realm.

The 25 of Edward the third, cap. 4. de Provisoribus, whereas it is contained
in the great Charter of the Franchises of England, that none shall be
imprisoned or arrested of his Freehold or of his Franchises, nor of his free
customs but by the law of the land.

It is awarded, consented and established, that from henceforth none shall be
taken by petition or suggestion made to our Sovereign Lord the King, or to his
Council, until it be by indictment or presentment of his good and lawful
neighbors, where such deeds are done in due manner, or by process made by
writ original at the Common law, nor that none shall be arrested of his
Franchises, nor of his freehold, unless he be duly brought in, and answer,
and forejudged of the same by way of law, and if any thing be done against the
same, it shall be redressed and holden for naught.

37 Ed. 3. cap. 10. although it be contained in the great Charter, that no man
be taken or imprisoned, or put out of his freehold, without due process of the
law: nevertheless diverse persons make false suggestions to the King himself,
as well for malice as otherwise, whereof the King is often grieved, and diverse
of the Realm put in great damages contrary to the form of the same Statute.

Wherefore it is ordained, that all they that make such suggestions be sent
with their suggestions to the Chancelour or Treasurer, and they and every of
them find sureties to pursue their suggestions, and endure the same pain that
the other should have had; if in case that his suggestion be found untrue, and
that then process of the law be made against them without being taken or
imprisoned against the form of the same Charter, and other statutes.

So that it appears by these several statutes, that such commandments of the
King as are grounded upon suggestion, either made to himself or to his
Council, for the imprisonment of a man, are against the law.

Fourthly, I find that there is a commandment of the King which is made under
his hand, with his signet, for in the fourth and the fifth of Philip and Mary,
Dier 162. where the statute of ^ Ric. 2. cap. 11. restrains the Warden of the
Fleet for letting any man at large that is in upon judgment at the suit of any
man, except it be by writ or other commandment of the King; It was doubted,
whether the Queen by letter under her hand and privy signet, does give
commandment to the Warden of the Fleet to suffer a man that is there in
execution to go about his business, or the affairs of the Queen: whether
this be a warrantable command or not within the Statute: and the Law has
always been conceived upon that book, that such a commandment is not
warrantable by Law, and if such a command will not serve the turn, to give unto
a man his liberty, which the law favors, and had the countenance of an Act
of Parliament for the doing of it, then I conceive it should be a more strong
case, the King should not have power by his commandment to imprison a man
without due process of the Law, and restrain him of his liberty when there had
been so many Acts of Parliament made for the liberty of the subjects.

Fifthly, I do find that there is the commandment of the King which is by his
writ under the Great Seal, or the seal of the Court out of which it issues,
Regist. f. 69. and 70. in the writ de cautione admittenda, I find the words,
mandatum Regis expounded to be breve Regis, for the writ goes: Rex vic'
Salutem. Cum nuper ad requisitionem S. de Isle Canonici Lincoln venerabilis
Patris H. Lincoln. Episcopi ipso in remotis agente Vicarii general. per Literas
suas Patentes nobis significantis Nicho. B. dict. Lincoln. Dioc. propter
manifestam contumaciam Authoritate ipsius Episcopi Ordinar. excommunicat. esse
nec si velle etc. vobis praeceperimus quod praefat. etc. satisfactum ex part
ipsius N. qui virtute mandati nostri praedict. per vos Capt. and in Prison.
nostra de Newgate detent. existit, etc. nos nolentes quod praefat. N. per breve
nostrum praedict. via praecludatur etc. pr^sequi possit in forma Iuris maxim.
etc. integer esse debeat, vobis praecipimus quod scire etc. quod sit etc. quare
praedict. N. a Prisona praedict. deliberari non debeat. Rex justiciar. suis de
Banco salut. Cum nos nuper ad significationem S. de Isle etc. usque ibi
excommunicat. extitisse nec se velle etc. esset satisfactum ex part ipsius N.
virtute manditi nostri praed. capt. and in Prisona nostra de Newgate
tuncdetenti, etc. et nolentes eo praetextu praefato N. per breve nostrum praed.
via praecludat. quo minus appellac. suae negotium etc. processerat. and
appellant. statut. etc. per breve nostrum praeceperimus praefat. vic. quod
scire facerent. etc. vobis signific. and consult. and circumspect. in Placitis
per breve praedict. coram vobis pendentibus procedere valeatis secundum legem
and consuetudinem Regni nostri.

Stamf. 72. 5 E. 3. c. 8. 1. E. 3. c. 9. says, that every Capias in a
personal action is a commandment of the King, for it is Praecipimus tibi quod
capias etc. and yet the defendant as there it is said is replevisable by the
Common law, 7 R. 20. a. Calvin's case, says that there are two kind of writs,
viz. brevia mandatoria and remedi^lia, and brevia mandatoria and non
remedialia: brevia mandatoria and remedialia, are writs of Right, Formedon etc.
debts, trespasses, and shortly all writs real and personal, whereby the party
wronged is to recover somewhat, and to be remedied for that wrong which is done
unto him.

Sixthly, I do find by our books of Law, and by the Register, that this
special mandatum domini Regis, is expounded to be his writ, and that the Law
takes no notice of any other speciale mandatum, then by this writ; the which
being so when the return is made, that he is imprisoned and detained in prison
by the special commandment of the King, how can the Court adjudge upon this
return, that Sir John Corbet ought to be kept in prison, and not to be bailed,
when the nature of the special commandment is not set forth in the return,
whereby it may appear unto the Court that he is not bailable. In Bracton, c.
12. 112. you shall see a writ reciting, Praecipimus tibi quod non implacites
nec impl^citari permittas talem de libero tenemento suo in tali villa sine
speciali praecepto nostro vel Capitalis Justiciar' nostri.

And the reason of it there is given, quia nemo de libero tenemento sine brevi
sive libello conventionali nisi gratis voluerit respondebit. So as the
exception of special commandment by the very book, appears to be breve sive
libellus conventionalis, Regist. 271. the writ of Manucaption goes in this
manner: Rex vic. Salut. Cum nuper assignaverimus dilectos et fideles nestros A.
B and C. D. ad inquisitiones de forstallariis et transgressionibus contra
formam statuti dudum apud Winton. editi in com. tuo faciend. et ad illos quos
inde culpabiles invenirent. capiend. and in Prisona nostra salvo custod.
faciend. donec aliud inde praecepissemus quod C. D. et E. pro hujusmodi
forstallamentis and transgressionibus unde coram praefat. A. B. and C. indict.
fuerint, capt. and in Prisona de L. detent. exist. a qua deliberari non
possunt, sine mandato nostro speciali, Nos volentes eisdem C. D. and E.
gratiaem in hac part facere specialem, tibi praecipimus quod si praedict. C.
D. et E. occasion praedict. et non alia in Prisona p^dict. detineantur, et pro
transgressionibus illis secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni nostri Angliae
replegiabiles existunt etc. tunc impos C. D. et E. a Prisona praedict. si ea
occasion et non alia detineantur in eadem interim deliberari facias per
manucapt. supradict. et habeas ibi tunc coram praefat. Justiciar. nomina
manucapt. illorum et hoc breve.

And the exposition of this speciale mandatum domini Regis, mentioned in the
writ, is expounded to be breve domini Regis, and thereupon is this writ
directed unto the Sheriff for the delivery of them.

And so for the first branch of the first part: I conclude, that the special
command of the King without showing the nature of the commandment of the Kings,
is too general, and therefore insufficient; for he ought to have returned the
nature of the commandment of the King, whereby the Court might have adjudged
upon it, whether it were such a commandment that the imprisonment of Sir John
Corbet be lawful or not, and whether it were such a commandment of the King,
that although the imprisonment were lawful at the first, yet he might be
bailed by Law.

And as for the general return of speciale mandatum domini Regis, without
showing the cause of the imprisonment either special or general, I hold that
for that cause also the return is insufficient.

First, in regard of the Habeas corpus, which is the commandment of the King
only, made the 15 of November.

According to the Test of the writ commanding the keeper of the Gatehouse to
have the body of Sir John Corbet, una cum causa detentionis et ad subjiciendum
et recipiendum ea quae curia nostra de eo ad tunc ibid. ordinar. conting^'. So
as the commandment of the writ being to show the cause of his detaining in
prison, the keeper of the Gatehouse does not give a full answer unto the writ,
unless the cause of the detainment in prison be returned, and the Court does
not know how to give their judgment upon him, either for his imprisonment, or
for his discharge, according to the purport of the writ, when there is not a
cause returned, and forasmuch as upon an excommengement certified, it has been
adjudged oftentimes that Certificates were insufficient where the cause of the
commitment has not been certified, that the Court might adjudge whether the
Ecclesiastical Judges who pronounced the excommunication, had power over the
original cause according to the book of 14 Hen. 4. 14. 8. Rep. 68. Trollops
case, and 20 Ed. 3. Excommengement 9.

So upon an Habeas corpus in this Court, where a man has been committed by the
Chancelour of England, by the Council of England, Marches of Wales, Warden of
the Stanneries, High Commission, Admiralty, Duchy, Court of Request,
Commission of Sewers or Bankrupts, it has several times been adjudged that
the return was insufficient where the particular cause of imprisonment has not
been shown to the intent that it might appear that those that committed him had
jurisdiction over the cause, otherwise he ought to be discharged by the Law:
and I spare to recite particular causes in every kind of these, because there
are so many presidents of them in several ages of every King of this Realm:
and it is an infallible maxim of the Law, That as the Court of the Kings
Bench, and Judges ought not to deny an Habeas corpus unto any prisoner that
shall demand the same by whomsoever he be committed, so ought the cause of his
imprisonment to be shown upon the return, so that the Court may adjudge of the
cause whether the cause of the imprisonment be lawful or not: and because I
will not trouble the Court with so many presidents, but such as shall suit with
the cause in question, I will only produce and vouch such presidents, whereas
the party was committed either by the commandment of the King, or otherwi^e by
the commandment of the Privy Council, which Stampford. fol. 72. terms the
mouth of the King, such Acts as are done by the Privy Council, being as Acts
done by the King himself.

And in all these causes you shall find that there is a cause returned as well
as a speciale mandatum domini Regis etc. or mardatum Privati Concilii domini
Regis, whereby the Court may adjudge of the cause, and bail them if they shall
see cause.

In the eighth of Henry the seventh, upon return of an Habeas corpus awarded
for the body of one Roger Sherry, it appears that he was committed by the
Mayor of Windsor for suspicion of felony, and ad sectam ipsius Regis pro
quibusdam feloniis et transgressionibus ac per mandatum domini Regis; 21 Hen.
the seventh, upon the return of an Habeas corpus sent for the body of Hugh
Pain, it appeared that he was committed to prison, per mandatum dominorum
Privati Concilii domini Regis pro suspicione feloniae.

Primo Henrici Octavi, Rot. 9. upon the return of an Habeas corpus sent for the
body of one Thomas Harrison and others, it appears that they were committed to
the Earl of Shrewsbury being Marshall of the household, Per mandatum domini
Regis, et pro suspicione feloniae, et pro homicidio facto super Mare.

3 and 4 Philip. et Mariae, upon a return of an Habeas corpus sent for the body
of one Peter Man, it appears that he was committed pro suspicione feloniae,
ac per mandatum domini Regis et Reginae.

4 and 5 Philippi et Mariae, upon the return of an Habeas corpus sent for the
body of one Thomas Newport, it appeared that he was committed to the Tower, pro
suspicione contrafact, mcnetae per privatum Concilium domini Regis et Reginae.

33 Elizabeth^ upon the return of an Habeas corpus for the body of one Lawrence
Brown; it appears that he was committed Per mandatum Privati Consilii dominae
Reginae pro diversis ^ausis ipsam Reginam tangen, ac etiam pro suspicione
proditicnis.

So as by all these presidents it appears where the return is either Per
mandatum domini Regis, or Per mandatum dominerum Privati Concilii domini Regis;
there is also a cause over and besides the mandatum returned, as unto that
which may be objected, that per mandatum domini Regis, or Privati Concilii
domini Regis is a good return of his imprisonment I answer.

First, that there is a cause, for it is not to be presumed that the King or
Council would commit one to prison without some offense, and therefore this
mandatum being occasioned by the offense or fault, the offense or fault must be
the cause, and not the command of the King or Council which is occasioned by
the cause.

Secondly, it appears that the jurisdiction of the Privy Council is a limited
jurisdiction, for they have no power in all causes, their power being
restrained in certain causes by several Acts of Parliament, Vide 4 Instit.
fol. 53.
as it appears by the statute of 20 Edward the third, c. 11. 25 Ed. the third
c. 1. stat. 4. the private petition in Parliament permitted in the 1 of R. 2.
where the Commons petition that the Privy Council might not make any Ordinance
against the Common Law, Customs or Statutes of the Realm; the fourth of Henry
the fourth, ca. 3. 13 Hen. the fourth, 7. 31 H. the sixth, and their
jurisdictions being a limited jurisdiction, the cause and grounds of their
commitment ought to appear, whereby it may appear if the Lords of the Council
did commit him for such a cause as was within their jurisdiction: for if they
did command me to be committed to prison for a cause whereof they had not
jurisdiction, the Court ought to discharge me of this imprisonment, and
howsoever the King is Vicarius Dei in terra, yet Bracton, cap. 8. fol. 107.
says, quod nihil aliud potest Rex in terris cum sit Minister Dei and Vicarius,
quam solum quod de jure potest. nec obstat, quod dicitur quod Principi placet,
legis habet vigorem, quia sequitur in fine legis cum lege Regia quae de ejus
imperio lata est, id est non quicquid de voluntate Regis temere praesumptum
est, sed animo condendi Jura, sed quod consilio Magistratuum suorum Rege
author. praestant et habita super hoc deliberatione et tract. rect. fuer.
definit. Potestat. itaque suajuris est, and non injuriae. The which being so,
then also it ought to appear upon what cause the King commits one to prison,
whereby the Judges which are indifferent between the King and his Subjects, may
judge whether his commitment be against the Laws and Statutes of this Realm or
not.

Thirdly, it is to be observed, that the Kings command by his Writ of Habeas
Corpus is since the commandment of the King for his commitment, and this being
the latter commandment, ought to be obeyed; wherefore that commanding a return
of the body cum causa detentionis, there must be a return of some other cause
then Per mandatum domini Regis, the same commandment being before the return of
the Writ.

Pasch. 9 E. 3. pl. 30. fol. 56. upon a Writ of Cessavit brought in the County
of Northumberland, the Defendants plead, That by reason the Country being
destroyed by Wars with the Scots, King Edward the second gave command that no
Writ of Cessavit should be brought during the Wars with Scotland, and that the
King had sent his Writ to surcease the Plea, and he averreth that the Wars with
Scotland did continue.

Hearle that gives the Rule says, That we have command by the King that now
is, to hold this Plea, wherefore we will not surcease for any Writ of the King
that is dead; and so upon all these reasons and presidents formerly alleged, I
conclude, that the return that Sir John Corbet was committed and detained in
prison, Per speciale mandatum domini Regis, without showing the nature of the
commandment by which the Court may judge whether the commandment be of such a
nature as he ought to be detained in prison, and that without showing the cause
upon which the commandment of the King is grounded, is not good. As unto the
second part, which is, Whether the time of the commitment by the return of the
Writ, not appearing unto the Court, the Court ought to detain him in prison or
no?

I conceive that he ought not to be continued in prison admitting that the
first commitment by the command of the King were lawful, yet when he has
continued in prison by such reasonable time as may be thought fit for that
offense for which he is committed, he ought to be brought to answer, and not to
continue still in prison without being brought to answer.

For it appears by the Books of our Laws, that liberty is a thing so favored
by the Law, that the Law will not suffer the continuance of a man in prison for
any longer time then of necessity it must; and therefore the Law will neither
suffer the party, Sheriffs or Judges to continue a man in prison by their power
and their pleasure, but does speed the delivery of a man out of prison, with as
reasonable expedition as may be.

And upon this reason it is resolved in 1 and 2 El. Dyer 175. and 8 Ed. 4. 13.
That howsoever the Law allows that there may be no term between the test of
an original Writ and the return of the same, where there is only a summons,
and no imprisonment of the body, yet it will not allow that there shall be a
term between the test of a Writ of Capias, and the return of the same, where
the body of a man is to be imprisoned, insomuch that it will give no way that
the party shall have no power to continue the body of a man imprisoned any
longer time then needs must. 39 E. 3. 7. 10 H. 7. 11. 6 E. 4. 69. 11. E. 4. 9.
48 E. 3. 1. 17 E. 3. 1 and 2 Hen. 7.

Kellawaies Reports do all agree, that if a Capias shall be awarded against a
man for the apprehending of his body, and the Sheriff will return the Capias,
that is awarded against the party, a non est inventus, or that languidus est in
prisona, yet the Law will allow the party against whom it is awarded for the
avoiding of his corporal penance and dures of imprisonment, to appear gratis,
and for to answer.

For the Law will not allow the Sheriff by his false return to keep one in
prison longer then needs must, 38 Ass. pl. 22. Brooks imprisonment 100. says,
That it was determined in Parliament that a man is not to be detained in prison
after he has made tender of his fine for his imprisonment, therefore I desire
your Lordship that Sir John Corbet may not be kept longer in durance, but be
discharged according to the Law.


The Lord Chief Justice his Speech.
Master Attorney, you have heard many learned Arguments, if you be provided to
answer presently, we will hear you, but if you will have a longer day for that
you are not provided to argue, you may, we will give it you.


Doderidge. If you will you may see these presidents, it may be you have not
seen some of them, and we must see them too.


Heath Attorney. May it please your Lordship, the Gentlemen that be of Council
with the Knights at the Bar, they have said much, and spoken very long for
their Clients, and to good purpose and pertinently. It is a cause that carries
with it a great deal of weight, both toward the King and his Subjects also,
and I am not so hasty to put my self upon the main point of this cause, when it
is almost time for your Lordship to rise.

My Lord, the Gentlemen have severally spoken, and given and insisted upon
several reasons, and they have cited many presidents. I could say something of
them at this present, and that some of them have been mistaken; and therefore I
beseech your Lordship that I may have time to answer, that I may not wrong the
cause of the Kings part, or slight the cause on the Subjects part.

But that which I desire to say now, is, that these Gentlemen have all of them
gone in one form to divide the cause into two parts:


For the form, me thinks we may put an end to that now, if your Lordship
please, that we may have no return to that another day, but I may apply my self
unto the matter of the Return.

To the form of the Return they have taken diverse exceptions, but they
especially insisted upon two main heads:

First, that the Return is not good, because it is not an absolute Return: I
confess the ground is well laid, and the Major is good, that if this Return be
not positively the Return of the Warden of the Fleet himself, but the relation
of another, it is no good Return, therefore I need spend no time in that, the
ground being well laid; but under your Lordships favor, the Major proposition
I deny, we differ only in that, for I say that this Return is certain, and
that it is not the words of any man else, but the express words of the Warden
himself, and that this is added ex abundanti to give satisfaction to the Court,
that he had order to make the Return; therefore I desire your Lordship to cast
your eyes upon the substance of the Return, and distinguish it into parts.

The words are, Detentus est in prisona sub custodia mea per speciale Mandatum
domini Regis mihi significatum per Warrantum duorum Privati concilii dicti
domini Regis, etc. If he had turned these words, and said, Detent' est prout
mihi significat' per Warrantum duorum Privati concilii per speciale mandatum
domini Regis, then it might be taken to be the words of the Lords of the
Council, but the first words being positive, Detentus est per speciale
mandatum domini Regis, that is sufficient, and the rest is surplusage, and he
does not say, prout mihi significut, but mihi significat only, which is
absolute, and the resolution thereof rests more in your Lordships expounding
of the words, then in putting any case upon them.

The second exception is taken to the form of the Return, for that there is not
the cause of the imprisonment returned, but of the detaining alone.

My Lord, I say no more to that but this, No man is bound to answer more then
that which is the contents of the Writ, I know the Writ, it may be to know
specially the cause of the detaining, or what the cause of the caption is
only, and if the Officer make answer to that which is required of him in the
Writ, it is sufficient, it may be there be presidents both ways, I am sure
there are detentions only, and there is no cause why the Officer should show
the time of his commitment, but if the Prisoner shall desire it, your Lordship
may grant him a Writ to show the cause both of his caption and detention also.

Thirdly, they say that this Return is uncertain, and that it is the Warrant of
the Lords of the Council, and not of the King, by which he is committed.

For that my Lord I say, that if it had all been left out, and he had only
said, Detentus fuit per speciale mandatum domini Regis, it had been sufficient,
but when he does more it is superfluous and not necessary, for it appeared
before by whom he was committed, and when he returns the Warrant of the Lords
of the Council, it is not their words that commit him, but they being the
Representative Body of the King, they do express what the Kings command is,
but they signify nothing of their own, and therefore I desire your Lordship to
deliver your opinion in that point of the Return, whether it be positive or no.

This cause as it greatly concerns the Subjects, so it much concerns the King
too, I am sorry there should be any occasion to bring these things in question,
but since it is now here, I hope I shall give satisfaction to your Lordship,
and to the parties too, and I desire that I may have Monday for it.


Hide Chief Justice.
I think it is not best for us to declare our opinions by peece-meals, but upon
all the case together, and as well as you are a stranger to the Return, so are
we, and there be many presidents and Acts of Parliament not printed, which we
must see.


Doderidge. This is the greatest cause that ever I know in this Court, our
Judgments that we give between party and party, between the King and the
meanest Subject, ought to be maturely advised on, for so are the entries of our
judgments, Quod matura deliberatione habita. It was judged, etc. And we must
see the presidents and Acts of Parliament, that we hear mentioned.


Justice Jones. Master Attorney, if it be so that the Law of Magna Charta and
other Statutes be now in force, and the gentlemen be not delivered by this
Court, how shall they be delivered? apply your self to show us any other way to
deliver them.


Doderidge. Yea, or else they shall have a perpetual imprisonment.


Per Curiam.
Monday was appointed for the Atturneys Argument, and in the interim the
Council for the gentlemen were by order appointed, for to attend the Judges
with all the presidents and unprinted Statutes which they mentioned, and that
they should let the Attorney see them also.

And the gentlemen being asked if they desired to come again, answered they
did, and a Rule was entered for it.

On Monday the 27 of Tertio Michaelis 3o Caroli Regis in Banco Regis. Sir John
Corbet, Sir Walter Earl, Sir Edmund Hampden, and Sir John Henningham Knights,
were brought to the Bar.
Heath Attorney General. MAY it please your Lordship, these gentlemen, Sir
Walter Earl, Sir John Corbet, Sir Edmund Hampden, and Sir John Henningham,
upon their motion to this Court to have their Habeas Corpus, and that
themselves and the cause of their detaining them in their several Prisons
might be brought before your Lordship, had it granted to them.

My Lord, at the first motion of it, the knowledge thereof of coming, and that
they had such a desire, his Majesty was very willing to grant unto them (as to
all his Subjects) this common case of Justice, and though it be a case which
concerns himself in a high degree, yet he has been so gracious and so just as
not to refuse to leave the examination and determination thereof to the Laws of
this Kingdom.

My Lord, it is very true that this is a very great Cause, and has raised a
great expectation, and for the manner of it more then was necessary; but my
Lord, I am afraid these gentlemen whom it concerns, have rather advised their
Council, then their Council them: but I shall take the case as now I find
it, and as the gentlemen's Council on the other side have led me the way to it.

My Lord, the exceptions that have been taken by the Council on the other
side, to the Return made by the Warden of the Fleet, and the rest of the
Guardians of several Prisons, have been two, for renewing of your Lordships
memory we will read one of the Returns, they are all alike.


Then the Return was read for Sir John Henningham by Master Keeling.

Heath Attorney. May it please your Lordship, against this Return the Council
of the Gentlemen have taken some exceptions, and have divided their objections
into two main points, The one the form the other the matter; To the form they
have objected four several things.

First, that the Return is not positive, but referred to the signification made
by another, as the Lords of the Council.

Secondly, that the Keepers of the Prisons have not returned the cause of the
commitment, but the cause of the cause, which is not good.

Thirdly, that the Return is imperfect, for that it shows only the cause of
the detaining in Prison, and not the cause of the first commitment.

And lastly, that the Return is contradictory in it self, for that in the first
part thereof there is a certification that the detaining of these gentlemen in
prison, is Per speciale mandatum domini Regis; and when the Warrant of the
Lords of the Council is showed, it appears that the commitment is by the
command of the King, signified by the Lords of the Council* and by your
Lordships favor, I will give a several answer to every of these several
objections: And for the first, that the Return, is not positive and
affirmative, but depends upon and has relation to some other, and therefore it
is not good; I do agree that the ground is true, that if the Return be not
positive it is not good, we differ only in the Minor, That the Return is not
positive and affirmative, for I agree that these Book cases that have been put
are good Law, as 27 Ass. pl. 65. that if the Sheriff return that he has sent
to the Bailiffe of the hundred, and he gives him that answer, that is no good
Return; for the Sheriffs ought to make the Return as of his own act without
naming of the Bailiffe of the Hundred in his Return; for if he return, Quod
mandavi Ballivo itineranti qui habet Retorn. omnium Brevium and executionem
eorund, per Cartam domini Regis qui mihi dedit nullum Responsum; this is not
good if he were not Bailiffe of a Franchise or Signiory, for so is 21 H. 7.
fol. 4.

There has been cited to maintain these objections, 20 Ed. 3. the Record I
have perused, and there I find that the Bishop said, that it is found in
Archivis in the Record etc. that he was excommunicated, but it was found to be
in Archivis etc. and that is no positive return: that it is so I will oppugn
what has been said by the Council on the other side, it must be granted that
if the return here be not positive, it is imperfect, and in 5 H. 7. 28. it is
said that an imperfect return is no return at all, it is all one; but if the
return was so, that was not much material, for then it were but temporary, and
it might be amended, but my Lord they have mistaken the minor proposition, for
they have it as granted that there is an imperfect return from the Lords of
the Council; my Lord I shall entreat you to cast your eyes upon the Return,
and you shall find the first words positive and affirmative: the words are,
Quod detentus est sub custodia mea per speciale mandatum domini Regis: the
other words mihi significatum, they follow after but are not part of the
affirmation made before it; but if they will have it as they seem to understand
it, then they must return the words thus: Quod testificatum, or significatum
est mihi per dominos Privati Concilii quod detentus est per speciale mandatum
domini Regis, and then indeed it had not been their own proper return, but the
signification of another, The Lords of the Council, the turning of the
sentence will resolve this point, the thing it self must speak for it self, I
conceive by your Lordships favor, that it is plain and clear here is a
positive Return, that the detaining is by the commandment of the King: and the
rest of the Return is rather satisfaction to my self and the Court, then
otherwise any part of the Return.

The second Objection has dependence upon this, as that he has returned the
cause of the cause, and not the cause of it self, wherein under your Lordships
favor they are utterly mistaken; for the Return is affirmative, Ego Johannes
Liloe testifico; etc. I know that among the Logicians there are two causes,
there is Causa causans, and Causa caussata, the causa causans here in this case
is not the warrant from the Lords of the Council, for that is causa causata:
but the Primary and Original cause, which is causa causans, is speciale
mandatum domini Regis; the other is but the Councels signification or
testification, or warrant for him that made the Return.

To the third Objection, that the Return is imperfect, because it shows only
the cause of the detaining in prison, and not the cause of the first commitment.

My Lords, for that I shall not insist much upon it, for that I did say the
last day which I must say again, it is sufficient for an Officer of the Law to
answer that point of the Writ which is in command.

Will your Lordship please to hear the Writ read, and then to see whether the
Wardens of the prisons have not made answer to so much as was in command?


Then the Writ was read by Master Keeling.

Heath Attorney General. My Lord, the Writ it self clears the Objection, for
it is to have the party mentioned in it, and the cause of his detention
returned into this Court, and therefore the answer to that is sufficient. Only
my Lord, the Warden of the Fleet, and the rest of the keepers of the prisons,
had dealt prudently in their proceedings, if they had only said that they were
detained Per speciale Mandatum Domini Regis, and it had been good, and they
might have omitted the rest: but because if they should make a false Return
they were liable to the actions of the party, they did discreetly to have the
certification of the Lords of the Council in suspicion, that if this Return
was not true they were liable to the actions of these Gentlemen.

In 9 H. 6. 40. 44. it is said, that whatsoever the cause be that is returned,
it must be accepted by the Court, they must not doubt of the truth of the
Return, and the Officer that shall return it is liable to an action if the
Return be false, and therefore the Guardian of the prisons did wisely because
they knew this was a case of great expectation to show from whom they had their
warrant, and so to see whether the cause returned be true or not.

The last Objection to the Return is, that it is contradictory in it self, as
that the first part of it is, that they are detained in prison, Per speciale
mandatum Domini Regis, but in this relation of it, it shows that they are
detained by the command of the Lords of the Council, for the words of their
warrant are to require you still to detain him, etc.

But my Lord, if they will be pleased to see the whole warrant together, they
shall find that the Lords of the Council speak not their own words or command
in that warrant, but they say that you are to take notice of it as the words
and command of the King; for my Lord, the Lords of the Council are the
servants to the King, they signify his Majesty's pleasure to your Lordship,
and they say it is his Majesty's pleasure you should know that the first
commitment and this present detaining him in prison, are by his Majesty's
special commandment.

And this my Lord is all that I will say for the sufficiency of the form of the
Return, to prove that it is sufficient.

Touching the matter of the Return the main point thereof, it is but a single
question, and I hope my Lord of no great difficulty, and that is whether they
be replevisable or not replevisable. It appears that the commitment is not in a
legal and ordinary way, but that it is per speciale mandatum domini Regis,
which implies not only the fact done, but so extraordinarily done, that it is
notorious to be his Majesty's immediate Act and will, it should be so; whether
in this case they should be bailable or not in this Court, which I acknowledge
to be the highest Court of Judicature for such a case as is in question.

The Council on the other side desire that they may be bailed, and have
concluded that they may not be remaunded, their grounds of argument (though
they were many that did speak) I have in my collection divided into five points:

The first was reasons that they must be so, arising from the inconveniences
that would fall to the subjects, if it should not be so in the main points of
their liberty.

The second was, they showed diverse Authorities out of their Law books, which
they endeavored to apply.

The third was, Petition of the Commons answered by several Kings in
Parliament.

The fourth was, Acts of Parliament in Print.

The last was, Presidents of diverse times, which they alleged to prove, that
men committed by the Kings commandment, and by the commandment of the Lords of
the Privy Council, which I conceive to be all one, for the body of the Privy
Council represents the King himself, that upon such commitment in such causes
men have been bailed.

In the course of my Arguments, I will follow their method: first, to answer
their reasons, and then those Books which they have cited, which I conceive to
be pertinent to this question, and then the Petition and Answer made in
Parliament, and then their Acts of Parliament, next their Presidents; and
lastly, I will give your Lordship some reasons of my own, which I hope shall
sufficiently satisfy your Lordship and all others but the parties themselves,
for I except them.

My Lord, the great and mighty reason that they insisted upon, was the
inconveniences that might come to the subjects in their liberties, if this
Return should be good, and this reason they inferred out of Records and Books
of the Common Law, which gives the liberty of the subjects; I do acknowledge
that the liberty of the subject is just, and that it is the inheritance of the
subject, but yet it is their inheritance secundum legem terrae.

My Lords, they put many cases likewise to enforce it, 1 and 2 Eliz. Dier fo.
175. that the continuance of a Capias shall be from Term to Term, without Term
betwixt, because otherwise the party defendant may be kept too long in prison,
and 38 Ass. pl. 22. Broke tit. Imprisonment 100. that imprisonment is but to
detain the party till he have made fine to the King, and therefore the King
cannot justly detain him in prison after the fine tendered, and 16 H. 6.
monstrans de faictz 182. if the King command me to arrest a man, and thereupon
I do arrest him, he may have an action of false imprisonment, or of trespass
against me, though it be done in the Kings presence, and 1 H. 7. 4. the
discourse of Hussy, where he says that Sir John Markham delivered unto King
Edward the fourth, that he should not arrest upon treason or felony any of his
subjects, because he could not wrong his subjects by such arrest, for they
could not have remedy against him. Prerogative, Br. 139.


These my Lord are the causes that they insisted upon for this purpose.

To the two first, I shall give but one answer, which is that the restraint in
these two cases, and most of the other cases before cited, appears to be in the
ordinary course of Judicature fit for Westminster Hall, and not for the Kings
Council Table. A writ of Capias was the first original of it, and therefore
not to be applied to the cause of ours.

And for the other two cases, the law presumes that the active part of them is
not so proper for the Majesty of a King, who ever does these things by his
subordinate Officers; But that the subject should not be committed by the King,
was never heard of, for the King may commit any man at his pleasure, but that
is not our case: but whether when the King has committed one, he must render a
cause of that commitment, that it may appear whether the party be bailable or
not, or else the party must be delivered.

The Book 9 E. 3. fol. 16. pl. 30. cited of a Cessavit, the King having by
Proclamation commanded that in the County of Northumberland, no Cessavit should
be brought, etc. during the war; the tenant pleads this command, and it was
denied him, and he that notwithstanding was commanded to plead, but the reason
thereof was, because the commandment thereof was given by E. 2. who being dead,
the commandment was determined.

The Book of Edward the third 4. fol. 16. is indeed where the commandment was
given by the same King, and that was likewise denied him, for the King cannot
command your Lordship to any other Court of Justice, to proceed otherwise then
according to the Laws of this kingdom, for it is part of your Lordships oath
to judge according to the Law of the kingdom. But my Lord, there is a great
difference between those legal commands, and that absolute Potestas, that a
Sovereign has, by which a King commands; but when I call it absoluta potestas,
I do not mean that it is such a power as that a King may do what he pleases,
for he has rules to govern himself by, as well as your Lordship, who are
subordinate Judges under him, the difference is, the King is the head of the
same fountain of Justice, which your Lordship administers to all his subjects,
all Justice is derived from him, and what he does, he does not as a private
person, but as the Head of the Commonwealth, as Iusticiarius Regni, yea the
very essence of Justice under God upon earth, is in him: and shall not we
generally, not as subjects only, but as Lawyers, who govern themselves by the
rules of the Law, submit to his command, but make inquiries whether they be
lawful, and say that the King does not this or that in course of Justice?

If your Lordship sitting here shall proceed according to Justice, who calls
your actions in question, except in your own Judgments, you see some error in
the proceeding, and then you are subject to a writ of Error.

But who shall call in question the Actions or the Justice of the King, who is
not to give any account for them? as in this our case, that he commits a
subject and shows no cause for it.

The King commits and often shows no cause, for it is sometimes generally, Per
special^ mandatum domini Regis, sometimes Pro certis causis ipsum dominum Regem
moventibus; but if the King do this, shall it not be good? it is all one when
the commitment is Per speciale mandatum domini Regis, and when it is Pro certis
causis ipsum dominum Regem moventibus, and it is the same if the commitment be
Certis de causis ipsum dominum Regem tangentibus.

And my Lord, unless the Return to you does open the secrets of the
commitment, your Lordship cannot judge whether the party ought by Law to be
remaunded, or delivered: and therefore if the King allow and give warrant to
those that make the Return, that they shall express the cause of the
commitment, as many times he does, either for suspicion of felony, or making
money, or the like; we shall show your Lordship that in these causes this Court
in his Jurisdiction were proper to try these criminal causes, and your
Lordship does proceed in them although the commitment be Per speciale mandatum
domini Regis, which has not secret in it in these causes, for with the warrant
he sends your Lordship the cause of the committing, and when these warrants
are made and brought into this Court, your Lordship may proceed, but if there
be no cause expressed, this Court has always used to remaund them for it has
been used, and it is to be intended a matter of State, and that it is not ripe
nor timely for it to appear.

My Lord, the main fundamental grounds of Arguments upon this case begins
with Magna Charta, from thence have grown states for explanation thereof,
several Petitions of Parliament and Presidents for expedition, I shall give
answers to them all.

For Magna Charta, in the 29 Chapter, has these words, No Freeman shall be
taken nor imprisoned or disseised of his freehold, liberties, nor free
customs, nor be outlawed, or exiled, nor any other way destroyed, nor we will
not pass upon him nor condemn him, but by lawful Judgment of his Peers, or
by the Law of the Realm.

My Lord, this statute has been many times confirmed, the Lord Coke numbered up
the number to be about twenty, and we are to conclude on this, it is the
foundation of our liberties.

No Freeman can be imprisoned but by legale judicium Parium suorum, aut per
legem terrae. But will they have it understood that no man should be committed,
but first he shall be indicted or presented? I think that no learned man will
offer that, for certainly there is no Justice of Peace in a County, nor
Constable within a Town, but he does otherwise, and might commit before an
Indictment can be drawn or a Presentment can be made: what then is meant by
these words, Per legem terrae? if any man shall say this does not warrant that
the King may for reasons moving him commit a man, and not be answerable for it,
neither to the party, nor (under your Lordships favor) unto any Court of
Justice, but to the High Court of Heaven; I do deny it, and will prove it by
your statutes.

My Lord, it was urged by the Council on the other side, that our printed
Magna Charta which says, nec super eum mittimus, are mistaken, and that in
diverse Manuscripts it is expressly set down to be nec eum in Carcerem mittimus.
I cannot judge of the Manuscripts that I have not seen, but my Lord I have one
here by me, which was written many Ages ago, and the words in print are word
for word as that that is here written.

Then they say that Matthew Paris sets it down so in his story; my Lord, we
do not govern our selves by Chronicle, but to answer that of Matthew Paris, he
reports a thing done in King John's time, but it was then but thought on, and it
was enacted in the time of Henry the third, and there be many things said to
be done in Matthew Paris which were not, and many things omitted by him which
were done.

This Charter was but in election in the time of King John, and then it might
be, nec eum in Carcerem mittimus, but it was not enacted till the time of Henry
the third, and then that was omitted, and the Charter granted as now we have it.

But if they do see no more then I in this clause, I know not why we should
contend about these words, seeing the first part of this statute says, Nemo
imprisonetur, why then may not I say as well, nec eum in carcerem mittimus? I
see no difference in the words, and therefore my Lord, I shall not insist any
longer upon the literal exposition of the words of Magna Charta, but I will
resort to the rest of it which is expressed in the subsequent statute and in
common practice.

2 E. 3. 8. 5 E. 3. 9. 14 E. 3. 14.
The Council on the other side said, that the statute of 28 E. 3. c. 3.
expresses and gives life to this Charter, I shall desire to have that statute
read.


Keeling Clerk. Item, whereas it is contained in the great Charter, etc. Vide
all these statutes following in Master Littletons Argument in Parliament.


Heath Attorney. My Lord, the reading of this statute will give answer to it,
for it is apparent by the words thereof, none shall be taken by petition, etc.
and that the Court be extended to the first arrest, but they are to be
understood that none shall be condemned, but he shall be brought to answer,
and be tried.

And if it be expounded otherwise, it will be contrary to that practice which
was then in use.

But it is utterly forbidden by this statute, that any man should be condemned
upon suggestions or petitions made to the King or Council, without due trial
by Law.

The next statute they cited was 25 Ed. 3. cap. 4. My Lord, I desire that that
may be read.


Keeling Clerk. Item, that no man of what estate or condition soever that he
be, shall be put out of land or tenement, nor taken, nor imprisoned, nor
disinherited, nor put to death, without being brought to answer by due process
of Law. 42 E. 3. 3.



Heath Attorney. My Lord, this statute is intended to be a final prosecution,
for if a man shall be imprisoned without due process, and never be brought to
answer, that is unjust, and forbidden by this statute; but when a man is taken
in causes that are unknown to us, (who walk below the stairs) we are not privy
to the circumstances which may cause the trial to be delayed, and peradventure
it is not time to bring the matter to trial, because it is not yet come to
maturity, and therefore this is not in the meaning of the statute.

Another statute that they mention, is in the same year, and it is page 9.
chap. 9. I desire it may be read.


Keeling Clerk. Item, because the people of the Realm, etc. Vide Master
Littleton as before.


Heath Attorney. My Lord, it is very clear, that this statute had no manner of
thought of this cause in question; But whereas Sheriffs did procure
Commissions to be awarded to themselves for their private gain to the prejudice
of the subject, the statute condemns those commissions, but it makes nothing
to this question which we have now in hand. The next statute which they cited,
was 37 Ed. 3. cap. 18. I beseech it may be read.


Keeling Clerk. Item, though it be contained in the great Charter, etc. Vide as
aforesaid.


Heath Attorney. My Lord, this statute seems to be a commentary and light to
the other statutes, the scope whereof is against private suggestions made to
the King or his Council, and not in legal way, and therefore it condemns
them; and this is more fully expressed in the statute of 38 Ed. 3. cap. 9.
which they likewise mentioned, by which statute direction is given what
security those persons which make such suggestions are to give, that they
should prosecute their suggestions, and what punishment they shall undergo if
their suggestions be found false.


Keeling Clerk. Item, as to the Article made at the last Parliament, etc. Vide
as before said.


Heath Attorney. My Lord, this and the last statute seem to conduce both to one
purpose, that they that in their accusations went not in a legal way to bring
the party to his answer, it was directed by this statute that they should go a
legal way.

The last Parliament in print, the Council on the other side produced, was the
statute of 1 R. 2. chap. 12. which I desire may be read.


Keeling Clerk. Item, whereas diverse people at the suit of parties were
committed to the Fleet, etc. Vide as before.


Heath Attorney. My Lord, it appears that the scope of this statute is
against the Wardens of the Feet, for some miscarriages in them; but there is
one thing in this statute which I shall desire your Lordship to observe: and
that is, for those misdemeanors he shall forfeit his office, except it be by
writ from the King or his commandment, so that it was no new doctrine in those
times, that the King might then give such commandment for committing: the scope
of this statute had two hands: first, that the Warden should forfeit his
office: and secondly, that he should recompense the party.

In the fourth and fifth of Phil. and Mar. Dier 162. it was resolved, that if
the Warden shall deliver a man out of prison without command, he forfeiteth
his office and damage unto the party; But if he have the command of the King,
that shall excuse the forfeiture of his office, but he must bring the party
hither, and here these Gentlemen are now, for that commandment of the King is
no exception for him not to observe.

If he receives a writ from this Court, to show the Court from whence he
receives his warrant, it may excuse the forfeiture of his office, but
notwithstanding he is subject to the action of the party.

But I desire your Lordship to observe that part of the statute, which the
other party would not make use of, which is, that the King may command by writ
or otherwise; these were all the printed statutes cited by the Council on the
other side.

But because I would not misinterpret these statutes, I thought it equal to
desire your Lordship that they might be read.

Besides the printed statutes, they mentioned Petitions by the Commons, and the
Answers to them of several Kings in Parliament. The first is, Rot. pl. ^6. Ed.
3. Numero primo and Numero vicesimo: besides these two, there is one other of
28 Ed. 3. nu. 18.

My Lord, these three petitions and their answers, the two first were mentioned
by the Council on the other side, that in 28 E. 3. 28. I have produced all of
them even to one purpose.

The Commons then petitioned the King, that all the Statutes made in exposition
of Magna Charta, and of the Forest, may be kept and observed: The King makes
answer, that it shall be done. And in one of the answers it is said, If any man
be grieved, he may complain. But what is all this to the point in question?
could there be any other answer to give life to these requests?

The King he is petitioned that some are injured; he answers, That if they
complain they shall be relieved.

And now my Lord we are where we were, to find out the true meaning of Magna
Charta, for there is the foundation of our Case, all this that has been said
concerns other things, and nothing to the thing in Question.

There is not a word either of the commitment of the King, or commandment of
the Council in all the Statutes and Records.

And now my Lord I am at an end of those Statutes, and come to that that was
alleged and mentioned to be in 3 H. 6. 46. and if I could have found it, I
would have brought it, but I could not find it, therefore if they have it, I
desire that they will show it, but I think they have it not, and therefore I
will let that go.

And now my Lord I come to that which I insisted upon, the Question as it was
at first, not whether the King or the Lords of the Council can commit a man,
and show no cause wherefore they do commit him, but whether the ordinary Courts
of Justice have power to bail him or no; for that I will insist upon the
Statute of Westminster. primo, which I desire your Lordship may be read, and then I
will apply. Cap. 15. Mainprise Br. 11, 56, 78, Dier 170.



Vide Westminster. primo.

My Lord, this Statute, if I misunderstand it not, is a full expression to this
purpose of Magna Charta, the scope whereof is to direct us in what case men
imprisoned were to be bailed.

It was especially for direction to the Sheriffs and others, but to say Courts
of Justice are excluded from this Statute, I conceive it cannot be.

It recites that whereas heretofore it was not resolved in what cases men were
replevisable, and in what cases not, but only in these four cases, For the
death of a man, or by the commandment of the King, or of his Justices, or of
the Forest.

My Lord, I say that this Statute expresses not the Law was made by this
Statute, that in these cases men were not replevisable; but it expresses that
the Law was clear in these cases; In these four cases it was clearly resolved
before.

I pray you, my Lord, observe the time of the making of this Statute, that of
Magna Charta was made in the time of Henry the third, and this of Westminster
in the time of Edward the first, so that the first, it was made in the time of
the same.

And my Lord, if they had understood the Statute of Magna Charta in another
sense, would they not have expressed it so in this Statute? was it not fitter
for them then for us, they being nearer the first making of Magna Charta then
we are? But certainly the Statute of Magna Charta was expounded at the time as
I have showed before, if not, without all doubt at the time of making of Westminster.
primo.

The Parliament would not have been so careful to provide for things of lesser
moment, and omit this of so great consequence, if there had been any question
of it. In all times and ages Magna Charta has been confirmed, but they show
not any one Law that does except against this positive Law of Westminster the
first, or any Acts of Parliament; nay more, in any printed books, that in this
case men should be replevisable.

My Lord, if you know nothing printed or unprinted, if any will desire to alter
a course that always has been held, you will seek for presidents, for the
constant use and course is the best exposition of the Law; it is not enough for
me to say, this it is, unless I make it good.

First then I say, they on the other side cannot cite one Book, late Statute,
or other thing, to prove, That they that have been committed Per speciale
mandatum domini Regis, are bailable.

But my Lord, I find some to the contrary, that they are not bailable, and I
will cite some of them, and read of others, for I would not in a case of that
expectation, that it should be thought that any thing should be mis-interpreted.

In the 33 of Hen. the sixth, folio vicesimo tertio, Robert Poynings Case, he
was committed Pro diversis causis ipsum dominum Regem tangent'; this alters not
the case, for it was as good as no cause, for it was the Warrant Domini Regis,
and there is no question upon this: But my Lord, I know this is not the point
in question.

The next thing I shall show unto your Lordship, is Pasch. 21 Edvardi primo,
Rot. cla. secund. and this, my Lord, was near the time of making of the Statute
of Westminster. prim. and this president is to this purpose.

The Sheriff of Leicestershire and Warwickshire, (for then there was but one
Sheriff to both those Shires) did receive commandment by Letters from the
King; That whereas the Earl of Warwick had commanded diverse persons to the
custody of the said Sheriff, the King sent a Letter to the said Sheriff,
commanding that those who were committed to his custody by the Earl of Warwick,
he should show no grace to them, that is, they should not be bailed.

The Sheriff notwithstanding this command lets some of those prisoners to
bail, whereupon he was complained of in Parliament, that he had done against
the Kings commandment, and he was condemned for it.

This was a Parliament, I wonder this should be done in Parliament, and that it
was not said there, That this commitment being done by the Kings commandment
was not good; no, he was condemned in Parliament, for it was one that did break
the Statute of Westminster. primo.

My Lord, the use that I make of this Record is this, It recites, that the Earl
of Warwick committed diverse, it might be that he did commit them by direction
from the King; but the Record mentions not so much, but it shows, that the
King by Letters commanded the Sheriff, that he should show those persons no
grace, and yet he did; he was examined upon this, and by Parliament committed.

The next matter I will offer to your Lordships judgment, for the true
exposition of the Law in this case, is the Book we call the Register, an
authority respected, it is the foundation of all our Writs at the Common Law; I
bring not the Book. Register fol. 77, etc.


In this Book there is one Writ says thus, Rex, etc. Quod replegiar' fac' A.
nisi fuerit per speciale mandatum domini Regis.


Justice Doderidge. In what Writ is that, De homine replegiando?


Attorney General. Yea, in the Writ De homine replegiando, and there is
another Writ directed to the Constable of Dover, in the very same words; by
which it appears, that they that are imprisoned by the Kings command, non sunt
replegiabiles.

F.N.B. 66. f.
Master Fitzherbert, a grave Judge, and is in authority with us, perusing these
Writs, expressed it in these words plainly; There are some cases wherein a man
cannot have this Writ, although he be taken and detained in Prison; as if he be
taken by the death of a man, or if he be taken by the commandment of the Kings
Justices, and mentions not chief Justice, which I believe is to be intended not
of the chief of the Court of Judicature, but of the chief Justice of England,
for there was such a one in those days: Thus my Lord you see the opinion of
Master Fitzherbert in this case.

The next thing that I will show your Lordship, is the opinion of Master
Stamford, in his Pleas of the Crown, Fol. 72. where he sets down the Statute of
Westminster primo, and then he adds, That by this appears in four cases at the
Common Law a man is not replevisable, In those that were taken for the death of
a man, or by the commandment of the King, or of his Justices, or of the Forest:
And there he says, That the commandment of the King is to be intended, either
the commandment of his mouth, or of his Council, which is incorporated to him,
and speak with the mouth of the King.

My Lord, I shall desire no better Commentaries upon a Law then these reverent
grave Judges, who have put books of Law in Print, and such Books as none, I
believe, will say their judgments are weak.

The next thing I shall offer unto your Lordship is this, that I cannot show
with so great authority as I have done the rest, because I have not the thing
it self by me; but I will put it to your Lordships memory, I presume you may
well remember it, It is the resolution of all the Judges, which was given in
the four and thirtieth of Queen Elizabeth, it fell out upon an unhappy occasion
which was thus; The Judges they complain that Sheriffs and other Officers
could not execute the process of the Law as they ought, for that the parties
on whom such process shall be executed were sent away by some of the Queens
Council, that they could not be found; the Judges hereupon petitioned the Lord
Chancellor, that he would be a suitor to her Majesty that nothing be done
hereafter. And thereupon the Judges were desired to show in what cases men that
were committed were not bailable, whether upon the commitment of the Queen or
any other.

The Judges make answer, That if a man shall be committed by the Queen, by her
command, or by the Privy Council, he is not bailable: If your Lordship ask me
what authority I have for this, I can only say, I have it out of the Book of
the Lord Anderson written with his own hand.

My Lord, I pray you give me leave to observe the time when this was done; It
was in a time, and we may truly call it a good time, in the time of good Queen
Elizabeth, and yet we see there was then cause of complaint; and therefore I
would not have men think that we are now grown so bad (as the opinion is we
are) for we see that then in those times there was cause of complaint, and it
may be more then is now.

This, my Lord, was the resolution of all the Judges and Barons of the
Exchequer, and not by some great one.

Now I will apply my self to that which has been enforced by the Council on
the other side, which was the reason that the Subject has interest in this
case.

My Lord I do acknowledge it, but I must say that the Sovereign has great
interest in it too. And sure I am, that the first stone of Sovereignty was no
sooner laid, but this power was given to the Sovereign; If you ask me whether
it be unlimited, my Lord, I say it is not the question now in hand: But the
Common Law, which has long flourished under the Government of our King and his
Progenitors Kings of this Realm, have ever had that reverent respect of their
Sovereign, as that it has concluded the King can do no wrong: And as it is in
the Lord Berklies Case in Plowdens Com. 246. b. it is part of the Kings
Prerogative that he can do no wrong.

Title Travers 5.
In the fourth of Edward the fourth, fol. 25. the King cannot be a disseisor;
and so it is also in the Lord Berklies Case in 32 H. 8. Dier fol. 8.

The King cannot usurp upon a Patron, for the Common Law has that reverent
respect to him, as that it cannot conceive he will do any injury.

But the King commits a Subject, and expresses no cause of the commitment;
what then? shall it be thought that there is no cause why he should be
committed?

Nay my Lord, the course of all times has been, to say there is no cause
expressed, and therefore the matter is not ripe, and thereupon upon the Courts
of Judicature have ever rested satisfied therewith, they would not search into
it.

My Lords, there be Arcana Dei, and Arcana Imperii, and they that search too
far into them, and make themselves busier with them then their places do
require, they will make themselves etc. I will say no more; but I shall be able
to show that there shall as much prejudice come to the Kingdom, if God direct
not the heart of the King, which is in the hand of God, as the Rivers of
waters: I say there may as much hazard come to the Commonwealth in many other
things, with which the King is trusted, as in this particular there can accrue
to the Subject.

If a Treason be committed as it was not long ago, nor far removed from our
memories; since there was a Treason, and the Actors thereof fled, some to the
Court of Rome, some to Bruxells, when it was to be put in execution; the
Treason being discovered one is apprehended upon suspicion of it, and is put
into the Tower, and there he lies and thinks the time very long, and I
cannot blame him.

It may be he is innocent, and thereupon he brings a Habeas Corpus, and by
virtue of that Writ he is brought hither, and will your Lordship think it fit
or convenient to bail him, when the accusation against him must come from
beyond the Sea? I think you will rather so respect the proceedings of the
State, as that you will believe these things are done with a cause, then
inquire further of them.

Peradventure some great misdemeanour may be committed, and some of the parties
make away, so as Proclamation cannot overtake them, and some are taken, it is
fit that they that are in prison should be tried before the principal be taken.

I will give you an instance, that lately was put into my mind; There be some
Prisoners in the Tower at this present, which were put in thither when they
were very young: If they should bring an Habeas Corpus, they were imprisoned
for State matters, will your-Lordship deliver them? No, in that the State does
not think it fit to send them back into their own Countries. You will esteem so
reverently of the State for committing children, that you will believe that
there is great reason of State so to do, or else they would not do it: Many
inconveniences may follow if it should be otherwise. It may be diverse men do
suffer wrongfully in prison, but therefore shall all prisoners be delivered?
that were a great mischief.

No doubt but the Kings Power is absolute over his coins, if then he shall
command his coin shall be turned to brass or leather, I confess it were
inconvenient, but if the King would do it, the answer that I can make is, that
he would not undo the Kingdom; but can your Lordship hinder it as being an
inconvenience if he would do it? the Cinque Ports are free for traffic for
all his Subjects, but the King in his Cabinet understands there is danger of
War to come upon this Kingdom, thereupon he shuts the Ports that no man can
go out, shall the Merchant say this is injustice in the King? And as in this,
so in many other particulars this may appear, but I will not go too high: and
therefore we are too wise, nay we are too foolish, in undertaking to examine
matters of State, to which we are not born. Now my Lord, I come to our Book
cases, by which it appears what our King may do, and nothing can be so against
it, but he will not do it; the King may pardon all Traitors and felons, and if
he should do it, may not the Subjects say, If the King do this, the bad will
overcome the good? but shall any say, the King cannot do this? no, we may only
say, he will not do this?

The King may exempt men from the Office of Sheriff, is not this inconvenient?
and may it not be said, he may exempt ten in a Shire, and then the burden of
the Country shall rest upon the meaner sort of people? can any man say more to
this, then that he will not do it?

Inheritances are to be decided upon trial; the King may exempt private men
from being of a Jury, but if he exempt all men, who shall try our Causes? for
it is to be presumed, that he will not do it.

But to our Case; by the Statute of Magna Charta, no man shall be put out of
his freehold, etc. But if the King will do it, must not the party that is so
put out go to the King by Petition? But you will say, it is a Petition of
Right, and it may be these gentlemen's is so; admit it be, yet when such a
Petition comes to the King, must it not be answered with these words, Soit
droit fait al part? and when that the King will give that Warrant for it, then
they must have it done, and not before.

And this may answer a perpetual imprisonment, and God forbid that this should
be so: And now my Lord, I will trouble you no longer, but I will go to
presidents. Presidents I know prevail much, and rule in many cases, and if the
presidents they cite were not mis-interpreted, I should think they had said a
great deal.

But my Lord, I will answer their presidens with presidents; nay, I will show
your Lordship that the presidents which they have cited are no presidents for
them.

And my Lord, it is a dangerous thing for men in matters of weight to avouch
presidents with confidence, when they make nothing for them: for my Lord,
presidents are now become almost Proclamations, for they already run up and
down the Town, and yet they know but part of them, and not all, and I think if
they knew all, men would be more modest.

But my Lord, I will now come to these presidents, where I may say they have
not dealt freely with me, for they have showed me many presidents more then
they mentioned here, and it may be they have done the like unto your Lordship.

They alleged but eight presidents before your Lordship, but they have brought
sixteen unto me: for these eight mentioned here, I will take them in order as
they were cited, and answer.

The first president they cited was in Henry the eight, Rot. 9. one Harrison,
we have the Record here to show your Lordship, that he was committed for
suspicion of felony, which was expressed in the Warrant; and then my Lord, this
is clear, if the King, or the Lords of the Council, will express any thing
within your Lordships jurisdiction, there is good ground for your proceedings:
But when there is nothing expressed, whether you will judge what the cause of
the Warrant is, I will leave to your Lordships judgment, but it appears this
was the cause, and that he was delivered.

The next president was 22 H. 8. Rot. 57. and it was Parkers case; and it is
true that his commitment appeared to be Per speciale mandatum domini Regis, but
it was also proposed to be Pro pace and suspicione feloniae; and the
signification of the command was given by Master Peck of Cliffords Inn; but
there the Warrant shows the cause of the commitment was for the peace and
suspicion of felony, and therefore he was bailed.

The next was in 40 Eliz. Wendons Case; but my Lord, that commitment was out of
the Star Chamber by an ordinary course: Then they cited 8 Jac. Thomas Caesar's
Case, he indeed was committed by Speciale mandatum domini Regis, and brought
his Habeas Corpus, but the Roll says remittitur; and is that a Warrant for
them to say that he was delivered?

Then Sir Thomas Vernons Case was cited; and my Lord when we looked into the
Records we found that he was committed for suspicion of Treason; and he was
tried for it and discharged.

The next president was Sir Thomas Monsons Case; I wonder that they did cite
that, for he was committed by the Lords of the Council indeed, but the ground
of it was the suspicion of the death of Sir Thomas Overbury, and he was
discharged again by the Lords of the Council. Certainly if you had known this,
you would not have named this as a president for you.

The next was Reynors Case; he my Lord, was one of the Gunpowder-Treason, and
yet there was a Warrant to discharge him too. And therefore what these
presidents are, I shall submit to your Lordship, I must confess when they are
cited together, they make a great noise, but when they are examined severally
they prove nothing.

My Lord, there is one more president of these that were cited here before your
Lordship, and I hope that one shall be as none.

It was mentioned to be Lawrence Browns Case, 30 Eliz. I know not what it is,
but it is like to be of the same value as the rest, Pro certis causis eos
moventibus, etc.

And thus, my Lord, I have gone through those presidents that were alleged
here before your Lordship; and now I will come to these presidents that were
brought to me, and not mentioned here.

The first was John Brownings Case, in 21 H. 8. My Lord, these presidents came
not to me before Saturday last about candlelighting, and yesterday was no time
fitting to search out presidents, and how could I then search for this?

The next was William Rogers Case of the same time. But the cause is expressed
to be for suspicion of felony, which is a cause within the Jurisdiction of this
Court.

Newports Case was the like in 4 and 5 Phil. and Mar. and so was Thomas
Lawrence Case, 9 Eliz. and Edw. Harecourts Case, 5 Eliz. which was for
suspicion of felony. Richard Beckwith, and not Barkwith as was cited, for they
have mistaken both names and matters, was committed Per speciale mandatum
domini Regis; and the Record says he was bailed. But it was by reason of a
letter from the Lords of the Council.

The cause of Peter man's commitment in the 4 and 5 of Philip and Mary, appears
to be for suspicion of felony and robbery.

For Reynors case it is the same with Beckwith, and were both for one thing.

In the eighth of Henry the seventh, one Rog: Cherry was committed Per mandatum
domini Regis, and it was for a criminal case, and he was afterward indicted
and acquitted and delivered.

And there is another president thereof, that says, he was afterward
arraigned, condemned, and hanged, we have the Record of it.

And now my Lord, I will show some presidents on the other side, where men have
been committed by the commandment of the King, and by the commandment of the
Council, and have been delivered again by their directions: And of this kind
there be two in the Tower, that as they were committed by Warrant, so by
Warrants again for their bailing they were delivered; the offenses were against
the Forest and for Murder.

In the fourth of Edward the third, M. 4. Edmond de Newport in Essex was
indicted for an offense committed by him in the Forest. And M. 7. John Fox was
likewise indicted for an offense by him done in the Forest: and there be two
Warrants to bail them.

M. 20. John Cobb was the like, and there was a letter from the King, Quod
ponatur in Ballium usque ad proximam Assisam.

These were offenses within Westminster primo, and there be several Warrants
to bail them.

The Clark of this Court has many Records, by which it appears, that many
have been committed by the command of the King and of the Queen, and of the
Council, and brought their Habeas Corpus; and the success was, that many of
them were committed to the same Prisons, and diverse were committed to the
Marshall of this Court; the reason was, for that many of them were to appear
here, their causes being triable here, and it would have been a great trouble
to send them back so far to Prison as into the Countries, and therefore they
were delivered to the Marshall of the Kings Household: again, many had their
Trials in this Court, and some suffered, and some were delivered by special
command as they were committed by special command.

The number of these of this nature are infinite that have been in our times,
we have found some forty presidents of men committed out of the Chancery, and
by the High Commission, for contempts, and some by the Barons of the Exchequer,
and some in London that have been brought hither by Habeas corpus.

Of this I shall observe, that in the 11 Iacobi, there was a private
Constitution in London made between the white Bakers, that they might live one
by another, and the one not to invade the others liberties, and for contempt
against this Ordinance, some were committed to prison, as Thomas Heanning, and
Littlepage, they had a Habeas corpus, and the cause was shown to be by reason
of the said Constitution, and thereupon the prisoners were sent back to London
to abide the Order of the Mayor; for my Lord, this Court has been ever
careful not to examine the Decrees of the Chancery, or Court of Requests, but
have only looked whether the cause returned be within the jurisdiction of this
Court nor have they called in question the bylaws and constitutions of London,
but they send them back to the court of Justice that commits them.

And has this Court been so careful of these inferior Courts to this which
is the chief, and when the King who is the head of Justice shall commit a man,
shall not they be as careful to do the like Justice to them? But when the King
says to them, the commitment was by my warrant and commandment, will you
question this? and whether this commitment be good or no? I hope you will not.

And now my Lords, touching some presidents which have been taken out of their
own showing, I shall make it appear, that as they have been committed by the
King or Council, so they had warrants also to discharge them: and they my
Lords, are two ancient Records, the first is 7 H. 7. Rot. 6. the other Rot. 73.
the first was Thomas Brown, he was committed to the Marshalseys, Per mandatum
domini Regis, and aliis certis de causis: and afterward the Records say,
Dominus Rex quoad Chase relaxavit mandatum suum, and he was bailed and the rest
lay by it.

My Lords, I will conclude, I could be infinite in this case in presidents, but
enough is enough, your Lordship knows the weight of presidents, it is not
enough to show this was done, but also to show the reason why it was done: I
will trouble your Lordship no longer, but if any man shall doubt whether that or
any part thereof, be truly recited, which has been said touching the Records
or Statutes, I can say no more but that the statutes have been read, and the
Records are ready sorted out to be seen by your Lordship.

I shall conclude (that I shall say) in this case to answer the fear rather
then the just ground, of them that say that this may be a cause of great
danger, with the words of Bracton, who spoke not to flatter the present age,
lib. 1. chap. 8. in the end, speaking of a writ for wrong done by the King to
the Subject touching land, he says these words, si judicium a Rege testatur
(cum breve non currat contra ipsum) locus erat supplicationi quod factum suum
corrigat and emendet, quod quidem si non fecerit satis sufficit ei ad poenam
quod dominum expectet ultorem, nemo quidem de factis suis praesumat disputare,
multo fortius contra factum suum venire.

My Lords, I englished it not, for I apply it not, any man may make use of it
as he pleases; and so I conclude both for the point of Exception, and matter
of the Return, which I refer to your Lordships judgment, whether all in the
Return but these words Per speciale mandatum domini Regis, be not superfluous.
And for the matter, whether these Gentlemen be bailable or not bailable, I have
showed your Lordship, that by the practice of all ages they are not bailable,
but have been remaunded back.

And therefore I pray your Lordship, that these Gentlemen may be remitted, and
left to go the right way for their delivery, which is by Petition to the King:
whether it be a Petition of right or of grace I know not; it must be I am sure
to the King, from whom I do personally understand that these Gentlemen did
never yet present any Petition to him that came to his knowledge.


Hide Chief Justice. Master Attorney, thus much we must say to you, you have
taken a great deal of pains, you having had so short a time to consider of this
case, it is a case of very grear weight and expectation, and we do not intend
that you shall expect long for our resolution, for that these Gentlemen are in
prison, and desire no doubt to know where they must trust; I hope we shall
resolve according to the reason of former times, and according to our
consciences: but this I must tell you, as I did those that argued, you must
bring in your presidents, for though we have seen some of them, yet some of
them we have not seen, therefore we desire that your servants or your selves
do attend, and bring unto us after dinner, those presidents you have mentioned
on the Kings part, for we intend to meet this afternoon, and you shall have our
opinions to morrow: and I must tell you on the other side, that this cause
being of such weight, Council should be wary, how they speak any thing to
inveagle the Court.

Touching such presidents as you urged in some of them, we know there is
something urged which makes not for you, so you have omitted some material
things to be shown; I speak it to this purpose, not to prejudice the cause or
to deliver my opinion, which becomes me not, but to show, that Counselors
should be careful, and this I dare say, there is matter in some of the
presidents themselves that leads to another case if they were entirely cited.

The Term grows away, you shall not be long in expectation, we will meet this
afternoon, and give you our opinions to morrow morning.


Master Noye. We desire that Master Attorney may bring the presidents of 34
Elizabeth with him.


Master Attorney. I will show you any thing, but my Lord, I shall be bold to
claim the privilege of my place, as the Kings Council, when the Kings
Attorney has spoken, there ought to be no Arguments after that, but if you
ask to see any thing you shall have it.


Hide Chief Justice. It is that we aim at, the truth and right may appear, and
not satisfy the one or the other part, but it is not desired to make use of it
by way of reply, but for satisfaction only.


Sergeant Bramstone. My Lord, for the presidents I cited, I did think they
should have been brought and read in the Court that your Lordship might see
them.


Hide Chief Justice. You shall need no Apology, the Records and Presidents
shall be brought to the Court, and read openly, for the Court will not wrong
you, and you shall see the difference between them, and your relation of them,
nor you must not wrong us with your written verities.


On thursday the twenty eight of November, Michaelis 3. Caroli Regis, Hide
Chief Justice, Justice Doderidge, Justice Jones, and Justice Whitlock on the
Bench: Sir John Corbet, Sir Walter Earl, Sir John Henningham, and Sir Edmund
Hampden at the Bar.
Hide Chief Justice. I am sure you here expect the resolution of the whole
Court, as accordingly yesterday we told you you should have.

This is a case of very great weight and great expectation, and it had been fit
we should have used more solemn arguments of it then now for the shortness of
the time we can do, for you have been long in prison, and it is fit you should
know whereunto you should trust: I am sure you expect Justice from hence, and
God forbid we should sit here but to do Justice to all men according to our
best skill and knowledge, for it is our oaths and duties so to do, and I am
sure there is nothing else expected of us. We are sworn to maintain all the
Prerogatives of the King, that is one branch of our oath, and we are likewise
sworn to administer Justice equally to all people.

We cannot I tell you deliver in solemn arguments and give the judgments of
every one of us touching this case, as the weight thereof requires; but we
have met together, and we have duly and seriously considered of it, and of all
that which has been spoken of on either side, and we are grown to a
resolution, and my brothers have injoined me to del^ver to you, the resolution
of the whole Court: and therefore though it be delivered by my mouth, it is
the resolution of us all: I hope I shall not mistake any thing of their
intention in my delivery, but if I do they sit here by me, and I shall not
take it ill if they right me.

Therefore I must tell you there has been many points learnedly argued at the
Bar, which we shall not touch, or give our resolution upon, but bend our selves
to the point in judgment here.

These three Statutes, as for example, the statute of Magna Charta, 25 E. 3.
and 36 E. 3. and the statute of Westminster primo, and diverse other statutes
that have been alleged, and particularly disputed of, we all acknowledge and
resolve, that they are good Laws, and that they be in force, but the
interpretation of them at this time belongs not to us, for we are driven to
another point: and though the meaning of them belongs to the one way or the
other, yet our judgment must be the same; for that which is now to be judged
by us is this, whether one that is committed by the Kings authority, and no
cause declared of his commitment, according as here it is upon this return,
whether we ought to deliver him by bail, or to remaund him back again? Wherein
you must know this which your Council will tell you, we can take notice only
of this return, and when the case appears to come to us no otherwise then by
the return, we are not bound to examine the truth of the return, but the
sufficiency of it, for there is a great difference between the sufficiency and
the truth.

We cannot judge upon rumors nor reports, but upon that which is before us on
record, and therefore the Return is examinable by us whether it be sufficient
or not.

The exceptions which have been taken to this Return were two: the one for the
form, the other for the substance.

For the form, whether it be formally returned or no, for it is not returned
(as it is said) positively and absolutely, that they were committed by the
King, but as it appears by a warrant from the Lords of the Council, and then
there seems to be a contradiction in the return.

For first it says, they were committed by the Kings command, and afterward
it alleges it to be by a warrant of the Lords of the Council, and so it is
repugnant.

Now we conceive that this is a positive and an absolute Return, and so the
reason is, that he first returns that they are detained by the special command
of the King, and if he had ceased there, it had been positive; now there
follows that this was signified to them by the Lords of the Council, this is
returned to ascertain the Court that he returned the cause truly, and to show
us that we should not doubt the verity of this return, and not to show to us
that he has no knowledge of the cause but by the signification of the Lords of
the Council, according to that case of the Bishop of Norwich, touching the
excommunication, he must testify his own knowledge, and not continetur in
Archivis: so a Sheriff must not return quod mandavi ball' etc. and he gives
this answer, unless it be the Bailiffe of a Liberty that has return of writs.

And so here if the Warden of the Fleet had returned that the Lords of the
Council had signified unto him that his prisoner was detained by the Kings
commandment, that had been sufficient: but when he returns positively, at the
first that is done by the Kings direction, he shows afterward that which
should make it appear that he deals not falsely, which might have been omitted,
but being mentioned that that is the scope of it, and not otherwise, the return
is good and positive.

Now then to the other objections, because he speaks nothing of the caption why
they were taken, you know it is the usual return of all Officers to answer the
point in question; there is not one word in the Writ that demands the cause why
they were taken, but why they are detained: so that the point in the Writ is
sufficiently answered; for though sometimes it is necessary that the cause of
the caption should be certified, yet sometimes it is superfluous, but in our
case the cause of the detention is sufficiently answered, which is the demand
of the Writ, and therefore we resolve that the form of this Return is good. The
next thing, is the maine point in Law, whether the substance or matter of the
Return be good or no, wherein the substance is this, he does certify that they
are detained in prison by the special command of the King, and whether this be
good in Law or no, that is the question.

To this purpose if you remember this point, I say you did not cite any Book or
Case in print but many presidents, which I confess are as strong as any Book
Cases; for Book Cases I confess are taken and selected out of the Records and
Resolution of Judges, and that is it which is in our Books, though they be not
so obvious for every eye, but are found out by pains and diligent search, and
being produced are of the same and equal authority with our Book Cases, but
this must be when Records are brought faithfully and entirely, so that the
Court may adjudge of them.

Now the presidents you urged them to be so many, and so fully to the point,
that we may thereby see that it is good to hear what can be said on both
sides, and for to hear all, and view the Records themselves, and therefore we
required you to bring the Records to us, and you did so, and you brought us
more then you mentioned here; and we have perused them all, that thereby we
might see whether the Court be faithfully dealt withal or no, for though
Counselors may urge a Book for their own advantage, yet it is the duty of the
Court to see and distinguish of their allegations, as the truth may appear.

This I told you yesterday, when I told you your presidents warranted not so
much as you urge them for; for if you be remembered you urge some presidents to
be, that where men were committed by the King, or by the Lords of the Council,
and no cause expressed why they were committed, they were delivered.

This is in effect our case, if the presidents affirm that when a man is
committed by the Kings command, and no just cause is shown, that upon such a
general Return the party shall ipso facto be delivered, for if the Return be
not amended that he shall be discharged.

For although men come with prepared minds, yet the preparation of every man's
heart ought to submit to the truth, and by the presidents, you shall see if it
be so as you have alleged; but this I dare affirm, that no one of the Records
that you have cited, does enforce what you have concluded out of them, no not
one; and therefore as you have cited Records and Presidents, Presidents shall
judge this case.

I will show you how they differ from the Records, you have concluded when the
King has committed one, and expresses not the cause, the Court has delivered
the party; but you shall see the contrary concluded in every Case that you have
put, where the cause of the commitment has been expressed, there the party
has been delivered by the Court, if the Case so required, but where there has
been no cause expressed, they have ever been remaunded, or if they have been
delivered, they have been delivered by the Kings direction, or by the Lords of
the Council: If this fall now in proof, you see you have gathered fair
conclusions out of the Records, and that you may see that this is so, I have
brought the Records with me of your own propounding, and I will go through
them from point to point, and then judge your selves of the case.

It is not material whether I call for them in that order as you produced them
or no, and therefore I will take them as they are, first or last in the Kings
Reign; They are in number many, in the time of Henry the seventh, Henry the
eighth, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, and King James his time.

I will show you Sir Thomas Monsons Case in 14 Iacobi which was in all our
memories.

I will begin with Pasche, in 8 H. 7. Roger Cherries Case, you vouched it to
this purpose, That Cherry being committed by the Major of Windsor, was brought
hither by a Habeas Corpus, and the Major he returns that he was committed Per
mandatum domini Regis, and that thereupon he was delivered; but you shall find
by the Record that he was committed by the Major at the suit of the King for
felony, for which he was afterward indicted, brought to a trial, and then
discharged.

Vide this Record in Master Seldens Argument in the Parliament, 3 and 4 Caroli
Regis, and so all the rest after mentioned.

The next was 19 H. 7. Vrswicks Case; and you say he was brought hither by the
Warden of the Fleet, who as you said, returned that he was committed Per
mandatum domini Regis, and you said he was discharged, but he was bailed upon
the Lords Letter, and brought hither to record his return, for he was bound to
appear here, and then he was discharged; but that was the cause of his bringing
hither, vide the Records as aforesaid.

The next was Hugh Pains Case, in 21 H. 7. and that you urged thus, you say
that he was brought hither by a Habeas Corpus, by the Warden of the Fleet, who
returned that he was committed by the Kings Council, and he was bailed: Now we
find that he was committed by them for suspicion of felony; and that cause was
declared, and he was bailed; so that you see there was a cause expressed. Vide
the Record aforesaid.

The next is 2 H. 8. Thomas Beckley and Robert Harrisons Case; these you said
were brought in hither by George Earl of Shrewsbury, and Thomas Earl of
Surrey; and the Return was, that they were committed by the command of Hen. 7.
and that they were bailed; but you shall find that they were committed for
suspicion of felony; and that Harrison was committed by Hen. 7. but it was for
Homicide upon the Sea, and so the cause is expressed, and afterward he was
bailed. The next was in 22 H. 8. John Parkers Case; you urged it to this
purpose, That he was brought hither by a Habeas Corpus by the Sheriffs of
London, and they you said returned, that he was committed Per speciale mandatum
domini Regis nunciatum, etc. by Robert Peck, etc. the cause why you urged this
was twofold; first, that he was committed by the Kings command, and yet he was
bailed: secondly, that he was committed Per mandatum domini Regis nunciat' per
such a one: But you shall find by the Record that he was committed for the
security of peace, and for suspicion of felony, and that was the cause for
which he was bailed, for he is bailable by Law when such a cause appears. Vide
the Record as before.

Go on to the next, and that is Peter Man's Case in the 3 and 4 Philip and
Mary, you urged that to this purpose, You say, that he was brought by the
Keeper of the Gatehouse, and you say, that he returned, that he was committed
by the command of the King and the Queens Council, and thereupon he was
bailed; but you shall find that he was committed for suspicion of felony and
robbery, and thereupon he was bailed.

The next is in the 4 and 5 Phil. and Mar. Edward Newports Case; you said that
the Constable of the Tower brought him hither, and returned that he was
committed by the Council of the King and the Queen, and that he was bailed,
but you see the Records that he was committed for suspicion of coining, which
is bailable only in this Court, and therefore it was removed hither; yet this
I must tell you, that it is true in one Record, it appears not but as you have
cited it; but you may see how it is supplied by another Record, and the cause,
and he was delivered by a Proclamation. Vide both Records in Master Seldens
Argument, as aforesaid.


Doderidge. He could not be delivered by Proclamation unless it was for a
criminal cause.


Hide Chief Justice. Observe another thing in the Book, he is brought hither by
the special command of the Council, so that although it appears not in the
Record, yet if the King or Lords mean to have him tried for his life, he is
brought hither: Then you cited Robert Constables case, 9 Eliz. and you said he
was brought hither by the Lieutenant of the Tower, who returned that he was
committed by the Lords of the Council, and thereupon he was bailed; but you
shall find that he came hither to plead his pardon, and he was pardoned.

Vide the Record as aforesaid.

Thomas Laurence Case in 9 Eliz. is the same with Constables, for it appears
that he was brought hither to plead his pardon, and he was pardoned, and that
was the cause he was brought hither.

The next was in 21 Eliz. John Brownings case; it is true he was committed by
the Lords of the Council, and he was brought by a Habeas Corpus to the chamber
of Sir Christopher Wray, Chief Justice, and he was there bailed.

The next was 33 Eliz. William Rogers; and he you said was brought hither by
the Keeper of the Gatehouse, who returned, that he was committed to him by the
Lords of the Council, yet there was a cause expressed, and that was for
suspicion of coining of money.

The next was in 39 Eliz. Lawrence Brown, you say that he was brought hither by
the Keeper of the Gatehouse, who returned that he was committed for diverse
causes, moving the Lords of the Council, and thereupon he was delivered; but
the Record is, that the Return also was for suspicion of Treason, and although
the suspicion of Treason appears not in one Record, yet there is another for
it: Here you see cause of his commitment, and that he was bailed, but it was by
the Kings command, Vsque Octabis Michaelis, vide the Record.

I blame not you that are of Council with these Gentlemen for urging this
Record, for this Cause is not expressed in your Record, but that he was
committed by command of the Council only, but he was committed for suspicion
of felony with Sir Thomas Smith: Vide the Record.

The next is in 40 Eliz. Edward Harecourts Case, and Thomas Wendens Case; I
bring them together because they are both in one year; in the 40 of Eliz.
Edward Harecourt you say was committed to the Gatehouse by the Lords of the
Council, and the Return was that he was committed by them Certis de causis
ipsos moventibus ignotis, and he was bailed.

Here is another in the same time committed to the same prison by the Lords in
the Star Chamber, it was Thomas Wendens case, and he you say was committed by
them Certis de causis, (as the other was) and that he was bailed; but you shall
find in the margin of the Roll, Traditur in ball' ex assensu Concilii dominae
Reginae; and that was the relation of the Queens Attorney, so that you see how
that president fits you.

The next are two more of the Gatehouse, Beckwith and Reyner, they, you said,
were committed to the Gatehouse, brought their Habeas Corpus, and the Keeper of
the Gatehouse returned, that they were committed by virtue of a Warrant from
the Archibishop of Canterbury, Henry Earl of Northampton, Lord Warden of the
Cinque Ports, and others of the Privy Council, requiring the said Keeper to
receive the said Beckwith and Reyner into his charge, until they should have
further order from them in that behalf; and you say they were bailed.

Vide the Record in Master Seldens aforesaid.

Now you shall see the direction to bail him; he was bailed by the direction
from the Lords of the Council, as appears by their Letter. Vide as aforesaid.

Now we come to Caesar's Case in 8 Jacobi, you urged that to this purpose; you
say he was committed to the Marshalsey, who upon a Habeas Corpus returned, That
he was committed Per speciale mandatum domini Regis, and you say, because the
Return was so general, the rule of the Court was, that it should be amended,
or else he should be discharged, I will open to you what the reason of that
rule was, for that notice was taken, that the Keeper of the Prison had used a
false Return, and had usurped the name of the King, I know not how, but the
commitment was not by the Kings command; and that was the cause that he had day
given him to amend his Return, but his body was remaunded to Prison, as you
shall see the Record. Vide the Record, etc.

The last president that you used, was that of Sir Thomas Monson, and that was
so notorious, and so late, that I marvel that was offered at all, it made me
jealous of all the rest, that was so notorious; and now I have omitted none you
brought me. Vide the Record.

By this Record you may see that he was committed by diverse Lords of the
Council, and it was for the suspicion of the death of Sir Thomas Overbury; and
it is notoriously known, that he was brought hither to plead his pardon.

I will not tell you that you read all these presidents, for you read none, but
urged them here before us, but we required you to bring them to us, and they
were brought to us, Master Corbet brought them all but one, and that Master
Noye brought, it was in 22 H. 8. Parkers Case: And one Master Holborn a man
whose face I never saw before, nor is he now in mine eye, did yesterday bring
us one president to this purpose, and it was Sir John Brockets Case in 1 Jac.
he was committed to the Gatehouse, and upon a Habeas Corpus the Keeper returned
that Commiss' suit per Warrantum Dominorum de Privat' Concilio cujus tenor
sequitur in haec verba. viz. To the Keeper of the Gatehouse, etc. vide Master
Seldens presidents; but see upon what ground he was bailed, it was a special
command of the Lords of the Council. Vide the Record.

These are all the Records and presidents that you ministered unto us in your
Argument, and that were delivered unto us, for I have dealt faithfully with
you, and now you have seen them in the Cases, I would have any man judge of the
conclusion which you made the last day, That when a man is committed, and the
case not known, but it is certified to be by the Kings special commandment,
and the Habeas Corpus is procured by your selves and speeded by the King, that
we can discharge or bail them.

Then the presidents are all against you every one of them, and what shall
guide our judgments, since there is nothing alleged in this case but
presidents? that if no cause of the commitment be expressed, it is to be
presumed to be for matter of State, which we cannot take notice of; you see we
find none, no not one, that has been delivered by bail in the like cases, but
by the hand of the King or his direction.

If we should cease here, you see you have shown nothing to satisfy us, and we
know that you that be of their Council, will satisfy your Clients therein.

But you shall see that we have taken a little pains in this Case, and we will
show you some presidents on the other side; and I believe there be five
hundredth of this nature that may be cited to this purpose, I shall go
retrograde and go backwards in citing the years of the presidents that I shall
mention.

I will begin with 7 H. 8. Edward Page, he was brought hither by the Steward of
the Marshalseys, who returned that he was committed Per mandatum domini Regis,
and he was remitted, so that he was not delivered upon this general Return,
but he was remaunded.

The next was 12 H. 7. there you shall see a president where one was committed,
his name was Thomas You, he was committed for felony, and also Per mandatum
domini Regis, and the Kings Attorney came hither and released the Kings
command, and thereupon he was bailed.


Master Noye. It is all one with Parkers Case.


Chief Justice Hide. No, for here were two causes of the commitment, Hubbert
was then the Kings Attorney, and he signified in open Court that he was
discharged by the Kings command, and Postea traditur in ball' pro suspicione
feloniae.

The next was Humphrey Booths, 9 H. 7. Rot. 14. you shall find it much to that
purpose as the other was before; he was imprisoned for an outlawry, and by the
commandment of the King also, and after that the release of the Kings
commandment was certified to the chief Justice, he was thereupon discharged.
Vide the Record.

The next is 7 H. 7. Thomas Brown, John Rawlings, and Robert Sherman and
others, were committed Per mandatum domini Regis, and for felony, outlawry, and
other causes, as appears by the Records, and after the King releaseth his
commandment, and that the outlawry should be reversed, and for the felony he
was bailed. Vide the Record.

So that you may see the offenses mentioned in the Warrant for the commitment
were triable here, and when the King releases his commandment they were bailed
for the rest, but they that were committed by the commandment of the King were
released by the King.

In 7 H. 7. the Cases of William Bartholmew, Henry Carre, and others, is to the
same effect, by all which you may see, that when the King releaseth his
commandment, they were bailed for the rest, and as they were committed by the
Kings commandment, so they were released by the Kings command.

Now here I shall trouble you with no more presidents, and you see your own
what conclusion they produce. And those strong presidents alleged on the other
side, we are not wiser then they that went before us; and the common custom of
the Law is, the Common Law of the Land, and that has been the continual
common custom of the Law, to which we are to submit, for we come not to charge
the Law, but to submit to it.

We have looked upon that president that was mentioned by Master Attorney. The
resolution of all the Judges of England in 34 Eliz. we have considered of the
time, and I think there were not before, nor have been since more upright
Judges then they were, Wray was one, and Anderson another: In Easter Term this
was certified under the hands of all the Judges of England, and Barons of the
Exchequer in a duplicate, whereof the one was delivered to the Lord Chancellor,
and the other to the Lord Treasurer, to be delivered to the Queen. We have
compared our copies, not taking them the one from the other, but bringing them:
we have long had them by us together, and they all agree word for word, and
that which M. Attorney said, he had out of Judge Andersons Book, and it is to
this purpose, to omit other things, That if a man be committed by the
commandment of the King, he is not to be delivered by a Habeas Corpus in this
Court, for we know not the cause of the commitment. Vide this at the latter end
of the first part of Master Seldens Argument as aforesaid.

But the Question now is, Whether we may deliver this Gentleman or not, you see
what has been the practice in all the Kings times heretofore, and your own
Records, and this resolution of all the Judges teaches us, and what can we do
but walk in the steps of our forefathers? If you ask me which way you should be
delivered, we shall tell you, we must not counsel you.

Master Attorney has told you that the King has done it, and we trust him in
great matters, and he is bound by Law, and he bids us proceed by Law, as we are
sworn to do, and so is the King; and we make no doubt but the King if you seek
to him, he knowing the cause why you are imprisoned, he will have mercy, but we
leave that. If in Justice we ought to deliver you we would do it, but upon
these grounds, and these Records, and the presidents and resolutions we cannot
deliver you, but you must be remanded. Now if I have mistaken any thing, I
desire to be righted by my brethren, I have endeavored to give the resolutions
of us all.


TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY: The humble Petition of Sir John Elliot
Knight, Prisoner in the Gatehouse concerning the LOAN. Delivered the 10th of
November. 1627. but never answered.

SHOWS,
THAT your poor suppliant affected with sorrow and unhappiness, through the
long sense of your Majesty's displeasure, willing in every act of duty and
obedience to satisfy your Majesty of the loyalty of his heart, then which he
has nothing more desired, that there may not remain a jealousy in your royal
breast, that stubbornness and will have been the motives of his forbearing to
condescend to the said Loan, low as your Highness foot, with a sad yet a
faithful heart, for an Apology to your Clemency and Grace, he now presumes to
offer up the Reasons that induced him, which he conceives necessity of his
duty to Religion Justice, and your Majesty did enforce.

The Rule of Justice he takes to be the Law, impartial Arbiter of Governments
and obedience, the support and strength of Majesty, the observation of that
Justice by which subjection is commanded, Religion (adding to these power not
to be resisted) bind up the conscience in an Obligation to that rule which
(without open prejudice and violence of these duties) may not be impeached.

In this particular therefore for the Loan, being desirous to be satisfied how
far the Obligation might extend, and resolving where he was left master of
his own, to become servant to your will, he had recourse unto the Laws, to be
informed by them; which in all humility he submits to your most sacred view
in the Collections following.

In the time of Edw. 1. he finds that the Commons of that age were so tender
of their Liberties, as they feared even their own free Acts and gifts might
turn them to a Bondage and their heirs, wherefore it was desired and granted:

25 E. 1.
That for no business such manner of Aids, Taxes, nor Prizes should be taken
but by common assent of the Realm, and for the common Profit thereof.

The like was in force by the same King, and by two other Laws again enacted:

Stat. Tallage. and 33 E. 1.
That no Tallage or Aid should be taken or levied without the good will and
assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons Knights, Burgesses, and other
Freemen of the Land.

And that prudent and magnanimous Prince Edward the third; led by the same
Wisdom, having granted:

That the greatest gift given in Parliament for the aid and speed of his
matchless undertaking against France, should not be had in example, nor fall
to the prejudice of the Subject in time to come; did likewise add in
confirmation of that Right, That they should not from thenceforth be grieved to
sustain any charge or aid but by the common assent, and that in Parliament.

And more particularly upon this point, upon a Petition of the Commons
afterward in Parliament it was established:

Rot. 16. 25 E. 3.
That the Loans which are granted to the King by diverse persons, be released,
and that none from henceforth be compelled to make such Loans against their
wills, because it is against reason and the Franchises of the Land, and
restitution be made to such as made such Loans.

And by another Act upon a new occasion, in the time of Richard the third it
was ordained:

That the Subject in no wise be charged with any such charge, exaction, or
imposition called a Benevolence, nor such like Charge, and that such like
exactions be damned and annulled for ever.

1 R. 3.
Such were the opinions of these times, for all these Aids, Benevolences, Loans,
and such like charges exacted from the Subject not in Parliament, which they
held to be grievances contrary to their Liberties, and illegal: And so pious
were their Princes in confirmation of their Liberties, as having secured them
for the present by such frequent Laws and Statutes, they did likewise by them
provide for their posterity; and in some so strictly that they bound the
observation with a curse: as in that of 33 Edw. 1. and also under pain of
excommunication, as by the other of the 25 of the same King, which was to be
denounced against all those that violate or break them, which Act extends to us.

And these reasons he presents to your most sacred Majesty as the first motive
taken from the Law.

There are others also, which in his humble apprehension he conceived from the
Action it self, which he likewise tenders to your most excellent Wisdom.

ex spontanea voluntate and charitate populi, whereby they made that
conjunction of their hearts at home which wrought such power and reputation to
their Acts abroad.

Chart. Libert. 9 H. 5. confirmed 25 E. 1. 1, 4, 5, 10, 14, 28, 31, 36, 42, 45,
50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 9, 13 H. 4. 4 H. 5. 2 H. 6. etc.




And these being the true grounds and motives of his forbearance to the said
Loan, showing such inconveniences in reason, and representing it an Act
contradicting so many of your Laws, and most of them by the most prudent and
happy of our Princes granted, which could not, without presumption, beyond
pardon in your suppliant, in taking to himself the dispensation of those Laws,
so piously enacted, by him violated or impeached.

In the fullness of all submission and obedience, as the Apology of his loyalty
and duty, he lowly offers to your most sacred Wisdom for the satisfaction of
your Majesty, most humbly praying your Majesty will be graciously pleased to
take them into your Princely consideration, where when it shall appear (as he
doubts not but from hence it will to your deep judgment) that no factious
humor nor disaffection led on by stubbornness and will has herein stirred or
moved him, but the just obligation of his conscience, which binds him to the
service of your Majesty, in the observance of your Laws, he is hopeful
(presuming upon the Piety and Justice of your Majesty) that your Majesty,
according to your innate Clemency and Goodness, will be pleased to restore him
to your favor and his liberty, and to afford him the benefit of those Laws
which in all humility he craves.

FINIS.

