ARGVMENTS FOR Toleration.

Published for the satisfaction of all Moderate Men.

ZACH. 13.6. And one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands?
Then he shall answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my
Friends.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1647.

Arguments for Toleration; Published for the satisfaction of all Moderate Men.
Twenty Four undeniable Premises from which a Toleration may be thus pleaded
for:
1 HEavenly wisdom is first pure, and then peaceable; therefore we ought to
have a Toleration of impure Doctrines, for heavenly wisdom will not suit with
an earthly Kingdom. 2 When men shake off Truth, they will shake off Magistracy;
therefore there ought to be a Toleration of errors: for why should our
sovereign Lords the People be in subjection? 3 The Papists have long expected
to see Popery flourish again in England; therefore there should be a
Toleration: for were it not pity they should lose the fruit of so much
industry? 4 If Errors were not tolerated, the Devil would be enraged;
therefore there should be a Toleration: for who knows what desperate courses
he will put his servants upon, if this be denied? 5 If there be not a
Toleration of Errors, the Truth will have more favor then Error; therefore
there ought to be a Toleration: for we apprehend it suitable to Justice, to
deal impartially. 6 Men are naturally prone to Error; therefore there ought to
be a Toleration: for if those things which are natural be not tolerated, what
will become of natural Liberty? 7 Errors have thrived well upon a connivence;
therefore they ought to have a Toleration: for it is like they will thrive so
much the better, and afford a plentiful increase. 8 The eyes of many Kingdoms
are upon England, to see what Reformation it will bring forth; therefore we
should have a Toleration: that we may at once deceive all their expectations.
9 It is recorded in Scripture, as a commendation of diverse Kings, that they
suppressed false Worship; therefore there must be a Toleration of false Worship:
for then was then, and now is now. 10 The Gospel-prophecy ( Zachary 13) would
be fulfilled, if Errors were suppressed by the Magistrate; therefore there ought
to be a Toleration: for we like not such bloody Tenets. 11 The Parliament
have declared that they will not let loose the reins of Government; therefore
there ought to be a general Toleration; that so they might falsify their
Professions. 12 England has Covenanted the suppression of Errors; therefore
there ought to be a Toleration of them established; that we may declare to the
world that we intend not to keep our Covenant. 13 The people of God prosper'd,
when they made and kept the like Covenant, (2 Chronicles. 15.) therefore there
should be a Toleration, lest England also should prosper. 14 God threateneth
the Sword to a Nation for breaking Covenant; therefore we should have a
Toleration against Covenant, that the Sword may go once more through the Land.
15 England has kept a day of Humiliation for the suppression of Errors;
therefore it must yield to a Toleration, that the world may say we mock God in
our Fasts. 16 England has been many Years famous for the Gospel; therefore
now they should be for a Toleration of things contrary to it; that it may
follow new fashions in Religion, as well as in Apparel. 17 In these latter
times all sorts of Errors do vend apace; therefore now there ought to be a
Toleration of them; for else the Father of Lies will lose his best Market. 18
The Foxes must be taken for spolling the Vines, ( Canticles 2.15.) therefore
there must be a Toleration of these Foxes: for if the bramble may reign, he
cares not what becomes of the tender grapes. 19 God complains of Tolerations of
Errors and Seducers, ( Revel. 2.) therefore there ought to be Tolerations of
them; how else should we justify Pergamus and Thyatira? 20 The same
corruptions which incline men to plead for Error, will incline them to
persecute Truth; therefore there ought to be Toleration of Error, to make way
for the persecuting of Truth. 21 Evil men, and Seducers will wax worse and
worse, (2 Timothy 3.13.) therefore they ought to be tolerated: how else will they
come to their perfection? for they are not yet bad enough. 22 Magistrates are
appointed by God for a terror to evil works; therefore the spreading of Error
is to be sheltred under a Toleration; lest the Magistrates should be a terror
to it. 23 Errors destroy men's souls and bodies eternally: therefore they are
to be tolerated; that so they which are minded to go to hell, may carry
company enough with them. 24 If we set not up a Toleration, we may want
occasion of War with our Brethren; therefore there should be a Toleration;
that we may requite them for their Brotherly assistance.
Twelve Premises laid down by way of Supposition, upon which a Toleration may
be inferred by undeniable consequence.
1 THe people of God want matter to make them sad; therefore there ought to be
a Toleration of gross Errors: for if any thing in the world will grieve them,
this will. 2 The Ministers of Christ stand in need of discouragement; therefore
there ought to be a Toleration: lest they should find too much fruit of their
Ministry. 3 The Gospel thrives too well; therefore there should be a
Toleration: that so the Enemies of the Gospel may have the better advantage to
hinder it. 4 God is not enough dishonored; therefore there is a necessity of a
Toleration: that ignorant people may be instructed in such Doctrines as tend to
Gods dishonor. 5 The tragedy of Munster must be acted here; therefore there
must be a Toleration: for liberty of Conscience was the stirrup by which the
Sectaries were mounted there. 6 Reformation would go on too fast, if it were
not for toleration; therefore there must be a Toleration for we would break
Christ's bonds, and cast away his cords. 7 Seducers want encouragement;
therefore there must be a Toleration: for many had rather go alone to hell in
quiet, then run upon the Magistrates Sword with company. 8 Magistrates ought to
meddle only with the second Table; therefore there ought to be a Toleration of
all sins against the first Table: for why should Magistrates take care for Gods
glory? 9 The enemies of Religion should have more matter administered to
reproach Christianity; therefore there should be a Toleration to open the
mouths of blasphemers. 10 Liberty of error is one part of our Christian
freedom; therefore there ought to be a Toleration of it, that so we may stand
fast in our liberty: for this is our Liberty of Conscience. 11 We cried out
formerly upon the Prelates for favoring some Errors; therefore we would have
a Toleration of all now; that so we may make them amends with advantage. 12 The
provocations of Englands fins are too little; therefore there should be a
Toleration, to fill up the measure of our iniquities, that we may be ripe for
destruction.
Ezech. 17.17, 18, 19. Neither shall Pharaoh with his mighty Army and great
company make for him in the War, by casting up mounts and building Forts, to
cut off many persons.

Seeing he despised the Oath, by breaking the Covenant, (when to he had given
his hand) and has done all those things, he shall not escape.

Therefore thus says the Lord God, As I live, surely mine Oath that he has
despised, and my Covenant that he has broken; even it will recompense upon
his own head.


FINIS.

