AN APPENDIX Of the Laws, Articles, and Ordinances, established for Marshall
Discipline, in the service of the Lords the States General of the united
Provinces, under the Command of his Highness the Prince of Orange.

TOGETHER, With the Articles of Quarter for the Ransoming of Officiers and
Soldiers, agreed and concluded on, betvveene the king of Spain on the on
side, and the States General of the united Provinces on the other side.

Translated out of Dutch into English, by Captain HENRY HEXHAM, Quartermaster
to the Regiment of Colonel GORING.



Printed in the Hagh by ISAAC BURCHOORN, MDCXLIII.

To his honored Cousins, JOHN HEYDON, Esquire, dwelling at his Lordship of
Oxie-hall near VVatford in Hartford-shire: AND JOHN HARVIE, Esquier, Justice
of Peace and Little at Wansey in the County of Essex, and one of the Gentlemen
of his Majesty's privy Chamber, HENRY HEXHAM, their old Kinsman, wishes them
all health, and happiness.
When I hear (dear Cousins) of the pillagins, plundrings, and insolences,
committed by some of the Melitia on both sides in my native Country; it
grieves me at the very heart, to think upon yt, and is a just judgment of God
upon us for our sins, which I beseech the Lord in mercy to divert his
punishments, and that by our timely repentance, we may stay the violls of his
wrath, which begins to be powered down, upon our dear Country and Ireland.
And thoug his sacred Majesty by his Generals, as likewise the Parliament by
theirs, have made, and proclaimed good, and wholesome Laws and Articles, for
the keeping and observing of Marshall discipline, and the restraint of
insolences in their Armies: yet it will not be amiss, to transport into
England, that our Chiefs and Commandeurs there, may see the Laws, Articles,
Placcards, and Proclamations, touching Marschall discipline, by which our old,
and conquering army here is governed in the service of the high and mighty
Lords the States General. And having run through the three parts of the
Principles of the Art military, practiced in these Netherlands, I thought that
my works were not complete, unless this Appendix of Marshall discipline were
annexed unto them. And now by the grace of God, having finished and even this
day putt an end to my Military Labors: I render thanks unto the Lord of
Hoasts, who has given me health, wisdom, and understanding to perform this
laborious work. And eternally blessed be his glorious name, who by the eye of
his divine providence, and under the shaddowe of his wings, has preserved me
the space of two and forty years through many dangers: and though I have bin
present in many hott services in this Land: yet he has not given the Ennemy so
much power, as to draw one drop of blood from me. And now this being the last
work. It comes unto you, to desire your Patronage as a token and an expression
of my love and respect unto you both. Beseeching the Almighty to preserve you,
my Aunt your Mother, and all our familly in health, and happiness, and
hereafter to crown you all with everlasting bliss resting.

Your ever loving Coussin to command
From the City of Delph, in Holland, this 30, Stylo novo.
AN APPENDIX OF THE LAWS, ARTICLES, AND Ordinances touching marshall
discipline.
Set down, and established by the Lords the States, General of the United
Provinces.
WHereas by daily experience, many disorders are found, to gtowe amongst those
that bear arms, tending to the great damage of these Countries, and
prejudice of the gouvernement thereof, which notwithstanding are not any where
so punished, as in reafon they ought, because there is no certain order, or
law touching like matters, as yet decreed and and published: The States
General of the United Provinces have therefore (with the advice of the
Council of the State of the same) ordained, appointed, and deereed, do by
these presents ordain, appoint, and decree the orders and laws here ensuing,
which is their will, to have from point to point strictly observed, and
followed by all those, that bear arms in their service. To which end, they
shallbe every where published, and according sworn to be kept by the Soldiers.

I.
FIrst, he that shall take the Lords name in vain, or blaspheme the same,
shall for the first time make an honorable amends, and be kept three days in
prison at bread and water: The second time he shall have a glowing iron thrust
through his tongue, then be stripped to his shirt, and so banished out of the
United Provinces.

II.
The like penalty shall they incur, for the first and second times, who shall
either do, or say ought in despite, or derision of Gods word, or the Ministers
of the Church.

III.
All wilful murders, rapes, adultery, fyring of houses, the very, violence,
outrage, falsehood, and other like bad facts, and open offenses, or unnatural
abuses, shall be punished with death.

IV.
None shall any way outrage, strike, knock, beat, threaten, or dishonestly
touch any widows, married, or unmarried women, or such as are in childbed, or
with child, or any young children, on pain to be discharged without money, or
pasport, or else punished corporally, according to the quality of the offense.
Likewise all common whores shall for the first time be expulsed out of the
Camp with shame, and being found there again, the second time, shall be soundly
whipped and banished.

V.
He that shall have done, or conspired ought against the States, the Country,
Towns, or other places, thereof, or against any Governors, or Captains in the
same, whereby the public state of the Land may be in any sort endammaged, or
endangered: as also whosoever shall consent thereunto, shall without any mercy
be hanged.

VI.
The like punishment shall they also incur, whosoever he be that has
knowledge of any such matter, and shall not reveal it to their Captain, or
chief Officers.

VII.
None shall raise any mutiny, or make any unlawful assembly, on whatsoever
secret, cloaked, or other pretenses whatsoever it be, but shall give notice
thereof to their Commanders, on pain of hanging.

VIII.
In like sort shall they alsoo be punished, that shall be present at such
assemblies, or call, stir up, and incite any to be present thereat. And it is
to be understood also, that such Officers as shall be at the like seditious
meetings, shall receive punishment before all other soldiers, except those
(that are noe authors thereof.)

IX.
He that shall speak ill of the States general, or particular, the Council of
State, or other Superiors, or shall speak ought to despite, or deride any of
them, shall without mercy be punished with death.

X.
He that shall have spoken any words tending to sedition, mutiny, or
disobedienee, or that having heard such words, and shall not presently acquaint
his Captain therewith, shall be punished with death.

XI.
In like sort shall they also be punished, who rehearse any such words in
presence of private soldiers, either of themselves, or by suggestion of
others, or practice ought, whereby any mutiny, or sedition may grow.

XII.
No man be it out of guarded, or besieged places, or in other like cases, shall
use any speech or correspondence with the ennemie, or send him any messages or
Letters, or receive any from him, or deal in like sort with any of his
confederates, be it in secret or public, without the consent first had of
his Gouvernour, or Cap. he shall make it forthwith known unto him, unless
he be thereto aucthorised. Neither shall any man be adherent, or in any fort
assistant to the enemy, on pain of death.

XIII.
Likewise none shall confer, or converse with any Trompetter or Drum of the
enemies, or with any other sent on a message from him, but they only who are
thereunto appointed, on pain of death.

XIIII.
None shall in going, departing, lying still, mustering, or in garnison do
outrage, or spoil to the inhabitants of these Countries, their favorours, or
confederates, or take from them any victuals, money, or ought else, without
paying duly for the same, nor yet throw down, or spoil any water-mils, or
waterworks, nor set on fire the same, or other houses, or the camp at the
breaking up thereof, without special command from the General, or other Chief
Officer, on pain of death.

XV.
Likewise none shall either do, or practice ought against any persons, Towns,
Villages, Forts, Havens, or whatsoever goods warranted by pasportes, or other
assurances from the Generality, on pain of death.

XVI.
He that shall depart from one Company to another, or elsewhere, or shall leave
the Colors under which he serves, is to have a sufficient pasport from his
Cap. or Commander and failing therein, shall be punished with death.

XVII.
Whatsoever Captain shall entertain any souldours, without a lawful
discharge from their former Cap. shall be punished with death.

XVIII.
Jf any souldour (serving on horse or foot) shall beat or strike his host,
hostess, their man, or maide-servant, he shall for the first time be kept three
days at bread and water, the second make an honorable amends, and before the
whole watch be disarmed, and then banished out of the Company, And if the
party so stricken be maimed, or blood drawn, then shall the soldier offending
have his hand stricken of.

XIX.
Whosoever shall have taken, or stolen any victuals, or other provisions brought
up, toward the Camp, Garnison, ot any Towns, or places under the Jurisdiction
of the States general shall be hanged.

XX.
Likewise none shall out of the Camp, or Garnison forcibly take, or else buy up
before hand, any victuals, or goods bound thitherwardes, before the same shall be
brought to a fit place for sail, and taxed: Neither shall he robb any Cabin,
shop, tent, Victualer, or Marchand that is there, for the help of the Camp,
or Garnison on pain of death.

XXI.
He that shall go out of the quarter from his Colors, or Garnison, further
then a Canon-shot, without his Captains leave shall be punished with death.

XXII.
Whosoever shall go out of the Camp, besieged town, Fort or other place,
without the special consent of his Captain, or Officer, for any cause, be it
for forage, or ought else, shall be hanged.

XXIII.
Whosoever shall take any Cattaile, or beasts within the Countries which lie
under the obedience of the Generality, shall be punished as a Theife.

XXIV.
He that in marching by land toward the field, or in returning thence, shall
forsake his Colors, or Cornet, shall without any mercy be punished with death.

XXV.
And whosoever (not being visited with manifest sickness, and the same known to
his Cap. or Commander) shall keep along with the baggage, or ride on the
wagons, shall be disarmed before the whole Company, and then banished without
money or paspott.

XXVI.
If any shall neglect his watch, or other service committed unto him, he shall be
punished with death.

XXVII.
If any soldier shall be found sleeping on his centinelship, he shall without
any mercy be punished with death.

XXVIII.
Whatsoever soldier shall, either by day or night depart from his
centinelship, where he has been placed by his Corporal, unless he be called
thence, or relieved by the said Corporal, shall receive punishment of death
without any mercy.

XXIX.
None shall declare, or make known the watchword to the enemy, or any other,
or give any other word, then is given him by the Officer, on pain of death.

XXX.
Whosoever shall absent himself out of the Court of guard above two hours in
the day time, or any within the night, without his corporals leave shall be
punished with death

XXXI.
None shall without lawful cause raise any tumult, make an alarm, or discharge
a piece by night, or make any noise, or do ought else, whereby the same may
grow (without cause) on pain of death.

XXXII.
He that shall presume within the Camp, Quarter, or place, where he lies in
garnison, as also after the watch is set, to draw his weapon, shall forfeict
his life: as also if he do it out of the Camp, Town, or place, without the
leave of his Officer.

XXXIII.
He that shall strike any man with his sword vndrawne, or with a cudgel, stone,
or otherwise, that blood follows, shall loose his hand.

XXXIIII.
He that shall give any one a box on the ear, shall in presence of the Company
take the like box again of the party so wronged, and besides be disarmed, and
banished the Company.

XXXV.
No Soldiers shall without order from their Chiefs, Captains, or Commanders
hold any common meeting or gathering together, be it to demand money, or
ought else, nor yet be present at such assemblies, on pain of death. Provided
always, that such Capt. or Commanders as shall suffer the same to happen at
undue seasons, and in vnlawfulwise, shall (for an example to others) be
punished with death before all the soldiers.

XXXVI.
If any shall call for money, as they are marching in the face of the ennemy,
or upon any enterprise, they shall receive punishment of death without any mercy.

XXXVII.
If it chance that the monthly entertainment be not paid on the very day,
or that it cannot be sent unto the soldiers for some cause, be it through
any hinderance of the enemy or otherwise, none shall therefore make any tumult,
or speak seditious words, or seek to force his Captain to the payment
thereof, neither yet do the less duty, but shall have a care of his marches
and watches, contenting him self with a reasonable loan, until the money be
come, or may come, and he shall fully perform the dutire required of a good
soldier. And whosoever does the contrary, or accompanies those that do it,
shall be punished with death.

XXXVIII.
Noe Captains, Lieutenants, or Ensigns shall depart out of the place where
their Companies lie in garnisoen, whether it be to solicit for payment of
their said Companies, or upon their own business, without leave of their
Commander, or Governor, on pain of death.

XXXIX.
He that in any quarrel, fight, or otherwise, shall call those of his nation
to help, or gather an assembly together, shall be hanged.

XL.
He that shall be found by day, or by night out of the Camp, or a place
besieged, without his Captains leave, shall be punished with death.

XLI.
Whosoever shall go a free-booting, and commit spoils, extorsions, and theft,
shall be hanged.

XLII.
If one souldior challenge another into the field, without leave from him that
commands in that quarter, he shall be punished with death.

XLIII.
If any Corporal, or other commanding the watch, shall suffer two soldiers
to go forth to fight, he shall without mercy be punished with death.

XLIV.
Any souldour being wronged by word, or deed, he shall repair to him that
commaundes in the quarter, who after the hearing of both parties, shall cause
satisfaction of the wrong he has done unto the party interessed, with bare
head, and in presence of the whole watch: And if he find cause, shall also
disarme the wrong doer, and banish him out of the Company.

XLV.
And if there be no witness of the quarrel, then shall the said Commander cause
the parties to agree in his presence whereto if they will not condescend, then
both, or he that denies it, shall be disarmed, and banished out of the Company

XLVI.
Whatsoever soldier or Commander shall go out of the camp, Town, or fort,
or enter thereinto by any other way, then at the poris, and ordinary entrances
shall be hanged

XLVII.
If any soldier shall refuse the command of his Cap. or any other, who
command over him in the service of the States Generael, and not perform the
same, he shall be punished with death: as he likewise shall, who transgresses
any of the Generals commandments published by sound of drum, or trumpet.

XLVIII.
At the soundich of any alarm every one shall resort to his Ensign, or
Cornet, and whosoever comes not thither (unless it be on apparaut necessi,)
or runs to an other place, without consent and special order from his
Commander, or comes not so soon as his Ensign, shall be punished with death,

XLIX.
Every Soldier shall aid, and defend his Colors by day and night, and on the
first warning repair unto them, not departing thence, until it be brought
into a place of safety on pain of death.

L.
If any shall depart out of the order, or rank wherein he is placed, unless it
be on necessary occasions, and that he has therewith acquainted his Officer,
he shall be punished with death.

LI.
He that shall first begin to fly in a battle, or upon an assault, may
lawfully be slain thereupon by any one: And if he escape, he shall be declared
a villain, and receive punishment of death without mercy.

LII.
None that is appointed for the defense of any breach, trence, or skonce, be
it Captain or Soldier, shall willingly forsake the same, or through any
false, or coulored occasions or excuses absent himself from thence, without
sufficient order, or warrant allowed by Council of war, on pain of death.

LIII.
None shall surrender, or deliver to the enemy any place, which the keeping
thereof is committed unto him, on pain of death.

LIVE.
Likewise none shall run from his quarter in a besieged place, call for
composition, or speak thereof, be unwilling to fight, labor, or defend their
quarter, or make others unwilling thereunto, or do ought else in such a place,
whereby the defense thereof may be hindered, on pain of death without any
mercy.

LV.
If any man run away to the enemy, or in his flight be taken from the enemy,
he shall be punished with death.

LVI.
No Captains shall seduce, or entice away each others Soldiers on pain of
death.

LVII.
Whosoever shall by word, or deed busy himself with the Sergeant Maiour, doing
his office, be he Captain, or Soldier, he shall without mercy be punished
with death: As he also shall, who will not content himself with that quarter, or
lodging, whereto he shall be appointed by his Quartermaster, or Furrier, or he
that will disturb another man in his place.

LVIII.
If any soldier having the watch, shall come to his Colors not fully armed,
to march with the rest unto the watch, he shall for the first time, be kept
three days at bread and water: the second disarmed and banished for three
Months out of the company, and the third time suffer death.

LIX.
Every one, of what condition soever he be, shall forthwith, or before the
evening bring before him that commands in the quarter, all such prisoners, as
shall be taken of the enemy, on pain of forfeicting the said prisoners, and to
be punished besides with death.

LX.
And if any shall take prisoner a General, Commander, or other man of account
of the enemy, he is forthwith to present, or cause to be presented the said
prisoner unto the States general, or Council of State, and with-all to
deliver him over, as also whatsoever other prisoners they will take to
themselves, receiving therefore a reasonable reward according to the quality
and ability of the prisoner: provided that it exceeds not the sum of 5000.
gilders: And so the said prisoner shall be at the disposing of the aforesaid
States, and he that took him, to pretend no further interest in that behalf.

LXI.
Likewise none shall kill any prisoner, or set his ransom, or after the payment
of the said ransom, suffer him to depart without leave of the General, or him
that commands in the quarter, on pain of being difarmed, and banished out of
these Countries.

LXII.
And if any prisoners be found, walking along the Camp or place of garnison,
without leave from the General, or him that commaundes there, he to whom the
prisoner belongs, shall forfeict him to those, who shall first lay hands on
the prisoner.

LXIII.
Concerning lawful prizes, whosoever brings in the same, shall acquaint
therewith the General, or him that commaundes in the quarter, within three
hours after their return, to the end they may be accordingly registered, on
pain of forfeicting the same, and to be besides punished on the body.

LXIIII.
Wosoever shall have gotten any thing upon the enemy, and gives not notice
thereof as aforesaid, that it may be recorded, and after sold, in the Camp,
or place of garnison, but shall sell, or cause it to be sold in the places or
towns near thereunto, shall without any mercy be punished with death, to
the end that better order be held in all, and no man wronged in his right.

LXV.
When a soldier shall have done any offense or fault, his Captain shall be
bound (on pain of three months supension from his charge) to deliver the said
soldier into the Generals hands, or his that commands in the quarter, who
with the Captains, Lieutenants, and Ensigns then present, shall upon
th'information, which he shall cause to be taken thereof, judge according to
these orders and laws.

LXVI.
He that is drunk on his watch-day, shall be cassiered, and banished out of the
Company.

LXVII.
Jtem if any one drink himself drunk, and in his drunkenness commit anv il
or ought forbidden, he shall not thereby be excused, but so much the more
sharply punished.

LXVIII.
If any Cap. or soldier shall refuse the muster, or review, he shall be
cassiered.

LXIX.
None shall at the mvster let himself be entered by a changed, or other name,
then his own, nor shall pass muster with a borrowed horse or arms: neither
shall any on the musterday lend the like, on pain of being disarmed, and
banished out of the Company.

LXX.
None shall let himself be entered, or muster under two Companis, on pain of
death.

LXXI.
None shall diminish or pawn his arms, which are appointed him by his
Captain, on pain of being disarmed, and banished for six months out of the
Company.

LXXII.
None shall likewise take or pawn any soldiers arms, on pain of loosing
double the worth of the pawn.

LXXIII
None shall play away, or quite his atmes, but keep the same always clean,
and serviceable, on pain of being cassiered out of the Company without pasport.

LXXIV
None shall by cousenage get away his fellows provisions, victuals, or arms,
on pain of being disarmed, and banished for three months out of the Company,
or otherwise shall sustain corporal punishment, according to the quality of the
offense.

LXXV
He that shall presume to set upon a Commissary of the musters, or wrong him,
either in word or deed, shall be punished with death.

LXXVI
Jf any Captain give his soldiers less, then the pay allowed him by the
States, he shall be disgraded.

LXXVII
If any soldier proffer to draw his weapon against his Chief, or
Commander, he shall be punished with death.

LXXVIII
If the Provost or his Officers apprehend one or more soldiers, none (of what
degree soever) shall oppose himself thereagainst, or reskewe, or attempt to
reskewe the said prisoners, on pain of death.

LXXIX
Furthermore, no Officer nor Gentleman of any Company of Horse, or Foot, or
any common soldier shall victaile in any Camp, without the Generals special
consent, on pain of being disarmed.

LXXX
Likewise all Victualers, that victual in the Camp, shall be subject to the
aforesaid articles and the Council of war there being, on the penalty here in
contained, and shall not draw any wine or beer for any one in the evening, an
hour after the Suns setting, or in the morning as much before the rising
thereof, on pain of forfeicting 3. gilders for every time they shall be found to
have done so: the said forfeict to be converted, the one half to the Provosts
behoof, and the other to the relief of the poor.

LXXXI
All other abuses and offenses not specified in these Orders, shall be punished
according to the ordinances, laws, and customs of the war.

LXXXII
If any soldiers should not be present at the proclayming of these orders
and laws, they shall notwithstanding be as much bound to the observation of
them, as the other who were present. But to the end none may pretend
ignorance, and every one have notice thereof, the States General have given
order, that the same shall be every where published on the muster-day, and
charge the Commissaries to cause all the soldiers to swear accordingly
thereunto.

THus done and decreed at Arnhem, after sundry conferences had hereupon with
the chiefest Commanders of these United Provinces. It being farther appointed,
that these orders, and laws shall be published both in the Camp, and
wheresoever else it shall be meet and requisite, and that at every muster the
Commissaries shall read, and propound the same again unto the Companies The
13. of August. 1590,

By order of the Council of State. Chr. Huygheus.

His Excie. Commands herewith, all Persons of this present Army, of what
Condition, or quality soever they be, to observe and keep these poincts
following, upon the penalties therein contained.
I.
THat noe man in marching shall forsake his Colors or Cornet, upon pain of
death.

II
That noe man in marching, or quartring shall endammage the Jnhabitants of this
Land, or those which sit under Safe-gard, or are Newtrall upon pain of death.

III
That noe man shall break down any churches, or Howses, Hew down any
fruict-trees, or steal any Bells, Jron work, matterialls, or Cattle, upon
pain of death.

IV
That noe man without the consent of his Commandour, shall go further then a
Canon shot in circumference without the Army, or lie out of it, upon pain of
a strappado, and wronging any man shall be hanged without mercy.

V
That noe man shall fight within the quarter, or drawn his sword, or make any
great noise by night, upon pain of death.

VI
That noe man coming to the Army with victuals, or Sutlers, either within or
without the Army, shall be made boot off, or robt upon pain of death.

VII
That noe man shall sell any boot, or goods in the Army, without beating the
Drum by the consent of the President of the high-Court of Justice, and the
foreknowlege of the Provost Marshall General, upon forfeyture of loosing the
said boot or goods, the one half to be given to the poor, and the other
half to the Provost Marshall General.

VIII
That noe man shall sell likewise any goods without beating the Drum, and the
foreknowledge of the Provost Marshall General, upon forfeyture of them, and to
pay six gilders besides.

IX
That all Chiefs, Captains of Horse and foot, their Soldiers under them,
having Committed, or being accused of any of these aforeseid offenses, they
shall help to put them into the hands of the Marshall, or else they shall be
answerable for them, in case they refuse, or hinder the same.

X
And all Shippers and Sailors being a Land, shall as well be liable to these
Articles, as all others persons.

XI
That noe man shall do his easement within the Army, but in the places
appointed for that use, upon forfeiture of his vpermost garmant.

XII
That noe man shall arrest any man in the Army, or sue him for any old
actions, or debts made without the Army.

XIII
That noe man shall oppose himself against the Provost Marshall General or
his men, shall howte after them, or misuse them in word, or in deed, upon
pain of being hanged without mercy.

XIV
That all prisonners of the Ennemy shallbe delivered into the custody of the
Provost Marshall General, As likewise all prisonners of the Army, which are
liable to bodily punishment, with a pertinent information of their offenses, or
accusations, as others.

XV
That all particular Marshals of Regiments, Admiralitie, Artillery, Guards, or
others shall be under the Provost Marshall General.

XVI
That noe man shall set any price upon any victuals within, or without the
Army, without the consent of the Provost Marshal General, and according to the
rate, which is given him upon pain of Arbitrall punishment.

XVII
That noe man shall subtle in the Army, before he has given up his name to the
General of the victuals and the Provost Marshal General, upon the forfeyture of
six gilders.

XVIII
That al Sutlers coming into the Army shall give up a note of their wares to
the General of the victuals and the Provost Marshal General, upon the
forfeiture of six gilders.

XVIII
That al Sutlars coming into the Army shall give up a note of their wares to
the General of the victuaills, or his Commis, neither may subtle without his
order, or commission, upon the like penalty

XIX
That noe Sutlars shall build any Hutts, then in such places as is appointed
them by the Marshall upon the like forfeiture.

XX
That noe man shall call for, or receive any Hutt-money, but with the consent of
the Provost Marshall General upon like penalty to forfeyt so much every time.

XXI
That al Soldiers or Sutlaers killing Cattle or Beasts, shall bring the fylth
and paunches thereof without the Army, and bury yt there upon like penalty.

XXII
That noe man shall sell away the right of killed Beasts belonging to the Marshal,
upon penalty of daying double for yt.

XXIII
That noe Sutlaers shall engrosse, or buy up any commodties being yet without
the Army, before they be brought to the place appointed, where they shall be
sold, or shall not sell the^ before they be prised, upon forfeiture, that the
one half of the same wares bought or sold, shall be given to the poor, and the
Marshall aforesaid.

XXIIII
That noe Sutlaers Shippers, or other persons shall buy or take in pawn any
Iron, Brass Bell-mettall, Bullets, Arms, Powder, Empty ammunition Barrells,
or any prohibited goods, upon forfeyture of them, and besides to be publicly
whipped.

XXV.
That noe Sutlars shall tapp, measure or weigh either with liquid, or dry
measures, ell or weight, but with such as shall be given them by the Provost
Marshall General, upon the loss of six gilders, and using any false measure
at all, shall forfeyt all their goods, the one half to be given to the
benefit of the poor, the other half to the Regiment of Justice, and besides
to be punished arbitrally.

XXVI.
That noe Sutlars shall tap any Bear, or Wine, hold any drinking, or shotts in
the morning before the Sun rising, or in the Evening an hour after Sun
setting upon penalty of loosing three gilders every time.

XXVII.
That noe man either waggonmen, Overseers, or Conductours of Drawing-Horses,
Sutlars, or other persons having horses in the Army, shall put, or let their
horses feed, or run in Sown grounds, with what seed soever the same be sown,
upon penalty of paying a daller for every horse, so often as he shall be found
to do the contrary.

XXVIII
And his Excie, Commands the Porvost Marshall General by these, to have a
good and strickt care for due observation of all these points above said, and
to execute the abovesaid penalties, and forfeitures in conformity of the same,
his Excie, intending hereby, that hens-forward ordinarily in his Army, they
thalbe kept, and stricktly observed.

Thus statued by his Excie in the Haghe, the 7th of May 1631. And was signed,
F. Henry de Nassau, underneath stood, By order of his Excie, and Countersigned,
C. Huyghens, having his Excies seal of arms upon yt in Red wax, covered with
a square of white paper.

THE PLACCATE FOR DVELS.
Whereas by daily experience it is found, that many as well Officers, as
private Soldiers in the Service of this State, under the command and charge of
his Excel. do challenge into the field, and cause others to be challenged by
their seconds, under pretext of righting, or repairing their honors.

1. His Excel. desiring to prevent such mischiefs and inconveniences, as
daily do arise out of the said licentiousness of Duells, as far as is
possible for him to do, has found fit and necessary, to command and
ordain, as by these he does ordain and command, that all, as well Volunteers
as Officers and private Soldiers, of what quality soever, being under his
Charge in the Service of this State, shall from henceforth live civilie,
quietly and peaceably together without wronging, injuring, or offending one
another, upon pain of exemplarie punishment.

2. If there shall happen any difference, or offense, which does seem to the
party offended, that no sufficient reparation can be made, that may satisfy
him in his honor, otherwise then by the sword: Jn such a case, if he be a
Voluntier, or an Officer of quality, he shall make his complaint to his Excel.
If a private Soldier, he is to adresse himself to his Colonel, or other
Officers that have the command of him, who with the advice of other Captains,
and Officers of the same Nation or Regiment, that shall be found present, shall
decide the difference, or accommodate it, if it can be done. But if it be of
that nature to require a combat, they shall acquaint His Excel. with it, to
resolve the best way. He shall think fit for the honors of both parties.

3. The party that shall have offended the other, shall be bound to appear
before His Excel. or such as he shall please to ordain for the hearing of the
difference, which if he fall, he shall be called in within three days
proclamation, and not appearing, be banished the Land, as disobedient.

4. He that shall have demanded the combatt, being judged to be vnreceaveable,
having taken an offense upon to slight an occasion, shall be sent back with
shame.

5. The offender, that shall have done such an injury to another, as shall be
found to offend him in his honor, if he be an Officer, shall be suspended
from his charges, and commandes for the time of two years, and obliged to give
such satisfaction to the party offended, as shall be thought fit and
reasonable. If the offender be but a private Soldier, besides satisfaction he
shall be imprisoned three Months at bread and water.

6. Whosoever shall challenge into the field, in the behalf of another, or shall
deliver the challenge, or any errand by word of mouth, offensive and
prejudicial to the honor of another, or have knowledge of it, without giving
notice of it where it apperteineth, shall be cassered from all his charges and
commands, and besides banished the Land.

7. He that shall find himself wronged or offended, and carry his own
challange (not having demanded leave for the combatt, as heretofore has been
commanded) shall be cassered and banished the Land. And if he that shall be
challenged, does his best to answer the challenge, though he come not into the
field, he shall be punished as if he were the challenger. And if parties come
to fight, they shall both be casseered and banished, besides such further
exemplarie punishment, as shall be thought fit.

8. Those that shall have assisted the two parties offending against these
orders, if they shall have drawn their swords, shall be as well punished as
the principal, according as is before declared. Jf they be but spectators
only, being gone thither for that purpose, they shall be cassered, and loose
their places; As likewise if it be proved that any coming to the place by
chance, and getting knowledge of the quarrel, did not do their best to hinder
them that fight, they shall be suspended from their places for years, and as
private Soldiers punished for an exemple to all others.

9. And as for volunteers, as long as they shall live in these Provinces, they
shall be bound to the observation and penalties of all the former articles,
even as those that are in actual service.

All with points, and articles His Excel. does command to be punctualie and
strictly observed without any contravention, excuse, or hope of pardon
whatsoever. Given at the Haghe the 3. day of July. Anno 1637. And was signed F.
Henry de Nassou. Underneath was written. By Order of His Excel. C. Huyghens.
Sealed with the privy Seal of his Excel. in redd wax.

ORDER FOR THE PROVOST MARSHAL GENERAL.
HIs Highness expressly Commands herewith, al particular Provost Marshals,
as well of the Horse if there be any, of the Admiralitie, of the English, French,
Duchess, Scots as of the Inlandish Regiments of Holland, Zealand, Frizeland,
Vtrecht, and other Provinces together of the Ordinance, victuals, Guards, and
all other Provosts Marshals of the Army, to respect, and assist the Provost
Marshall General each in his quarter, to the end, that the rule of
Gouvernement may be duly respected, and the execution of Justice performed in
a convenient order.

II.
And to the intent, that no disputes may arise among them for profits, his
Highness commands, and intends, that everye Provost Marshall in their
Regiments or quarters, shall take and receive the right, and the sett-money of
all Wijnes. Beeres, Meats, and victuals, the autient right, or set moneys
which heretofore have bin paid, and to keep for himself the one half, and
for the other half they must be answerable for to the Provost Marshal
General, in giving him, good and a sinceere account thereof, and in setting
follow and cause to be observed the prise appointed and made by the President
of the Justice, and the General of the victuals, given them from the hands of
the pro Mars. General.

III
And if any Marshall be unwilling, to give an Account thereof, to the aforesaid
Provost General, his Highness commands those of the Council of war, to
force the said marshall thereunto by Justice, and to constrain him presently,
and without any delay, to conform himself thereunto.

IV.
Intending notwithstanding, that the principalest Sutling-place being in that
quarter, where the Provost Marshall General shall be, shall stand under the
Command of the same Provost Marshal General, without any man's contradiction.

V.
Concerning Hutt-money his Highness intends, that the same shall be received
only by the Provost General, or those which he shall depute thereunto,
Commanding all Sutlars shopkeepers, and others trading in the Army, as well
those which receive pay under the Regiments, as others which have none of what
Nation soever they be, everye week to pay unto the Provost Marshall General
three stuyvers for Hutt-money, where of he Provost every week shall give up an
account in the presence of the Advocate Fiscal of the Generality into the hands
of his Highness Fourryer, and the two third parts thereof to be answerable for
himself for to be distributed to the necessity of the sick and poor
woundede soldiers, in charges of Justice, and other such like extraordinary
expenses. His Highness commanding expressly hereby, as well the General, as the
particular Quartermasters, also to all other particular Provosts, not to meddle
themselves hereafter with the said Hutt-money, or to take the same unto them,
but contrariewise to give all help, and assistance unto the Provost Marshall
General for the Receipt of the aforesaid Hutt-money, upon pain of indignation
and arbitrall punishment. Commanding those of the Council of war to
constrain the unwilling Sutlars, shop keepers, and others by Justice to the
observing thereof, Commanding likewise all Sutlars and Jn-keepers of the
Army, which receive noe pay under the Regiments, not to hutt themselves after
the same Regiments, but to settle themselves in the General Sutling place upon
penalty that their Huts shall be made prise off hy the Provost Marshall
General.

VI.
And that the right of beer may be given with a better order. His Highness
wills and commands herewith, that the Shippers and Sutlars, which shall
come and arrive with beer in the Army in conformity of the former Acts,
Ordinances and Resolutions bearing the 7th of August 1610. the 26 of August,
and the 18. of November 1614. shall be bound to pay two stuyvers, for every
Tonne of Beer to the Provost Marshal General, or to whom he authorizes, or at
least to put him in security therefore, and the said marshall shall be obliged
to restore back unto them the two stuyvers for every Tonne of Beer, which
they shall carrye back again, if it be not spent in the Army. And the
Shippers, Sutlars, and Victuailers, shall demand the two stivers again, and
cause them to pay them for every bought Tonne, which the Sutlars shall be bound
to make present restitution off.

And the particular Marshal shall demand again there share, to wit, half a
stiver from the Provost Marshal General, for the beer, which shall be spent in
every of their quarters.

VII
Likewise all Sutlars, or Shippers, which shall bring up any wines unto the
Army, as also al those which shall carry into the Army any Wines, or Beeres by
Boats or Wagons, shall be bound at their coming into the Army to pay unto
the Provost Marshal General the sett-money thereupon, or to those, which he
shall depute thereunto in every quarter, or at the least, to put in security
for the same: Jntending hereby that if they shall carrye any thereof back
again, that the Provost Marshal General or his Authorized shall presently
without any delay restore back the money to them, which they have received for
every parcel, which shall be carried back again. And the Provost Marshall
General shall be accountable to the particular Provost Marshalls in whose
quarter they were spent, for the one half of such Beeres and Wines, Wherewith
they are to ask, or take nothing for their pains in setting or making the
same.

VIII
His Highness commanding all Shippers, Sutlars, as also the Provost Marshal
General, and all particular Marshalls, to gouverne themselves according to
these Articles, for the avoiding of all further disputes.

IX
Ordayning moreover the Provost Marshal General to take good heed for the
preventing of all night-disturbances or tumults; And at the beginning of the
Army, to cause to be published, and proclaimed these orders, and to give a
coppie of them to all the Provost Marshalls, whom his Highness expressly
commands hereby to govern themselves in all things, and every special point
herein contained.

X
Commands herewith besides the Quartermasters, as well General, as
particular, not to trouble themselves with the Articles of the Ordinance.

Thus statuated by his Highness in the Haghe the 1th. of July 1637. and was
signed, F. Henry de Nassou, underneath stood, By order of his Highness C.
Huyghens, having printed upon it his Highness seal in Red wax, couvered over
with a square of white paper.

FR. HENRY, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, Prince of Orange, Count of Nassau
Catzenelnbogen, Vianden, Dietz, Lingen, Moers, Bueren, Leerdam, etc. Marquis
ofter Vere and Vlissingen, Lord and Baron of Breda, of the City of Grave,
Land of Kuyck, Die, Grimbergen, Herstal, Kranendonck, Warneston, Arlay,
Noseroy, S. Vijt, Daesbourg, Polanen, Wilmstadt, Niervaert, Ysselsteyn, S.
Martensdijck, Geertruydenberg, Chasteau Regnard, the high and lower Swaluwe,
Naeltwijck etc. Vicount Hereditarie of Antwerpe and Besancon, Marshal
Hereditarie of Holland. Gouvernour of Gueldre, Holland, Zeeland,
West-Friesland, Zutphen, Vtrecht and Over-Yssel, Captain General, and Admiral
of the United Provinces of the low Countries. Unto all who these presents shall
see or hear. Whereas by daily experience it is found that many Officers of
Companies, both of Horse and Foot, in the service of this State, do meddle
with tapping of Beer, wine or Burndwine Selling of Tobacco, and the like:
Being a thing evidently ^ending to the great prejudice and disreputation of
Arms, as also contrary to all good military order and discipline, and from
which many disorders and inconveniences do happen and arise among soldiers.

We therefore let you know, That being intended to amend and prevent from
henceforth, as much as possible may be, the disorders aforesaid, we have
prohibited and forbidden like as we prohibit and forbidd expressly by these
presents, that no Officers of Companies, comprehending also the Corporals and
Clerks of Companies, of what qualities soever they be, either of Horse of
Foot, nor their Wifes, or any other person of their families, after the time
of a month next following the date of these, shall undertake, to meddle with
tapping of Beer, Wine or Burndwine, Selling of Tobacco, and the like, upon
pain of the loss of their Offices, and that the Captain who have notice of
it, shall be found to permit it in his Company shall forfet every time to wit
the Captain of Horse the sum of fourscore gilders at twenty stivers a
piece, and the Captain of Foot, the sum of fifty gilders or the like value.

Wherefore, we do ordain and command the Fiscal of the Generality, and all
other particular Auditors of the Garrisons, to proceed against the offenders,
according to the losses, punishments, and fines aforesaid, without any kind of
favor. And to the end that no body may have occasion to pretend any ignorance
of it hereof We do also charge and comman all Coronels, speedily to acquaint
all the Captains of their Regiments with the contents of these. Item all
Governors and Commanders of the Garrisons, to cause this our Placcate of
Interdiction presently to be proclaimed and published by sound of Trumpet and
Drum, at such times and places as are used for the like proclamations. Given
at the Hage, this 1. of July. 1637.

F. Henry de Nassau. C. Huygens.

A Copy, Of the Articles of Quarter, for the Ransomes of Officers, and
Soldiers agreed, and concluded on between the King of Spaines side, and the
States of the united Provinces, Translated out of Dutch in to English.
Don Francisco de Mendoza, Duke of Veraguas, Admiral of the Kingdoms, and
Crown of Arragon, and of the West-Indie, and of the Ocean sea, Marquess of
Guadelesta, and of Iamayca, Conte de Montalegre, and of Adelandtado in the
Indie, Lord of Valey, of Setta Trandel, and Contrides, and of the Barronies of
Gorga Bechi, Ribarosa, Andara, and Venidolech, Commander, of Valdepenas, of the
order of Calatrave, Stuard, unto his Catholic Majesty, and one of his Council
of State, and of the war, High stuard to the illustrious Albert Archduke of
Austria, Captanie General of the light horse in the Netherlands.
BEing found fitting for certain good respects, to make a more particular, and
a more special declaration, then has been heretofore of the Quarter, which
ought to be held, and observed between the melitie, and those of Holland and
their associates on the other side: because there happens duylie disputes,
touching the ransoming of some particular men, and the excessive charges, which
they are at about their diet, and other things, and which is exhausted from
the prisonners, who in regard of these excessive expe^s, are not sometimes able
to pay, and satisfy them, and therefore are forced to stay longer in prison,
then they should do to their great hurt, and the damage of those which have
taken them prisonners. To the intent the^; that every man may precisely know,
for what ransom he may be released out of prison, and that noe more excessive
charges may be pressed out of him, being not able to pay it: It is so, that
we have specified by writting the taxation; which every man is bound to pay,
and which noe man shall violate, or infringe in this form and manner following
vidz.

gilders A reformado. A Captain of a troop of horse in Esse. 1000. 300. gs, A
Lieutenant of a troop of Horse in Esse 200. 75. A Cornet in Esse 150. 50. A
Lieutenant Coronell of foot in Esse 70.0 200. A Sariant Maiour of a Regiment
of foot, being, or having been a Captain. 700. gs. And being noe Captain
150. 50. A Captain of Foot in Esse 600. 50. A Lieutenant to a Sariant Maiour
a foot 75. A Sariant Maiour of a particular place 100. A Lieutenant of foot
60 An Alpherus, or an Ensign 60 All Sariants, clerks of Company:, and other
inferior Officers shall be released for their months pay. Likewise al Soldiers
serving, as well on horse, as on foot shall be released for a months pay as has
bin accustomed in former times. A Quartermaster General for 400. gs. The
particular Quartermasters, as well of Horse, as of foot Regiments, a Captain of
the watch, a Captain of the Guides, and all those, which serve under the
Quartermaster General, with the Officers above specified, al of them shall be
released for a months pay. A Commissarie of the Musters 300 gs. The Officers
and Commisses of the Veador, Contador, Pagador, belonging, to the Treasury of
War each of them shall be ransomed for 200 For those of the Train belonging to
the ordinance. gs. The Lieutenant of the ordinance 600 A Gentlemen of the
ordinance and master Cannonier 60 The Contadors, Commisses, Controullers and
Pagadors of the ordinance, or ammunition each 300 The Receivers of the ordinance
each 300 The Waggenmaster General 600 His Lieu^enant, and other Commisses of
the wagons each 60 gs. The chief Commissarie of the Canon horses 300 gs. All
other Commisses, or particular Commises of the Canon horses each 60 gs The
Conductors of the Ordinance, Ammunition, Wagons, and Canon chorses, each in his
train 15 gs. Each Canounier 15 gs. The Masters of the fire-worckes each 70
Each of their Conductours 20 The Captains of the pyonniers each 100 Each
Pyonnier 10 The saylours, which serve about the ordinance: as well in the one,
as in the other army, or other particular workmen, shall be released each for 15.
gs. and the Captain of these saylours each for 300 gs. The Bridg-masters or
Captains of the punts 100 Their Lieutenants, each 30 gs, a piece, and those
which have the oversight of the bridge or punts 12 gs. The Inginiers and
Controulers of the works, each 150 gs. The Commisses, Conductours, the
officers, and takers on of works each 30 gs. The Captain of the miners 60 gs.
And each miner 15 The Captain of the Carpenters 60 And every carpenter under
him each 20 The Master Farrier 60 And every smith, or workman under him 12 gs.
The Waggon-men, or those that repaires the broken Wagons of the train of the
ordinance, victuals, or any of the army, and the drivers of canon horses each
10 gs. The Auditor, the Quartermaster, the Physician, the Apothecary, the
Chirurgian, the Provost of the Ordinance, each is to be ransomed for two months
entertaynment, and all and every one that is under them each for a months pay.
The Train of Victuals. The chief Commis, or the Receiver of the victuals 600
gs. Each Commisse serving under him 200 The Commisses, Staplers, or Tenidores
of the Bastimientos each 300 The Controulers, or Commisses of the Victuals 300
The Commisses of the wagons, of the victuals each 60 And those which serve
under them, and the Conductours each 15 All officer belonging to the Gesthouse
shall be released for a months pay.

And if there should happen any dispute, touching the quality, or pay of any
here above mentioned; he shall be condemned by the declaration, which he shall
give over in writting upon his honor, which shall be credited by him that
Gouvernes, Commands the Army, Province, or Town on the prisoners side,
without producing any further testimony.

None shall detain any prisonners against this Quarter upon any color, or
pretext what soever, as well on the one side, as on an the other; but as soon as
the money of any prisoner is proffered to pay his ransom, according to the
taxatio^ above specified, and his diet money for meat and drink, paying also
the Provost his fees, according to the list made, and agreed upon, bearing the
date hereof, together with the declaration of his quality, they shall set him
at liberty within 48. hours after it, without any consideration of his fellow
soldiers, which were taken prisonners with him, or whether others pay their
ransomes or not upon penalty, that those that keeps them any longer, shall be
bound to pay all the charges which afterward they shall be at for the time of
their detaynment, and if any comes to quest on their releasement; they must do
it upon their own charges, and if they should be overthrown in their suite,
the process as well on the one side; as on the other shall be determined within
14. days, after the first insinuation is made upon the penalty above said.

Neither shall they detain, either on the one side, or on the other any
Trumpetter, or Drummer coming for the prisoners, under any color whatsoever
of those that detaines them.

And to the end there may be a certain rule for their Diet, and the Provost
marshalls sees: the list here upon agreed, and concluded on, bearing the date
hereof, shall be stricktly kept and observed, as well in garnison as in the
army, and (as is said) shall be coppied out both in French, and in Dutch, which
shall be sent by the chiefs unto every garnison, with express command to
followhit, and not to transgress any part thereof, under what pretense soever
upon the penalty therein contained. The chieftaines on both sides, promissingh
to give satisfaction for that which shall be broken on their side to the
contrary.

And to take away all occasions of difficulty against the said list. It shall be
commanded every where, and to all persons, which are prisonners both on the
one side, and the other (without any distinction, whither they be included in
the quarter or not) they shall be brougt unto the Marshall General of the Army,
or of the garnison, without keeping them in Inns, or other places upon penalty,
that they shall not be forced to pay any more for their diet the^ according as
they are taxed in the list abouesaid, and the contents thereof.

All Captains of horse, or foot, which have the charge and office, of a
Drossard, or otherwise, being not in the possession of their Drossardship, or
office shall be released for a Captains ransom specified above, and being in
possession of the one, or of the other, they shall not be included in this
Treaty, but shall pay each a ransom as shall be agreed on by them.

All those also, which are not comprehended in the memorandum above said, shall
pay such a sum of money, as shall be likewise agreed upon.

All Ransomes, and diet money shall be paid with such current coin, and upon the
same valuation, as it goes in the place, where the prisoners are kept.

And seeing it often happens, that some Horse Captains and others are employed
upon enterprises, and Command as chiefes, over a troop of three or four
hundred men: serving either on Horsback, or a foot, without having any
commission, or entertainment above their ordinary pay: we intend that such
Captains shall give noe higer ransomes, then other Horse, or foot Captains,
and if they have any other Commission, or entertaynment above their ordinary
pay, they shall not be comprehended in this aggreement, but shall pay such
ransomes as shall be agreed upon.

All Captains, Officers and Soldiers mentionned here above, which were taken
prisonners before the date of this present Treaty, and are included in the
former Quarter of the xjth of June in the year 1601. shall be set al liberty by
virtue of this quarter, in what place soever they are prisonners, as soon as
they have paid their ransoms and diet, according to the taxation of the same
quarter, and list made then: and shall in noe wise be detayned after the
presentation of their moneys: upon penalty of paying the charges, which should
arrise here upon afterward.

And those which are taken prisonners during this present Treaty shall enjoy
the benefit hereof, moreover this quarter general shall be observed and kept
strictly, and punctually on-both sides, so that noe man may oppugn, or
infring it in any manner soever, upon pain of paying the abouesaid expe^ses:
reserving nevertheless, that the chiefes on both sides, which have power to
make a general quarter may break, or alter the same, when as the one, or the
other side shall find just causes, and reasons to do it: upon condition, that
he shall give warning thereof twenty days before he breaks it, by an
express Trumpetter, or drummer with an act under his own hand: for otherwise
this quarter shall in noe wise whatsoever be infrenged or broken. And those
which shall be taken prisonners within the term of these xx. days shall be
ransomed according to the abouesaid taxation, without any other charge; or
detaynement: but those which shall be taken prisonners after the expiration of
these 20 days, shall be bound to pay such a ransom, as shall be agreed upon with
them, intending that in this treaty all Captains, officers, and soldiers,
shall be included, and all others above mentioned without any exception, whither
they be in the army, or out of it in any garnison. And to this end we have
made two acts of this Treaty, of one and the same tenure, and substance in te
name of chiefes of the one and of the other Army, who have full power, and
authority to make this quarter. Given in the Hagh the 14th of May 1602 and was
signed.

F. M. Admirant of Arragon. And is also signed
Translated out of French into Dutch and is found to agree 1602. JAN VAN DALEN
Griffier, or Secretary to the Council of

A LIST
Of the daily diet, according to which every Provost Marshall, and the Keepers
of Prisonners on both sides shall allow their prisonners, without any pretext
of exceeding the same, so that if they do satisfaction shall be made by their
persons, and upon their intertaynments.

All these prisonners following shall have noe more allowance for their meat
and drink upon what pretense soever but 10. stiuers a day vidz.

All private Soldiers serving a foot. Conductours of the Ordinance,
Ammunition, of the victuals, of works and fire works. Cannoniers. Pionniers.
Saylours about the ordinance. Brigd-men. Sobrestants, Commisses, Officers,
Chassanantes and work Basses. Miners. Carpentiers. Waggon-men and drivers of
Canon Horses none of these are to have above 10. fts. per diem.
Al these persons following shall spend noe more in meat, or drink, then
fifteen stiuers a day. vidz.

All Horsemen. Sariants. Gentlemen of the ordnance and master Gunners. The
Lieutenant, or particular Commis of the Wagons. The Comises, or particular
Commissaries of Canon Horses. The Lieutenant of the bridge. The officers
belonging to the Gesthouse of the Army.
All these persons following contained in the Quarter, shall spend no more in
meat and drink but a gilder a day, viz: A reformed Horse Captain. A
Lieutenant, or a Cornet of horse, whither reformed or not. A reformed Captain
of foot. An Assistant to the Sariant Majour. A Sariant Majour of a particular
place. A Lieutenant, or an Ensign reformed or not. A particular
Quartermaster. A Captain of the wards. A Captain of the Guides. A Commissarie
of the Musters. The Officiers, or Commisses, of the Veador, Contador, Pagador,
or Treasurer of war The Contador, Commisse, Controuler, and Pagador of the
ordinance. The Wagon-master General. The chief Commisse of the Canon horses.
The Masters of Fortifications and works. The Captain of the Saylours for the
ordinance. The Captain of the Pionniers. The Bridge-master. The Ingeniers and
Controulers of works. The Captain of the miners. The Captain of the
Carpenters. The Mastersmith. The Physician, Quartermaster, Auditor, Apothecary,
and Chyurgion of the ordinance. The particular Commisses of other victuals. The
Stapelers and Senedores de Bastimentos. The Controuler, or Commisse of the
victuals.


The persons following and all others of a greater quality may use themselves,
as they please, and spend every day as much as they list.

A horse Captain. A Lieutenant Coronell. A Sariant Majour of a Regiment. A
Lieutenant of the Ordinance. A foot Captain. A Quartermaster General. The
chief Commisse, or Giver out of the Victuals, what it pleases them.
Touching the iron money, a Captain of foot, or a Captain of Horse, and all
other of a higher quality, shall give no more to the Provost for his fee then
two gilders.

And all other persons of an inferior quality, included within this quarter:
shall give no more for their yrons then twenty stivers.

All other persons, which are not included in this quarter, as Burgers,
Pesants, Inhabitants of Towns, Merchants, Sutlars, and all other persons not
specified hereabove, shall spend no more for their diet in meat, and drink,
nor be charged with any more, then 15 fts: a day, yea not upon their own
desire, unless they had agreed for their ransomes before and had put in
sufficient caution for the payment thereof: upon penalty, that the Provost
Marshall and others, which shall have allowed their prisoners more then is set
down, in this list, shall loose the same, as well of these prisoners, as of al
others above taxed, which prisoners they shall not detayne for the expenses
over and above, nor hinder their going out, as soon as ever they are paid,
according to the former taxation, upon penalty, that they shall have no other
expenses allowed them.

Of the persons abovesaid not included in this quarter, they shall take no more
for their yrons then 30 stivers.

All Provosts Marshals and keepers of Prisons of war, shall be bound
henceforward to use their prisoners well for their meat and drink, according to
the rates above mentioned and that upon their honors, and as they shall answer
it before God and man, so that no complaints come of it. Given by his
Excellency in the Hagh, the 14. of May. 1602. And was signed F. M. Admirant of
Arragon. And underneath was written By order from his Excel. Subscribed G. de
Roy. Having in the margent thereof his seal of arms in red wax. And agrees
with the principal, witness me IAN VAN DALEN.

The Copy of the Quarter amplified by Marquess Spinola. Translated out of
Dutch.
TO take away all difficulties, that might arise upon certain points, about
keeping of the quarter made heretofore by the Admirant of Arragon Anno 1602.
and to treat of some others, whereof no mention yet was made in the aforesaid
quarter general; it is agreed on both sides, to depute two Captains on each
side, with full authority and power to determine, and end the said
difficulties, which were agreed upon the 17. of October 1622. in the village of
Calmpthout, where these points following were concluded and agreed on; between
Captain d'Aubermont, Captain of a Troop of horse, and Captain Fourdine, Captain
of a Company of high dutchies, deputed on the one side, and Monsieur de
Broecham, horse Captain, Drossard of Bergin op Zoom, and Sr: John Hacket Lieut.
Colonel on the other side.

1. Imprimis that the said General quarter made the 14. of May 1602. shall be
hence forward punctually kept, and observed.

2. To come to an end then, and to release, and set at liberty all soldiers,
which are detained in prison at this present on both sides: It is agreed, that
they shall all of them be set at liberty, in paying their ransomes, and 25
days expenses, according to the ordinary taxation in the general quarter.

3. That all Soldiers prisoners, which have not bin prisoners 25 days, as
aforesaid, shall not lie in prison, or be detained; but pay proportionably for
so many days, as they have bin taken prisoners.

4. That all prisoners on both sides included in this treaty, and in the
General quarter, shall be ransomed within the time of the 24. day of this
present month.

5. And if any Captain be failing herein, and sends not for them upon the 24.
of October, to ransom and release his Soldiers, according to this present
agreement, he shall pay the charge of the days which shall be over and above
the 24. of October.

6. That as well on the one side as on the other, all Captains and Officers,
which have prisoners taken, shall be commanded not to omit the sending of their
ransomes, and the expenses of the Soldiers, prisoners, according to the
agreement abovesaid.

7. And forasmuch as in the general quarter, one cannot know in what place the
quarter ought ordinarily to be kept, which causes often disputes: It is agreed
on, that the quarter shall be kept, and observed in all places, where
Contribution is paid, with the consent and will of those that are owners of the
same places, as also in neutrall Countries.

8. And seeing that in the aforesaid General quarter, many of the superior,
and chief Officers, as also some of the inferior, and meaner Officers and
others; having pay as well on the one side, as on the other, are not included
therein: We declare that henceforward, all those which are not comprehended in
the general quarter above mentioned, of what quality soever they be, and
which are bound to follow the armies on both sides, shall enjoy the benefit of
this quarter, upon condition of paying six months of their entertainments only
the two Generals excepted.

9. And because in one of the articles of the quarter, there is a Clause, that
Captains, and other military Officers having in their possession some other
charge, or commission then military, should not be included in the aforesaid
general quarter, it is intended, that they only shall be comprehended in that
Article of the quarter of their military charge, without paying any other
ransom.

10. And seeing in the general quarter, there is no mention made of any posts
or Messengers, it is agreed on, that all Messengers or posts being taken on
horsback shall be ransomable for the ransom of a horseman, and those which go
a foot for the ransom of a private soldier: upon condition that under such a
pretext or color no man of quality may pass, who indeed ought to take no such
office upon him.

11. It is likewise agreed upon and is intended, that all Traitors, Runnawaies,
Malefactors sentenced and banished by justice: shall not be included in this
accord, but to all others they shall be bound to give quarter that are so taken
prisoners, as well on the one side, as on the other, though one is not bound to
give quarter to those persons abovesaid.

12. And seeing in the General quarter, there is an Auditor of the ordinance
nominated, whereas indeed there is none. It is intended, and is agreed on, that
under the same Article the particular Auditors of Garrisons, Regiments, and
Tercias shall be included, and touching the Auditor General, and his Griffiers
in the Army of his Catholic Majesty; and the Fiscall, and his Griffier in
the army of the States of the united Provinces, they shall be comprehended in
the eighth Article mentioning the superior, and chief officers, and the
meaner Officers and others, which are not included in the former general
quarter.

All which Articles shall be punctually observed and kept on this side, in
witness whereof we have signed hereunto. Given in the Army at Brecht the 18.
of October 1622. And was signed Ambrosio Spinola. By order from his Excel. And
was subscribed De la Motte. And sealed with the seal of arms of the said Lord
Marquess in red wax. And translated out of French into Dutch, and out of
Dutch into English, and is found to agree with the Original. Ian van Dalen,
Griffier.

HIS HIGHNESS THE PRINCE OF ORANGE HIS Proclamation and Edict, against wicked
Swearers, and Blasphemers of the sacred Name of God.
WHereas by daily experience, a great number of ungodly Swearers and
Blasphemers, are in this present Army: It is so that his Highness, to
prohibit and punish all such abominations and blasphemies, if these
Transgressors and Offenders, of what Nation soever they be, shall presume to
swear by the most holy Name of God (if they be Officers, the first time shall
forfeit a months pay, whereof one third part shall be given to the Informers,
and the other two parts to the relief of the poor wounded sick Soldiers) and
if the second time, the Officers shall be degraded from their charge and
command, as long as his Highness shall think fitting. And in case they be
Soldiers, or other Persons, which bear no office or charge in the Army, the
first time they shall be locked to a post to the open view of all men, before the
front and head of their Quarter and Regiment, as an example to others, and
afterward to be committed to prison to live with bread and water for the space
of two days: And the second time, to have a glowing aule boared through their
tongue, and besides to be banished out of the command of this State.

Charging and commanding by these, all Colonels, Captains, and other Officers
whatsoever, to proceed against the Offenders hereof, and to see that the
execution be strictly and duly performed, without any favor or connivence,
according to the contents abovesaid, and the second time to inform his Highness
thereof, to the end that these Penalties, against Officers, Soldiers, and
other Offenders (with the consent of his Highness) may be inflicted upon them.
Given in the Camp at Botbergen, near Rhyneberk, this 19. of July 1642. stylo
novo, and was signed Frederick Henry de Nassau, and underneath stood, By order
from his Highness, C. Huygens.

FINIS.

