Arguments Pro and Con about the Right of BAPTIZING; viz. Whether it ought to
be by putting the whole body under water, or only Sprinkling a little water
thereon.
The Baptists or Dippers give the following Arguments.
I. From the natural signification of the word.
The Baptists or Dippers say,
FIrst, That it is to be by Dipping, not by Sprinkling or pouring, is manifest
from the nature of the Greek word Baptiso, which all our Lexicons and Learned
Critics with one consent do tell us does signify to Dip; yea, such a Dipping
as is used in Bucks where clothes are washed, or as Dyers in their Dying-Vats (
Leigh's Crit. Sac.) Therefore Scapula, Stephens, Plantan, Tingo quod fit
mergendo, a Dying by plunging; Causabon, Tanquam ad tingendum mergo; Erasmus,
Tingendi causa immergere, to dye by immerging; and Beza, a tinction by Washing
or Dipping; and as Bucan. Bulinger, Zanchy, Spanhemius, to Dip into water, or
plung under water; Vossius, to wash the whole body; as Leigh. Crit. p. 50.
Grocius, to Dip over head and ears: Therefore the Latins render it sometimes by
Tingo, to dye; sometimes by Baptismus, to Dip; the English and French for the
most part by the Greek word Baptism, or Baptim, to Dive or Duck, not Rantize or
Sprinkle; the Saxons call it Gefullad, from fulling of clothes where they are
duck'd or plunged; the Dutch always Doopselor or Doopen, to Dip, dipping being
the only proper sense; and which is also confirmed by Lisput. p. 25.
Vossius Pan. Cath. Tit. 4. l. 5. c. 2.
Chamier, Diat. on Tit. 3.2.
Mead, on Mat. 3.
Causabon, de Prim. pap. p. 193.
Salmatius, de Jure not. l. 2. c. 2.
Pindorus, Ode 2.
Seldom, Rule Consc. l. 4. c. 4.
Dr. Tailor, Annot. New Test. Mat. 3. Mark 7. etc.
Dr. Hamond, Tract. Sac. p. c. 8. p. 177.
Mr. Dan. Rogers, Dict.
Mincheus, Scotus, Aquinus, etc.

The Rantists or Sprinklers answer.
That it may be by sprinkling or pouring, by applying the Element to the
person, not the person to the Element, appears by the nature of the word, which
signifies to Wash as well as to Dip, as most Critics acknowledge, Item Lavo
says Beudeus, Scapula, Stephens, Scriverius, Pasor, yea, to sprinkle, as
Schimdjus, Dr. Featly.

The Baptistt Reply.
That a word may have diverse Significations, nay sometimes contrary one to the
other, is no ways doubtful; for the Hebrew Kodesh, the proper word for
Holiness, sometimes may signify Whoredom, or Sodomy, Deuteronomy. 23.17. Hosea 4.14.
2 Kings 23.17. And Barack, the word for Blessing, is taken sometimes for
Cursing, Job 1.5, 11. and 2.9. Therefore the genuine and proper Signification
is mainly to be eyed; and when respecting Divine things, the usuage of
Scripture, nature of the thing, and scope of the place, is to rule about it. It
is true, the word may sometimes import washing; but as Beza on Mark 7.4. which
in the Treat. of Bap. is mistakenly said to be Erasmus.
Beza observes, only by consequence, not properly, because you cannot dip a
thing, but you must wet or wash it: But never is taken for sprinkling.

II. From the Scripture-Acceptation of the word.
The Baptists say,
Secondly, That it is by Dipping, may yet further be confirmed from the
Scripture-Acceptation of the word, both in the Old and New Testament: First, in
the Exodus 12.22. Lev. 4.6, 17. and 9.9. and (...) 16.52. Numb. 10.18. Josh.
3.15. Ruth. 2.14. 1 Kings (...) 4.6, (...) Ezekiel. 23.15. (...) 24.27. 2 Kings
8.15. Job 9.31. 2 Kings Mark 4.^^. Deuteronomy. 33.29.
Old Testament the word Tabal one and the same with Baptize, as the Septuagint
renders it (and as Beza, Hamond, Minchius, Kircherus, etc. and others do
assert) is always and in every place, by all our English Translators, rendered
to Dip. And in the Luke 16.24. John 13.26. Mat. 5.14. and 26.23. (...) 10. Rev.
19.13.
New Testament, several times also to Dip, but most frequently by the Greek
word it self Baptize or Dip, not Rantise, or Sprinkle; Loise, or wash; Keiose,
or pour: And therefore says Treat. of Sacraments, part 1. chapter 8. p. 177.
Mr. Rogers, The word imports nothing else but to Dip, for the Greek wanted not
other words to express any other act besides Dipping, if the Institution could
bear it, (as he says) is exceeding material to the Ordinance, as Scripture and
Antiquity informs, and without exception to Countries hot or cold.

The Rantists answer,
That it may be by pouring or sprinkling, we have Confirmation from the
Scripture. Acceptance of the word. 1. Because the word Tabal is by Genesis 30.37,
38. rendered by Moluno poluo, which by the circumstances must be sprinkling. And
the Chald. Jitztabah, Dan. 4.20. which by the LXX. is rendered Ebephe, is
translated wet, which must be by aspersion. And Rev. 19.13. the word Bapto,
compared Isa. 63.3. must be sprinkled; and Mark 7.48. to wash, not dip.

The Baptists Reply
That if it should be taken for granted, that the word in these four places may
be taken otherwise than in all other places, will it be judged reasonable, that
those four should out- balance and overruled all the rest, which are above a
hundred times rendered to dip. But in the next place, if the particulars be
considered, you will not find them make good the thing pretended: For 1. As to
Joseph's Coat, Genesis 37.31. if dipped in blood, as we render it, it may well be
said to be polluted, dyed, or smeared therewith. And as to Dan. 4.20. the word
Jitztabah is by Montanus rendered intingatur vel aspergetur: And if the
Scripture do render it Ebaphe, which we translate wet, yet it must be granted
to be such a weting as is by by dipping; viz. A thorough weting, a weting all
over: A wetting by the dew of Heaven from above by aspersion, and a wetting by
the dew of Heaven resting upon the long grass, by applying the body thereto,
and so a dipping also; yea every part of the body. And as for Rev. 19.13. it is
parallel with Isa. 63.12. as says our English great Annotations, dyed, red
Garments, and garments dipped in blood; being one and the same, though as in
Verse. 3. Blood may be sprinkled upon Red Garments also. As for Mark 7.3. the
word rendered wash is Nipto, not Bapto, which fignifies when respecting washing
of hands, a dipping up to the Elbows, as Dr. Hamond (and Theophilact, as in the
margent) upon the place observe: And to which purpose, they had Water-pots
containing two or three Firkins apiece always ready in their houses, as John
2.6. so that we should always (as the Dutch do) read it dip; and therefore in
Verse. 8. it is explained to be such a washing, by the word dip or baptize.

III. From the Scripture-Metaphors explaining it.
The Baptists say,
Thirdly, That it is by Dipping, and wherein much water is required, and not by
Sprinkling, wherein a small quantity of water suffices, appears from the
Scripture-Metaphors alluding to this Rite; viz. When persons are said to be
overwhelmed in great sufferings, they are said to be baptized therein, Matthew.
20.22, 23. Luke 12.5. When said to have greet measures of the Spirit, it is to
be Baptized with the Spirit, Acts 5.11, 16. When the children of Isral were
covered with a Cloud behind them, and over their heads, and the Sea on both
sides, were then said to be Baptized in the Sea and Cloud, 1 Cor. 10.2. with
Exodus 14.22. When Asher had the promised Blessing of great plenty, he is said
to have his feet dipped in oil. And when great victory over enemies, it is said,
that feet are dipped in their Blood, Psalm. 68.23.

IV. From the nature and ends of the Ordinance.
The Baptists say,
Fourthly, It is to be by Dipping, not Sprinkling, from the nature and ends of
the Ordinance; viz. To a figure or sign in the outward Visible act of spiritual
things held forth thereby, that by the sign, the thing signified might be
exemplified; viz.

1. To figure out the Covenant on man's part that he visibly declares to enter
into thereby; viz. To dye to sin, and to live to Christ in newness of life: By
that figurative Death, Burial and Resurrection, being put under the the water,
and taken out thereof, and therefore said to be buried with Christ in Baptism,
as Romans 6.4. Col. 2.11, 12, 13. as so fully owned by Piscator, Tilenus, Diodat,
Assemblies and Leigh's Annotations, Dr. Cave, Tillotson, Goodwin, Kekerman,
Baxter, Magdiburg, as Treat. Bapt. B. 2. chap. 4. does particularize.

2. To be a sign of the Covenant on Gods part; viz. of washing away of sins,
cleansing the whole man, and every part, and to give spiritual Life and
Salvation, Acts 2.32. and 22.16. 1 Pet. 3.21. And to the end that whole and
every part is be to washed, that as every part is defiled, and needs cleansing
and purifying, so must not one part be left unbaptized: Therefore Ainsworth
treating upon Baptizing the Lepers under the Law (the Type hereof) says, Lev.
15.5. That every part must be baptized, and if so much as the tip of the finger
was left unbaptized, it was esteemed no Baptism: And therefore says the
Learned de Jure Not. l. 2. c. 2.
Seldom, That the Jews (from whom this Rite is conceived to come) took that
Baptism, wherein the whole body was not baptized, to be void. And to this end,
Upon John 13.10.
says Dr. Hamond, they had large Diving-places, or Baptisterions, containing
diverse Baths of water, which they called Columbethro's, or Diving-places.

3. To figure out Regeneration, being as so generally owned a Symbol of
Regeneration wrought; therefore being born of spiritual water by Regeneration,
John 3.5. We are in the figure taken out of literal water, or born out of the
Bowels of it, as we are really taken out of the Womb in the first birth.

4. To figure out our Sanctification, or newness of life; for as in Baptism we
are all covered over, as with a garment, so we are said thereby to put on
Christ, Gal. 3.27. viz. his white Garment of Righteousness and Holiness, and
therefore to expect from him to that end, according to promise, the being dipped
or baptized into or with the Spirit, Acts 11.16. and 2.38.

The Rantists answer,
It is to be by Sprinkling, not Dipping:

1. From the Analogy it has with sprinkling Christ's blood upon the Conscience,
Heb. 12.24. 2. Effusion of the Spirit, Acts 2.17. 3. Washing of Regeneration,
Tit. 3.5. 4. Pouring water upon the Ark, 1 Pet. 3.23. the figure of Baptism.
The Baptists Reply.
It is true, 1. Christ's blood is said to be sprinkled, but that is in allusion
to the sprinkling of the blood under the Law, Heb. 9.12, 13. and 19.21. with
Lev. 14.6, 7, 8. Numb. 19.17, 18, 19. but not to express and point out to us
the external Rite of Baptism, to which it bears no proportion either in name or
nature. 2. That the Spirit is said to be poured out is very true, which
respects that great measure and quantity of the Spirit, not the outward mode
and Rite of Baptism; though that pouring out of the Spirit, as before is
Metaphorically called the Baptism of the Spirit, in allusion to that of water,
wherein was quantities of water, and whereof every member of the baptized
person did partake: But similies do not run of all four. 3. As to the pouring
water upon the Ark, no question when the windows of Heaven were opened in that
Deluge, great measures were poured down upon it; but that is not the Figure of
Baptism: The figure wherein the Ark and Baptism are said in that place to hold
Analogy, is in this, that as those persons that entered into the Ark in Noah's
time, were saved in that Deluge, so they that enter into Christ the spitual Ark
by Faith; and the Visible Ark, the Church, by Baptism, the visible door thereof
do enter into the promised savation: Therefore for any to use Srpinkling
instead of Dipping, says Dr. Tailor in his Rul. Con. c. 4. p. 644. is not only
against Ecclesiastical Law, but against the Analogy and mystical signification
of the Sacrament; and therefore he says, is not to be complied with. As to
that of the washing of Regeneration, I refer to that which is said in the
Treatise of Baptism, part 2. chap. 4.

V. From Scripture-Practice, and Command.
The Baptists say,
Fifthly, Dipping, not Sprinkling, is the Rite of this great Ordinance, if we
respect the Scripture- Practice or Command confirming the same: 1. The
Practice, Mat. 3.15. When Jesus was baptized, or dipped, he came straightway out
of the water: Therefore Cajetan upon the place says, that Christ's ascending
out of the water, proves that he was baptized by John, not by sprinkling, but
by Immersion, or dipping. And Musculus says upon it, that the baptized parties
were dipped, not sprinkled: And John 3.13. John baptized at Enon, because there
was much water. Upon which place says Calvin, you may gather, that John and
Christ administered Baptism, by plunging the whole body into the water. And Acts
8.38. Philip and the Eunuch went both down into the water: And therefore says
Calvin upon it, We see what fashion the Ancients had to administer Baptism, for
they plunged the whole body into water, etc. And the command to this was
express, Mat. 28.19. Go teach all Nations, dipping, (not sprinkling) them in
the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. And Acts 10.48. it is said, Peter
commanded them to be dipped, (not sprinkled) in the name of the Lord, etc. And
therefore whether this is not as plain a Conmand for a Believer to be dipped, and
which he should no more shift or alter, than when we are commanded, Fagate, to
eat of the Bread, etc. that we are literally and plainly to do so, without any
changing or altering the same, as sone have done in that and the like case also.

The Rantists answer,
That Sprinkling, not Dipping, was the usage in the Scripture; because how
could they baptize by dipping three thousand in one day, Acts 2. And how could
the Jailor be so baptized in his own house, Acts 16.

The Baptistr Roly.
That the three thousand mentioned in Act 2. were dipped, not sprinkled, is
clear, not only from the words, because it is said in plain terms they were
dipped, Acts 2.41. And they wanted not help in that great Administration, the
Twelve and Seventy were witnesses, besides others of the 120 Disciples, that if
need required, were capable to be helpful in the work. And as to the Jailor's
being baptized in his own house (as suggested) it is a mistake; for after he was
baptized, it is said, Verse. 34. he brought them into his house.

VI. From the practice of the Ancients, and confessed change from Dipping to
Sprinkling.
The Baptists say,
Sixthly, As a further Confirmation by way of Illustration, that dipping was
the Rite of this Ordinance, not sprinkling, may further appear from the Confessed
practice of the Ancients for the first Ages, and the acknowledged change and
alteration of it afterward; In testimony whereof, Daille on the Fathers, lib.
2. p. 148. says, That it was the custom heretofore in the Ancient Church to
plunge, those they baptized, over head and ears into the water; as (says he)
Tertullian in Book 3 Cor. Mil. Cyp. in Ep. 7. p. 211. Epipha. Pa. 30. p. 128.
and others testify. De Reb. Eccles.
Walafrid Strabo says, That at first Believers were baptized simply in Floods
and Rivers. Ad Theol. wit. Resp. 11. c. 8.
Jeremias Pat. of Constant. says, That the Ancients baptized not by
sprinkling, but immerging, following the example of the Evangelist, who came up
out of the water, therefore did he descend. Zopperus de Sacram. says, from the
Etymology of the word it does appear, what was the custom of old of
administering Baptism, which is since changed into Rantizing. Chrysostom, as
Dr. Tailor in his Rule of Conscience, Book 4. c. 4. tells us, That the old man
is buried and drowned in the Immersion under water (...) and when the baptized
person is afterward raised up from the water, it represents the Resurrection
of the new-man to newness of life. Mr. Jos. Mead upon Tit. 3. tells us, there
was no such thing as Rantism or sprinkling in the Apostles time, nor many Ages
after. And Dr. Tailor as above, says, That the ancient Church did not in their
Baptism sprinkle water with their hands, but did immerge; and therefore says,
we find in the Records of the Church, that the persons baptized were to be
quite naked, for which he gives diverse instances and Authorities for diverse
Ages. Dr. Cave in his Prim. Christ. says, That of old the baptized party was
immerged, or wholly put under water, which was the almost constant and
universal custom of those times. Vossius de Bap. 14, to 64.
Vossius in p. 40. gives not only the nature of the word, from the old
Glossers, and the Septuagint, and the best Critics, to be dipping; but from
the sayings and usage of the Ancients from the trine Immersion, till Gregory,
and then the single Immersion by the Council of Tolitan; and how in these cold
Climates it came to be altered. Annimad. p. 297, to 319.
Sir Norton Knatch in p. 40. gives the usuage of it from the Scripture and
Antiquity to be dipping, and that it so continues in the Greek Churches to this
day. Ut sup.
And as Daille tells us, is still the practice of the Grecian and Russian,
Churches at this day, Cassander de Bap. p. 193. and that it was the confessed
custom of the Church of England, their English Liturgy will determine, which
required the party to be baptized, to be dipped in water, except in great
extremity and weakness.

Secondly, As to the change and alteration of this Rite, we have the following
Confessions; viz. a Disput. of the Rise to Sacraments.
Mr. Baxter in his third Augument to Mr. Blake says, as to the manner of it,
it is commonly confessed by us to the Anabaptists (as our Commentators declare)
that in the Apostles time, the baptized were dipped over head in water; and
though since it has been thought meet to disuse the manner of dipping; and to
use less water. Pau. Cathol. Tom. 4. l. 5. c. 2. Ser. 6.
Chamier confesses, That the ancient use of Baptism was to dip the whole body
into the Element, which is the force of the word (...), therefore did John
baptize in a River, which is nevertheless changed into Aspersion, though
uncertain when and whence that custom was taken. The Marquis of Worcester in
his Certam. Relig. confesses, that the Church of Rome has changed dipping the
party over head and ears, into sprinkling upon the face. Calvin upon Acts 8.38.
confesses, they have varied from the Apostolical practice, which was by
plunging the body into the water. Beza upon Gal. 3. acknowledges, that it was
the custom of old to baptize the Adult by immerging. Ut supra.
Daille further says, as before, Though this custom of dipping be ancient and
universal, yet it is now abolished by the Church of Rome; and this is the
reason, says he, that the Muscovites say, that the Latins are not rightly and
duly baptized, because they despised this ancient Ceremony of Dipping.

The Rantists answer,
That sprinkling was very ancient in the Church, as well as dipping, appears
out of Eusebius, witnessing, that Novatus was baptized by pouring water upon
him. Walafrid Strabo is peremptory, that it was done both ways: And Cyp. Ep. to
Mag. evidenceth it to have been of very ancient practice. Clem. Alex. p. 387.
testifies the same; and though it is confessed, they did in some places of old
dip the baptized, yet it was in hot -- Countries.

The Baptists Reply.
That sprinkling of the sick, or Clinical Baptism, did early creep in is
confessed: But Rule Cons. ut supra.
Dr. Tailor tells us from Cornelius Ep. to Fabianus, Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 43. and
out of Magnus Ep. That they scrupled to receive into holy Orders, any that had
only received the Clinical Baptism; yea, so much as to esteem them Christians,
that had only been sprinkled. And as Voss us in his Book of Baptism tells us,
is was questioned, whether they did not lie when they said, they baptized a
person, when they only sprinkled him. And as to baptizing in cold Countries by
dipping, as well as hot, we have Authentic proof; there being, as Dan. Rogers
says, no distinction of hot or cold. Russia, as is well known, an
extraordinary cold Country, whereas you have heard they have, and do still use
the Rite of dipping to this day. And in England of old, how frequent was it to
baptize in Rivers, witness Germanus and Lupus, baptizing multitudes in the
River Allin in Cheshire, Treat. of Bapt. p. 228. Paulinus great numbers in the
River Swol in York shire, and Trent in Notinghamshire, Bed. Book 2. ch 16.
besides the appointment in the English Liturgy to dip little Children in this
Country, and which has been the practice in some places formerly, but
especially the known, constant practice of the Baptists in Holland, Germany,
and England, both Winter and Summer, without the least detriment or
inconveniency.

A brief Corrollary, containing some necessary Quaeries upon the whole.
Quaer. 1. WHether is it not demonstrably evident by this Six-fold Argument
(confirmed by so great Testimony both Divine and Humane) that Dipping, not
Sprinkling, was the instituted Rite of this great Ordinance of Baptism?

Quaer. 2. Whether this of Dipping, having been Christ's positive Appointment,
from all those holy ends, and spiritual Reasons enforcing it as well as his own
and all the primitive Saints express practice, it will not appear to be very
dangerous, and savor of too much Presumption and Arrogance, upon such gross
mistakes, and upon nothing but Human Institution, to alter and change the same
to a clear other Rite, inverting thereby so solemn a piece of Gods holy
Worship, and introducing instead thereof, so groundless a Tradition and
Invention of man; and does not justly fall under the Reproofs and Threatenings
of the following Scriptures, Matthew. 15.9. In vain they do worship me, teaching
for Doctrines the Commandments of men: Mark 7.7. For laying aside the
Commandment of God, ye hold the Traditions of men, rejecting and frustrating
the Commandments of God, to keep your own Traditions: Isa. 24.5. They have
transgressed the Law, changed the Ordinances therefore, etc. And no less then a
Violation of the First and Second Commandment, intrenching upon God's
Prerogative-Royal, wherein he is so jealous, the Presumption whereof cost
Israel so dear?

Quaer. 3. Whether sprinkling only a few drops of water upon the face, instead
of dipping the whole person, does not as much spoil the Symbol, and vacate the
instituted significant ends of the Ordinance, as to eat only the Wafer, and
reject the Cup, spoils the Ordinance of breaking of Bread, and drinking of
Wine, in remembrance of the broken Body and Blood of our Lord: Or as some of
old, when God commanded the foreskin to be circumcised, should have satisfied
themselves to circumcise their nails, if they did but keep the name and ends of
the Ordinance? And whether one is not as provoking to the Lord as the other?

Quaer. 4. Whether to conform hereto, is not to yield obedience to the
Institution and Injunction of Antichrist (for though it is granted it was in use
before it was imposed by the Popes) as Infant Baptism was, yet was it by them
especially enjoined, as the other was, as confessed by so many of their own? And
whether in so doing, there is not as great indignity offered to the Authority
of Christ, and contempt to his Wisdom, as there is a declared subjection to,
and owning and honoring such a gross Usurpation?

Quaer. 5. Whether it may not rationally be supposed, that one great end of the
Popes enjoining theeeof, was not with more Pomp and Solemnity to establish and
confirm Infant Baptism, so much the Pillar and Foundation of his Church? And
whether it does not appear, he did upon as good ground change the Rite, as so
alter the subject? And that he does as warrantably, and by as good
Scripture-Authority, sprinkle Bells, and Church- Walls and Standards, and call
it Baptism, as the other?

Quaer. 6. Whether for any to sprinkle an Infant, and to say they Baptize it in
the Name of the Father, Son, and Spirit, is not as much to tell a lie in the
Name of the Lord, and to profane a holy Ordinance of his, as they do who use
the same Form in Baptizing of Bells? etc.

Quaer. Whether Learned and good men may not, from the consideration of their
mistake in the Rite, have cause to conclude they have mistaken the subject
also? And that being neither right in the matter or manner of the Ordinance, it
is a mear nullity, and therefore should engage them to the right performance in
both, as they would approve themselves Christ's Disciples and Followers, and
not err in so great a foundation of the Christian Religion?

LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhil, near
the Royal Exchange. 1675.


