THE ARMY NO USURPERS, OR The late Parliament not Almighty and Everlasting:
Showing,

That the present Army in their former opposing, and late dissolving of the
Parliament, have done nothing contrary to Law, but according to equity.

And that the late Parliaments claim of power to do what they please, until
they should be dissolved by their own consent, is long since made void by their
own Act.

Exodus 7.4. But Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that I may lay my hand upon
Egypt and bring forth mine Armies, and my People the children of Israel out of
the land of Egypt by great Judgments.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the sign of the Black-spread Eagle, at
the West end of Paul's. 1653.

To the Reader.
WHere every man may do what he list, there can be nothing but perpetual strife
and bloodshed: To avoid this, men choose subjection to Government, as a kind of
Arbitration for taking up differences amongst them, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Romans 13.1, 2.
and the less there is of obligation between them to abide this trial, the more
there is of trust: For which cause we are to submit thereunto, as an ordinance
of man approved by God; and keep Covenant, though to our loss. Psalm. 15.4.


Those that do otherwise, render vain all mutual Trusts and promises, and by
consequence distroy all commerce and lively hood, which is far from common
honesty, farther from Piety, worst in Public affairs, especially in public
men, and most especially in the Godly; to the justifying of seditions, ruin of
Nations, and making Religion Odious; All which, if the Army have been guilty
of, they deserve their doom.

Now as it is far from my desire to justify an evil Action, (especially thus
aggravated, if it had been indeed evil) So neither was it in my thoughts to
have writ any thing at all of this Subject till many days after the Parliament
was dissolved; when by an unexpected providence I was led unto it, though Isa.
15.2.
with resolution (through grace) to be guided by truth, and not to fain
pretenses. For if I may say that any sin is more contrary to my nature then
another, (as all sins are not alike predominant in every man) I think it is
that of faction or part-taking farther then I see ground for it, as is
something known to those that are acquainted with me; and so submitting what is
here written to censure.

I remain a Servant to Truth.

The Army no Usurpers, etc.
IT is pleaded by some, that the Authority of the late Parliament is still in
force, though at present interrupted, and therefore whatsoever Government shall
be settled without them, is of no validity; The rather for that (say they) there
was an Act made at the beginning thereof, that they should not be dissolved
otherwise then by their own consent; For this cause it may be a matter of great
Importance to the settlement of men's minds therein, if it shall fully appear
that the late Parliament was by their own Act long since dissolved, as to their
Parliamentary power, and retained since that time only a ruling power, such as
that of Kings and Supreme Governors, which amongst all free Nations is capable
of resistance and removal by the People, and that the Armies under their
Command had power to do as much as the People themselves, being in Arms, might
have done in order to the opposing of Usurpation, as well in their own Rulers
as others; And first I shall give you the state of the Case.

The Parliament in their declarations make as large Promises of doing great
things for the People, if once they could but get the power into their hands,
as almost was possible? They are at first afflicted with several Armies that
make it their design to prolong the War, rather then obtain a Conquest; at
length many gallant men (not Soldiers of fortune, and men of mercenary
Principles) for the love of their Country, and hopes of the great things
promised, expose their lives to hazard, for maintaining the Parliament in
their dominion, follow their business with such uncessant pains, Vigilance and
diligence, as is without all example of any Army since the World began; They
find in every thing success to wonder, acknowledged by friends and enemies to
be from a divine presence, they have on a sudden reduced the whole Nation;
which is scarcely done, but these men must lay down Arms, that others whose
ways tend to persecution and oppression (especially against men of their
practices and Judgments) may take them up, and reap all the sweet fruits of
these men's losses, of their blood and limbs, of their precious friends slain in
the service (and the Widows and Orphans made thereby) of their incomparable
diligence, unexampled adventures, Invincible courage, miserable hardships
undergone by them, and many other things of what moment soever, not at all now
to be spoken of, but they are doomed to submit all this, yea and their lives,
yea and their posterities, yea and some things relating to their souls, to the
mercy of those that they plainly perceive, do implacably hate them, manifested
in this their undeserved cruelty.

These people have now reason to fear that such a bloody and deboist crew as
are usually listed in all ordinary Armies, shall again be levied upon the Nation
and themselves, to the Plundering and Ruining of the People; and further, that
by means thereof themselves, their posterities and all men of the most raised
Principles, must be inslaved to the wills of a Generation, whose destructive
ways and purposes are sufficiently manifested in this prodigious proceeding,
and that the future dominion will by them be secured to such as they in their
kindness shall think good enough to rule over them.

From these great endeavors to remove the Militia into the hands of their own
Creatures, whereby to be maintained in ruling, how long and which way they
pleased, and their not performing their large promises to the people in their
first declarations (to the deluding of these men who would never have undergon
the hardships of such a bloody war) merely to put the feet of some designers
into the Stirrup, they (though required to lay down Arms) demur upon it, humble
themselves deeply, seek God solemnly, he returns such an answer, as with one
heart and Soul they are agreed, That to lay down Arms, would be to forgo their
trust.

Hereupon they stand it out, resist the Parliament, and since that time upon
like occasions they seclude many members, and at last (finding still the same
design more subtly carried on) they dissolve the house.

Now the question is, how far these things, though otherwise very equitable,
yet being thus acted against the Supreme power, were fit to be done at all; and
if they were, then whether they might be done by the present Army, in that
capacity wherein they stood in relation to them.

For notwithstanding all that has been said, I must needs confess, Romans 3.7. 1
Pet. 2.13. Romans 13, 1, 2.
that to do the least evil for obtaining the greatest good, or to resist the
higher powers in that sense as the Scripture requires obedience to them, is not
in any sort to be justified by honest men, much less by Christians.

And therefore,

Although it is of no less then Divine Institution, Exodus 18.21. Dan. 7.14.18.
Isa. 49.23. Exodus 7.4.
that men fearing God should have the government (which many of those were not)
Though such Magistrates have been of old promised as a great blessing to
mankind, and advantage to the truth; Though through the late unwonted
providence, it seems to be now in design, especially here in England; though
the whole Creation (shortly to be delivered) groans under those Pharaoh's that
will not let the People receive the Gospel, Mat. 24.14.
or serve God otherwise then they please; Though the late Parliament have been
so frequently attempting to infringe the liberty of the Godly, and that very
people, by the price of whose blood they were settled in their power, yet I
shall not take sanctuary from any of these Considerations, 2 Samuel 23.17.
to prove either the equity of the aforesaid proceeding, or the Injustice of
the Parliaments aforesaid claim, but in order thereunto shall insist only upon
these four Particulars.

1. That the late Parliament were long since divested of their National power.
2. That their ruling power was from a new choice of their own party. 3. That
their own party had power to lay them aside upon mislike. 4. That this power of
their own party was in their Armies.
And first for the first, The Parliament having declared against the King, step
up into his Throne, by taking upon them the ruling power. So that whereas
before they were as the People, ruled; Assembled only (pro tempore) to
control their Rulers, and make Laws for them to rule by; they are now the
standing Rulers that are subject to the like control from the People; For,
Both these powers they could not have at once, because there was no Law for it,
and it was against equity.

When was there ever any Law made, that in case any King be declared to break
his trust by any Parliament, that same Parliament shall succeed him in his
dominion, and yet not be subject to the Control of the People, as the King
was; I highly presume such a ridiculous Law as this was never made: and for
equity,

1. It makes the Parliament both judge and party in their own cause, whereby
they may do what they will, and say it is well.

2. It is otherwise injurious in three respects; First it lays a temptation
upon Parliaments to declare against good Kings, that they might obtain their
dominion.

2. It makes good Parliaments liable to suspicion for doing their duty against
Kings; and lastly it might make other Parliaments neglect their duty for
avoiding that suspicion: And thus you see how much this double power is against
equity.

Now since that claim which has no ground either in Law or equity is void; it
follows that the Parliament by accepting of the ruling power (since I say there
was no Law, (and it was against equity) for them to hold both) dissolved
themselves by their own Act, as to their Parliamentary or National Power.

2. That their ruling Power was from a new choice of their own Party.

If the People had suspected a mere design in the Parliament to gain the Kings
dominion to themselves (and having shared a good part of the Public Treasure
amongst them) in the end to make their peace with the King by betraying those
that assisted them unto his lust, (which was a thing possible) yet if the
People had been bound up by their first choice, they must either have submitted
to the Kings will in not opposing him, or to the Parliaments in being betrayed
by them; For a medium betwixt Acting and not Acting cannot be found, but they
were free from this exigency: for,

There was no Law to constrain them to choose the Parliament for a ruling power,
who as yet I say are no more then the people ruled, that have power to control
their rulers; And as there was no Law, so there was no equity that they should
be constrained to it against their wills, since they were not slaves, but a
free People; so that their submitting themselves to the Parliament as a Ruling
power, was a new choice of them to a new Office, and that of their own party
only; for Royalists opposed it, and Neuters paid not Contribution but by
constraint.

3. Their own party had power to lay them aside upon mislike.

Their ruling power being only of free gift upon liking from their own party,
they were but as Tenants at Will, to be laid aside upon mislike, since their
own party never gave them power to rule which way, and how long they pleased;
and without their gift they could not have it; and if it had been otherwise,
they were in a better condition when they had Kings that were controulable.

Again, the Parliaments party could not give the Parliament an uncontrollable
power though they would; for men are not sole Lords and Masters of their own
lives, much less of their posterities, and therefore cannot give that to others
which is not their own to give.

And therefore to conclude, if I trust another with the custody of my goods, I
may remove them upon suspicion, much more my person; especially when I never
indented how long he should keep either; and it is no prejudice to him, since
he has no right to any dominion over me especially if he professes to aim at
nothing but my good, and undergoes much trouble therein; which being the very
case in hand, it is clear that the Parliaments own party had power to lay them
aside upon mislike.

Object. Since the Royalists and Neuters were reduced to their obedience, their
own party could not cast them off without their consent.

Answ. By the same reason they must have had the consent of Ireland and
Scotland in it also, but especially in dealing with the late King, in whom
those Nations had interest as well as we; But I say there is no equity at all
that those who did not make choice of the Parliament themselves as a ruling
power, should impose them upon others.

Lastly, I deny that the enemy were reduced to the obedience of the Parliament
as the Objection says; for by that reckoning the Parliament must have sat for
ever; but they were reduced to the obedience of that government which the
Parliaments party should think fit to set up over themselves.

Object. The removing of the Parliament was against the late Engagement.

Answ. Was it at all intended by the late Engagement that the Parliament should
sit for ever? Or did it not rather refer to a being satisfied without King or
house of Lords; and in the absence thereof, to be true and faithful to the
present government that was and should be established.

Again, The Parliament men were once all bound as subjects to obey the King,
and yet as a Parliament they had power to resist him; so every particular
person in the Army or elsewhere, as private men might be obliged to submit unto
the Parliament, and yet the Army as a joint body might have power to remove
them; which that they had, will appear by what follows.

That this power of their own party was in their Armies.

That the Parliaments party had power to remove the Parliament upon mislike, I
have already proved, and now I say that this power of theirs was in their
Armies, and that for these reasons:

1. Without their Armies they could not Control them. 2. The Soldiery might
in their own defense do it. 3. They are a National Power, as the Parliaments
heretofore. 4. Otherwise the Militia would tend to more hurt then good. 5.
Otherwise the Parliament had been inexcusable in Commissionating of them.
1. Without their Armies they could not control them.

And that for three reasons: for the rest of the People were, 1. Unarmed;
therefore could not suppress any resistance that might come therein. 2.
Dispersed; therefore could not debate or vote what was fit to be done; nor are
capable of being trusted with such secrets as relate to advice about great
affairs. 3. Without Commission; therefore could not warrant their proceedings
therein.


Object. Such Commissions were received from the Parliament, therefore could
not be employed against them.

Answ. It might as well be pleaded The Parliament were Summoned by the Kings
Writs, therefore they were to obey his will.

But to both it is answered, that the King granted those Writs, and the
Parliament those Commissions (or should have done) in order to their Trust, and
not their own wills.

2. The Soldiery might in their own defense do it.

When Parliament men are to be chosen, if those that appear to give in their
Votes should be denied the Privilege, because all that might come are not
present, there would be no end of things; but since those that are present
cannot help the absence of the rest, it is always thought equitable they
should proceed without them, and not lose their own freedoms through others
default, who if they like not the issue, may thank themselves.

Mat. 6.2. and the latter end.
Thus also it is in all Parliaments, Councels, Committees, and such like,
wherein absent members are concluded without their consent. Now I say, if there
be ground for it in any case, much more in this; for the Armies venture their
lives and limbs for freedom (and that not as Soldiers of fortune, but as their
design;) others only their money, between which there is no comparison.
Therefore they had no reason from the absence of others to submit to their own
slavery, but might in their own defense rescue themselves, since freedom was
due, I say, to them as well as others, and they had paid much more for it then
others.

3. They are a National power as the Parliaments heretofore.

By a National Power, I mean a power to Act and do, whatsoever the Nation it
self (being present) might do.

This power in a time of peace is in Parliaments, but in a time of War it ought
to be in the Trained Bands, or such as are worthy to be Entrusted to Act for
them; For in a time of War the National trust is not to be put in Councels but
in Armies, (I mean the defensive Trust) Councils may be dissolved by the
Adversary or sudden commotions, whilst if Armies stand and be faithful, the
Nation is upheld; but if Armies be dissolved, what becomes of Councels? Again,
what can Councels do (though they would oppress) if Armies be so faithful as
they will not obey them? On the other side, what can Councels help, if Armies
will be so unfaithful as to cast off good Rulers and oppress the People?
whereas if the people thems ( viz. the trained Bands) or such as are entrusted
to Act for them, do any of this, and there come any prejudice thereby, they may
thank themselves; or they being the People, none else can suffer by it.

Now that the Armies are entrusted to Act and do whatsoever the Nation or
trained Bands being in Arms might do, is very evident: thus,

Judge. 8.1, 2, 3.
The Nation of England is invited to appear in its own defense; the Peoples
leisure will not give way, but they permit these to appear for them; and this
permission is a trust put upon them to Act in their stead.

Thus in the examples before, when Parliament men are chosen, those that are
not present at the Voting, do by their absence permit, and thereby Entrust the
rest to Act for them; Thus also in all Parliaments, Councels and Committees, as
is said.

Now if this kind of permission be a trust in all other cases, why only to be
excepted in this? which is so much the more a trust, by how much men's goods and
lives are more immediately concerned in Armies then in Councels: It is evident
therefore that the Armies are entrusted for the People (or Trained Bands,) to
do in their absence whatsoever they being present might have done, and
therefore are a National power, such as the Parliaments heretofore, which have
Authority to remove evil Rulers if they see cause.

4. Otherwise the Militia would tend to more hurt then good.

Esther. 4.14.
If the Nation it self be in Arms (or those that Act in their stead) then though
the ruling power would oppress them, yet they can do nothing without the
Armies, and the Armies are the Nation whom they would oppress, who will rather
remove such rulers then oppress themselves; So that the chief end of the
Militia is to Act as if they were the Nation; And therefore if the Army had not
done that which the Nation in Arms might undoubtedly have done, they had
overthrown the end of their own being, and in neglecting their duty had been
more for hurt then good.

5. Otherwise the Parliament had been inexcusable in commissionating of them.

The lives and fortunes of a People are subject to the Military force that is
raised upon them; therefore the Ruling power can by no means be excused, if
they do not permit the People themselves to be the Militia (as by their Trained
Bands (or if they cannot attend the service) Commit it to those that are worthy
to be trusted, and do undertake to Act in their stead, and to do for them
whatsoever they being personally present might have done, who (as is already
proved) might have restrained or removed the late Parliament, being but a
ruling power.

By all which it plainly appears what power the present Army had to restrain or
remove the late Parliament.

FINIS.

