ARGUMENTS, Inviting all Faithful Mariners to engage cheerfully in Englands
Honorable and Just Cause, against the Irish Rebels and their Adherents, now
Robbing at Sea, and about to Invade this NATION
NOW my brave Blades, my Brethren and Seamen, if ever, now is the time for you
to stand to your tackle: The great and glorious God of Heaven calls you forth
to bring you to honor and purchase, for you are to fight the Lords battle by
Sea, as your Brethren in the Army have done by Land, and you have as much cause
to expect happy and speedy success as they, for these reasons.

I. The cause you fight for is the same, though the Element be changed, and God
is Lord of the waters as well as of the Land, being Lord of all Hosts, and God
you know has owned the Cause by many signal Victories

II. The Persons against whom you are to fight, are of the same stamp, Sons of
Belial, Plunderers, Murderers, and Irish Rebels, and among them such as have
been already conquered by your Friends, and being let go upon their words,
not any more to molest this Nation, do now most basely and perfidiously break
their Parrolls, and some of them being English men, and of English extractions,
do Vypour like, endeavor to tear out the very Bowels of their Mother, and
therefore God cannot in justice bless them, but being a most just God,
commands you now to go and scourge them.

III. Observe their baseness and treachery, how they take all, as well Friends
as Foes, honest Merchants, trading for their Countries good, and to get a poor
Living by much hazard, are by their depredations spoiled, and them and their
Families thereby exposed to ruin; nay, and many of them too, as Malignant as
themselves; so that you may see their resolution is to make all Fish that comes
to Net with them, and if they presume to do such outrages now, when as they
have but a little power, what will they not do if they Conquer you.

IV. Consider, that the Nation unto which such wicked Imps are joined, is not
only a Barbarous, but a bloody people, witness their unparrallell'd
butcheries of hundreds, of thousands, some few years past, of poor
Protestants, Men, Women, and Infants, Massacred by them in Ireland, the cry of
whose Innocent blood is got into Heaven, and has prevailed with God to move
the hearts of his sons, the Seamen of England with much compassion to go forth
in glorious Fleets (the like whereof England never yet set out) to take
vengeance on those Murderers and Traitors, and to procure unto your selves and
your posterities, eternal Fame and Glory.

V. Take notice that your enemy is dying already, and does as dying men do,
take hold of any thing for preservation, any twig, any Nation, French, Spanish,
Irish, though Atheists, Papists, etc. These be the broken Reeds on which they
lean, by which you may perceive their lost and forlorn condition.

VI. Ponder seriously, what is like to become of you and yours, in case such
wretches should prevail, who are like to be your Governors: what a mixture of
vatlets are to have dominion over you; really, no people under the Sun would be
such slaves as you would be unto these Caniballs:

And now I have shown you your enemies, a generation most horrid, most
deformed, enough to raise courage in any, but a Female heart, to pull down,
subdue, and vanquish, such vile creatures: I Will now show you your Friends who
are in Conjunction with you.

I. Heaven and all the powers therein, the Almighty God, even the Lord Jesus,
at whose very word only, Armies fall backward; a God Omnipotent, Omniscient,
who can take away the courages of your enemies, and give animosities to you.

II. A Parliament that have continually advanced your wages, endeavored to
make you a free people, that you and yours may live cheerfully, who has eased
you of Councell-Tables, High Commission Courts, Star Chambers, Monopolies, and
Tyranny; whereby your comforts increase, and sorrows decrease, a Parliament,
who watching night and day, that you may sleep, who take all the care that you
may have all ease, the freest Parliament that ever England had, now freely
Voting the same righteous things, they would have formerly done, had they not
been over Voted by a corrupted Party; so far from being a selfe-seeking
Parliament, that they lend vast sums of money out of their private Estates, to
carry on the Work, least it should miscarry, and all for your welfare: That
after the Conquest, when you shall return each with a prize or two, you may
sit down with joy, recounting the great things God has wrought by you, and
for you, and that by the wise dome and direction of this Parliament.

III. You have all the godly of the Land who night and day pour forth their
prayers to God, to ruin your enemies, and to bless and protect you, and to
prosper this very design in hand, and therefore you have strong, nay assured
hopes of Victory.

IV. You have the Laws of God, Nature, and Nations, on your side, all teaching
and requiring to defend your own, and to protect the Innocent, to relieve the
oppressed Brethren.

V. Lastly, you have a glorious and Victorious Army, vigilant to defend the
Land, in case of Invasion or Insurrection at home, while you are preserving the
honor of the Seas abroad, who are so forward to manifest their former love to
their Country, that in case you need and have a mind to it, will venture their
persons with you at Sea, as some of you have bravely done with them on Shore.

By all that has been said, it seems to me, that Heaven and Earth conspire to
Crown your heads with Laurels, and to fill your hearts with courage.

The Enemy braggs that you intend basely to betray your trust, and to adhere to
them; But they are of their Father, who was a Liar from the beginning; we know
you are confiding men, therefore we trust you with all our strength and wealth,
we have had experience of your past fidelity at Goree, where you did something,
and much more would have done, had others actions jumpt with your desires.

And now laying aside the thought of your Enemies, not worthy your remembrance,
recollect the dignity of your Associats, a good Cause, an Almighty God, a
faithful Parliament, a Victorious Army, all the godly in the Commonwealth,
and the Laws of God, Nature, and Nations, and then see what an heap of
arguments you have, able to bring courage into the hearts of Cowards.

If you will be valiant, you will be happy, if you will neglect your duties,
God will stir up others (a little Gideons Army) to perform the, business:
God never wanted Instruments to do his work: but blessed be God you have
means enough, if you do not trust too much in them, which sin of all things
you must beware of, and put your confidence in him who then will protect you.

More might be said, but more were loss of time, now it is a time for action;
methinks I see your forward steps advance for Service, each to out-sayle his
Fellow, I fear each Line seems to retard your passage, therefore I Will say no
more, but wish your prosperous gales, a flying Enemy, or a submitting one:
God's gone before you, follow close, the Chase will be successful, All Is your
own.

London, Printed in the Year, 1649.


