AN-APPEALE From the Court to the Country.

Made by a Member of Parliament lawfully chosen, but secluded illegally by my
L. Protector.

Printed, MDCLVI.

AN APPEAL From the Court to the Country; Made by a Member of Parliament
lawfully chosen, but secluded illegally by my L. Protector.
AFter so manifest a breach of our Laws, so uncoulorable a violation of our
Privileges, so heinous an invasion of our common Right, and freedom, and so
public a defiance given to the whole Nation, it is more then time for us to
prepare for our defense, and to raise new bancks against that violent
inundation of Arbitrary power, which h^^ broken in upon us, and is ready to
bear down all before it, and against which our ancient, and great Charters,
our fundamental Institutes have been too insufficient to make resistance. I
confess it were much to be wished that the necessity of our case had not
compeld us to refer this present Controversy to the arbitrament of the
Sword, we having so lately past through all the calamities of a civil War,
but the axe being laid to the root of our Liberties, and all other means
proving ineffectuall for our redress, like Physic too weak for the body of
the Patient, there remains only this choice either to submit our selves, and
posterity perpetual Slaves to the uncontrollable dictates of one man's will, or
by our strengths united to break his bands a sunder, and cast away his cords
from us. Neither ought we to distrust that the appearance, and owning of the
Divine providence will be less signal for us in this so necessary and just
assertion of our Liberties, then it showed it self when we engaged upon far
slighter provocation against the late King.

To omit his forcible encroachment upon our inherent right when he assumed the
style of Protector (for I will appeal to the breast of every individual
Person, how far his assent attended him to the Throne) let us take a short
view of his Government, that from thence we may gather, whether in any one
instance he has labored the Peoples satisfaction for his injurious
usurpation of it.

And our Prospect hereof will be the fayrer, if we begin it from his division
of the Land into several Cantons; and placing over them those lawless M: Gs:
which have usurped likewise the Civil power, over-awing the Judges in their
Circuits, countenancing the causes of their own faction, reversing the decrees
and verdicts of our public Judicatories; and like the Sultans Timariols
farming the Land out at 60000. pounds a Month, or what higher rate he shall
hereafter please to set it at. Nor shall any man under these rigid tax Masters
retain any longer a property in his estate then this our Grand Signeur shall
please to continue him in it. From whose illegal exaction of the Tenths of all
compounders estates and of whose else he pleases we may readily conclude,
and in the following parts of this discourse shall make clear how great danger
from this kind of economy hangs over all men though of different Principles
and interests for them.

This severity therefore exerciz'd upon them from a groundless surmise (for
ought that yet has bin made appear to us) of their general guilt, should
timely awaken us to our defense, least like those in Poliphemus his den,
whilst we weakly and faintly hoping that it will be our fate to survive the
fury of the Monster, or to linger out a wretched life beyond our fellows,
shall at the last find our numbers so decreased, and our strengths insensibly
abated, that it will be to no effect to oppose.

That the condition of those who have faithfully in their several stations
discharged their Consciences in vindicating the Liberties of the People, is at
this day the same with those who in that quarrel formerly withstood them, you
shall need for a proof no further to look back, then to the late Secluding
the major part of the Members lawfully returned, who upon their address to the
remaining Number for their admittance, were by them referred to the Council,
from whom they received answer, they had refused none that to them appeared to
be men of Integrity, and according to the qualification in the Instrument; and
therefore his Highness and the Council had given order to the Soldiers at the
door to keep them out.

Let us stay a little to compare this infringement of our Privileges with that
of the late Kings in demanding the Five members, which as it was in it self a
violation most unjustifiable, so was it by him afterward confessed to be, and
recanted; yet even at that time there was a pretense of a particular Charge
preparing against them, notwithstanding which allegation in excuse of that
insolent fact, it was by all men judged to be the highest Indignity that ever
was offered to that supreme Court. But how infinitely this transcends it in all
its measures, considering the Number of the persons secluded, the insufficiency
of this general Charge, and how far this does reflect upon the Honor of the
respective Countyes, whose Delegates they are, to have their Messenger
reproachfully dismissed like David's by Hanun, Sam. 2.10. How nearly this want
of Integrity does entitle us to the crime of Cavaliers, and consequently to all
that ruin that has attended them, a man of a very short sight may easily
discern.

And that none for the future shall be deemed worthy to bear Office in the
Commonwealth, but such who have interests distinct from the Peoples, and own
their sole and immediate dependence upon the Protector, that none shall be
reputed Men of Integrity but the corrupt part of the Soulderie, and their
abettors, that this qualification of the Instrument admits so great a latitude
of interpretation that the most zealous Patriots and incorrupt assertours of
the Peoples rights may stand secluded by it, I presume this our last repulse
has put out of dispute; and that those who have not streyn'd at this Gnat, may
swallow a Camel, and from this scandalous objection, this odious defamation of
our Persons names proceed to derive a title to our estates we have too great
reason to fear: Especially if we recollect at what vast charge he has
maintained those Fleets and Armies for these two last years against the
Spanyard; for it is most confessedly true that when a period was put to the
long Parliament, and in their dissolution to all our hopes of future Fieedome
and felicity, there remained in Banck above Four hundred thousand pounds, all
which in these late inglorious Enterprises has been expended; and the Nation
at this day above two Millions in debt. And how far future exigencyes will
drive his Highness to make use of the estates of such persons whom he deems
men of no integrity we may find when these arreares come to be audited and
paid.

It was then little thought (for into what heart could it en^er?) when we
opposed our selves against the illegal exorbitancyes of the Court, that a
Person of so great austeritie of life, so frequent in bewayling the miseries of
his Country; so sedulous and vigilant in his Charge; so tender of the Laws,
and Libertyes of the Nation, and so narrowly searching into all the hidden
corners of arbitrary and encroaching Policy, should at the last arrogate to
himself a jurisdiction far greater then that with which he contested, or
then yet any King of England ever assumed. It was then little imagined that the
time should come, when this great Champion of the Laws, should stop the Laws
in their due course and imprison the most eminent of the long Robe for
declaring the express letter of the Laws; That this defender of Liberty of
Conscience should discountenance and restrain men in the exercise of their
Conscience; and this rigid maintayner of the Rights, and Privileges of
Parliament, laying aside his now useless religicall vizard, subvert the very
foundation of that venerable Assembly; To this I say some years past, though
the tongue of an Oracle had praedicted it, we should slowly have given credit.

But that these pleasant dreams might no longer delude us, he declares how
that our Laws are not the Card by which he is to steer, and that it were
Ridiculous, and foolish; nay brutish to imagyne that those Charters which our
Aneestours with so great hazard and expense contended for, were now any longer
fit to be maintained as the square of his Government, that in the intercourse
pretended between his and the Divine Spirit, whatsoever should be dictated to
him he would observe as his rule, and we ought to follow as our blind guide;
That he had rather be led by necessity and providence (his own Creatures)
then by the wisest, and best instituted Laws of the world.

That our supreme Magistrate is irreprehensible, that his actions ought neither
to fall under the examination of the People, or be liable to the Censure of any
Court whatsoever.

We do not, we cannot believe that the whole body of the Army are so
forgetful of their engagements, that they contribute so much as their assent
to this sad oppression of their Countrymen; or that those who so strenuously
opposed it in the late King, can now favor tyranny under the disguise of
another name. Nay we rest assured that these praevarications have averted the
hearts of many whom the impostures of his zeal had allured and seduced.

For if these Maxims must now be tamely subscribed to; if a select Number of
his favorites must bear the title and authority of a Parliament, if persons
legally returned must with a hateful brand upon their Reputations be secluded,
and rendered incapable for the future (which is a conjecture not at all
improbable) of trust in the behalf of their Country; how much better had it
been for us patiently to have borne the yoke of Kingly Government, then after
the effusion, of so much blood, and the expense of so great Treasure, after all
our glorious victories over our Enemies to bear this man's yoke, and that
heavier, and more insupportable then either we, or our Forefathers ever
endured.

This our Condition therefore manifesting a necessity for the defense of our
Libertyes, let us first implore the assistance of that Almighty arm which has
showed it self so strong for Us, and then with holy confidence in our
invincible Ayder, jointly and unanimously oppose our selves against this mighty
oppressor, and all his Apostate adhaerents, and no doubt but God will scatter
the bones of all them that encampe against us, and we shall put them to shame;
because God has despised them, Psalm. 53. verse. 5.

FIN.

