THE ARRAIGNMENT OF THE ANABAPTISTS Good Old Cause, With the manner and
proceedings OF THE COURT of JUSTICE Against him. Also the Names of the JURY and
WITNESSES that came in against him, WITH THE SENTENCE Of Death pronounced by
the Judge before his EXECUTION,

LONDON, Printed by John Morgan, 1660.

THE ARRAIGNMENT OF THE ANABAPTISTS Good Old Cause, Together with the manner
and proceedings of the Court of Justice against him.
UPon the 11th of February last the Judge came to the place of Judicature,
attended with Knights, Sheriffs, and Justices of Peace, and other Officers. The
Commission was read for the Trial of the Malefactor, who being brought to the
Bar, the Jury was impannesd, and sworn to give in a true Verdict, according to
the evidences. The Clerk stands up and calls them by their names: and the Crier
names them, Mr. Conscience, I. Mr. Obedience, II. Mr. Honor-king, III. Mr.
Honesty, IV. Mr. Duty, V. Mr. Faithful, VI. Mr. Trusty, VII. Mr. Law, VIII.
Mr. Truth, IX. Mr. Love, X. Mr. Unity, XI. Mr. Justice, XII. Good Men and true
stand together and hear the Charge: and looking upon the Prisoner as the Judge
commanded, they were charged to take notice of every Passage and Sentence, that
should be read by the Clerk in the Indictment, and thereupon to give up a true
Verdict: Silence being made, the Prisoner is commanded to hold up his hand,
which being done, the Clark read the Indictment as follows. Good Old Cause,
thou art here Indicted by the name of Good Old Cause alias Rump, of the City of
Government, in the County of Kingshire.

That thou did assume unto thy self in the yea^ 1641. the name of Supreme
Authority, and dids^ Levy a War against the chief Magistrate, and did plot
and endeavor to draw all other thy Fellow Subjects to do the same, and cause
there to bring in their Estates, to defend and maintai^ thee in the pursuance
of this War, and dids^ make a General over Horse and foot to be the Captain,
and did settle a Militia in every County of the Land against the Commission
of Arr^ ordered by Law: and then thou, the Good O^ Cause, did lay Siege
against the strong Citie^ Castles, Towns of the Land, to batter them dow^ or
yield unto thee, and had set Battles fought against the good people of the
Land, in which Battles, many a brave Lord, Knight, and Gentleman, was Slain, or
taken Prisoner by thee, a^ kept a long time in prison, and did put out O^ders
and Ordinances, to force and compel men (...) serve thee, which if they denied,
thou did either plunder them of their goods, or secure them as ill affected,
or both; contrary to all Law in that case made: provided and also that thou,
the Good Old cause, did impeach thy Fellow Members Treason (when thou thy
self wast the greater Traitor) and cause them to be put to death, either by
Hanging them, Killing them, or Shooting them to death, upon no good account,
but only to exercise thy Power and Will over the people: also thou did borrow
infinite Sums of money of the good people, and never paid any of it back again,
and those that would not lend thee any, thou compelledst them to it, and
moreover imposed upon the people, pole money, Taxes, Free Quarter, and Excise,
besides the voluntary subscriptions of the men of thy own judgment, to the
utter undoing of the people in general.

And moreover thou did in the year 1647. exclude thy Fellow Members out of
the House, for many years, because they would not Act with thee, in those
things which were contrary to Law, Reason, Honesty, Faith, and a good
Conscience: and thou, the Good Old Cause, did add unto all thy wickedness
and abominations, a greater than any of the former, in betraying thy trust, and
committed that unparallel regicide against thy true and lawful Magistrate, unto
whom thou wast bound by the Oath of Allegiance, to defend and maintain to the
uttermost of thy power: also in the same year thou did Execute thy malice upon
three Noble persons in one day, which were far better and honester than thy
self, also thou the Good old Cause did make an Ordinance, that this Land
should be a Free State, and that no Writs should run in a single Persons name,
and that there should be no more Kingly Government, because thou said it was
burdensome and dangerous.

And that there should be no House of Lords for thou said it was useless.
And thou the Good old Cause did banish the regal Line, and made it to be
Treason to give them their proper titles, or that any one should pray for them
in their Pulpits, or aid and assist them with any money, meat, victuals, or any
other necessary thing; and moreover thou the Good old Cause, did put to sale
all Crown Lands, Jewels, Houses, Manors, and Plate, belonging to the chief
Magistrate, with the felling of his Woods, demolishing of Castles, in every
part of the Land; besides Bishops, Deans, and Chapters Lands, which was not a
little. Also thou did pluck down and deface all the royal arms in what place
soever set up, whether in Churches, on Ships, or Halls, and did place thine
own instead thereof. And moreover thou the Good old Cause, did break in
pieces the great true Seal of the Land, and made a new stamp to coin money
withal, with this circumscription God with us when the Devil was in thee.

And also thou did impose a Tax, of 90 thousand pounds a month for several
years upon thy fellow Subjects, and made them to subscribe to an engagement
to be true to thee, and made thy self rich by undoing others of thy Brethren,
by plotting and fomenting things against them which they never knew, so that
thou becamest hateful to the eyes of all, and for thy ill actings and grand
misdemeanor was turned out of doors for the space of six years and upward;
after all which by thy craft and subtility, thou the Good old Cause, did wind
thy self in again, and by the power of thy strength and policy, did defend
and justify thy doing to be agreeable to Laws, and would not be
contradicted nor entreated by the request and petitions of the said truly good
and honest; but after all, thou, the Good old Cause, did out of malice, and
envy, and invettered hatred against the honorable City, by whom thou have been
much engaged to, and from whom thou have received so many gratuities, favors,
and bounty; thou have in thy rage plucked up their posts, took off their Chains,
took off their Gates, and broke in pieces their Percullisses, and sold the iron
for naught; all which rebellions, Murders, Robberies, and Perjuries, have been
by thee committed contrary to the peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, his
Crown and dignity.

Judge then said to the Good old Cause, what say thou for thy self to this
Indictment? Guilty or not guilty?

He answers, not guilty, and puts himself upon trial, then the Crier said, if
there be any can give evidence against the Prisoner at the Bar, let them come,
for he stands upon his deliverance: at which words came in Mr. Loyal, and
witnessed saying, My Lord this fellow, the Good old Cause, came in a very
formal way, and promised to act good things, and seemed to be a very holy man,
but his heart was full of hypocrisy, and deceit, My Lord, he branded all the
true hearted to their Superiors to be Malignants, and those that would not
give or bring in their money at his order were called delinquents and
ill-affected, My Lord he would acknowledge no power above himself, he valued
the shedding of blood no more then the cutting off a dogs head, he maintained
Rebellion, gave out Commissions to kill and slay, justified Hothams actions,
and yet killed him at last, made an excellent protestation, a seeming holy
Covenant and performed neither, jugled with the People, that they took him for
a God. Mr. Bishop can tell you more of him my Lord, I am but a Servant, what
say you Mr. Bishop against the Prisoner at the Bar? My Lord, he was an utter
enemy to us, he thrust us out of our places, and would not suffer us to sit
with him, he branded us by the name of Popish Prelates, he took away our Means,
our Livings, and came and dwelt in them himself, put us in prison, and some of
us to death, took away Churches liveings, and sold them to others, yea my Lord
he took the very plate out of the Churches, and melted it, and coined it into a
new stamp, here is Mr. Duke my Lord a very noble person can evidence much more
against him then I have done.

Mr. Church a witness.

Judge speaks.

Mr. Duke or Lord what can you say to the Prisoner at the Bar? My Lord, this
Fellow called the Good old Cause, did plunder me of all my Estate, sold our
Houses, that whereas I had 5000 a year, and kept a good house for all comers,
and maintained good Hospitality, relieveing the poor, and setting whole Towns
at work, did Homage to my Sovereign when my turn was, he took my Estate away,
bestowed it upon some of his own friends; to one, he gave a thousand a year, to
another, five hundred a year, to another, two thousand a year, and has left me
nothing for my self, but one hundred a year, to maintain my self, my wife, and
children, in our old age. And besides after I was turned out of doors I was
glad to compound for what I had, and to fly into France to hide my self from
being imprisoned, and to save my life, for he killed as many as he thought good;
Here Is Mr. Citizen can witness many other things.

Judge,

Mr. Citizen, what can you say against this Prisoner at the Bar? My Lord I can
testify against him, that he imposed great Taxes upon us, and if we did not
pay him as soon as ever he demanded them, he either quartered Soldiers upon
us, or else fetched away by violence from us, ten times the worth of the Tax he
required: he also hindered the trading amongst us, kept us bare of money, and
made us pay Excise for Meat and drink, and laid insupportable Taxes upon us,
yea we gave him the meat out of our mouths.

And my Lord, he even out of mere spite, stole away the Gates and Chains of the
City, and made Bonsiers of the Posts.

And whereas his name was called the Good old Cause before, it was afterward
called the Rump. I think my Lord, because he would not be known, for he did
hide himself sometimes, being ashamed of his doings, and then again would wipe
his mouth and come to light. Mr. Countryman that is here my Lord can give
evidence also against him.

Judge, Mr. Countryman, what can you say to the Prisoner at the Bar?

My Lord, this Fellow did send Troops of Horses into our Houses, and Inns,
which eat up all our Hay, Oats, Beans, and Peace, yea my Lord he suffered his
Horses to go into the Medows, and Corn Fields, to eat it, tread it down and
spoil it, and when we complained against him for such abuses, he would do ten
times worse; take the bread and meat out of our mouths, eat up our Bacon, kill
our Poultry, and Geese, and Ducks, and Lambs, and Hogs, insomuch that we had
not any thing left for to keep us alive, and kept us out of our beds, that we
never had a good nights rest; and if we refused, presently he would set a
Pistol or Sword against our breasts, and force us to give what they required:
Mr. King can say much more against him then I have spoken.

Judge, Mr. King, what can you say against the Prisoner at the Bar? My Lord, I
can say thus much of him, that he is as great an adversary to any of my name,
as can be, yea he is a mortal enemy, for he hates their being, place, name, and
person, he covets their Houses, Manors, Lands, Jewels, Plate, Apparel, and
what not? He endeavors to make them but titular or none, he will break the
oath of Allegiance, he will promise to make them glorious, and yet fight
against them, keeps no fidelity, sends out Armies, as if it were to bring him
home from Councillors, but with intention to kill him, yet disparageth him of
breach of trust, intrudes into his Militia, takes away his revenews, reviles
them that adhere to him, gave out Commissions to Rebel, and to secure all
orthodox Ministers, and put out of their Benefices, and to bring in Anabaptism,
Independantism, Quakerism, Ranterism, and all manner of profaneness, and
Poperism, and all things to confusion. Nay my Lord, I can say of this Fellow,
the Good old Cause, that he put to death a Gentleman of my name, who was the
most eminent and famous in the World for Prudence, Goodness, Love, Chastity,
Godly life, good Government, Piety, Religion, Justice, and a Defender of the
Faith, and banished his dear Wife and Children, and would not suffer them to
enjoy the smallest Cottage he had, or allow him the least maintenance that
might be; yea, forbid strangers in other Lands to supply him in his necessity,
and to relieve his wants: My Lord, he is the greatest Rebel that ever was heard
of, all which he did under the Title of doing Reformation: Yea my Lord, he made
Plots himself, and then discovered them, and we suffered for it.

My Lord, we can bring many witnesses more of this ill life and name, if it
please your Lordship to call for them.

Judge, Here are witnesses enough: Jury, have you heard what these Gentlemen
have evidenced against the Prisoner at the Bar? if you have, give it in, if you
be agreed of the Verdict; what think you of him, is he guilty or not guilty?

The foreman Mr. Conscience, answers in the behalf of the rest, guilty my Lord.

Then the Judge speaking to the Prisoner, said, Good Old Cause, thou have heard
what all these have witnessed against thee; what can thou say for thy self,
why Sentence of Death should not be pronounced against thee? then the Good Old
Cause, spoke as follows.

Good my Lord, I am accused wrongfully, I am not the Good Old Cause that they
took me to be for; My Lord, it stands upon me now to speak for my life, I
beseech you my Lord here me a little.

Judge, What have thou to say? My Lord, only two or three words, which is this:
I was summoned (...) appear by a Writ, near unto Hell, where I have sat above
12 years, and done righteous things, and many Noble Acts, worthy to be recorded
to all posterity; for I went about to make a thorough reformation from the
narrow Seas, to the Irish Bogs. My Lord, I put down all Organs in the Churches,
and break in pieces all the Windows painted with the twelve Apostles, or any
other Image or Saint in them; I plucked down all Crosses that were on Church
Steeples, and in Market places, especially that great Idol the Cross in
Cheapside, which caused many to bow to it: I caused the word Saint to be
blotted out of the Weekly Bill of Mortality, neither would I have any one to
name or call a Street, or Church, by the name of St. Laurence Lane, or St.
Lawrence Church, or St. Bartholomew Lane, or St. Bartholomew Church, or St.
Thomas, or St. John, or St. Peter; but Laurence Church, Laurence Lane,
Bartholomew Church, or Bartholomew Lane, or Thomas Church, or John's Church, or
Peter's, and the like, because it was superstition and popery my Lord; and I
ordained Fasting days, because of Profaneness and Hypocrisy; and I ordered
feasting days of joy, for the good things I did, and for Victories, and would
not suffer that Christmas day should be kept, no nor Easter, or Whitsuntide,
nor any other Holy Day beside. And my Lord, I gave commandment that no Milk
should be sold between nine of the Clock in the Forenoons and four in the
Afternoons, on Sundays, and that none should bake any Puddings abroad on
Sundays, or set on their pots, or send for Beer or Wine out of Doors, or walk
and travel abroad; and I gave the guifted people both Men and Women, to
exercise their gifts in Conventickles, and places where they would; and I gave
a toleration in Religion to weak and tender Consciences.

And for these things, and many more my Lord, they called me Roundhead, yet
that did not at all grieve me, for I had a just and lawful war: Yea my Lord, I
put the Land into a posture of defense against the Enemies of the Church, and
punished offenders in it, and did Justice upon them, and would not suffer them
to live; and I made my Orders and Ordinances, make Null all Acts whatsoever had
been made, by any Tyrant whatsoever heretofore, and I countenanced the good,
and justified their doings, and gave to some of them according to their
deservings, to some I gave 100 l. 200 l. 300 l. or a 1000. for their good
service, and to some I gave the like Quantities and Sums of money a year, for
gratuities and favors, some have had 1000. a year, some 1500. and 2000. a
year, and I thought it very well bestowed on them, and indeed they deserved it,
for they ventured their Lives for it: My Lord, I cut down Woods, and made it
Arrable Land, being most needful, and plucked down old Castles, and great
Houses, which were only Dens for Thieves.

And at last my Lord, I plucked down the Gates, Posts, and Chains, of the
Enemies City, and that they should not offend us any more, because they were a
hindrance to the intended work of Reformation.

Judge, I have heard thee a long time with patience, but before I pronounce
Sentence against thee, I remember I heard in the Indictment against thee, that
thou wast Indicted by another name beside the Good Old Cause, and that was the
Rump, what is the reason that thou have changed thy name?

The Good Old Cause answers, My Lord, it is true my Lord, I was called the Rump
at the latter end; but my Lord, when I began the work of Reformation first, I
began it in Aries, which signifies the Horn, and it went on as you may remember
with great encouragement and resolution, and having made such a good progress
in it; that it came to such a successeful conclusion, and I found such
sweetness in it, that in the end I was called the Rump: My Lord, I did not
change my name because I would run away, as 'twas reported; for although I was
absent six years, yet I showed my Face again with cheerfulness and courage,
and when I was put to the worse a second and third t me, I was not ashamed of
my self, or my name, but I acted vigorously to the life in defiance of all the
mal^cious Adversaries; and therefore because my last Actions were the best, I
thought that name most suitable to me, and every one was so taken with the name
Rump, that they rejoiced exceedingly over it, and clean casheered my former
name the Good Old Cause, and baptized me by the name of Rump, in Fire, Water,
and Salt. This is the very truth my Lord, that I have told, but for those
evidences that have witnessed against me that I did such things, My Lord, I did
do it to set forward the work of Reformation, and I did very good service to my
Country, that I acted confidently, and upon good grounds, therefore good my
Lord be good unto me.

Judge, Good Old Cause, alias Rump, the Evidences against thee are clear and
manifest, and these excuses are vain, for thou have not performed the trust
given thee in charge, and unto which thou have sworn to be true and faithful;
therefore hear thy Sentence.

Good Old Cause, alias Rump, speaks; Good my Lord before you give Sentence
against me, let me speak one word, it is this; during this sitting my Lord, I
acted with the most, and with the strongest party; for when I saw which party
got the upper hand, I thought it safe to keep my self to that: whether it was
in voting, or by hands: My Lord, I cried out for Justice upon delinquents, and
made them come to composition I forced the Cavaleer party 20 Miles off the City
when occasion served: My Lord I carried as fair an outside as ever did any in
the world, that none could epsy it.

Therefore good my Lord be good to me, and let me have a Psalm of mercy.

Judge says, The Law affords not the benefit of the Clergy to such as thou
art, therefore whereas thou have been indicted by the name of the Good old
Cause, alias Rump, and have been found guilty of all the blood spilt since
1640. broak thy oaths of Allegiance, committed and maintained Rebellion; given
out false Commissions, framed an unnatural War, killed thy fellow Subjects,
spoken evil of Authority, art a Regicide, and for these and all other thy
forenamed Treasons, have been arraigned, and have pleaded not guilty; and being
put upon the trial was found guilty, and have no more to say for thy self. This
is the Law, thou shall be carried back to the place of Execution, where thou
shall be hanged up by the heels, with thy Rump upward, fleed, and salted, and
thy Head downward, thy Members, and Bowels, cut out, and thrown into the fire,
thy Limbs cut off, and hung upon the Gates of the City; and lastly thy Head
shall be cut off and set upon a pole, and thou shall be carried back to the
place of Execution upon a Sledge, where thou shall be hanged up by the heels,
with thy Rump upward, fleed, and salted, then cut off, and thrown into the
fire, thy Members also shall be cut off, and burnt with thy Bowels.

Thy Limbs also shall be cut off one by one, and hanged upon a pole at every
Gate; and lastly as thou hangest, thy head shall be cut off, and set upon (...)
Bridge Gate of Government, the rest of thy Carcass shall the Fouls and Beasts
devour. Gaolor take away the Prisoner, and see that execution be done upon him.
After this Sentence, the Crier made an O Yes, every man to depart home.

And so the Court broke up, and the Judge arises with the Gentlemen and
Officers that were present, and the Servants went before them with sounding of
Trumpets, and the People with their loud clamors, and shouting, and
acclamations, did heartily rejoice, and gave thanks to the Judge, for giving
such a just judgment upon the Malefactor.

FINIS.

