AS YOU WERE, OR THE NEW FRENCH EXERCISE OF THE INFANTERIE, Balanced with the
Old.

Printed in the Year 1674.

Public war (one of the effects and salaries of sin) began to show its
ouglie face among the sons of men not long after the general Deluge. The art
used in it then was certainly rude, bot time and Industry having a little
polishd it, Military Exercise was, no doubt, one of its products, if it was
not coetaneous with it. We may therefore after so many ages look for some
additions to drilling and training, bot not for any new sisteme of Exercising.
To invent new arts is difficill, to add to them, is feasible, bot to perfect
them not so easy a work. Many things are convenient that are not necessare,
bot nothing is necessare, which is not convenient, though not at all times, and
in all places. So it is that many motions that were usual with the Graecians
and the Romans in their exercises of war have been thought fit to be
retaind in ours, which for my own part I never thought to be necessare in the
modern art of war, and on the other hand, some motions frequentlie used and
practisd by them, would have been perhaps both fiting and needful for us to
have Imitated, and yet we have totallie neglected them.

There is sometimes an absolute necessity to add to former inventions, and
thus it was purlie necessare for Tacticks and Masters of the art of war, to
add to former exercises, words of command, for the Dexterous and comely
handling and mannaging Hand-guns, and Harquebuses, Carabines, Pistols, and
Muskets, all of which acknowledge Gunpouder to be their Mother, which four
hundredth years ago was not heard to make any noise in the world. There be
likewise many things brought in fashion by curieous wits, that serves more for
show then for use, and very convenient, I think, it sold be so, provided, a
necessity of practice be not imposd upon them. For I am none of those, who
think that none of the old customs of war sold be alterd, nor am I one of
these severe men, who hate all Novelties, nay I look on all these old
soldiers, as little better then old fools, who will not hear of any new
Introductions in the art and discipline of war, for no other reason, bot
because they never saw them before, for by this argument, if they had livd
three ages ago, they had rejected the whole art of Gunnerie, concerning all
kinds of great Ordinance and artificial Fireworkes, which suceeded the
Machines and Engines of war used in the days of old.

Bot, notwithstanding of all I have said, I am obligd to tell you, that more
then two years ago I red this French Exercise in its original, and had the
very same sentiments of it. that I still have, these for some particular
reasons I publish now, which I did not at all intend to do then. I look upon
it as a very ingenious piece, and the birth of a fertile brain; yet, whether
all the several parts of it be necessare, nay, whether they be all convenient,
whether they be all for use, or for show, or for both, or whether some of them
be for neither use nor show, may by these, who are not so great lovers of
Innovations, as to fall out with old customs, be both questiond and examind,
without making either schism in the Church, or sedition in the State. Each
section of this French Exercise, that I look on as singular I shall set down
apart in the Translators words, and immediately subjoyne an animadversion to
it. Nor shall I be troubled, that my Reader reject all my Observations as
impertinent, because I know, he has as much liberty to adhere to the French
Author in all things, as I have taken to my self to dissent from him in some
things.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
The Major takes the Muskers, and forms the front of the Battaillon.

The Adjutant ought to be at the head of the Pikes, which he draus up in the
same manner in the rear of the Muskets, at twenty paces distance, if he have
ground sufficient.

Animadversion.
IF the Major form only the front of the Baitaillon, who forms the Rear,
the wings, and the middle of the Battaillon? And since this Author exeems the
Major from the care of the Pikes, I conceave he may with very much case form
the whole Body of the Muskereers, and perhaps the Author intended it so, bot
then, I say, he has worded it ill, in calling it the front of the Battaillon,
for a Battaillon is a Body consisting of several parts. If any say by the
front of the Battaillon he means, The Musketeers, and by the Rear the Pikemen,
I can not be satisfied with that answer, because the Musketeers of a Regiment
drawn up in a Body by themselves, make a Battaillon apart, and so do the
Pikemen another Battaillon, each whereof has a front and a rear, till they be
joynd in one Body, and then they make indeed, bot one Battaillon.

In the nixt place, I say, An Aid Major, or Regiment Adjutant is not to be
found every where, though the French have him, neither is his Office or his
help either so requisite or so necessare in the marshalling a Battaillon, as
this section of the exercise seems to import. I am so charitable as to believe
that, there is none of the Field Officers of a Regiment, Colonel, Lieurenant
Colonel, or Major, bot may form and draw up a Regiment or Battaillon without
help, if they do bot indifferently understand their charges, and if any of
themselves be askd the question, I presume, nothing bot modesty will move them
to contradict me.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
No Company shall enter into the Field, bot in its order, and six deep in
file.

Animadversion.
SIr, you say well, six deep in file, in regard it has been appointed to be
so of a long time by two of the most Christian Kings, for though the French be
liberal enough to lend fashions to other nations, yet they have been content
to borrow this from a colder Climate then their own. But since ten deep was
the custom of old, and six deep is now the custom, how come you to
introduce an exercise, that can neither be performd by the one nor the other?
Do not you heerby reflect on all these famous Generals both of your own and
other nations, who by making their Infanterie either ten or six deep, bard
entrance to this Quarter file exercise of yours, which you now bring with so
much pomp upon the stage? For my part I think, if ever any fancy of it enterd
their heads, they have lookd on the Theorie thereof as loss of time, and the
practice of it as pure fopperie. Nay, who knows, bot some of them have thought
that to draw up a Battaillon sixteen deep, and exercise it by half Quarter
files, might be a suitable object of an Idle man's speculation. But assuredly,
never one of them conceavd it to be either necessare or convenient for this toy
of yours, to make so great an alteration, as to change the deepth of their
Battaillons, which in all armies belonging to one Prince, or one State, sold
be constantly one and the same. And, Sir, to cry up the singularity of your
device, I shall tell you, that the ancient Groecians drew up their foot
Battaillons sometimes eight, sometimes sixteen in file, yet had not so nimble
wits as to exercise by quarter files. To come to our own times, The great Earl
of Strafford orderd his Majesty's Infanterie in Ireland to be eight deep in
file, which certainly so judicious a person, as he was known to be, did for
good reasons, if one whereof had been to exercise by quarter files, he had lost
perhaps much of that reputation of military skill, which fame has so
bountifully bestoud upon him.

Sir, in this place, you appoint the Companies to be six deep before they come
to the Field, and in another place you order the files to be made eight deep,
when they are in the Field. Bot since you must exercise sometimes at six
deep, and since you will exercise sometimes at eight deep; I shall make no
bones to tell you, that it will be much more convenient to exercise your foot,
one day at six deep, and another day, at eight deep, then to put your
Captains to a double labor in one day, first to make their Companies six
deep, before they come to the Field, and then eight deep before they go out
of the Field. For to change the deepth of files in the Field purposlie for
quarter file exercise, is not so easy a work, as perhaps you at first imagine
it to be, my reason is this. In a file of six deep you have bot three leading
men, these be, The Leader of the file, The Leader of the half file, and the
Bringer up of the file. In a file of eight deep when you are to exercise by
quarter files, you have four Leaders, and four Bringers up, for divide a file
of eight men in quarters, there will be in each quarter a Leader, and a Bringer
up, these must be leasurlie chosen as fit persons to obey the words of command
of that harsh exercise, which needs not be so punctuallie done in exercises at
six deep. Now the stations of these files at eight deep cannot constantly
be keepd by the same men, because of sickness, forloss, and many other accidents
which may withdraw them for a time, and their stations being changd, or other
men put in their rooms, you shall not miss to meet with an embarras, the
danger whereof you need not fear in exerciseing at fix deep in file, it being
neither so knottie nor difficill as the other.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
The Captains or Officers must lead their Companies with a Pike in their
hand. The Lieutenants must be at the rear of the Pikes, when there are
Ensigneys, and when there are none, they are to place themselves at the head of
the Pikes, when they are drawn into Battailla.

Animadversion.
THe Author tells us not, whether the Officers shall carry their Pikes
shoulderd, as the Spaniards do, or comported as the French used to do. Nor
shall I tell my opinion, whether Pikes, half Pikes, Pertisanes, or Canes be
most proper for Commissionated Officers. Only I shall desire the Lieutenants
to take notice, that this Master, fixes them all with the Pikes, whether in the
front or rear of them, makes no matter.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
The Companies being come to the designed ground, shall file of one after
another, and pass upon the left wing of the Pikes, and in the first place,
shall leave their Pikes in the Field of the batle, and the Muskets shall pursue
their march, till they have joined the front of their Muskets.

Animadversion.
ONe of the hardest lessans ever I red. As it is worded, I shall never reach
the meaning of it. Companies; which the Author himself acknowledges to consist
of both Muskets and Pikes, shall pass on the left wing of the Pikes. Dura
Dictio, who can understand it? Companies, which consist of Pikes and Muskets,
shall in the first place leave their Pikes in the Field of batle, First, a
Company is no more a Company, bot a part of a Company, when the Pikes are
left behind. Nixt, how can the Pikes be left in the Field of batle, since that
must of necessity be the Field of batle, where both Muskets and Pikes of the
whole Regiment are formd in one Battaillon. Bot take head. Muskets shall pursue
their march, till they have joynd the front of their Muskets. Where are we now?
O, for an Interpreter, I am affrayd, The Printer has wronged both the Author
and the Translator. Must Muskets or Musketeers pursue their march till they
join the front of their Muskets? O Sense, where art Thou? In what corner of
this Paragraph has thou hid thy self? I am sure, I cannot find the. Bot lest
we offer to wrong the Author, let us hear him speak in his own language,
Both in his general and particular Exercise of the Infanterie, he has these
formal words. Les Compagnies arrivants dans le Champ de Battaille, desileront
consecutivement, and iront passer sur l'aisle gauche des Piques, and auparavant
laisseront leurs Piques dans le Champ de battaille, and les Mousquets suivront
le front des Mousquets. It is not in my power to English this otherwise, as the
Translator has done. Yet I would gladly be so just to the Author, as to
think, his meaning were this: When the Companies arrives at the place of
Battoll, they shall leave their Pikes behind at that distance spoke of, (to
wit, twenty paces) and the Musketeers shall march, these of one Company after
another, on the left hand of the Pikes still forward, till they come to the
place appointed by the Major for the front of the Muskets. And when all this is
done, we may ask, why may not the Musketeers of each Company leave their
Pikes and march straight in a direct line to the place appointed for them, and
not be obliged to march in an oblique line upon the left wing of the Pikes, but
more of this heer-after.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
So soon as the last Company has joined the Battaillon, the Adjutant shall
file of the Pikes by quarter ranks, to go join the Battaillon, on the same
front of Muskets on the left wing, and without loseing time, as soon as the
last quarter rank is arrived, he shall face them to the left in Demi rank, to
the left the Muskets, and to the right the Pikes, and by a word of command
(March) the Pikes and the Muskets shall possess the same ground, after which
he shall give command (As you were) taking care that in all these moveings, a
Sergeant shall be at the wing of each division to prevent their falsifying.

Animadversion.
NOr is this Paragraph renderd so smooth, as it sold be, or, as I think, as
it might be, for assuredly the Adjutant must not face the Pikes by Demirankes,
bot by whole ranks, and the Muskets by the left hand Demiranke, the whole
Pikes to the right hand, and the Demiranke of the Muskets to the left hand,
that, so by the word of command, March, they may interchargablie take up one
another place, for so I understand the Author, when he says, It sera saire (a
scavoir, l'Aide Major) a gauche au Demirang de lagauche des Mouquets, and an
droict, aux Picques. The Adjutant (says he) shall make the left Demiranke of
the Muskets face to the left, and the whole Pikes to the right, and then by a
command, march, etc.

But, let the translation be as it will, To the thing it self, I say, that in
forming a Battaillon consisting of two wings of Musketeers, and one Body of
Pikes, any of the ordinare ways used formerlie seems to me as formal, and
more easy, as the way prescrivd by this French Author. And when the Major has
drawn the Musketeers in one Body, And the Adjutant the Pikemen in another
twenty paces behind the muskets, according to the Anthors direction, I shall,
by his permission, say, the Pikes may join the Battaillon of muskets, with
sever words of command, in a shorter time, and with less trouble and embarras,
then by the way mentiond by the Author.

I say, with fewer words of command, thus. The Author will have the Pikes to
march in four several Divisions (for so I understand his quarter ranks) and
this requires four several words of command, for to every quarter rank he
must say, march. When the Pikes have marchd to the left hand of the muskets
(for there the Author will needs have them to be) They must face to the right
hand, and that requires the fifth word of command. Immediately after the half
of the muskets must be orderd to face to the left hand, and that is the sixth
word of command. Then the half Body of muskets, and the whole Body of pikes
must march, or rather countermarch to take up enterchangeablie one another
ground, that is the seventh word, And lastly when muskets and pikes have
changd their grounds, they must be orderd to face, as they were, and that will
be the eight word of command. Bot I say four words may serve the turn first,
let the half ranks of muskets face to the left hand, that is one, nixt, let
that half rank of muskets march, till there be a competent Intervall made
betueene it, and the other Demiranke of muskets, to receave the pikes, that is
the second word; thirdly, order the pikes to march all in one entire Body
from the rear, and take up that Intervall, that will be the third word of
command; lastly, cause the forsaid Demiranke of muskets face as it was, and
that is the fourth word of command; and then your Battaillon is formd without
more words.

Secondly, I say, in a shorter time, as thus: To march in a whole body is a
work of quicker dispatch by three parts of four, then to march in four
several Bodies or quarter ranks, as the Author orders the pikes to do, before
they join the musketeers. Secondly, a body greater or smaller, will twice as
soon march twenty paces in a straight and parallel line, then forty perhaps
fifty in an oblique or croocked line, as these pikes must do, which stand
twenty paces behind the Battaillon of muskets, and must march to the left hand
of them. Now, the Author in this section says, without loosing time, therefore it
is, that I propose a way that loses less time, then this way of his.

Thirdly, I say, The Battaillon of muskets standing in one Body, and the
pikes in another twenty paces behind the other, (as the Author appoints them
to be.) The pikes may be receavd in the middle of the Battaillon of muskets
with much less trouble and embarras, then by the way prescrivd by the Author,
thus: Let the Demirank of the Battaillon of muskets face and march to the left
hand, (leaving the right Demirank standing firm) and so make an Intervall,
this is done without any embarras at all, nixt let the whole Body of the Pikes
advance at one time, and take up that intervall, and this is likewise done
without any embarras. Thirdly, the Demirank of muskets, which did face and
march to the left hand, being commanded to face as they were, do it also
without any embarras at all. Bot when the Pikes that stand on the left hand of
the whole Battaillon of muskets, and the left Demirank of the muskets are
orderd to face one to another, and then by a Countermarch to take up one
another ground, there will be some shouldering, some justling, and some
clashing of arms, even among the best trained Soldiers, and that I call,
Embarras.

The French Kings Officers are obliged by this Section to marshall their
Regiments according to its prescriptions, and no other way, Bot these Officers
and Drill-masters who receave no French pay, may try either this way of the
Author, or the good old way, or a third, if they please, and then retain any
of them, they find most convenient for themselves, and most easy for their
Soldiers.

Lastly, This Author requires a Sergant to be at the wing of each Division, to
prevent their falsifying. Observe here, that a Regiment standing in Battle,
there are two divisions of muskets, and one of pikes; Two Sergants being
required to attend each division, will be six that are appointed for that
duty, In my observation upon the nixt section, we shall see how the rest of
the Sergants are disposed of.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
When a Battaillon is formed, the first Lieutenant shall stand in the rear of
the first division of muskets, and the last in the rear of the last division,
an Ensigney in the rear of the Pikes, with one half of the Sergants, to hinder
the Soldiers from dispersing, or breaking their ranks.

Animadversion.
I Never had so strong a conceit of the usefulness of a Lieutenant in a
Company, or a Lieutenant Colonel in a Regiment, that I need care, where this
French Gentleman place the Lieutenants, whether with the Pikes or the Muskets,
In the front or the rear, nor should I be much troubled, if in imitation of a
wise and a warlike Nation, he should banish them for ever out of all his
Battaillons; Bot indeed, I am astonished to fee him make Lieutenants
Ubiquitaries, for in the sixth section of the way to form a Battaillon, (as I
have observed) he appoints the Lieutenants to be in the rear of the pikes, if
there be Ensigneys, and in the front of the pikes, if there be no Ensigneys,
and consequently still with the pikes, either in front or rear whether there
be Ensigneys or not, Now in this section which I last cited, he orders one of
the Lieutenants to be in the rear of the first division of muskets, and
another Lieutenant to be in the rear of the second division of muskets. Can
two Lieutenants be with the muskets, if all the Lieutenants be with the pikes,
unless a Lieutenant can be in two places at one time? If it be said, the
Lieutenants are to be with the pikes, when the Battaillon is forming, bot when
it is formed, they may be otherwise disposed of, to shun contest, I am content
to be so charitable (though I see no reason for it) to believe the Author meant
so, bot then I say, why takes he so much notice of the first and last
Lieutenants, and tells us nothing where the rest of them shall have their
stations, whether still with the pikes (which most probably he means) or some
more of them then two with the muskets, (which most rationallie he sold have
meant) or that he leaves the rest, except these two, to be individua vaga, to
wander where they please. And indeed, though he do so with all of them, I am
sure I shall not fall out with him for the matter.

In the nixt place, I desire it may be rememberd, that in the eight section of
the way to form Battaillons, the Author requires a Sergant to be at the wing
of each division, which, in my animadversion on that section, I reckond to be
six, in this section he requires the half of the Sergants to be with an
Ensigney in the rear of the Pikes, Now let us suppose there be in one Regiment
ten Companies, these have twenty Sergants allowd them, of these the Author
takes the half, to wit ten, and places them in the rear of the Pikes, and
six on the wings of three Divisions, this is in all six teene, there remains
then bot four of the twenty to attend the rear of the Musketeers, which
being twice as numerous as the Pikes, makes this Division of the stations of
Sergants very disproportionable Sergants formerlie were obliged only to attend
the wings, Bot if the Author does allow as he does, Sergants to be in the rear
as well as on the wings, I shall agree with him, for I have often wonderd, why so
necessare an Officer as a Sergant, sold be pind to the flanks, as I have seen
too often practisd, Bot I will still dissent from him in allowing so many
Sergants for the rear of the Pikes, and so few for the rear of the Muskets,
till he make it appear, that Pikemen may break their ranks, bot Musketeers
cannot,

FRENCH AUTHOR.
The Drums shall be placed on the right hand and the left.

Animadversion.
IF he mean on the right and left hands of the whole Battaillon or Regiment, I
would gladly know, what they sold do there? I sold think it most consonant
to reason (not to speak of practice) that when a Battaillon, Brigad, or
Regiment is formd, every Officer (among whom Drummers ordinarlie are reckond)
sold have his station assignd him in that place, where he can do best
service, whether they be to fight, or to march, Bot to what use Drums shall
serve either on the right or left hands of the whole Battaillon, and in no
other place, when they are either to fight or to march, is a thing not so
easily understood. Bot if the Author mean, that Drums shall be placed on the
right hand and the left, only so long as the Battaillon is Exercising; I say,
he was obliged to tell us, at what distance on the right and left hand the
Drums sold have their stations, for I am sure, The French Drill-masters will
confess, that there be some motions of Exercise, which will not suffer either
Drummers or other people to be within a great distance of either right or left
hand of the whole Battaillon. As when half files are commanded either by half
File-leaders, or Bringers up of whole files to double the front of the
Battaillon Entire, or to the right and left hand by Division, when this word of
command is obeyed, the Battaillon possesses in front twice as much ground as it
did before, bot these half files can not perform this, till they chase the
Drums a great way from both the right and left wings of the Battaillon.

Bot, before I part with this head of forming a Battaillon, I shall take leave,
to say, that I conceave, The Author has not said so much on it, as he might,
at least, not so much as he sold, and consequently that his rules concerning
it are Defective, and because I am obliged to give reasons for my opinion, I
offer these first, he has not told us, what Company sold have the
precedencie of another, that is, where the Lieutenant Colonels Musketeers and
Pikes sold stand, (for I suppose he allows the Colonels the right hand) where
the Majors, where the oldest Captains, where the youngest, and where the rest,
that every one of them may have their due according to their prioritie. This
is a point, wherein there is neither custom nor law of war universallie
observed, it being variable according to the pleasure of the Prince or State,
who wageth the war, or of their Generals who mannageth it. Secondly, he has
not assignd to every Officer belonging to the Battaillon their proper
stations, for though it may be soon known, where the Officers of a private
Company fould stand, so long as it is a Company apart, yet when the several
Companies are incorporated in one Body, the stations of the Officers are
sensible changed, as any who never saw a Battaillon bot in paper, may easily
understand. All he has done in this so necessare a point, is to tell us, where
the Ensigneys, Sergants and Drums, and the Lieutenants sold be, and that in so
confusd and unintelligible a way (as I have demonstrated) that he might better
have said no more of them, then he has done of the Captains, and the three
Field Officers. Nor do I imagine, any man will be so little the Authors friend,
as to say, he needed not speak of these two points, because they are known in
the French Armies, for by that reason he might have held his peace of very many
things mentiond by him in his Book, which were not only known in France, bot
in most places of Christendom, long before his Grandfather was borne.

To support these reasons given for my opinion, I shall say further, that a
Battaillon, Regiment or Brigad (or give it what name else you please) is formd
for one of four reasons. These are, either to be lookd upon and viewd by a
Prince, a General, or some great Personage, or to fight, or to march, or to
Exercise. In the first case it is very proper and convenient, that every
Company be placed according to its prioritie, and every Officer have his
station assignd him according to his Dignity. In the three last cases, those
two points are not only convenient, bot purlie necessare. And therefore I
conclude, a Battaillon is not formd; or not formd as it sold be, where any of
these two things are either omitted or forgot. The Author having with many
niceties formd his Battaillon, as you have seen, proceeds thus.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
The General Exercise for the Infanterie. After having drawn the Regiment
into Battailla, they draw out the files of Halberdeers, which are placed on the
wings of the Battaillon by the following commands. Take care, Halberdeers to
form your files on the wings of your Battaillon. To the right and left by
half ranks draw your files on the wings of your Battaillon, March.

Animadversion.
AFter so much pains in this general Exercise, in giveing us so many motions
many old, and many new, to repeat most of them (except doubling by quarter
ranks and quarter files) in the particular exercise of the foot, can be done,
as I conjecture, for no other reason, bot that in the first he gives us these
he thinks most convenient, and in the second these he conceaves most
necessare; bot why either the one or other, let us a little examine.

To place some files of Halberdeers or Pertisaners on the flanks of the
Musketeers, is no doubt of excellent use, for in our ordinary Battaillons the
firemen ly open on their wings to the Impression of any Cavallerie, especially
Curaseers, Bot our Author sold have appointed them to be strongly armed for
the Defensive, otherwise Pistolls will reach them, before the Horse come within
reach of their Halberds. Bot, I think, he is more to blame, for not telling
us, how many files of these Halberdeers are needful: Nor can he be excused for
giveing command to draw out the files of Halberdeers to be placed on the wings
of the Battaillon, without telling us from whence, or from what place they
sold be drawn. We know not, for any thing he says, where these Halberdeers
are, Bot since he permits us to guess, I conjecture that at first they must be
with the Body of the Pikes, if so, may it not be asked, whether Pikemen will
not serve the turn as well, and if that be granted, and the number of the
files condiscended on, they may be sent from the Body to the wings by two
commands; first, so many files of Pikes face to the right, and so many to the
left. The second, march to the right and left wings of the Musketeers.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
Then they open the files of the Baettaillon. Take heed to your selves in
opening your files, that the right hand file stir not. To the left open your
files to three foot distance March, Halt, To the right.

Animadversion.
WHen the Halberdeers have taken their ground on the wings, must the files of
the Battaillon open? for what reason? To what purpose? I would have thought that
the files of Halberdeers being drawn from the Body to the wings had left a
void place, which was necessare to fill up by closeing the files, bot the
opening them is a mystery, and a greater mystery to me it is, that they are
commanded to open to three foot of distance. At what distance were they before?
perhaps at close order, which ordinarily is reckond to be one foot and a
half, Bot this will not satisfy those who stand strongly for all the Author
says, in regard neither he nor they will be governd according to ancient
custom, and therefore I must come closer up to both him and them, and say, The
files could not be at one foot and a half distance, because the Author orders
them to be at 3. foot distance in the fourth section of forming his Battaillon,
where he has these express words. The Major or Adjutant must observe that the
distance of files (when they are not exercising) is only half a pace
distance, bot when they come to handle their arms or doublings, they must open
to a whole pace; This shall not be contradicted by me. Bot in this section,
which I now examine, the Author contradicts himself, in bidding the files open
to three foot distance, which presupposes them to have been at a closer
order, and this in the section cited by me, he does not at all admit, That by a
pace is meant six foot is clear by the Translator, who in this section
interprets that which the Author in French calls half a pace, to be three
foot. Now, how files who were at no closer order then three foot, shall open to
three foot distance passes my natural understanding. And though it sold be
granted to the Author, that he is not obliged to any old form of exercising,
yet I think he is bound not to disagree from his own form.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
The Exercise of the Musket. Take heed to your selves there in the exercising
your Musket. Lay your right hand on your Musket. Poyse your Musket. Join your
left hand to your Musket. Handle your Match, Blow your Match, Cock your Match,
Try your Match, Lay your two singers on the Pan, Blow your Match, open your
Pan, present. At this command the Pikes charge. Give fire, withdraw your Arms.
At this command the Pikes advance. Take out your Match, return it to its
place, Blow your Pan, Take your Primer, prime your Pan, shut your Pan, pas your
Musket to the sword side. Take your charger, open your Charger with your teeth,
put the powder into the barrel. Draw your rammer, Advance your rammer, Shorten
your rammer against your Breast, put in your rammer into your Gun, Ram hard,
withdraw your rammer, advance your rammer, shorten your rammer against your
breast, return your rammer. Join your right hand to your Musket, poyse your
Musket, shoulder your Musket.

Animadversion.
WHat all these commands serve for, I do not know, since the most necessary
one is omitted, both here and in the particular Exercise for the foot. And
truly if the French Musketeers forget to charge with ball, as well as this
great Drill-master has forgot to give a word of command for it, The most
Christian Kings Enemies may have a cheap market of most of his Infanterie,

In the nixt place, I can observe no new precepts for the Exercise of either
Musket, or Pike, perhaps the former way of using or handling of both has been
altered by the Author, and if so, he was obliged to set down his directions,
and rules how to obey his new way, for without them, his own Disciples may
differ among themselves in the explanation of his new fangle way, as much, as
Mahomets followers, Haly, Ebubequer, Homer, and Osman disagreed in the
interpretation of their false Prophets new Doctrine.

His words for exercising the Musket were used by the French long ago, and yet
are by all, who have laid aside the Muskets rest, (for that requires an
alteration) which, for any thing I know, is now universallie out of fashion,
both because Muskets are made lighter, then at first they were, as likewise,
because use (which Caesar calls rerum Magister) has made them more mannagable.
Bot before I go further, let me speak a few words of Hand-guns.

Though the Musket and Pistol have now got the pre-eminence over all other
Weapons both for Horse and Foot service, yet none of them are of an old
invention. It is about 370. years or thereby, since Swart the German Monk found
out Gunpowder, the mother of all fire engines, after which in a little
Intervall of time followd the invention of the several kinds of Ordinance,
nixt them Harquebuses of Croc, with longer and shorter Harquebuses for
horsemen, and foot Soldiers. Muskets were not heard of (as many think) till
the siege of Regium in Italy 250, years after the birth of powder. Bot for my
part, I believe they be not so old, because I find no mention of them in all
these great Armies of the Emperor Charles the fifth, Francis the first of
France, and Henry the eighth of England, in the years 1530, 1536, and 1542,
nay; nor in that brave Army of Henry the second of France, wherewith he marched
in Person into Germany to assist the Dutch Princes against their master the
Emperor, and that was in the year 1550. or thereby. And which is more, Monluc
the famous Mareshall of France in his Commentaries speaks bot of a very few
Harquebuses for every French Company of foot, and not one word of a Musket in
the years 1330, and 1536, the Crossebow being then much used by the French, and
the Longbow by the English. The Pistol began to come in fashion in the raigns
of James the fourth of Scotland, and Henry the eight of England. Bot to our
purpose.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
Exercise of the Pike. Take heed to your selves there, Pikemen, etc.

Animadversion.
IN his commands for exerciseing the Pike, I find little or no alteration in
most of his words from these used before his time, In the way how to obey these
words, it may be he differ from others, bot he has not told it to us. I shall
advert to some things he has omitted to tell us, bot before I do it, it will
not be impertinent to speak something of that ancient Weapon, the Pike.

The Pike is so old a Weapon, that the several posturs of it have been taught
many ages a go, we have most of our words of command for it from the Greeks.
The Romans made little or no use of it. The Graecians in the days of old, did
admirable feats with it, the Macedonians far greater, and in later times,
the Switsers have made themselves formidable by it. The Grecian Pike for most
part was eighteen foot long. The Macedonian one, was one and twenty foot in
length. Our Europaean Pikes are ordinarlie reckond to be eighteen foot long,
bot in many places they exceed not sixteen.

One hundredth and fifty years ago the Infanterie of our modern Armies
consisted mostlie of these who were armd with long Weapons, which the French
called Long-bois, in which were comprehended, Partisanes, Hallberds, Two-handed
Swords, Axes with long handles, and especially Pikes, they who carried them
were strongly armd for the Defensive, and were called the heavy armed. The
Bowmen, Slingers, and Darters were called the light armed, in Latin, Velites.
Bot Bows, Darts, and Slings, were chased away by Harquebuses, and when these
began to be numerous, they who carried them, were reckond to make the fourth
part of the Infanterie, as at Vienna, when Charles the fifth expected Soliman,
his foot consisted of eighty thousand men, whereof twenty thousand were
Harquebusiers, the other sixty thousand were all armd with long Weapons of
several kinds. Bot after Muskets made a noise in the World, they chased away
Harquebuses, and they who carried them challengd the third part of the foot to
belong to them, and not contented with that, In a short time, they would be
half play makers, nor did they stop there, for now Universallie, Musketeers
make two parts of three of the Infanterie, and in some places I have seen the
Musket usurp the sole soveraigntie of all Weapons in foot Battaillons,
banishing the Pike absolutely, not one whereof I could see in many Regiments.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
Order your Pike. Charge to Horse. Draw your Sword. Return your Sword. Order
your Pike, etc.

Animadversion.
THat which the Author calls present your Pike, The Translator all along
renders it, Charge your Pike, how properly, I can not tell. That which he says
here, Charge to Horse, the original has it present the Pike to the
Cavallerie, and it is like the Author intended not then to charge the Horse
with Pikes, because he immediately subjoyns, draw your Sword, which could not
be done when the Pikemen chargd, Bot my work is with the Author, not with the
Translator. Therefore I say, This French Gentleman does not tell us in what
posture the Pike sold be presented to the Cavallerie, or how the Pikemen sold
draw their Swords, both which he was obliged to do. If Pikes be presented with
both hands, how can these who present them draw their Swords? Perhaps with
their teeth. The ancient custom was, to foot their Pikes, and draw their
Swords over their left arms, Bot whether this Author, means this or another
way, who can Divine, since in it, as in many things else, he is so
superciliouslie reservd? Practice indeed, has taught that posture of putting
the but of the Pike to the right foot, holding the shaft of it with the left
hand, and drawing the Sword with the right, to be too weak to endure the Schock
of Horse, especially Seus d'armes, and therefore many have thought, that a Body
of Pikes having its ranks and files at close order, presenting their arms at
a steadie posture, without drawing Swords is fittest to resist a Cavallerie.
Bot, whether, This Gentleman has brought back the old custom, or invented a
new one, we know not, if he had pleased to speak out his mind, any may to
present Pikes and draw Swords at one time, would have got followers, as well as
other French fashions do.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
Take heed there, the whole Battaillon to present your arms. Musketeers make
ready. The Pikes charge at the same time. To the right, to the right, to the
right, to the right, Half turn to the right, As you were, etc.

Animadversion.
THe Author having taught us the exercise of Musket and Pike, does at full
length teach us Faceings, Doublings, Counter-marches, and conversions, he would
have taught us better, if he had instructed us how, and in what manner we sold
obey some of his new commands. I shall say here in the general, that 64. or
65. years ago another French Gentleman Louis de Montgomerie, Lord of
Carbousin, wrote of all necessare motions of exercise for Bodies of either
Pikes or Muskets, or both, which was done, no doubt, by many, before he could
draw a Sword, and by many, since he went to another World.

Bot I shall not offer to wrong this Author, with whom I have to do, to think,
he imagind all the motions and evolutions he speaks of, to be necessare, it
seems to me, he thinks not so, because, when he has done with his general
Exercise, he gives us a particular Exercise for the foot, which he calls
necessare and ordinare in encounters, Then what are all those mentiond in the
general exercise and not in the particular one, if they be not necessare?
Certainly he asserts them to be at least fitting, and convenient. Whether all
of them be so or not, requires some consideration.

The various and diverfieing alterations of the Authors doublings by Leaders of
files, Leaders of half files, and Bringers up of whole files, by whole ranks,
half ranks, and quarter ranks, to the front and the rear, of these of the
middle to the wings, and of the wings to the middle (which middle, The
Translator renders constantly, The Center, I hope not a Geometrical one) and
both of them Inwards, are, in may be, all of them pretty for show, bot not the
half of them for use. As to the conveniencie of them, let it be considerd,
that those of them that are most for use, are most easy for the Drill-master
to teach, and the Soldiers to learn, whereas these that are meerlie for show,
are more difficill both to teach and to learn.

As to the Exercise by quarter files, I suppose, these Officers who understand
it, or think they do so, will find work enough to instruct their Soldiers
in it, and certainly much time will be spent, before they make them capable to
obey readily and perfectly the several commands, that belong to it. How
little it serves for use, may be known by this, that you must alter the deepth
of your battle, before you can practice it, and the Author himself tells you,
the Battaillon must be eight deep, the reason is clear, because the quarter
of that file, which is composd of six men, is one and a half, and
Drill-masters must not be permitted to devide a man in two halfes. To prove,
that this Exercise by quarter files can not be made use of before an Enemy,
though he be at a great distance, will be needless labor, for I suppose it will
not be denied by the Author himself or any of his Abettors, yea, I think, he
tacitlie grants it, when he says nothing of it in his particular Exercise for
the foot, where he speaks of things necessare and ordinare in encounters. And
yet in former times it has been laid down for a ground, that practice before
an Enemy is the ultimate end of all military Exercises. The ancient Romans (a
people that deserved imitation) exercisd their soldierie every day summer and
winter, yet every point of their exercise was not only frequentlie bot
punctuallie practisd before an enemy, which made the Jewish Historian Josephus
say, that the military Exercises of the Romans were bloodless Battles, and
their Battles were bloody Exercises.

This exercise by quarter files cannot be made use of, bot in these Bodies, the
quarters of whose files terminats in an equal number of men, therefore you can
not exercise by quarter files, when your file is ten deep, as all the
Infanterie of Europe was fifty years ago, because the fourth part of ten is
two and a half, nor can you do it, when your file is six deep, as most, if
not all Europaan foot now are, because the fourth part of six is one and a
half, and yet both ten and six are equal numbers. Let it be a rule to those
who exercise by quarter files, that, That equal number whose quarter terminats
in an equal number, is a number proper for them, and only proper for them,
such are, 8, 12, 16, 20, 24, 28, 32, 36, 40. Bot the nixt equal number to any
of these will not serve their turn, a 10, 14, 18, 22, 26, 30, 34, and 38,
because the quarters of all these terminates in an unequal and od number, or
rather in a number and the half of an unite, as the quarter of 14, is 3, the
quarter of 22, is 5, the quarter of 26, is 6, and so of all the rest.

These who intend to make use of this exercise for show (for I hope, it
pretends to nothing of necessity) had need to keep constantly the same men
in these same ranks and files, wherein they were, when they were first
exercised that way, for if any of them be changd from their former stations,
The Drillmaster shall have a new work to begin again with them. As by
example, The first and second men in the file make one quarter of it, The third
and fourth make the second quarter, The fifth and sixth make the third, and the
seventh and eight make the fourth quarter of the file. Now, if the men who have
stood (it may be) six or seven days in one and the same place of the file
have cund something of this abstruse Doctrine, that is lecturd to them, do not
change them or their stations, If you do, your former labor is lost, you must
begin again, because you have neither the Leaders nor followers of quarter
files, that you had before. It is not so in the old and ordinare commands of
exercise, the performance whereof is with much less difficulty. And truly in
this quarter-file exercise, as the Author descrives it, Officers would not only
be of a quick apprehension to understand all the hard words of command used in
it, bot they would likewise have very tenacious memories to retain them, and
these who have not, I sold advise to exercise by book, bot then what shall
become of the Soldiers that cannot read? And though they could, yet have no
lessons writ for them how to obey these difficill commands. Indeed, I would have
lookd upon it, as a charitable act of the Author, and yet no more as what he
was bound to do, both to have set down rules, how all his new orders sold be
obeyed, and figures representing them all to the eye. This, all Tacticks and
Masters of exercise before him thought themselves obligd to do, In this he had
done himself much right, for then he had not left the rarities of his
Invention to be misunderstood by the weak apprehensions of vulgar capacities,
who cannot reach his meaning. I profess ingenuouslie, that after some study,
I fancy I have the Ideas of these motions or notions (call them which you will)
in my head, bot nixt morning I am to seek them, nor can I find them, till I
find my Book, and then I must study them de novo. Let other Officers,
Drill-masters, and Soldiers have as much brain as they will, sure I am, they
have got work enough cut out for them. And that Reader of a Country Church
who durst not hazard to read the names of Shadrach, Meschah, and Abednego, for
fear he sold not pronounce them distinctlie, bot gravelie called them the
three Gentlemen with the difficill names, would rather have quitted his office,
then adventured either to give or receave these hard words of command, of this
exercise. Take two of them for example. Quarter files in front and rear take
care, To the right and left, Quarter files of the front and rear, double your
ranks in front and rear upon the quarter files of the Center on the wings,
March, march. And within a little. Quarter files in the Center take heed to your
selves? To the right and left, Quarter files in the Center double your ranks in
front and rear, on the quarter files of the front and rear, inwards. March,
march. Certainly, these words are so long and so harsh, that they require not
only a nimble apprehension and a ready tongue, bot also good lungs, that they
may be pronouned with one breath, and with a loud voice. And whether a ready
obedience to them be very easy, if we can not judge, we may at least guess,
and hit right enough.

As to the conveniencie of much of this general exercise, I desire to know,
what conveniencie, what delight, what pleasure in a thing, that is very
troublesome to a Master to teach, more troublesome to a Scholar to learn, and
of no use at all, when it is both taught and learnd? Exerciseing of Soldiers
sold render to the lookers on an inward content of mind, to see their
compatriots expert and ready in feats of arms to withstand and repel the
violence of malignant Neighbors, that would disturb their peace at home, bot
little content they can have, to hear an Officer command that which puzles his
Soldiers so in the obedience, that he must be glad to bring them to the
posture, As they were. Indeed, I confess, it will be no small matter of
ridiculous sport, to beholders, who love to be merry with a mischief, to see a
desperate Drill-master, stamp, stare, swear, look like one frighted out of
his wits, and behave himself like a man something more then half mad, when,
neither by words of his mouth, nods of his head, gesticulations of his body,
nor grimaces of his face, he can get his Soldiers either one way or other to
obey these commands, which most mercieleslie are imposed on the poor
Drill-master himself to pronounce, without any methood or rules how to teach
performance to his Soldiers; Just as, that inward sweet delight, which
Spectators expect to enjoy by seeing Tragical and Comicall events of bygone
times represented to the life before their eyes, is turned to a loud and
confused laughter, when these on the stage act their parts foolishlie, and
impertinentlie, notwithstanding all the endeavors of the Master of the play,
and the prompter to the contrary. Bot it will not be amiss to examine one or
two particulars of this general exercise.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
Half ranks take care to close with your files. To the right and left Demiranks
close to your files, March. Half file-leaders take care to double the ranks on
the wings in front. To the right and left half file-leaders double your ranks
in the wings in front March, march. Bringers up make good your siles as you
were, march, march. Half Bringers up take heed there. To the right and left,
half file Bringers up double your ranks on the wings in the rear, march,
march. File-leaders make good your ranks as you were, march, march. Half
file-leaders take heed there. To the right and left half file-leaders double
your ranks in front inward. March, march. Bringers up make good your ranks as
you were. Half file-bringers up take heed there. To the right and left half
file-bringers up, double your ranks in the rear inwards, March, march.
File-leaders make good your ranks as you were. March, march. Demiranks take
heed there. To the right and left by Demiranks regaine your distances, march,
halt, to the right and left.

Animadversion.
IF any old Drill-master had been standing by the Author, when he commanded
Demiranks to close to their files, he would have concluded, that the nixt
command would have been one of two, either to make a conversion, whole, half,
or quarter, or for Demiranks to open to their former order. Bot this old
Drillmaster would have been much deceived, for he sold have heard nothing of a
conversion, nor sold he have heard Demiranks orderd to regaine their
distances, till twelve commands were given and obeyed, Besides the word, March,
fifteen times repeated. In his exercise by quarter files, he does worse, for
there, after he has orderd the files to close by Demiranks. He gives 33. words
of command before he orders the Files to take up their former distances, beside
the word, March, 47. times repeated. For my part, I am so shallow, that I
cannot so much as conceive how a body of men can feasiblie, handsomely, I had
almost said possibly obey any one of these twelve commands when either Filos
or ranks are at close order. The old rules of exercise required open order, or
open open order, bot ancient and approved customs are too weak bars to
confine this Authors unbounded conceptions, yet I think they sold be limited
by his own rule, which is, that when the Battaillon is exercised, The Files
shall be at six foot distance

FRENCH AUTHOR.
Exercise by quarter files. To the right by quarter files double your ranks in
front, march. To the left by quarter files double your ranks in the front. To
the right by quarter files double your ranks in the rear. To the left by
quarter files double your ranks in the rear. To each of these commands he
subjoyns, as you were. Then follows, half file-leaders take heed there, To the
right half file-leaders double your ranks in front, etc.

Animadversion.
WHat a strange sally is this? First with some trouble and some loss of time
to alter the deepth of the Battailla to no other purpose bot to exercise by
quarter files, and before he had given five commands concerning it, to run
full speed back to the exercise by half files, which was sufficiently done
by him before, for in this place you shall hear him give these same commands,
and in these same very words for ranks to be doubled in front and rear by
half file Leaders, and half file Bringers up, that he gave, when the
Battaillon was six deep. Why this repetition? Is it to let us see, he can
exercise by half files when the Battaillon is eight deep, as well as when it
is six deep? Who doubts, bot he can do it though the Battaillon be two and
thirty deep? Is not then this exercise by half files out of purpose, and a
little impertinent, when he promises Exercise by quarter files? And is not an
ayrie repetition of these some things and words he had given us before, a
Battologie? Unless there be a mystery in it, which I cannot comprehend, And
yet I sold think, military Exercises sold not be misterious. I wish once
more, that the Author or some of his Proselites would write a Commentary on
this new Exercise of his.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
Particular Exercise for the foot, for things most necessare, and ordinary
used in encounters. Take heed the whole Body to present your arms. Musketeers
make ready. The Pikes charge at the same time.

Animadversion.
I Can hardly be induced to believe that all that is containd in this
particular Exercise be necessare, much less most necessare, or if some of them
be used in encounters, I conceave, it must be done on extraordinary occasions,
and not ordinarlie. Nor do I imagine the French Generals will be persuaded in
any encounter to double their files by either Demiranks of the wings, or yet
Demiranks of the Body. If they do, they have good luck, if they put not
their Battaillons in an inextricable confusion, then which an enemy can desire
no fairer advantage.

As to that, that the Pikes sold charge at the same time, that the Musketeers
make ready, the original has it, present their Pikes, which the Translator,
(as I observd before) renders, charge, I know not, to what purpose, Pikes sold
either present, or charge, when the Musketeers are either making ready, or
giving fire, unless they be comd within the length of their Pikes of an enemy,
nor do I think it convenient they sold, for it is neither a necessare nor an
easy posture for Pikemen to keep their Pikes presented, the whole time they
are advancing toward an enemy, which I suppose both they and the firemen are
bound to do, though all that while the Musketeers are either making ready, or
giving fire.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
To the right, double your ranks in front, ranks as you were. To the left,
double your ranks in front, ranks as you were. To the right, double your ranks
in the rear, ranks as you were. To the left, double your ranks in the rear,
ranks as you were.

Animadversion.
THis way of doubling ranks mentiond here is done thus. The second rank
doubles the first, the fourth, the third, and the sixth doubles the fifth for
what use this doubling serves, let these tell, who are more in love with it,
then I am. Is it necessare and useful in encounters? I trow not, nor am I
bound to take this Gentleman's word for it. But waveing that question, I
affirm, The Author has committed two gross errors in this one Paragraph.
First by mentioning only this way of doubling ranks (after he had promisd to
give us the Exercise of foot in things necessare and useful) he prefers it to
any other way of doubling ranks, whereas it may be done with more conveniencie
and advantage by making either Leaders of half files, or Bringers up of files
to double ranks. My reason is, because, though when by the last two ways ranks
are doubled, the files of these ranks are at a closer distance, yet the ranks
doubled keep the same distance they had, bot by this way of the Author, not
only files are at a closer distance, bot the ranks doubled are at twice as
great distance, as they were before, and so the more unserviceable. The truth
is, the most advantageous way to double ranks is to make the last three half
files by right and left hand double the three ranks that stand before them.
Entire, or, (as this Author calls it) on the wings, for thereby, you not only
keep both your ranks and files at the same distance they were at before their
doubling, bot also you possess twice as much ground in front, as you did
before your doubling. His second error is, that he orders ranks to double in
the rear, which must be done thus. The first rank doubles the second, the
third doubles the fourth, and the fifth rank doubles the sixth. Assuredly
then, the ranks doubled stand with their faces to the Drill-master, bot the
ranks doubling, turn their backs to him, and stand still with their backs to
him, for against this ridiculous posture, the Author has provided us with no
word of command either before or after the doubling. Bot to strike home, the
necessity of doubling ranks in the rear, must needs arise from the news you
have of an enemies approach in your rear, In this case, you will resolve
either to leave him, or stand and fight him. If the first, I pray you, trifle
not away your time, in doubling ranks either in front, or rear. If the second,
that you mind to fight, then, I suppose, you will face your Battaillon to the
rear, whether you do this by a Demi tour, (which is the best way) or by a
Countermarch (which is not so good) or by a half conversion, (which is the
worst of the three) is not the question here. Bot the face of your Battle being
changd, that which was your rear is your front, and what was your front is
your rear, and consequently your Collor's and Officers must change their
places and stations. If then you think it fit, that ranks double, you may do
it, without bidding them double either to front, or rear, for by what I have
said, you may see, that ranks must all wise double to the front, bot never to
the rear. If you be please, to consider this rightly, you will perhaps
conclude with me, that all the Authors doublings of ranks in the rear, either
by this may prescriv'd in this section, or by Leaders of half files, or
Bringers up of files (whereof he speaks in his general exercise) are not only
needless, useless, and inconvenient, bot redundant, to call them no worse.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
The whole Body take care to Countermarch. To the right by ranks Countermarch,
March, halt to the right. To the left by ranks Countermarch. March, Halt, to
the left.

Animadversion.
WHy not a Countermarch by files as well, as by ranks? The one is as necessare
every bit, as the other. And if he had said, that neither the one nor the
other was necessare, or yet ordinarlie used in encounters, I sold not at all
have contradicted him. Bot the Author in his general Exercise speaks of
Countermarches by files, as well as by ranks: So do some others who write of
exercising, bot I wish that seeming difference were expunged out of all their
Books, for it does bot puzle a young Soldier when he hears or reads of two
several Countermarches, one by files, and another by ranks, and if his
judgment be not subtiler then mine, he will never distinguish them. And indeed
they are bot one thing, files cannot countermarch bot ranks must do it too,
nor can ranks countermarch, bot files must do it likewise. Imagine a regiment
of a thousand men drawn in battle on a Field, whereon they may march a
hundredth in breast, That Body is drawn up ten deep in file, and so there are
one hundredth files, and ten ranks, It were superfluous, nay, ridiculous for the
Colonel of that regiment, to bid the ten ranks march, or yet the hundredth
files march, because the one cannot move, but the other must move also. It is
the very same thing in a countermarch. And therefore in exercising, Officers
sold say no more, bot, To the right, or, To the left hand, Countermarch,
without mentioning either file, or rank.

Countermarches in the days of old, were on some occasions thought useful,
till the force of Gunpowder made the performance of them before an enemy
dangerous, and consequently, the command for it, something Impertinent. The old
Graecians, and other nations too, made much use of them, in their bodies of
foot, which were sometimes eight, very often sixteen deep, as also in their
bodies of Horse, which were four, five, eight, and sometimes ten deep. There
were three kinds of those Countermarches, The Macedonian, The Laconian, and the
Persian, which was also called the Choraean. All these three are still used in
our Europaean Exercises, bot seldom or never in encounters for any thing I
ever faw or heard, till I read it in this Author. The different ways how all
these three Countermarches are performed, are known well enough to ordinare
Drill-masters. Bot this Frenchman speaks bot of one kind, nor does he tell us,
of which of these three sorts it is, or if it be of a fourth of his own finding
out, and therefore we know not, whether by his Countermarch, He will have us to
win ground, to loose ground, or keep the ground we have.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
Take heed to make a quarter Conversion, To the right a quarter conversion.
March, Halt, To the left a quarter conversion. March, Halt.

Animadversion.
WE must suppose, when these commands were given the files and ranks were at
six foot distance, for so the Author will have the Battaillon to be when it is
exercised. Bot why he does not order both ranks and files to close to a nearer
distance, before he command them to make their quarter conversion, I do not
apprehend. I know the practice of others in doing it, will be no rule for him,
bot I wish, he had given us a rule how to do it convenientlie and handsomely
at so open a distance, which to me seems so unfeasible, that I conceave the
bringing both ranks and files to some closer order then six foot would be very
needful, before the conversion be commanded, What necessity the Author has
found, to use either half, whole, or quarter conversions before an enemy, or
in what place of the World they are ordinarlie used in encounters, I cannot
devine, till he inform us, what ever-use may be made of them in exercises, I
think, they may be with no disadvantage forborne, when an enemy is near. This
is that Motion which our Scots Drill-masters used to call, The great turn, The
English tearmd it properly enough, To wheel your Battle, The Dutch, Swenget
euch. Whether it be more proper for the horse then for the foot, being it may
be performd in far shorter time and with much less trouble with the first,
then with the last, shall not be debated here.

I shall in this place take occasion to tell you in few words the opinion of
another French Author concerning Faceings, Doublings, Countermarches, and
Wheelings. That is, Louis de Montgomerie Sieur of Carbousin, (whom I once
mentiond before) he was a Cousine of that famous Count de Montgomerie, (whose
sad fate and not fault it was, to kill his Master Henry the second of France at
justing) A great Captain this Louis was, and had served long under a far
greater Captain and a great King too, Henry the fourth of France, I shall
speak first of Wheelings. Before you make your conversion, says Montgomerie,
you must close your files and your ranks, beginning with the files, and when
you have made your conversion, and would open them to their former distances,
you must begin with the ranks, whether they be to open to the front or the
rear, and then with the files, whether they be to open to the right or the
left. As to faceings, he says, it is enough to face to the right hand, or right
about, to face to the left he conceaves may make some disorder, because of the
Soldiers Swords. Concerning doublings, He thinks if ranks and files be taught
to double to the right hand, it is sufficient, for he holds it not necessare
for ranks or files to double to the left, or to double ranks by half
File-leaders, or Bringers up, or yet to use countermarches and conversions. Yet
concludes, it is in the discretion of the Commander to use them all, or none of
them as he pleases. His words are Cela, neantmoins, demeure a discretion. It
is to be observed, that this Montgomerie had seen the Wars of the
Low Countries, when they were hotly managed by the renouned Captains, Maurice
Prince of Orange, for the Estates, and the Duke of Parma, and Marquis Spinola,
for the King of Spain. And in these times, martial Exercises frequentlie
reducd to practice were in Vogue, The Netherlands being indeed Schools of
war.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
Take notice all. Order your arms. The Pikemen rest their Pikes on the ground.

Animadversion.
THe French word is, Reposes vous sur vos Arms. Rest upon your Arms. The
Translator renders it, Order your Arms. The properest English word he can
give. Bot truly I think the French word more proper then the English one, and
the hie Dutch word as proper as any of them, which is stellet ever gevehr bey
den rechten fus. Set your Arms by your right foot. Bot, order your Arms, (to
speak strictly) is too general a word to denote that special posture which
it sold import, for there is no posture either of Musket or Pike, which sold
not be done orderly, and a Pike, either shoulderd, ported, or comported, so it
be handsomely done, is a Pike ordered, as well as when the but of it is set on
the ground. Bot as in this, so in several other motions, I find a penury and
defect of words, which makes some of them signify the thing intended very
improperlie, This may be observed in the French, in the hie and low Dutch, as
well as in the English. In all your doubling of ranks by half File-leaders and
Bringers up, and doubling of files by half ranks, the things intended are not
fully nor well enough expresd by these words which were invented and are still
used for them. As by example, when you say, Bringers up of files double your
ranks to the right hand, this word strictly and properly imports, that you
sold make the ranks double the number, or twice as many as they were, and
consequently, since they were six before, you sold by that command, make
them twelve, Bot when the word of command is obeyed according to the usual way,
the very contrare appears, for whereas they were six ranks before, they are
made to be bot three, the number of men in each of the three foremost ranks is
indeed doubled, bot the ranks themselves are made fever. It is the same thing
in the other languages I spoke of. And suppose, you are exercising a Body of
twenty files, you will say, half ranks to the right hand double your files.
If a man, who never had seen any of these exercises before, were standing by
you, he would assuredly think, you intended to make your twenty files, forty,
bot he shall see just the contrare, when he perceaves that by the performance
of that command, your twenty files are made bot ten, The number of men in
every one of the ten files on the right hand are indeed doubled, bot the files
themselves are made fever by half, And as to this motion, I last spoke of, I
believe, it would be more proper to say, half ranks double the ranks on your
right hand, for thereby, indeed, the ranks which stand on the right hand and
were bot six, are made really twelve, and that is the double number of six.
If you please to consider it a little, I believe, you will find it to be so.

Now, when we say, Order your arms, The Soldiers set the buts of them on the
ground, the Pikemen hold their Pikes in their right hands just against their
right ears, The Musketeers lay their right hands on the barrills of their
Muskets, and so both of them lean on their arms, and all leaning is repose,
therefore it is, that I think, Rest on your arms, is more proper then, Order
your arms, and, set down your arms at your feet, more proper then any of
them. Bot I do not offer to introduce either new things or new words.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
Lay down your arms. The Pikemen stick their Pikes between their two legs.

Animadversion.
BOt, if the ground be so hard, that you cannot stick your Pikes in it, as in
a dry summer, and a frostie winter it will unquestionablie be, I suppose you
may lay your Pikes on the ground, bot if you can stick them, it will be more
handsome, and have the braver show. Bot I mistake the French language, if in
the original which I read, it be not, lay down your Pikes on the ground
between your feet. When Pikemen were formerlie orderd to lay down their Pikes,
they were taught by a turn of the right hand to lay the buts of their Pikes
level with the outside of their right foot, bot now that Monsieur will have
us to lay them between our feet, or stick them between our legs, let it be so,
we need not fall out with him for the matter,

FRENCH AUTHOR.
Be ready to go, a la paille. A la paille. Which they are to do when the
Drum beats a charge, and are to return, when the Drum beats again, with their
Swords in their hands, and holding them above their heads when every one is
returned to his place, and when they are returned. Return your Swords, handle
your Arms.

Animadversion.
WHat a fanfare is all this? To what purpose all this glancing show? what can
the business be? Before this piece was Englished, I read in the French
original, A la paille, bot did not know what it meant in exercise, bot was
hopeful, The Translator would have helped me, Bot in him I meet again with, A
la paille, and with no English for it. So both the Author and the Translator
leave us to our conjectures. For my part, I think it is probable, he intended
no more bot what is usual in exercises, to permit the Soldiers, after they had
laid down their arms, to go recreate and refresh themselves, under the name
of, a la paille, and on the beating of the Drum, to return with drawn Swords
to their other arms. Secondly, A la paille, in French, is as much, as, To the
straw, is in English; therefore it may be, he intended, that, when the Battaillon
is to encampe, and the watch is set, and the Regiment has laid down their
arms, The Soldiers are commanded to go look for straw, and sticks, for
hutting and fuel, And while they are about that work, if the Drum beat, they
are to draw their Swords (in case of a sudden attack) and therewith defend
themselves, till they get back to their other arms. If neither of these two
conjectures of mine please you, you may, (if you think it worthy your labor)
guess your self, the freedom to do it, can be denied to neither you nor me.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
All sorts of change of fileings. Take care in all changeings of filings, that
the siles be of even number, and if there be found any supernumerarie files,
let them be formed into ranks in the rear of the Division.

Animadversion.
IN the first place, what this Gentleman means by supernumerarie files in the
plural number, I do not understand, for I conceave, in the greatest Battaillon
that ever was, or yet can be fancied to be, there will be bot one odd file, and
why that one od file sold be called supernumerarie (even in the singular
number) I know not, od or uneven it may be, bot supernumerarie it can not be,
for I do not believe that any of the French Captains entertains more Soldiers
then these the French Kings allows them wages for. And if they have no
supernumerarie Soldiers, they will have no supernumerarie files; As little do I
understand why od files (if there were any) sold be made ranks in the rear,
for by that mean you shall increase the number of your ranks (which sold be
constantly and perpetually the same) and consequently add to the deepth of
your Battaillon, which must not be permitted you or any under the Prince, or
his General. Suppose you have one od file (which may frequentlie fall out) if
you make a rank of it in the rear of a Division, then you make that Division
seven deep, whereas it sold be bot six. Sure there is less hurt and less
disorder in an od file, then in an od rank. If the Author had said, If there
be any od men in any of the Companies let them all be cast in the rear of the
whole Battaillon, and make files of them, he had (to my sense) have spoke
reason, yet no more then very ordinary Officers have both spoke and practisd
before him.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
Manner of fireing. The best way of fireing, is by rank, when you would fire in
a Parallel line with the Enemy.

Animadversion.
YEs, To fire by rank is not alone the best, bot the only way of fireing, if
the Enemy be either in your front or your rear. Bot if he be on either of
your flanks, you are to face him by these files that are nearest to him, and
then you are to fire likewise in a parallel line with the Enemy, and yet in
this case, the Author must permit us to fire by file, and not by rank.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
For this purpose to do it with less trouble, it is good to do it standing
firm your ground, without any motion, save that, of making the five first
ranks kneel, and let the sixth be the first that fires, then the fifth rising
up, does the like, and so the rest in order.

Animadversion.
I Have seen three several ways how ranks fire successivelie, not to speak of
fireing by three ranks together, the first kneeling, the second stooping, the
third standing, which is not used bot at a dead lift. The first is, when the
first rank has fired, The Musketeers divide themselves in two parts, the one
half marches by the right, the other by the left hand to the rear, where they
are again by their Officers marshald in one rank. This way is troublesome,
especially if the rank be numerous, as in all great Battaillons ranks are, yet
it has been so ancient a custom in the armies of the Estates of the United
Provinces of the Low Countries, that I saw it practisd in the year 1659. by the
Estates Guards at the Hague. The second way is, when these who have fired,
turn to the left hand, and marches down to the rear between that file whereof
they were members, and the nixt file to it, This has far less trouble in
it, and though it can convenientlie enough be done, when the Enemy is in front,
yet it is most proper, when he is in your rear. The third way is, when the
first rank having fired, stands still, the second advances six foot before
the first, and fires, and so the rest successivelie. This according to my weak
judgment, is the best, and has least embarras in it, bot only can be used,
when your Enemy is in your front, observe, that by all these three ways,
whereof I have spoke, you gain ground.

This fourth way which our Author prescrivs seems to me to have two
inconveniences inseparably joynd with it. The first is, you only keep the
ground you have, bot gains none, and in the keeping it, five parts of six of
your firemen look like supplicants, and not like Combattants. The second
inconvenience is, that unless your Soldiers by long practice be habituated to
this New Mode, these who kneel may readily be more affrayd of the bullets of
their fellows who stand behind them, then of these of the Enemy who are at a
far greater distance before them, for the nearer danger is, with the more
ouglie and dreadful aspect it looks. This fear (which is natural to man) may
make Musketeers slow to rise from their kneeling posture, and when they are up,
too slow to give fire. Besides all this, the Author gives us no rule how ranks
shall fire, if an enemy be behind them, it seems, he conceaves Victory is so
entaild to his Masters armies, that they need not provide for a retreat, for
if an enemy chance to be in their rear, I suppose none of their ranks must
kneel, unless it be to beg quarter.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
All the ranks, before the skirmish renues, must be closed up to six foot
distance.

Animadversion.
THe French Original has it, deux pas, two paces. I do not think the Author
meant two paces, each of them of five foot, ten foot is too great a distance
between ranks of Musketeers. I suppose he intended two ordinary steps, and the
Translator has done well to make them six foot. Bot why, close up to six
foot distance? were they ever at a greater distance? I believe, not. I will
once more put the Author in mind of his own rule concerning distances given by
him in the fourth section of the forming his Battaillon, in which he orders the
Major or Adjutant to observe, that the due distance of files (when they are not
exercising) is only half a pace distance, bot, says he, when they come to
handle their arms or doublings, they must open to a whole pace. The like,
certainly, he meant of ranks. In marching, six foot of distance between ranks
of Pikemen is necessare, because the length of a Pike from a man's shoulder to
the but requires no less, Musketeers in marching requires not so much, bot to
keep a Decorum, they must keep alike distance with the Pikes. Since then the
Author has not told us, when ranks either were or sold be at a greater
distance then six foot, and since other Tacticks have requird no greater
distance, why sold ranks, before the skirmish begin (says the Author) renew
(says the Translator) ulose up to six foot distance? And till it be explaind,
to me it is unintelligible.

FRENCH AUTHOR.
When they file of on a Bridge before an Enemy after the loose men have
passed, The Battaillon must be filed of by rank, by the Center.

They must make quarter Conversions, and half Conversions.

Animadversion.
WHy these two commands are joynd so close together, I suppose, be only known
to the Author, and some few of his friends to whom he has reveald the
mystery. Whether must they make these conversions, before they pass the
Bridge, or upon the Bridge, or after they have pasd the Bridge? A very hard
matter to do it, I think, in any of the three places, though no enemy were
near, and yet here it must be done before an enemy. If it be answered, that
this command for conversions is general, and has no relation to the passing a
Bridge, then, I say, The Author placed it ill here, Its proper place had been
where he spoke of conversions both in his general and particular exercise.
What has conversions to do with passing a Bridge?

I have now given the reasons of my dissent from some things of this French way
of exercising the Infanterie. Notwithstanding whereof I think the Authors
invention is to be commended, and I sold have imagined, that most of his
novelties had been practisd only within the walls of Paris, or among the
traind Bands of France, if there be any there, if the title page of the Book
had not told me, they are practisd in the armies of his most Christian Majesty.
Yet for all that, I am of the opinion that since the time the Author wrote this
piece, to this very day, the French Kings armies have been so hotly employed,
that they have had bot little leisure to make use of all his new motions. The
Author might, if he had pleased have made his Battaillon sixteen deep, as well
as eight, and thereby not only have drilld it by quarter files as well, if not
better, bot also have imitated the Macedonian Phalanx, which was constantly
composd of sixteen ranks, and so have represented to his soldiers the form,
divisions, and subdivisions of that Battaillon.

And, because many of his motions are meerlie for show, and since for such a
trifle, as is that exercise by quarter files, he thinks the deepth of a battle
may be changed he might have cast his Battaillon in a Wedge, in a Rhombe or
Diamant, in a Globe or Ring, or in a Saw. And so have represented to his
Spectators, the Figures of Battles used by the Ancients, which to my
apprehension, would have been more delightful to behold then any of his new
Evolutions.

And once more, if the deepth of Battaillons may be alterd, as the several
fancyes of Drill-masters lead them, they may, if the Regiment consist of a
thousand, or a thousand twenty four men (as many of our modern Regiments do)
order their files to consist of two and thirty men, and so their Battaillon
shall be square of men, and with some other rules of the square root, they may
make Battaillons square of ground, doubled Battaillons, and Battaillons large
of front, the art whereof every Drill-master knows not, and yet the sight and
opening up the use of these (though now out of fashion) would be of more profit
and advantage to an attentive Soldier who minds his business, and of more
pleasure and delight to the curieous Beholder, then any new thing any of them
can see in this exercise. Bot it will perhaps be answered me, that all these
things I have mentiond, are old, and this Exercise is new, and Novelties,
without all peradventure, please best.

FINIS.
P. 17. l. 11. for sens, read, S'ens. P. 17. l. 15. for may, read, way. P. 20.
l. 29. for methood, read, method. P. 23. l. 18. for files of these ranks, read
no more, bot files. P. 24. l. 11. for please, read, pleased. P. 24. l. 13. for
leaders of half files, read, leaders of files. P. 24. l. 14. for bringers up of
files, read, bringers up of half files. P. 31. l. 17. for vlose, read, close.


