THE ARTICLES Of Agreement, For the Surrender of the strong and invincible
Castle of Edinborough; the manner of the Lord Genesis Cromwell's playing his
Fireworks before the Treaty, the number of men slain; the taking of the Scots
Roaring-Meg, and 52 Pieces of Ordnance, eleven thousand Arms, 200 Barrels of
Gunpowder; and great store of Match and Bullet. The Lord Genesis Declaration to
the Scots; their marching away with flying Colors; and the Protestation of the
Earl of Castles, and the L. Humby, touching the King and Parliament; with the
Copy of a dissenting Decla^ation against their King, cast into his Coach as he
was coming from the Parliament-hous.

depiction of a (city) gate, illustrating the verse of the psalm PSALM. 118.
Ver. 20. This is the Gate of the LORD;
The righteous shall enter into it.


Dec. 31 1650 LONDON, Printed by R. W. 1651.

ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT; FOR The surrender of Edinborough Castle, with all the
Ordnance, ten thousand Arms, 40 Barrels of Powder, and great store of Warlike
Provision.
Honored Sir,
HIs Excellency the Lord General Cromwell being desirous to use all means
possible, for the reducing of Edenborow Castle, without the effusion of blood,
sent another Summons to the Lord Governor Dundass, for the surrender thereof;
which was again denied: Whereupon Tuesday December. 17 the four Mortar pieces,
and six Battering Pieces played very hard against the Castle, so that in an
hours time, all their Guns, except one upon the main Battery, were drawn back,
and many of the Granado's fell into the Castle, doing great execution:
Notwithstanding which, the Governor caused a red Flag of Defiance to be hung
on the top of the high Tower; but upon playing the last Granado, a most hideous
noise was heard within, diverse being wounded, and five killed; which soon
caused the Enemy to take down their red Flag, and hung out a white one,
immediately sending forth a Drummer, offering to surrender, if they might have
liberty to send to the Committee of Estates; but that being denied, a treaty
was embraced, and Major Aberneth sent out to treat on their behalf; and on
ours, Col. Monk, and Lieu. Col. White, who sat up all night in debate of
Articles; at last, it was resolved as follows:

1 That the Castle of Edinburgh should be surrendered to his Excellency the Lord
Genesis Cromwell on Tuesday the 24 instant, with all the Ordnance, Arms, Magazin,
and Furniture of War thereunto belonging.

2 That the Governor, with the Officers and Soldiers, should march forth with
their Arms, Colors flying, Drums beating, matches lighted, and bullet in
mouth, to such a place as they should make choice of.

3 That the Goods belonging to the Inhabitants adjacent, and others, should be
restored to them.

4 That the competency of time allowed for them to fetch them away, should not
extend above four days, beginning Friday the 19 instant. And for the due
observation and performance of Articles, Hostages were delived to the Lord
General. There is in the Castle 52 pieces of Ordnance, diverse of them large
brass pieces, above ten thousand Arms, and much Ammunition and Provision; a
List whereof I have sent you here enclosed: together with the Lord Generals
Declaration. When our men entered the Castle, they found very little Wines, less
Beer, and not above ten gallons of Water. There marched out about 400
Ministers, Gentlemen, and soldiers, and not above twenty horse.

Edinborough 27 December. 1651.
The Lord Genesis Declaration.
WHereas there is an Agreement of Articles by Treaty, concluded betwixt my
self, and Col. Dundass, Governor of the Castle of Edinburgh, which does give
free liberty to all Inhabitants adjacent, and all other persons who have any
goods in the said Castle, to fetch forth the same from thence. These are
therefore to declare, that all such people before mentioned, who have any goods
in the castle, as is before expressed, shall have free liberty between this
present Tuesday the 19 instant, and Tuesday the 24, to repair to the castle,
and to fetch away their goods, without let or molestation. And I do hereby
further declare and require all Officers and soldiers of this Army, that they
take strict care, that no violation be done to any person or persons fetching
away their goods, and carrying them to such place or places, as to them seem
fit, and if it shall so fall out, that any soldier shall be found wilingly or
wilfully to do any thing contrary hereunto, he shall dye f^r (...) ^^^me; or
any Officer whatsoeve^ (...) ^^al either through connivance or o^, do any thing
contrary hereunto, shall likewise suffer death.

O. CROMWELL.

Since the publishing of this Declaration, we hear that the Earl of Castles, E.
of Bridge, Lord Humby, Sir Jo: Cheesly, and others, have declared against the
King and Royal party, protesting against the proceedings of their Parliament,
etc. The Inhabitants in the West have likewise declared against King and Parl.
their discontents being exceeding great; as appears by this enclosed Paper,
lately cast into their K. Coach; a copy whereof follows.

That by the Laws of God, and Nature, they were bound and obliged to preserve
their Liberties and Freedoms, against all sets and sorts of Persons who
endeavored to infringe the same, and in Order thereunto, were resolved to
shake off the yoke of Monarchy, utterly detesting the Agreement lately made
between the Parliament, and their declared KING, as a thing unwarrantable,
arbytrary, and usurping.

A Lift of the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, etc. taken in Edinburgh Castle.
52 Pieces of Ordnance, viz. The Roaring Meg. 2 Whole Brass canon. 4
Demi-canon. 6 Demi-culverin. 8 Murderers. 20. Sakers; and other small Pieces.
11000 Arms. 7000 Muskets. 1200 Pikes. 500 half pikes, and arms for
Curiseers. 200 barrels of powder. Great store of Match and other Furniture of
War. 700 bushels of meal, Pease flower, and other such like grain.
FINIS.

