The Art of Courtship.

depiction of a woman

depiction of a man

printer's or publisher's device

This may be Printed.

R. P.



Printed for I. Back on London Bridge.

The Art of Courtship; OR, The School of Delight.

Containing Amorous Dialogues, Complemental Expressions, Poems, Letters, and
Discourses upon sundry Occasions, relating to Love and Business: Pleasant New
Songs, and Directions for Courtship and Behavior: And Rules for Carving Flesh,
Fish, Fowl; and cutting up Pastry: Also to distinguish the best Pieces, and
decently to serve a Table after the most Modish and Courtly manner.

With other delightful and profitable things, necessary for the accomplishment
of all Persons.

To which is added, The signification of MOLES, in any part of the Body, in
relation to good and bad Fortunes.

As likewise, The Interpretation of Dreams, as they presage happiness or
unhappiness to Men and Women, in all Stations and and Conditions. Very
profitable and advantageous to all Persons.

Printed by I. M. for I. Back, at the Black Boy on London Bridge: 1688.

THE Art of Courtship; OR, The School of Delight.
An Amorous Dialogue between Thomas and Sarah; Or, The ready way of Wooing.
Thomas. OH my Love, how happy am I, thus accidentaily to meet you! alas my
dear, why blush you? why turn you that face away, on which with delight I could
gaze (would the brittle thread of Life continue) Ages without Number.


Sarah. Ah! how you flatter me now? truly Thomas I did not think you had been
so deep read in the Mystery of Courtship; yet I am too wise to credit all that
men say: Yes, yes, my Mother told me indeed, that men had deluding tongues, and
charged me never to trust 'em.


Tom. Cruel Maid, can you, after all the Expressions of a real passion, which I
have many ways demonstrated, believe that I am in jest or can be false.


Sarah. Nay Tom, I know not but you may, for adad, my Mother says, there is not
one in forty Mile that mean (indeed and good earnest) what they pretend.


Tom. Then by all that is good in you, and my self I swear.


Sarah. Oh fie Tom, nay, no swearing, for I had rather believe you then you
should use any vain expressions.


Tom. And you do believe me real, and that I love you above what words are
capable of Expressing? above all that I can wish or think, referring to things
on this side Heaven.


Sarah. Adad if I thought so, i would tell you more of my mind -- Well if you will
be constant and faithful -- But why do I talk of that? especially if I consider
what my Mother told me?


Tom. Come, come, no more of Ambiguity, let doubts cease, and try my Love;
kindled by a flame as bright as the Planet of the day; a love that is lasting,
and cannot be extinguished by want of Jealousy.


Sarah. If I thought so -- Well, to be plain with you Tom, for I cannot hide it
no longer; if you love me as you say, let us be married as soon as you will,
and then do as you please, as for our Fortunes, you know are but mean, and I am
not insensible of yours; I hate to see a man of your parts pine and whine, come
come, let us make an end on it if it must be so.


Thom. Now you revive me, and as it were call back my fading Spirits.

It shall be as you say, this day shall-be
The happy Nuptial, joyful day to me;
If you consent to be my charming Bride,
All cares i will banish, and while by my side
You panting lie night shall your blushes hide,
Night, that kind coverture of insant love,
Shall make you know how dear, how kind i will prove.

S. I yield, and if a power remain in me,
To make you happy naught shall wanting be.

T. Then let us haste and tie the Nuptial Bands,
Since hearts are joined, we will quickly join our Hands.

A Dialogue between Amyntas and Pricilla; Or, The Willing Lovers.
P. Say, why are you of late so drowsy grown,
why over your face is melancholy thrown

A. The cause is from within, a mighty grie^
That strongly strugles, fain would have relie^

P. Whence sprung it? speak, does it proceed from Love?
Besure it cannot that you will never approve.

A. Ah! fair Prieilla, you have found it now
And what you say I blushing must allow;
It Is over my heart great love does tyrannize,

P. But who is she that could thy heart surprise?


A. A Beauty gay and lovely as the morn,
When Rosy blushes does its face adorn,
And pearly dews over Floras face does shade,
The fairest Creature Nature ever made.

P. Has she no name? who is she? tell me true,


A. Ah, dear Pricilla fair one, it is you.


P. Me! O, it cannot be, I have no Charms
But Nature cast me roughly from her arms.

A. It Is only you can cure my wounded heart,
From your bright eyes was shot the wounding Dart.

P. Do not thus flatter to deceive a Maid,
Whose yielding heart is easily betrayed.

A. No words of course you heart that come and go,
But such as from entire affection flow.

P. Could I believe ye true, on soon should find
That I am to no cruelty inc^in'd.

A. Nothing more joys me, then to hear your name,
Though hitherto I have conceald' my flame?
That it might brighter burn and I be blessed,
When of your dearest self I was possessed.

P. Was I confirmed in this, with joy i would fly
Into your Arms and in your Bosom lie.

A. Mistrust me not thou fairest of that kind,
A Love than mine more true you never can find.

P. I must believe or dare I longer doubt,
Thus arm in arm we will wear our ages out;
Till Death to blessed Elysium us convey,

A. we will my joy, and this thrice happy day
We Will memorize with Festival and play.
And to all Lovers a kind pattern be,
Whilst both our hearts as if in one agree.

The different Effects in LOVE; Or, A discourse between Will and Ned.
Ned. Well Brother Will, how sped you with your Mistress the other day? I
perceive you pusht the matter home; Come, come prithee tell me man, how it
fared with you, for I observe by your countenance, you are wonderfully pleased.


W. How can I otherways, when so fair so soft, so kind and charming a Creature
has east her self into my arms, and met my passion with an equal flame?


N. You are a happy Man if it be so: Venus was kind in ruling your Nativity:
but Ah!


W. How Is this Ned -- Why Man, what makes you sigh? sure you have not fell in Love
with a cross Mistress, have you?


N. Your guess is right; that heart which long withstood the batteries of
mighty love, and as unconcerned beat back the dazzling beams of brightest
Beauty, at last is stormed, by a cruel fair one, who let us me languish without
hope.


W. Fie, fie, it cannot be; can you the witty gallant and the brave, languish
for one who is regardless of your pain? Come, rouse up man, and banish such a
Servile love, be your self and you have conquered it.


N. As soon may Prisoners loaded with strong Chains, break from their Iron
durance, as I break the Chains of Love; No, though she be cruel, yet I still
must love, and wound the Air with sighs, as when the wind from hollow Rocks
sends an imperfect murmer.


W. Surely you are in jest?


N. In jest, say you, if it be a jest it is a true one; a jest which makes me
covet Solitude, and shun those Recreations I was wont to Glory in; a jest made
worse by what you tell, and makes me do what never before I did, Envy your
happin ss, since I am miserable.


W. No more of this, Psha -- it is but counterfeit; come, come along thou
whining sneaking pretending Lover; or if it be true, We Will to the place where
joy and mirth abound, In Songs and Masks we will thy Passion drowned, Whilst thou
shall scorn the scorner, and be free From her that held thee in Captivity:

It Is Music, Wine, and Voices, that remove
The pangs and tortures of a fruitless love.

N. I Will go and try, though trial may be vain,
And if I Am freed i will never be caught again.

Complemental Expressions, and Love Posies.
SIR, the joy to see you is more than words can utter.

Sir, it is you alone, next Heaven, on whom I must rely; your favors are so
many, that my heart has scarcely room to contain them.

Sir, I am proud to be your Servant, and desire no more but to enjoy that name.

Sir, your Wisdom and Eloquence is so Charming, that I must needs admire you.

Sir, the Excellencies with which you are endued, are many, and even beyond
expression.

Sir, your friendship I covet above all others, and am proud to be ranked
amongst the number of those you are pleased to term your Friends.

Madam, your Beauties are so rare, and your actions so tempting, that I must
wear your Chains, and count it a blessing to be your Slave.

Madam, Wounded by your fair Eyes, I languish.

Madam, you are the fair Phyfitian that can only cure the distemper of my mind.

Lady, it is your Virtues I admire, for that more than Beauty adorns the Female
Sex.

Lady, I am Ravished with your Charming Voice, whose power is as great as that
of Orpheus, in compelling the attention of admiring mortals.

Madam, in your Cheeks the Roses and the Lillies strive for mastery, and on you
wait a a pomp of winning Grace.

Lady, be pleased to rank me amongst your meanest Servants, and I shall make it
the business of my life to do you pleasure.

Lady, I am all your own, command me in what you please, and you shall be
obeyed.

Fairest of Creatures, O that I could find words to express how much I love.

Madam you are fair and cruel, your beauty made the wound you now refuse to
cure.

POSIES.
My love shall be
For ever free.
Naught shall divide
The knot we have tied
By Death alone
It is undone.
Till life is past,
My love shall last,
My love I place,
On thy sweet face.
It Is thou in me,
Shall happy be.
My joy thou art, and have my heart.
A Letter in Verse from a Lovesick Youth to a scornful Maid.
WHilst Gales of sighs were sent from my sad breast,
And thoughts of you would give my eyes no rest,
Snatching a midnight Tapor strait to write
I did begin, but tears so dulled my sight,
That pardon if some blots do here appear,
Whilst I entreat you be as kind as fair,
Pity the Man that sighs and pines for you,
The man who vows for ever to be true,
And thinks that nothing for you is too good
O give me some though but Camelians food.
Let me have hopes although I feed on air,
And run me not thus headlong to despair:
Sead me a Cordial dearest or I dye,
It Is you or death must end my misery;
One or the other I must surely have,
You for my wife or wed the sullen Grave:
And till I know my doom, I must remain,
Your slave to wear your chains and live in pain
I. B. The Answer.
Sir,
YOur Poetical Fancy is very great, I suppose much greater then your passion;
but if you are real, take notice I give you leave to hope, yet rely not too
much upon that, for Women's minds are wavering: indeed I could have wished you
had placed your affections some where else, for though I should admit you
amongst the number of my servants, it is ten to one whether you will ever have
what you desire. This Letter how pleasing it may prove I cannot tell, I wrote
it at the importunity of your Servant, which I had not done, but that he told
me he should have but cold welcome if he returned empty handed: therefore take
it as it is, and make what you can of it, whilst I rest entirely my own to
dispose of my self when and where I have mind to it.

A. G.

The Perfection of Women-kind.
BEauty with virtue joined is the bright jem that makes the wise the softer sex
esteem

For those united Iustre does unfold,
Like flaming Diamonds in an Orb of Gold;
The last may well consist without the first,
But when the last is from the former thrust,
Woman's no more, Women in virtue lies,
That is the thing that only we should prize;
For if not so, a Picture that is fair,
Conceited living, is a thing as rare.
SONG.
To a pleasant New Tune.
My life and my death are both in your power,
I never was wretched till this cruel hour;
Sometimes it is true, you tell me you love,
But alas, it is too kind for me ever to prove;
Could you guess with what pain my poor heart is oppressed,
I am sure my Alexis would soon make me blessed
Distractedly Jealous I do hourly rove,
Thus sighing and musing, it is all for my love;
No place can I find that will yield me relief,
My Soul is for ever entangl'd in grief;
But if the kind Stars let me see him, O then,
I Will forgive the cruel Author of all my past pain*
The Delights of Marriage.
HOw happy Celia is it, now we are
In wedlock joined and made a happy pair*
It Is true my Strephon, we have joys,
That few the like can find,
A passion that no time destroys,
Is fixed in eithers mind;
It Is for my Celia, mighty Love has made
Us blessed, since we to him our Vows have paid:
This had not been, if you had proved unkind,
This true content you never before could find:
It Is true my Strephon, I had been
In Ignorance till now;
These happy days I never had seen,
If I had kept my Vow:
But now I find such follid bliss,
That i would not be a Virgin now,
For all that I could wish:
Come Celia then let us to the shade,
And solace in our love;
Thou shall be yet more happy made,
And i will more constant prove.
SONG.
Tune of, Amoret and Phillis.
Young Pheon strove the bliss to taste,
but Strapho still denied;
She struggled long, the Youth at last,
lay panting by her side:
Useless he lay, love would not wait,
till they could both agree,
They idly languisht in debate,
when they should active be.
At last, come ruin me, she said,
and then there fell a tear,
I Will in thy Breast my blushes hide,
i ts all that Virgins fear:
Oh that age could loves right perform,
we'd make old men obey,
They court us long, Youth loves to storm,
then plunder and away.
The bashful Lover have I seen,
in raptures of surprise,
Adore his Mistress like a Queen,
and gaze upon her Eyes:
Then sigh, say nothing, and away,
and leave the insulting foe,
Proud in the conquest of the day,
without ever saying no.
Loves Power and Cruelty.
LIghtning is not swifter then the glance
of charming beauty, for though seen by chance
It penetrates the Soul and fires the mind,
That wretched Lovers no contentment find,
But cruel Torments, a tormenting grief,
Seizes the wretch that is void of a relief.
Courtship what it is.
COurtship and good behavior is the mo^^ accomplished way of addressing
carriage all Company, a Civil respect for Inferiors, and a due reverence and
regard for Superiors, comely behavior and modesty in Discourse and action; a
moderate carriage, and not too much dejected, a temper suitable to all company,
and a mind not to be moved by passion, either of anger, joy or grief, not
Loquatious but prudent and considerate, which are the chief Ornaments of either
Sex, and gain a good repute amongst the wisest of men.

A name you gain which time can never blast,
A name that will remain till time is past.
The Happy Suecess: Or, Damaris and Rosa.
D. AH! my Joy, you now are in my power, Love gives us opportunity, come be not
coy, you are my own, although divided sometimes by our Parents.


R. Alas, I know not what you mean, though I confess I love you, and therefore
am confident you will not hurt me.


D. No, no, you need not fear that, my tender joy, for in hurting you I wound
my self, come, come my little happiness, let us retire.


R. With all my heart I know you will make much of me, and so long I am safe.


The newest Directions for Carving Butchers Meat, Fowl, Fish and Pastery.
IN a Loyn of Veal, it being decently cut in two, cut off that piece next the
Kidney end, and present it as the choicest piece.

A Leg of Mutton, being taken by the handle, turn your Knife on the inside, as
if you would slit it, then turn off to the left, and turn out the Nut-piece, or
the little Bone by the side of the handle, and present it as the most
acceptable.

In a Quarter of Lamb, you must divide the Shoulder from the Ribs, sprinkle
some Salt thereon, and lay it in its place, then turning your Knife under the
handle, take off that part, and present it to your Friend.

In a Haunch of Venison, turn your Knife in the middle, cut out a round piece,
and with Sauce present it: the same cutting serves for a Gammon of Bacon,
Westphaliaham, etc.

A Neats Tongue you must slit, and cutting it in thin slices, prefent it.

A Pig must be Chined down the Back, the Head being cut off fair, the Ears laid
upon the Shoulders, and the Jaws by the Front; the Ears by Ladies being
accounted best.

A Pheasant must be displayed, by entering the point of the Knife under the Legs
and Wings, lacing the Breast, then be taken off and presented.

A Turkey must be Raised or lifted, by takings off the Legs and Wings, and
lacing the Breast, taking the Merithought, which is presented as the best piece.

A Patridge or Plover, must be minced, by lacing and cutting cross, taking off
the Legs and Wings, presenting the Breast.

A Heron or Bittorn, must be lifted, that is, by raising the Legs with the
point of your Knife, lacing the Breast, taking off the Bellypiece and
Merithought. Plover, Teal, and Widgeon, may be cut as Pullets.

A Goose must be taken off Wings and Legs by a quick hand, with the point of a
Knife, the Merithought raised, the breast laced, and the raised flesh taken
off, the Belly-piece taken off and divided. As for Pigeons, young Chickens,
Earks, and the like they must be split or divided in halves, long-ways. A Capon
or Pullet cut up like a Goose. The Wings of all Wild Fowl are the best, and the
Legs of Tame ones are so accounted.

A Salmon must be Chined, laid open, and sliced. A Lobster must be Clawed and
broken up, or slit. A Venison Pasty, or any large Pasty, must be cut up in the
middle of the Lid, the meat taken out with a Fork, and the Gravy with a Spoon,
and so presented. As for lesser Pies and Tarts, the lid must be entirely taken
off, and the Filling served in Plates with part of the lid or inside Crust.

The Signification of Moles in any part of the Body.
A Mole on the right part of the Forehead, signifies the party wise and
Industrous.

A Mole on the left part of the Forehead, signifies the party to be of no great
Ingenuity, bu^ that the party shall be laborious, and thereby get Riches.

A Moles in the m^ddle of the Fo^ehead, denotes an indifferent Fortune, but
that the party shall be much beloved, and by that means may doubtless attain
preferment.

A Mole on the right Eye-brow, promises the party to gain Riches by Marriage.

A Mole on the left Eye-brow, threatens the first marriage unhappy, but the
second plyant and easy.

A Mole on the Nose denotes another on the privy parts, signifies the party
to be lustful, and very desirous of marriage.

A mole on the Lip, signifies a sweet and affable temper, that the party has a
good stroke at K^ssing.

A m^le on the Chin, or on one corner of the mouth, denotes Riches and Honor,
but that the party is somewhat Gluttonous.

A mole on the Throat, threatens ths party with Diseases, as Strangury,
Quinfie, etc.

A mole on the Neck behind, is dangerous, unless that danger of sudden death be
averted by providence.

A mole on the right Shoulder, signifies the Favor of great persons; and on
the left, Servility and labor, with many Crosses.

A mole on the Back, signifies a good Name, and many Children.

A mole on the middle of the Belly, just by the Navel, denotes an early
marriage.

A mole on the privy parts, denotes the party powerful in Venery, and promises
many Children.

A mole on the Buttocks, denotes the party to be of a plyant and affable temper.

A mole on the right Thigh, denotes plenty and pleasure.

A mole on the left Thigh, signifies the contrary.

A mole on the Knee, signifies the party is given much to Piety and Devotion.

A Mole on the Calf of the Leg, signifies the party will be subject to the
Gout.

A mole on the right Ancle, signifies the party swift and industrous: On the
left Ancle, it threatens him with falling into the hands of Thieves and Robbers.

A mole on the right Foot, signifies the party shall travel on honorable
occasions.

A mole a on the left Foot, denotes to a Woman much danger in Childbirth, and
to a man much pain in Travel. Cum Multis Alias.

A Discourse of DREAMS, and their Interpretations.
TO Dream you see white Hens upon a Dunghill, signifies Disgrace by some false
accusation.

To dream one is in a pleasant Meadow, signifies the possession of Riches, and
the advantage of pleasure.

To dream one fights and overcomes, is to have the advantage over ones
Adversary in Law Suits, or otherwise.

To dream it Thunders and Lightens, is a figure of approaching sickness.

To dream two Lovers meet and have not power to speak to each other, denotes
the match will be broken off by the means of their Parents.

To Dream you see Death in Sickness, and that he flies you, is a sign of
recovery.

To dream of Kisses and Embraces, signifies sudden Marriage.

To dream you are dead and laid out, signifies a dressing for the Nuptials.

To dream of gay Clothing, and that upon your Back they turn to Rags,
signifierh poverty.

To dream one is with Child, and knows not the Father, denotes her Marriage
with a stranger.

To dream one sees the Sun in its brightness, signifies the favor of Great
ones.

To dream a Ring drops off ones finger, denotes a disappointment in Love.

To dream one has a Garland of Flowers brought and presented, denotes he or she
will have the party desired.

A Song of COURTSHIP.
To the Tune of, State and Ambition.
SWeet my Ambition is only to woo thee,
Your Beauty's so lovely it does me surprise,
Let my fair Mistress my gentle sighs move ye,
Who long have a Captive been to your fair eyes,
Wishing no greater bliss then to adore ye,
So sweet is the pain I in languishing find,
No beauty had power to wound me before you,
Then Gentle dear Virgin come smile and be kind.
Lilly's and Roses shall shadow our pleasure,
Fair Flora with sweets shall perfume our soft Bed,
Whilst in my kind arms I hug my dear treasure,
Till Blushes created by fear are all fled.

Maid. Since you are so kind I cannot refuse ye,
A conquest great love in my heart now has made,
No longer kind Sir it is I mean to abuse ye,
Then cheer up your Spirits and be no more sad.
Though Virgins a while may stand at a distance,
They cannot be cruel when true love is found,
Their hearts they grow tender and loose all resistance,
When patience and constancy gives them a wound.

Man. Blessed be the moment that gave me the blessing,
To make me so happy beyond all degree,
A joy that is worth a Monarchs possessing,
Love mighty Love has now heaped upon me.

FINIS.

