ARTICLES OF High Treason Exhibited against the FORT-ROYALL, With all other the
Horn-works and Breast-workes about the CITY.

By the representative body of the Common-Counsell of the CITY.

WITH The last Will and Testament of the said FORT-ROYALL.

ALSO, Her several Legacies to diverse eminent Persons of Quality.

Also her Epitaph.

Printed in the Year 1647.

Articles Of High Treason, etc.
Whereas this Fort for many Capital crimes, and other notorious offenses
committed upon diverse Members of the City, to the breach of our Privilege,
and City Customs; we by advice of our great Counsel at Guild Hall have drawn
up against her these ensuing Articles following.
INprimis, That this Grand Malignant Horn-worke, known by the Name of the Fort
Royal; has against the laws of our dread Sovereign, and by the instigation
of the devil, traitorously endeavored to foment and profecute a New and
bloody War, and has kept back Supplies from Ireland, and likewise keept out
his Majesty from his Children and Parliament, to the great decay of Tradings,
and the forfeiture of our Charter, ann

Secondly, the loud Reports of her Tormenters called Canons, etc. being very
hurtful unto us even in their names as well as their natures; have so thundered
from time to time in our ears to the great disturbance not only of our little
wits, but to the great prejudice of our beloved wives, making so hideous a
noise that many of them have lately miscarried, and fell backwards at the very
report of the Ordinance.

Thirdly, she has been the abbettor and maintainer of many unlawful sports;
for whilst she has kept us drinking, dicing, at nine-pins and the like games
or plays, our Wives have played fast and lose with us, and have bin at Put,
and In and In with others.

Fourthly, she has lately played the harlot, and prostituted her body, and
delivered up the key of her Turn-pike; or Virginity to Sir Thomas; to the great
shame and disturbance of the City.

Fifthly, she has commanded diverse Citizens to guard her day and night, even
as they tendered their duty, to stand bolt upright in their Arms, upon their
guard, till their Wives have fortified their Halfe-Moones at home, and made new
Horn-workes, and breast-workes, and armed their own men, and so put them in a
posture to raise a new War, which has caused much jarring and dissension, and
many by-blowes in this City, to the great disturbance in the Headquarters of
their husbands.

Resolved upon the question, that this pernicious Act of the said Royal Fort
is an absolute invasion of the City Charter in the representative foreheads of
their Dear Husbands.

Resolved again, that the said Royall-Fort is ill-affected to the State and
City.

Resolved that there be a public thanksgiving for the great deliverance of the
Trained-Bands their brow-antlers; and for the demolishment of the said Fort,
and all other Forts, Sconces, halfe-Moones, Horne-workes and Breastworks about
the City; and a Covenant drawn up to defy Sir Thomas, and all his works
hereafter.

Ordered, That speedy course be taken for suppressing all private and unlawful
seperte Congregations.

Ordered, That no person disaffected to the Presbyterian Government be employed
in any public trust in the City.

Ordered, That Union be preserved between all Citizens and their Wives, and all
Jealousy removed that may endanger their mutual agreement.

Ordered, That the Militia be fully and wholly settled upon the City, as it was
presented at Ox bridge.

Ordered, That the late Lord Major and his venerable Brothers be fully
vindicated.

Ordered, That Quarter-man, and all other Independents that be ill affected to
the peace of the City, be forth with brought to exemplar punishment.

The said Fort understanding that these Articles of High Treason were drawn up
against her, being prompted by the consideration of the frailty of these
changeable times, called a Scrivener, and made this Will following.

The last Vill and Testament of the Fort-Royall, and all other Brest-works and
Horn-works aabout the City.
IN the name of Uulcan, and of the Committee for the safety of the City, Amen.
I the Fort Royal, being a professed Presbyter, being sore sick in body, but in
perfect memory do make this my last Will and Testament, in manner and form as
follows.

Inprimis, I do bequeath my Ghost into the hands of Alderman Isaac that gave
it; to be buried in a parcel of the waste ground of his lately revived credit,
and to be buried without sound of Bell, or any words of Conjuration at my
burial.

Jtem I give and bequeath all my Guns to Sir Thomas Fairfax, and by him to be
disposed of for His Majesty's use.

Jtem, I bequeath my powder to the City boys, that went to the Parliament to
make Crackers, when the L. Major shall be released from the Tower.

Jtem, I bequeath my bullets unto the City Rampants that brought their
dust-baskets and fire shovels to help set me up; that with the said bullets
they may grind Mustard, and so do it in a dish, which shall be something for
them to begin house withal; when the Wag-tayles shall be provided of yoke
fellows, otherwise called husbands.

Item, I give and bequeath my stones unto the reverent new Dean of Paul's to
help him build a stone-wall of Reformation that may be as hard and flinty as
the hearts of his brethren, and he himself more honest, then ever to make use
of more Compurgators.

Item, I bequeath my soldiers, Montrosses, and other for the relief of
distressed Ireland, provided they be first furnished with their Arrears from
the City.

Jtem, I bequeath my Sutlers wife to Doctor Sibbals to to be his Worships
Nurse, provided that she nurse none but his ligitimate Children.

Jtem, I give and bequeath all my wood unto Master German, Citie-Carpenter to
make Gibits for the use of the City.

Jtem, I give my earth to the Parliament to put them in mind that they are but
men, and all made of no better metal, and are as subject to fate or
desolation as my self.

Jtem, My Sutler I bequeath to the care of Instice Long, and Justice Louder
when he keeps asutling Alehouse in the Suburbs, where I wish, that all his
Guests may be pennilesse; that he may pawn his wifes Petticoat to pay his
Brewer, and his glorious shelves shine not so much as with an earthen Platter;
instead of satin hangings, may the walls of his house be painted with choke,
and the figers of of no more value then Ciphers: May he weekly be subject to
Informers, and his forfeited License be put to the last use of waste paper, etc.

Lastly, all my grass upon my work to Alderman Atkins, to cleanse his Breeches,
and constitute and ordain him and the rest of his Brethren in the Tower to be
my lawful Executors for the administration of this my last Will and stament.

Epitah for a Postscript.
Imperious Ignorance begot me first,
Put me to Presbytery to be nursed:
That I died young, alas I do confess
J sucked from her but varnished Rottenesse.
Whilst I was one day in a sprightfull trance
Fierce Death dismounted all my Ordinance,
Seized on all; now all was in his power,
And (like to Traitors) sent us to the Tower,
Where like dull Aldermen, we are doomed to lie
Till we be charged, and then must be let fly.
No hopes of a Reprieve; the mutinous cru
That stung brave Strafford, dispatch me and you.
If we must hang, let not our states much vary
Our office was alike, to * fetch and carry.
Dear Citizens, for evermore farewell,
For sins of Paracide, I must to Hell.
FINIS.

