ARTICLES OF High Treason, MADE And Enacted by the late Half-Quarter Usurping
Convention: And now presented to public view, for general satisfaction of all
True Englishmen; With a Petition or Remonstrance from the Shentlemen of WALES,
to their cood Worships; and a Supplement to the New Letany for these times.
With the FRENCH Dancing-Masters speech, All-a-mode-de-France.

Together with Trotters Journy-man on his Amble to the Gallows; And his
Arraignment and Confession, before the time of his Execution.

Imprinted for Erasmus Thorowgood, and are to sold at the sign of the ROASTED
RUMP, near the Western Barge, a little above Strand-Bridge

Trotters Journy-man On his Amble to the GALLOWS: OR, The Confession of J. M.
before his Execution.
Gentlemen,
I Confess to have been brought up under a Trotter, but being taken from thence
by my Rider, Tichburn, and put into the Tramels of Rebellion, I soon took a
very good pace, and ever since have stepped at such a distance, that I presume,
none scruple my interfearing, being easy to have driven a Wheelbarrow betwixt
my Legs, when I struted in the head of my Regiment: Soon report that being in
the Tower I should steal Kin Henry's Pin Cushion, and for its safer conveyance
slipped it under my Twist, which occasioned my Pelantick Guard, but to that
assent not, to warn those pretty pieces of good luck which attended me: Since I
dropped into the House Office at Mr. Pettits, be pleased to know I was made a
Captain of Horse before I was a Soldier; I being to exercise my Troop with
Bedstaffs in my Houlsters, my word of Command, was, Stand to your Arms
Gentlemen; by which, the nimbler Puppits then in motion, thought me more fit to
be Colonel of Foot; of which I no sooner heard, but hasted to my Glass to
salute my self with the Title of Most Noble Colonel, and there began to Ape,
as I thought the becoming posture of my new created Honor, by which I am now
become so Ridiculous; and some dispute whether the substance was in me or my
likeness, the one being shadow, the other a vapor; but to proceed how busy I
was in the displying of, or rather Dancing my men, I have cause to remember,
having taught one of them to handle his Arms so well, that he made me a while
after unable to lift mine to my Head: I had added to this the Honor of being a
Militia man if you please, a Malicious man and returning from thence somewhat
late, I found a person who beleiving me to be an Officer of the R V M P, was
Shiting at my Door, but I made him know I belonged to the Committee of Danger,
though I committed him to Safety: Who upon Examination confessed his design of
blowing open my Doors, and to have forced away my Silver Head-Peice, and my
beloved Glass, in which I first saw my self a Colonel. There are some, who have
added to my Title, Colonel Shallow Brains, but had they fathomed my depth when
I Marched into Cornhil (with my Brother Hewson) they would have waved it; for
it might have been observable how I Guarded the Blind Side, leaving the Single
Eye, as a Butt to any Marksman: In hopes it being out, I might at last supply
the place of a Dog and Bell to beg the charity of the GENTLE CRAFT: But
alas, Fortune does not always favor fools, for though now my case be all
turd, yet my shitten luck has its period. I now lament my unpudent intruding
the Common Council, for which I was shamefully turned out, where each man very
readily lent me his Foot to help me out of the Crowd. I now bewail my playing
the Changling, in going to the Exchange, and thrusting my betters from the
Wall, for now, alas I cannot walk quiet in the Channels, the lesser Boys being
ready to Piss upon me: But what grieves me most is, I am like to be deprived
of the Office of Tichbourns Cash-Keeper, from which I have sucked more
sweetness then ever he did from the Christers of Canaans Grapes, by the loss of
which, I shall be no longer able to proffer the Merchants ready Money, and
then those that led me out of their Warehouses then, will kick me out now: But
I do but wait till my Brother Hewson is cut down from the Gibbet, and then I
shall save them that labor.

In the next place, we shall present you with the new Articles of Treason made
and Enacted by the Airy Notions of a destructive Convention to the Peace of the
Commonwealth.

WHereas it concerns us, who have taken upon us to succeed the 30 Tyrants of
Athens, in the monstrousness of their fame; And whereas there are millions that
care not a Figg for us, we have thought it expedient, for certain good Old
Reasons, to chatk at these our new Commandments and Treasonable Articles; that
is to say, whoever yields not an exact obedience to a Half-quarter RVMP-MAN,
in Thought, Word, and Deed, shall be guilty of High Treason. Whoever shall see
a Half-quarter man salute his Wife, and thereupon grows Yellow, shall be
committed to the Black-rod. Whoever shall demand any Crown Lands from him that
has purchased it, shall be Guilty of High Treason, and suffer as the Marquess
of Montross did, though not deserving.

During the time of this Convention, a Petition was presented in the name of
sundry Welsh-Farmers; as also a Speech made by a French Dancing Master; the
Copies whereof follows.

To the reeght Honoraple, etc. The humble Pettishon of sundry Shentlemen of
Wales:
Does most humply shoh to your Worsips,
THat whereas there were sundry fery creat Repells in our famous Countres of
Wales, who did rise hup in repellion against your Worsips, and would have
killed and slain all your cood worsips: And the Ringleater of these pase
repells was a fery creat Shentilman of Wales, a man of creat power, and of a
fery creat estate, py name Sir Hugh Middleton, and whereas we so understand
that you are coing apout to sell all his fery creat means;

Ma it therefore plese your worsips, if you will sell such cood peniworth, as
your cood worsips formerly have done, as tere is no doubt, put your cood
worsips must be forced to do, to let your Pettishoners have a cood pargain as
soon as another, for py Cods plutre nails we pe Shentilmen of Wales, and will
pay fery honestly, and pesides we shall be ever bound to pray, etc.

Monsieur de man in de Shore,
BEgar me no speak a si bon Engliss comme vous, but me make a de shift for to
speak a de leetle, pour make a you ave a de some understanding of mine affairs.
Begar Monsieur, mine affairs be de plus important affairs in all de varle,
begar and dat is mush, you will say. Begar me play ode leetle Fidele me teash a to
dance, o so rare, so rare; begar you no ave a so brave fellow in all England
besides me self. Begar your autre Maistress dey teach make Leg like a de Bear,
or like a de Hoarse; begar all me Scolars be all de compagnie for a Prince, au
de Princess: but begar dit is nothing to dat I kenow, for begar me can reach
all de People to dance after mine peep. Begar if you will done moyl Argent,
me give you dis peep, and me teach a you to make a de People dance after your
peep, begar the people all follow your peep, comme de au de stone follow
after de Poet Orfus. Par mafoy n'aucum autre man in de varle offer so great
advantage to any Prince in de varle. Begar if you make a de refuser, me go a
presentemant to Monsieur de King of o de Swedes, au me go to monsieur de King
de Denmark, me varrant you me live a deer in de plus great fame in de varle.

In fine, here follows a Supplement to the New Letany of these times, viz.
THat it may please thee to uphold
The Religion of our Fathers old,
Which now for novelty is sold:
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to have compassion
On this our sad distracted Nation,
And bring plain honesty in fashion:
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to reduce
Our ancient Laws, grown out of use,
Unto their Power without abuse:
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee for to smother
Our bloody rage against one another,
Since Cobbler Hewson slew his Brother:
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to fulfill
That Prophecy, That England will
Even by a Monck be freed from ill:
Quaesumus te, etc.
FINIS.

