ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT already concluded upon, betwixt The Kings Majesty, and
his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax and the ARMY Under his Command.

Expressing their mutual Concord for the sudden settlement of PEACE in his
Majesty's three Kingdoms, ENGLAND, SCOTLAND and IRELAND.

Commanded to be forthwith Printed and published.

Printed for G. W. and are to be sold near the Royal Exchange. 1647.

ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT etc.
IT is mutually agreed on between our sovereign Lord King Charles and his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax; with his Council of War, for the speedy
Restoration of his Majesty's three Kingdoms and for the settling of them in a
safe and wel-grounded Peace.

I. THat this present Parliament shall be suddenly adjourned to OXFORD, and shall
be there speedily dissolved, not exceeding the space of 80 days, His Majesty's
Warrant being already signed for that purpose. II. THat the Bishops shall
continue in Statu quo prius, and be restored to their undubitable Rights
according to the ancient customs Laws and Statutes of this Realm. III. THat
all the ancient Charters, Laws, Edicts and several Pleadings in this Kingdom
shall be forthwith translated into the English tongue, for the better
understanding of all his Majesty's Subjects therein. IIII. THat all causes
whatsoever shall be tried each in their respective County, and Judges deputed by
his Majesty to hear and deside the said causes; that the people may no more be
put to that excessive traveling to Westminster upon all occasions of Suits. V.
THat the Earl of Bristol, the Earl of Newcastle, the Earl of Worcester, and the
L. Digby shall expect no pardon: That Matthew Wren Bishop of Ely, Sir Robert
Heath, Sir George Ratcliffe, Sir Richard Greenvile, Sir George Carteret, Sir
Charles Dalison, and other notorious Delinquents, be banished this Kingdom,
during life, and their Estates to be sequestered for three years; and after the
three years shall be expired, the said Estates to be firmly settled on their
posterity. VI. THat all those that have not already compounded be forthwith
freely discharged. VII. THat six thousand Foot and two thousand Horse be with
all speed furnished with all accouterments for the service of Ireland VIII.
THat the several Guards consisting of his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX his
Army be speedily drawn off from the Tower, from the two Houses of Parliament
and the Lines of Communication, and the said places to be again guarded by the
Citizens of London, as formerly. IX. THat Liberty of Conscience be allowed to
all men, and that none molest or Injure one another for their Conscience, but
peaceably and quietly bear with one another, that so we may be al kept in the
general Bond of Peace, and though different Members, yet all wrapped up in the
natural skin of one politic body, that so all may lead quiet and peaceable
lives under his Majesty's Government.

And that his Majesty is pleased to reside at HAMPTON Court till all this be
fully perfected.


These Articles were concluded and agreed upon betwixt our gracious Sovereign
Lord King Charles and our ever to be honored General. Sir Thomas Fairfax.

AUG. 1647. To the great joy of all faithful subjects.



FINIS.

