ARTICLES Exhibited against the KING, AND The CHARGE of the Army, against His
Majesty; Drawn up by the General Council of Officers, for the speedy
executing of impartial Justice upon His Person; and the time, place, and
manner of His Trial.

ALSO, A Message to His Majesty concerning the same; And His Declaration and
Proposals touching the Crown of England, and the Government thereof; and the
Resolution of the Army in order thereunto.

LIKEWISE, The Declaration of the Citizens of London, concerning the Trial of
the King; And Proposals to the Lord Genesis Fairfax, for Liberty and Freedom.

With a joyful and satisfactory Answer thereunto.

LONDON: Printed for John Gilbert, near Temple Bar, 1648.

The gallant RESOLVTION Of the Lord General FAIRFAX Concerning The speedy
re-investing of His Majesty's Royal Person, the time appointed, and the manner
how He shall be established: With the Proposals of the Army, for the present
settling of the peace of the Kingdom.
HIs Excellency the Lord Genesis Fairfax, Lieuten. General Crumwell and the rest
of the Council of Officers, have seriously debated the Remonstrance and
Proposals of the Army, for the speedy settling of the peace of the Kingdom, and
executing of impartial Justice upon all Offenders whatsoever; and to that end,
have drawn up a Charge against the King, which contains these particulars,
viz.

1 That Charles Steward has acted contrary to his trust, in departing from the
Parliament.

2 That the said Charles Steward has forfeited his trust reposed in him by the
people, by setting up his Standard, making a war against them, and thereby been
occasion of much bloodshed and misery to the people whom he was set over for
good.

3 That the said Charles Steward has been the chief Instrument of augmenting
and promoting a second War, by granting Commissions to Incendiaries and
Malignants, and inviting them thereunto.

4 That the said Charles Steward has acted contrary to the Liberties of the
Subject, and tending to the destruction of the fundamental Laws and Liberties
of this Kingdom; all which amounts to a forfeiture of the said trust reposed
in him by the People at his Coronation, with much more to this effect.

The Council of War (who now manage business, as in relation to him have to
ordered the way of State and Majesty observed about him, as to persons and
manner, viz. that nothing be done upon the knee, in reference to his trial,
who (as is said) will receive it at Windsor about the 6. day of the next
month. And it is said, that his Maj. upon the receipt hereof, declated, That
though he could have no restoration to his right, privileges, and Crown, and
had participated of far more trouble and misery in this world, than any of his
(late) Predecesors, yet he doubted not, but in the world to come, to receive an
everlasting Crown of glory.

His Majesty's Proposals touching the Crown of England.
FIrst, That no Law can judge a King, or make him rightly to suffer death by
any power. 2 That though He suffers under them by restraint, yet his Irish
Subjects will come in their time and rescue Him. 3 That all men when they find
that great decay of trade, which will be, if the Kingdom be not settled by him,
they will rescue him. 4 That He knows what an influence is from the people upon
him; That, that if he be not restored, they will not be satisfied. 5 That the
kingdom is generally well pleased with what he condescended to, as very great
on his part, at the Treaty with the Parliament. 6 That the City of London are
of great power both in purse and strength, and will oppose any that shall seek
to destroy him. 7 That relief will come to him from several parts of
Christendom. 8 That his Son Prince Charles is able to raise a good strength
in France and Holland.

Answer.
1 That there is not only example hereof in other parts, but in Scotland, yea,
and England also, of the 35 last Kings, above twenty were imposed and deposed
by power. 2 That nothing will ruin his Majesty more, than joining with the
Irish against his Protestant Subjects. 3 That there will be a sudden course
taken for settling of trade, and enriching the kingdom. 4 That Law and Justice
being executed, it will render great satisfaction to the people. 5. That the
kingdom cannot be satisfied with Ormonds negotation with the Rebels in Ireland.
6 That the City of London will be new modelled, and begins to be framed to a
pretty good order, and temper, since the putting of Malignants our of power and
authority. 7 That foreign forces cannot daunt the spirits of the Soldiery of
England. 8 That the French have troubles enough at home, by the present
distractions in the City of Paris, and that the Prince wants money for
facilitating his design in Holland.

ON Saturday last his Majesty arrived, being guarded by Coly Harison, and ten
Troops of Horse, who upon their coming, a great influence of people resorted to
the Townsend, and upon his Majesty's passing by, a great echo arose, from the
voice of the people, crying, God bless your Majesty and send you long to
reign. And after that his Royal person were conducted to the Castle, and the
dark Curtain from the Canopy of Heaven being drawn, the Royalits (in several
places throughout the town) began to drink a carouse to their dread Sovereign;
but with an Eagles Eye being discerned, they were soon taken off from that
Ceremonial and Court-like action; for notice thereof being given to the Capt.
of the Guard, several sides of musketeers were commanded forth for the
securing of them, but upon their advance toward the place of sanctuary, they
found Bacchus in the posture of Mars to receive them, the Royalists standing in
a posture of defense, and would not give admittance: whereupon, the Soldiery
forced their passage, broke in upon them, wounded diverse, killed three, and
secured the rest, who are now committed to safe custody, to answer their high
insurrection and commotion before a Council of War.

Windsor 28. December. 1648.

And Letters further from Windsor intimates, that his Majesty is very pleasant
and meery, since his coming thither, and takes much delight in disputing the
case of the atmy: further purporting, that his Maj. is determined to draw up a
Message to be sent to the Lord Genesis Fairfax, by way of gra^ulation, for his
present accommodation, and that He may be admitted to London, to confer with
his Excellency about some things of weighty importance, in relation to the
unanimous establishing of his bleeding Kingdoms, protesting to make future
provision for the Soldiery, and to give all due and lawful satisfaction in
all things desired by the Army.

December. 26. Letters from the Navy say, That there has bin a bloody Fight at
Sea between the English and the Irish, and thta the Irish have obtained the
Conquest, and taken 14 Merchants ships, and others, 40 piece of Ordnance, and
other rich booty and prize. A speedy course will be taken for subduing the said
Rebels.

The Lord Genesis Fairfax, and Lieut Genesis Crumwell, has given the Lord Admiral a
visit, where they congratulated each others good successes, and at a
Conference, professed joint concurrence, in what might make the kingdom happy:
some disputation happened, in reference to the King, and settling of the Kingdom.


A Remonstrance from Gloucester-shire.
1 We do seriously profess, that though your former procedings against that
Generation were exceedingly prospered, beyond the parallel of former ages, and
had engraven upon them the kindness of God to a distressed people; yet they
had but served to make us more exquisitly miserable, if your former Conquests
should have acquiesced in the actions of that House; who were bringing your
conquered prisoner with honor and safety to sit upon his Throne of power,
Majesty, and Greatness, without satisfaction for the blood that has been
spilt both by Sea and Land, or sufficient provision made for the security of
the liberties of England.

2 We were filled with sorrow when we saw the abominable Apostasy, and
degenerated actings of the majority of the House of Commons, who after we had
bought their security with our most precious blood and treasure, should by
treating with the King, so cruelly sell us into the blood and revenge of him,
and his confederats, so contrary to their first principles and Declarations;
the consideration whereof, as it filled us with amazement, so it drew from us
threof a mutual Remonstrance, to live and die, and stand and fall with your
Excellency, for the establishing of peace and righteousness, in our native,
bleeding, and languishing Kingdom.

The well affected party within the City of London, have declared their
unanimous resolutions, to live and die with the Army, in the speedy and
impartial executing of Justice, upon the grand Delinquents of this Kingdom,
which is well taken and rescented by the Council of Officers.

The work goes on, about the choosing of Common council men, and it is said,
there are as many soldiers made choice of, as may almost serve for a Council of
War.

Yesterday 16 of the restrained members were sent for to the Genesis quarters, and
told, that if they would promise to act nothing against the army, they might
have their liberty: whereupon they desired, 1 To know if that was the Generals
pleasure, 2 To know if they might not have their liberty without any
engagement, and it was permitted them, their names are, Lord Weinman, Sir
Walter Earl, Sir Robert Pie, Sir Samule Luke, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Sir Thomas
Somes, and the rest. As for the foregoing Charge against the King, it is said,
the army are resolved to try him very speedily, and that if he can acquit
himself of the guilt thereof, that then he shall be re-invested, and restored
to his just Rights and Dignities.

FINIS.

