Articles to be diligently enquired of, and particularly answered unto in
writing by the High Constables in every Hundred, and by the petty Constables
and Tithingmen in every several Parish, Town and Hamblet, at the Assizes to be
holden for the County of
1 YOu shall enquire and truly present the names of all Popish Recusants within
every Parish, who do forbear to repair to the Church according to the Law, in
this manner distinctly you shall set down the names of the Masters and
Mastresses, or Dame of the Family, and the names of the servants by their
Surnames and names of Baptism, the names of Sojourners, and above the rest, the
names of all the Schoolmasters. You shall present the names of all such as do
not resort to Divine Service every Sunday according to the Law, and certify
whether the twelve pence on the Sunday forfeited be required and received, and
duly employed for the poor, of whom it has been received, and of whom
neglected.

2 You shall enquire what Felonies have been committed within your several
Hundreds, Parishes and Towns, which come to your knowledge, by whom, against
whom, and of what kind and nature, and who has presented the same, and what
concealment or connivence has been, and by whom in the prosecution of any such
felonies, and if any Robberies since the last Assizes has been committed, you
shall certify whether Hue and Cry has been made, and the same has been duly
prosecuted by Horsemen and Footmen, or in whose default, or by whose negligence
the same has failed to be duly prosecuted, and also whether Watches have been
duly kept for the apprehension of Felons, and Vagrants, and by whose default
the same have been neglected.

3 You shall certify what Vagrant persons, or Rogues have been apprehended
within the several Parishes since the time aforesaid, and what let pass, not
apprehended, or not punished, who has been sent to the house of Correction,
when, and how they have been delivered from thence, and by whose negligence the
same has happened, and who has relieved such Rogues with meat.

4 You shall enquire and certify what Cottages have been erected, by whom, and
by whose means, contrary to the Statute of Eliz. and what inmates entertained
in Towns not Corporate, and by whom.

5 You shall certify how many Taverns, Innes and Alchouses, and Tippling
houses there are within every several Parish, who keep the same, and how long
they have kept them, and which of these Alchouses are licensed, and which not,
and whether they sell their Ale and Beer according to the Assise or not, which
of these entertains Neighbors, as Alehouses, who have been drunk within the
said Parish since the last Assizes, and in what Inn or Alehouse the same has
happened, and who has maintained any unlawful games there; and whether the
number of any such Innes or Alehouses in any one Parish be burdensome, and
more then is convenient, and which of them may be best spared, and whether the
houses stand in convenient places, and which of them be situate in nooks, by
lanes, woods, or other secret places, and like to be dangerous to the people in
respect of entertainment and shelter of Thieves, Robbers, and other lewd
company.

6 You are to present whether lawful weights and measures be used within your
Hundred, and whether the lawful Assise of bread be kept and observed, and to
present all persons within your several Precincts that offend herein.

7 You shall enquire who are or have been since the time aforesaid, Ingrossers,
Forestallers, or Regrators of Corn within the said County, or any other County,
who dwell or reside within your Precinct, and what kind of corn, and grain, of
what quantity they have been Ingrossers, Forestallers, or Regrators, and who
are Maultsters within your Parish, to sell their Malt again, and who use
common Brew-houses for Ale or Beer within every several Parish, and which of
them sell to any unlicensed Alehouse.

8 You shall certify all the names of the Petty Constables and their
abilities, and by whom they have been made, nominated, and chosen, to the end
that men of ability and good discretion may be chosen to those places.

9 You are to enquire and certify what servants have been put out of their
service, or have put themselves out of service, their Terms not being expired,
where this has happened, and what is become of such servants; and what
unmarried persons of able body lie out of service, and whether they have means
to live without labor, if they do labor for their living, who sets them on
work.

10 You shall enquire what bridges, causies, and highwayes are in decay in
every several Parish, and through whose default the same has happened, and who
ought to repair them, if you doubt whether side, present both.

11 You shall enquire and certify what stocks are provided in every Parish for
setting the poor on work, and how, and by what means the poor are set on work
in every Parish: what Apprentices have been placed, or bound forthwith in every
Parish, and who has refused to receive and keep any Apprentice so ordered to
be put forth by the Justices of Peace: what bastards have been born within
every several Parish, who the reputed Father, how they have been punished, and
how the bastard provide for.

12 You are to present all profane swearers and cursers within your Hundreds
and Liberties, and whether they have been punished according to the Law, and
the Penalties levied, and distributed to the use of the poor, as the Law
requires.

13 You shall enquire what riots, routs, and unlawful assemblies, batteries
and affrayes have been committed, raised and done in every Parish within the
time aforesaid, by whom, and when, and how the same has been punished.

14 You are to enquire what Constables neglect to punish Rogues and wandering
persons, and to do other things belonging to the duty of their Office,
especially who have neglected to bring in their presentiments.

ff. Ad Assisas and general. Jail deliberat. tent. pro Com. (...) apud (...)
in Com. pred. die (...) die (...) Anno (...) Caroli Regis,

Whereas there has been great neglect by the Chief Constabled and petty
Constabled within the County of (...) as also in diverse other Counties within
this Circuit for want of due execution of their several Offices in not
presenting the offenses and misdemeanors committed within their several
Townships and hundreds: It is therefore ordered by the Court that the several
Chief Constables of every hundred, and petty Constables of every Town within
the County of (...) and other the Counties of the same Northern circuit, do
henceforth make answer upon their several oaths unto the several Articles
hereunto annexed; And the chief Constable are to present the same at every
Asissed, as they receive them from the pettif Constables unto the grand
Inquest, upon oath; together with what they know of their own knowledges. And
it is further ordered that copies of the said Articles be forthwish delivered
unto the several chief Constables, who are to give notice of the same to the
several pettty Constables accordingly.


