ARTICLES EXHIBITED TO The Honorable House of COMMONS Assembled In PARLIAMENT,
Against the Lord Inchiquine Lord President of Munster, Subscribed by the Lord
Broghill and Sir Arthur Loftus Knight.

Together with a full and clear answer their unto made whereby it appears
that the said Articles are false scandalous and full of groundless aspersions.

Subscribed by Rich. Gething Secretary to the said Lord President.

LONDON, Printed for Hu. Tuckey, at the Black Spread Eagle in Fleet Street,
over against St. Dunstons Church. 1647.

To the Reader.
BEing employed by the Lord President of Munster into England in June last to
negotiate some affairs for that distressed Province I took notice that there
were certain Articles presented against his Lordship to the Honorable House of
Commons, and subscribed by the Lord of Broghill and Sir Arthur Loftus Knight,
and delivered to the speaker of the House of Commons, and meeting with a copy
thereof, which I hear came from a person relating to the informing parties or
one of them, who (probably) designed the publication thereof to aggravate
thereby those aspertions against his Lordship, and to render him and his honor
more publicly culpable. I have taken upon me, being well acquainted with the
particulars contained in that charge by reason of mine attendance on his
Lordship and the transaction of much of his business to compose a full answer
thereunto, and to publish the same, which was forborne till now, in expectation
that the Honorable House of Commons would have long ere this have had some
leisure and opportunity to hear and examine the said Lord Presidents
vindication to those Artcles, unto which purpose they have been several times
moved, but by the interposition of more weighty affairs his Lordship ^ould not
arrive to that degree of happiness, by means whereof he has lain still under
the scandal of them so much to his prejudice as that the Army under the
command of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax have (upon misinformation of some
particular persons well known for by respects to bear causeless ill will to
the said Lord President taken cognizance of that accusation, and made use of it
against some of the impeached members within making his Lordship, a party
thereunto, to his Lordships very great dishonor and disadvantage, and
therefore the duty and affection I ow to truth and to his Lordship, that I
might endeavor to undeceive all such as have bin herein misguided in their
thoughts, I have been induced to vindicate his Lordship in this kind, which
being vented with judgment and impartiality will undoubtedly argue the
informers egregiously and maliciously mistaken (I Will say no more) in their
objections, and his Lordship evidently innocent of these pretended crimes.

Richard Gething. Secretary to the Lord President.

Articles humbly presented to the Honorable House of Commons assembled in
Parliament against Murrogh. Brion L. Baron of Inchequin and Lord President of
Munster.
1 THE Custodiums which by his Lordships instructions should have been employed
to the Public use or for the reward of well deserving Officers have been
conferred upon Officers that actually served against the Parliament in England,
and upon his own meniall Servants, as Barbers, grooms, etc. who have thereby
been enabled to live in plenty, when many others of good merit have been in
exceeding great want.

2 That his Lordship has placed so many Officers that have actually served
against the Parliament in England, in commands in the Parliaments Army in
Munster, that upon a rumor of the Earl of Ormonds coming down with an Army
against that Province, it was thought fit to administer an Oath to all Officers
and Soldiers of the Army that might oblige them to be faithful to the
Parliament which was laid aside upon Consideration that the Cavaliers were so
numerous in the Army, that their refusal of it might endanger the loss of the
Province.

3 That one Charles Honesey an Irish Papist, who in the beginning of the
Rebellion served as a Lieutenant of Horse on the Parliaments side, and
afterward went to the Rebels, where he actually served against the English
and in the cessation surprised a considerable Calile in the Parliaments
quarters in Munster called Barries Court, and in process of time became a
Collouell of the Rebels, and Lieutenant of their Ordnance, afterward had a
protection given him by the Lord President (his Regiment then in being)
contrary to the advice of some of the Council of, some of the Province who was
consulted with about it.

4 That one Piers Perri^er who had robbed many English, and that had been at
the besieging, taking, and pillaging of many English men's Castles where he
expressed much barbarousnesse to the English, and who had and yet has two sons
Officers in the Rebels Army who were at the besieging of Tonghall, yet
notwithstanding the said Ferriter had a protection from his Lordship though he
lived in so remote a part of the Country, as that we could not probably derive
any advantage by in and which he made use of to the Parliaments ships that
touched upon that coast as he gained from them Ordnance and Mun^ which we are
credibly informed he afterward employed against the English, and
notwithstanding all this his protection stands still in force.

5 That one Dominick Ferriter son to the said P. Ferriter being brought to Cork
by Admiral Moulton, as in hostage for the said Pierce his delivering up a
considerable Island in the West, then and now in his possession to the
Parliaments forces upon demand the said Dominick was set at liberty by the Lord
of Inchequin upon 500 l. Bond of one Crosby and Fites Morris two Irish men, the
latter also having served against the Parliament in England, and yet had foot
companies given them, by his Lordship, since August last, the said two Captains
being as his Lordship well knew) not worth so many shillings, the said Dominick
being out upon their bai^ fled to the Rebels, and has since raised a foot
company to serve against the Protestants, but the sa^d two Captains were not
questioned until after the arrival of some of the new Colonels which was
about February last, though the said Ferritor was fled long before.

6 That one Lombard living at Limrick in the Rebels quarters had his Rent duly
taken up for him in the city of Cork by one Punch an Irish Papist (since dead)
being authorized thereunto by a Warrant from the said Lord President and that
since the laid Punch his death one Ge^. G^^pere Steward to the Lord Inchiquine
was authorized by the said Lambert by Letter of Attorney to continue the
receiving of the said Rents.

7. That one Fitz Patricke a notorious Rebeil and of very near kin to the Lord
President was admitted into the Garrison of Cork to treat with him to the
great dishartening of the well affected English, And that suddenly after the
said Fitz Patricke being there, his Lordship employed one Captain Alexander
Piget a confident of his own) unto Dublin upon pretense of carrying Letters to
the Parliaments Commissioners then sent to treat with the Marquess of Ormond,
but delivered them no Message or Letter, though he met them at the Harbors
mouth (returning after the treaty was broke off) yet went he then into Dublin,
and continued there about a fort night for which he was never questioned.

8. That upon a discourse betwixt his Lordship and one Colonel Pollard about
the King, and his Lordship delivering up the Garrisons of that Province to the
Parliament, his Lordship said these words, viz. If the King had dealt by me as
he might have done, things had not been here as now they are.

9. That their has been great abuses in the stores of Victuals by his
Lordship.

10. That there has been diverse Priests Soldiers in Command, some of the
Rebels supreme Council, and some of their general Assembly protected by his
Lordship.

11. That public Mass has been frequently said in Cork and in Kinsale
since his Lordship being made of the Province by the Parliament.

12. That his Lordship going to besiege a Castle called Ballimartire belonging
to one Edmund Fitz Gerrald (a notorious bloody Rebel and his Lordships Uncle)
gave order to an Officer of the Army to go into the Castle, and there to
signify to the Priests and Religious men that his Lordship was content they
should have free liberty to be, Provided they went away before the Gunnes were
planted, which Sir Arthur Loftus having told his Lordship that if the
Parliament should know of such actions that they would desert us, Whereupon the
Message was forborne.

We whose names are subscribed do undertake to have all these above mentioned
Articles sufficiently proved. Broghill Arthur Loftus.

The answer to the said Articles.
To the First.
1. THat Custodiums according to the Lord Presidents Instructions were employed
to the public use, or for reward of well deserving Officers, and for the
contentment of the Officers generally when means was short, or rather when
there was no means at all stirring and for the encouragement of such as did
both raise and reinforce their Troops and Companies at their own costs and
charge, and by their own Industry without having any advance from the State.
That no Custodium has been conferred, on any Officer that has served under
the King until he had actually served the Parliament, nor upon his meniall
Servants, but such as were Members of the Army, or where the Proprieter had
made over some precedent interest or engagement unto them, upon the expelling
the Irish out of Cork, and other Garrisons it was of good advantage to the
State, That his Lordship should place any persons in the several Messuages and
Tenements in the Towns and Lands in the Country on condition to repair and
uphold the housing, which otherwise being wast and uninhabited would have
fallen to the ground and to encourage tillage about the Garrisons or otherwise
the Lands would have layen wast and the Soldiers have wanted quarters to lodge
in both in Town and Country, neither were they then of any yearly value, and
if the Lord President had not so granted them, they were no Tennants or under
takers that were able to stock or manure them, or to give any considerable
Rent out of them which yet the Officers did pay to the public by Takes, Rates
and impositions* laid as occasion and the necessity of the Army required. And
the Lord President has been induced to offer houses to several persons on
condition only to keep them up, with promise that if they were not allowed to
hold them a considerable time, they should be reimbursed their charges and
though by that means many of the bonies were preserved, yet for want of
Inhabitants, and more such undertakers about 3000. good houses in Cork, and
near as many in Yoghall have been demolished by the Soldiers finding them
empty, and for want of fireing on their guards, and in case the Lord President
wanting means to maintain his Servants, had assigned them Custodiums or some
profit out of their estates, which by his industry were subject to Custodiums
it is conceived to be without prejudice, and to the advantage of the public
service, his Lordship having taken care that an exact account upon oath should
be kept of all profits of Custodiums to the end the State might be answered for
the same out of the pay of the Officers or otherwise, and if the profits and
values of those Custodiums granted to his meniall Servants as Grooms and
Barbers, etc. Who are not Officers of the Army were computed, they would not
amount unto 40. l. per annum at that time, and the same may be charged on the
Lord Presidents account, and so no disservice to the State can arise, As for
the imputation that his Servants lived in greater plenty then others of their
quality, it is but a bitter insinnuation, or if they did live so, it was by
their own industry, and if others of better merit were in want 40. l. per
annum would have afforded them but little releife, and it was so little the
Lord Presidents desire the States Interest should want improvement. That he
has often importuned and desired by his several addresses hither to the
House, and to the several Committees, that a Committee might be sent over for
the settling and taking of accounts of Custodiums and for leasing out Houses and
Lands for some such term as might induce Tenants to give a certain Rent after
the Officers had improved them and drawn in Tenants upon them, and such a
Committee his Lordship was promised, and an Order was made for sending them
away in September 1645. which occasioned that his Lordship in expectation of
them did nothing of himself in order to the recalling of the Custodiums, And
further as soon as the Lord President did arrive the Commissioners appointed
long before, did deliver in a Book at the Council table of the Custodiums,
their values according to their returns made unto them upon oath, of which
Custodiums diverse were granted by the Lord Broghill during the Lord Presidents
being in England his Lordship having then left him his Vice President.

To the second.
2. That many Officers who had served against the Parliament in England were
placed in Commands there is true, And it is as true, and well known to the
Lord of Broghill and Sir Arthur Loftus that the most part of them were not of
his Lordships placeing therein, as the Regiment which upon surrender of Wareham
to the Parliament, conditioned to be recruited to receive a months means, and
to be sent for Munster, and the Regiment sent over with Sir Arthur Loftus
consisting for the most part both Officers and Soldiers of such as had served
the King against the Parliament, and were taken Prisoners at Nazeby. Besides
the Officers and Soldiers that were at several times sent over by the
Parliaments Generals out of Wales, Cornwall, and other parts, and were
enlarged and sent into that service, by order of the Parliament or of the
Committees of the House, and the Lord President has not preferred any such
Officers of his own accord to Command, but such as have approved themselves
faithful, and have well deserved there, and of whose fidelity to the
Parliament, and cause he is well assured, and that none of them is tainted with
any disaffection though often in much want and extremity nor did any that
served the Parliament want preferment to his Lordships power. It is true, that
upon a report of the Lord Ormonds breaking off with the Parliaments
Commissioners. It fell into debate whether such an Oath (as is in the Article
mentioned) were not necessary, and it being conceived that most of those
Officers even of those that had served the King were sent out of England by the
Parliament and had taken the Covenant, and given testimony of their fidelity in
that service it was judged unnecessary and pleaded against by the Lord Braghill
with much earnestnes ^ late opinions and not upon the considerations in the
Article mentioned. And the Lord President did conceive, (and hopes it will be
so esteemed) that he did the Parliament good and acceptable service upon
expelling the Irish about 3 years since being at that time in want of
Officers, to draw over such Officers and persons of quality as he had interest
in to serve the Parliament, whereby the Kings Army was much impaired, and the
Parliaments Army against the Rebels strengthened.

To the third.
3 It may be, that one Charles Henesey had a safe guard or Letpasse for certain
seasons, and for some short time undertaking to lay down his Arms, and to
submit to contribution with the county according to the general Articles, and
that he had a protection thereupon, but if his Regiment were in being (as in
the Article is mentioned) his protection was thereby forfeited and upon notice
thereof (if the Relators had acquainted the Lord President therewith) he would
have given warrant for seizing his Person and goods, as in like case was
usual, and it is certain the Officers of the Army would have suddenly taken
the penalty thereof, as they had in like cases, whereby some have got good
booty, and have made it very penal to the delinquents, but some further cause
may be assigned for granting such protections to him, in order to the States
service, if any such be had, of all reasons it can with least Justice be
imputed either to favor, or affection, or any other by respect, the Lord
President abhorring such courses he having hanged this man's brother in the
market place at Cork And so far was the Lord President from granting this man
any thing, of particular favor, as that he had often threatened to hang him
where ever he could be attached, for that very act in the Article mentioned
viz. the betraying and surprising of Barries court. This Henesey being a man of
so base extraction, and of so little esteem with the Rebels themselves, as that
in reason the Lord President could neither have respects unto him, or ends upon
him.

To the fourth.
That Pierce Ferriter has succored, relieved and preserved many of the
distressed, stripped English at the beginning of the Rebellion and sithence
has been sufficiently attested, and is upon record, but that he ever robbed or
pillaged any, (...) never yet appeared to the Lord President. That he was a
great means of relieving the Fort of Ballingarry (a place of great importance
in the West of Kerry on the Sea coasts, and impregnable by force maintained by
Captain David Crosby against the Rebels see 4 or 5 years at his own charge
principally, until the number of 80 men were reduced to three, is a pregnant
truth. That the Island of Blasques which Master Perriter in Habiteth being a
league of the Coast, affords great refreshing to our shipping being at Sea, or
anchoring about the mouth of Shanon, called the river of Limerick will be
acknowledged where they have been frequently supplied, with fresh meat and
water, and that the Lord President did grant him a safeguard (intending to make
use of him for the relief of Ballingary) desiring the Seamen to forbear
prejudicing of him during his good deportment is probable; but if it had been
made appear, that he had committed any act of disadvantage to any of our party
sithence that safeguard. The Lord President would not only leave the shipping
at Liberty to take revenge, but would have incited them and contributed
thereunto, if he have made any advantage of the Parliaments shipping it is more
then the Lord President could foresee, yet the Lord President did desire that
he might be furnished with some necessaries to encourage him (though not
artillery) having some design toward these parts, and it appears the Seamen
were cautions of letting him have any thing but on good assurance, for they
took his son (as Hostage) for what they delivered, and if the Relators
understood he employed the Guns or any thing he had of them against the
English, and did not inform the Lord President thereof, they were to blame and
yet that he should in those remote parts employ them against the English is
improbable, there being no English Garrison nearer him then Baltamors, or Castle
haven about 80 miles distant from him, especially considering how little
friendship he had with the Rebels, from whom he had taken two ships that came
under his Island, as manifestly did appear unto the Lord President.

To the fifth.
That Dominick Ferriter was brought as an Hostage to Cork by Admiral Moulton
is apparent, but whether for delivery of an Island, or for restitution of the
two small Guns, and the Ammunition delivered to his father is doubtful. But
this being either determined or depending at a Court of War, the Relatons might
have spared the Honorable House the trouble of debating it. That Dominick being
bayled by the two Genlemen in the Article mentioned, made an escape is true,
but that those sureties were taken by the Lord Presidents direction, does not
appear, you probably it might be so, That those men offering to be bound body
for body, and not being then of the Army, were accepted by his Lordships
approbation, And where they are said to be Irish men the one of them viz.
Captain Crosby has been always bred a zealous and good Protestant, and the
son of a Protestant, always accounted an English man, and never served but
against the rebels, and the other is of English extraction (as the Relators
are) and always bred a Protestant, and admitted here to go over a Volunteere
after he was taken prisoner, where he took the oath, and has faithfully served
against the Rebels, and for the penal sum wherein they became bound, though
it surpass their abilities at present, yet it may be in their power to recover
or satisfy for the said two small Guns and Ammunition (the chief engagement
whereon Ferriter lay at stake) for the doing whereof time was desired of the
Court of War. That they were not questioned sooner after Ferriters departure
was by reason the Lord President had not information thereof till they were
made Officers, and then his Lordship being made acquainteed therewith convented
them before a Council of War, and whether any new Colonels, who had been
long a coming, were come over then or no is not material, and it seems the
business was a while forborne in expectation that the Gentlemen might procure
Ferriters return, or to procure that Gunnes for which he engaged him, whereof
they were confident to recover the one or the other, in reasonable time, the
judgment of Crosby and the other to become bound for young Ferrtter being for
that his father had been, so friendly and effectual a means for relieving
Crosbies brother, when besieged with the Rebels in the Fort of Ballingary at
several times.

To the sixth.
5 That Lambard being an inhabitant in the City of Cork never acted any thing
to the prejudice of the Parliament, but on the contrary did give the Lord
President intelligence, and Caution of the ill affection born unto the English
Army by many of the inhabitants of that town, and of their practice and
combinations with some of the Rebels abroad in that County, whereupon he was at
the expulsion of the Irish (among some few others that have done service in the
same kind) promised by the Lord President that he should enjoy the benefit of
his Estate, in and about the City whilst he lived in our Quarters, which he
accordingly did receive by his Atturneyes) whereof one of them might be the
Lord President Steward for ought he knew) after his removal toward the County
of Limrick he did give the Lord President advertisement of what he would leave
among the Rebels to the advantage of the service, which when he ceased to do
whereby the Lord President apprehended he was joined with the Rebels, his
Lordship gave order that stay should be made of the profits of his estate, and
that they should be converted to the use of the Army.

To the Seventh.
7 That Fitz Patrick pretending some negotiation, that might much conduce to
the good of the Parliaments Army, was admitted by advice of the Council into
the Garrison of Cork, where he made an overture from Owen Ree Oneal, on the
behalf of the Popes Nuntio, That the Lord President would stand Newtrall, and
suffer them that were of the Nuntio's party to dispute their differences with
those that adhered to the peace, with the Lord of Ormond by the sword, used
arguments to persuade the President not to incline to Ormonds party, for that
he and all the Butlers had ever hated the Lord Presidents family with much
discourse to that purpose, whereunto the Lord President and Council gave such
answer, as they conceived would tend most to the aggravation of those
differences betwixt the Rebels, and yet keep them free from engagement toward
them, And of this proceeding, the Lord President did give an account by Letter
to the Lord Lieutenant or Committee of Ireland, and therefore it is a strange
proceeding in the L. of Broghill and Sir Arthur Loftus (who could not be
ignorant thereof) to charge this as a fault on the President: After this about
the space of a Month, and after it had been long debated at the Council and
that Sir Piercy Smith, and Lieutenant Colonel Cook had been nominated to go
and desired to be excused, Captain Alexander Pigoe, whose father and family had
no obligation to the Earl of Ormond was by his own desire (having newly heard
of the death of his father) sent to Dub^^^ with Letters to the Commissioners
appointed by the Parliament, there to treat, and to the Lord Ormond with an
answer to a Letter he received from him, which was sent to the Lord President
by Captain Willoughby chief Commander of the Parliament Ships then there,
wherein the Lord of Ormond declared to the President his intention to stand for
the Parliament, and did desire his assistance. But upon Captain Pigots coming
to the Bay of Dublin he found the Commissioners (not as in the Article is
mentioned at the Harbors mouth) to be gone the day before, whereupon he
communicated his directions and instructions to the Commanders at Sea, Captain
Willoughby, Captain Moulton and such others as were there, who did advise,
give way to, and approve of his going into Dublin to see his disconsolate
Mother and Sisters, and sent to Dublin for a pass for him, And thereupon his
Letters to the Lord of Ormond and his instructions he left in Captain
Willoughbyes hands least he should be searched, his instructions being to
communicate his Letters to the Lord of Ormond first with the Commissioners of
the Parliament and all that he had in charge to negotiate with Ormond being
that he would send some Agent into Munster with private directions, to some
that commanded several places of strength in the Rebels quarters, (and were
likely to comply with his Lordship) to deliver up their Commands to the
Parliaments Army, upon signification of his intention unto them, as also that
his Lordship would cause the Sword and other Ensigns of the Majorality (which
the late Major of Cork stole away and presented to his Lordship) to be sent
down. But Captain Pigot did not confer with the Lord of Ormond about any
thing, as he is ready to depose being now in this City, and that the maine
cause which drew him thither, was to relieve and visit his distressed Mother,
and Sisters who were sent to that Town stripped by the Rebels even to
nakedness, being thirteen in family, and his Father holding out a Castle of
great importance against the Rebels, called Disert in the Queens County then
lately was betrayed and surprised, and in the most inhumane manner that has
been heard of murdered and his body cast forth into a ditch, his son, his
Chaplyn and most of his men with him to the number of 42. being also foully
butchered in the presence of his Mother who with her daughters were stripped, and
barbarously by them driven through the fire. The Gentleman and his Father Sir
Robert Pigot having been persons of fair estates, and the greatest eminency
for their zeal and affection to Religion that their times and those parts did
produce as is generally known to all the well affected thereabouts. And cannot
be (...) to Sir Arthur Loftus being Cozen Iermaine to the said distressed widow
now in this City.

To the eight.
8. The words supposed to be spoken to Colonel Polland. The Lord President
does in the first place deny to have uttered any word to that sense, whereunto
they are wrested to the said Colonel, who denies that he ever heard the said
Lord President use any words to that effect, or that the said Colonel ever
reported them to any person whatsoever from the Lord President, in manner and
form, and in the sense as they are charged in the said Article, which may the
more probably receive credit in reg^^a^d his Lordships practice has bin
utterly repugnant thereunto, in the transaction of all his business.

To the ninth.
9. The abuses in the store charged to be committed by his Lordship is a
notoricus scandal, and so known both to the r^latou^^ and the Lord of
Broghill himself, has with the rest of the Officers in general by an
Instrument dated the first of August last, vindicated the Lord President from
it to which vindication this Article may justly be referred for an answer, And
this charge is indeed a most injurious Calumny for that the President has been
ever most careful, and tender to prevent any abuse in that kind, and hereof
the Clearke of the Store, and Commissary of the Magazine would be best able to
acquit or accuse his Lordship. In the mean time it will appear that the Lord
President has out of his own purse and provisions, and out of his Mothers and
Friends supplied the stores when greatly exhausted, and when heavy Encumbrances
and deep danger would have risen to the States Interest if his Lordship had
not used his diligence Industry and Credit to prevent them as is well known
even to the relators themselves, and as it has been already by the said
Instrument, so will be again clearly attested, And on the close of all
accounts will be fully evidenced.

To the tenth.
10 That some Priests have been included within the Articles of Contribution
within the Country (without which the Country, would never have submitted, and
without which the Army could not have subsisted) is confessed. But that
Soldiers supreme Council men or men of the general assembly were protected
being in Command or known to be of the supreme Council is not so, for
Soldiers none were protected but upon the general Articles of Contribution,
that is to lay down Arms etc. which was done out of a considerable regard to
take off as many as was possible from the stronger part of the Rebels which was
held to be that of the Nuntio's, and to balance their Forces so that one part
might not be able to suppress the other readily, but that the differences
might be upheld, wherein our safety (before the Forces arrived) did for a long
time consist. But moreover our own quarters were thereby much improved and
inhabited, the Rebels impaired, our markets the more plentifully replenished,
and at easier rates, and our Contribution made more considerable and certain,
and more punctually paid. For men of the supreme Council it is denied that
ever any of them were protected, being so, and known to be so. It might fall
out, that when the late supreme Council was supplanted and suppressed, and a
new one erected there might some of the old have protections for their Tenants
and Cattle, as some that were formerly under contribution might be chosen of
the new, which can in no reasonable construction reflect on the President. For
those of the general assembly, it is said that when the divisions grew happily
to so great height that there was violent siding on either party. The Lord
President and Council did esteem it neither ill policy nor ill service as
their condition was then) to increase and uphold those differences all they
could, and to that end being sought unto by some persons of the country, that
were to be of their National assembly did encourage and engage them to oppose
the predominant party amongst the said Rebels at Kilkenny and did let fall
words which might encourage them to hope that they would desend them against
the adverse party, and for this end and to gain intelligence of the Rebels
proceedings, and transactions the L. President did protect some (but none save
those formerly under contribution) that went to the General assembly with the
privity of the Council, and by that means had frequent advertisements thence,
and did thereby undoubtedly contribute so much to the aggravation of the
differencies, as that 3 several times they fell to blows with their drawn
swords in their great convention which probably had not determined there, if
the interposition of their Friars and Clergy, and the Lord of Ormonds
unexpected offer of the the surrender of Dublin have not concurred to allay
their heats one toward another, and make them entire.

To the eleventh.
11 That Mass has been said pubickly in Cork or Kingsale fithence the L.
Presidents Commission, and with his privity, alowance or connivance is denied.

To the twelfth.
12 That the Lord President might send a message, or intend one in the nature
of a summons to the Castle of Ballimarter, is but agreeable to al proceedings
military in like cases, and that the Castle of Balimarter, was commanded by a
Friar or Priest is possible, or that the L. President might think of sending
such a message, the more to afright or terrify the rest of the Defendants
(having hanged a Priest, but at the last Castle he took before) or the more to
facilitate the delivery up of the place, by the rest that should remain if the
Priests (who had power over their consciences) were gone is not improbable. But
that his Lordship, did the same, in favor of their Clergy, or in a desire to
preserve them, is a most injurious Insinuation, His Lordship having hanged a
priest (with them a famous Deane] at the last Castle he took as aforesaid,
lying near Ballimarter. That he hanged also one of their titular Deans at
Bandon Br. and the double hanging of Friar Francis Matthews, a great
Provincial Factor for the Pope, and highly esteemed, and his death mightily
resented by the Queen will testify his little affection to their Clergy, which
being real truths will merit greater credit and consideration, then to admit
of what would be enforced on this suggestion, as for Edmund Fitz Gerald, who is
a notorious rebel, and uncle to the L. President by half blood, if his
relation had been nearer it will contrary to the intent of the Relaters, much
assert the Lord Presidents integrity in that he made choice of first of all to
fall into the country which belonged to a person so near unto him of kin, where
he first took his eldest sons Castle, and afterward his own, which he blew up
with powder, and demolished it as near as he could, staying himself in person
to see it done, till the Rebels Army were advanced over the black water to
relieve that place, and drawn within less then two miles of it, being only
hindered and delayed in their march by our Horse facing theirs, and forcing
them to two several stands til their foot drew up to them, And if this Fitz
Gerald had been his father, the destroying of his country, excepting him out of
all benefit of quarter, when that Country did afterward submit to Contribution
will manifest as little favor toward that Rebellious bloody faction, as these
Articles hold forth either of justice or conscientiousnesse, when these things
are urged against his Lordship as crimes which are known to the Relators to be
highly conducing to the States service.

And to the end the matter of protections might be rightly understood it being
alleged that the L. President did grant them out of his affection to the
Irish, which is the more likely to gain credit because he is that Countryman
by birth, It will appear that nothing but extreme necessity did occasion his
granting of them, that without that course had been taken the Parliaments,
interest then could not have been preserved, that he granted them not without
advise and consent of the Counsel whose advise and direction he has been
directed by the Parliament to follow, and that he used such caution therein
that it was expressly conditioned that each Inhabitant who took any protection
should lay down Arms, the advantages and necessities of which course may
abundantly satisfy all men that are not prepossessed with passion or prejudice,
and besides this course was the same which for great and weighty reasons and
considerations has usually been taken by such as have been employed by
authority of this present Parliament, as fit to be continued till they may
conveniently supply the Army, in such manner as they may not be necessitated to
admit of protected Rebels to contribution and to markets for a subsistence,
and if any man be yet unsatisfied, they may be pleased to take a view of an
instruction given to the Commissioners of Parliament, employed to the Lord of
Ormond in Nov. 1646. Appearing in the book of treaty with his Lordship page
55. viz. you or any 3. of you have power hereby to give protection to such as
will come under contribution and to give them the best fafeguard you can by the
countenance of the forces serving under the Parliament, And in their
explanation of their instructions in page 32. paragr. 3. it is expressed that
power is given (as by the said Instructions of the 16. of Nov.) to protect such
as will come under contribution and to give them safe guard by the countenance
of the forces serving under the Parliament, according to which they are to be
protected in their persons and estates as well from the violence of the
Soldiers under the Parliament as of the enemy, And this to be extended to all
without distinction of offense or Religion, This was offered by the late
Commissioners to the Lord of Ormond and afterward all their Offers upon his
Lordships last overture, were approved by Order of both Houses of Parliament
dated 22. Feb. 1646. And the Commissioners had particular instructions to make
them good, as by their Proclamation dated 23. of June last did publish, so as
no man can justly tax the said Lord President with favoring the Irish in this
his proceeding tending so much to the Parliaments service, in preserving their
interest and the lives of many thousand poor Protestants who have lost their
fortunes for their sakes.

Rich. Gathing Secretary.

FINIS.

