Articles a greed upon the 6. of May 1646. by Capt. Gannock and Capt. Baylie,
deputed on the behalf of Sr. William Compton Governor of the Castle of
Banbury, And Colo. VVhetham, Colo, Bridges, Leiftenant Colo. Matthewes, and
Leifte.
Colo. Castle Comissioners appointed by Colo. Whaley, Commander in chief of
the Forces employed for the reduceing of the said Castle, touching the surender
thereof.
IMPRIMIS, That the Governor and Sir Spencer Compton and the Major with each
of them one servant, and their Arms, with 6. of their own Horses, shall have
liberty to march away to what places they think fit, the Captains each of
them his own Horse and Sword the rest of the Officers with their swords, and
private Soldiers without Arms in like sort to march away to such places as
their Passes shall direct.

2. Item. That all Officers and Soldiers of the said Garrison shall have
liberty to march away with their wearing apparel, and half their monyes, so
as they give a true and just Account thereof.

3. Item, That Sir William Compton the Governor with all the Officers and
Soldiers shall have passes to go to any place in the kingdom af England or
principality of Wales (not beleagured the city of London excepted and the said
Coro. Whalley shall endeavor to procure passes to all such persons of the said
Garrison to go beyond the Seas as shall desire the same.

4. Jtem, That all Officers and Soldiers of the said Garrison shall have free
quarter in their march to the several places appointed by their passes, so as
they remain not above one night in a place.

5. Item, That all Officers and Soldiers of the said Garrison may freely pass
to the places appointed without any Oath imposed upon them by the said Colo:
Whalley or any other.

Item, that the said Colo. Whalley upon the surrender of the said Castle Shall
take such ear for restitution of such goods belonging to the Countries now in
the said Castle as the said Colo. Whalley shall seem just and equal.

Item, That the said Governor nor Officer or Soldier of the said Garrisson
shall be molested for any debt or any actdone by any of them, until the time
limited in their passes shall be expired.

Item, That all Officers and Soldiers of the said Garrison being sick or
wounded together with Mr. VVoodhall Chyrurgeon to the said Castle and his Mate,
shall have accommodation in the Town of Banbury or near thereunto until their
recovery, and afterward shall have passes granted as others of their quality
by virtue of their Articles and the Chyrurgeon with each of them one case of
instruements unmolested.

Jtem, That Carriges be provided by the derection of the said Colo. Whalley for
the conveihing of such things as are to be carried away by virtue of these
Articles to such places as the said Sr. William Compton shall think fit the
same being not distant, 10 miles from Banbury.

Upon which considerations the said Sr. William Compton does engage his honor
to surrender the Castle of Banbury in the condition it now stands with
Cannon, Coullers, Arms, and Ammuniton, and all things not contained in these
Articles, withuot any embezelment whatsoever to the said Colo. Whally for the
use of the Parlaiment on Friday morning next being the 8. of this instant May
by 9. a clock, at which time the said Arms are to be delivered to such persons
as to the said Colo. Whaley shall appoint in the half moon before the Gate
and Hostages are to be sent our for the performance hereof. All which was
performed accordingly.

Jmprimatur. Gilb. Mabbot. Jo. Rushworth

8. May ^646.

Printed by T. B. for H. Tucke and F. Tyton. 1646.


