THE ARRAIGNMENT, CONVICTION, and IMPRISONING, OF CHRISTMAS: On St. Thomas day
last.

AND How he broke out of Prison in the Holidayes and got away, only left his
hoary hair, and gray beard, sticking between two Iron Bars of a Window.

WITH, An Hue and Cry after CHRISTMAS, and a Letter from Mr. Woodcock a Fellow
in Oxford, to a Malignant Lady in LONDON.

And diverse passages between the Lady and the Crier, about Old Christmas: And
what shift he was fain to make to save his life, and great stir to fetch him
back again.

With diverse other Witty Passages.

Jan: 12th London Printed by Simon Minced Pie, for Cissely Plum-porridge; And
are to be sold by Ralph Fiddler Chandler, at the sign of the Pack of Cards in
Mustard-Alley, in Brawn-street. 1646. 1645

Lady. HOnest Crier, I know thou knew old Father christmas; I am sent to
thee from an honest scholl^^ ^f Oxford (that has given me many a hug and kisst
in Christmas time when we have been merry) to cry Christmas, for they hear that
he is gone from hence, and that we have lost the poor old man; you know what
marks he has, and how to cry him.


Crier. Who shalll pay me for my pains?


Lady. Your old friend Mr. Woodcock of Oxford, will thou take his word?


Crier. I will cry him I warrant you, through the City and Country, and it
shall go hard but I will find him out; I can partly guess who can tell some
news of him, if any people in England can, for I am acquainted with all his
f^miliar friends: Trust me in this business, I will bring you word within few
days.


H o o o o o o o yes, ho-o e-o o o yes, ho o o o o o o yes;

Any man or woman, whether Popish or Prelaticall, Superstitious or Judaicall,
Ignorant or J^suiticall, or what person s^ever, of any Tribe or Trullibub; that
can give any knowledge, or tell any tidings of an old, old, old, very old, gray
bearded Gentleman, called Christmas; who was wont to be a very familiar ghest,
and visit all sorts of people both poor and rich, and used to appear in
glittering gold silk qand silver in the Court, and in all shapes in the Theater
in White Hall, and had ringing, feasts, and jollitie in all places, both in the
City and Country for his coming; if you went to the Temple, you might have
found him there at In and In, till many a Gentleman had outed all the money from
his pocket, and after all, the Butlers found him locked up in their Boxes: And
in almost every house, you might have found him at Cards and Dice, the very
boys and children could have traced him, and the Beggars have followed him
from place to place, and seen him walking up and down; and in every house
roast Brefe and Mutton, Pies and Plumporrige, and all manner of delicates round
about him, and every one saluting merry Christmas; if you had gone to the
Queens Chapel, you might have found him standing against the wall; and the
Papists weeping, and beating themselves before him, and kissing his hoary head
with superstitious tears, in a theater exceeding all he plays of the red
Bull, the Forture, or the Cockpit.

For age, this hoarie headed man was of great years, and as white as snow, he
entered the Romish Kallender time out of mind^, as old or very near, as Father
Mathusalem was, one that looked fresh in the Bishops time, though their fall
made him pine away ever since; he was full, and fat as any dume Docter, on them
all, he looked under the consecrated Laune sleeves as big as Bul-beefe, just
like Bacchus upon a tun of wine, when the grapes hang shaking about his
ears; but since the catholic liquor is taken from him, he is much wasted, so
that he has looked very thin, and ill of late; but the wanton women that are
so mad after him, do not know how he is metamorphised; so that he is not now
like himself, but rather like a Jack a lent.

But yet some other marks that you may know him by, is that the wanton Women
dote after him, he helped them to so many new Gowns, Hatts, and Hankerches,
and other fine knacks, of which he has a pack on his back, in which is good
store of all sorts, besides the fine knacks that he got out of their husbands
pockets for household provisions for him: he got Prentises, Servants, and
Scholars many playdayes, and therefore was well beloved by them also and made
all merry with Bagpip^s, Fiddles, and other musicks, Giggs, Dances, and
Mummings, yea the young people had more merry days, and hours before him
whilst he stayed, which was in some houses 12. days, in some 20. in some more,
and in some less, then in all the year again: and more Lasses was got with
child, when he elevated his knees with his socundity then was in all the time
of the lent following.

The Candlemaker, Cardmaker, Cooks, Pimakers, and all fotts of trades
seasonable for the time, got well by him, and vended his Commodityes best at
his coming, and many a broken poor whore could get up a new baudie house, and
a new stock, by the coming of this good fellow.

The proportion of his feet is well known, for he crept from under the Romish
Chair; and was placed in the Calendar only by a popish Edict, to be a time
observable for the common People to bring in large offerings to the Popes
holiness, and to maintain the Cardinals, Priests, and Friars.

If you will know him by his smell, you may scent him amongst the malignants,
for they will rather keep his Excrement for a susstitious monument, then let
him be quite gone they flock for some looks of his gray head, or pieces of his
nails, or a pin of his clothes, or rather then fail, one of the Feathers of
his bauble to keep for a relic; something they are resolved to keep in
remembrance of him, which way be easisy scented when you come amongst them, for
they slinke of it as bad as a Friar of his weeds, or a Non of her mantle,
which will fume sufficiently in your noses, except they coster you with a
little holy water sprinkled upon him to deceve your senses.

You may also know him by his voice, for he cries just like to the Oxford
luncto men, have not I been of great esteem always with your have not I
authority, has not my ways been Idolizied by the most, and what will you
leave me now, if ever you stuck to a poor old man, that will do fine
acceptable things for you stick to me now, you know I have made you merry, and
if the men will not take my part, then all you Women and Boys. Prentises and
Servants, do not you leave me, for then I shall die; but you are the staff of
my age, then be you my comfort, all you that ever think to see Christmas
again, stick to me now close, for I am constrained to remain in the Popish
quarters, and dare not show my face where the Parliament have any power, thus
you have his marks.

All you therefore that by your diligent inquiry, can tell any tidings of
this old man called Christmas, and tell me where he may be met withal;
whether in any of your streets, or elsewhere, though in never so straightened a
place, in an Applewomans staul, or Grocers Curren Tub, in a C^okes Oven, or the
Maids Porrige pot, or crept in some corner of a Tra^sl^ters shop, where the
Cobbler was wont so merrily to chant his Carolls, whosoever can tell what is
become of him, or where he may be found, let them bring him back again into
England, to the Crier, and they shall have a Benedection from the Pope, an
hundred oaths from the Cavaliers, 40. Kisses from the wanton Wenches, and be
made Pursevant to the next Arch Bishop; Malignants will send him a piece of
Braune, and every Prentice boy will give him his point next holy Thursday,
the good-Wives will keep him in some corners of their mince pies, and the new
Nun io Ireland will return him to be canonized the next Reformation of the
Cilender.

And so Pape save Chrismas,

Crier. Lady I am come to tell you what return I can make you of the crying of
old Father Chrismas, which J have done, and am now here to give you answer.


Lady. Well said honest Crier, Mr. Woodcock will remember you for it.


Crier. The ^oor old man upon St. Thomas his day was araigned, condemned, and
after conviction cast into prison amongst the Kings Soldiers, fearing to be
hanged, or some other execution to be done upon him, he broke prison, and got
out at so narrow a passage, between two Iron Bars of a Window, that nothing but
only his old gray beard and hoarie hair of his head stuck there, but nothing
else to be seen of him; and if you will have that, compound for it, lest it be
sold amongst the sequestered goods, or burnt with the next Popish pictures, by
the hand of the hangman.


Lady. But is old, old, good old Christmas gone? Nothing but the hair of his
good, grave old head and beard left! Well, I will have that, seeing I cannot
have more of him, one lock whereof will serve Mr. Woodcock for a token; But
what is the event of his departure?


Crier. The poor are sorry for it, for they go to every door a begging as they
were wont to do (Good Mrs. somewhat against this good Time) but Time was
transformed, Away be gone, here is not for you; and so they instead of going to
the Ale-bouse to be drunk, were fain to work all the Holidayes. The Scholars
came into the Hall, where their hungry stomachs had thought to have found good
Brawn and Christmas Pies, Roast bief and Plum porridge, but no such matter;
Away ye profane, these are superstitious meats, your stomach must be fed with
wholesome doctrine. Alas poor tallow-faced Chandlers, I met them mourning
through the streets, and complaining that they could get no vent for their
Mustard, for want of Brawn.


Lady. Well, if ever the Catholics or Bishops rule again in England, they
will set the Church doors open on Christmas day, and we shall have Mass at the
High Altar, as was used when the day was first instituted, and not have the
holy Eucharist barred out of School, as School boys do their Masters against
the festival. What shall we have our mouths shut to welcome old Christmas? No,
no, bid him come by night over the Thames, and we will have a back door open to
let him it. I will my self give him his diet for one year, to try his fortune,
this time twelve month it may prove better.


FINIS.

