THENTHPOPOS; OR, God-Man: BEING AN EXPOSITION Upon the first Eighteen verses
of the first chapter of the Gospel according to St JOHN.

Wherein, is most Accurately and Divinely handled, the Divinity and Humanity of
Jesus Christ; proving him to be God and Man, Coequall and Coeternall with the
Father: To the confutation of several Heresies both Ancient and Modern.

By that Eminently Learned and Reverend Divine, JOHN ARROWSMITH, D. D. Late
Master of Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge, and Professor of Divinity there.

The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before the works of old. I
was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was. Prove.
8. 22, 23. Quid est Deus? Men's universi. Quid est Deus? Quod vides, totum, et
quod non vides, totum. Sic demum Magnitudo sua illi redditur, quia nihil majus
excogitari potest. Si solus est omnia, opus suum and extra, et intra tenet,
Seneca. London, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and William Wilson, and are to be
sold at the Prince's Arms in St Paul's Churchyard, and in Well-yard near St
Bartholomew's Hospital. 1660.

TO THE READER.
WHat was said to the highest praise and Commendations, out of the mouth of
Truth it self, concerning John the Baptist, John 5. 35. may not unfitly be
spoken of the Learned Author of this mysterious Treatise, That (...), He was a
burning and a shining Light; who by his indefatigable and unwearied study in
the sublime mysteries of the Gospel, did spend and waste himself to the socket
and utmost end of his last breath, to explicate the darkest places of the
sacred Scriptures; that he might give light to others in the knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And though this Piece be a Posthumus, yet it
speaks the living praise of its departed Author. And cannot but discover its
self to be the product of so holy and learned a Divine as the Author was. The
matter it self declares the excellency of his worth, and the largeness of
his capacity in the right apprehending and dividing of the word of truth, to
the confuting of heresies and damnable errors. It may well be said of him, as
of Athanasius of old; Maluit sedem, quam fidei syllabam mutare, He had (while
he was) rather have lost whatsoever profits and preferments were cast upon him,
than to have altered or forsaken the least syllable or Iota of his
Christian-faith: who after he had fought a good fight, kept the faith, and
finished his course with joy, is accepted into glory. Our loss, and the
Churches deprivation of him, became his gain, his advantage. For the Prophets
do not live for ever. Zach. 1. 5. which may give us just occasion to wish
Jeremiah's wish, Oh that our heads were full of water, and our eyes fountains
of tears, that we might weep day and night for the Prophets that are taken
away from us. And, amongst them, for this Prophet of whom I may say the Poets
words, (...). That he was one of a Thousand. With what diligence, and with what
study and pains, with what good conscience, with what integrity and
uprightness he did carry himself in the constant course of his life, those
that were most intimate with him cannot but testify. All that knew any thing
of him, knew the truth of all. His manner of Preaching did show indefatigable
great pains and labor, being one of the most hard courses that could be
undergone, which was by way of Paraphrase, and Explication of the most
mysterious and obscure Texts of the Sacred Scriptures. Great dexterity, good
judgment, and profound and admirable learning were everywhere manifested in
his Ministry. He was noted in the University for one of prime wit, and sharp
conceit, plain in the delivery of the word, yet so, that any one might discern
there was both judgment, much learning, and wisdom mixed therewith. He had a
soul that aspired after much more, than so weak, and sickly a body was able to
undergo. He put forth his strength beyond his strength to do good. Even as a
Taper, that does wast it self to give light to others; so did he exhaust
himself, and strengh and vital parts to give light to all. Nothing made him,
for some time before his death, to give off his Ministry, but weakness, and
disability of body. So that he must have this testimony, that he did service to
God, and his Church, as long as God would have him to do service to him on
earth. And many have cause to weep, though not for him, who is now translated
to glory, yet for themselves in the loss of so faithful and careful a
dispencer of the word of God. I dare say no more, lest, while I endeavor to
declare his worth, and dignity, I should do him wrong. Had he lived to have
supervised this work, no question but it would have passed his hand with more
politenesse, and authority. I now desire thee, not only to read, but thoroughly
to weigh, and consider the worth and excellency of the heavenly matter
contained therein; That that God, that causes light to shine out of darkness,
may cause the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ to shine in all our hearts more and more to the perfect day: Which at
the Throne of grace shall be continually prayed for, by him that is,

Thine in the Lord, T. A.

THENTHPOPOS. OR, GOD made MAN.
JOHN 1. ver. 1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God.
ANcient Records tell us, That before the first Writing of this Book, The
Churches of God set upon the Work of Fasting, and Prayer, by the Appointment of
St. John; That so they might seek Divine assistance. How much more need have I,
at this time, to beg your Prayers before I begin (and all the while I shall
continue) to expound this Glorious Gospel. It is therefore my hearty and
humble request to you all, that your Prayers may neither be denied, nor
sparingly put up for me; That, as Augustine prayed for himself in reference to
the whole Scriptures; Domine, sint Castae deliciae meae, Scripturae Sanctae.
Lord let thy holy Scriptures be my chaste delight. Nec fallar in iis, nec fallam
alios ex iis. Let me neither be deceived in them, nor let me deceive others out
of them. So, that you would pray on my behalf; That I may neither my self be
deceived in the misunderstanding of the sublime places of this Book, not
mis-guide you by giving you either false, or impertinent Interpretations of
them. What progress I shall make herein, God only knows. But in the
Confidence of His assistance, not in mine own strength, (which I acknowledge
to be far below many others) I shall enter upon this first Chapter, after I
have premised, by way of preface, something concerning

The Title of this sublime book.
The Writer The Occasion The Scope
And likewise, something concerning the Difference, between it and the other
Three Gospells.

First for the Title. It is a Gospel. The Gospel according to St. John.
(...). The word signifies Glad-tidings, Salvation by Christ imparted, gladdeth
the heart.
good news. No tidings in the world so good as those that impart Salvation by
Christ. And that Message was never so clearly delivered as under the New
Testament; though under the Old it was, but more obscurely. Therefore though
there were Gospel in the Old Testament, yet ye do not find it called (...),
but (...), the Promises. But, in the New Testament, this message goes under a
new name of (...), namely the Gospel, Romans 1. 1. Paul a servant of Jesus
Christ, called to be an Apostle, separate to the Gospel of God. The four first
Books of the New Testament, because they do most lively hold forth to you the
History of Christ's Incarnation, and Conversation, and Passion, and
Resurrection, and Ascension, and his Sermons, and Miracles; Therefore they are
called peculiarly by this name of Gospel. All the other Books they do but
enlarge, and apply, and illustrate these four Evangelists. Even as all the
Prophets under the Old Testament, were but as so many Commentators upon Moses.
Now, if it be lawful to compare Scripture with Scripture, for some kind of
difference there is. As in pieces of Gold, though all be pure Gold, yet some
have a clearer stamp then others: So all divine truths in Scripture, are divine
truths; yet there is a clearer truth in some places, then in others. Therefore
you Evangelium Sancti Iohannis est Evangelium Evangeliorum.
may call this of John, The Gospel of Gospells; as Solomon's Song was called,
the Song of Songs. If it be lawful to compare Scripture, with Scripture. He
that brings glad Tidings, we say, He may knock at any man's door; Here are glad
Tidings indeed! The Gospel, what is that? Certainly, glorious things are
spoken of Thee, Oh Thou Gospel of God, as he said of the City of God. Glorious
things, etc. It is called the Glorious Gospel of the Blessed God. Such a
phrase you have, 1 Timothy 1. 11. according to the Glorious Gospel of the Blessed
God, which is committed to my trust. It is called, else where, The Gospel of
the Kingdom. There is no coming to Heaven, but by the Gospel, Math. 4. 23.
Preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom. It is called the Gospel of Peace, Romans
10. 16. How beautiful are the feet of them that Preach the Gospel of peace,
and bring glad Tidings of good things? It is called the Gospel of the Grace of
God, Acts 20. 24. That I might finish my Course with joy, and the Ministry
which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the Grace
of God. Would you then have Glory, or Peace, or Grace, or Kingdom, listen then
to the Gospel. So much for the Title.

Secondly, for the Writer of this Book, The Penman of it; It is John. The
Gospel according to John. Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, these four drew the
Chariot in which Christ rid all the World over. And amongst them four, John
has a kind of preheminency. The Ancients are wont to compare these four, to
those four beasts in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 1. 10.
who had the faces of a Man, of an Ox, of a Lion, and of an Eagle: and they
make John the Eagle, because he soareth aloft more than all the rest in the
Contemplation of Christ's Divinity. The Eagle makes his Nest on high, as it is
in Job. The Eagle can do that, which the other fouls of the air are not able
to do. It can look upon the Sun in its highest beauty. Behold the Eagle of the
Gospel looking upon Christ in his Divine nature, and expressing that more then
all the other Evangelists. They that are given to Divine speculation, know the
flight of this Eagle. You that would be heavenly-minded, listen to what John
tells you. John John's Title.
whom the Lord loves. That is his Title. There was leaning on Jesus Bosom one
of his Disciples, whom Jesus loved. The likelier man to reveal secrets; who
was in the Bosom of Christ. We are wont to communicate our secrets to our
friends, to those whom we love most. You may expect to hear of Christ's secrets
from the Disciple whom Jesus loved. And therefore, says Augustine, John drew
out of the bosom Christ's secrets are revealed to his best beloved ones.
of Christ, the very Heart of Christ, what he was about to make known to the
World. The King sends a messenger to you, and by his Favorite; you expect to
know the whole mind of the Prince, because his Favorite is the messenger. Here
is the Disciple whom Christ loved. And not only so, but John the Son of
Thunder, that is a true Title of his, which only he and his brethren shared
in, Mark 3. 17. James the son of Zebedee, and John the brother of James. He
names them Boanerges, which is, the sons of Thunder, to rowse men from
security. Here is Thunder in the Gospel. So many Words, so many Thunderclaps.
John was now to deal with desperate Heretics, That denied the Divinity of
Christ; and here is Thunder for them, enough to affright them all. Junius was
not able to stand Junius how converted.
before the force of this Thunderclap. He himself tells us, That in his
youth he was given to Atheism, and drowned in Cursed principles; and the first
thing that brought him to the Knowledge of a God, was the beginning of this
Chapter of John; He cast his eyes upon these words, and professed, that he was
not himself of a long time after; he s^w so much Majesty therein beyond all
humane Rhetoric, that he was not himself of a long time after. This, Junius
(that Translated the Bible) speaks of himself. There is a mistake amongst
people, as if there were no powerful preaching, but that which is Clamorous
preaching. As if the goodness of a man's Sermon were to be made out of the
goodness of his Longues, and not out of the matter; by the goodness of the
delivery, and not by the sublimity of the Doctrine. Here is John, the meekest
of the Disciples, the most beloved Disciple of them all, a Man of a meek
spirit, as we read in his Story, yet this John has something of Thunder in
him. How? By the effect of his Doctrine, not by the height of his voice. As it
is said of Pericles, a great and famous Orator in Athens; He Thundered, and
ratled in his speech. And so John in his Doctrine; the son of Thunder in that
respect.

Thirdly, you must Consider the occasion of John's writing this Gospel. When
the Pastor was absent, the Wolves broke in upon the Flock. When John was
banished into Patmos by Domitian, Ebion and Cerinthus, and other Heriticks The
reasons why the Gospel of John was written.
there were, that denied the Divinity of the Lord Jesus Christ, and this
occasioned John, as they say, to write this Gospel, wherein he asserteth the
Godhead of Christ; And so, by the way, occasionally ye see what use even
Heriticks are made of to the Church of God. We had lost this Gospel, if Ebion
and Cerinthus had not broached their heresies. God suffers desperate opinions
to be vented for the purging of his own Truth. The Truth of God is compared to
Silver. The words of the Lord are pure, yea, as Silver tried in a furnace of
Earth, purified seven times. Every corrupt opinion that comes to be vented
against any Truth of God, that is a new furnace; and the truth being cast into
that furnace, it comes out the purer for it. Purified seven times. As it is
with Passengers of quality and note, were it not for some evil inveterate
Currs in the street, they might pass, and never be observed; the very barking
of the Dogs makes them to be noted. So these evil inveterate Corrupt
Heretics, by their barking, have occasioned the taking notice of that truth of
the Divinity of Christ. Had not they barked, John had not Written. This was the
occasion. And this should encourage you to attention; because the same
Heretics are with us now: we have our own Ebions, and Cerinthusses to this
day, that deny the Divinity of Christ, and say, He had no being till he took it
from the Virgin Mary.

Fourthly, we come to the Scope of this Book, which is to hold out the Divine
nature of Christ, as the object of our Faith, to set forth Christ as the Son
of God, that we believe in Him, so, as to have Salvation by Him. And This St.
John tells you, to have been his aim, Joh. 20. 31. These are written, that
you might believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that
believing you might have Life through Him. He desires to set forth Christ to us
as our Redeemer, and therefore labors so much, both in the beginning of his
Gospel, and throughout, to hold forth the Godhead, and Divine nature of
Christ, That so it might appear that he is a sufficient Redeemer. If He had not
been God, He could not have gone through with the purchase. As the Eagle tries
her young ones, by holding them against the beams of the Sun; and, if they be
able to look upon them with a steadfast eye, she owneth such: So John brings
his Readers to the Sun of the Divinity of Christ, and such as will not
acknowledge that, are bastard-Christians, and not Saints.

Fifthly, One thing yet remains, by way of preface;

First, whereas the three former Evangelists, insist especially upon things
done by Christ, after John was cast into Prison; John takes in here the acts
of his two former years: what Christ did, and what Christ said, before John was
cast into Prison: which the other touch but sparingly upon.

Secondly, whereas the other Evangelists insist mainly upon what Christ did;
Saint John relates especially what Christ said. They are much more large in
recording his Miracles, John in recording his Sermons, and Prayers, as Chap.
15. Some Miracles indeed he relates to us, but they are such, as wake may
either for his Discourse with the Disciples, or for his disputation with his
Adversaries. So still he seemed more to take notice of what Christ said, then
what he did.

I now prepare you to be attentive: for I begin to close with the first
Chapter, and with these first words of the Chapter, which are of so great
importance, That, as I told you before, they had a most extraordinary force
upon Junius his spirit; and besides, upon one Numenius, a Heathen Philosopher.
That falling upon this Gospel, cried out in a kind of indignation, This
Barbarian, says he; (for so the Greeks call the Jews) has concluded more in a
few lines, than our great Philosophers have in all their Books; He was so taken
with the mystery of these words! For they are words which the most
quick-sighted Christian can be hardly able to see through. And throughout, I
shall endeavor to make it as plain, as God shall enable me. Only ye must not
take it amiss, if some things shall be left obscure. Augustine says, I will
not defraud those that are able to understand, for fear of being irksome, to
them, that are not able. Do but think your selves at a feast. When many guests
are invited to a feast, They are of several Constitutions, and like several
dishes. But now, Shall a man that sees such a dish before him, to which he
has no stomach, presently rise from the Table? No, he will perhaps think with
himself, Other men may like this dish: So it should be taken here. Suppose
something be too hard for thee, it may perhaps be clear to another. Paul is a
debtor to the wise, and to the unwise; therefore let none arise and go away,
but let every man expect his portion. Do you hope, that whatsoever difficult
passages there are in the Scriptures, yet there will be some full of Light and
Comfort. To close then, with the first verse.

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was Text.
with God, and the Word was God.
YE have here the Subject, and the Predicate, which are laid down in three
Propositions. The subject in every proposition is the same, the Word. And there
are in these three propositions, three things predicated of this Word.

First, an eternal existency, and that in the first Proposition. The Word was
in the beginning.

Secondly, a Personal Co-exsistency of Christ with the Father. The Word was
with God, namely, as a distinct person from God. That is the second Proposition.

Thirdly, a divine Essence. The Word was God: a distinct

The first thing we are to understand, is, a discourse of the Subject of these
three Propositions. The Word. And for the clearing of that, three Quaeries we
shall resolve.

First, what Person is here meant by the Word?

I answer clearly, The second Person in the Trinity. Of John, Christ is called
the Word by John.
but by St. Luke, and Paul too. Jesus Christ is called by St. John, The Word, 1
John 5. 7. There are three that bear record in Heaven, The Father, the WORD,
and the Holy Ghost. Here the Word comes in, in the second place, between the
Father, and the Holy Ghost, to denote the second Person, Revel. 19. 13. He was
clothed in a vesture dipped in Blood, and His Name is called the Word of God.
Neither is John the only man that calls Him so, though, by the way, St. John
himself, above all the Apostles, got the name of (...), John the Divine. (A
word too much scorned now a days) (...), why? because he did set forth (...).
He is called Divine, because he held forth the Divinity of the Word, namely of
Christ. Others did it as well as He. But not so much. Ye shall find Luke
calling Christ the Word in that place, though not often, yet worthy your
noting, Luke 1. 2. Even as they delivered them unto us, which from the
beginning were eye witnesses, and Ministers of the Word. What is that? not
Preachers of the Gospel, but (...) followers of Jesus Christ. St. Luke had
that relation from the Apostles themselves, who were eyewitnesses of Christ;
and from the Seventy Disciples, who were likewise servants of the Word. And, in
all reason, this must be the sense, that, by Word here, Luke should mean the
Lord Jesus Christ, because it suiteth so well, with what the other Apostles
said. As John begins his Epistle. He tells them, he would speak to them, of
whom they had heard and seen, of the Word of Life, 1 John 1. 1. That which was
from the beginning, which we have heard, and seen with our eyes, and have
looked upon, and have handled, of the Word of Life. So Luke tells them, he
spoke what he received By Luke.
from the Ministers of the Word. Which suiteth with that place, 2 Pet. 1. 16.
We have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known to you the
power and coming of Jesus Christ, but we were eyewitnesses of his Majesty.

But if this be not the meaning, then consider, How much wanting does Luke seem
to be to his Readers. He intends to write of Jesus Christ, and to make a
Preface of Christ, and fully mentions him whom he intends to write upon. Ye
shall find Paul calling Christ the Word, in that fare-well-speech of his to
the Church of Ephesus, By Paul.
which is recommended, Act. 20. 32. Now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to
the Word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an
inheritance among all them which are sanctified. I know, this place is commonly
interpreted of the Gospel; and, that the Gospel is called the Word of Grace,
in another place of the Acts of the Apostles: but yet, they question, whether
that be the meaning here or no; and that upon this ground, because that Word is
here meant, to which the Saints are commended. Now, the Gospel is commended to
the Saints, but the Saints are not commended to the Gospel. But, some other
Word is here meant, that is, Christ: I commend you to God, namely, to God the
Father; and to the Word, namely, to Christ. Indeed, for the Gospel to be
commended to the Saints, is an usual thing; 2 Timothy 1. 13, 14. Hold fast Usual
for the Gospel to be commended to the Saints, not the Saints to the Gospel.
the form of sound words, which thou have heard of me, in faith and love, which
is in Jesus Christ. That good thing which was committed to thee, keep by the
holy Ghost, which dwells in us. And so, in the second Chapter of that
Epistle, verse. 2. The things that thou have heard of me amongst many witnesses,
the same commit thou to faithful men. Here is the Gospel committed to the
Saints. But where do you find the Saints committed to the Gospel? To God, ye
find them committed again and again: Act. 4. 26. Having commended them to the
grace of God. Here are men commended to God. And so in that sense I take it
here. I commend you to God, and to the Word of his grace, to Jesus Christ, who
is called, The Word of his Christ the Author of Grace, and Reconciliation with
God.
grace, here; because it is Christ, that God is reconciled to us by. He is the
Author of all that grace, and reconciliation, and favor, which we have with
God. So understand the Word of grace, as you understand the Word of life,
that is Christ, clearly: What we have heard and seen, of the Word of life;
that is, Christ, the Author of that. Ye shall find Paul calling Christ by the
name of the Word, in another place, which is commonly otherwise interpreted;
Heb. 4. 12. The word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any
two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and
of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart. Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all
things are naked and open to the eyes of him, with whom we have to do. The
Word, clearly, here is a Person; I say, a Person: for, the Word of God is
quick. All things are manifest in His sight. All things are naked, and open in
the eyes of Him. He, and Him, and His; these imply, that the Apostle speaks
of a Person: not of the Word revealed, but of the Essential vord of God, which
is Christ. Not but that something may agree to the revealed Word, because it
has the stamp of Christ upon it; but something cannot be given to it. The Word
is a Revealer of the thoughts of the heart, when it is powerfully Preached.
But, Who can properly say of the word, that every creature is naked and open
before the word of God. Before Christ, every creature is open. Christ is
called, (...), the searcher of all hearts, in a proper sense. Take the end of
the thirteen Verse, All things are naked and open to the eye of him, the word
namely, with whom we have to do. Our Translation reads it thus, which the
Original does very well bear, All things are open to the eye of him, to whom
we must give an account. (...); not, With whom we have to do; but, To whom we
must give an account: (...) there, signifies Account, compared to Romans 14. 12.
So then, every one of us shall give an account of himself to God, (...); the
same word that is in Heb. 12. To whom must we give account? to the revealed
Word? No, but to the Word, that is, to Jesus Christ: We must all stand before
the judgment seat of Christ, Heb. 12. 13. The very word that is in this place,
speaks expressly of Christ, Seeing then we have a great high Priest that is
passed into the heavens for us, let us do so and so. The Word is the same with
the High Priest.

The second Quere, then, is this. Why is Christ rather called by this term,
The Word, than by the name of the Why Christ is called the Word, rather than
the Son of God.
Son of God, here in the beginning of this Gospel? why does not John rather
say, The Son of God was in the beginning, and was God, and was with God? But,
In the beginning was the Word. Why, for this reason probably, because he would
not at first alienate the hearts of his Readers. John knew, neither Jews nor
Gentiles would endure the term of the Son of God; They could not endure to
hear of a sonship in the Deity and Godhead: but, with this term Word, applied
to the Godhead, they were well acquainted, both Jews and Gentiles. But John
had often met with it in the Old Testament in this sense, for the second person
in the Trinity. I shall show you a place or two. Psalm. 33. 6. By the Word of
the Lord, were the Heavens made; and all the hosts of them by the breath of his
Mouth. Here is JEHOVAH the Lord, and the Word of the Lord, for the Second
Person, and the Spirit of his Mouth for the Third. The Creation is ascribed to
the whole Trinity. So here is Word. In the same sense ye shall find Jesus
Christ is called the Word, 2 Samuel 7. 21. in that speech of David; For thy
VVord's sake, and according to thine own Heart, have thou done all these great
things. What is that? For thy VVord's sake, 1 Chronicles. 17. 19. Compare these two
places, O Lord for thy Servant's sake, and according to thine own Heart, have
Thou done all these things. Thou have done them, for thy VVord's sake, says
Samuel. Thou have done them, for thy Servants sake, in the Chronicles; And who
is that Servant, but Christ? My servant whom I have Chosen, and in whom I
delight, etc. There is a place in Haggai, that calls Christ the Word, Haggai
2. 4, 5. Yea, now be strong, Oh Zerobbabel, says the Lord; and be strong, Oh
Joshua son of Josedeck the High Priest; and be strong all ye people of the
Land-saith the Lord, and work, for I am with you, says the Lord of Hosts:
according to the Word that I Covenanted with you, when ye came out of Egypt,
so my Spirit remains amongst you; fear ye not. Here is JEHOVAH, and Word,
and Spirit: (according to) ye may see by the Character, is not in the
Original, it is in another Letter in our Translation of it. Therefore, thus
according to the Original, or more nearly, I am with you says the Lord of
Hosts, with that Word, in whom I covenanted with you. In quo vobiscum pepegi,
I am with you together with that Word, in whom I covenanted with you, when ye
came out of Egypt. So that, God promises the Church deliverance in the Name of
God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Well then, the Jews you see were
well acquainted with this term of Word, applied to the second Person in the
Trinity; They had it in the beginning, and in the Chaldee Paraphrase, (which is
applied to JEHOVAH) it is rendered, the Word of God. What JEHOVAH is said to
do, they translate it, The Word of God did it; applying the Word of God to
Christ. Yea the very Heathens (whom John would likewise take, and therefore
baiteth his hook accordingly) the Heathens had a strong notion of the Word.
They said, There was an eternal Mind, from which proceeded (...) a Word, which
was the Creator of all things. Ye have it in Plato, Trismegistus, and diverse of
the Philosophers; yea the very Oracle. Pheuros the King of Egypt, sends to
the Oracle to know, Who should be the greatest in the World, hoping the Oracle
would have named him. But he received this answer, (...), expressing the whole
Trinity clearly and expressly: First God, says the Oracle, then the Word, and
together with them, the Spirit. So then this term Word being known, and
applied to God, both by Jews, and Heathens; and St. John knowing that Ebion,
and Cerinthus were better versed in this Philosophy, than in the Scriptures of
God; he, to win them, baits his hook with this expression of the Word: whereas
the expression of the Son of God would have angered them. In this sense, John
practices, what St. Paul confesses, to become all things to all men. He
sets forth Christ under the term of (...), the Word, which they would better
receive.

Whence the third Quaerie does arise, which is the main; How does it appear,
that Christ is fitly called by this The Word?

We must distinguish. There is a twofold Word: There The fool has said in his
heart, There is no God. Here is what the fool thought, He said; that is, within
himself. When the mind speaks to a man's self, that is a word conceived.

Secondly, there is (...), a word delivered; that is twofold, either verbum
quod, or verbum quo. The word delivered is either that word, which is one's
mind expressed; that is, the thing which he has spoken. Then it is said, he
keeps his word, when he has done the thing uttered. And then, there is the
verbum quo; that is, that thing by which a man's mind is expressed. Yet, more
plainly, take it thus.

There is a threefold word.

Verbum mentale. A word conceived. Verbum reale. A word uttered. Verbum orale.
A word uttering.

The word conceived, verbum mentale, is the Apprehension Notion, or a
Conception.

The word uttered, verbum reale, is the thing that is spoken. With God, nothing
can be impossible; (...), with God, no word shall be impossible. So in the
Original. There is nothing that God has spoken, but it shall come to pass.
Ye have a very clear place for that, Matthew. 4. 4. Man does not live by bread
alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. As I take it,
the most proper meaning of that place is. By every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of God, we understand, every creature which God has ordained for
food. And ye will be of that mind, too if you see Deuter. 8. 3. He humbled
thee, and suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee with Manna, which thou knew
not, nor thy fathers before thee; that he might make thee know, that man does
not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of
God. Whatsoever the word of God makes food, whatsoever God appoints to be
isntrumental, as he did Manna here; There is verbum reale.

Then, verbum orale, the word uttering, is the expression by which that thing
is delivered. That is the end, why God has given us speech. If we were to deal
only with God, we should need no tongue or speech, because God knows the
thoughts of our hearts. If we were to deal only with our selves, we should
need no speech; for every man knows Why the use of Speech is given to man.
what himself thinks. But because we are to deal one with another, therefore
God gives us the use of speech, that there might be a word uttering and
declaring to one another, what one another thinks, Psalm. 139. 4. There is not a
word in my tongue, but lo, O Lord, thou know it altogether.

Now, Christ is therefore called the Word, because he resembles all these. He
resembles the word conceived, as being the express Image of his Father's
Person; even as our conceptions are the image of our minds.

Again. He resembles the word uttered, as being that Thing, which is the very
suhstance of all his Father's Revelations and Promises.

And again. He resembles the word uttering,, as being the Interpreter of his
Father's will, in all Ages. In all these three respects, Christ is called the
word.

First, in reference to a word conceived. Look as the word conceived in the
mind, is the image of the mind, or 1. Christ is the Word conceived, in
reference to his Father's Person.
conception, or notion; it represents our understanding to the full: So, the
Lord Jesus Christ, He is the Image, the express Image of his Father's Person,
Heb. 1. 3. therefore his Father's word. There is no such representation of a
man, as his conception. No such representation of God, as Christ, the express
image of his Father's Person. Mark that, I pray you. There is a great deal of
difference to be put between a Shadow, a Picture, and a Statue. A Statue, to
which this expression seems to refer. He is the engraven image of his
Father's Person. A Shadow, that is a kind of a slight representation of a
body, but not a clear one; and such a representation of God is all the
Creatures. We see something of God even in the Grass and Trees, and Beasts of
the field. A Picture, that represents him a great deal more lively than a
Shadow can; it has usually a man's feature and complexion, which a Shadow has
not. And there is a kind of Picture of God, drawn upon the Souls of Men and
Angels.

But there is a further representation than either of these, that is, in a
Statue: A Character that represents further than a Picture; a Picture may
show but half the face, or half the body, to the middle; but a Statue, that
represents the whole man, Cap a pe, from top to toe. Whereas a Picture; (though
you may have one drawn more fully, yet) is, for the most part, so framed, as to
represent, though the whole body, yet not in its full proportion; not the limbs
so big as in a living man. That also Statues have above Pictures, they
represent not only the shape, but the proportion of every limb: Christ is the
Character of his Father's Person. Thus he does not only hold forth God, but
whole God, altogether. Christ is Omnipotent, as the Father; and Omni-present,
as the Father; and Omniscient, as the Father. And thus be is fitly called the
Word, in reference to the word conceived, as being the express Image of his
Father's Person.

Secondly, In reference to the word uttering, to the 2. Christ, the Word
uttering, as the Interpreter of his Father's will.
verbum orale; because Christ is the Interpreter of his Father's will. Look, as
we express our selves one to another, by our words; so God, in all Ages; has
expressed himself to the world, by his Son. The great Interpreter of His will,
in all Ages, has been Christ. Matthew. 11. 27. All things are delivered to me of
my Father, says Christ. And no man knows the Son, but the Father; neither
knows any man the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will
reveal him. God; that dwells in the light inaccessible, had been for ever
hidden to the eye of the world, and unknown to them, if the Lord Jesus Christ
had not been the word to reveal him. Joh. 1. 18. No man has seen God at any
time, but the only begotten Son in the bosom of the Father; he has declared
him. All the knowledge we have of God in the world, we may thank Christ for it;
He has declared him. We should never know one another's minds, if we had not
the use of speech to declare our selves. Christ is the word, by which God
declares himself to man. He it was, that was the word uttering. The first
Promise that ever was, that which was made to Adam in Paradise, The Genesis 3. 15.
seed of the woman shall break the serpent's head. He it was that delivered the
Law to Moses, and that spoke by the Prophets, and in them; 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11. Of
which salvation, the Prophets have enquired and searched diligently, who
prophesied of the grace that should come unto you; searching what, and what
manner of time, the Spirit of Christ, which was in them, did signify, etc. It
was the Spirit of Christ in the Prophets, that signified whatsoever they
foretold. And so in the Apostles after them, Christ was the Speaker in them: 2
Cor. 13. 3. Ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me, which to you-ward is not
weak, but is mighty Christ the Church's Orator to God, and God's Orator to
the Church:
in you. This word in the Text, as it is the Church's Orator to God, so he is
God's Orator to the Church. He speaks to God for the Church, and to that end
he sits in Heaven, at the right hand of God, interceding for us. And he
speaks from God to the Church, and in all Ages has made known the will of the
Father. And so resembles the word uttering.

Christ is resembled by the word uttering, the verbum orale, as being the
substance of all his Father's Revelations and Promises; the sum of all that God
has uttered, since the beginning of the world, and the Product, Christ himself
to be the summa totalis of all God's Revelations. What was the thing promised
to Adam in Paradise? The seed of the woman. What to Abraham? Christ, who was
the seed, in whom all nations should be blessed. All the Types of the
Ceremonial Law, What was the substance of them? Christ. Indeed, the Ceremonial
Law was the Jews Gospel. Christ the Substance of all God's Revelations.
Every thing pointed to Christ, the substance of all those Revelations of God.
To him give all the Prophets witness. The Prophets and the Law both. It is the
speech of Nathaniel, Joh. 1. 45. We have found him, of whom Moses in the Law,
and the Prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth. The sum of all Divinity is the
Scripture, the sum of the Scripture is the Gospel, the sum of the Gospel is
Christ: He is the word uttering in all. What is the world, but God unfolded?
What is the Scriptures, but Christ unfolded? As the Prince of Antwerp, one of
that House; a Prince, and yet a Preacher by Profession: It is said to be his
expression, Scripturae sunt faciae, in quibus involutus est puer Jesus: All the
Scriptures are but swadling-clothes, in which Christ, the Child Jesus, is
wrapped up.

So he is likewise resembled by the word uttering, as being the substance of
all his Father's Revelations and Promises. For, in him (Christ), all the
promises are Yea and Amen, 2. Cor. 1. 20. This for Explication of that term,
[The Word,] which ye have twice in this Verse.

Let us now Apply it, before we come to any of the Predicates.

First, In that Christ is here called the Word, in reference

First, to be helped here, to understand something of that Eternal Generation,
What the Son of God is, who, of himself is inexpressible: Who can declare his
generation? Isa. 3. This may help us to conceive better of it, than any
expression in the world. When we compare Christ with the conception of our own
hearts; there is nothing comes so near the nature of that eternal generation
of the Son of God. The understanding that conceives a notion, without
difficulty, without passion, without agitation and stirring. There is no
conception, no procession of any thing, so purely inconcrete, and simple, and
unmixt, as the proceeding of the thoughts of our Understanding. Such is the
generation of the Son from the Father; at least, this, of all things we can
take into our imagination, is the fittest to express Him. And indeed, if it
were possible for a man to contract all his notions into one; mark it, if it
were possible for him to conceive at once, whatsoever he apprehends; then
that Conceit, that he conceives in his understanding, it would be that man's
wisdom, and that man's truth, because it contains whatsoever he has in his
heart. Such a word is Christ, in reference to his Father: Whatsoever there is
in the Father, of wisdom, it is expressed there; whatsoever excellency is in
God, it is in the Son. Thence it is, that Christ is Christ, both Wisdom and
Truth.
so frequently called Wisdom, and set forth by that name, Prove. 8. And he is
called Truth, I am the way, and the truth, and the life. And there would be the
whole of a man's wisdom in that notion, which will contain all his apprehension
at once. So it is in Christ, which is the wisdom of his Father. That is one
thing. It may help us something in conceiving, the unconceivable and
unexpressible Generation of the Son from the Father.

Secondly, It may help us to conceive of the Father, according to what we read
of the Son; and to conceive of the Son, according to what we read of the
Father; because the Son is the express Image of the Father's Person. Therefore
it is of great use for poor penitent sinners, that, with the Publican, stand
afar off, and dare not lift up their eyes to Heaven. For howsoever they
conceive some hope in regard of Christ, yet they are afraid, God the Father
will never pardon them. They look at Christ, as a Savior all of Bowels. Many
poor souls have strange apprehensions of God the Father, as if he were
altogether a consuming fire, therefore no pardon to be expected from him. But
here is for thy comfort: Christ, Comfort to penitent sinners.
whatsoever he is, is the express Image of the Father's Person; therefore,
what thou find in Christ, thou may find in the Father. Was Christ so full
and free-hearted, as to be ready to help every poor soul, in the days of his
flesh? He is but the Father's Image, and thou may find the same disposition
in the Father. Thou may go to God, as to Christ if he were here in the flesh.
On the other side, If any man Terror to stubborn sinners.
be a stubborn and presumptuous sinner, that dares go on to walk in the lust
of his eyes, and pride of his heart, and flatter himself with these thoughts,
[Lord have mercy upon me, will save him on his deathbed: Howsoever there may
be some rigor expected from the Father; why, Christ will have mercy upon him,
Christ dyed for him, and will save him: And he needs make no question of the
love of Christ, of his affection, and readiness to help him, though he walks
in the stubbornness of his wicked heart:] Let such a one know, That God, as he
will by no means clear the guilty, so nor will Christ too. Mark that place for
this, Exodus 23. 20. Behold, (says God there) I send an Angel before thee, to
keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared.
That Angel was Christ; for it is said, that they provoked Christ in the
Wilderness. Therefore it was Christ. Now mark, Beware of him, and obey his
voice; provoke him not, for he will not pardon your transgressions. Why? for my
name is in him. Christ is just as I am, says God the Father here, and as
severe to sinners as I am: Therefore provoke him not, he will not pardon. Kiss
the Son, lest he be angry. The Son can be angry as well as the Father. Though
he be the Lamb of God, yet that Lamb will turn Lion against them that disobey
him, and refuse to obey the Gospel of Christ. The Lamb will be so angry, as to
make the great ones of the earth to cry, Who shall deliver them from the wrath
of the Lamb? Rev. 6.

Secondly, In that Christ is called the Word, in reference word uttering,
because he is the Interpreter of his Father's will, and declares the Father's
mind to the sons of men: Let us learn from hence to bless Christ; for all the
knowledge we have of God, and the things of God, it is from him we have it, he
is the Word that has declared it: The only begotten Son in the bosom of the
Father, he has declared him, Joh. 1. 18. If men think themselves so much
beholding to their Tutors, and Schoolmasters, that discover to them the hidden
things of Arts and Sciences; If Alexander was so much bound to his Master, his
Schoolmaster, Aristotle, his Instructor; that he made a question, Whether he
were more bound to him, for his teaching of him, than to Philip his father for
begetting of him: Then, what do we owe to Jesus Christ, the great Tutor, to
whom we owe all our Learning, Tutors, and Fathers too? for all Relations meet
in him, and all Duty is due to him. And if He be the word uttering, let none be
ashamed of that work of the Ministry. Some Gentlemen think it scorn to make
their sons Ministers; God the Father made his Son a Minister, ye see; and
sets the Lord Jesus Christ, his only Son, to be a revealer of his will to
the sons of men. And if so, something else may be learned from it.

Let us all take heed to what we hear. It is Christ that is the word uttering.
What we find in Scripture, and hear delivered according to the Scripture, it is
the word of Christ: Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom,
The power of the Word Preached.
Col. 3. 16. Ye must give me leave to tell you, when men speak Scripture to
you, rightly interpreted, and ye refuse to hear; ye do not refuse men, that
speak from the Pulpit, but him that speaks from Heaven, which is Christ
himself; according to what we read, Heb. 12. 25. See that ye refuse not him
that speaks. For if they escaped not, who refused him that spoke on earth;
much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from
heaven. Christ speaks from Heaven in every Sermon, wherein truth is delivered
unto you. He says to the drunkard from Heaven, Become sober; and to the wanton
he says from Heaven, Become chaste; to the unbeliever, Lay hold on Christ. It
is said from Heaven, when it is said from the Pulpit. If men will go on in sin
in spite of Heaven, God will confound them in spite of the world; they must
to Hell in spite of the world: Though hand join in hand, they shall not go
unpunished. If men will not hear him speak on earth, they must not expect to
have him to hear, when they would have Heaven. That is the third thing. Christ
is called the word, in reference to the word uttering; because he is the
substance of all his Father's Revelations and Promises.

Let us therefore learn from hence, to grow in the knowledge of what we read,
and whatsoever we hear from the word of God, because he is the substance of
all. Thus, take any Scripture, gage it, and you will find Christ in the bottom
of it: If it be a Precept, it leads you to Christ for strength to perform it:
If it be a Threat, it leads you to Christ for grace to escape it: If it be a
Promise, it clearly conveyeth Christ; In him all the promises are Yea and Amen,
and therefore called, Precious promises; not that they have any more price in
them, of themselves, than any other Truths have; but precious promises. That is
a precious Box, that has a rich Jewel in it. Every Promise is precious, that
has Christ in more latitude, than other places of Scripture have. Therefore
let us labor to find Christ in every one. The old World had but one Promise,
for a great many years together; from Adam to Abraham, we read but of one
Promise which God made to Adam in Paradise; and yet Adam a holy man, and Enoch
a holy man; and yet but one Promise. Now, we that have so many Promises, cannot
we find Christ in some of them to rely upon? Having therefore these promises,
dearly Beloved, let us cleanse our selves. Let us seek for Christ, and
Cleansing, in the Promises. I have done now with the Subject of these three
Propositions, The Word.

The first thing that is predicated of the Word, is, that Existency, In the
beginning was the word. The other Evangelists, especially Matthew and Luke,
they have spoken fully of the temporal Generation of Christ. So Matthew
begins, The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the
son of Abraham. Now John, whose aim was to insist upon those things, that
concern the Divinity of Christ, he begins with his Eternal Generation.

In the Beginning was the Word.
Beginning and was, says Basil, these two terms are like two Anchors, which
the ship of a man's soul may safely ride at, come what storms will come. None
of those Heresies that deny the Divinity of Christ, shall be able to shame that
man, that lays hold upon these, In the beginning, and Was. There was a
Beginning, when other things received their Being; I, but Christ was in that
Beginning, and so before the things had received their Being. Much ado there
is amongst Interpreters, to little purpose, to find out several senses of this
word [Beginning]. I will not trouble you with them: That of Mark will clearly
give you the meaning of it, In the beginning of the Creation of God, Mar. 13.
19. Such as was not from the beginning of the Creation, which God created. Here
is the thing clear. The beginning of the Creation that God created, is the same
that Moses means, Genesis 1. 1. In the beginning God created heaven and earth.
It is something remarkable, that Moses, with whom God spoke face to face; and
John the Evangelist, who lay in Christ's bosom, should both of them have one
Exordium; In the beginning, says Moses; and, In the beginning, says John. It
is thought, that John does allude to Moses, only with this clear difference;
Moses speaking of the Creation of the World, says, In the beginning, God made
heaven and earth. He speaks of a World that was made. John speaking of a Word
that was not made, says, In the beginning was the word. He does not say, He
was made, as if Christ were a creature; but, when all other creatures were
made, Christ was. Christ had a Being, when they did but begin to be; therefore
he was before them. That which was in the beginning must needs be eternal;
Why? Why, because, before the creatures began to be, there was nothing but God.

What was before the Beginning? Let that be the question.

It will lead you into the Abyss of Eternity, what may God before all, and God
after all, and God in all. Before the Creation, nothing but God. Christ was
before the Creation; when they began to be, he was. Therefore Christ was
Eternal, there was no beginning before that Indeed, there was God before the
Creation, but God has no beginning. Though there be principium ordinis, there
is not principium temporis; as, the Father first, and The Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, Eternal.
Son secondly, and the holy Ghost the third. Here is principium ordinis, Order;
but no Time, wherein the Father, Son, or holy Ghost began to be. So, Christ was
in the beginning, had a being then. There was no beginning till the Creation,
Therefore Christ was from all Eternity.

This may be confirmed with more strength, because the holy Ghost, throughout
the Scripture, when he would express Eternity, uses to do it thus; Such a
thing was before the world; that is, it was Eternal. Psalm. 90. 1, 2. Lord,
thou have been our dwelling place in all generations. Before the mountains were
brought forth, or ever thou had formed the earth or the world, from
everlasting to everlasting, thou art God. How proves he that? Because he was,
before the Mountains or Earth was made. Christ was before the world, therefore
God from everlasting to everlasting. Joh. 17. 5. Now, O Father, glorify thou
me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world
was. That is, from Eternity* Take a clear place (for those that clearly
apprehend Christ to be meant by Wisdom, as undoubtedly He is) Prove. 8. 22. and
so forward to the 30 verse; a place, to which our Evangelist is thought to have
alluded here, and it is fully parallel; where Wisdom says, The Lord possessed
me in the beginning of his ways: Just as in the Text, In the beginning was the
word. The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his ways, before his works of
old. I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the world was.
When there were no depths, I was brought forth; when there were no fountains
abounding with water. Before the mountains were settled, before the hills were
brought forth, etc. Another testimony ye have of Christ's Eternity: it is in
the Type of Melchisedeck, Heb. 7. 2, 3. King of Righteousness, and King of
Salem, which is King of Peace. Without father or mother, or without descent;
having neither beginning of days, nor end of life, but made like the Son of
God, which abides a Priest continually. What cause have we to adore, as
Tertullian speaks (not only to admire, but to adore) the fullness of the
Scriptures? The very silence of the Scriptures speaks deep Mysteries. The
Apostle arguing from the Scriptures the Eternity of Christ, speaks nothing of
Melchisedeck's father or mother. Moses speaking of the Worthies in Scripture,
he is wont to speak of their parentage, when they began, and when they dyed.
But the Apostle, when he speaks of this Priest, says, He was without father or
mother. Another place, of the Eternity of Christ, ye have, Mich. 5. 2. where he
speaks both of the temporal and eternal Generation of the Son of God; Thou
Bethlehem Ephrata, though thou be little amongst the thousands of Judah, yet
out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that shall be Ruler in Israel: Out of
thee shall he come forth. That is, of his temporal Government. Here he
speaks of his eternal Generation, Whose goings forth have been from
everlasting. In the beginning was the word. That is, Christ was from
everlasting. He had a being, before the greatest began to be. And this may
serve briefly, for the Explication of that Proposition.

I now come to the Application, because I intend to be as brief as may be. What
ye have heard of Christ's Eternity, of having a being before the creatures were
made, will afford you,

First, matter of Comfort. Secondly, matter of Duty.
First, Matter of Comfort from hence: because this lets Of Comfort.
us see, that our happiness stands upon an everlasting foundation, upon one
who was in the beginning, before any creature began to be: And what shall
overthrow that Building, whose foundations are laid in Eternity? Shall the
Creatures, which are but of yesterday? What can they do, to undo, what the
eternal God has ordained before the world was? That is the foundation of all,
Ephesians. 1. 4. According as he has chosen us in Christ, before the foundation of
the world, that we should be holy, and without blame before him, in love. Our
salvation bears date before the world was; therefore there is nothing in the
world shall prejudice it, much less overthrow it. It rests upon him who was
in the beginning, and who will be after the end; upon him, who is Alpha and
Omega; more ancient than the beginning, and more lasting than the end of the
creatures. Alas, poor creatures! time was, when they were not, but then was He,
In the beginning was the word; and there will come a time when they shall not
be; but no time, wherein it can be said, Christ is not. The Devil is a
creature, Shall he be able to undo, what the Eternal has appointed? He was
not when Christ was; and though he shall now live for ever to be in torment,
yet the time shall come, when he shall not be a Tempter. Then Christ shall be a
Savior, be sure. Hab. 1. 12. See what a spring of consolation does arise from
this consideration of Strong Consolation, from the consideration of Christ's
Eternity.
Christ's Eternity; Art thou not from everlasting, O Lord my God, my holy One,
art thou not from everlasting? we shall not die. Certainly, we that have an
everlasting Savior, shall be freed from everlasting death, we shall not die.
This is the lot of as many, as lay hold on him by faith. Our eternal Savior
loves to do all things like himself. Lest you should fear either want of love
or might, both his love and power are eternal, even as Himself is. He has
everlasting kindness in him, and intends to show it unto us, Isa. 54. 8. In
a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, And from his Love and
Power.
but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy
Redeemer. And his Power is as everlasting as his Love, Isa. 20. 4. Trust ye in
the Lord for ever, for in the Lord JEHOVAH is everlasting strength. The
consideration of these two, should fill us with everlasting consolation, as
Paul speaks, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16. Everlasting consolation, and good hope through
grace. He that was in the beginning, will be with us to the end; I, and in the
end of our days too. It is a great comfort, when a man comes to die, to
think, Whom my Salvation depends upon; why, upon an everlasting Redeemer,
that dies not.

There is a time when we must go out from all the creatures, and have no more
to do with those things, that are so pleasing to us in the world. There is a
time when we must go into Eternity; and there is Christ. The creatures we
delighted in, they remain not; I, but the God we go to, He remains; From
everlasting to everlasting, thou art God. Here is a living Comfort for a dying
Creature.

Secondly, Here is matter of Duty, as well as matter of Of Duty.
Comfort. If Christ were in the beginning, before all the creatures, then let
him not come after any of them in our esteems. That is one Lesson we learn from
hence. It is expressly said of Christ, Col. 1. 17. He is hefore all things, and
by him all things consist. He is before all things, in regard of his own
being: Let him be before all things, and above all things, in our esteem. He
was before all the creatures, O let him not come after them in our hearts. In
the beginning was the word, when no wealth, no profit, no pleasure, no
preferment, such as men now dote upon. Christ is before all these things, Why
should he go after them in the esteem of men?

As it was amongst the Heathens, they placed their happiness in the exercise
of virtue; and yet some of them cried, Virtus post nummos, quaerenda pecunia
primum. Let Lib. 1. Epist. Horat. ad Moecenatem.
virtue come after wealth. They first labored to get a good estate, and then
looked after good qualities and dispositions. So it is with many Christians,
who, in their Doctrins and Professions, place their happiness and fellowship
with Christ after riches; let Christ come after. Which of us does not wonder,
and cry shame of the Gadarenes, that preferred their swine before Christ,
rather let him go out of their coasts, than part with their herds. Certainly,
we, in effect, do the same, when we prefer our swinish lusts, before the
embracing of, and yielding obedience to, our blessed Savior. We are ready to
defy the Jews for crying, Not him, but Barabbas; and yet our actions cry as
loud, Not Him, but the world; not Him, but the flesh. Rather imitate good
Tremelius, who was himself a Jew born: and after, when he turned Christian, in
reference to what his Countrymen, the Jews, had once said, Not him, but
Barabbas; he made this his Motto, Non Barabbam, sed Christum; Not Barabbas,
Tremelius his Motto, after his Conversion.
but Christ; to intimate, his having renounced all, for the Lord Jesus Christ.
Let it be thine: Not the world, but Christ; not the creature, but Christ; not
the flesh, but Christ. He was before all, and shall be before all in my esteem.
Whom have I in heaven but thee? Psalm. 73. 25. That is one Duty we are to learn
from hence.

Secondly, Seeing Christ is Eternal, trust him for Eternal things; expect
such from him, that is an everlasting Father, Isa. 9. 6. Do you think, an
everlasting Father will lay up none but temporal blessings for his children?
He that was from the beginning, has provided something that shall be after the
end, for everlasting for you, if ye will seek after him. Remember what the
Apostle says, 2 Cor. 4. ult. While we look not at the things which are seen,
but at the things which are not seen; for the things which are seen are
temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal. Oh! look at those
eternal things, trust in an eternal Savior, who has purchased them first,
and since provided them for you. He is gone before, to provide heavenly things
for you. Grace is a thing, which has something of eternity in it. The way of
holiness, the Scripture calls it, the everlasting way, Psalm. 139. ult. Lead
me in the way everlasting. Seek to Christ for that. For your everlasting
Savior will give you that which Grace begets Glory.
has an influence into eternity; so Grace has. It is an immortal seed, that
begets its glory, and that is everlasting too. Ye have a Promise, Isa. 45. 17.
Israel shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting salvation. He that was
before the world, has happiness world without end, for all that believe in
him. So much for the first Proposition, namely, In the beginning was the word.

The second is that, that concerns the Personal Coexistency of the Word with
the Father; and it lies in these words, The word was with God.

By the Word, we still understand the same Person, Jesus Christ. By God, in
this Proposition, ye are to understand the Father. For you must know, this
term [God] is taken two manner of ways in this Verse. Sometimes the term
[God] is taken essentially, and so it is appliable to all the Persons in the
Trinity; as when it is said, God is a Spirit; God there is taken, so as to
signify the Nature of God, and the Essence of God, which is common to all the
three Persons. And so it is taken in the last clause of this Verse, The word
was God.

But otherwhile it is taken Personally, and so it signifies not the whole
Essence, but some one Person in the Trinity: As when it is said, God was in
Christ, reconciling the world to himself. The Father in the Son. When it is
said, Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son.
Here is God loving the world, and giving Christ. So in the second Proposition,
The word was with God; that is, with God the first Person. This implies at
once, a Nearness, and a Distinction. A Nearness to God, The word was God; and
yet a Distinction from him, for it was but with him. Now, that which is with
another, does imply a person distinct. We do not say, a man is with himself,
but Peter is with Paul, or Paul with Peter. So here, The word was with God.
Take two or three places to help you to understand this. Joh. 1. 18. No man
has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of
the Father, etc. Here is the Son in the bosom of the Father, that is, the Word
with God. Here is a nearness, and yet a Personal Christ near to, and yet
distinct from, the Father.
distinction. Nearness, for it is in the bosom; and yet a Personal
distinction, it is the Son in the Father's bosom. One more clear, that is fully
parallel with the Text; that is, 1 John 1. 2. The life was manifested, and we
have seen it, and bear witness, and show to you that eternal life which was
with the Father. Eternal life is a Person here. By Eternal life ye must
understand the very self-same Person, who is called the word of life, in the
first verse. Eternal life is something that was seen, and born witness to,
namely, the Lord Jesus Christ, of whom, says he, verse. 1. they have seen him,
and looked upon him, and have handled the word of life. So that it is no new
thing for John to call Christ, the Eternal life. He says, This is the true
God, and eternal life. What does he say of this Eternal life? Why, that we
have seen it, and bear witness: That is, of that Eternal life which is with
the Father. Take another, which is parallel to the Text, Prove. 8. 29, 30.
where, by Wisdom is understood Christ, which says of it self, Then I was by
him as one brought up with him, and was daily his delight* Rejoicing always
before him, rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth, and my delights were
with the sons of men. Where Christ is spoken of, as a son, in the presence of
the Father. He is said to be with him, as here in the Text. Take notice of two
Praepositions, there used, in reference to Christ; In, and With; (...), and
(...). It is said, Joh. 14. 10. Believe thou not? (says Christ to Philip) He
that has seen me has seen the Father. And then he says, I am in the Father,
and he in me. Here Christ is said to be in the Father, and, in my Text, with
the Father; with this difference, [in] that notes Unity; [with] that imports
Distinction: [in] that falls upon the Essence, [with] that falls upon the
Person. So as, in plain terms, Christ is in the Father, in regard of the Unity
of the Essence, which is the same with that of the Father. Christ is with the
Father, in regard of the Distinction of his Person. So as between the Son and
the Father, there is alius and alius, but not aliud and aliud, as Divines say:
That is, The Son is another Person from the Father, but not another thing from
the Father. The Father and the Son are Unum, but not Unus; the Father and the
Son are one Thing, but not one Person. Ye may truly say, The Son is with the
Father, as my Text has it; but ye cannot say, The Son is the Father, because
there is distinction of Persons, and yet a personal Co-existency, The word was
with God. So ye have the meaning of that Proposition.

Let us now make Use of it.

First, Take notice, here, of the distinction of Persons in the word with God,
and the Son with the Father, not divided from him. And yet one Person with
another, and so distinct one from another. With him, not without distinction;
and in him, without division. As in the nightime, if a man set up three
Candles in a room, all these concur to the lightning of the room; yet there is
but one light: So, but one Essence in the Divinity. Yet here are three Candles
that give that Light, but no man can say, that this light is peculiar to the
First Candle, and this to the Second, for all shine together; and yet the light
of the second Candle is with the first, but the light is all one. But O the
depth! It is no wading here, farther than a man has footing out of Scripture,
for fear of being past our standing, and be drowned. The Word of God is with
God, and one Person with another; but, the manner How, as Basil said, when he
met with some knots of difficulty in this Mystery, I believe, says he, I do
not busy my self in searching over far; what we cannot make out in plain
reason, we must make out in believing, where we have the Scripture for our
bottom; only take notice of such a thing. Certainly, there is a distinction of
Persons in the Trinity. Here, is One with Another. The word was with God.

Secondly, Learn from hence to worship God, according There are three that bear
record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit and these three are one.
And some kind of necessity appears, in a way of reason, which we may take
notice of, for the strengthening of our faith in this great Mystery, that there
should be a distinction of Persons. God The benefit of the distinction of
Persons.
the Father was the Person offended. Reconciliation was to be made. None but
God has enough in him to satisfy God. Therefore it was requisite there should
be a Person, to satisfy the Person offended. That, the second Person, the Lord
Jesus undertakes, and goes through with it. But how shall this be made known?
Poor man is as far off as ever he was, if he be left here; he has no power in
his own nature to reach this. Therefore there is a Third Person, the holy
Ghost, who discovers this, and applies it. So that the Salvation of Man, is
by the concurrence of the whole Trinity.

But I must here again take off my self, with, O the depth! as Bernard did, Hoc
magnum est Mysterium, This is a great Mystery, a Mystery rather to be adored,
than searched into. Well, says he: Quomodo esset Pluralitas in Unitate, and
unitas in Pluralitate; How there should be a Plurality in Unity, and how a
Unity in Plurality; three Persons, and yet but one Essence; Scrutari temeritas
est, It is rashness to search too far into it. Credere pietas, it is piety to
believe it. Cognos^ere vita aeterna, It is life eternal to know it. We can
never have a full comprehension of it, till we come to enjoy it.

Thirdly, This may serve to Answer that Question, which some make, What was God
a doing before he made the world?

It might suffice to Answer them, as Augustine did in He was a making Hell for
such as put these Questions. But there is a fairer Answer in the Text, which
tells you, That the Word that was in the beginning, before the Creatures were
made, that Word was with God. God was delighting himself in his Word. God and
his Word were a contriving the Redemption of Mankind, and had thoughts of peace
toward the Elect from all Eternity. That place, Prove. 8. speaks something to
it, When he appointed the foundations of the world, verse. 30, 31. then I was by
him, as one brought up with him; or, as a Nourisher, in Intention or decreeing
of the Creatures, that were to be made; or out of the Church, that was to be
gathered out of the world. I was daily his delight, rejoicing God delighting in
his Son, before the world was
always before him. This God was a doing before the world was made, he was
delighting in his Son; this Text says so, clearly. So says Peter, 1 Pet. 2.
19, 20. The precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, and without
spot; who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was
manifested in these last times for you. Before the foundations of the world,
what was God a doing? Plotting (as I may speak with reverence) the work of man's
Redemption; projecting my Redemption and thine. Before we were, he had thoughts
of peace and mercy toward us. Therefore we may trust him as long as we live.
When we think little of him, he thinks much of us.

The fourth Use we may make of this, is this; It should Word with God, yet was
pleased, in the fullness of time, to become Emmanuel, God with us. What an act
of respect and love was it in Moses, to his Countrymen the Jews, Moses his
exceeding love to his Countrymen, the Jews.
poor Hebrews, in sore bondage; and he in Pharaoh's Court, brought up in all
the learning of the Egyptians, adopted by the King's daughter, full of honor
(some say, Lord Treasurer of Egypt; and they build their conjecture upon that,
because it is said, He forsook the treasures of Egypt): It was a great thing
for him to leave the Court, and sort himself with poor Laborers at
Brick-kilns; yet, that he did. Here is an act of great condescension in Moses,
of much respect to his Country, and love to the poor Hebrews. But what is this
of Moses to that of Christ, who was with God in the Court of Heaven, taken up
with the mutual delights, which the blessed Trinity had in each other? To
leave this, all this, for a time, and to come to be Man with us! To leave his
Mansion, which was Heaven, and to pitch his Tent upon Earth, as the word
signifies, Joh. 1. 17. He dwelt amongst us, (...); that is, as in a Tent or
Tabernacle. Do but consider the difference of these two states; that which
Christ left, and that which Christ took: The former was a state of
incomprehensible glory, In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with
God. What was the state of the Word? See, Joh. 17. 5. Now, O Father, glorify
thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the
world was. I had with thee glory before the world was. Here is the Word with
God, in the state of glory. From this state of glory he is pleased to descend:
To what? To take shame. It is emphatically said, for that is one half of
Christ's sufferings, Shame is. Heb. 12. 2. Looking to Jesus, the Author and
Finisher of our faith; who, for the joy that was set before him, endured the
cross, and despised [the shame]. He came to Isa. 53. 3: Luke 23. 36, 39 Luke
17. 34. Matthew. 9. 11, 34. Matthew. 12. 24. and 10. 25.
be buffeted, and spit upon, and reviled, and called a friend of publicans and
sinners, a wine-bibber; yea, the prince of devils. They called Christ
Beelzebub. Before he came into the world, he was in a state of Joy, as well as
of Glory. The Text says, He was with God; and wheresoever God is, there is
joy; as the Psalmist says, In thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy
right hand are pleasures for evermore. What is that Christ took instead of joy?
He came to sorrow; sorrow, and deadly sorrow, surrounded his soul on every
side. From that eternal joy, he is pleased to descend to those intolerable
sorrows, to be a man of sorrows, acquainted with grief. Blessed Savior! may we
well say, Isa. 53. 3.
What a change have thou made, for thy love to us? of being with God, to be
with Man; from the Father's Bosom, to the Virgin's Womb; from Heaven, to Earth;
from Glory, (as ye have heard) to Shame; and from Joy, to Grief: And all this,
for our sakes. Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus 2 Cor. 8. 9.
Christ, (says the Apostle) who though he were rich, yet for your sakes he
became poor, that ye, through his poverty, might become rich. How should this
fir'e and inflame our hearts with love to Christ! He, who was the delight of
his Father from all Eternity, had his delight with the sons of men; How should
the sons of men have their delight in him? Has Christ left Heaven for me, and
shall not I leave the world for Christ? Has he thus emptyed himself for me, of
his Joy and Glory, for a time; and shall not I deny my self for him, in my
pleasures, and profits, and ease? What a poor sorry joy is that, which the
world affords us, to that which Christ has first given us? Let us love him,
who loved us so, as that he was pleased to become Emmanuel, God with us. So,
The Word was with God.

This is that which concerns the Personal Co-existency of Christ, with God
the Father.

In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
There is hardly any place of Scripture more abused, in a way of superstition,
than the beginning of this Gospel. It was a common thing in times of Popery
(and I would to God it were abolished wholly at this day) to write these words
in certain Characters, and to tie the paper or parchment about people's necks,
as a Charm against Agues; or as a Spell, to prevent some other mischief. We
shall, I hope, make better use of them, by how much this Scripture has been
wronged by others. These words are a Charm indeed, but it is against Heretical
Opinions, and carnal discouragements. The Deniers of Christ's Divinity, never
had such a Charm as this is, Joh. 11. We have made some of them to that end,
and hope to make more, as we do proceed.

The Fifth Use from hence, is, that this very Proposition, the Word was with
God, holds forth Comfort to us: For he that was with God in the beginning, is
with him still, and will be with him for everlasting; with God then, and with
God now, and with God to all eternity: And that under the notion of our
Advocate, 1 John 2. 1, 2. If any man Christ our Advocate.
sin, we have an Advocate with the Father (So the phrase is here, With the
Father) Jesus Christ the righteous; and he is the propitiation for our sins. He
is there as an Advocate to plead a cause: And what cause? His own as well as
ours. We know, when a Counselor is employed in a Cause, that concerns
himself as well as his Clyent, he is wont to be exceeding active in that
business, more than in other; he will neglect no opportunity in such a Cause.
So, Christ is such an Advocate, as to be a Propitiation for our sins. And
Christ should lose the price of his own Blood, if our Cause should miscarry
before God the Father, with him, where he appears for us; Heb. 9. 24. Christ
is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of
the true; but into Heaven it self, to appear in the presence of God for us.
Observe that, [With God] and, [For us]. He appears there as an Advocate
appears for his Clyent; when such a Cause is called upon, he pleads that
Cause as an Advocate. So, Christ appears for us as our Proctor; He is God
with us, and for us; and therefore able to save to the uttermost all that come
to God by him; because he lives to make intercession for them, Heb. 7. 25.
Never fear, that any thing shall be wanting to thy salvation, Christ will be
sure to perfect it. He will save to the uttermost, because he lives for ever.
Well may Satan's accusations trouble us on Earth, they shall never trouble us
in Heaven, for Christ appears there for us. He is ever with the Father.

I pass now to the third Clause of this first Verse, which concerns the
Divine Essence of Christ.

The Word was God.
So with God a distinct Person from the Father, as to be God, of the same
Essence with the Father. The word, [God] is taken essentially for the Father,
the First-Person in the Trinity. This is a point of high concernment, that
Christ is God; so high, as whosoever builds not upon this, builds upon the
sands. This is the Rock of our salvation, The Word was God. But there will be
frequent occasion in this Gospel of meeting with it, and therefore I shall
speak now but briefly of it. Take a few clear places, such as our enemies know
not how to evade; that in Romans 9. 5. Of whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ
came, who is over all, God blessed for evermore. Christ is here himself called,
God blessed for ever. So, Tit. 2. 13. Looking for that blessed hope, and the
glorious appearance of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. Who is it
that shall appear at the last Day in the Clouds, but Christ, who is called the
great God, and our Savior? God blessed for ever, says Paul to the Romans; The
great God, says Paul to Titus. And lest any Heretic should hope to shift it
off (as they are as full of shifts, as the Serpent is of turnings and windings)
and should say, Why, Angels are called gods, and Magistrates are called gods.
To stop their mouths, St. John tells you, He is the true God; I, and God
properly so called, The true God.

You know what they use to object against this, as if the This is life
eternal, that they know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent. Jesus Christ seems to be made a different Person from the true God.

I answer, There is no necessity of limiting this phrase, [The only true God]
to the Person of the Father, the First Person in the Trinity. It is true
indeed, that the word Thee in the third Verse, refers to the word Father, in
the first Verse, These words spoke Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven, and
said, Father, glorify thy Son, etc. And, this is eternal life, that we know
thee the only true God. Ye must know, the word Father is taken two manner of
ways in Scripture: First, Sometimes it is taken for the First-Person in the
Trinity. And Father is taken for the Divine Essence, or rather for an Attribute
that is common to all the Persons in the Trinity: Every one is Father, in this
sense. So, Christ is Father as well as the First Person. He is called, The
everlasting Father; and, The Prince of peace, Isa. 9. 6. Father, in that sense,
is no more than, God in his Essence. Mal. 2. 10. Have we not all one Father?
has not one God created us? There is a concurrence of all the Persons in this
great work of Creation, and so in this Relation of Father. That, Jam. 1. 27.
True religion, and undefiled before God and the Father. Father here belongs
to all the Persons. 1 Pet. 1. 17. We know that all judgment is committed to
Christ. So that Father is taken here essentially, and belongs to all the
Trinity. If ye understand it so here, then the Objection is of no force.

But Christ is conceived here as Mediator, and as Man praying to the whole
Trinity, under the name of Father, and This is eternal life, to know thee
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. So that, 1 Timothy 2. 5. is
parallel, There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the man
Christ Jesus. Nothing is so familiar in Scripture, as to distinguish Christ as
Mediator from God, taking the word essentially, for all the Persons in the
Trinity.

Secondly, Suppose the word [Father] Joh. 17. be taken Personally, for the
First Person in the Trinity; yet the [Onely] is not here to be limited to the
First Person. I pray you observe that, This is eternal life, that they know
thee the only true God. It is not, Thee only, the true God, as if the Father
only were the true God. Indeed, the (...) is not to be tied to the saying,
[Thee onely] but, [Thee, God] is to be tied to the word [Onely] To know thee
the only true God. So as (...), the word, [Onely] is not exclusive from the
other two Persons, the Son, and God distinguished from Creatures and Idols, not
from the other Persons.
the holy Ghost; but only exclusive from the Creatures, who are improperly
called gods, as sometimes Angels, and sometimes Magistrates, are called so; and
Idols so called, falsely. The only true God, excluding Idols, but not the Son
and the holy Ghost. You may as well argue from that place, 1 Cor. 8. 5, 6. that
God the Father is not Lord, as argue from this, that Christ is not the true
God; for it is said there, Though there be that are called gods both in heaven
and in earth, as there be gods many, and lords many. But to us there is but one
God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord, Jesus
Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. But one Lord Jesus Christ. May
men from hence argue, and say, The Father is not the Lord Jesus Christ? But
many argue and say, That Christ is not God, because he says, There is but one
God the Father, of whom are all things. I will not hold you long upon this,
because I hope there are not many here, that need solution in this point,
though the error be spreading. Consider that place, Matthew. 11. 27. All things
are delivered to me of my Father, says Christ. And, None knows the Son but
the Father; neither knows any the Father save the Son, and he to whom the Son
will reveal him. None knows the Son but the Father. Why, does not the Son
know himself? does not the holy Ghost know the Son? Yes. It is said, The Spirit
searches the deep things of God. Neither knows any the Father save the Son.
Does not the Father know himself? and the holy Ghost, both the Persons? Yes.
But this none excludes Creatures, from the other Persons. So the true God is
distinguished from Creatures and Idols, not from the other Persons in the
Trinity.

I will make Use of this, to meet with such Heretics as Socinians and Arians
Beware of Heresies.
should be held forth amongst the rest. Let us beware of their doctrines, shun
their meetings and persons, that come to us with the denial of the Divinity of
Christ in their mouths. This was John's doctrine, and his practice. Irenaeus
tells us, that after he was returned from his Banishment, and came to Ephesus,
he came to bathe himself; and in the Bath he found Cerinthus, that said, Christ
had no being, till he received it from the Virgin Mary: Upon the sight of
whom, John skipped out of the Bath, and called his companions from thence,
saying, Let us go from this place, lest the Bath should fall down upon us,
because Cerinthus is in it, that is so great an enemy to God. Ye see his
Doctrine, see his words too, 2 John 10, 11. If any come to you, having not this
doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God-speed: for he
that bids him God-speed, is partaker of his evil deed. What the Doctrine
was, ye may see to be the Doctrine of the Divinity of Christ. This is one word
to Ministers, to confute the gainsayers; but it is not the main: I will not
therefore stand upon it in this Auditory. As it is with the Angels that are
ministering Spirits, for the good of the Church; so it should be with the
Ministers, that are called, the good Angels of the Church. The Angels are
fometimes put upon conflicts with the Devil, they have many combats with the
wicked Spirits, as may be gathered out of Daniel. But, this is but in order to
their ministering for the good of the Elect. They conflict with evil Spirits,
that they may be serviceable for the good of the Church. So should Ministers
conflict with evil Angels, but in reference to the good of the Church. Speak
comfortably to Jerusalem, says the Lord to the Angel. Therefore I shall pass
to another Use of Consolation.

The Word was God.
Beloved, If this be not true (say Heretics what they The promises cannot be
made good; if Christ be not God.
of sins by Christ. What soul can get to Heaven, if Christ be not God? He has
promised eternal life to all that love him, and believe in him; How shall a
man have this Promise made good, if He be not God? If a man that has never a
foot of land in England, shall make his Will, and bequeath to thee such and
such Houses, and Land, in such a Town and County, whereas he was never the
owner of any such Houses or Land: Certainly, this Deed is null, thou art never
a whit the nearer enriching thy self with such a Legacy. If Heaven be not in
Christ's dispose, how can we have it as his gift? If Christ be not God, we
cannot have Heaven. If Christ be not God, we are all still in our sins. For,
the Justice of God expects satisfaction to be made, for the sins of men; we
cannot make satisfaction, but our Surety must. Christ is our Surety. If Christ
be not God, our Satisfaction is null; for, an infinite Justice offended, must
have an infinite Price paid. A man may satisfy the Justice of man, but what
man can satisfy the Justice of God? Will God accept the firstborn of thy body
for the sin of thy soul? No, he will not. Yet he will accept His Firstborn for
the sins of the world, for in him he is well pleased. There lies a great deal
of strength upon that place, it is a special foundation of faith; Act. 20. 28.
Over which the holy Ghost Christ is God.
has made you over seers, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased
with his own blood. The Church of God, which he has purchased with his own
blood. This must needs relate to Christ. And Christ is here called God, and
Christ's Blood is called the Blood of God. Christ could never have gone through
with the purchase of the Church, if the Blood he shed had not been the Blood of
God. Whatsoever the Justice of God can exact, that the Blood of God can
discharge. The blood of man would not have done it; the blood of men or Angels
would not have done it. Man sinned, and Man must satisfy. Therefore the Human
Nature must be assumed by a Surety, for a man cannot do it. If an Angel should
have assumed Human Nature, it would Humane nature assumed by none but God.
have polluted him; Human Nature was so defiled by sin, that it could not be
assumed by any but God. Now Christ being God, the Divine Nature purified the
Human Nature, which he took, and so it was a sufficient Sacrifice. The person
offered in sacrifice was God, as well as Man. This is a ground whereupon a
Believer may challenge Satan to say his worst, and do his worst! Let him
present God, as terrible; Let him present me, as abominable in the sight of
God, by reason of my sins; Let him aggravate the height of God's displeasure,
and the height, and depth, and length, and breadth, of my sins; I grant all.
And, against all this, I oppose this infinite Satisfaction of Christ. Though
the Justice of God cannot be bribed, yet it may be satisfied. Here is a
proportionable Satisfaction; here is God answering God.

The Word was God.
This Word was He that laid down his life, and shed his blood for us. And now
let Satan urge the Justice of God as much as he can. The Justice of God makes
me sure of Salvation, Salvation assured by Gods Justice.
Why? Because his Justice obliges him to accept of an adequate Satisfaction,
of his own appointing. The Justice of God makes me sure of mine own
happiness: because, if God be just, that Satisfaction should be had; when that
Satisfaction is made, Justice requires, that the person for whom it is made,
shall be received into favor. I confess, that unless God had obliged himself
by Promise, there were no pressing his Justice, thus far, because Noxa sequitur
caput. There was mercy in the Promise of sending Christ out of mercy, to
undertake for us; otherwise we cannot say, that God was bound, in Justice, to
accept of Satisfaction, unless he had first, in mercy, been pleased, to
appoint the way of a Surety. Justice indeed requires Satisfaction, but it
requires it of the person that sins. Here comes in Mercy, that a Surety
shall be accepted; and what he does, is, as if the person that offended should
have done it himself. Here is Mercy and Salvation surely bottomed upon both. So
much sweet comfort flows from this consideration, That Christ is God. I come
now to the second Verse.

Verse. 2. The same was in the beginning with God.
What the Evangelist had affirmed in the former Verse, The Word was with God;
he now confirms in this second Verse, The same was in the beginning with God.
There is a Repetition, but with some Illustration. It may be thought, that
some, or all of these three things, may be aimed at.

First, it may be thought to aim, at showing us that these words, (...), In
the beginning, are to be referred to all the three Clauses and Propositions, in
the first Verse, whereas they are there annexed but to one of them; In the
beginning was the Word, says he, verse. 1. Now the second Verse, knitteth the
same words to the second Proposition, The same, in the beginning, was with God,
and the same was God. So that ye must put both into that Proposition, which
concerns the eternal Existency of Christ, and to that which concerns the
Personal Coexistency, The Word was with God; and the divine Essentialnesse
with God, The same was God.

Though he were with God in the beginning, may some say, yet it is questioned,
whether he were God then. This addition will prevent such mistakes, to show
you, the words, In the beginning, is to be put to every Proposition. That may
be one aim.

Secondly, There may be another: In the former Proposition. The Evangelist had
told you of Christ's Co-existency with the Father, when he said, The Word was
with God; and he adds, The same was in the beginning with God. Here he
tells you of his Co-working with God, as well as of his Coexistency with God.
In the beginning, As he was then a Person distinct from the Father, and
coexistent with him; So, so soon as the Father began to work, He began to work.
All things were made by him. He was so with him, as to work together with him,
in the work of Creation in all things.

Or perhaps, neither of these are intended. But the Repetition Repetition of
much use in Scripture.
as a rule to help you in the interpretation of Scripture: Repetitions have
diverse uses in Scripture; we find them frequent both in Prayer and Prophecy, in
Threatenings and Precepts, and in the laying down of Truths. Repetitions have
their several uses in all these.

1. In Prayer. Repetition serves to note frequency in 1. In Prayer, it argues
affection.
the same things, said over again with new affections; as, O Lord hear, O Lord
forgive, O Lord hearken, and do. Take the instance of Christ; we read of his
fervency and earnestness in prayer, especially in his Agony, Luke 22. 44.
Being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly. How does he express this
earnestness? Matthew. 26. 44. He went away the third time, praying the fame
words, Father, if it be thy will, let this cup pass from me. So the second,
and the third time, it is said. This Repetition serves to note Christ's
earnestness in Prayer.

Secondly, in Prophecies. Repetition serves to note the 2. In Prophecies, it
notes celerity and speed, and the certainty of them.
certainty of them, together with their celerity and speed. That reason is
given by God himself, Genesis 41. 32. For that the dream was doubled to Pharaoh
twice, it is because the thing is established by God, and he will surely bring
it to pass. The doubling does note the certainty of the thing.

Thirdly, in Threatenings. Repetition notes unavoidablenesse, 3. In
Threatenings, it notes unavoidablenesse and suddenness.
and, perhaps, suddenness. Ye have, Ezekiel. 21. 27. I will overturn, overturn,
and it shall be no more. Twice, I will overturn, to show, that their overthrow
should be unavoidable.

Fourthly, in Precepts. Repetition serves to note 4. In Precepts, it notes a
necessity of performing them.
a necessity of performing them. So, Psalm. 47. 6. Sing praises to God, sing
praises to our King; sing praises, sing praises. Four times, to show the
necessity of that duty.

And lastly, to our present purpose, in Truths. Repetition serves to show the
necessity of believing them, and of knowing 5. In Truths, it serves to know
the necessity of believing them.
them. So, in that great Truth of Regeneration, ye see, Christ repeateth it
thrice with one breath, in his Sermon to Nicodemus, Joh. 3. 3. Except ye be
born again, ye cannot see the Kingdom of God. Verse. 5. Except a man be born of
Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. And, Marvel
not I said unto thee, Ye must be born again, verse. 17. So here, the Evangelist
repeateth this great Truth, to show the absolute necessity of our knowing it,
and believing it. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God. And
the same that was in the beginning, was God.

That which we are to note from hence, is this: First, in general, The
usefulness and lawfulness of repeating the same things: To me, (says Paul)
it is not burdensome; for you, it is safe, Phil. 3. 1. We are all by nature, as
Christ said of his Disciples, fools, and slow of heart to believe this great
Mystery of God, Luke 24. 25. Then said he unto them, Oh fools, and slow of
heart to believe all that was spoken. Slow of heart, they had therefore need to
be switcht and spurred again and again; had need to have the goad thrust in, a
first, second, and third time. That is the expression, Eccles. 2. The words of
the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened by the masters of the assemblies.
So necessary are Repetitions of Truths. It is in this case, as with Peter, in
his vision of the Sheet, when all sorts of Beasts came down, clean and unclean.
Upon the first letting them down, when it was said, Arise, Peter, kill, and
eat. Not so, Lord, says Peter; he could not think it lawful, when it was
prescribed at the first; but the Sheet was let down a second time, and a third
time; then he was convinced, which at first he was not. So, a man may hear a
truth at first, and may say, Not so, Lord; he cannot relish this for a truth:
but, it may be, at the second, or third time, he may relish it. It is not with
Truth as with Flowers, which we use to smell at for an hour or Truth, not like
Flowers, quickly fading; but like precious Stones, always shining*
two, and so thtow them away. But for necessary Truths, they will not die in
your hands: they are not like Flowers; they are like Jems, precious Stones,
that keep a luster from year to year, they are always shining and bright. Ye
may wear them while ye live, and not be weary of them. This in general.

But then in Special: From this Repetition which the Evangelist makes,
observe, That the Eternity, the Personality, the Divinity of Christ, are of
necessity to be believed. Because we cannot rightly worship God, without the
belief of these Truths; namely, That the Word was in the beginning, and that
the Word was then God, and was with God from everlasting to everlasting. For we
must worship the Son, even as we worship the Father; so says Christ himself,
Joh. 5. 23. And that, unless we acknowledge the Eternity of Christ, and the
Divinity of Christ, the Second Person; as well as of God the Father, the First
Person; we honor neither Father nor Son. And this is it that excludes both
Turks and Jews: who, though they both acknowledge one God, yet they deny the
Distinction of Persons, deny the Son of God, and so the Divinity of the Lord
Jesus Christ, as also of the holy Ghost. We see now, what miserable case such
men are in, as deny Christ thus. It is remarkable, that in Ephesians. 2. 12. if you
compare the beginning with the end, At that time ye were without Christ, being
Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, having no hope, and without God in the
world. Without Christ, and without God. He is an Atheist that knows not
Christ; whatsoever he may hold of God. There can be no true knowledge of God,
where there is not a true knowledge of Christ. Ye were without Christ, and
without God in the world. Wherefore, my Brethren, pray, that ye may understand
these things; for, indeed, they are things that depend upon Revelation,
therefore they call for prayer. Says Bernard, of the Mystery of the Trinity,
The best way of seeking it, and the easiest way of finding it, is, not to enter
upon Disputings, but Prayer. To Prayer, add the use of the best Means, reading
the Word of God, in which these Mysteries are revealed, that concern the
Eternity, and Personality, and Divinity of Jesus Christ, Scripture will help
you more then Reason here.

There are two sorts of things. Some things there are which we do first
understand, and then believe; Others which we first believe, and then come to
understand. If ye Natural things are first understood, then believed.
Supernaturals not so.
go to natural things, first ye understand them, apprehend the inside and
outside of them, and then believe them, because ye understand them. But now, in
these great supernatural Mysteries, that ye may understand them, you must
first believe them. For this there are two rules.

If ye will first set Reason on work, believe no more then Arians of old that
denied the Divinity of Christ, they got a great deal of advantage, especially
over Women, by putting questions for grounds of reason to them: They were wont
to come to Women, and The Arians delusion and sophistry.
ask them. Have thou born a Child, say they? Yes. And art thou not older then
the Child thou have born? why, yes, say they. And yet, say they, our
Adversaries, They tell us, that God has a Son, and that the Son is Co-eternall
with the Father. Athanasius goes to work to confute them, thus; I ask you a
question. Can thou build a house without Timber, and Stone, and other
Materials? no: yet God made the World without any of these things. If Gods
building be not as an Artificer's, God made the World without Materials. He
has his Son from Eternity, but not as a natural parent, for who can declare
his generation? If ye will ask a question, Ask the Sun, if ever it were
without its beams. Ask the Sun, if it did not shine as soon as it was Created.
And ask the Fountain, if ever it was without its streams. As the Sun was never
without its beams, nor the Fountain without its streams, so God was never
without his Son: In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God, both Co-existent, and Eternal.

Verse. 3. All things were made by Him, and without Him was not any thing made,
that was made.
Who is here meant by Him? the foregoing verses tell you? namely, the Word.
And, who is meant by the Word, ye have heard at large, namely Christ. Whose
Divinity the Evangelist had affirmed, verse. 1. The Word was God, confirmed in
the second verse, The same was in the beginning with God. And here he proves
it by a new argument, from the Creation of the World.

All things were made by Him, and without Him was nothing made, that was made.
Now the Apostle tells you, Hebr. 3. 4. He that built Syllogism.
all things is God, Christ built all things, says my Text, Therefore Christ is
God. The argument lies fair and undeniable. But whereas, the Apostle Paul
speaks of a new Creation; we are hinted to think of a double Creation, There is
the old Creation, and the new Creation. Now some Heretics make a question,
which of the two is here meant, There is the old Creation spoken of by Moses in
Genesis, In the beginning God Created Heaven, and Earth. And there is the new
Creation spoken of by Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new
Creature: old things are past away, behold all things are become New.

The question is, which of these the Text is meant of, All things were made by
Him. Socinus, who denies the Socinus, his damnable heresy and opinion.
Divinity of Christ together with his Satisfaction, makes it to lay hold upon
the latter of these, and says, that in the Text ye must understand the new
Creation, As, In the beginning was the Word. He understands the beginning of
the Gospel, not of the World, All things were made by Him, that is, all things
were made new when Christ was born of the Virgin Mary. These are the all things
meant in the Text, says Socinus.

As this is not true, so it will not serve his turn. It is not true, nor
consonant to the Text, which does not say, that all things were made new by
Him, but that all things were made by Him; and undeniably spoken of the
Creation of the World.

Neither will it serve his turn. He hops by this evasion to avoid the dint of
this argument, taken from the Creation of the World, to prove the Divinity of
Christ, but it fails him; for take that which he grants. By all things,
here, we must mean the new things, the new Creature; If this be the thing, we
will prove Christ to be God in spite of Socinus. For who can turn a heart of
stone, into an heart of flesh? who can work faith, and love? faith in an
unbelieving heart, love in an hating heart, and meekness in a passionate
heart? who, but God! Do not these things declare an Almighty power? This by his
own Confession, proves him to be God.

But we are to understand it, of the old Creation of the World, which Moses
tells us of. All things were made by Him, that is the proposition. An
illustration of it in the following words, without Him was nothing made, that
was made. In the proposition, observe two things.

First the Effect. All things were made, Secondly The Efficient. By Him.
This is an excellent help, and of great Concernment, The making of all things,
is the first lesson that God Almighty teaches us in the Bible; In the
beginning, the Lord made Heaven, and Earth. Therefore, worthy the dwelling a
while upon, and making inquiry into these five things, for the clearing of
these words.

First, What are the things here meant? Secondly, In what Order? Thirdly, In
what space of time? Fourthly, In what manner? Fifthly, To what end were they
all made?
When these are done, we shall come clearly to show that the Lord Jesus Christ
had an influence, as the Efficient cause of all these. All things were made by
Him.

First, What things are here meant? All things. These 1. All things are here
meant.
are words of a vast Comprehension, but you shall find them all reduced to four
heads, by God himself. In the fourth Commandment, Exodus 20. 11. In six days,
the Lord made Heaven, and Earth, the Sea, and all things that are therein.
These are the heads of the All things.

First, the Heaven: Heaven is a fair building, a glorious Fabric of three
Stories, the first, second, and third Heaven. 1. Heaven.
So Paul teaches us to distinguish, when he speaks of his being rapt up into
the third Heaven. Therefore there is a second, and first, as well as a third.
And these three Heavens were sweetly resembled, by those three Courts in
Solomon's Temple. There was the first Court, the outward Court, and the Court of
the Gentiles, which was common for all sorts of people to come into; So is the
first Heaven here below, Men breathe in the air, birds and beasts they live
and breathe in the air, which is the first Heaven. The second Court was
something more hidden: In that the golden Candlesticks were, which were the
Lights, that lighted the Temple. So are the Sun, Moon, and Stars in the second
Heaven. The third Court, was the Holy of Holies, into which entered none, but
the high Priest. And the third Heaven, is the Heaven of Heavens, into which
Jesus Christ the high Priest is entered, to prepare a place for all his Members.
All these Heavens were of Christ's making, Hebr. 110. Thou Lord, in the
beginning, have laid the foundations of the World, and the Heavens are the work
of thy Hands.

The second head, is the Earth, the Circle of the World, the pavement of this
glorious Fabric, the footstool of the 2. Earth.
most high God. Of his making it, you have an excellent expression in Job, Job
38. 4, 5, 6. Where wast thou, when I laid the foundations of the Earth? says
God, there; declare, if thou have understanding, who has laid the measure
thereof, if thou know? or who has stretched out the line thereof? wherein
are the foundations thereof fastened, or who laid the Cornerstone thereof? God
has so made it, as to make it The admirablenesse of the fabric of the Earth.
admirable to our understandings; that such a vast body, as the Earth is, of a
round figure, and so fit for motion, should be still immovable! a body so
heavy, should yet be able to hang, as it does, in the midst of the air! Why,
God has fastened it by a Word of his own power, Job 26. 7. He stretches out
the North over the empty place, and hangs the Earth upon nothing. Which of us
can hang a ball in the air, without some support? God, He hangs the Earth;
how? upon nothing, but upon the air without side of it.

Then Thirdly the Sea, Psalm. 95. 5. The sea is his, and He made it, so, as to
make all men rejoice in the thoughts of it, 3. Sea.
Psalm. 97. 1. The Lord reigns, let the Earth rejoice, let the multitude of
the Isles be glad thereof. It is with an Emphasis: All sorts of men, that dwell
in Islands, have much cause to rejoice, because God reigns. For if He did not
Reign, and Rule, and bound the Seas, with which they are compassed, they would
quickly be destroyed. If God did God boundeth the Seas, being above the Earth;
else the Islands would be destroyed.
not reign, the natural place of the Sea is above the Earth, and how should we
in this Island be overflowed in a moment, if He bounded not the seas? Ye shall
see an elegant comparison in Job 38. 8, 9, 10. Who shuts up the Sea with
doors, when it breaks forth, as if it had issued out of the Womb, when I made
the Clouds the garments thereof, and thick darkness a swaddling band for it,
and brake up for it my decreed place, and set bars, and doors. Here he
compares the sea to a Child, breaking out of the Womb of his Decree; to a
Child swadled, as it were with a Cloud. That is the expression, Thick darkness
has swaddling bands for it. And it is rock't, as it were, in a Cradle of
Providence.

The fourth head, is, These All things, (as that place in Exodus tells you)
are the things that are within this Heaven, 4. All things.
and Earth, and Sea. And all things therein. Which Paul reduces to two heads.

Things Visible, and Things Invisible, Col. 1. 16.
By Him were all things Created that are in Heaven, and Earth, visible, and
invisible. Zanchius adds a third branch to this distinction, and makes it
more plain, by saying, That all things that were made, are either visible, or
invisible, or mixed. Visible things, as the Stars, and Fouls, and Clouds of
Heaven, the fish in the sea, and beasts upon the earth. Invisible things, as
the Angels, they also were made. They were not the Makers of the World, as
some Heretics have thought. Then there is a third sort of Creatures, which are
of a mixed nature, partly visible in regard of their bodies, and partly
invisible in regard of their souls, and those are Men. And so you have, The all
things. Not to stand upon that, I will pass to another head.

Secondly, let us Consider. In what order these things were made, That so we
may learn the more to magnify the 2. In what Order.
Creator. This ye shall have under sundry Considerations. No way more
profitable.

First, all things were made so, in such an order, as that 1. Heaven made
before the Earth.
Heaven, a place of blessedness, was made before the Earth, the Stage of
vanity. In the beginning, God created Heaven, and Earth; To teach us, that we
should begin our search, and desires, and love, where God began his Work first,
at Heaven; and then at Earth. It is a Praeposterous course, that is taken, to
begin with earth: God did not so, He first made the Heavens; First, seek the
Kingdom of God, Math. 6. 33. And yet, through the Corruption of men's souls,
Curvae in terras animae, Coelestium inanes, The most are bowed down to the
Earth, and few look up toward Heaven. There are in the Militant Church some
dead, and some living Children; some true, and some false Professors. Suppose a
Woman should have a dead, and a living Child together in her Womb. The dead
Child would make no way for his birth, the living would; so it is here, such as
are dead Professors in the Womb of the Church, they do not make forward toward
Heaven. But every living soul that is born for Heaven, and ordained for Heaven,
will to Heaven. Every soul that is baptized with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire,
has a fire in it, that will carry it up Heavenward.

Secondly, as in order to the Creation, Things of less perfection, 2. Things
lesse-perfect before more-perfect, in the visible world.
were made before things that are more perfect, as if ye come to the visible
World especially; not, that otherwise the invisible Heavens are more perfect
then any thing we see. But I say the visible World. God in the work of Creation
went from things less perfect, to those that had more perfection in them.
First he made the Elements, then the mixed bodies compounded of them; and,
amongst them, such as had life, before those that had sense; and such as had
sense, before those that had reason. A thing profitable to observe, that so ye
may look at Gods method, both in Nature, and Grace. His method is to begin with
the lowest and so go upward; to begin with less perfection, and so go on to
more. Do we aim at the top of Grace? We must climb up by certain steps; The
New Creature goes on as the Old Creature dies, from the less perfect, to the
more perfect. Never expect Love, and Fear, and Joy, and all at the first: God's
work will be going on still, from less, to more perfection.

Thirdly, as to the point of order in the making of all 3. The essential part
of the world made before its Ornaments.
things, God he made the Essential part of the World before he made their
Ornaments. As ye know, he made the the Heaven, and Earth, and Sea, before he
made their furniture; before He furnished the Heaven with Stars, and the
Earth with Plants and Beasts, and the Sea with Fishes. To teach us to look, in
the point of Grace too, for the like proceeding. There are Essential Graces,
and Graces that tend to Ornament. Essential Graces that go to the
Constitution of a Christian: Such are Faith, and Love. And accessory graces
that tend to his Ornament, and well-being: Such are joy, and assurance. Observe
now Gods method, He first begins with the most essential happiness: but he
that by faith lays hold on Christ, and by love cleaves to Christ, it may be
God will make him stay some time for his Ornaments, before he furnishes him
with full Assurance; even as a Heaven, before stars to furnish it.

Again, It may be observed in order of Gods Creation. 4. He made things
dependent, before the things they depend upon.
That he made some things, which now depend upon others, before the things upon
which they depend. For instance, the light ye know depends upon the Sun, the
Sun being removed, we shall have no light; but yet God made the light before
any Sun. The light was the work of the second day, and the Sun not made till
afterward. The growing of Plants, and Fruits now depend much upon the
husbandry of men, and upon showers and rain; yet God made them before any
rain, or any man to till the ground, Genesis 2. 5. Every plant of the field
before it was in the earth, and before it grew, for the Lord had not caused it
to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man to till the ground. To teach us
thus much, That all the Creatures though they be subordinate one to another,
do yet depend more upon God, the first Cause, then upon any second Cause. And
to let us understand, That we have reason to depend upon God, though we see no
means. He that can maintain a light without a Sun, and cause things to grow
without rain, he can maintain grace in thy heart, though thou have no means, or
but small means of thriving in that way. I do but hint these things by the way,
as profitable Observations from the Creation of the World.

Lastly in point of order, God made Man last of all. He, ye know, was the
workmanship of the sixth day, and that to 5. He made Man last of all.
the end we might see both his wisdom and his goodness; a great deal of
wisdom in this, That after God had raised such a glorious Fabric as the world
is, he should do as sometimes men are wont to do. A man that builds,
(suppose) a Library, or Exchange, or some such Monumentall place; It is usual
for such persons to send their Pictures thither, and to have them hanged up
therein, that all may know at whose charge that was done. So God made the
World, and furnishes it, and then sends his own Picture, and makes man
after his own Image, and puts him into the World. And at such a time as the
Wisdom of God had provided it, and furnished it. That man should be so made as
to let him see, that he was made to serve God, as other things to serve him:
Therefore he is not created, till the latter end of the sixth day, immediately
before the Sabbath; that so the first work which he takes in hand, might be the
worship of God that made him. Here is wisdom, and goodness, in this,
abundant goodness! God would not invite man unto bare walls, but first he
builds, and furnishes a house, and then brings his guest into the house,
that Man at first might taste and see how good the Lord was. And that all men
might learn for ever to trust him. He that provided for us a being, will he
not, now he has given us a being, maintain us? These things I observe to you,
from the Order.

Thirdly, Let us inquire into the space of Time; wherein 3. In what space of
time.
all these things were made. I do it the rather to let you see what Doctrine
may be sucked out of these first Principles of Religion. In six days the LORD
created Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all things therein. Here are diverse
Considerations to be deduced from hence.

1. God could have done all things in a moment, yet it pleased him to be six
days about this great work. Days, 1. To teach us Deliberation.
and not Moments. First, to teach us the necessity of Deliberation in all
matters of Consequence. We understand God could have done all in a Moment; but
he was pleased to take time about it, that he might thereby inform us, of the
necessity of taking time, when we undertake things of Consequence. Many a man
does that in haste, that he Serius absolvit, qui nimium properat.
repents him of at leisure, whereas he should not have had cause to repent,
if he would have taken leisure in doing of it: Dan. 2. 16. He required time of
the King, when he had a hard task.

Secondly, days and not years. Here is an observeable 2. To bless God more
for Redeeming us, than for Making us.
difference between the work of Creation, and the work of Redemption. The one
was finished in six days; but it cost Christ three and thirty years pilgrimage
upon earth, before he came to say, It is finished. So much more noble is the
one work, than the other. So much do we owe more to God for his having
Redeemed us, than for his having Made us. There is not one of us, but owes
himself to God for his Creation. If we had a thousand, yea ten thousand selves,
we should owe them all to Christ for our Redemption, because that is the
greater work; it took God a longer time.

Thirdly in point of time. All things were made in six distinct several days;
That so God might help us the better 3. To help us the better to understand the
making of all things.
to understand this great work. It is too vast for us to comprehend at once,
The making of all things. Therefore God was pleased to cast it into six
several days, that so he might follow his work in our meditations. Moses
says, Such a day was such and such a Creature made; that we might run
through all the Creatures, as it were, by these several stages, and let our
affections go on, as God went on in working.

Fourthly. But six days. De Posse, God might have done 4. To see, how great
things God can do in a short time.
it in a moment. But defacto, he did it in six days. We see how great a thing
God can do in a short time. That which men and Angels could not have done,
though he had given them a thousand millions of years to have perfected it.
Thirteen years was Solomon a building the first Temple. And forty years were
the Jews a building the second Temple. Here in six days, Heaven, and Earth,
and Sea, and All things therein are made. Therefore trust God, be thou never so
low in thy estate, or name, or body, or Soul: He that raised the World out of
nothing in six days, how soon is he able to raise thee to a Competencie of
these things?

Lastly, Six days, and no more. God cast it so, as we may 5. To limit us a
time of working.
think, on purpose, to limit us a time of working, and a time of resting. He
himself wrought six days, and rested the seventh day from all his works. To
teach us, That we should have six days to labor in, and keep the seventh as
a Sabbath, Levit. 23. 3. Six days shall thou labor, but the seventh day is
the Sabbath of rest, an holy Convocation: ye shall do no work therein, It is
the Sabbath of the Lord, in all your dwellings. That is the third thing. Ye
have heard what these All-things are. In what order they were made. And in what
space of time they were created. See now next, In what manner they were created.

Fourthly, In what manner were they made?

They were made by the sole word of God, without instruments, 4. In what manner.
without materials, merely by the word of Command, Psalm. 148. 5, 6. Praise him
ye Heaven of heavens, and ye waters that be above the Heavens, let them praise
the name of the Lord; for he commanded, and they were created. He has
established them for ever and ever, he has made a decree which shall not
pass. You read of no Instruments. Solomon could not make a Temple, but he must
have a thousand of Tools. God does but speak the word, and the earth was made.
You read of no materials out of which he made the world. What can men make, if
you give them nothing to work upon. Let a Smith have Iron, and a Mason Stone,
and they can make some Work: but here God makes all out of Nothing, says the
Apostle, Heb. 11. 3. Through faith we Understand that the World was framed by
the word of God, so that things which are seen, were not made of things which
do appear.

Briefly, God made Something of Nothing, and then out of that Something, made
All things, as one well expresses it. That which (Genesis 1.) is called the
earth, and the water, and the deep, that first matter, it was made out of mere
nothing. There is something out of nothing, and then out of that first-Matter
were all things framed. There is all things out of something; so as, mediately
or immediately, all the Creatures come out of Nothing. There is Non-ens
negativum; And so the first matter, comes out of nothing. There is, Non-ens
privativum; And so the other things, they came out of that which is, Non-ens
tale, a thing that had no natural disposition to receive such a form. And here
is the omnipotency of God seen in both. For it requires as much power to
produce such and such forms, as to produce that God Omnipotent in the Creation.
first matter out of Nothing; and yet, This, God has done. And this should
teach us both Obedience, and Humility, The consideration of the manner of
making all things. He made them all by his word. Who are we, that we should
disobey the word of God, which every Creature was framed by. It is a shame for
a man to be the worst thing in his house. All the World is a house made for
Man; and man approves himself the worst thing in the World, if he disobey the
Word of God. Fire, Hail, Ice, Snow, fulfill thy Word, says the Psalmist. He
did but say, Let there be light, and the light presently shined; How many words
have we had? Ten words of the Law, as the Ten Commandments, all comprised in
two Words under the Gospel. Repent, and Believe, and how many are unbelieving
and disobedient still? The Creatures cast shame upon us in this particular, As
they were made without Instruments, by a sole word of Command, so they were
made of Nothing; This should take down our Pride: shall we be proud of the
Creature? That is to be proud of Nothing. Proud of our parts, or gifts? Who art
thou? the Son of Adam? who is Adam? the Son of dust. What is that dust? The
Son of nothing. All resolves it self into Nothing. And certainly he that has
brought something out of nothing, can quickly reduce our something, to nothing
again, if we begin to be proud of it. As he did the parts, and power of
Nebuchadnezzar, when he took away his understanding, and turned him to eat
grass with the beasts of the field. Some thing ye have heard about the Things,
and the Order, and the Manner, and the Time.

Fifthly, See now, the End for which all things were made. 5. To what end.
Solomon tells you in one word, That they were all made for the glory of God,
Prove. 16. 4. The Lord has made all things for himself. The Heavens declare the
glory of God. The firmaments show his handy works. Therefore this is the great
improvement, we should make of all the things that are made, to read something
of God in them. And this is a duty that lies especially upon man. Man as he is
the most considerable part of the visible World, so the only Creature that can
consider the rest: and it lies as a more strong engagement upon him, to
Glorify God above all, because no visible Creature can do it, if man deny it.
And it lies as a more strong obligation upon Ministers to Preach the Word,
because Regularly none but they can Preach. And also upon Kings to govern, and
Merchants to trade, because none can govern, none can trade, in such things as
they. No, none but Men can consider, and praise God, for what he has done in
the World. Therefore every man should look at this great book of the Creature,
as that which is written all over, with something of God.

Beloved, There is many a man cast away for not reading, when he is put to this
book: a Non legit, here, may destroy a man; for not reading the book of the
Creature. Though some of us take it but for a moral fault. Observe that, Psalm.
28. 5. Because they regarded not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of
his hands, he shall destroy them, and not build them up. Why, Should God set
before us such a glorious piece as this is, and shall not we consider it with a
Contemplative eye? An Artist thinks himself negglected, when he hangs forth
a Picture to be viewed, and no body give it the beholding. All creatures are
active upon the stage of the world; but Man is a Spectator as well as an Actor;
therefore they should observe, not themselves Man is not to observe himself
only, but what God does in other Creatures.
only, but whatsoever God does in other creatures; and toward other
creatures, as well as in and toward themselves.

To this end, God has fitted them with Sense; to let the consideration of him
into their Understandings; and set them in such a place of the world, as that
they are compassed about, both with lasting works of Creation, Sun, Moon,
Stars, Beasts, Plants, and the like; and also with transient works of
Providence, that pass over their heads daily. O therefore, that men would
praise the Lord, and glorify him in and for all these things that he has
made! That is the Use we should make of it. Rev. 4. ult. Thou art worthy, O
Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power; for thou have created all
things: For thee they are, and were created. Romans 1. 20. Therefore give him the
glory of his power. Who, but God, could have created such a Palace as Heaven?
and Pond, as the Sea? and Pavement, as the Earth? Give Him the glory of His
wisdom: O Lord, how manifold are thy works? In wisdom have thou made them all.

It requires wisdom to manage a great Family; much wisdom to martial a great
Army. What wisdom is it in God, not only to make, but to govern all the host
of all the Creatures? In wisdom have thou made them all, in wisdom do thou
govern them. Let all therefore give Him the praise of his Goodness; for the
next words there say, The earth is full of thy riches; namely, of his goodness
to the sons of men; because, for us were all these things made, and we were
made for God, as ye heard before. And therefore made after his own Image.

Now, my Brethren, What does God expect from us, in a way of requital for all
these things, but that, as they serve As the Creature serves us, so we should
serve the Lord.
us, so we should serve him? That seeing we are made after his own Image, we
should represent him in our dispositions and carriages toward the sons of men,
in being holy, and meek, and loving, even as God himself is. Whose image and
superscription is this, (will God ask one day) that is upon thy soul? Is it
God's, after which thou art made? or is it Satan's? If the Devill's, give to
Satan that which is Satan's. God will give the Devil his due, one day. If he
finds his own Image spunged out of us, and the Devill's stamped upon us, woe be
to us. As it is said of Queen Elizabeth, that, passing by the streets, and
seeing some of her Pictures hang for Signs, that were not made like her, she
was angry, and caused them to be pulled down, and thrown into the fire.
Brethren, I speak it with trembling: Should any of you carry souls about you,
that do not look like God, they must be thrown down, and cast into the fire.
Thus have I run over a sort of Considerations, from the great and glorious work
of the Creation. The next thing is to discourse of Christ, as the Maker, the
Efficient.

Verse. 3. All things were made by him, and without him was made nothing that
was made.
Verse. 4. In him was life, and the life was the light of men.
The Divinity of Jesus Christ, under the term of the Word, has been asserted
in the former Verse, In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
and the Word was God. And this our Evangelist proves, by an Argument taken
from the Creation.

First, Generally, from the Creation of all things, All things were made by
him, and without him was not any thing made that was made.

Secondly, More Especially, from the Creation of living things, living
Creatures; In him was life.

And Particularly from the Creation of Man; The life was the light of men.

That part of the Argument which is most General, lies in the third Verse.

Where ye have two things. The Argument, first, Propounded. And secondly,
Illustrated.


Propounded, All things were made by him.

Illustrated, Without him was not any thing made that was made.

In the Proposition are two things. Here is the Effect, All things made. The
Efficient, By him.


Of the Effect, I have spoken already.

I proceed now to the Efficient. Christ, the Eternal Word, was the Maker of
them, All things were made by him. The Eternal Word was the Creator of all
things.

Ye shall have this truth established in the mouth of two or three witnesses.
Ephesians. 2. 9. Who created all things by Jesus Christ. The Epistle to the
Hebrews will afford two pregnant testimonies, Heb. 1. 2. He has in these last
days spoken to us by his Son, whom he has appointed heir of all things; by
whom also he made the worlds. This may seem something difficult, because he
speaks of Worlds, whereas we acknowledge but one. Let it be considered whom he
writes to, the Hebrews, whose custom it was to style God, Rabboni, Dominus
mundorum; The Lord of the Worlds. They were wont to speak of three Worlds, the
lower World, the higher World, and the middle World. The lower World contains
the Elements, Earth, and Water, and Air, and Fire. The higher World, that
contains the Heaven of the Blessed: And the middle World, that contains the
Starry Heaven. We now being acquainted with this Language, and the Apostle
writing to them, he says, That God by Christ made the Worlds, those worlds,
which they were wont to speak so frequently of.

And whereas one scruple might arise from this expression in the Text, By him
were all things made; that, in the Ephesians, God created all things [by] Jesus
Christ; this, to the Hebrews, By whom he made the worlds. As if Christ were
only an Instrument in the Creation, and not the principal Efficient.

Therefore another place in this first Chapter will clear it, which speaks of
Christ as the principal Efficient of all things, Heb. 1. compare the 8th. and
10th. Verses together, To the Son he says, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and
ever. And, Thou, Lord, verse 10. have laid the foundations of the earth, and
the heavens are the work of thy hands. Namely, thine; that is, the Son, which
he spoke of before. There is no great distinction here in all Objections; for
this Praeposition (...), does not always signify an Instrument, but sometimes
it notes a principal Agent. It is said of God, Of him, and through him, and
to him, are all things: (...), Romans 11. 36. by him, which we render, through
him. Ye will have a more clear place, Gal. 1. 1. Paul an Apostle, not of man,
neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father; (...). Who was the
principal Efficient? not Paul the Apostle, then certainly Jesus Christ, and
God the Father; he is said to be an Apostle, by Them. So then, Christ is the
principal Efficient of the Creation. And in this sense it is said, By him were
all things made, not as by an Instrument, but as by the chief Efficient. No
more of the Proposition, By him, till I come to make Use of it.

I come now to the Illustration of this, And without him was not any thing made
that was made.

These words are considerable three ways.

First, as an Hebraism, a manner of speech, borrowed from the course of the
Hebrews, in their Writings. Secondly, As an Addition to what Moses had said,
concerning the works of Creation. Thirdly, As an Explication of the former
Clause, By him were all things made.
First, Look at them as an Hebraism, which this Evangelist is full of. Ye must
know, that, amongst the Hebrews, there was nothing more usual, for the
heightning of an expression, then to join an Affirmative and Negative together
in one sentence; when they had first affirmed a thing positively, then to join
another clause, that should deny the contrary. I will give you an instance or
two, to make it clear; that in Isa. 39. 4. Hezekiah answered, All that is in
mine house have they seen; there is the Affirmative. There is nothing in my
treasures that I have not showed them; there is the Negative: and both make up
one complete sense. Jer. 42. 4. And it shall come to pass, that whatsoeever
thing, the Lord shall answer you, I will declare it to you, there is the
Affirmative. I will keep nothing back from you, here is the Negative. And the
sense is enforced by it. Just as it is here. All things were made by Him, and
without Him was not made any thing that was made.

Secondly, If ye look at them, as an Addition, to what Moses had mentioned
concerning the Creation. He had Evangelist All things, visible and invisible,
created by Christ:
intending to carry the Efficiency of Christ, to the making of all things that
receive a being, whether visible, of which Moses speaks, or invisible;
therefore, he contenteth not himself by saying, By Him were all things made,
but adds further, without Him was not made any thing that was made. The
former clause has reference to what Moses said: The latter carries it
further, All things visible, and invisible, Colos. 1. 16. By him (speaking of
Christ, who is the Image of the invisible God, by Him) were all things created,
that are in Heaven and Earth, visible and invisible, whether Thrones, or
Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers; All things were created by Him.

Thirdly, These words are considerable, especially as an By him were all things
made, wherein are two things to be noted; The Efficient, and the Effect. Here
is something to explain both.

The Effect, first. These words, without him, was not any thing made, that was
made. Any thing that was made, All things in the former clause, to all created
things; all things that receive a being: whereas, otherwise, God himself, God
the Father, the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, these are in the number
of all things. The three Persons in the Trinity, God the Father, Son, and
Spirit, have the most excellent being
have the most excellent Being. But some have brought desperate arguments from
this Text, That Christ is a Creature, because in the number of all things. Now,
say the next words, without him was not any thing made, that was made. Ye must
limit the first words, All things, that receive a being, not that have a being.
As the Apostle argues in another Case, so we may reason in this, 1 Cor. 15.
27. He has put all things under his feet, but when he says, All things, are
put under him, it is manifest; That he is excepted, that put all things under
him. So, all things are created by Him. But when He says, All things are
Created by Him, it is manifest, that he is excepted, by whom all things are
Created.

Secondly, Here is something to explain the Efficient, from these words,
without him was not any thing made. It implies a kind of Co-partenership in
the work of Creation. Christ alone, does not make all things. But Christ,
together with the Father and the Holy Ghost, yet so as without the Word,
without Christ was nothing made, by any of the other Persons. This wisdom
challenges, as the Prerogative of the Son of God, Prove. 8. from the 27 verse.
to the 31. When He prepared the Heavens, I was there; when He set a compass
upon the face of the deep, and stablished the Clouds above, when He gave to the
Sea his decree; then I was by Him, as one brought up with Him, and was daily
His delight, rejoicing always before Him. It excludes only Creatures, not
the Cooperation of the other Persons in the Trinity, to what was made, without
Him was not any thing made. It is an usual distinction amongst Divines, God
has two sorts of works, some Opera ad intra, works terminated upon some Person
in the Trinity, works within. And these are done by some one person, not by
another. So the Father begets. That work is terminated upon the Son, he is
begotten, the son begets not. The Holy Ghost proceeds, the Father does
not. That is a proper work, Adintra. But works Adextra. Works without God. And
these are all common to all the three Persons. The Father creates, and the Son
creates, and the Holy Ghost creates, and yet but one Creator, because it is a
work that proceeds from the Will of God, and the will of God is the same in
all the three Persons, and accordingly, though the work be ascribed to every
Person, yet they make but one Creator, because all Three have but one Essence.
But because, they have different Subsistencies, the Father a distinct Person
from the Son, and the Son from the Holy Ghost, therefore, they have a distinct
manner of working, even in this business of the Creation. In all things, the
Father works. All matters of Inchoations are ascribed to the Father, of
Dispensations to the Son; of Consummations, to the Holy Ghost. But I will no
longer dwell upon that: you see the meaning of these words.

Let us now come to apply them. All things were made by him, that is, by
Christ, and without him was not any thing Of Instruction.
made, that was made. To pass from more knotty difficult matter, to what may,
I hope, come home to the conscience: Here are both Instructions and
Consolations, and Directions to be borrowed from hence. Three Instructions,
four Consolations, and five Directions I shall give you from this truth, That
Christ is the Creator of all things, and without him was made nothing, that was
made.

First, It instructs concerning the Divinity of Christ, which is the very end
for which they bring this argument. The builder of all things is God: Heb. 3.
4. Christ was the builder of all things, says my Text. Therefore Christ is God.

In the beginning, God Created Heaven and Earth, and Sea, and all therein,
says Moses.

Christ created Heaven, and Earth, and the Sea, says my Syllogism.
Text.

Therefore Christ is God.

To bring things together that are infinitely distant requires an infinite
power.

The distance which is between Being and No-beeing is infinite.

Therefore, He must needs be God that can bring all things out of nothing; and
he that Creates, does so.

This exalts God above all Idols. None of them can make a World. So the
Apostle argues, Act. 14. to turn them from Idols to the living God. 15. verse.
We are men of like passion with you, and preach to you, that you should turn
from these Idols to the living God, which made Heaven, and earth, and all
things therein. Justin Martyr quoteth two Greek verses out of Pythagoras, to
prove there is but one God, (...), etc. says Pythagoras. If any will assume to
himself, and say, I am God, except only one, let him lay such a Worid as this
is to stake, and say, This World is mine; then I will believe him, otherwise
not. He is God that made the World. Christ made the World. Therefore he is God.

Secondly, It instructs us concerning the Excellency By him were all things
made. Therefore he himself must needs be better then all things, for he made
them. The cause is better then the effect. The Carpenter better than the house,
and the Shipright then the ship. Look whatsoever excellency is in the Creature
it All creature, excellency is from Christ.
came from Christ. Therefore he has a greater excellency, than the Creature
has. Yea whatsoever are in the Creatures, they meet in Christ. Therefore it
is, that there are names borrowed from all the most excellent Creatures, to
decipher Christ by, in Scripture; to show that all their excellencies are
eminently in Him, from whom they have their being. Amongst things in earth,
that have barely a being, the most excellent are Jewels, and precious Stones;
Christ takes a name from thence. He is called the Cornerstone, elect, and
precious, 1 Pet. 2. So, Isa. 28. he is the great precious stone, the Jewel of
Jewels. Amongst Vegetables, Plants, and Trees, the most excellent is the Vine
and Olive: Christ is the true Vine, Joh. 15. and the good Olive Tree, Romans 11.
Amongst Beasts that have sense, the most excellent amongst wild Beasts is the
Lion, and amongst tame Beasts the Lamb: Christ takes name from these; The Lamb
of God, that takes away the sins of the world, Joh. 1. The Lion of the tribe
of Judah, as in the Revelations.

And so, if ye look up into Heaven, the most excellent Quality is the Light,
the most excellent Luminary is the Sun: Christ has names from both these, This
is the true light, that lighteneth every man that comes into the world. And,
The Sun of Righteousness, with healing under his wings, Mal. 4. So as it
shows to us, in the second place, the excellency of Christ above all things.

Thirdly, It instructs us, concerning the primitive good 3. Christ so good,
as to make nothing ill.
of all the Creatures; they are all of Christ's making, and therefore must
needs be good; good in themselves, and good to us. For he is so good, as that
he can make nothing ill. He bears such affection to us, as that he will do us
no harm. He that in fullness of time, was made for us of a Woman, made under
the Law, will make all things useful for us that he undertakes to create. It
is true, many things are now become hurtful to man; Whence comes this? Not
from Christ. It is said by Moses, in the end of the Creation, God looked upon
the works of his creation, and behold they were all good. If any thing be evil
now in the end of the world, we may thank our selves and the Devil for that;
for they came all good from Christ. Therefore let not us play the Balaam, and
beat the Ass, when we are in the fault, as he did. Jude tells you, verse. 15,
16. of a generation of men, (and the world is full of them) that are Murmurers
and Complainers, men that always find fault with what God has made their lot.
This very consideration might help us to complain of our selves, not of God,
not of the Creator. As Physicians sometimes do, when a man bleedeth excessively
at the nose, they open a vein in the arm to divert the blood. If we will be
complaining, here is a diversion: Our complaint should only be against sin,
not against God.
we should complain of our sin, that has brought all this misery; kill
sin, and all is good. Nothing more frequent, then for a man to deal with God,
as Hiram did with Solomon. 1 King. 9. 11, 12, 13. It is there said, that
Solomon gave Hiram twenty Cities in the land of Galilee, and he came out from
Tire to see the Cities which Solomon had given him, and they pleased him not;
and he said, What Cities are these, which thou have given me? and he called
them, the land of Cabul to this day; which signifies, Dirty. Solomon had
bestowed Cities upon Hiram, and in all likelihood they stood in very fertile
places: only they had this Inconveniencie with their fertility, they were Mire
and Dirty, therefore he was displeased at them. God has bestowed many
blessings upon us; and yet, if there be any dirt goes along with the fruit,
(many times the fattest soil is liable to that,) we are apt to call them
Cabul, never looking at God that gave them. Let us remember that all creatures,
as they came from God, are good. Therefore if we will be finding fault, find
fault with our selves.

I now come to the Consolations.

First, here is matter of Comfort in case of the want of the Of Consolation, in
case of Want.
Creatures. When men are destitute either of temporal blessings, ot spiritual
blessings that belong to the new creature, Let them solace themselves in this,
Though the creatures be wanting, if faith be not wanting, they have Christ that
made them all, and they may have the comforts of all in Him. Thus the Psalmist
comfort himself in such a case, Psalm. 146. 5, 6. He had said before, Put not
your trust in princes, nor in the sons of men, in whom there is no help. His
breath goes forth, he returns to the earth: in that very day his thoughts
perish. Here he speaks against the creatures, the greatest men, Princes, they
are gone. What follows? Man's happiness in trusting in God, and not in Man.
Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord
his God, who made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all that is therein. When
creatures fail, and men are wanting, Happy is he that trusts in God, says
the Psalmist. Beloved, God himself is All-sufficient, and needs not the help
of any creature; therefore he never made all these things for Himself: that is
clear. For, if he had need, How could he have endured to be without them, till
within these 5672 years. I say, If God had needed them himself, he would not
have been without them till then. Therefore, certainly, he made them for some
other end. Not for his enemies; his friends have an interest in them. If Christ
made all these things, he made them with a special reference to them, that
have the greatest interest in his favor. Therefore despair not. For God has
promised to withold no good thing from them, that walk uprightly. I speak now
of temporal blessings: It is much more true of spiritualls. That which is
good, and good for me at this time, I shall have it, God will not withold it.
He may indeed withold something that is good, but, it may be, it is not good
at this time, or in this estate I am in. Water is good, one of the most useful
Elements; but not for a man in the height of a Feavour, though good for him at
another time. None of those things that God has made, will he withhold from
his servants, when they are fitted to receive them. Ye have a great experience
of this, how God provided for his Apostles in this case, in the want of the
creatures, Luke 22. 35. Christ says to the Disciples, When I sent you without
purse, or scrip, and shoos, lacked ye any thing? And they said, Nothing. Here
were men as poorly provided for, as one could imagine, sent to travel without
any shoos upon their feet. Here is want of apparel without. No meat Believers
want nothing, that is necessary for their support.
they could carry along with them. When I sent you without scrip, and without
any money to buy any food or raiment with; I sent you without purse, as well as
without food or shoos: And yet, lacked ye any thing? And they said, Nothing.
The Maker of all things so disposed, that though they carried nothing with
them, they had some that bestowed all things upon them, that were necessary. As
that reverend Divine, Vrfine, whose Catechism you have amongst you at this day,
was frequently heard to use this expression, being a poor youth, I had many and
many a time lain in the streets, if the Providence of God had not been mine
Host, taken me in, and given me a lodging.

Well; But are they spiritual blessings that thou want? All wants of
spiritual blessings are supplied by Christ.
All these thou may have from the Creator of all things, if thou believe.
Do thou want Grace? Fetch it from him: Create in me a clean heart, O Lord,
and renew a right spirit within me, Psalm. 51. 10. Do thou want Peace, peace
of Conscience? Have ye that? Whence comes it? Christ, who is the Creator of
all things, is the Creator of that; I create the fruit of the lips, peace,
peace, to him that is afar off, and to him that is near, says the Lord. Go
then to Christ, as the Centurion did, when his servant was sick, and say, Speak
the word, and my servant shall be whole: Lord, speak the word, and my soul
shall be whole. It is but as at the Creation, He said, Let there be light, and
there was light: Lord, let there be light in my understanding, and there shall
be light: Let there be peace in my conscience, and there shall be peace there.
It is as easy for him to make thee righteous, as to make thee at first.
Therefore trust Him.

Secondly, Here is comfort in case of Scruple, about right to the Creature,
which is a very usual case, and that many 2. In case of Scruple.
times with the dearest servants of God. They think, they have no right to the
least bit of bread they put into their mouths; and therefore some have starved
themselves, out of scruple. Who is the maker of all these things? Is not
Christ? and art not thou his? All are yours, if you be Christ's, and Christ is
God's. The Apostle resolves that case clearly, 1 Cor. 3. latter end, Whether
Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or principalityes, or powers, or things present,
or They that have Christ, have all.
things to come; all are yours, and ye are Christ's. If ye be Christ's, all are
yours. Whatsoever question may be made, of what right unregenerate men, out of
Christ, have to the creature; yet, it is out of all question, thou, that art a
Believer, have a right. The ungodly have the right of a servant, but thou have
the right of a son. Take this comparison. A Simile.
maidservant, while she lives in a family, has a right to the good things of
that house; but now, put case, (as it often happens) that the Master of the
family marry that Maid, and make her his wife; she has a farther right now to
the same things, an higher right, and a more comfortable right than before. So,
when a soul comes once to be married to Jesus Christ, to have a sanctified
use of all the creatures, as part of her Jointure; All is yours, and ye are
Christ's.

Thirdly, Here is Comfort, in case of fearing harm from the Creature. Are they
not all of thy Savior's making? 3. In case of fearing harm from the creature.
are they not all thy Father's servants! Shall a son and heir be afraid to
converse in his Father's own family, and fearful of those that serve him, whom
he calls Father? The creatures are more; they are not only servants to
Christ, but they owe their being to Christ. Ye see, great men, when they raise
men, they are wont to call such a one their Creature. What are the servants of
the family? have they been raised up from nothing by the Master of the family,
and shall the son fear to be amongst them? I will lift up mine eyes to the
hills, from whence comes my help. My help stands in the name of the Lord,
who made heaven and earth. He speaks nothing of help from the creatures,
because he trusted in the Lord that made them. Ye have it, Isa. 54. 16, 17. God
himself suggesteth this consolation to his people, Behold, I have created the
smith, that blows the coals in the fire, and that brings forth an
instrument for his work. And I have created the destroyer to destroy. No weapon
that is formed against thee shall prosper. Therefore fear not. He that made all
these things, has them at his command; and if he speaks the word, they shall
do thee no harm. Without him was nothing made, and without him can nothing
hurt. If God speaks a word in a dream to Laban, and says concerning Jacob,
Hurt him not; Laban shall have no power to do him mischief, when God rebukes
him. If God say to the creatures, even when they are armed against us, as David
to the Captains, when they went out against Absalom, See ye do the young man no
harm; Plague, Fire, Sword, see ye do no hurt to him, they shall not be able to
do any.

Lastly, here is comfort in case of parting with the Creatures, as we must all
do at death. Consider, how mean they 4. In case of parting with the Creatures
are. I do but go at Death, if I am a Believer, from inferior beeings, to the
superior Being; leave the creature, but go to the Creator of all things, to
Him that puts all the goodness, all the sweetness, into the creatures,
which I find in them, or can expect from them; and has infinitely more
goodness and sweetness in himself. Shall I then complain of a Loss by death?
No, I shall be a Gainer: I leave the Stream and Rivolets, and go into the vast
Ocean of all bliss and comfort. Shall a man that has wandered and traveled
all night by Starlight, which can hardly help him to see his way, complain,
when the Sun arises, that is a better guide? All the creatures, they are but
Stars, they cannot all make Our great advantage by dying in the Lord.
a day; put them altogether, it is but a dimn light you have from thence. Let
no man complain, that he is hardly dealt withal, that dies in Christ; then
the Sun rises, and he shall go to a higher light; from the fruition of the
creature, to Him that made him, even to God himself. Therefore he may
comfortably commit his soul to God, as to a faithful Creator, as Peter says.
Because God will find his own Image upon that soul, and accordingly will own it
for his own. He may comfortably commit his body to the grave, in assurance of
the Resurrection, upon this ground, because Christ made all things; and he that
made the body of man out of the dust, can raise the body of man out of the
dust. Our remainders after death cannot be so little, as our being was before
the world. Cannot that God, who fetched all things out of nothing, repair our
bodies out of something, out of ashes, out of dust? Therefore when a man most
needs comfort, here is consolation from hence, even in case of parting with
the creatures at death. Ye have had the Instructions and Consolations.

I come now to the Directions, in point of Practice; and of them briefly.

First, Seeing Christ is the Creator of all things, and not To fear God, the
Creator of all things.
hence, First, to stand in awe of him, upon this ground. Psalm. 33. 6, 7, 8. By
the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the hosts of them by the
breath of his mouth. He gathers the waters of the Sea together as an heap, he
lays up the depths in a storehouse. Let all the inhabitants of the world
fear him. All must fear him, because he made all. If they were at his making,
then they must be disposed of by him. As we carry our selves to Christ, so
shall the creatures carry themselves to us, serviceably; or, if we walk
contrary to him, no wonder if we find the creatures walking contrary to us.
Amos. 3. 12, 13. Thus (says he) will I do to thee, O Israel. And because I
will do this to thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. For lo, he that formed
the mountains, and created the winds, that dwells upon the high places of the
earth; the Lord of hosts is his name. He created all, therefore prepare to meet
him in a way of fear and reverence; because, if the Creator of all things be
offended at us, he will arm all things against us; it is but giving the
creature a commission, and how soon is man destroyed? If Christ say, Take him,
Plague, and consume him; take him, Fire, and burn him; take him, Water, and
drown him; Earth, open, and swallow him; Hell, be enlarged, and dispatch him;
it must be so. Therefore stand in awe of him.

Secondly, Learn we from hence, to commit our souls To commit our souls to him,
as to a faithful Creator.
have, 1 Pet. 4. ult. Let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit
the keeping of their souls to him in welldoing, as to a faithful Creator. If a
Watch had understanding, doubtless, it would commit the keeping of it self to
none, but to him that made it; because when it is out of frame, he best knows
how to set it right again, because it is his own workmanship, therefore he will
have more regard to it, than any other man will have. Christ has been the
Creator of our souls, let him have the keeping of them; Cast all your care upon
him, for he cares for you, says Peter. Shall not he that made thee, be able
to keep thee? Does not the Artificer love the work of his own hands? He that
has given so much power to many creatures (as to the Angels) has he not
reserved much more power to himself, who is able to keep, and to keep to
salvation? Ye are kept by the power of God, through faith, to salvation. How
secure do men think themselves, if some excellent creatures do but take care of
them? Suppose a great Prince should say to any of us, that have a great many
children, Take no care for such and such a child, send him to me, I will take
care for him; How would such a person think himself at rest concerning that
child? With what security may we build upon the love of God in Christ, if we
commit our souls to him in well-doing, as to a faithful Creator.

Thirdly, Learn we to get an interest in him, as a Redeemer; otherwise, we
shall have no more show for Salvation, To get an interest in him as a Redeemer
ours; All things were made by him. He gave life to other creatures as well as
to man. Believe it, whosoever thou art, an Ox or an Ass may be saved, as well
as a Man or a Woman, if that Man or Woman will not believe in Christ. Thou art
the workmanship of his hands; true, so is the brute beast. It is not enough to
be Christ's creatures, we must be Christ's Members before we can get to Heaven.
Do not say, He that madens will save us. What says the Prophet? Isa. 27. 11.
It is a people of no understanding, therefore he that made them will not have
mercy upon them, and he that formed them will show them no favor. It is not
our being framed creatures by Christ, but his framing the new creature within
us, to help us in the way to Heaven. Give up your selves to Prayer, as David
does, Psalm. 119. 73. Thine hands, O Lord, have made and fashioned me; give me
understanding, that I may learn to keep thy commandments. He rests not in his
being made by God, but, Give me understanding to keep thy commandments.

Fourthly, seeing all things were made by Christ, Learn To consider the works
of the Creation with admiration.
dishonor to Christ, to have the works of the Creation neglected, and no man
to look after them in a way of Admiration. As it would be a dishonor to a
curious Poet, that has framed an excellent Comedy, and brought it upon the
Stage, to have no spectators. God has laid out a great deal of his Wisdom in
the works of the world, and calls upon men to behold the works of his hands;
How ill will he take it, if we consider them not. If he hangs out such a
Masterpiece as the world is, and we go as swine, and never behold it, we do
much neglect the Lord. See how ill the Lord takes it, and how ill men fare,
and from this very sin, Psalm. 28. 5. Because they regard not the works of the
Lord, nor the operations of his hands, he shall destroy them, and not build
them up. He will destroy them for want of considering the works of his hands.

Lastly, Seeing Christ is the Maker of all things, Let all be improved in his
service to his praise; that is the end he To be improved in the service of
Christ, to his praise.
made them for. Rev. 4. ult. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and
honor, and power, for thou have created all things. He is worthy to receive
honor and glory, because he created all things. Col. 1. 16. All things were
created by him, and for him. Not only by him, as the Efficient; but for him,
as the End. Therefore we should employ our strength, and parts, and means:
whatsoever we have, employ it to the service of Christ, because from him we had
it. Take along with you this Rule, That is a vain thing that misseth its end.
That is a cursed thing that crosses its end. That which misseth its end, which
it was made for, is a vain thing. For instance, Christ has given me a tongue
to glorify him withal; I have my tongue in vain, if I do not speak of Christ
with it; as David did, who made his tongue as the Pen of a ready Writer. But,
if I shall not only speak of Christ, but against him, blaspheme him, deny his
Divinity, and Satisfaction, as the Socinians do; here is a curse upon my
tongue, here it crosses the end of its creation. And so it is, when a man
employeth his wits to scoff against God and goodness with it; when he grows
proud of his wealth, or parts, or apparel, or any thing that God has given
him; when he abuses his strength to intemperance or luxury. Here the end of
his Making is crossed, and here is a curse upon his parts and all other gifts;
his blessings are a curse to him. I conclude with Col. 3. 17. Whatsoever ye do
in word or deed, do all things in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, giving
thanks to God and the Father by him. So I have done with the third Verse, and
proceed to the fourth.

Verse. 4. In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men.
An Argument of Christ's Divinity, taken from the Creation, considered in
general, in the making of all things. He comes now to speak more specially,
of things that have life; and then more particularly of Himself, and Man, In
him was life, and the life was the light of men.

Three degrees of Communications there are from Christ, as a Creator, Esse,
Vivere, Intelligere. To some things he gives a being, as to Stones and Stars;
to other things he gives life as well as being, as to Plants, and Birds, and
Fish, and Beasts; some whereof have the life of Vegetation, others, both of
Vegetation and of Sense. And then there is a third degree of Communication,
that is, Intelligere, Understanding; that God gives to men and Angels. Of the
first degree, he had spoken before; of all things that are made in general:
now he speaks in special manner of the second degree of communication, which
is giving of life to all the creatures; that is in these words,

In Him was Life.
In Him; namely, in the Word. For he had spoken, that Life in Christ. two
manner of ways.
in Christ, life was two ways, Formaliter, and Causaliter. Life was Formally
in Christ, as in the Subject of it. Life was Causally in Christ, as in the
Fountain of it.

Ye may give me leave to speak of both, though the second, happily, be
principally intended. In him was life, as in the Subject of it. Take from hence
an Observation, That 1. As in the Subject. 2. As in the Fountain.
Christ ever lives, and is the giver of all life. He ever lives, life is in
him, as the Subject. He is the giver of all life, life is in him as the
Fountain.

First, He ever lives; that is, He is the living God; according to that, Joh.
5. 26. As the Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have
life in himself. There was no time wherein Christ did not live, he lives from
all eternity, had life in himself, even as the Father had. If any question be,
it must be at that time, wherein his Soul was parted from the Body, when the
Body lay in the grave? Yet even then, Christ lived. One of his last words upon
the Cross, was to the Thief, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. He had
his Soul and Divinity in Paradise, even while his Body lay, and was housed in
the Grave. Christ lived in Heaven, though his soul parted for a time from the
Body; neither was the Hypostaticall union dissolved. So, the life was not lost.

But the main thing intended is the Second, In him was life (Causally) as in
the Fountain of life. When he created all things, life was originally in him,
and from him derived to certain creatures, which he then made. Hence it is,
that Christ is called, The Word of life, The Prince of life, The Life of life.
Because, as he is the End, so he communicates life to all things that partake
of it. He is called The Word of life, 1 John 1. 1. which we have looked upon,
and our hands have handled of the Word of life. He is called, The Prince of
life, Act. 3. 15. They killed the Prince of life, whom God raised from the
dead, whereof we are witnesses. He calls himself, The Life, Joh. 14. 6. I am
the War, the Truth, and the Life. And because his is not only life in himself,
but life to us, therefore he is called, Our Life, Col. 3. 4. When Christ, who
is Our Life, shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory. All
this is to show, that whatsoever life is communicated to the creature, it
comes from Christ, it is in him as in the Fountain, With thee is the fountain
of life, Psalm. 36. 9.

So as here now, in consideration of this, it may be of Use to us diverse
ways; as,

First, Take it to pieces again, In him was life, as in the 1. In Christ is
Life as in the Subject, therefore fear and tremble before him.
Subject. This should serve as a Canon to fear, which we find called for in
Daniel, in this respect, Dan. 6, 26. I make a decree, says Darius, that in
every dominion of my kingdom, men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel,
for he is the living God. Let all fear and tremble before Christ, for in him is
life, he is the living God. What says Paul, Heb. 10. 31. It is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God. O therefore, tremble before
him. There are hands of God, into which it is a comfortable thing to fall.
There are merciful hands of Christ, which he stretches forth to poor sinners,
to invite them, and call them in to himself: but if we refuse the Call which he
now makes to us; if all the benefits, which those bountiful hands of his
spread out amongst us, scattered in our Congregations, and in our Houses; if
all these allure us not, then remember what follows, It is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God: one will follow upon the other. If
this merciful hand cannot win us, this destroying hand will be sure to reach
us. This makes it fearful, because His is the living God. Every death is the
more fearful, by how much the more terrible the immediate Executioner of it
is. For a man to be drowned is more gentle, than to be burnt; Why? Because
Water is not so operative, and active, and quick, as Fire; Fire is a more
raging element. The wrath of God is the immediate Executioner of damned souls.
And what so terrible as that is? If God live, such souls must die. And because
God lives for ever, such souls must die for ever, as fall into his revengefull
hands. Fear and tremble to offend Christ, because such as fall into the hands
of the living God, must be miserable as long as he is happy; and die, as long
as he lives.

Secondly, The consideration of this truth, That in Christ is life, as in a
Fountain, from whence all sorts of life are He is Life as in the Fountain,
therefore trust him, seek him, and depend upon him.
derived to the creatures, according to their several kinds, may serve as a
ground of faith.

First, to put us upon trusting in Christ, and seeking to him, and depending
upon him for all kinds of life: Psalm. 36. 7th. and 9th. verses compared
together, The children of men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings,
verse. 7. and the reason is rendered, verse. 9. For with thee is the fountain of
life. Therefore our trust should be in him, because life is in him, as in the
Fountain. Whither should he, that wants water, go, but to the Fountain? Carry
Faith, as the Bucket; and then, according to the bigness of thy bucket, shall
be the proportion of thy water thou drawest from thence. Life comes in, as
Faith draws from Christ. Trust him for temporal life, when we are sick, and
in dangers; though means may be used, and ought to be used, there is no relying
upon Physic. Our utmost confidence must be in him, from whom all life comes.
Deuteronomy. 32. 39. I, even I am he, and there is no god with me. I kill, and I make
alive; I wound, and I heal; there is none that can deliver out of my hand. And
so for spiritual life: when the pulse of Grace beats slowly, and unevenly,
Who shall we then depend upon for life, but upon him that is the fountain of
it, the second Adam, whom God has made a quickening Spirit?

Secondly, as it may be a ground of Faith at all times, so 2. Therefore a
ground of Martyrdom.
a ground of Martyrdom at any time, when a man is called, to seal the truth of
his profession with his blood. Now this being considered, that life is in
Christ as in the Fountain, and derived from him to us; this is a special
ground to prevail with the soul, to suffer it self, even to be laid down for
Christ. Now he calls for that life, which he himself first gave; we had it
from him, and now we are called to restore it to him: the best husbandry that
can be. But to be provident of our lives in this case, and to be over-thrifty,
is the way never to thrive, as Christ says, Mar. 8. 35. Whosoever will save
his life shall lose it. Whosoever will lose his life for my sake and the
Gospel's, the same shall save it. It is no such great matter: Life is as common
to brute beasts as to men; and therefore when Christ calls for it, there is
reason to part from it, because he gave it. It must be given up as a tribute to
Nature. What is it to part with it a little sooner, as a sacrifice to Christ,
as a seal of our profession, and as a pledge of our thankfulness? It is not so
much parting with it, as restoring it to the Owner.

Thirdly, it may serve as a ground of Encouragement. Life 3. Therefore a ground
of Encouragement.
is in Christ as in the Fountain, therefore let all that wait upon Christ be
encouraged to expect life in abundance. A great deal of complaining there is of
dead hearts, and dull spirits; no life in the soul, in duty or service.
Exercise Faith, go to the Fountain for all, and you shall have life, and have
it in abundance. Christ does not use to give niggardly, when he is sued to. It
is said of Araunah, All th^se things Ara^nah gave as a King. Christ gives as a
Savior, in this very particular, Joh. 10. 10. I am come that they might have
life, and that they might have it more abundantly. He gives so, as to give it
in abundance. It will not be amiss to spend some time, in clearing of that,
that Christians may go away with encouragement. Whether we speak of the
several sorts of life, of Spiritual life, (for I will not speak of Natural)
or to the several blessings, that accompany every sort of spiritual life,
which is all derived from one fountain. I take them together, that I may speak
the more briefly of them.

There are five sorts of Spiritual life, which are proper to Saints; besides a
Natural life, which is common to all Five sorts of Spiritual life.
men.

First, There is a life of Reconciliation, which stands in 1. A life of
Reconciliation.
opposition to the wrath of God. The wrath of God, that kills, but in the
favor of God there is life, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 30. 5. Thy anger
endures but for a moment, but in thy favor is life. This life is from Christ,
because it is he in whom he is well-pleased, and through whom he is well
pleased with us: God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself. If any
Reconciliation, it is in Christ. Here is one sort of spiritual life that
Christ gives, and that in abundance; I came that they might have life, and
have it more abundantly; because, where God is reconciled, he bears abundance
of good will to such a soul. In thy favor is life; and that favor abounds
so much, as that God loves every reconciled soul with the same love, wherewith
he loves Christ himself; Joh. 17. 23. That the world may know that thou have
loved them, as thou have loved me, faith Christ. That shows abundant love.
All love falls first upon Christ, as the head, Divine love does; and so
descends to the skirts of his garments. It falls upon us from Christ, and
through Christ.

Secondly, there is a life of Justification, which stands 2. A life of
Justification.
in opposition to the guilt of sin; and of this the Apostle speaks, Romans 5.
and tells you, what abundance of righteousness accompanyeth it, Romans 5. 15,
17. If through the offense of one many be dead, much more the grace of God, and
the gift by grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many.
For if by one man's offense, death reigned by one; much more they which receive
abundance of grace; and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by
one, Jesus Christ. It is called, Justification of life, there, verse. 18. Even
so, by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men to
Justification of life.

Thirdly, There is a life of Sanctification, that stands 3. A life of
Sanctification.
in opposition to the power of sin, as that of Justification did to the guilt
of sin. This is likewise from Christ; and of it Paul speaks, Gal. 2. latter
end, I through the Law am dead to the Law, that I might live to the Lord. I am
crucified to the world, notwithstanding I live; yet not I, but Christ that
lives in me. This comes in from Christ in great abundance. Hence are those
expressions, 2 Cor. 8. 17. Therefore as ye abound in every thing, in faith, and
utterance, and knowledge, and all diligence, and your love toward us, see that
ye abound in this grace also. Romans 9. 8. God is able to make all grace abound
toward you. This is that that Christ says, That he gives life, and more
abundantly.

Fourthly, There is a life of Consolation, which stands in opposition to the
discouragements that arise, both from 4. A life of Consolation.
the power of sin, and the guilt of sin, that strike the soul dead. And
therefore a soul that is glad, is said to live; Psalm. 69. 32. The humble shall
see this, and be glad, and your heart shall live. So you see, that to be glad,
and to live, is all one. This is founded in Christ, and there is abundance of
this communicated to believers. See that 1 Cor. 2. 15. As the sufferings of
Christ abound in us, so our consolation also abounds by Christ. Here is
consolation, abundant consolation, and both by Christ.

The last thing is a life of Glory, which stands in opposition 5. A life of
Glory.
to that misery, that arises from all the former, from the wrath of God, and
the guilt and power of sin, and the discouragements that arise from thence; all
these bring misery after the soul's death. Now, there is a life of Glory, that
freeth the soul from this, that is hid in Christ: You are dead, but your life
is hid with Christ in God. When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then
shall we also appear with him in glory. There is a glorious life for believers,
but it is now hidden, like the sap in the root in the wintertime. It is hidden
in Christ, who is their glorified Head already. This they shall have, and have
it more abundantly, because of that abundant happiness, which accompanies
this life of Glory, They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of
thy house, and made to drink of the rivers of thy pleasures. For with thee is
the fountain of life, Psalm. 36. 8, 9. When there is but a little small Brook,
and a whole Army comes to drink at it, they are ready to emulate one another,
because there is not enough to serve them all. As he said, Xerxes's Army drunk
up whole Rivers. But where there are Rivers of pleasure, there is enough for
all comers; there needs be no emulation, all shall be satisfied: They shall be
abundantly; and, Thou shall cause them to drink of the Rivers of thy pleasures.
Thus ye see, what strong Encouragement arises from hence, that life is in
Christ as in the Fountain. So I have done with that Clause of the fourth Verse,
In him was life. The next is,

And the Life was the Light of Men. Verse. 5. And the Light shined in Darkness,
and the Darkness comprehended it not.
We proceed to that which concerns the Creation of Light of Life,
Men in particular, The life was the light of men. That is, as I take it, The
Life which was originally in the Eternal Word, and conveyed to the creature,
according to their several ranks and degrees, was a life of Vegetation in
Plants, and a life of Sense in Brutes, and a Life and Light of Men. It was so
in the Angels as well as in Men. But the Evangelist, because the Scripture was
made for the use of Men, and not of Angels, contenteth himself only to mention
them; The life was the light of men.

By Light, I am soath to understand only Knowledge, as is Knowledge Grace, and
Joy.
some do; or only Grace, as other some: I rather take in both, and add a third
thing, which is the result of both, namely, Joy. For all these three come under
the notion of Light. Then make this our Observation, That man was created by
God at first in a state of light: The life was the light of men.

Do but compare this place with that, Joh. 8. 12. for the understanding of the
phrase; Then spoke Jesus again to them, saying, I am the light of the world. He
that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of
life. The light of life, and the life of light, is all one, and both come from
Christ, without any great difficulty. Next the life, was the light of men, And
he shall have the life of light, says Christ here; but that he speaks of
Conversion. My Text confineth me to what was in the Creation. Christ is
presented to us, as the Maker of all things. So then, Man was created by Christ
at first in a state of light; that is, in a state of Knowledge, of Holiness,
and of Joy; for these three things come under the notion of Light in the
Scripture.

First, Knowledge. See in that 2 Cor. 4. 6. God, who 1. Man created in the
light of knowledge.
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus
Christ. This light of knowledge was eminently in Man, at his first creation.
Therefore the light of God is said to stand in knowledge; Having put on the new
man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that created him.
And whereas there are three sorts of beams of light, by which the understanding
sees Three sorts of Beams of Light. Direct. Reflect. Refract.
things; and these were all eminent in Adam at the first Creation. There are
Direct beams, and Reflect beams, and Refract beams, so they are wont to call
them. Thus, a man sees another man, whom he looks upon face to face, by a
direct beam. The same man, when he sees his own face in a glass, it is by a
reflect beam. Let him look into the water, see a staff in the water; that is by
a refract beam, because the species is broken, by reason of the thickness of
Adam's Knowledge in Perfection.
the water, through which he sees. Now, Adam saw by all these, and, by them,
in a way of perfection: He looked, by a direct beam of light, upon all the
creatures; he saw the inside and outside of them; he knew all their Natures so
plainly, as that he was able to give them all names, according to their
several kinds. He looked upon himself by a reflect beam of light, he was able
to apprehend all his own notions and apprehensions, and all the duties God
required at his hands, and that without any oblivion; which, since the Fall, we
cannot do. We have power to reflect, indeed, upon our selves; but what we do
one day, we forget another. But now, with Adam, in this state of light, he
could neither forget evil, nor forget good. He could forget no evil, for
there was no evil to forget; and he could forget no good, for it had been
evil to have forgotten it, for he was without all evil. And then, for a
Refract beam of light, he looked upon God with such a beam, because he saw God
in them through a thick Medium. He could not see God in his Essence, but
through the Medium of the creature, and through those Revelations, which he was
pleased to make of himself before the Fall. Herein stood that light of
knowledge, wherewith Adam was at first created.

Secondly, Man was created in a state of Light; that is, in 2. Created in a
state of Holiness.
a state of Holiness: 1 John 1. 6, 7. If we walk in the light, as he is in the
light, we have fellowship one with another; that is, in Holiness. Ye were
sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord: that is, holy, and
sanctified persons. Holiness was stamped upon Adam there, in an eminent
measure; it was a deep stamp, and a clear one, because the Image of God was not
only in knowledge, as before, but in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians.
4. 24. insomuch as there was no irregularity in Adam's soul. He was an
Instrument, new made by the finger of God himself, well strung, and well tuned,
not a jarring string in the whole Instrument. A Glass filled with pure
crystall-water, no mudd at the bottom, no defilement in the water, stand it
never so much. His Body was subject to his Appetite, his Appetite subject to
his Will, his Will subject to his Reason, his Reason subject to God. One
Faculty sweetly subordinate to another, and all to the Divine Majesty. This I
have found, (says Solomon, Eccles. 11. ult.) that God made man upright, and
that he has sought out many inventions. If man would have contented himself
with that happiness, that God made him in at first, he might have been happy.
He was at first created in light of Holiness.

Thirdly, Man was created in a state of Light; that is, of 3. Man created in a
state of Joy.
Joy, which comes under the notion of Light in Scripture; Hest. 8. 16. The
Jews had light, and gladness, and joy, and honor. Light is sown for the
righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart, says the Psalmist. There
was nothing wanting, to make Adam's condition comfortable to him. For his Body,
he had a Paradise; all the delights and pleasures, that are found in all the
several places of the world at this day, put together, they could not make
such a Garden as Eden was, nor such a pleasant place as Paradise. For his Soul,
he enjoyed the chiefest good; the more he knew God, the more God loved him; and
the more he loved him, the more he praised him; and the more he praised him,
the more he delighted in him. There was overflowings of joy in Adam's soul.
Then, in reference to God, and so the Creatures; It could not but add
exceedingly to the light of joy in Adam's heart, that all the creatures were
willingly subject to him. God had made him Master of them all, and not one of
them that refused to be subject. Indeed, afterward, since the Fall, the
creatures became formidable to him. Moses, when his Rod was turned into a
Serpent, he fled from it, and was afraid; but so was not Eve, when the Serpent
came to her in Paradise. The Image of God was so perfectly stamped upon Adam
then, that every creature bare him reverence, and stood in awe of the face of
Man. And so they did to Jesus Christ, in whom the Image of God was fully
renewed. That is a passage observable, though, happily, not much heeded, Mar. 1.
13. it is a clause brought in by St. Mark, which the other Evangelists (as I
think) have not spoken of; Christ's being in the Wilderness, He was there
forty days tempted of Satan, and was with the wild beasts of the field. The
other tell you of his being tempted, but St. Mark only puts in these words,
And he was with the wild beasts, which was as great a miracle as any of the
other. It was a miracle, that Christ fasted forty days and nights; but it was
as great a miracle, that all the beasts did homage, and gave reverence to him,
even as they had done to Adam in Paradise. Thus ye have heard, for Explication
of this Truth, That Man was created at first, by Christ, in a state of Light;
that is, in a state of Knowledge, of Holiness, and of Joy.

First, The Use shall be general, to all the sons and 1 General Use. To seek
to Christ, to be restored to the state of Light.
daughters of Adam, that they would seek to Christ, that they may be restored
to this state of light. He, who himself is the Image of God, the express Image
of his Father's Person, Heb. 1. who at first made man after that Image of God;
He only it is that can restore him. He, from whom life was the light of men,
he it is, that must give that light of life; and he has promised to give it to
such as follow him. Certainly, this is worth the seeking after, Joh. 8. 12. I
am the light of the world, he that follows me shall not walk in darkness,
but shall have the light of life. That which we lost in the first Adam, we
shall have restored in the Second; there is no other way to come by it, but
this. The Mint, in which Knowledge, Holiness, and Joy, are coined, it goes in
Heaven, and no where else: Christ is the Master of that Mint.

That you may be encouraged to seek to Christ for this, set me tell you,
Beloved, That if the Lord Jesus Christ be 1. Sweeter Knowledge by Christ, then
that we lost in Adam.
pleased to renew this Image in you, and restore you to this state of light,
you shall have a sweeter Knowledge, ye shall have a surer Holiness, and a more
lasting Joy, than Adam himself had in Paradise. The light that the second Adam
gives, is better, in some respect, than the light which the first Adam lost.

Ye shall know that which Adam never knew, the height, and depth, and breadth,
and length, of the love of God in Christ. That which did not come within the
compass of Adam's knowledge, to know what belonged to a Redeemer; but that is
made known to the Saints, in whom the Image of God is renewed: Ephesians. 3. 17,
18, 19. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being rooted and
grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the love of God which
passes knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fullness of God. Adam
knew much of the love of God, as a Creator; but now, we know the love of God as
a Redeemer. This must needs be a sweeter knowledge, because this second is a
greater love. The misery of the person to whom love is showed, heightneth the
love. That which God, in Christ, Pity in misery heightneth love.
shows to man fallen, is love in mercy; love, joined with mercy, is greater
love, therefore the knowledge of this is sweeter knowledge.

And as ye shall have sweeter Knowledge, so surer Holiness; 2. Surer Holiness.
I do not say, a purer Holiness: Adam was more pure in the state of Innocence,
than any man on this side Heaven; he had no corruptions stirring in him. But
surer Holiness. That Holiness which Adam had, he was capable of losing it,
and did lose it. That which Christ restores to them, in whom this Image is
renewed, it is not left to their own keeping, He himself keeps it for them,
and no man shall take them out of his hand, Joh. 10. 28. They shall never
perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. As it fares sometimes
with a man that has broke his leg or arm, if he light upon a good Surgeon
that sets it well again, the arm or leg is stronger, than before the
breaking of it; and we say, He fell into the hands of a good Surgeon. So, we
were broken in Adam, but we have by Christ a stronger Holiness, than we had at
first.

And so you shall have a more lasting Joy, than you could 3. More lasting Joy.
have in the first Adam: It was a joyful state, as ye have heard, but how long
endured it? The Psalmist says, Sorrow endures for a night, but joy comes in
the morning. Here, joy endured for the morning, and sorrow came at evening.
Some think, Adam did not stand in his integrity a whole night; sure, he did not
stand long, but lost his joy presently. That joy which is given, to whom this
Image is renewed, is such, as no man or devil can take from them: Joh. 16. 22.
You all shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man t^^e from you. Bernard says,
Gaudium ^^it in fine, sed Gaudium sine fine. It shall be joy in the end, but it
shall be a joy without end; which Adam's was not. This is the General Use.

There is another more Particular, that is to such, as are Particular Use
restored to this Image of God, and a new state of life, from which Adam sell,
that they might walk as children of the light. How is that? The Exhortation ye
have, Ephesians. 5. 8. Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the
Lord; Walk as children of the light. That is, Walk knowingly, walk piously,
walk cheerfully; for light includes all these three.

Has Christ restored you to what ye fell from?

First then, Walk knowingly, have a care to see your way 1. Walk Knowingly.
before you; whatsoever ye do, it upon warrantable and good grounds; take up no
Opinion upon trust, follow no Principles, without a warrant from the Scripture:
He that walks in darkness, faith Christ, Joh, 12. 35. knows not whither he
goes. And so, Prove. 4. 19. The way of the wicked is as darkness, they know
not at what they stumble. So long as a man is in the dark, he knows not
whither he goes, nor at what he stumbleth; he reeleth sometimes this way, and
sometimes that way, runs his head against a post, or falls into a ditch,
into this error, or that. He stumbleth now upon a mad Principle, and then upon
a bad Principle, because he knows not whither he goes. In the dark there is
no discerning of colors, all things are alike fair. So it is with men in the
state of unregeneracy; there is no difference between civility and grace,
between formality and truth, between faith and fancy. He that will walk as a
child of light, must discern of things that differ; for, It is light that
makes manifest:

Secondly, As he must walk knowingly, so Piously: Put on (says the Apostle)
the armor of light, and let us walk 2. Walk Piously.
honestly as in the day, Romans 13. 13. Would you know how? Cast your eyes upon
Ephesians. 5. 8, 9, 10. Walk as children of light. For the fruit of the Spirit is
in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth; proving what is acceptable to
the Lord. This place shows you, that the light of holiness, which is in the
souls of the Saints, it is a Prolificall Light, which brings sorth fruit:
Walk as children of the light. For the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness,
and righteousness, and truth. It is the light of the Sun that begeteth
creatures, which the light of a Candle does not. Many Creatures have no other
father, but the Light, as Philosophers say, Putredo matter, Sol pater; Putridity
is the mother, and the heat of the Sun, that is the father of them. So it is
with all inferior Lights, they are like the light of a Candle; the natural
light of Reason, and the utmost improvement of natural abilities; this light,
make the best of it, till it come to be supernatural, and to have infusion
from Christ, it has no quickening power in it, it will not reform a man's life,
it begets no work truly good. Whereas the light of Holiness, like the light of
the Sun, it ingenders, and brings forth good works: The fruit of the Spirit
is in all goodness.

Then there will be a proving of what is acceptable to the will of God. Men
will not go blindfold to work, but will prove what is acceptable. The word in
the Original is, (...), which is a Metaphor taken from Goldsmiths, that prove
their Mettle by the Touchstone, not by the color only, or tinnitu, by the
jingling of the Mettle only; but bring it to the Test: if it will not bear
that, they disallow it. Many things have a fair color to the eye, that seem
good and beautiful, fit to be practiced by a Christian; and some things that
sound well to the ear, as of good report in the world: but here is not enough,
bring them to the Test; believe neither color nor sound, if they will not bear
the touchstone of the Word; A man that walks holily will endure the proof it.

Thirdly, He that walks as a child of light, must walk Cheerfully, for there
is a light of Joy too. Such a phrase ye 3. Walk Cheerfully.
have in the Psalms, Blessed is the man that hears the joyful sound, they
shall walk in the light of thy countenance. Here is now one walking as a child
of light, that walks in the light of God's countenance cheerfully and
joyfully. Serve the Lord with gladness, and come into his presence with
singing, Psalm. 100. 2. This is acceptable to God, and creditable to Religion.
God likes it well, that his servants should walk in the light of his
countenance joyfully. The Apostle tells you, this is acceptable to God, Romans
14. 17, 18. The kingdom of God stands not in meat and drink; but in
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. He that in these things
serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of men. This is one of the
things wherein we must serve Christ; joyfully, in the holy Ghost. Christ does
not like to be served uncheerfully. They that make conscience of serving Christ
in righteousness, and of serving Christ in peace, dare not be the Authors of
division. Why do not people make conscience of serving Christ, in joy too? He
that in these things, namely, in righteousness, and peace, and joy, serves
Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of men. The Saints of God like it
well, when they see men go cheerfully on in the way to heaven; otherwise, they
bring a bad report upon the good Land, and make men to suspect, that the
service of Christ is not so acceptable, when men walk so droopingly, that stand
in relation to him. You know what Jezabel said to Ahab, who had a mind to
Naboth's Vineyard; and because he could not compass it, he walked droopingly.
She came to him, and said, Why is thy spirit so sad? Do thou now govern the 1
King. 21. 6.
Kingdom of Israel, and be so sad? Implying, how ill it became a King, that
has the world at will, to walk droopingly and uncheerfully. Every one in whom
this Image is renewed, is made a King; Christ has made him a King to God, and
his Father. What! a King, and droop! One that has such a nearness, and so
near a relation to God, and yet so full of discontent! Let me yet say to every
child of God, as the Apostle, Phil. 5. 4. Rejoice in the Lord always: and
again I say, Rejoice. So I have now done with that Verse, In him was life, and
the life was the light of men.

Verse. 5. And the light shined in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it
not.
Ye have heard in what estate man was created, it was in a state of Light; and
the next news ye hear is of Darkness, The light shined in darkness, and the
darkness comprehended it not.

First, here we find man fallen, and Christ's demeanor

Secondly, his inability to receive that light, which Christ

Thirdly, Here is a supposition of the Fall, intimated by Darkness.

Fourthly, Here is a declaration, what Christ did to man The light shined in
darkness.

And fifthly, Here is a manifestation of man's carriage toward And the
darkness comprehended it not.

The first thing to be observed from hence, is, That Man, by his fall from the
state of light, became dark, yea, darkness it self.

The second Observation is, That light from Christ has continued to shine,
ever since the Fall. The light shines in darkness. It is something
emphatically uttered; for it is not in the Praeter perfect Tense, as before; it
is not, The light shined in darkness, or, has shined: but it is, The light
shines, (...); to show, that the light continues to shine. There is no time
since the Fall, wherein it could be said, The light shined not. This was
always an approved Proposition, ever since man became dark: The light shines
in darkness.

Thirdly, We must imagine, That it is natural to man, since the Fall, not to
comprehend the light of Christ. The light shines in darkness, and the darkness
comprehends it not.

Here ye have a supposall of Man's Fall, and a declaration, both of man's
carriage toward him, and of his carriage toward Christ since the Fall. I
shall but touch upon the first, which is this.

First, That Man fell from a state of light, and became dark, yea, darkness it
self. Light was the life of men, by Creation, and since, the light shines in
darkness.

By darkness, understand the persons of unregenerate men; all the world, before
the Lord Jesus Christ enlightneth them savingly, with the light of life, come
under this notion of darkness. Therefore Satan, who is elsewhere called, The
prince of the world, is said to be the ruler of the darkness of this world;
that is, of unregenerate men, Ephesians. 6. 12. Ephesians. 5. 6. Ye were sometimes
dark, but now are ye light in the Lord; therefore ye were sometimes
unregenerate, but now ye are sanctified. Ye were sometimes dark. That which
predominateth, uses to give the denomination: that is the reason, why the
natural man is called darkness in the abstract, because darkness has a
predominancy in their minds. As, when a man is extremely vicious, we call such
a man, Vice: Non est invidiosus, sed invidia; He is not envious, but envy and
malice it self. Non est vitiosus, sed vitium; He is not vicious, but vice it
self. The Papists call the Pope, of Holy His Holiness, in the abstract, because
they would have the world to believe him to be exceeding holy. Dark, in the
abstract, is exceeding darkness, in regard of the dominion of a threefold
darkness: the darkness of Ignorance, opposed to the light of Knowledge; the
darkness of Sinfulness, opposed to the light of Holiness; the darkness of
Misery, opposed to the light of Joy. This threefold darkness accompanies the
state of nature, even in all men, as long as they continue in it.

First therefore, that of Ignorance, Ephesians. 4. 18. Having the understanding
darkened, being alienated from the life of 1. A darkness of Ignorance.
God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their
hearts. Some natural men may have a deep reach in the things of the world, but
there is a darkness upon the face of the deep, a spiritual darkness upon the
deepest wits of natural men; something they know, but nothing as they ought to
know, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 8. 2. If any man thinks he knows any
thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know. They may perhaps know, that
God is a Spirit, but as long as they do not worship him in spirit, they know
him not as they ought to know him.

Secondly, A darkness of Sinfulness lies upon them: 2. A darkness of
Sinfulness.
1 John 1. 6. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness,
(that is, in sin) we lie, and do not the truth. He that hates his brother is
in darkness, which is an expression in that Epistle. How easily are men cheated
in the dark, having bad wares put into their hands? They vent falsities instead
of truths, they vent formalities instead of holiness, they put off any thing
to men in the dark. So, the deceitfulness of sin comes to rule over them,
because they are in a state of darkness.

Thirdly, Darkness of Misery; ye shall find that called 3. A darkness of
Misery.
darkness, in Lament. 3. 1, 2. I am the man that have seen affliction, by the
rod of his wrath; he has put me into darkness, but not into light. Darkness
there, is misry. Such is the condition of all natural men, though all be not
alike sensible of it. Adam* no doubt, was exceeding apprehensive, after his
Foelicem fuisse meminisse miserum est.
fall, of the change of his condition; but his posterity are not so. It is in
this case, as it fares with a Nobleman, punished with banishment into a
foreign country, and there forced to live in a mean condition; he himself will
be exceeding sensible Simile.
of his alteration, from the Court, in which he lived before, to the Cottage,
in which he lives now. But his children, that were born in that condition,
would not be sensible of the misery they were in. Adam found what it was, to
enjoy communion with God in Paradise, and what it was to be in a state of life;
therefore his fall went to his heart. But we, that are born in a state of
misery, are not sensible of it, because we know no better. Enough has been
said, to cause every one to make haste out of the state of Nature, because it
is a state of darkness. How formidable is darkness? It is said of Abraham,
there fell upon him the horror of a great darkness, Genesis 15. 12. Lo, a
horror of great darkness fell upon him. Darkness uses to be accompanied with
horror. And so it is with Nature; and yet this darkness of nature is not
formidable. How miserable would men be, if they knew their condition? how much
more miserable, because they do not know it? That in Egypt was palpable
darkness, which might be felt; here is that which aggravateth this darkness,
it keeps it self from being felt; men feel not their ignorance, and
sinfulness, and misery. Ye know the story of Jeremiah, when he was in the dark
dungeon, and his feet stuck fast in the mire; Ebedmeleck lets down cords to
draw him up: Jer. 38. 11, 12.
What a madman had he been, if he would not have fastened the cords under his
arm-holes, and suffered himself to be drawn up. Yet, so are the most in the
world; the Ministers of the Gospel find them dark and filthy, in a darkness
of ignorance, and mire of lust: Now God, by the Ministry of his Word, lets
down cords of love, to draw them up; so senseless are men, as to refuse these
offers, and there to lie and die, before they will come to Christ, that they
might be saved. This being supposed, I pass that, and go to the second thing.

The Light shines in Darkness.
Shines, in the Present Tense, because there was no moment The light shines.
The Point then is this, That light from Christ has continued to shine in all
ages, since the Fall. Look, as there are for the body two great Luminaries,
which God has made, The Sun to rule by day, and the Moon to rule by night; so
are these two Luminaries for the soul, the Sun, and the Moon; the Works of God,
and the Word of God: Christ, by the light of these, has shined in all Ages,
since the fall of Adam.

First, He shines in the works of Creation and Providence, 1. Christ shines
in the works of Creation and Providence.
and therefore these works are said to witness for God, Act. 14. 17.
Notwithstanding, he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and
gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food
and gladness. The heavens have declared the glory of God, ever since they were
made, and the firmaments have showed his handyworks. The beauty and bigness of
those vast Bodies, show to the world, that none but the hand of a God could
make them. Every creature is a kind of Professor, that reads man a Lecture
concerning God, of his Wisdom, and Power, and Goodness. Man is the Master of
all the creatures, and yet man is become a Scholar to all the creatures; the
Serpent may Matthew. 10. 16.
teach him wisdom, and the Dove innocence; and the Ant industry, Go to the Ant,
thou sluggard, Prove. 6.

There is a light besides this, that shines from Christ in 2. Christ shines
in his Word.
the Word; that is called his Testimony, as the former is called his Witness,
1 Cor, 2. 1. I, brethren, when I came to you, came not with excellency of
speech, and wisdom, declaring to you the Testimony of God; that is, the Word
of God, because that testifies what God is, and what he has done, and what he
requires. It is true, there was not always a written Word since the Fall, but
a Word there was. God revealed his Will by Visions, and Dreams, and other
Intimations, in a way of Revelation to Adam, and so to Noah, and to Abraham,
and to the rest of the Patriarks. It was a Word unwritten till Moses his time.
And then, as at The Word not written till Moses his time
the Creation, Light was the first thing that was made, and yet ye read of no
Sun till the third day. But all the light which was scattered throughout all
the great frame of the Universe, upon the third day, was gathered together, and
united in the body of the Sun. So here, Truths were scattered before, now a
little and then a little, by Dreams, and Revelations, and Visions; but in Moses
his time, all the Truths that had formerly been revealed this way, God gathered
together, and united them in a written Word; then began the Scripture, and from
that time forward it has been enlarged. After Moses, came the Prophets; after
them, the Evangelists and Apostles. So as this Age enjoyes the benefit of all
the light, that former times have had. Thus you see it is made good, that a
light from Christ has continued to shine in all Ages, ever since the Fall.
This lets us see, that ignorant persons, in all Ages, have been inexcusable;
they cannot say, but that God sent them light, more or less. Romans 1. 20. The
invisible things of him, from the creation of the world, are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal Power and
Godhead; so that they are without excuse. No age can plead any thing for it
self, by way of excuse, if it looks not after God; and this age least of all;
for Christ, who has continued to shine in all ages, shines out most
gloriously now. They had but, as it were, the Starlight before Moses;
afterward (I will take in all that under Moses too) it was but a Starlight in
comparison. In John the Baptist's time, they had, as it were, the light of the
morning peeping out; he was the Lucifer, the Morningstar, that came before the
Day. Then came the Dayspring from on high to visit us, the Lord Jesus Christ
himself, in the Ministry of the Gospel, he being both the Subject and Christ
both the Subject and the Preacher of the Gospel.
the Preacher of the Gospel. Then, the Sun arose, and so the light shined more
and more to the perfect day. He sent forth his Apostles, and endowed them with
infallibility of spirit, And the holy men writ, as being moved by the Spirit of
God. So as in the ages since, God has been pleased to make good that, which
was Prophesied of old, by Isaiah first, and afterward by Habbakuk, The time
shall come, when the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, even
as the waters cover the sea, Isa. 11. 9. Former times had but poor Ebb-tydes,
in comparison; there are now Spring-tydes since the coming of Christ into the
world. The earth is full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the
sea.

You may see, if you will, a little, by what degrees Light came in: Heb. 1. 1.
God revealed himself (...) God revealed by degrees.
(...), in several ways, and at several times: (...), by piece-meals, in
many parts, which the word implies.

As for instance, He first made known to Adam, that he would send Mankind a
Mediator, that should be born of a A little light revealed to Adam,
Woman; there is the light with him, The Seed of the Woman shall break the
Serpent's head. And that manifestation goes no further. After, comes a
further light, that is to Abraham, a little more to Abraham,
where he tells him, In thy seed shall all the nations of the world be
blessed. And to him is given Circumcision, as a seal of this covenant of Grace.
A further light came in more to Jacob,
Jacob's time, and discovered the time when Shiloe should come into the world,
Genesis 49. 10. After him, the Prophetical Office of Christ is revealed to Moses,
A Prophet like more to Moses,
to me will God raise up to you, of your brethren, him shall ye hear, Deuteronomy. 18.
18. Then comes in another Sacrament, and more afterward to the Jews.
the Passover, and all the Ceremonial Law, which was the Jews Gospel; every
thing there pointed at Christ. Afterward clearer manifestation still: Isaiah
tells you, what kind of Mediator he shall be, not descended of a pompous A
clearer light to Isaiah,
way, but as a man of sorrow. He tells you of whom he shall be born, A Virgin
shall conceive and bear a Son. Micah more to Micha.
tells you the very place where he shall be born, Thou Bethlehem, out of thee
shall come forth to me, him, that shall be the Ruler in Israel, Mich. 5. 2. And
so by degrees light came in. How much is this Age of the world bound to God,
We, under the Gospel, have all the light of former Ages.
for the enjoyment of all the light of former Ages; so as if still we are
ignorant of Christ, we are of all men most inexcusable. It was but a little
that our forefathers enjoyed, in comparison. Look but back a few years to
Henry the Eighth's time, and to Queen Mary's days; the Protestants then had
but little light, in comparison of what they have now.

As it is in Reason, our Reason should answer our Light; so it is in Nature,
when the Sun appears at noonday, then it is hottest. Naturalists say, Calor
and Lux concrescunt, Light and heat increase together. But alas,
notwithstanding the light in our heads, what a coldness is there in the most
of our affections? Let me say this to you, Our fathers, in those days, they
walked to Heaven, as it were, by Candlelight: But Oh! if we shall now post to
Hell by daylight, What will become of us? how inexcusable will our guilt, and
insupportable will our condition be? I have done with the second Observation,
The light shines in darkness. It follows,

The Darkness comprehended it not.
The Point from hence is this, That it is natural to man, since the Fall, not
to comprehend the light of Christ. The Apostle speaks in plain terms, 1 Cor.
2. 14. The natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God, for
they are foolishness to him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. It is not with this Metaphorical light; as it is with
the Natural; the natural light scatters the darkness where it comes: Let
the Sun arise, Darkness gives way. But here, the Metaphorical darkness will
not give way; that resists the light when it comes, and prevails against
it. Thus, in St. John's language, It comprehends it not. Job 24. 13. These
are they that abhor the light, they know not the ways thereof, nor abide in
the paths thereof. They are of those that rebel against the light. For the
light that shines in the works of God, darkness comprehends Light shining
in the Works of God.
it not. God has gloriously appeared in the works of Creation, but with what
issue? 1 Cor. 1. 21. Seeing the world by wisdom knew not God, in the wisdom of
God, it pleased God, by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe.

There was a great deal of wisdom appeared in the works of Creation, In wisdom
have thou made them all, says the Psalmist, of the works of God; and yet the
world by wisdom knew not God. All that appeared of God by the creatures, could
not bring man to a taking knowledge of him. Therefore you see, God is put upon
another way of saving man, (viz.) The foolishness of Preaching, as this place
tells you. Something men did apprehend of this light, but they comprehended
it not fully: The light shines in darkness, but the darkness comprehends it
not.

Again, This light shines in another light, a better and higher light, The
light of the Word. How speedeth that? Light shining in the Word of God.
Why, darkness comprehends not that neither. See what the Prophet Hosea
says of the Law, Hos. 8. 12. I have written to them the great things of thy
Law, but they were counted as a strange thing. If a Master shall deliver his
will to his Servant, he expects obedience if he do but speak the word; but if
he should give the servant his mind in writing, then he takes it extremely
ill, if the errand be not done, the servant's neglect is inexcusable. God has
not only declared his will, manifested his Law, but written his Laws; and they
were counted as a strange thing, people regard them no more, than if they were
things that nothing concerned them, strange things, which they had nothing to
do withal.

It may be, the Gospel had better entertainment, surely It deserved better:
Why, no; Darkness comprehended not the light of the Gospel neither: Romans 10.
16. They have not all obeyed the Gospel, for Isaiah says, Lord, who has
believed Isa. 53. 1.
our report? Isaiah complains, Paul complains, both in the same words, Who
has believed our report, or to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? Not, but
that some did entertain the Gospel in all ages; but that does not invalidate
the truth of the Point, because it was not by Nature that they did it, but by
an over-powering work of Grace. The darkness is said, not to comprehend it,
because there were very few in all ages that entertained the Gospel, in
comparison of them that refused it. It is said by John, What he has seen and
heard, that he testifies, and no man received his testimony. None? Yes, some
received his testimony; the Apostles, and the Virgin Mary, in those days
received it; yet it is said, No man received it: that is, few, or none, in
comparison. Thus, in all ages, though the light did shine in darkness, yet the
darkness comprehended it not. If so, let not Ministers be discouraged to find
it so at this day, It is bred in the bone, and it will never out of the flesh.
It is natural with man so to do, not to comprehend the light, though it shine
upon him never so clearly. If Isaiah complains, and Paul complains, Who
has believed our report? what wonder is it, if Ministers have the like
occasion to complain now adays? Are they more Evangelicall Preachers than
Isaiah? and more wise than Paul? Nay, did not Christ himself complain, I have
spent my strength in vain? they are his words, Isa. 49. 4. Yet, if any such be
here, let me speak to them for encouragement, If thou art a Minister of Christ,
imitate Christ, continue to let thy light shine, though the darkness
comprehend it not; so did Christ. As a late faithful Minister said, If men
repent not Ministers must preach, though the people do not repent.
upon my Preaching, however, it shall not repent me that I have preached to
them: though my Doctrine be not a sweet savor of life to them, I my self shall
be a sweet savor to God, even in their damnation. I have done with this Verse,
and pass to the next that follows.

Verse. 6. There was a man sent from God, whose name was John.
Verse. 7. The same came for a Witness, to bear witness of that Light, that
all men through him might believe.
The Evangelist begins to confirm, what before he had asserted, namely, That
the light of man was originally in Christ, and derived from him, the true
Light: And this he does by the testimony of John the Baptist, whom he
describes here,

1. From his Nature, There was a man.

2. From his Calling, sent from God.

3. From his Name, whose name was John.

4. From his Office, The same came for a witness, to bear witness of that
Light, that all through him might believe.

In all likelihood, some of these are hid in this very term The Jews conceit
of the Forerunner of the Messiah.
of Man. There was an opinion amongst the Jews, that there should come some
Angel to be the Forerunner of the Messiah, which was grounded upon that place
in Malachi, Mal. 3. 4. Behold, I send my Messenger, and he shall prepare thy
way before thee. The same word signifies both Messenger and Angel. Therefore
they looked for an Angel to come, before the Messiah came. When John Baptist
came, Men that understood what Circumcision was, and saw him circumcised; men
that considered the austerity, and strangeness of his course of life, began to
imagine, there was something in him more then man: They knew not what to make
of him, as ye may see by their questions, Joh. 1. 21, 22. When they had heard
him say, I am not the Christ, they asked him, What then? Art thou Elias? He
answered, No. Art thou that Prophet? He said, No. Who art thou, that we may
give an answer to them that sent us? What say thou of thy self? He tells
them what he was. There was a man sent from God whose name was John.

Let us not pass it without some Observation, namely, That God has ordained
the ministry of men to be used amongst God teaches men by men,
men. An Observation of some use, and worthy of our consideration. It is the
great Ordinance of God, that men should teach men, that men should bear
witness to Christ. And this God has done, partly in respect to his own Glory,
and partly in respect to our Necessity.

First, Partly in respect to his own Glory, which ye have the Apostle clearly
telling you, 2 Cor. 4. 7. God shines in our hearts, to give the knowledge of
the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. But we have this treasure in
earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power might be of God, and not of
us. If God should teach men by Angels Language, not by Angels
Creatures more noble than themselves, the Messengers would go near to shame
them they are sent to. But God has put treasures purposely into earthen
vessels, that the excellency of the power might be of God, and not of us. Poor
earthen vessels, crasie men! a feavour comes, and breaks the earthen
vessel in pieces. Such is the best of men, earthen vessels. Yet, how much
treasure does God put into some of them, whom he intends to make instruments
for his glory? Why? That the excellency of the power may be of God. It is God's
carriage to make use of weak vessels, that 1. In respect to his own Glory.
the praise may be for himself. As men that have a Jewel, they put it into a
box of Crystal, that it may be seen through the Case, that the radiancy of the
Jewel may appear through the transparency of the Glass. So, God puts his
Word into earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may appear through
the meannesse of them: He therefore purposely makes choice of such
Instruments. If the Devil be to choose an instrument to work by, he will
commonly choose one of the subtlest, some cunning-pated man, some Machiavel, to
be his instrument; if he choose another creature, it shall be a Serpent. But,
when God chooses, when God has a mind to confute Balaam, What creature does he
choose? An Ass, the silliest of all the creatures, because he would have his
power to appear, in the simplicity and silliness of the instrument. That is
one reason, He does it in respect to his own Glory.

Secondly, In respect to our Necessities. The truth is, we 2. In respect to our
Necessities.
were not able to bear the Ministry of Angels, much less to hear God himself
speaking to us from heaven. It was the usual preface of the Angels, when they
appeared to men, Fear not, Fear not; because their very appearing was always
formidable to them that had Visions. Ye know the story of Manoah's wife, and
Zachary, and the Virgin Mary her self; they could not bear the presence of God
without horror. Therefore the Israelites said to Moses, Speak thou to us and
we will hear, but let not God speak to us, lest we die. Therefore he is
graciously pleased to make choice of men, to speak to us by them, that are
flesh and blood like our selves. Let us learn, not to despise this Ordinance of
God, to content our selves with it; not to talk of voices from heaven, when God
has ordained the voices of men, like our selves, to be the instruments of our
conversion. There is a voice indeed, but what voice? the voice of the Teacher,
Isa. 30. 20, 21. Yet shall not thy Teachers be removed into a corner any more,
but thine eyes shall see thy Teachers, and thine ears shall hear the word
behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk in it: Namely, the Word from the
mouth of the Teacher. It is true indeed, there is a motion made, Luke 16. of
sending of some from the dead to teach the living; but the motion was made in
hell, it was the motion of the Rich man in hell, to desire of Lazarus, that he
would beg of Abraham, to send some body from the dead. God has put this
treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power might be of him,
and not of us.

There was a Man sent from God.
His Calling next offers it self. That is a main thing, a 2ly.
thing that the men of God have been careful to make good; they first-shew'd
their Commission, before they began their business, for the most part: Isaiah
tells you of a Coal from the Altar, wherewith his lips were touched. And
Jeremiah tells you, how God touched him with his hand. And Paul tells you,
in every beginning of his Epistles, Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the
will of God. And so St. Luke the Evangelist tells you, John was a man sent
from God. Then take this Observation, Such as have a lawful Calling to the
Ministry, are sent from God. How Those that are lawfully Called, are sent from
God.
can they preach except they be sent. Ye know the Gradation, Romans 10. How can
they call upon him on whom they have not believed? and how can they believe if
they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? and how can
they preach except they be sent? The Ministers are Christ's Ambassadors, We are
Ambassadors of God, and beseech you, as sent from God. Let men so account of
us, says the Apostle, as the stewards of God, dispencers of the mysteries of
God, 1 Cor. 4. 1. Shall any man thrust himself into a Nobleman's house, to be
his Steward, that has not a calling to it? Let no man take this honor upon
him, but he that is called of God.

Three things concur to a lawful Calling.

1. Ability. 2. Inclination. 3. Separation.
First, Ability. It is not every man's work to be a Witness 1. Ability,
concurrent to a lawful Calling. Un-gifted, Un-sent.
of Christ, in such a way as John the Baptist was, in a way of Office. He that
is Un-gifted, I dare be bold to say, he is Un-sent. 2 Timothy 2. 2. The things
that thou have heard of me amongst many witnesses, the same commit thou to
faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. Ability fitteth men. It
is not enough for a man to be godly, but he must be able to teach others. Not
that there is the same measure of ability required of all: God proportioneth
men's gifts and parts, to the places he calls them to. Ye shall have a Skiff
do as well in a River, as a larger Vessel, perhaps better. God gives ability,
suitable to the places he calls men to, when they are sent of God.

Secondly, There must be Inclination to that, above all 2. Inclination.
other works, that must go to make a true Calling. 1 Pet. 5. 2. Feed the flock
of God which depends upon you, taking the over sight thereof not of
constraint, but willingly. There must be a willingness as well as skill; not
for filthy lucre, but out of love to Christ, whose sheep the Minister is sent
to feed. Peter, love thou me? Feed my lambs. Love thou me? Feed my sheep.
God is my record, says Paul, how much I long after you all in the bowels of
Jesus Christ. And, My hearts desire is, that Israel might be saved.

Thirdly, To all this, there must go a Separation. Act. 3. Separation.
13. 2. As they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the holy Ghost said,
Separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereto I have called them. Here is
a Calling, but it is with a Separation, which is sometimes made immediately by
God himself, so Paul was called from heaven by God in Christ; and sometimes
mediately by the ministry of men, so Titus was called by Paul, and others by
Titus, For this cause left I thee in Crete, to ordain Elderse in every City, as
I had appointed thee Tit. 1. 5. Now, that the Man in the Text, John, was sent
of God, it appears in all these three respects: he had Ability, and
Willingness, and Separation to the work. His Ability and Willingness, both
appear in that expression, which Christ himself gives of him, Joh. 5. 35. He
was a burning and a shining light. Shining, in regard of his ability; burning,
in regard of his zeal and desire to do good to the souls of men. And for his
Separation, he had an immediate Call by God himself, in an extraordinary way,
Luke 3. 2. Annas and Caiphas being the high Priests, the word of God came to
John the son of Zachariah in the wilderness. As it was wont to do to the
Prophets of old, who were extraordinarily called to that service. Thus ye see,
why a Man, and in what respect, he was sent of God.

I come now to insist upon the Duties, that concern People from hence.

First, Seek God, in case you want Ministers; for they 1. Seek God, in the want
of Ministers.
must be of his sending. The Stars, they are in Christ's right hand, and
therefore they set in one place, and rise in another, even as he disposes and
appoints them. This lesson Christ teaches you, Matthew. 9. ult. Pray the Lord
of the harvest, that he would send forth Laborers into his harvest.

Secondly, Bless God in case you have them, for they 2. Bless God, for having
them.
are tokens sent from Heaven. Hezekiah thought himself exceedingly honored,
that the King of Babylon should send him Ambassadors: What an honor is it then
for people, to have a Minister sent from God? It is an act of high expression,
The Lord God of their fathers sent to them by his Messengers, rising up
betimes, and sending, because he had compassion upon his people.

Lastly, Entertain them as men sent from God. Trample not the gifts of God
under your feet. The Galathians had 3. Entertain them, as men senr from God.
learned this, and accordingly Paul says of them, Gal. 4. 14. My temptation
which was in my flesh ye despised not, but received me as an Angel of God, even
as Christ Jesus. Remember, they are Meslengers, and let them have their errand;
give them audience, and then give them dispatch. The errand God sends them
about, is, to stir men up to repent and believe. No more of that point.

There was a man sent from God, whose name was John.
He is here named, to add some honor to his testimony, because he had this
name imposed upon him by the Angel, before he was born; which is an honor done
to few in Scripture, Luke 1. 13. The Angel said to him, Fear not, Zachariah,
thy prayer is heard, and thy wife shall bear a son, and thou shall call his
name John. It is the rather added, because of the sense of the name, which is
from Jochen, which comes of Chen, which signifies Grace, The grace of God,
which the name imports. And it well became that person: both because he was
given to his parents as a favor from God, for Elizabeth was barren, they were
both old, and had no children; God gives them John, as an act of grace and
favor to them. And because he was to be a Preacher of the grace of God in
Christ; therefore he carries grace in his name, because he came to point at
the Lamb of God, that came to take away the sins of the world. Because he was
endowed with grace from the womb, yea, and in the womb, therefore might well
have the name of the grace of God given him then, before he was born. Or,
because he himself received a great deal of grace and favor from God, even in
that which he was sent about, to be the Forerunner of Christ. The voice of one
crying in the wilderness. Here is the Voice, the Forerunner of the Word. John
was the Morning Star, which was the forerunner of the Day. As the break of day
is the forerunner of the rising-Sun; so was he of the Sun of Righteousness.
As it is in Trees, the blossom is the forerunner of the fruit; and by the
sweetnesseiof the blossom, the expectation of man is raised to look for
deliciousness in the fruit. So were men's expectations raised, to look for
something in John more than in others, because of his grace and favor with
God. I I go on.

The same came to bear witness of the Light, that all men through him might
believe.
Here ye have his Office described to you directly, from the proper Act of it,
and the End of it.

The proper Act, He came to bear witness of the Light.

There are two special ways of bearing witness to Christ, the one by
Teaching, the other by Suffering.

First, By Teaching Christ. And thus all the Apostles were his Witnesses, Act.
26. 16. Arise and stand upon thy feet, for I have appeared to thee for this
purpose, to make thee a minister and a witness; even a Witness and Minister
to teach Christ.

Secondly, there is another Witness-bearing, that is, by Suffering for Christ,
sealing his witness with his blood; and those are properly called Martyrs,
(...) is the Greek word, that signifies Witness. This name is given to
Antipas under that notion, Rev. 2. 13. I know thy works, and where thou
dwell, even where Satan's feat is; and thou hold fast my name, even in
those days wherein Antipas was (...), my faithful martyr and witness. Now
John the Baptist bore witness to the truth, in both these ways, in Teaching
Christ, and in Witnessing too, in Suffering for him, he was beheaded; and so
there was something of Martyrdom in his death. The Observation from hence is
this, That men sent from God, as John was, will bear witness to the Light, as
John did. God and Christ never left themselves without witness, God has not
left himself (...), (says Paul to the men of Lystra, Act. 14. 17.) without
witness, in that he gives rain and fruitful seasons. As he has witnesses in
his works all the world over. So, Christ has not left himself without a
witness in his Word, ever since there was a written Word in all ages. The
Fathers before the Flood, the Patriarks after the Flood, the Prophets after
them, under the Law; the Apostles under the Gospel; they all bare witness to
the Light. Noah, he received the doctrine of the Gospel from the Fathers
before the Flood, and transmitted it to the Patriarks after him; and him ye
will find called by the name of a Preacher of righteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 5. He
spared not the old world, but saved Noah the eighth person, a Preacher of
righteousness. The very righteousness of Faith, which we preach in these
days, Noah preached in those, sent forth by the Messiah to come, and
righteousness to be by him. And after him, comes Moses the Lawgiver. And
whom does he bear witness unto? Surely, to Christ, as it is clearly said in
John; He bore witness to me, says Christ, Joh. 5. 46. There is one that
accuses you, even Moses, in Genesis 3. 15. Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
whom ye trust. For had you believed Moses, you would have believed me, for he
wrote of me. After him, came the Prophets, and witnessed of Christ. After them,
the Apostles, Act. 1. 8. Ye shall be witnesses to me, both in Jerusalem, and in
all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the earth. So they
all witnessed to the light, though not all with the same clearness, As, a
Light carried in the midst of a company of men, they that go before the light
see something of it, but not so much as they that come after. The Fathers,
Patriarks, and Prophets, they went before the Light, and so saw things less
clearly; the Apostles, they came after it, and so are able to speak more
distinctly of his Passion and Resurrection, and the things that concerned him.
So as, to this day, it is the work of God, that Ministers should bear witness
to the Light; therefore they are called Witnesses, Revel. 1. that is the name
given to them, that publish the truth of the Gospel, against the encroachments
of Antichrist. They are called two Witnesses, two Olivetrees, two Candlesticks.
But two Witnesses, to import, that Few witnesses to the truth, in the days of
Antichrist.
those that bear witness to the light in the days of Antichrist are but few,
if ye compare them with them that went the wrong way. And yet, two Witnesses,
that is, a sufficient number in all ages, to hold forth the truth, because two
witnesses would serve to give testimony under the Law, In the mouth of two or
three witnesses shall the truth of every thing be established. Though but two,
yet two in the worst times. And thus, Two Olive Trees, because God, by them,
conveyeth the oil of grace into the hearts of his people. And two
Candlesticks, because they hold forth the light of the truth.

Now, this may serve as a touchstone, to discern between The true Ministers of
the Gospel.
true and false Churches, and true and false Ministers. They that are sent of
God, they bear witness to the light, they set up Christ in their Ministry; they
are content themselves to stand in the crowd, and to lift up Christ upon their
shoulders; content, not to be seen themselves, so Christ be exalted. They lift
him up, as the Serpent of old was lifted up upon the Pole, in the Wilderness.
Men, in this respect, are like Trees, that receive their influence from Heaven,
and raise up their tops toward heaven in a way of acknowledgment, whence they
had their grouth. Men sent from God, and having received all from Christ,
return all to Christ in their dispensations.

But now, look into false Churches, for instance, that of The false ones of
Rome.
Rome: Popery is, in effect, nothing else, but an underhand close
witnesse-bearing against Christ. Antichrist opposes Christ in all his Offices;
under show of witnessing for him, he does indeed witness against him, both as
King, and Priest, and Prophet.

As King, because the Pope makes himself the Head of the Church, which is
proper only to Christ. One that sat 1: Rome against Christ as King.
in that Chair, was not afraid to call himself, Sponsum Ecclesiae, the Husband
of the Church.

As Priest. In that Office to which belongs Satisfaction 2. As Priest.
and Intercession, see how they go against Christ, who offered himself once for
all; their Priest must offer him up daily in the Mass, and unbloody Sacrifice.
So in his Intercession, they bear witness against him too, because they join
other witnesses with him (as they acknowledge them) Saints.

As Prophet. In that Office, they add Traditions to the 3. As Prophet.
Word; and the Council of Trent says, they are to be received, eadem
devotione, with the same devotion, that Scripture is to be received with. This
touch is but by the way, to fill your hearts more and more with detestation,
against that way of Popery. If it be a dangerous thing for a man to bear false
witness against his Neighbor, What is it then to bear false witness against
his God?

Now the End why he was sent, is, That all men through The End why John was
sent.
him might believe.

There is no more in the Original, but, (...), That all might believe; but
[men] is put in into the Translation. How should all men be saved by John's
Ministry, if it did not extend it self to all men? His Ministry was confined to
the Land of Judea, he preached only to the Jews. Therefore Men not being in
the Text, certainly the universal term is to admit of some restraint. I shall
interpret it unto you, in that of Matthew. 21. 26. which is something parallel,
where the debate was concerning the Baptism of John, Whether from heaven, or of
men. If we shall say, From heaven, he will say to us, say they, Why did ye not
then believe him? But if we shall say, Of men, we fear the people; for all hold
John as a Prophet. What, All the world? No, there were millions, and millions
of millions, that never heard of John. But, All that were acquainted with his
Ministry, they all held him as a Prophet. That all through him might believe,
that is, All his hearers. All believe, and, through him: not, in him, as the
Object of their faith; but, through him, as the Instrument of their faith. That
all. The meaning is, That all his hearers, through him, might believe in
Christ. Through him, but In the other. You have it clearly expressed, Act. 19.
4. John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying to the people,
That they should believe on him which should come after him; that is, on Jesus
Christ. Here is through whom, and on whom; through John the Baptist, and on
Jesus Christ. John Baptist's Office was, to make a way for Christ. As the
custom is amongst great Princes, when they are to go to any place, they send
before them their Harbingers to prepare the way, to tell the people who it is,
that comes to them, and what is expected at their hands, Genesis 45. Joseph, when
he was advanced, and went in the streets, a man went before him, crying, bow
the knee, And so Hester 6. There was a man went before Mordecay; and proclaimed
before him, What shall be done to the man, whom the King delights to honor?
So it was done to Christ by John, And so shall it be done to him, whom God
delights to honor, To the Mediator, whom God delights to seal. He came,
thus preaching Christ, that all hearers might believe through him in their
Stations: which affords us this observation, That the end of good Ministers
witnesse-bearing to the light, is, that all the hearers through them might
believe in Christ.

That was the end of the Prophets-Ministry in the place before cited, Acts 10.
43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that, through his Name, whosoever
believes in Him, should receive remission of sins. That was the end of the
Apostles both Preaching, and Writing, Joh. 20. ult. These things are Written
that ye might believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that ye
might have life through his Name, That is the end of our Ministry to this day.

Methinks, Our work is something like that of Abraham's Rebecca by Abraham's
servant wooed for Isaac.
servant, when he was sent to get a Wife for his Master's son. He goes on his
errand, and tells them of the family he came to, and where he found Rebecca,
that his Master was a great potent Prince, that he had an only son Isaac, whom
he made heir of all his Estate, and that he was sent on purpose to persuade
Rebecca to come over, and be espoused to this son. Such is our work: we are
sent to woo souls for Souls by the Ministers of Christ, wooed to Christ.
Christ. We tell you, What God is, and how glorious in himself, and all his
attributes; and that he has an only Son, the Son of his Love, the Lord Jesus
Christ, who is the heir of all things, The Father has committed all judgment
to the Son; And our errand is, to beseech you, to go over, and leave your own
father's house, and forsake all your lusts, and worldly Correspondencies, and
be married to this Jesus. This is the end of our Ministry, to persuade men to
believe in Christ; because we know, there is no other Name under Heaven, by
which we can be saved, Acts 4. 12. Neither is there salvation in any other, No,
there is no other Name given under Heaven, by which men must be saved.

We might tell you, as they do in the Church of Rome, Popery, a foppery.
of Pardons, Indulgences, and Pilgrimages; but this is, but to still Children
with rattles. We might tell you of your own works, of praying, and reading, and
giving of Alms: but this is, but to send you to Hop^er, and Arpad, the Rivers
of Damascus; for there is no salvation to be had, but by Him. Therefore the end
of our Ministry is, that all might believe in him; because, As there is no
other Name but his, by which we must be saved; So no other way to lay hold upon
him, but by believing. The just they live by faith. The Righteousness of God
is revealed from faith, to faith. Ye know how it was with the Woman in the
Gospel, that came to Christ in the crowd, and got healing from him. No
question, in such a crowd, many touched Christ, (for He was in the midst of the
throng) as well as that Woman. But none received healing, but that woman,
because she believed, that if she could but touch him, she should be healed. So
it is here, There is a crowd of Professors, that seem to come to, and follow
after, Christ; but none receive healing, but those that believe indeed; and to
them comes a healing virtue. Well then, if this be the end of all Ministers
witnesse-bearing; that through them their hearers might believe in Christ.

First, learn from hence, to look at these Ministers, as Ministers to be
accounted public blessings.
public blessings: here is one, John the Baptist, A man sent from God, that
all through him might believe. All that were within the compass, and reach of
his Ministry, if they were not wanting to themselves, might be the better for
him. That all through him might believe.

It is no small matter, this, whatsoever people may make of it, the Apostle
happily sets a high price upon it. All are yours, who? in the first place,
whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas. He reckons up the Minister as a great
part of their goods there. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. speaking of the Ascension of Jesus
Christ, and setting Him forth as a great Prince, he tells you, what gifts He
gave. Princes are wont in the days of their Coronation, to give largely to
their Subjects, Christ was Ascended, and Crowned with Glory, He led Captivity
Captive, and was in his Triumph, He ascended up on high, and gave gifts to men,
what gifts? He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists, these
were gifts indeed. They were men of infallible spirits; But, he gave Pastors,
and Teachers, and Ministers, for the edifying of the Body of Christ.

Secondly, seeing this is the end of their witnesse-bearing; learn to give heed
to their Testimony, because they are Their Testimony to be received.
sent by God, on purpose, that you through them might believe. They are
Instruments, as of your faith, so of your happiness. Faith comes by hearing,
and hearing by the Word of God, Romans 10. 14. The Philosophers, make hearing the
sense of Discipline. The Apostles make it, the sense of faith. Faith comes by
Hearing. Those that cry out of too much preaching, are as if they were afraid
of too much faith. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing, by the Word of God. It
is the great ordinance that God has appointed, to beget faith in the hearts of
men. Unbelief came by hearing, by Eve's harkening to the Serpent. So God will
have faith come by hearing, that we might beat the Devil at his own weapon.
Eve heard the serpent, and was drawn aside from God. We by hearing of the
Ministry of the Gospel, are brought home to God. As Calvin says, sweetly,
That, we who were deceived by the subtilty of the serpent, might be saved by
the foolishness of God; (so the Scripture calls the preaching of the Gospel)
1 Cor. 1. 21. It pleased God, by the foolishness of preaching, to save them
that believe. This is not an arbitrary business, that ye may take or leave,
without danger, or loss to them that teach you rightly. It must cost you dear.
For out of the witnesses mouths comes fire, to devour their Enemies, Revel.
11. 5. If any man would hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouths, and
devoureth them. These Sermons which are so slighted at present, may be as fire
in your consciences another day.

It was the manner under the Law, for the Witnesses, before a Malefactor was
stoned, to lay their hands upon his head; they were the first men that stoned
him, Levit. 34. 34. Bring forth him that is to be stoned without the camp, and
let all that heard him lay their hands upon his head, and then let all the
congregation stone him. This the Witnesses did, to make it appear, that they
translated all the guilt from off themselves, and laid it where it ought, upon
the head of the Malefactor. So may Ministers do, that come to be Witnesses to
the Light; they may say as Paul did, I have declared to you the whole counsel
of God, I am free from the blood of all men. They that have faithfully preached
Christ in any place, may safely say, We have delivered our own souls, and done
what in us lies to deliver yours, if you would believe. We come to bear
witness to the truth, that all men, through us, might believe. So I have done
with his Office, as it is directly laid down.

Secondly, It is laid down in opposition to a false conceit, The Jews falsely
conceit John the Messiah.
that the Jews had of John, as if he had been the Messiah. To meet with this,
He was not that light, says the Evangelist here. This conceit of theirs ye
shall find, Luke 3. 15. As the people were in expectation, and all men mused in
their hearts of John, whether he were the Christ or no. Now to meet with this,
and to clear it, says the Evangelist here, He was not that light. He was a
light indeed, but not that light. He was, as Christ himself says, a burning
and a shining light; he said so of John the Baptist, Joh. 5. 35. He was a
burning and a shining light, and ye were willing, for a season, to rejoice in
his light. There may be a Candle that is not lighted; a Candle may be lighted,
and burn, and yet give but a small light: But here, John was a burning light,
and a shining light too. Therefore the greater wonder, perhaps, why it is said
here, He was not that light. But the wonder will be over, if ye consider, that
The vast difference between CHRIST and John.
though these two are eminent lights; yet, to be that light was a farther
business. John was the light enlightened, but Christ was the light enlightening:
In him was light, and the light was the life of men. John had light by
participation, Christ had light, and was light originally. John shined for a
while, then his light was put under a candlestick, when he was beheaded; but
Christ shines for ever, he has shined in darkness, and will shine to the end
of the world. John was a light, Instrumentaliter; Christ a light, Efficienter:
John, Instrumentally conveyed light into others by Christ; but Christ, the
light Efficienter. Who of himself, and by himself, by his own power, conveyeth
light by way of infusion into the hearts of his servants. Therefore, to put the
difference, it is purposely said, He was not that light. We may note from
hence, That God cannot endure to have that ascribed Note.
to any man, which is proper to Christ. Therefore I will here show, Where the
holy Ghost sets himself to advance John the Baptist, yet he would not have
him raised too high; he would not set him in the Throne: He does purposely
prevent all imaginations, of his deserving what is Christ's due. He was not
that Light.

Look through Scripture and History in all ages: Ye shall find how ill God
takes it at the hands of men, whenever they come to usurp any thing out of
the hands of Christ. As in old time, where there rose up a Seducer, an
Impostor, that gave himself out to be that Star, which Balaam prophesied of,
which was a prophecy of Christ; Now Numb. 24. 17.
this fellow called himself, Ben-chomar, The son of a Star; this man professed
himself to be Christ: but he was slain with thunder and lightning from heaven.
And then the Jews called him, Ben cosmar, which signifies, The son of a Lie.
Ye have it said, It is the voice of God. It is proper only to God. Never man
spoke like this man, as they said true of Christ. But if Herod will take this
to himself, when the people cry out, The voice of God, and not of man, Herod
shall pay for it, it cost him his life, Act. 12. He was eaten up with worms. If
ye look into the beginning of that chapter, Herod had, before this, imprisoned
Peter, and slain James with the sword. God puts up this, but if he will come
to usurp what is proper to Christ, God will put it up no longer, then the worms
devour him. Herod might safelier take-away the liberty of one, and the life of
another, than the glory due to the Son of God. This is to be considered by
them, that take too much upon them; and by them, that ascribe too much to men.
Some take too much upon them, even so much, as Christ himself can take no more.
It is said of the man of sin, that he sits in the temple of of God, as God;
and some of the Popes sat down so, as Pope 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
Martin the fourth. When the people of Cicily had given some offense to the Sea
of Rome, and in an humble manner sent their Ambassadors to make their peace, it
is frequently known in History, that those Ambassadors deprecated in these very
words, Thou Lamb of God, that take away the The Pope usurpeth the title of
Christ.
sins of the world, have mercy upon us. Was not this a wicked, cursed,
blasphemous thing, for the man of sin to have this spoken to him? All power,
says another Pope, is given to me in heaven and in earth. It is wonderful
patience, that The Pope a Blaspheme^.
God should suffer the man of sin so long, now he has usurped what belongs
to Christ.

On the other side, some there are that ascribe too much to men, even that
which is Christ's due, and ought to be reserved for him; as, when people, in
trouble of conscience, go to this or that godly Minister, or Friend, and do
expect they shall have peace spoken to them from such a mouth. Here is a great
deal of dishonor done to Christ. That man, whatsoever he be, is not that
light; therefore they that go with this expectation, ascribe too much to man.
God, many times, sends men away without comfort, because they come in
expectation of more than is in man: They come (as Mr. Greenham was wont to say)
not as to Ministers, (who have nothing but what is derived) but as to
Magicians, as if men could conjure for comfort. Who is it that has the keys of
David, that shuts, and no man opens; and opens and no man shuts? This
is Christ's prerogative. If he open the conscience, all the devils in hell
cannot shut it; and if he shut the conscience, all the Angels in heaven cannot
open it. As for Ministers, they are Instruments through whom ye believe, yet
they are but Instruments; therefore are ready to say to all men, upon such
occasion, even as Peter and John said to them, when they had healed the lame
man, Act. 3. 12, 13. Ye men of Israel, why marvel ye at this, or why look ye
so earnestly on us, as though by our own power and holiness we had made this
man to walk? The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our
fathers, has glorified his Son Jesus; it is He that has done it. Look not on
us, but look to Christ. We are not that Light. I conclude this, with that of
the Apostle, purposely, 1 Cor. 3. 5, 6, 7. Who then is Paul, or Apollos, or
Cephas? but ministers, by whom ye believe, even as the Lord gives to every
man. I have done with the declaration of John the Baptist's Office, save only
for what follows in the end of the Verse, which is nothing else but a
repetition of what went before; namely, He was sent to bear witness of that
Light.

Verse. 8. He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light.
Verse. 9. That was the true Light, which lights every man that comes into
the world.
Let us consider what is said of this eighth Verse, He was sent to bear
witness to that light. Amongst other diverse The end of Repetition in
Scripture.
ends of Repetition in Scripture, this is one, to set on a commendation: Exodus
6. 26, 27. These are that Moses and Aaron, to whom the Lord said, Bring up the
children of Israel from the land of Egypt. These are they that spoke to Pharaoh
King of Egypt. These are that Moses and Aaron. Here is thrice, These are they,
these are that Moses and Aaron. The Repetition heightneth the Commendations.
So, The same came to bear witness of that light. And, Was sent to bear
witness of the light. To teach us this, That to bear witness of the light,
and to testify of Christ, is a most honorable employment. Of all that are
born of a woman, as our Savior tells us, there was none greater than John;
excepting Christ, who had not a natural generation; Matthew. 11. 11. Verily I
say unto you, Amongst them that are born of a woman, there has not risen a
greater than John the Baptist. This great John, the first.

What is his Employment? Certainly, so honorable a Person, must be called to
some honorable service. It is, The employment of the Ministers of the Gospel
is an honorable employment. Luk 2. 11. Mar. 16. 6.
To bear witness to the light, than which, no service is more honorable: It
is that, which Angels have not disdained; They, ye know, bare witness to
Christ's Incarnation; they tell the shepherds, That to them is born in the
City of Bethlehem, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. And then they bore
witness of his Resurrection, to women at the Sepulcher. God the Father, and the
holy Ghost, thought it no disparagement to them, to bear witness to Christ;
God the Father at his Birth, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well Matthew.
3. 17. Matthew. 17. 5.
pleased; and at his Transfiguration in the Mount. And it is the great work of
the holy Ghost, in all his negotiations to the sons of men, to testify of
Christ: Joh. 15. 26. When the Comforter shall come, whom I will send to you
from the Father, even the Spirit of truth; he shall testify of me. There is
his work. I will not insist long upon this. Let us learn only from hence,
every one in his and her place, to bear witness to Christ; Ministers by
preaching Christ, as Paul did, who desired to know nothing amongst his people,
but Christ, and him crucified; therefore he is called a Chosen vessel, Paul
is. But to what end? Act. 9. 15. The Lord said to him, Go thy way, for he is a
chosen vessel to me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and
children of Israel. Here is the Minister's work, to bear Christ's name before
the people, like those Pitchers of Gideon, Judge. 7. earthen pitchers indeed,
and so earthen vessels, as Paul calls them; but they have a Lamp in them,
and are chosen vessels to bear the name of Christ, to witness to this truth.
And so, Believers, in their conference, should bear witness to Christ, by
telling one another, what great things he has done for their souls;
discoursing of him, as the Disciples in the way to Emmans, their talk was of
Christ. As people, when they come from Market, they tell of their penny-worths.
When people How to bear witness to Christ.
come from Sermons, they speak what they have heard, and what a good bargain
Christ is. All, of all sorts, are called to witness for Christ, by their
living; and if they be called to it by their dying, living to him, dying for
him; there is witness born to Christ both these ways. All are not, indeed,
called to Martyrdom, and so to testify of Christ by their death; but all are
called to Testify of Christ by their Life. As ye read of some that professed
God in their works, so some confess Christ in their lives, those that show
forth the grace of Christ, as Peter speaks, who are called out of darkness,
into his mavelous Light. Those that can carry themselves meekly toward the
malicious, and humbly toward the proud, they may hereby, by their Carriage,
bear witness to that meekness, and humility, which they receive from Christ,
as the head and fountain of it. Whosoever has received Christ Jesus the Lord
truly, he will walk in him; not only talk of him, but confess him, not only
with his mouth, but his life. Here is a way of witnessing to him! That ye may
be encouraged to witness for Christ, take two Considerations.

First, If we do not witness for Christ now, Christ will one day witness
against us, Mal. 3. 5. I will come near to you in judgment, and I will be a
swift witness against such and such sinners, as he there mentions. Christ
himself will be a witness against us, if we be not witnesses for him, and a
swift witness too. And now beloved, Consider with your selves, what
astonishment seized upon the souls of Joseph's brethren, as soon as he stepped up
to witness against them, and said, I am Joseph, whom ye sold into Egypt. And
yet he did this merely to inform them, and not to affright Genesis 45. 3.
them. Who can tell the horror, and amazement, which will fall upon the souls
of men, when Christ will, at the last day, say, I am Jesus, whom ye Crucified,
and whom ye refused to believe, and whose Word, and Gospel, ye have trampled
under your feet.

Secondly, Consider, That if we do witness for Christ, we shall have Three,
witnessing for us; in whose Testimony we shall receive abundance of Comfort.

First, We shall have a witness without us, and a witness within us, and a
witness above us. Without us; That is the Testimony of men, that fear God. If
we witness for Christ, They will witness for us, even the Consciences of
wicked men will be enforced many times to witness for us, when their words
witness against us. But though they should not, yet by faith the Elders
obtained a good report, Hebr. 11. 2. The Saints will have a good report amongst
them that are Saints, like themselves. Jonathan will witness for David, though
he incur Readiness displeasure for so doing.

Secondly, We shall have a witness within us. That, is the Testimony of our
Consciences. Though there should be storms without, yet there will be a calm
within. And it is the wind within that makes the Earthquake. And the wind
within, that makes the soul to quake. Conscience is a witness within us.

Thirdly, God is greater then our hearts. He is a witness for us: so says
Job, Job 16. My witness is in Heaven, and my Record is on high. Though men
upon earth should witness against him, and though he should not at all times
have the peace of his Conscience, speaking good things for him, yet he has a
witness above all, His witness is in Heaven, and his Record on high. As
Augustine says, Deus major Conscientia; and pro nostra Conscientia testatur.
That is one end, why God will have men witness for him, because he might have
occasion to witness for them, if time serve; what a comfort is here to have
him witness for us, who is our Judge, whose sentence will never Certainly go
against his Testimony. I have done with that, and proceed now to another
argument, which the Evangelist uses to prove, That Christ is the Fountain of
Light, namely, from the effect of Illumination, general Illumination.

Verse. 9. That was the true Light, which lights every man that comes into
the World.
Here is both the Agent, the Act, and the Subject. The Agent, Christ, under the
name of true Light. The Act, Lightning. The Subject, Every man that comes into
the World.

That was the true Light. Light ye know was the first distinct Creature that
God made. And as it was the first, so it is the most Excellent of the visible
Creatures, and puts an excellency into other things. What is it that makes
precious stones and Jewels, of so much value; but because Christ the true
light.
they are so light-some, above other things? The Sun, Moon, and Stars, differ
one from another in glory, but all are glorious, because all Lightsome.
Therefore light is fit to set forth Christ by, who is Excellently
super-Eminent. He delights to compare himself to such things, as, to the Sun,
to the bright Morning Star, to precious stones; and is often called the Light,
in scripture. Only in this place, there is an Epithet given to the Light, That
is, The true Light, (...). The true Light, in four respects.

First, because Undeceiving Light.
Secondly, because Real Thirdly, because Underived Fourthly, because
Supereminent
First, The true light, because undeceiving, in opposition 1. The undeceiving
Light, in opposition to false light.
to false, and deceitful. In that sense, ye find the word used by Joseph's
brethren, when they came into Egypt, and were taken for spies, Genesis 42. 11.
Joseph had said, ye are spies; to see the nakedness of the Land, ye are come.
No, say they, we are all one Man's sons, we are true men, thy servants are no
spies. True, in opposition to deceitful. So Christ is called the true light,
in opposition, to all the false lights of the Gentiles. They had their Idols,
and Balaams. And so all natural men to this day have their Lights, but they be
false ones. The natural man's light is, the Ignis fatuus. It is lightsome
indeed, but he that follows the light of it, is lead into ditches, and boggs,
such is false light which the Creatures afford, it leads to sorrow. Man may
hope for cheering, but he shall lie down in sorrow for all that, Isaiah 5. ult.
Behold all ye, that kindle a fire, and compass your selves about with sparks,
walk in the light of your fire, but ye shall lie down in sorrow, because these
are deceitful lights. But Christ is the true Light, because, whosoever
follows him, is lead to everlasting happiness, Joh. 8. 12. I am the Light of
the World, he that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have
the light of Life.

Secondly, True light, because a Real light. True in 2. Real, in opposition
to Ceremonial types, and shadows.
opposition to Ceremonial types, and shadows; As, true, that is, undeceiving,
in opposition to the false light of the Gentiles: So, true, that is, real, in
opposition to the Ceremonies of the Jews. So it is opposed to Ceremonies, 1 John 17. The law came by Moses, grace and truth by Jesus Christ. Where it is
commonly thought, that Grace is opposed to the Moral Law, and Truth to the
Ceremonial. The Jews had their light; much light shined in Ceremonies and
Types of old. But Christ was the true light, because he was the Substance of
all these, Col. 2. 17. which are all shadows of things to come, but the body is
Christ.

Thirdly, The true light, because underived. True is 3. Underived, in
opposition to borrowed, etc.
sometimes opposed to Borrowed, Communicated, Participated from another. Thus,
Christ is called, The true God; and so God. The true God, in opposition, not
only to Idols, that have no Deity in them; but to Magistrates, who are called
gods, by derivation of their Authority from another. 1 John 5. 20. We know that
the Son of God is come, and has given us understanding, that we may know him
that is true; and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ.
This is the true God; but Magistrates, they are gods, but gods by derivation,
and so not true gods. But Jesus Christ is the true light in this respect,
because he borrows not his light. Some of authority, they say, are light, Ye
are the light of the world, Joh. 5. Ephesians. 5. Ye were darkness, but now are ye
light. How? Light in the Lord. Christ has light in him. You are a borrowed
light, he is an underived light; and so, The true light.

Fourthly, True, because super-eminently true, in opposition 4. Super-eminently
true, in opposition to Common and Ordinary
to ordinary and common. So he says, Joh. 6. 55. My flesh is meat indeed; it
is, (...), truly meat: and my blood is (...), truly drink; that is, not
ordinary, not common, but super-eminently meat and drink. Joh. 15. 1. I am the
true Vine, not an ordinary common Vine, but a super-eminent one, because his
Blood is more cherishing than Wine. And so, The true Light, a super-eminent
light, more excellent than the natural light in many respects. If the natural
light be cheering, why, Christ is so much more; light refreshes the eye,
Christ refreshes the soul more abundantly. Does the natural light penetrate,
and search into the most secret corners? Christ does more search into the heart
and spirits of men, to discover what is hidden there. The hidden things of
darkness are made manifest by light. The hidden things of God are manifested
by Christ, even the great mysteries of the Gospel. Is the light of the Sun able
to shine upon dunghills, and not receive defilement from them? Christ does so
much more: He searches into filthy hearts, and receives no defilement from
them. Therefore the true Light, because not ordinary. What shall we learn from
hence? Why, to make out after Christ, and that upon this ground, because he is
the true light. Who is there, that is not desirous of light? Truly (says
Solomon, Eccles. 11. 17.) the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for
men to behold the Sun. Christ is light, true light. Christ is sweet, truly
sweet. A pleasant thing it is for men to lay hold upon the Sun of
righteousness; no true pleasure can be had any where else. If we find a dark
room in a house, we say, This is a melancholy room. It is the saddest
condition in the world, for The saddest misery, to lose our Communion with
Christ. Exodus 10. 21, 22. Act. 27. 20.
men to want this light, nothing is worth the grieving for, in comparison of
this, being out of Christ, or having lost fellowship with Christ. A sad
condition it was for the Egyptians, to be three days in a palpable darkness;
and for Paul and his fellows, to be diverse days and nights, without the
light of the Sun, and Moon, and Stars. What is it for men and women to continue
for many years, without God and Christ in the World? Suppose a room were never
so full of the most curious Pictures, if there be not windows to let in light,
the Pictures lose their luster: So, let men have beauty, strength, and never so
good parts; all these, without the light of Christ in their souls, are neither
beautiful nor lovely, nor of any worth at all.

Ye should therefore learn to thank God for this great Gift, that he has
bestowed his Son upon us, that we might not sit in darkness, but wait for him,
as they that wait for the morning. Men that have most business to do, and
cannot do it without light, How do they watch for the morning? Ho! the morning!
ho! they cry out. Phosphore, read diem. Jesus Christ is that morning Star, and
yet gave himself; therefore wait upon him for him. It is observable, that Rev.
22. 16. he calls himself the Morning Star, I Jesus have sent mine Angel to
testify these things to the Churches. I am the root and offspring of David,
and the bright Morning Star. And Rev. 2. 26, and 28. He promises to give the
Christ is the Morning Star
Morning Star, He that over comes, and keeps my word to the end, I will
give him the Morning Star. What is that? I will bestow my self upon him. Other
Commanders, they give their soldiers some little pay; other masters, they give
their servants some little wages: But, he that overcomes, and keeps my word,
I will give him My self, I will give him the Morning Star.

That was the true Light, that lights every man that comes into the World.
Some difficulty is in this Clause: therefore, for the fuller explication of
it, there are two Conclusions to be cleared, and two Queries to be resolved.

First, two Conclusions to be cleared.

The first is this, That whatsoever any man receives, he has it from Christ.
That was the true light, that lights Whatsoever man receives, it is from
Christ.
every man. Indeed, in this sense, many take it; as if one should say, Such a
Schoolmaster, he teaches every boy in the town. This were true, though every
boy in the town did not go to school. The meaning is this, That every one that
is taught, is taught by such a Master. And so, though every man, and every
mothers son, should not be enlightened; yet, it may truly be said, that Christ
enlightneth every man that comes into the world, because every man that is
enlightened, has his light from him. There is truth in that, but that is not
all the truth. Thus far it is undeniable, that whatsoever light any man has,
he has it from the Lord Jesus Christ, who is therefore called, The Sun of
righteousness. The Sun, that is the wellhead of light; whatsoever light is in
the Moon, or Stars, or inferior Orbs, it is derived from the Sun. So, all
light, whatsoever it is, it is derived from Christ.

The second Conclusion is this, That every man and Every man and woman in the
world, some way or other is enlightened by Christ.
woman that is born into the world, is enlightened by Christ some way or other.
Not only every one that has light has light from him; but, Every one has
some light from him. I say, every one that comes into the world, is some way
or other, enlightened by Christ. But that is the importance of the expression in
the end of the Text, Every man that is born into the world; therefore [every
man] cannot be restrained, because born into the world is too large an
expression. Every man that comes into the wrrld. Ye may say, What means
coming into the world? Joh. 18. 37. To this end I was born, and for this cause
came I into the world. Born, and coming into the world, is all one. And so,
dying, and going out of the world, is all one: Naked came I in, and naked shall
I go out. We brought nothing into this world; namely, Job 1. 21.
when we were born: and we shall carry nothing out, namely, when we die. So
that man's coming into the world, is, Every man and woman that comes by
natural generation into this world, is born into it.

Come we now to resolve two Quaeries, of more importance.

First, Whether the same measure of light be communicated

To that, the Answer must be Negative; He does enlighten every man that comes
into the world, but not every Natural, and a Supernatural Light; and each of
these comprehend three several things under it.

The Natural light, that comprehends the light of the Sun, the light of
Reason, the light of Conscience. Natural Light. 1. Of the Sun.


First, The light of the Sun, that makes all other things visible, Psalm. 74.
26. Thou have prepared the light, and the Sun.

Secondly, The light of Reason, a natural light; In him 2. Of Reason.
was light, and the light was the life of men, Joh. 1. 4. where the meaning is,
That the light of Reason comes from Christ to every man.

Thirdly, The light of Conscience, which is to be found even in every man by
nature, by which he is prompted to 3. Of Conscience.
good, and taken off from evil, and able to discern between right and wrong,
more or less. And thus I understand that of Prove. 20. 27. The spirit of man is
the candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the belly. The
spirit, it is often put for conscience; The things of a man knows no man, but
the spirit of man which is in him. Now this is called the Candle of the Lord,
because it lights and directs all men. We all, by our Fall in Adam, lost
not only our Supernaturalls, but forfeited even our Naturalls. All the light
we had, was blown out by that Fall; therefore, what we have now, we owe to
Christ. The Natural light we have, it is the Candle of the Lord.

Supernatural light, that comprehends three things. Supernatural Light.
The light of the Word. The light of Grace. The light of glory.


The light of the Word, Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet, 1. Of the Word.
and a light to my paths, Psalm. 119. 105.

The light of Grace, Ephesians. 1. 18. The eyes of your understanding 2. Of Grace.
being enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, the riches
of his glory.

The light of Glory, Col. 1. 12. He has made us partakers 3. Of Glory.
of the inheritance of the Saints in light. One of these makes way for the
other, the light of the Word for the light of Grace, and the light of Grace
prepares way for the light of Glory. The light of Grace, that is the fruit of
the Word ingraffed; and the light of Glory, that is the crown and reward of
Grace.

In all, there are six sorts of Light, three Natural, and three Supernatural.
The First and Last of these, cannot be understood in the Text; the light of the
Sun is the first, and the last is the light of Glory, which is not understood
here. Though it may be affirmed, that the world continues for Christ's sake.
That cannot be understood here, because the Evangelist speaks of a Sun proper
to man; whereas that is common to all the world, to brute beasts as well as
men; It enlightneth every man. The last of these, the light of Glory, cannot be
understood here, because no man partaketh of that, till he be gone out of the
world; and, here, is light spoken of, given to them which come into the world.
But the other four sorts of light that remain, they are all taken in, the light
of Reason, the light of Conscience, the light of the Word, and the light of
Grace. These are the several Lights that come from Christ.

But I must show you, That these are not divided amongst mankind, nor
communicated in a like measure to all; that so I may answer the first Quaery.

It is true, That all do partake of the light of Reason, and Conscience: but
yet there is a difference, and That all partake of the light of reason and
Conscience, though not alike.
inequality, even in that light, because Reason and Conscience are more
vigorous in some, then in others. What shall we say of Infants, and of Idiots;
we must say, Even these have some light from Christ, but not like to other men.
Infants have the gift of Reason, though not the use of reason; that gift they
have from Christ. Idiots have the use of reason in some lower degrees, I, and
of Conscience too, in some lower acts, though neither Reason nor Conscience, be
so vigorous in them, as in other men.

To go on. The light of the Word, that is not equally dispensed to all, as
appears, Psalm. 147. two last verses. He showed his word to Jacob, his
statutes, and judgments Inequality, in dispensing the light of the word.
to Israel, he has not dealt so with any Nation, as for his judgments, the
Heathens have not known them. Israel had the word, when the Heathens had none.
He that causes it to rain upon one City, and not upon another, sends the
word to one City, and Nation, and not unto another. He causes the Word
plentifully in some places to dwell, as in this London.
City, at this day; but in other places, there is a famine of the word. So as
the light of the word is not equally dispensed now amongst them, that do enjoy
the light of the word. The light of grace is dispensed, but not in a way of
equality. Many enjoy the light of the word, that never enjoyed the light of
grace, both before, and since the So of the light of grace.
Incarnation. Before the Incarnation, The Hebrews in the wilderness had the
light of the word, yea, and confirmed to them by many miracles, and yet the
light of grace withheld from them. Therefore, it is said, Deuteronomy. 29. 3, 4. The
great temptations which thine eyes have seen, the signs, and those great
miracles; yet the Lord has not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to
see, and ears to hear unto this day. Here were means, but no grace to improve
them. They had not an heart to perceive, nor eyes to see, nor ears to hear. And
since the Incarnation, ye have Christ testifying, Matthew. 3. 11. He answered,
and said unto them, namely to his Disciples. It is given to you, to know the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not given; given to
some, not given to others. So have you the resolution of the first Quaery.

The second Quaery is. Whether sufficient light be given

Here we are to distinguish both of Sufficient, and of Light.

Sufficient, is Considerable two ways, First, in reference to Inexcusable,
Secondly, in reference to Salvation.


Light is twofold. Convincing Light. Converting Light.


Now the Resolution of the Quaery, will lie in these two

First, That Christ does dispense convincing light, sufficient to leave every
one without excuse. Secondly, Christ does not dispense converting light to
every one, sufficient to bring him to salvation.
First, Christ does dispense Convincing light to every one, 1. All have light
convincing, sufficient to leave them without excuse.
sufficient to leave him without excuse. So much the Apostle says: Among the
heathen which had no other light, but that of nature, no other knowledge of
God, but that which flowed from the works of Creation, and Providence, Romans 1.
20. The Invisible things of him, from the Creation of the World are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made, even the eternal power and
Godhead; So that they are without excuse. If the very Gentiles had enough to
leave them without excuse; then much more such, as live under the dispensation
of the Gospel; because there goes a Clearer light with the word, then does
accompany the works of darkness. As the Sunbeams discover a great deal more,
then the Moon shine, because it is a stronger light; so the light of the
Gospel, and Word, being stronger then the light of nature, are more convincing
then the other; so as every one, be he Jew, or Gentile, be he Heathen without
the Word, or a Professor of Christianity under the word, has light enough to
convince him, and to clear God in his proceedings against him. I say, not only
to convince him; but to clear the Justice of God: because there is no man that
walks up to the utmost of his Life. No man may go to God, saying, I have done
all I was able to do, and therefore, I challenge a reward at thy hands. This to
be sure; He has enough to convince him, and to leave him without excuse.

Secondly, Christ does not dispense to every one Converting 2. All have not
converting light sufficient to bring them to salvation.
light, sufficient to bring him to Salvation. There is no light sufficient to
bring to salvation, but that which Christ calls the light of Life, John 8.
12. I am the Light of the World; he that follows me, shall not walk in
darkness, but shall have the light of Life. Every man by nature, is not only
blind, but dead, dead in sins and trespasses; and therefore, must not only
have life, but such a life, as may quicken him, The light of life. Indeed, if
light alone will serve the turn, any kind of Illumination; then, acceptance of
the will, and illumination of the understanding, and moral persuasion might
prevail, to bring a man to God. Hic opus est medela, suadela non sufficit.
Here is need of quickening, therefore light will not serve the turn. It must be
a quickening light, that suffices to Conversion; This, Christ does not dispense
to every one; for if He did, every one would come home to Christ. No man can
have possession of Christ, that is not overpowered to believe. Sufficient
grace, and over-powering grace, is all one. Till a man be overpowered, he can
never close with Christ for salvation, Now because, this over-powering grace is
not bestowed upon every one, therefore it is clear, that sufficient grace, the
Life of light is not dispensed to every one that comes into the World. Without
Christ no salvation, without faith, no closing with Christ. All have faith,
says the Apostle. That is, all might have faith if they would, say some,
Therefore God does to every one give sufficient light, remotely sufficient;
because, say they, He gives them such light, as, if they would follow it, He
would give them faith. This is commonly said. But I could never yet see it
proved. Wheresoever there is an improvement of natural life, men say, there
shall certainly be an addition of super natural discoveries of Christ, and so
power to believe. If there be no such thing, the connection between the
improvement of what a man has, and the donation of what he stands in need
of, for to bring him to salvation, must depend either upon the merit of man,
that does so improve his nature, or upon the promise of Christ, that whosoever
does improve his natural abilities, shall have grace vouchsafed to him. But it
depends upon neither of these. Therefore no such thing.

First, it does not depend upon the merits of man, nor upon his utmost
improvement of natural abilities; so long Salvation depends not upon men's
Merits, nor their improvement of natural abilities.
as we are out of Christ, all our abilities are but natural, they cannot
deserve the grace of Christ. No creature can raise it self to an higher kind,
by improving of what belongs to it in a lower sphere. As for example. Take
creatures that only have sense in them, it is possible, by art and industry,
to bring them to a great exactness, in the exercise of their science; as, an
Horse to dance, an Elephant to write, and a Parrat to speak; but none can bring
them to Reason, because that is a thing of an higher sphere. So, take a Man,
that is natural; by the improvement of nature, he may go on a great way: but
he cannot, by all the improvements of nature, deserve grace at the hands of
God. The Papists call this the Merit of Congruity; if a man improve what he
has, he deserves, ex Congruo, that God should give him more. But, if so, then
the heavenly Call, upon which Salvation depends, to such a man it will be of
works, and not of mere mercy; contrary to that of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Who
has saved us, and called us with an holy calling; not according to our works,
but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus
before the world was. Thence follows Calling from Election, not from
improvement of our abilities in our own works. Might such a man say, I am
called; and why? why, according to my works and improvements. How then shall
that of the Apostle, Romans 9. 15, 16. be overthrown? I will have mercy on whom I
will have mercy, and compassion on whom I will have compassion. According to
this way, in the merits of Congruity, it will be of him that wills, and
runs, and not of mere mercy. Then it cannot follow from the merits of man.
But perhaps it follows from the promise of God, Nor upon the Promise of
Christ.
That is the Armintan way. Let such a promise be produced, and how gladly will
men submit to it? That which the Arminians pitch upon, is this, To him that
has shall be given; a speech of Christ, which is annexed to two several
Parables, to the Parable of the Sower, and to the Parable of the Tares: To him
which has shall be given. Therefore, say they, if a man improve his Naturalls,
he shall have Grace; if his Reason, he shall have Christ. But there is a great
mistake in this; for the utmost that this Promise will bear, is, a reward for
them in the same kind, for an improvement of what one has, and uses aright.
He that uses his natural wit aright, shall have more natural wit; he that
uses his parts, shall have more parts; and he that uses his graces, shall
increase his graces. And in this sense, To him that has, shall more be given.
A man may as well say, He that uses his wealth well, to him health shall be
given; and he that uses health well, to him wealth shall be given; as to say,
He that uses his reason well, to him grace shall be given; for here is a
transition, or passing into another kind of thing; whereas the promise runs,
for the increase of a thing of the same kind. This may suffice to clear that
second Quary, namely, Whether sufficient light be given to every one. In these
two Propositions, Christ does dispense to every one light sufficient, to leave
him without excuse. Christ does not dispense to every one Converting-light,
sufficient to bring him to Salvation. I have done with the Explication of the
Point.

For the Use of it, briefly. If Christ does thus lighten every man that comes
into the world, let us learn from hence these four Lessons.

1. To see Him. 2. To seek Him. 3. To serve Him. 4. To bless Him.
First, Learn to see Christ, and to acknowledge him in Learn to See Christ.
ye see the cause in the effect; in Christ, as the Author of all that light.
When ye see men, knowing men, men of great understanding, there is much of the
light of Reason; strict men, there is much of the light of Conscience; holy
men, there is much of the light of Grace. Admire Christ in all these, for all
comes from him. Think, how holy, and how understanding Christ is, in whom all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are. We are many times apt to admire men,
and to overlook Christ; this should not be. Suppose a man, that were kept in a
deep dungeon all his days, and were brought out at midnight, when the Moon
shines; this man would be apt, when he looks upon the Moon, to think it to
be the most glorious creature that he sees, to be the spring of all light; for
it is the most glorious creature that ever he saw. But, let him but stay till
morning, when the Sun arises, and he will be ashamed of his mistake. If we see
men that shine as the Moon, think how much more glory there is in Christ. This
is the way to see him, in all the light dispensed by him to the creatures.

Secondly, We should learn hence to seek Him, for the He is the Father of
lights, so says Learn to Seek him.
James, Jam. 1. 17. Every good and perfect gift is from above, and comes down
from the Father of lights. Some men are of a foolish conceit, that men derive
their understandings from such Constellations at their birth, and that makes
them wise. No, it is not the light of heaven, but it is the Father of lights.
It is Christ that conveyeth all understanding to men: He is not only the
Author of all the light we have, but the Father of it. He is the Author of many
things, that bear his Image; He is called the Father of lights, because all the
light we have, has a clear impression of the night, of and upon it, even, that
of Reason, which is like Mephibosheth; it is lame, but yet it is of the
Blood-Royall. There is much in the light of Reason, much more in the light of
the Word, and of Conscience, and of Grace. Do we want light, as who does not?
Seek to him that is the Father of light; he is the Father of Supernatural
light as well as of Natural. Seek him, but in a way of humility and sincerity;
otherwise, little hope of finding him. It is an excellent speech of Bernard:
says he, Superbo oculo non videtur veritas, sincero patet; Truth is not seen
by a proud eye, it opens it self to a sincere one. Humility sits lowest in
the School. Take out thy Lesson in the School of Christ, seek it sincerely.
Painted Glasses hinder the light from coming into the room. He that will too
much paint, that is, play the hypocrite, hinders the light from entering his
soul. It is the sincere heart that receives the light of the truth.

Thirdly, Let us hence learn to serve him; for all light tends to some work.
The Sun arises, says the Psalmist, Learn to Serve him.
Psalm. 104. 22, 23. and man goes forth to his work and labor till the
evening: God shows man light to work by, and that is the end of the light;
that, Christ scatters abroad in the world, not to loyter by, but to do
service with. The spirit of a man is the candle of the Lord, searching the
inward parts of the bowels. Christ has set up a candle in every one of our
hearts, not to play by, as children use to do, to play by the candle that they
should go to bed by, and go to bed in the dark, when they have done. Many men
mispend their time which God has given them, and so lie down in darkness.
Some men, God gives wit to, and they employ it to the dishonor of Christ, and
the reproach of the Gospel: for the true end of the light is, that we may do
service. If ye give light to your servants to work by, ye expect, they should
do more and better work, than they that go to work in the dark.

Fourthly, Bless him, for he it is from whom we have all our light, those four
lights, I told you of. The light of Reason is that, that distinguishes us from
beasts; it is that, Learn to Bless him.
which, though it cannot find out the deep things of God, yet, when they are
revealed, it may help to confirm them. As, when men go to plant a Vine, first,
they take out the earth, and make way for the root; but when they have planted
the Vine, they put in the earth again, and that better confirms the grouth of
the Vine. There are some kind of mysteries of faith, that a man must take away
his reason before he goes to believe them, he must not first dispute, and then
believe; but when faith is once planted, lay to it reason, and it helps to
confirm the excellency of faith it self. If so much in the light of Reason, how
much more in the light of Conscience, which God has set as a Schoolmaster in
every man's bosom, to teach him, what is good, and what is evil. It is said to
be a bridle to keep from evil, to restrain a man, that is to commit evil,
from the evil. And for the light of the Word, it is the crown of a Nation. The
Church is represented to us, Rev. 12. as a Woman, with a Crown of twelve Stars
upon her head; the Doctrine of the twelve Apostles is the Crown of the Church.
And the light of Grace, Peter tells you what that is, 1 Pet. 2. 9. It is a
mavelous light. Therefore may every true Convert say, Bless the Lord, O my
soul, and all that is within me bless his holy name.

I now proceed to the tenth Verse of this Chapter.

Verse. 10. He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world
knew him not.
Let me give you first the Connection of these words, and then the Explication
of them, and so come to some Observations.

Look back a little into the fourth and fifth Verses, there ye shall find these
three Assertions laid down by the Evangelist.

First, That Light comes from Christ, Light was the life of men. Secondly,
That this Light from Christ shines in darkness. Thirdly, That the darkness
comprehends it not.
Now the Verse that follows, serves to make good all these three Assertions.

First, That light comes from Christ. That is proved two ways.

First, By the testimony of John the Baptist, who was a man sent from God, to
bear witness of this light.

Secondly, By the effects of general Illumination, That was the true light,
which lights every man that comes into the world.

Our Evangelist goes on to prove the two other Assertions, namely these, Light
shines in darkresse, and it comprehended it not.

First, in reference to the Gentiles. Secondly, in reference to the Jews.
In reference to the Gentiles, in this tenth verse. He was in the World, and
the World was made by Him; There is the light shining in the World. And the
world knew Him not. There is the light, not comprehended of darkness.

In reference to the Jews. Light shined there in darkness, but the darkness
comprehended it not, for his own received him not.

For the meaning of the words, let us take them as they lie.

He was in the World, He was present in the World. There is a threefold
presence of Christ.

1. A general presence of Christ.
2. A special presence 3. And a singular presence
First, a general presence of Christ, by which he is with 1. A general
presence of Christ in the world.
all the Creatures, preserving them, and upholding them; according to what is
said, Hebr. 1. 3. Who being the brightness of his glory, and express Image of
his person, has upheld all things by the word of his power. Which is likewise
spoken to, Col. 1. 17. He was before all things, and by Him all things consist.
He was in the World, which He himself made, as a Carpenter is in a house, which
he himself has built. A Carpenter builds an house to dwell in, and then
keeps it in repair. Christ so made the World, not as to leave it, but so as
to keep in it, and preserve it, as well as to make it. As suppose a man, that
were both a Ship-wright, and a Ship-master: He first makes the ship, then
goes to Sea in it himself. Christ has so made the World, as to preserve the
World, which he made; as to look after it, and every thing in it. He was in the
World, and the World was made by Him. These words are added, to show that he
was not in the World, as part of the World, but as the Maker of it. He was not
in the World, as a Creature, but as the Creator of all things. According to
what the Evangelist has taught us before, By Him were all things made, and
without Him was nothing made, that was made. He was in the World, and the World
was made by Him; and the World knew him not. Ye have here the World in another
sense. The world in the beginning of the verse, is taken for the whole Fabric
of Heaven, and Earth, as Aristotle says, The World is a Mass, made up of
Heaven, and Earth. In this sense it is said, He was in the World, the World was
made by Him. Now in the latter Clause of the verse, The world knew Him not, The
World there, is put for the Inhabitants of the earth, for the men of the World,
Romans 5. 12. The World, and Men, are all one. By one man's disobedience, sin
entered into the World, and death by sin, and so death passed over all-Men. Here
is the World, and all men. The world was made by Him, and the world, that is,
the men of the world, knew him not. It is a Rule in Divinity, Verba
Cognitionis, affectiones important, etc. Words of knowledge, import affections,
and operate suitably. So, to know, carries more then mere speculation. When
Christ is said to know us; The Holy Ghost tells us, It is more then barely to
take notice of us: It is to take care for us, Joh. 10. 14. Christ knows his
sheep, that is, he takes care of his Elect. And he is known of his, that is,
He is served, and obeyed, and worshipped, and believed on by them. So the world
knew him not, that is, the World worshipped him not, as God; The world did not
own Him, and serve Him, as became their Creator. So as now, the words thus
opened, The observation lies clear before us, namely. That, notwithstanding
Christ's being in the world, and the world being made by Him, the men of the
world knew him not. Take a place, or two, to clear up this, especially in
reference to the Gentiles, for to them properly it belongs. I should have
told you, that the word, World, is sometimes confined to them. If the fall of
them be the diminishing of the world, and the fall of them the riches of the
Gentiles. He came to his own, and his own received him not. That is, did not
know him, 1 John 2. 1. Therefore the world knows us not, because it knew not
him. There is yet a clearer place, 1 Cor. 1. 21. After that, in the wisdom of
God, the world by wisdom knew not God. All the wisdom the Heathens had, could
not raise them to a due knowledge of God; The world by wisdom knew not God.
Christ was in the world, but the world knew him not. A threefold ignorance of
Christ was found in all the Gentiles.

First, They knew him not, as the second person in the Trinity.

Secondly, They knew him not, as Mediator.

Thirdly, They knew him not, as Creator, which is properly here spoken to. He
made the world, and the world knew him not.

Let me run over these briefly: first, They knew him not 1. The Gentiles knew
not Chtist as the second Person in the Trinity.
as the second person in the Trinity; so they are said to have been without
Christ, and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12. speaking there of the
Gentiles, says he; At that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenants of promise, having no
hope, and without God in the World. They had the great book of the Creatures to
read, but that did show them nothing of Christ, as the second person in the
Trinity. Natural reason could never find out that Mystery in it self.
Therefore men, when they go to find out this great mystery of the Trinity, they
are at their wit's end; They might find out a God, and that he was Good, and
Great, and that he was One: but to find out a Trinity of Persons, a Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, This they could not. Take a curious piece, a well drawn
Picture, he that sees it may be able to say, that he that drew it, was a
skillful, and exact Painter. But whether an English man, or a Spaniard, or a
Dutch man, or an Italian, that he cannot tell by the Picture, why? because he
made this piece, as an Artist, but not as a German, or English man. Therefore
he discovers his Art by the piece, but not his Country. So God made the
World, not as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Three in one, and one in three; All
the works toward the Creatures, works ad Extra, are common to all the persons
in the Trinity. God, as God, made the world. Therefore by the sight of the
world, men may be able to know, that it is a God that made it, and that this
God is good, because he made so many things useful in the world; and this God
is wise, because of the variety of the creatures; and this God is One, because
of the order of things: But to say, This God is Three in One, the Creation of
the world does not bear this. If the works be ad Intra, as Generation, these
are the works of some one Person; but the works ad extra, they represent the
Godhead, but not the Persons.

Secondly, They did not know Christ as Mediator, therefore 2. They knew not
Christ as Mediator.
they raised up many Mediators: 1 Cor. 8. 5, 6. Though there be that are called
gods, whether in heaven or in earth, as there be gods many, and lords many: But
to us, there is but one God; the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him;
and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. The Apostle
does here clearly allude to the custom of the Heathens, who had two sorts of
gods, they had their dii Coelestes, their supreme heavenly gods, which they
worshipped, as the Sun, Moon, and Stars: and then, besides these, they had their
dii Terrestres, inferior gods, gods on earth, who were men that lived upon the
earth, which were afterward canonized, and made gods. That is the true meaning
of this, There be many that are called gods, whether in heaven or in earth. So,
there be gods many, and lords many; gods many, those are their supreme gods;
lords many, those are their inferior gods, Baalim, as they called him, who was
the first King of Babel, and the first that was made a god; and all those kinds
of gods therefore after him, were called Baalim; as Caesar, being the first
Emperor, all Emperors after him were called Caesar's. Now, says the Apostle,
To us is but one God, not many; but one Lord, not many; but one Mediator,
Christ Jesus.

Thirdly, They knew him not as Creator; therefore Paul, 3. They knew not Christ
as Creator.
when he came to Athens, found them ignorant of this. Greece was the Eye of the
world, and Athens was the Eye of Greece; yet, even at Athens, Paul found an
Altar, To an unknown God; and that same God was the God that made the world,
God the Creator, Act. 17. 23, 24. says Paul, For as I passed by, and beheld
your devotions, I found an Altar, with this inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD;
Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you. God that made the
world, and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord both of heaven and earth,
dwells not in Temples made with hands. No wonder if the Heathen did not know
Christ as the Creator; for the Jews, after Christ was come in the flesh, and
began to put forth a creating power in their sight, yet would not own him as
Creator of the world. To make him see that was born blind, and to raise him
that was dead, requires no less strength, than the same power that made the
world. This Christ putt forth to the Jews. Lazarus comes out of the grave,
even as the world came out of the Chaos at first, at the commandment of Christ.
He then said, Let there be light, and there was light; He now says, Let there
be life, and there is life: And Genesis 1. 3.
yet he was not owned as the Creator. The world knew not him as the Second
Person in the Trinity, neither as Mediator, nor as Creator.

I now proceed to the Application of this.

First, By way of Admonition. It teaches us all to take To teach us to take
heed of being ignorant of Christ.
charge of the Gentiles here, that they knew him not; and how much more heavy
will the charge be against us, that enjoy other kind of means than the Gentiles
had: They, indeed, had he works of Creation and Providence; We have them too,
and a greater light than so: we have the Word to be a light to our feet, and a
lamp to our paths.

They had the Oracles of the Sybbils, we have the Writings of Moses and the
Prophets, of the Evangelists and Apostles. Therefore, such as refuse to use the
means of knowing Christ as a Savior, they must certainly expect to know him as
an Avenger: For, He will come ere long, says the Apostle, with his mighty
Angels, in flaming fire, to render vengeance, to whom? to them that know not
God, and obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.

Indeed, God will not reckon with men for their Negative Ignorance, that is,
for their bare not knowing, what they are not bound to know; but for their
Privative knowledge, for not knowing what they ought to know, and what God
gives means to them to know; for that, he will be sure to reckon with them: And
those that continue wilfully ignorant in such things, must be miserable against
their wills. Wherefore, to the end ye may all thirst after the knowledge of
Christ more and more, I shall propound to you two things.

The Excellency and of this Knowledge.
The Necessity
First, Consider the Excellency of the knowledge of The Excellency of the
knowledge of Christ.
Christ, of which ye read, Phil. 3. 8. I eount all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of the Lord Jesus, my Lord, for whom I have
suffered the loss of all things, and account them dung, that I may win Christ.
All is but dross and dung to Paul, in comparison of the knowledge of Christ.
How is it, that amongst us, men run after dross and dung, and neglect the
knowledge of Christ, as preferring that before him? For the excellency of the
knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord. Nothing in the world so excellent as
knowledge, no knowledge so excellent as that of Christ. Other knowledge may,
perhaps, make a man famous, this only can make him holy and happy; other
knowledge can give him the esteem of a learned man, this only can make him to
be a Saint. Therefore an excellent knowledge.

Secondly, There is a necessity of this knowledge, whether The Necessity of the
knowledge of Christ.
you look to

Justification, There is a necessity of the knowledge of Christ.
Sanctification, or Salvation.
First, If ye look to Justification: By his knowledge shall 1. As to
Justification.
my righteous servant justify many, Isa. 53. 11. His knowledge, that is, not
cognitione sua, but cognitione sui; not by that knowledge which is inherent in
Christ, but by that knowledge which we have of him. By his knowledge, that is,
by the knowledge of Him, shall my righteous servant justify many. Here
knowledge is put for faith, which justifies; because there is such a necessary
connection between faith and knowledge. Amongst men, some are better known than
trusted; it is not so with God, for according to our knowledge of him, so there
will be a proportionable trusting in him: Psalm. 9. 10. They that know thy name
will put their trust in thee. No knowledge, no faith; and according to the
measure of our knowledge, so will the measure of our faith be. Thus, you see a
necessity of knowledge, in point of Justification

Secondly, In point of Sanctification, which may be gathered from that of the
Apostle, 1 John 2. 3, 4. Hereby we 2. As to Sanctification.
know him, if we keep his commandments. He that says, I know him, and keeps
not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. Where there is a
fatherly knowledge, there will be obedience; for this knowledge of an Object so
amiable, will engender love, and that love will be the fulfilling of the Law.

Thirdly, It is necessary in point of Salvation. Not to insist long upon these
things, Hence it is, that all these three 3. As to Salvation.
things, namely, the state of salvation, the ministry of the Gospel, and the
knowledge of Christ, come under one and the same notion in Scripture, under the
notion and name of Eternal life. The everlasting stare of Happiness, that is
called Eternal life, Matthew. 25. ult. They shall go away into everlasting
punishment, but the righteous into life eternal. The Ministry of the Gospel,
that is called Eternal life; Act. 13. 46. It was necessary (says Paul to
Barnabas there) that the word should first be spoken to you; but seeing you put
it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life, we turn to the
Gentiles. They that reject the Ministry of the Gospel, are said to account
themselves unworthy of everlasting life. Thirdly, the knowledge of Christ is
called so, Joh. 17. 3. This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God,
and Christ Jesus whom thou have sent. What is the reason of this? Because these
make way for the other; the Ministry of the Gospel, that makes way for the
knowledge of Christ; the knowledge of Christ makes way for the state of Bliss
and Glory. Therefore all comes under the notion of Eternal life.

We come to a second thing. Notwithstanding Christ's being Christ in the world,
not known by the world.
in the world, and the world being made by him, the inhabitants of the world
knew him not.

Secondly, This lets us see, by way of Information, the unthankfulness of the
world, the patience of Christ, the happiness of Christians.

First, See the unthankfulness of the world. If one 1. Of the world's
unthankfulness.
should build an house for a man, then furnish it, and afterward put the poor
man, that was harbourlesse before, into it, and put a stock into his hands to
trade withal, and keep his house in repair for him, and require no other Rent,
but some small acknowledgment: Would not all the world cry shame of this man,
if he should not be thankful? It is our case: God has made a world for man,
and furnished it before he brought man into it; Jesus Christ, he has been in
the world ever since the Creation, upholding all things by the word of his
power. And yet such is the unthankfulness of men, that they know not Christ:
He was in the world, the world was made by him, and the world knew him not,
therefore did not acknowledge him as their Creator and Preserver. Such is the
madness of men, that they are over-apt to bestow divine honor upon those it
belongs not to, and to deny it to Christ, to whom it appertains. When Paul
and Barnabas had cured the Creeple, Act. 14. 11. they had much ado to stave off
the people from making gods of them; Now when the people saw what Paul had
done, they lifted up their voices, saying in the speech of Lycaonia, The gods
are come down to us in the likeness of men. And they called Barnabas, Jupiter;
and Paul Mercurius. The Priests of Jupiter offered sacrifice to them. Christ
does a great deal more than this comes to, and yet men own him not. Do ye
thus requite the Lord, (as Moses said) O foolish people and unwise?

Secondly, It helps to clear God, and to magnify the 2. Of the patience of
Christ.
patience of Christ. He made the world, the world knows him not; and yet he
lets the world stand for all this. He has let the world continue almost six
thousand years, notwithstanding all this ingratitude of the world. We may well,
upon this occasion, call to mind that which the Prophet Hosea records, Hos.
11. 8, 9. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel?
how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? My heart is
turned within me, my repentings are kindled together. I will not execute the
fierceness of mine anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim. For I am God,
and not man, the holy One in the midst of thee, and I will not enter into the
City. For I am God, and not man. Here is a great evidence, that Christ is God,
and not man; otherwise, the world had been made as Admah and Zeboim, long ere
this. Suppose Moses himself, (the meekest man upon earth) to be endowed with
that power, that Christ had in his hands from the beginning of the world; and
suppose him to have hated sin, as Christ does: It would have been impossible,
even for Moses, to have held his hands. He that cried out at the Rock, Ye
rebels, shall I bring water out of this Rock to you? would certainly have
cried out, Ye rebels, I will send down fire Exodus 17. 2.
upon you from heaven, to consume you. What an high provocation is this, when
Christ has done so much, to have all slighted? Men take it ill, when there is
any competency of worth in them, to be neglected. Not to speak of the worth of
Christ as Redeemer, look to his works of Creation; see what glorious Attributes
shine in them; do but compare them with the works of men: If a workman does
many things, surely they are not great; for one great thing will take up a
great deal of time: If he produces a great piece, he does not make many such;
if many and great, commonly they are but great Torrasses, things of no worth,
or, both botchingly and bunglingly done. Now here, in the work of Creation, is
both Mercy and Greatness; here is Comeliness and Usefulness kissing each
other: And yet all this slighted by the sons of men, and that for so many
years together; and yet the earth stands. Oh! the Patience of God,
notwithstanding all this provocation.

Thirdly, Ye may see the happiness of Christians. Though the 3. See the
happiness of Christians.
world knows not God, there is a certain sort of Men in the world that do: 1 Timothy 3. 16. God manifested in the Flesh, justified of the Spirit, seen of
Angels, preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the world. Believed on in the
world! This is the great privilege of us Christians. The poor Gentiles knew
there was a God, and might come to the knowledge of some of his Attributes; but
when their consciences flew in their faces, they were then at a great stand:
They had learned that God was, and was merciful, and that he would pardon sin;
but they had not the knowledge of a Mediator, nor how to make a friend to God.
This God has made known to them, that live under the means of grace, and hold
the Ministry of the Gospel. He has let them see what ways they have, to make
to God. The Lord Jesus Christ has held forth the ways of Truth, and Life.
Truth and life by Jesus Christ.
No man goes to the Father, but by Him. Therefore, if that Philosopher, of
whom we read, thought he had so much cause to bless God, that had made him not
a Barbarian, but a Grecian, and amongst Grecians, an Athenian; amongst
Athenians, a Philosopher. Certainly, we have cause to magnify the grace of
God, that we are born not Pagans, but Christians, in regard of an outward
Covenant; and not Papists, but Protestants, and amongst Protestants, English
men. Because this Island of ours, has by the grace of God been the Goshen,
wherein this light of the Gospel has shined, more than in any Kingdom of
Christendom. I have done with that verse, and proceed to the Eleventh, which
concerns the Jews especially.

Verse. 11. He came to his own, and his own received The Jews refuse to
receive Christ.
him not.
He came, two ways. There are many sorts of Christ's coming, which will be
needless to repeat to you. He came.

First, In his Ordinances. Secondly, In the Flesh.
First, Christ is said to come amongst a people, whom 1. Christ comes to a
people in his Ordinances.
He blesses with his Ordinances, according to that, Exodus 20. 24. In all
places where I record my Name, I will come to thee, and bless thee. The
Gospel never comes to a place, but Christ comes with it.

Secondly, He came in the flesh. This is a faithful saying, 2. Christ came in
the flesh.
and worthy of all men to be received, says Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 15. That Jesus
Christ came into the World to save sinners. Thus he came, He came to his own,
(...), the word is, and may be rendered thus. He came to his own home. So the
word is rendered, Acts 21. 6. When we had taken leave of one another, we took
ship, and they returned home again, (...). The same word in the Text. He came
to his own home, Though the earth be the Lords, and the fullness thereof; yet
the Land of Judea, was Christ's home in a special manner, He dwelt there, in a
more remarkable way. As it is said, Psalm. 76. 1, 2. In Judah is God known, his
Name is great in Israel, in Salem also is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling
place in Sion; where Christ's home was. And accordingly it is said, Isai. 31.
ult. He shall pass over to his strong hold for fear, and his Princes shall be
afraid of the Ensign, says the Lord, whose fire is in Sion, and his furnace
in Jerusalem. It is a Metaphor taken from them that keep fire in their dwelling
houses. It is a sign that the house stands not empty, where fire is kept;
Now says he, The Lords furnace is in Jerusalem, He dwells there. Therefore
he is said to come to his own, when He came to them, He came to his own, that
is, the Jews, who are said to be his own in a special manner, Psalm. 33. 12.
Blessed is the Nation, whose God is the Lord, and the people, whom He has
chosen for his own Inheritance. Here it is spoken of the Nation of the Jews.
And his own received him not. That is, believed not in him. So the word is
interpreted in the very next verse, To as many as received him, that is,
believed in Not to receive Christ, is not to believe in Him.
his name. Received him not, that is, believed not in his name; so as here,
that which we are to observe, is briefly this. Though Christ came to his own,
he was not received, no, not by them.

First, He came to them, in his Ordinances; They had the 1. How in his
Ordinances.
Ministry of the word. He has not dealt so with every Nation, Psalm. 147. ult.
Neither have the Heathen knowledge of his ways, but he shows his word to
Jacob, and his statutes, and judgments to Israel. Christ came in his word. The
Scripture is but the shell, Christ is the kernel; The Scripture is the
Cabinet, Christ is the Jewel. Scripturae sunt fasciae, in quibus involutus est
puer Jesus. This the Prince of Antwerpe was wont to say. The Scriptures are the
swaddling Clothes, in which Christ is wrapped. So Christ came in the word, in a
great many personal types, that did fore-signifie him. He came in
Melchisedeck. He himself Genesis 14. 18.
being the true King of Righteousness, the King of peace. He came in Joshua,
he being the true Leader of men into the heavenly Canaan. He came in Isaac, he
being the true Joshua 4. 19. Genesis 18. 12. Genesis 22. 6.
Son of Laughter; The cause of his peoples joy, bearing his own Cross, as
Isaac bore the Wood. So in all other personal Types, He came in the Sacrifices
under the Law, they all signified Him. Therefore they offered the Morning, and
Evening Sacrifice. The Evening sacrifice was offered at the same hour, in which
Christ was after nailed to the Cross. And he did so purposely to make it
appear, that He came to fulfill all those Sacrifice. He came in the Sacrament,
the Lamb slain. The passe-over was a Type of Christ. Christ our passe-over, was
sacrificed for us. Manna, was a Type of him. And so the water in the Rock, that
was Christ. So he came in his Ordinances to the Jews, but they did not receive
him. Let two Prophets answer that, Isa. 8. 12. I have written to him, speaking
of Ephraim, the great things of my Law, but they were counted as a strange
thing; Christ came in the Word, and they looked at the word, as if it concerned
not them, they accounted it as a strange thing: this for the Law. And for the
Gospel, whereof Isaiah was a Preacher in that age, the most Evangelicall of
all the Prophets, see what he says, Isa. 53. 1. Who has believed our report,
and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? Here is Christ, comes to his own
in his Ordinances, and not received; the report of him, not believed; his Law
accounted, a strange thing.

Secondly, Christ in the flesh, The word was made flesh, 2. How in the flesh.
and dwelt amongst us; He conversed in the land of Judea, This was an act of
special favor. For one to receive a man into his house, is a favor: What was
it for Christ to become man himself, to assume the Manhood into one and the
same Person, into the Godhead? yet this he did. He came to his own, did they
receive him? Search the Sciptures, some kind of reception there was, when He
was born. But what? Here is a King born, where is his Palace? Matthew. 2. 2^.
Luke 2. 7. Matthew. 2. 14.
The stable for beasts, is his Court. His Chamber of presence, a Manger. Before
He can go, He is forced to fly to Egypt in his Mothers arms; and at his
return, what entertainment finds he? The Gadarenes prefer their swine Mar. 5.
17. and 15. 13.
before him, the Jews cry out, Crucify him, crucify him: Not him, but
Barabbas: Which is excellently set forth in that Parable of the Master of the
Vineyard, wherein Christ Luke 20. 9.
tells us, How the Master of the Vineyard, after other Messengers sent,
sends his own Son; And the husbandmen said, This is the heir, let us slay
him. This was the entertainment Christ found, when he came to his own. This,
for the Explication of it.

In the first place, it hinteth us to a considerable Parallel 1. Christ not
received, nor Antichrist avoided.
between Christ and Antichrist, in regard of their Entertainment: Christ came,
and was to be received; Antichrist was to come, and to be shunned. The
Scripture had foretold, that Christ should come, when the Scepter should depart
from Judah. Therefore, about that time, they began Genesis 49. 10.
to look for the Consolation of Israel, as Simeon and the rest Luke 2. 25.
did. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. When that which withholds is taken out of the way, then
the man of perdition shall be revealed. Accordingly, Christ came at his time,
and Antichrist came at his time; and yet neither was Christ received, nor
Antichrist shunned, as he should have been: and all upon a false surmise. They
looked not at Christ at that time, but as a temporal Monarch, therefore they
received him not, because he came in a mean condition. Antichrist came in his
time: up-starts the Pope, when the Emperor went down. But they looked for
Antichrist as a Tyrant, that should with fire and sword overrun the world; but
he came in sheep's Antichrist's hypocritical delusion.
clothing, as a Lamb; therefore they shunned him not, upon this mistake only.
As some godly Jews, when Christ came, gave him entertainment as the Messiah; so
when Antichrist came, some believers were stirred up to cry out, that the Pope
was Antichrist, and so to write against him from his first rise. After
Antichrist had been in the world a while, people began to smell him out, and
discover him; and whole Churches fell from him, as many of these Western
Churches have done. So, a time is coming, that Christ shall be discovered to
the Jews, and they shall mourn over him. Thus the Parallel, you see, runs
throughout. That, by the way.

Secondly, We may here see our own Pictures, in the 2. We may see our own
carriage to Christ, by the deportment of the Jews.
Jews carriage toward Christ: As face in water answers face, so the face of
man to man, says Solomon. Just such are we to Christ as they were. He is come
to us, and we have not received him; he comes in his Ordinances, and we receive
him not. We cry shame of the Jews, and we our selves are as bad. We have our
Gadarenes, that prefer their swine before Christ, their base swinish lusts
before our Savior. We have them that cry out, Not Christ, but Barabbas; not
Christ, but the world. Never let men, that walk in ways of disobedience,
pretend their receiving of him. They say, perhaps, What would you have? We are
baptized in the ways of Christ, and come to the Lord's Table, and hear the
Word Preached. But what do we more than many of the Jews did, who are said, not
to have received him? They flockt after Christ, but it was to see his Miracles;
whole troops flockt after Christ, and yet they received him not: Why? Because
they obeyed him not, nor believed in him. It is not all our formalities and
profession, that will make us to pass as receivers of Christ, if we do not
obey hit Gospel. If a Sovereign Prince shall send his Agent or Ambassador into
some part of his own dominions, he will expect, that this Agent of his should
have a fair acception: It will not be enough for the people to suffer him to
land, to provide a fair house, and to make good entertainment for him, and give
him respect; no, they are not said to receive such an Agent from the King,
unless they obey the commandments that he brings them from his Sovereign.
So, we are not said to receive Jesus Christ, unless we yield obedience to him.
As a man takes adultery a great deal worse in his wife than in his kinswoman,
than in his daughter, because she is married to him, and because he is nearer
to her. The Churches that profess Christ, they are the Spouse of The Church's
near relation to Christ.
Christ; and for a Spouse to play the harlot is far worse, than for them that
are at a greater distance from him. If Israel sin, yet let not Judah
transgress. If Spain and France commit Idolatry, and sin, yet let not England
play the harlot. Let us not act the parts of the Jews with Christ.

There is a word of Comfort also here, to such as are rejected by their own for
Christ's sake; that is an usual case, it is that which Christ foretold, Matthew.
10. 35, 36. I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the
daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law,
and a man's foes shall be they of his own house. Here is a division made by
Christ's coming. Whence it comes to pass, that those of his own household,
many times, do not receive him, after he has received Christ. It is the case
of many a poor soul to be frowned upon, and to meet with hard usage, because of
his going after the Lord Jesus Christ in his Ordinances. Here is comfort, It is
that which befell Christ, His own received him not. Therefore if thy own reject
thee, it is no such wonder. It is said of our Saviors friends, and near
kinsfolk, Joh. 11. 5. Neither did his brethren believe on him. They were those
of his nearest kinsmen; Mary's sister's sons, James and John, they were
believers indeed; but the rest of his kindred, many of them, even his very
brethren, believed not in him. Nay, so far were they from believing in him,
that, as we read it, they were mightily mistaken about him; When his friends
heard of it, they went out to lay hold on him, for they said he was besides
himself. The words well bear another interpretation; but, according to this,
his very friends had a conceit, that Christ was mad, as many now adays. Says
the unbelieving husband, I think my wife is mad; and says the unbelieving
wife, I think my husband is besides himself, when he goes after the ways of
God. Let us be content to lose our selves, to be conformed to Christ. As
Bernard said, Risu ludentes, and joco, etc. Those that spend their time in
laughing and jollity, they cannot accompany the tears of Christ. They that
affect the high places, cannot be accompanied with the humility of Christ, for
his humility comfort the lowly. And he being not received of his own,
comfort those which are comfortless for Christ's sake.

I have done now with this Verse. The next comes in by way of an Answer to an
Objection, thus: If the world knew him not, and his own received him not, then
Christ came in vain. No, says the Evangelist, there were some that received
him, and to purpose too; for they became the sons of God by receiving of him.

Verse. 12. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the
sons of God, even to them that believed on his Name.
Three things you have in this Verse. First, the Benefit, Power to become the
sons of God. Secondly, the Benefactor, The Lord Jesus Christ; He gives them
this power. Thirdly, The Persons gratified, they upon whom this benefit was
bestowed, As many as received him:


Who are described two ways.

By their Believing, in the end of this Verse;

And by their Birth, in the next.

By their Believing, Even to them that believe on his Name.

And then by their New birth, Which are born, not of blood, nor of flesh, nor
of the will of man, but of God.

First, For the Benefit, (...). 1. The benefit of being the sons of God.
The Papists catch at this, and from hence they would gladly infer Free Will,
which they contend so much for, as the great Diana, both of Papists and
Arminians; He gave them power to become the sons of God. And therefore, say
they, they have power to become or not become, to receive Christ or not receive
him. If they will receive him, they have power to become the sons of God. But
this I shall have occasion to include in the next Verse, Born, not of the will
of the flesh; for the Text shall show you, it will not serve their turn.

First, If the Holy Ghost had meant to lay a foundation 1. Free Will cashiered.
here for Free Will, he would not have said, He gave them power to become, but,
to make themselves the sons of God; not, Potestatem fieri; but, facere scipsos.

Secondly, There is no necessity of translating the word 2. What is meant here
by Power.
(...), by this English word Power; for it rather signifies, as the Margents
of your great Bibles have it, Right, or Privilege; or, as the Geneva has it,
The Prerogative.

What is this to the Point, of the Power against Free Will? Read it so, and the
color for their pretense is taken off; and so the word (...) often signifies
Right and Privilege, as in that, 1 Cor. 9. 5, 6. (...), Have we not power to
eat, and to drink, and to lead about a sister a wife as well as other Apostles?
and have not we power to forbear working (that is, right and privilege) as
well as the rest?

Thirdly, Suppose we should read it, Power to become the 3. Power and Privilege
signify one and the same thing.
sons of God, as our Translation has it; yet this Power will imply no more,
than the word Privilege does. As if a man should say, That the Pope had a
special eye to those Bishops, that wrought for him in the Council of Trent,
and gave them all power to become Cardinals; that is, he gave them this
privilege to be so. What is this to Free Will?

Lastly, read it Power, and suppose it to imply some liberty 4. This Power is
given to Believers, not to them in the state of Nature.
of will; yet it serves not their turn neither: For the power here spoken of
is a power received by those, that formerly believed in Christ. What is this
then to the power of of them, that are yet in the state of nature? To as many
as believed in him, to them gave he power. It is not Free Will, if not set free
by Christ. But, to avoid all ambiguity, we shall take it for a Right, or
Privilege, or Prerogative, which indeed is the better reading. And so I ground
this Observation from hence, That for the sons of men to become the sons of God
is a very high privilege. To as many as received him, to them gave he this
privilege, this right, this prerogative, to become the sons of God. When God
would set forth his favor toward David to the height, in that goodwill which
he would bear to his son Solomon; mark, 2 Samuel 7. 14. I will be his father, and
he shall be my son; he could not promise him a greater prerogative than this.
When Saul would encourage some of his Army, to undertake the Duel with great
Goliath, that defied the Host of the living God; What is the motive? I will give
him my daughter to wife, and he shall be the King's son in law. When God will
encourage men to fight it out against the world, and to separate from the sins
thereof, he uses this motive, I will make them sons, and daughters, if they do
so, and so. He holds that forth as the great prerogative, 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18.
Come out from amongst them, and separate your selves, says the Lord, touch no
impure thing, then will I receive you, and I will be unto you instead of a
Father, and ye shall be to me instead of sons, and daughters, says the Lord,
that is Almighty. This will appear to be a very high prerogative, If we
consider, first, The estate from which we are raised to become sons; secondly,
The state to which we are raised, by becoming sons.

First, this Sonship will appear to be a great privilege, 1. The high
privilege of being the sons of God.
if we consider, from what estate we are raised, That we may become sons; from
a state of bondage, and death, misery, and slavery, from being sons of
perdition, Children of wrath, as the Apostle calls it, Ephesians. 2, 3. We are by
nature the children of wrath, even as others. For God to take children of
wrath, and make them children of love; Heirs of perdition, and make them heirs
of Heaven, what a rise is here? It was a great matter for Pharoah's daughter to
cast an eye upon poor Moses, when he lay in the Bullrushes, ready to be drowned
in the water, and to adopt him for her own son; The Scripture speaks of it,
as a great privilege, and therefore raises the commendations of Moses. By
faith, Moses refused to be called the son of Pharoah's Hebr. 11. 24.
daughter; yet this Adoption of hers, would not have made him heir to the
Kingdom. Here is an higher privilege: men are taken, not out of the water,
but out of Hellfire, that is our portion by nature, and deputed to be heirs to
the King of Heaven, and so as that they are made heirs to a Crown of Glory; for
all deputed children are heirs of the Kingdom, Matthew. 13. 38. The good seed
are the children of the Kingdom. If sons, then heirs, heirs of God,
joynt-heirs with Christ, Romans 8. 2. It will appear to be a high privilege, if
ye consider that estate to which we are raised, by being sons. It is a wealthy,
and honorable, and free, and sweet, and safe estate; All this raises the
price of it in our esteem.

First, It is a wealthy state, God does not adopt us to a 1. Our estate by
Christ is a wealthy estate.
poor Inheritance, but to a rich, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 1. 18. That you
may know what is the hope of his Calling, and what the riches of the glory of
his Inheritance in the Saints; Here is riches in this Inheritance. So, many
times, riches, when there is no honor. Ignoble spirits scrape a great deal of
Wealth together, in which they place their happiness: 2. Here is honor.
but here is not only wealth, but Glory to, and he Glory of a Kingdom. There
is not such an honorable incorporation in the World, as this, to have God the
Father, for his Father, and Jesus Christ for his Head and Governor, and all
the Saints for his Members; a body politic, that ^ath the eternal spirit of
God, for the soul of it. The society of Saints, is an honorable Society. Here
is both wealth, and honor, which may sometimes be, where there is no liberty.
It is but Splendida servi^us, a glittering slavery for men to be rich, and
honorable, and yet in slavery. But here ye read of, a glorious liberty of the
Sons of God, 3. Here is liberty.
not only riches, and honor, but a glorious liberty, Joh. 8. 31. If the Son
has made us free, we shall then be free indeed, from the service of sin, and
bondage of Satan; free from Temporal afflictions, and free from the danger of
eternal wrath. There may riches, and honor, and freedom, meet in some one
person; who yet cannot have content, nor does he live a Comfortable life for
all that. Therefore, this in the fourth place is a Sweet state, as well as
wealthy, 4. Here i^ a sweet estate.
and honorable, and free. There lies a great deal of sweetness in the name
of a Father; when the soul can say, howsoever things go in the World, I can
look up to Heaven, and say, doubtless, Thou art our Father: there is so much
sweetness to be found in this Relation, as to take away the bitterness of all
other dispensations, and providence, though in other respects very averse. Our
Chroninicles tell us of King Edward the first, when he was in foreign parts,
news was brought him at once both of the death of his father, and of his son.
The King was exceedingly struck into sadness at the relation, but especially
at the death of his father. For, says he, I may have more sons, but never
another father. We may have more friends, and more estates, if we lose our
friends, or estates: but we can have no more fathers; if we once lose our God,
we shall never have such a Father as he; lose him once, and all is gone. Am not
I, (said Elkanah to Hannah) better to thee, then ten sons? Well may God say to
us, Am not I better to you then ten thousand sons, and ten thousand times ten
thousand estates? All sweetness concenters in this Relation, God is our
Father, we are his Children.

But there may be a great deal of wealth, and honor, 5. It is a safe estate.
and freedom, and sweetness, and yet no safety may attend this condition.
This is a safe estate: that is the commendations of it. This honor, and
riches, and freedom, and sweetness, they shall all continue. The servant he
abides not in the house for ever, but the son abides ever, says our Savior,
Joh. 8. 35. Therefore fear not little flock, says Christ, It is your Fathers
pleasure to give you the Kingdom. Nothing shall intervene, so as to hinder a
son from the Inheritance. It is his Fathers good pleasure, and his will shall
stand, to give them a Kingdom in the issue. So it is clear, that this is an
high privilege.

What use shall we make of it?

First, examine whether we be thus preferred, yea, or Examine our selves
wherher we be sons or not.
pretends to be, a son, and daughter of God. It is therefore, worth the while
to try, whether the Lord Jesus Christ has made us partakers of this
privilege. It is a use both for the assurance of the Saints, and for the
discarding of Hypocrites, that are but pretenders to it. They favor even those
men, of whom Christ says, You are of your father the Devil. They pretend
sonship to God, Joh. 8. 41. We, say they, be not born of fornication, we have
one Father, even God. And yet Christ says to them, ye are of your father, the
Devil. We are of God, say they: ye are of your father the Devil, says
Christ. One way to try this, and the only one that I will name, is by the
spirit of adoption. If we be sons, then God has sent forth into our hearts the
spirit of adoption, by which we cry Abba, Father. This ye have expressly laid
down in so many words, Gal. 4. 6. Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the
spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba father. Wheresoever there is
sonship, there will be crying, Abba Father. Crying implies fervency of spirit;
as, Why cryest thou to me? faith God to Moses, when he was in a great strait at
the Red Sea. Because both the profane persons, and formal professors, will put
on for a share; before we can break the childrens bread, we must discard them
from the comforts of this. If crying, Father, and if praying, argue my sonship,
Formality and Profaneness reproved.
then I am a son, says the profane person; for I say my prayers ever and anon.
Alas, what is this to the purpose? Thy praying is but craving, yea, thy praying
is but houling in God's esteem, Isa. 7. 14. They have not cried to me with
their hearts, when they houled upon their beds. How irksom is the houling of
dogs to the ears of men? such is that, which profane persons call Praying, in
the ears of God. The truth is, their praying is but a driving of
contradictions, because their life, all the while, gives their tongue the lie.
Our Father (says the profane person) which art in heaven; and in the mean
while, he serves his father the devil which is in hell. Hallowed be thy Name;
so say his lips, but in the mean time, he dishonors God in swearing, and
lying, and whoring, and drinking, and profaneness. Thy kingdom come; and in
the mean while, he opposes the Kingdom of Christ in his heart, and in the
lives of his Saints, and does what he can to hinder the coming of it. Thy will
be done in earth as it is in heaven; and in the mean while, he does the will of
Satan, that will which the damned do in hell. Give us this day our daily bread;
seemingly acknowledging, that he receives all, even his outward mercies, from
God; and in the mean while, perhaps, sacrifices to his own net, commending his
own skill for the estate he has gotten. Forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive them that trespass against us; and in the mean while, he goes on in
malice and envy, sinning to his very hour of death, as it were. Lead us not
into temptation; in the mean while, he tempts the devil to tempt him. He
cries, Deliver us from evil, and delivers himself up to evil while he
says so: He lays the reins upon the neck of his lusts, that run away with
him into all mischief. Call you this praying? I but, says the formal
professor, I pray, and that frequently; not in distress only, but, happily, keep
a constant course of prayer. Surely I must go for a child of God.

That we be not deceived, let us consider, It is one thing to draw nigh with
the heart, and another thing to draw nigh with the lips. You know the complaint
of Isaiah, compare two places together, Isa. 1. 15. When ye so read forth your
hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; and when you make many prayers I will
not hear you. And yet he complains of them by Isaiah, Isa. 4. They make many
prayers, and yet none hears that prayer: Why? Because, Isa. 29. 13. This
people draw near to me with their mouths, but remove their hearts far from me.
Therefore they pray, and their prayers are no prayers, because their hearts are
not in them. I will not deny, but many a formal professor may have attained to
the gift of prayer, but that which I make an argument of Sonship, was a spirit
of prayer, the spirit of adoption, by which we cry, Abba Father. What that is,
ye may see, Zach. 10. 12. I will pour out upon Jerusalem the spirit of grace
and supplication. How works that? They shall look upon me whom they have
pierced, and mourn for me, as one mourns for his only son. Wheresoever the
spirit Spiritual Prayer looks up to Christ.
of prayer is, there will be a looking up to Jesus Christ in all our devotions.
The spirit of Adoption, that comes from the Son, guides to the Son, and
takes us along with him in all our addresses to God. They that would have
their voices to resound, will make choice of Rocky places, which send forth the
best Echo. This Rock, the Lord Jesus Christ is he, that makes our prayers to
return with a blessing into our own bosoms. You shall have many men that go to
devotion, and leave Christ behind them; What a poor devotion is here? The
spirit of prayer is always accompanied with Evangelicall humility, with a
mourning that flows from our looking to Christ. I know, there is a great deal
of legal sorrow in formal professors. Men may go blubbering to hell, without
true repentance. But here is a mourning, that flows from a looking up to
Christ. Where there is a spirit of Adoption, men will speak from feeling, which
flows from the apprehension of Christ, and the certainty of God's grace in
him. Now, this spirit of Adoption argues Sonship.

But then comes in the poor weak Believer, and says, Abba Father with more
importunity.

All Believers are not alike gifted, there may be a gift of Hezekiah like a
Crane and Swallow; yet consider, whilst thou can not speak, there are two
Spokes-men for thee, the consideration whereof, may render A Believer has two
Spokesmen to stand for him.
thee confident of success, even in thy devotions, how weak soever they be. The
lispings and stammerings of a child, God likes better, then all the Oratory in
the world. The Spirit of God is in thee, and the Blood of Christ is for thee.
The Spirit, and
We know not what to pray for as we ought, but the Spirit makes intercession
in us. And God knows the meaning of the Spirit, and hears the least
whispers of his own Spirit, in the soul of a poor Believer. And then, The Blood
of Christ, that speaks better things than the blood of Abel. the Blood of of
Christ.
As Christ says of himself, it may be said of this Blood, Father, I know thou
hear me always. But I pass now from matter of Trial, and

I come now to matter of Exhortation. All Dignity, ye To exhort to Duties.
of being the children of God, they are obliged to certain Duties that flow
from hence.

First, Obedience. The sons of Jonadab, they were obedient 1. To Obedience.
to the commandment of their father, Jer. 35. I set before the sons of the
family of the Rechabites, pots full of wine, and cups; and I said unto them,
Drink wine. But they said, We must drink no wine; for Jonadab, the son of
Rechab, our father, has forbid us, saying, Drink no wine, you nor your sons
for ever. Neither build houses, nor sow seed, nor plant ye vineyards; but dwell
in tents all your days, that ye may live all your days upon the face of the
earth, where ye are inhabitants. So we have hearkened to the voice of Jonadab,
the son of Rechab, our father, in all that he commanded us. So we drank no wine
all our days, we, nor our wives, nor our sons, nor our daughters. When God
has said, Drink not of the world's cup, taste not of the world's dainties,
lest you surfeit on them; it becomes an obedint child to say, My Father has
commanded me, I dare not drink, when he is tempted to the enjoyment of any
unlawful pleasures. Mal. 3. 17. Ye read there of a son that serves. Indeed,
the best service God has done him, is by his sons; all other services are
little worth in comparison. I will spare him, as a man spares his own son that
serves him. The son goes naturally and ingenuously about his father's work;
he does it kindly, much more kindly than a servant will, that does it only for
his wages. Therefore of old, they were wont to set their children to the work.
The chief work lay in husbandry. We read of Rachel's keeping her father's
sheep, Gen 29. 6.
and so of Jacob keeping his father in law's sheep. Would we approve our selves
children of God, we must do the works of God. Our Savior beats off the
Pharisees from their plea, upon this ground; We are the children of Abraham,
say they. If ye were, says Christ, then would you do the works of Abraham.
Abraham believed in me. No man can ever approve himself the child of God, that
does not abound in the work of the Lord.

The second Lesson is for Imitation, Ephesians. 5. 1. Be ye 2. For Imitation.
followers of God, as dear children. It is natural to children to imitate
their parents; look what the father does, the child is apt to learn the same.
If we be dear children, we must be followers of God, and walk in love, as
Christ has loved us. Blessed are the merciful, they shall be called the
children of God. Why? Because that makes it appear, they follow God. And so,
Be ye holy, says Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. As he which has called you is holy,
so be ye holy in all manner of conversation. Because it is written, Be ye holy,
for I am holy.

Thirdly, We should learn from hence this Lesson, that is, 3. Learn Dependency
upon God.
of Dependency. Children hang upon their parents, so should we upon God, if we
will carry our selves as becomes sons. This Argument Christ uses, Matthew. 6.
22. Take no thought, saying, What shall we eat, and drink, and be clothed
with, for your heavenly Father knows you have need of all these things. Leave
the care of all these to your Father. If ye were Orphans, and had no father; or
if your father were not willing, or not able to supply your wants, then ye
might be careful; but seeing you have an heavenly Father, that knows all
these things, cast all your care upon him, for He cares for you. Does not he
tell us, That he that provideth not for his own family, is the worst of
Infidells? Ye are of Gods family, therefore be sure, He will provide for you,
if ye trust Him.

Fourthly, It teaches us a lesson of Patience, Hebr. 12. 4. It teaches us to
be patient.
5. Forget not the exhortation which speaks to you, as Children. My son
despise not thou the Chastisements of the Lord; For whom the Lord loves, He
chastises. Faint not under the correction of a Father, and, because it is from
a Father that will lay on no more, no longer, than the Child stands in need
of it. Herein, that of our Savior should be often in our thoughts, Joh. 18.
11. The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? Why, every
affliction that befalls me, is a Cup out of my Fathers hand, and from Him I
should take it, and drink it, because it is mixed by Him, who will be sure to
put no poison into his Children's Cup.

Fithly, It should teach us a lesson of reverence, If I 5. It teaches us
reverence.
be a Father, Mal. 1. 6. A son honoreth his father, and a servant his master;
If then I be a father, where is mine honor? The children that will be playing
the waggs happily together; if the father come into their presence, he husheth
all the noise; and the respect they bear him, takes them off from their
vanity. The Reverence we owe to God, should take us off from all unseemly
Carriages. It was a report made of Luther, by one that lived much with him, and
observed his devotion; Tanta reverentia cum Deo, and Tanta fiducia cum Patre.
He goes to God, says he, with so much reverence, as a man that comes to a
Lord above him; but with so much confidence, as a man that goes to a Father,
6. It teaches us to separate from the iniquity of the World.


Lastly, It should teach us a lesson of separation from the folly, and iniquity
of the World; This ye have in that place, 2 Cor. 6. and the two last verses.
Come out from amongst them, and be ye separated, and touch no unclean thing,
and I will be a father to you. God expects a great deal of holiness in his
Children, that they should nor run into the like excess of Riot, with the men
of the World. We should all be separatists in this sense, namely, from the
pollutions of the world; we should not behave our selves unbeseeming the sons
and daughters of God. It was an excellent advice given by a Philosopher to a
young Prince under his Tuition, and Care. The Prince was to go abroad into a
place, where he knew he should meet with some naughty Company; he desired his
Tutor, to teach him how he should govern, and behave himself. He gives him
this rule. Memento, te silium esse Regis; Remember, Thou art a King's son: when
thou come there, do nothing but what becomes the son of a King. Could we
always carry this Memento along with us, how pure would our Conversations be?
Thou art a son and daughter of God, be sure to do nothing unbeseeming this
relation, and thou will do well enough. Is this thy son's Coat, say they to
acob, when they brought it home imbrew'd with blood? When we see a man's
Carriage defiled with lust, and scurrility, and bitterness, is this the Coat
of a Son? is it the badge of an heir of Heaven, and Child of God? He that will
do nothing unworthy of this relation, must be sure to walk unspotted of the
World. Thus, I have run over the Observations, that flow from the first
particular of the Text, namely, The benefit; The power, or privilege, or
prerogative to become the sons of God.

Secondly, The next thing is, The Benefactor, that is 2. Christ our Benefactor
gives power to become sons.
Christ. He gave them power to become the sons of God. Sons of God, in a
special way, not only sons by Creation, so all men are, Mal. 2. 10. Have we
not all one Father? Has not one God created us? Nor only sons by profession;
so all the members of the visible Church are, Genesis 6. 2. The Sons of God saw
the daughters of men. Nor only sons by Deputation; So all Magistrates are,
according to that, Psalm. 82. 6. I have said ye are Gods, and all of you sons of
the most High. But sons of God by adoption. That which the Apostle tells us
of, Gal. 4, 5. That we might receive the Adoption of sons.

Of which there are two sorts; A natural Adoption. and A personal Adoption.


A natural adoption. That belonged properly to the Natural adoption, properly
of the Jews.
Jews, who were in that respect called the firstborn sons of God, Exodus 4.
22. Thou shall say to Pharaoh, Thus says the Lord. Israel is my son, my
firstborn. Therefore the Adoption is said to belong to Israel, Romans 9. 4. Who
are Israelites, to whom pertains the Adoption, namely this natural Adoption.

Secondly, There is a personal adoption, that of which Personal adoption
properly is to believers.
I told you, out of Gal. 4. 6. As many as received Him, gave He the privilege
to become the sons of God. Here is the benefit, and the Benefactor. He gave it,
it is the gift of Christ, He made us adopted Sons.

Thirdly, The Persons on whom the Father does bestow 3. The persons upon whom
God the Father bestows Chtist.
the gift of Christ, being described by their faith. I shall wrap up all in
this one Observation, which will take in all the remainder of the verse; namely
that, It is given to all such, as truly receive Christ by faith, to become the
sons of God, by adoption. For the explication whereof, four things are to

First, That Christ should be received. To as many as received Him.

Secondly, That to the true receiving of Christ, there must be a special
concurrence of Faith, Even to them that believe in his Name, says the Text.

Thirdly, That all such as do receive Christ by faith, are adopted ones. To
them gave He power to become the sons of God, as many as received Him.

Fourthly, That this sonship is a free gift. He has given them power to become
the sons of God.

These all lie clearly in the words: when I have explained them, I shall come
to apply them.

First, Jesus Christ should be received, Col. 2. 6. As ye 1. Christ should be
received, and how.
have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him. Walk in him,
but receive him first. Therefore it is, that Christ is compared to such things
in Scripture, as do import a receiving of him, conveying of him to men's souls.
He is called the Bread of life, Joh. 6. 35. If bread be not eaten, it
nourishes not; if Christ be not received, he saves not. We are said to put
him on as a garment, As many as have received Christ, have put on Christ. A
garment must be taken and applied to the body, or it cannot warm it, to sense
it from the weather. He is said to come with healing under his wings, Mal. 4.
2. Christ brings medicines with him, salves for sores, medicines for
diseases. But the salve must be applied to the sore, else the salve heals
not; and the medicine to the disease, else it cures not. Christ is the husband
of our souls, Thy Maker is thy husband. By marriage, there must be a mutual
receiving of each other, else it is no marriage. All these expressions imply
the receiving of Christ; and not to receive him, is the greatest folly and
madness in the world. As, Who would not think that man besides himself, that,
having a violent disease upon him, when the best medicine in the world shall be
offered him, and which will infallibly cure him, shall refuse to take it? That
is our case. We are all sick, sick to death; and the Lord Christ is offered to
us in the Gospel? Is it not madness to refuse him? If a poor woman, that were
deep in debt, should have a Sergeant come upon her, and arrest her, and be
dragging of her to prison; and, at the same time, should have a good march
offered to her, a rich husband, that will pay all her debts; Were not she an
unwise woman, if she would not take him for her husband? It is our case: We are
all deep in God's debt, ready to be dragged to the prison of hell, there to lie
and die, and rot for ever. Now the Lord Jesus offers to take us, and to be
married to us: And for us to refuse him, who will pay all our debts, and
advance us to an high and glorious condition; Is it not madness? And yet there
is no greater, and more common and frequent sin To refuse Christ offered, is
the great damning sin.
in the world, than this. The not receiving Christ, it is the great damning
sin. It is this that argues the profaneness of man's heart, as Esau is
called profane; Why? Because he sold his birthright for a mess of pottage;
the brand of prophannesse is fastened upon him in this respect. So,
profaneness is in the hearts of all the ungodly, they sell their birthright
for some mess or other of the devill's pottage, for pleasures or profits. They
let Christ go, Not him, but Barabbas; not Christ, but credit; not Christ, but
wealth and estate. Therefore still the Lord has occasion to complain of men,
that they would not receive him: Ye would not come to me, that ye might have
life, and sonship. This is laid for the first ground, Jesus Christ should be
received. If he be not, it proceeds from the folly of men.

Secondly, To the true receiving of Christ, there must be 2. A special
Concurrence to the receiving of Christ.
a special Concurrence of Faith. As many as received him. Who are they?
Believers, That believed in his Name. In his Name. Name, in the Scripture, is
often put for Person, as, Rev. 3. 4. Thou have a few names in Sardis, which
have not defiled their garments; that is, a few men and women, a few persons.
The Receivers of Christ are said to believe in his name, because the direct
object of their faith is the Person of Christ, for this or that purpose. That
Christ died for all, or for me, or for the elect only, It is not the believing
of any of these Propositions, that saves; but in Christ. The Person of Christ,
his Name is the object of faith. Believed in his Name, (...). It is a known
distinction amongst Divines, that of Credere Deum, Credere Deo, and, Credere in
Deum. It is one thing to believe that there is a God, that is, Credere Deum; so
the devils believe, and tremble. And another thing, Credere Deo, to believe
God, that is, what God says, to be true. But that which saves is, Credere in
Deum, to believe in God. That is, Cedere credendo in Deum; By believing to
pass into God, and cleave to him, and close with him. So the same may be said
of Christ, It is one thing, credere Christum, to believe that Christ is; and
another thing, credere Christo, to believe what Christ has said in the word of
truth; but another thing, credere in Christum, to believe in Christ. Joh. 14.
10, 11, 12. ye shall find all these, Believe thou not that I am in the
Father, and the Father in me? Here is credere Christum, to believe that Christ
is, and what he is; that he is in the Father, and the Father in him. Verse. 11.
Believe me, that I am in the Father, and the Father in me. That is, credere
Christo, because he has said it. Verse. 12. Verily, verily I say unto you, He
that believes on me, the works that I do shall he do also. Here is credere in
Christum, that is the faith in the Text, that is required to the true receiving
of Christ, -- believed in his Name. Believing on him, that is, relying upon
him. Faith lies in recumbency, therefore faith, the act of faith, is often
expressed in Scripture by acts of relying, and staying our selves upon God; 2 Chronicles. 16. 7. 8. because thou have relied on the King of Assyria, and not on
the Lord thy God; therefore is the host of the King of Assyria escaped from
thy hands. Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubims a great host, with very many
chariots and horsemen? Yet, because thou did rely on the Lord, he delivered
them into thy hands. Here is believing expressed by relying on the Lord. That in
case of a temporal deliverance, faith exercises the same kind of act, as,
toward God, in spiritualls: Isa. 10. 20. It shall come to pass in that day,
that the remnant of Israel, and such as have escaped of the house of Jacob,
shall no more again stay upon him that smote them, but shall stay upon the
Lord, the holy one of Israel, in truth. Here is believing in his Name, relying
upon, and staying on Christ. And God has been pleased to make faith the
instrument of receiving Christ, for two reasons, intimated by the Apostle, Romans
4. 16. Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace, to the end the
promise might be sure to all the seed. 1. Faith the Instrument of receiving
Christ, both to justify and to save.


First, Faith is chosen out from all other graces, to be the instrument of
receiving Christ, to Justification, and to Salvation, that it might be of
grace, that the free grace of God might more appear in this way of
dispensation. If God should have chosen Love, or Zeal, or Hope, or any other
Grace; this would carry some show of worth and merit in it, and bring something
to God with it: Whereas Faith is an emptying Grace, brings nothing but an
empty hand, that God might fill it. And therefore it is of faith, that it might
be so much the more of grace; because faith is a mere naked Receiver. In point
of Sanctification, faith is a purger and worker; but in point of Justification,
it is a mere receiver: And that magnifieth the grace of God so much the more,
that it might be of grace.

Secondly, That the Promise might be sure. Should God 2. Salvation depends
upon Faith, that the Promise might be sure.
have hanged our Salvation upon any other Condition than of faith, Believers
could never have attained that assurance, which they may now arive at, by the
help of the Spirit of grace: Why? Because God requires nothing of us now, but
the taking of Christ, as to point of Justification. Should the Condition have
been our Obedience, as under the first Covenant of works, Do this, and live;
Though God had treated with us upon very low terms, Never be drunk in thy
life, and thou shall be saved; Forbear adultery and murder, and thou shall be
saved; the Promise would not have been sure, no man durst have trusted himself,
no, not in this thing. We know how David, and other servants of God, have been
seduced and fallen. But take and receive Christ, and he will be thy Savior;
here is the way for assurance. As, put case you come to a beggar, and say, Do
such a piece of service for me, and thou shall have such a reward; there ye put
him upon a greater difficulty, than to give him so much money. So God deals
with us. Believe, and thou shall be saved; Receive, and thou shall be saved.

Thirdly, All that truly receive Christ by faith, are adopted 3. By Faith we
are adopted to Christ.
ones; To as many as received him, gave he power to become the sons of God: Not
by Creation only, as all men are; nor by Profession only, as all the Members
of the visible Church are; nor by Deputation only, as all Magistrates are, I
have said, Ye are gods, and the sons of the most high: But by Adoption, that ye
might receive the adoption of sons. All that receive Christ are thus adopted:
For which ye have a clear place, Gal. 3. 26, 27, 28, 29. For ye are all the
sons of God in Christ Jesus. For all ye that are baptized into Christ, have put
on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Grecian, there is neither bond nor free,
there is neither male nor female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And if ye
be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs by promise. It is said by the
Apostle, Romans 9. speaking of the Jews, that to them belonged the adoption,
speaking there of a National adoption, that belonged to the Jews, the only
peculiar Nation of the world, that God had then picked out, to glorify himself
among. But hereupon the Jews were apt to conceive, that none had right to be
the sons and daughters of God, but those of their Nation. What was true of
National adoption, they used to apply it to Personal, and called themselves
the children of God, because they had Abraham to their father. Now, says the
holy Ghost here, All, without any difference, that have received Christ, they
are sons, as well as the sons of Abraham by a natural generation, because they
are all of Abraham's faith, and so come to be heirs of Abraham's seed. He
tells them here, There is neither Jew nor Greek. A believing Greek is as true
a child of Abraham, yea, of God, as a believing Jew; and much more than an
unbelieving Jew, that braggeth so much of being Abraham's seed. There is
neither Jew nor Greek nor bond nor free. Christ finds men in a state of
bondage, and leaves them so, happily, in worldly respects, but he makes them
free in respect of God: If the Son makes you free, then are ye free indeed.
There is neither male nor female. In some Commonwealths, Females are excluded
from the chief Dignity, as by the Salique Law in France, no Woman can inherit a
Crown. In all Commonwealths, they are secluded from many Offices, which are
proper only to men. But when you come to speak of the Dignity of Adoption,
Females come in as well as Males. Every Believer is a partaker of this high
privilege, of being the child of God. That is the importance of this word in
the Text, (...). As many as received him. All, and every one that receives
him, become the sons of God.

Fourthly, The Adoption of sons is a free gift: As many 4. It is the free gift
of God, that we are adopted sons.
as received him, to them it is given to become the sons of God; (...), He gave
them power to become. It Is an Ingredient into the very essence of Adoption, It
must be free. So the civil Law defines Adoption, Gratuita est assumptio, non
habentis jus; It is a free Assumption of a person, that has no right to an
Inheritance, to the partaking of that Inheritance. As, what right had Moses, a
poor Hebrew child, that was thrown out in an Ark of Bulrushes, ready to perish;
what right had he to that Estate that belonged to Pharaoh's daughter, till she
adopted him, and gave him that? So Mordechai adopted Hester.

There are three things that go to make up a Civil Adoption, Three things go
to make up Adoption.
and you shall find them all in this Divine Adoption.

First, There must be an Inheritance, which the party is 1. An Inheritance.
adopted to; It is a vain thing to adopt one to nothing. To take one, and leave
him to the wide World, when he has done. Adoption supposes an inheritance.
That is here, even the Kingdom of Glory, an Inheritance with the Saints in
light. Hence it is, that, that blessedness, which the Saints shall enjoy in
the state of Glory, is called by the Apostle, The adoption, because it is that,
which we are adopted to. And so I understand that phrase, Romans 8. 23. where
Adoption is taken in that sense, waiting for the Adoption; We which have the
first fruits of the spirit, we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for
the Adoption. That is, for that glory, we are adopted to, for that Inheritance,
which God has promised us. Otherwise, men which receive the first fruits of
the spirit, they receive Adoption in this sense. But here is a further thing,
which they have not yet, but wait for, which is called Adoption, even the
Consummation of all their hopes, the Inheritance in glory.

Secondly, As in every adoption there must be some Inheritance; 2. It must be
of a party, that has no right to the Inheritance.
so adoption must be of a party, that has no right to that Inheritance. A man
is not said to adopt his own son, because nature gives him a right to his
father's estate. But if he adopteth, it is a stranger. Moses was a stranger to
Pharoahs daughter. Hester, though she were akin to Mordecay, yet was not his
natural daughter, and therefore was adopted by him. We are all by nature
strangers, and a great deal worse, enemies to God, as well as strangers, we
have no right, no show of right to the Inheritance, for we all have sinned, and
come short of the glory of God, Romans 3. 23.

Thirdly, It must be Gratuita Assumptio. A free assumption of a person that
has no right, and the having no 3. It must be of a person that has no right.
right, shows it to be free. And that we are sure, is to be found in this
Divine Inheritance. It is an act of God's free grace, nothing moved him but his
own free love. God loves, because he loves; and has mercy on whom, he will
have mercy. See this proceeding from free grace, Ephesians. 1. 5, 6. Having
predestined us to the adoption of Children, by Jesus Christ to himself,
according to the good pleasure of his Will. Here is the good pleasure of God's
will, the only ground of our adoption. Thus I have run through the four
things, which I undertook for the explication of this point.

Come we now to apply it.

First, let us all learn from hence to extol, and magnify, 1. Learn to
glorify God, for so great a gift, as adoption is.
and adore the goodness and bounty of our Lord Jesus Christ; in giving the
poor sons of men, so great, so excellent a gift as this of adoption is. To them
that receive Him, to them gave He power, dignity, privilege, prerogative, to
become the sons of God. You see it is a free gift. Look to all the progress of
salvation, from first to last, and you shall find free grace running through
every passage of salvation, even as blood runs through every vein in the body
of a man. Christ himself is the great gift of God, and all other things are
the gift of Christ; God together with him, gives us all things else. Have we
any newness of heart in us? It is He that gives it. He takes away the heart
of stone, and gives an heart of flesh. Have we Ministers after Gods own
heart? It is God that gives the increase. Have we any thing to suffer, or to
do? To you it is given to believe, and to suffer. To the first, This great
privilege of Adoption. What but free, and undeserved love could have moved
Christ, to bestow such a favor upon us? He himself was the only begotten Son
of God, and might have contented himself with this dignity for ever, and yet
He is pleased to become the first begotten of many Brethren. The natural Son
of God made way for the poor sons of men, that they might receive the adoption
of sons. It is a greater favor then any Adam had, to thank God for, this, that
we receive from Christ; Adam was rather in the condition of a servant, then of
a Son. He lived under the Covenant of works; Do this, and live. And therefore
it was, that Adam was in a possibility of falling from his happy Condition, as
ye know he did, and of being turned out of the house, The servant abides not
in the house for ever, but the son abides for ever, Joh. 8. 35. If ye will
say, he was a son, as indeed he was, it was but a son by Creation. He bore the
Image of God, had the divine stamp upon him, but here is a further sonship by
adoption. There is a mystical union of believers to Christ, as their head;
which Adam had not. But if ye will distinctly see the height, and excellency
of this privilege, that so we might know, what we have to bless, and magnify
Christ for, so much the clearer; Let us compare this Divine adoption with
Civil adoptions, which are in use amongst the sons of men. And see how far
this Excellency reaches, in four or five particulars.

First, in Civil adoption, there is always some need on 1. In civil
adoption, there is some need on the Adopter's part.
the Adopter's part. No man will go, and take a stranger's son; and adopt him,
unless he want a son of his own; or unless his own son be so unworthy, as he
thinks him not fit to be trusted with an estate. But it is seldom done, but
in case of Orphany, where there wants Children. The law says, That adoption
is, Actus lega is, naturam sequens, etc. A legal act, Imitating nature,
Invented for the comfort of them, that have no Children of their own. But now
look to this spiritual adoption, and ye shall find God had no need, he had a
son of his own. The Son of his bosom, the Son of his love, the Son of his
delights, in whom he did take pleasure from all Eternity, and might have taken
pleasure to all Eternity; though there had been no such Creature as Man, made
in the World. And yet He was pleased to adopt the sons of men, not because He
wanted a son, but because we wanted a Father. And therefore, in this respect,
we have great cause to say as the Apostle does, Behold, what manner of Love,
the Father has showed us, that we should be called the sons of God? 1 John 3.
1.

Secondly, there is commonly on the Adopted his part, 2. On the adopted his
part, there is expected some worth.
some worth. As there is some need on the part of the Adopter, so some worth in
the Adopted. When men make their choice, either they have regard to some
excellency, or some relation, or something that is a motive to their
affections, to pitch upon such a child, rather than another, to adopt for an
heir. When Pharaoh's daughter adopted Moses, it is said, Moses his beauty moved
her; the Text gives you that hint, Act. 7. 20. Moses was exceeding fair. When
he was cast out, Pharaoh's daughter took him up, and nourished him for her own
son. The very beauty of the Child had an operation upon the Lady's heart. So
Mordechai adopted Hester: What was the reason? First, she was near akin to him;
then, very beautiful, Hest. 2. 7. He brought up Haddassah (which is Hester)
his uncle's daughter, for she had neither father nor mother; and the maid was
fair and beautiful, whom Mordechai, when her father and mother were dead, took
for his own daughter. So, here is something in the Adopted, that moves the
Adopter: But what is in us to move God? unless we speak of moving him to
indignation. Beauty we have none, for we are defiled all over with sin,
overspread with a leprosy; all our faculties are in sin, and all sin is in
our faculties; our very Righteousness is as a menstruous cloth, What then are
our Abominations? Our Civilities and Formalities are but as dung, as the
Apostle accounts of all for Christ: If they are but as dung, What then are our
oaths, and lies, and prophanenings of the Lord's day? The truth is, we have
nothing lovely in us, and yet behold, we are called the sons of God: What love
is here?

Thirdly, The adopting father may leave an Estate, but 3. The Adopter cannot
convey a Disposition, to enable to manage the Estate rightly.
he cannot convey a disposition to him, whom he adopteth, to enable to manage
it aright; therefore is there often mistakes: they think they pitch well, and
it proves ill. Such as are adopted, they come leightly by their estates, and
they set leightly by them. But herein lies a further and higher excellency of
this divine Adoption, God, together with an Inheritance, conveyeth a
Disposition, that renders one fit for the managing of such an estate. Ye have
an expression that sounds that way, Col. 1. 12. Giving thanks to the Father,
which has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in
light. He does not only give us an inheritance, but makes us meet to be
partakers of that inheritance. Our adopting Father stampeth his own Image upon
every adopted son. He makes every believer Patrizare, to imitate his Father
which is in heaven, which the other cannot do.

Fourthly, In Civil Adoption, the Adopted son cannot 4. The Adopted cannot
enjoy the Adopter and the Inheritance both at once.
enjoy his father and the inheritance both at once; till the adopting father be
dead, what is left him by the Adoptor does not come into his hands. But now,
herein lies another excellency of this Spiritual Adoption, Every believer may
at once enjoy both the Inheritance and the Father, because he that adopteth him
lives for ever; yea, because his Father is his Inheritance. So the truth
stands. He that adopteth us to an Inheritance, Himself is that Inheritance
which he adopteth us to; for we are adopted to the fruition of our God. Psalm.
16. 5. The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance. So that here is Father and
Inheritance joined both together, because the Father is the Inheritance.

Lastly, In Civil Adoption, it is but some petty Inheritances 5. They are poor
petty things that we are here adopted to.
which men are adopted to, by their adopting fathers, some poor things; it may
be, a Farm, or Lordship, or Manor; What if it be a Kingdom? It is, in
comparison, but a poor thing, to that Inheritance which Christ has adopted us
to, which we shall find described to the life, 1 Pet. 1. 4. To an inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in heaven for you.
Here are the super-excellent properties of that Inheritance, the consideration
of which, will exceedingly inhaunce this privilege of Adoption.

First, It is (...), an incorruptible inheritance. 1. An incorruptible
Inheritance.
Whatsoever Inheritances we have here below, they are liable to corruption. If
a man's estate lie in Money, that may rust, or the thieves may break through and
steal it; If in Cattle, they may die; if in Houses, they may be burnt; if in
Lands, an enemy may invade them. But here is an Inheritance that cannot be
corrupted, because it lies in God: For the Father is our Inheritance, and the
immortal God is not liable to any corruption.

Secondly, It is (...), an Inheritance undefiled. 2. An Inheritance undefiled.
There are few inheritances here below, but some defilement sticks to them;
they are either ill got, or ill kept. An Inheritance may be got by oppression;
or, if not so, yet there may be defilement in the keeping of it. He that
comes to inherit it may behave himself oppressively. If, when riches
increase, the heart comes to be set upon them, there will be defilement with
the inheritance. But here is an Inheritance undefiled. No unclean thing shall
enter into heaven, not so much as a Serpent, to tempt in that Paradise that is
above. Mahomet tells his followers of a defiled inheritance, wherein there
shall be a great deal of filthiness: But Christ has provided another kind of
Inheritance for his, which is without sin, undefiled.

Thirdly, It is (...), an Inheritance that 3. An Inheritance that fades not
away*
fades not away; a Metaphor taken from flowers: The beauty of a flower, and
the sweetness of it, is quickly gone, withers in a moment, and fit for
nothing then but to be cast away. So it is with all other temporal
Inheritances, they lose their glory after a while; they cease to minister that
content, which a man hoped to have found in them, which may be had at the first
possessing of them; yea, all the glory of the world is like the flower of the
field, that fades away. But herein lies the excellency of this Inheritance,
it fades not away. It is a flower that never withers, their joys are
always flourishing: a continual spring of flourishing consolations, arises
from the enjoyment of God, and every day sweeter and sweeter.

Fourthly, It is (...), an inheritance 4. An Inheritance reserved
reserved. We cannot say so of temporal inheritances, they may be gone. A
trick at Law may put a man out of his estate, he may be wrangled out of it by
some device or other, an enemy may come and spoil him of it, he can have no
assurance. Though men purchase houses and lands, for themselves and their heirs
for ever; alas, how soon are some men dead and gone? and, it may be, the next
generation knows no such houses or lands, nor no such men. But here is an
inheritance reserved: All the Devils in hell shall never wrangle a man out of
This Possession reserved.

Lastly, It is (...), an inheritancc reserved 5. An Inheritance reserved in
Heaven.
in heaven; which is still a farther addition. Whatsoever is in Heaven, is
excellent. Many fading things are on earth. The least thing in heaven is above
the best things in the world. And it is a consideration that adds much to the
sweetness of the Inheritance, to consider where it lies: As, Who would not
rather desire to have a small competency of land in England, amongst his own
friends, where he was born, than to have much in the Indies, amongst strangers.
It is an Inheritance reserved in heaven, which is our Country, the Believer's
home; Every man is born from above, (...); his kindred live in Heaven, his
Father is there, and his Mother there. We are strangers upon earth, therefore
our inheritance is in heaven, which is much more worth than our inheritance
below. So excellent is this Inheritance. Therefore how great is this love of
Christ, in giving us this privilege, to become the sons of God?

Secondly, Let us learn from hence to judge of our How to know, whether we be
the sons of God.
estates, how things stand between God and us, whether we be sons and
daughters, yea or no; nothing concerns us more. Therefore time spent in this
scrutiny will be profitable. Our Sonship is evidenced two ways. By way of
Testimony, and By way of Inference.


First, By way of Testimony. So we come to know our 1. By the witness of the
Spirit.
selves to be sons and daughters, by the witness of the Spirit, which ye read
of, Romans 8. 16. The Spirit it self bears witness to our spirits, that we are
the children of God. This Spirit it is, that keeps the Records of Heaven. The
holy Ghost is conscious to all the secrets of God, knows what names are
written in the book of life; therefore he is able to make them known to us.
None but the Son of God can Redeem, and none but the Spirit of God can Assure,
so as to make your Evidences clear, and infallible, and above all doubt and
fear. But this does not now lie so clear in my way.

Secondly, It is therefore evidenced by way of Inference, Verse. 8, 9. Our
Sonship depends upon our receiving 2. By way of Inference.
Christ. It may be inferred from hence, As many as received him, to them gave
he power to become the sons of God. Therefore every son of God has received
him; and every one that has received him, may know himself to be the Son of
God. This I shall insist upon, hoping you will excuse me, though I be a little
large in it. To help you in your search, I shall endeavor to show, what it is
to receive Jesus Christ aright, because your sonship hangs upon the having,
or not having, Jesus Christ.

Give me leave therefore to tell you, First, What it Supposes. Secondly, What
it Includes. Thirdly, What it Produces. That by laying all together, ye may
come to some estimate of your own condition.


First, It Supposes certain Acts of the Understanding. Secondly, It Includes
certain Acts of the Will. Thirdly, It produces certain Effects, to bear
witness to the truth of the former Acts.
First, Receiving Christ supposes certain Acts, of men's 1. To receive Christ,
supposes certain Acts of the Understanding.
understanding their Graces. Father, sanctify them through thy truth, thy Word
is truth. I say, certain acts of the understanding; namely, certain due
apprehensions concerning diverse particulars I shall name to you, which, in an
ordinary course, we come to have the knowledge of, before we come to receive
Christ. I speak not, what the work of God has in the souls of Infants, when he
conveyeth Christ to them; but in an ordinary course, when men and women come to
years, there are certain precedent apprehensions of the understanding.

First, Concerning the Person and Office of Jesus Christ. 1. The Person and
Office of Christ is to be understood.
No man receives he knows not what. We receive not Christ till we desire
him, Ignoti nulla cupido; and we desire him not, till we know him. The soul
first comes, by the Spirit of Christ, to have some apprehensions wrought
concerning the Person of Christ; to know him as God-Man, the Word made flesh.
The Man-God, only Suffering as Man, Satisfying as God. There lies much in
this, in the right apprehension of Christ's Person, which is the object of our
faith, as it justifyeth. As they say of marriage-contracts, If there be a
mistake of the person, the Contract is not valid; as, if by some way of deceit,
when the Contract comes to be made up, another woman be brought in the habit
and room of that party, to whom the man intends to contract himself, here is
an error of person. As it was with Laban, that gave, to Jacob, Leah under
color of Rachell, and that made void the marriage. How can a soul be married
to Christ, and mistake the person? and not know what Christ is, nor acknowledge
his Godhead? Here is an error of the person. Christ is another kind of person,
than they take him for. As there must be knowledge of the person of Christ, so
of his office too.

We must know him as the great Priest, our sacrifice. No other sacrifice would
have served our turn, and none could have offered that sacrifice but himself.
The Eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God. The Priest
sacrificing, and The Priest interceding.


These are the two great parts of his Priestly office.

And so know him as our Prophet, guiding us by the Word. This is my beloved
Son, hear him, guiding us by his spirit, We shall be all taught of God. And as
King, ruling us, and subduing our Enemies under his feet.

Secondly, It supposes due apprehensions about the nature, 2. It supposes due
apprehensions about the nature and danger of sin.
and danger of sin. For till men have some consideration about this, they do
not use to look out for a Savior. Therefore the first thing the spirit of God
does, when he comes to convert, is to convince, He shall convince the World of
sin, because they believed not on me. To let men see sin, as for its nature
extremely odious. That there are two great evils in it, Aversion fron God, and
Conversion to Sin defined.
the Creature, Jer. 2. 13. Ye have committed two great evils; by forsaking Me,
the fountain of living waters, and hewing to your selves Cisterns, yea broken
Cisterns, that will hold no water.

And for the danger of it; It is such as exposes men to eternal death. And
till this be seen, there will be no 3. It supposes due apprehensions about the
necessity of a Savior.
looking out for Remedy; where Justice is, wages must be paid. Now God is just,
therefore sin is dangerous.

Thirdly, It supposes due apprehensions about the necessity of a Savior,
which follows upon the sight of sin, Acts 16. 30. The convinced Jailer cried
out, Sirs, what shall I do to be saved? Till men come to be sensible of their
spiritual drought, they never look out for the waters of life. It is not every
cut-finger that causes a man to send to the Surgeon; nor every headache,
that makes him to go to the Physician: but when he is wounded, when he is sick
to death, then send for the Surgeon, for the Physician; when sin lies heavy
upon the soul, then they make out for Christ. Those that scoffed at Noah, all
the while he was building the Ark, when the Deluge was come indeed, when they
saw no other shift; then they cried out, A World for an Ark. When we are ready
to be turned over the Ladder, pardon then, is pardon indeed.

Fourthly, It supposes some due apprehensions about 4. It supposes, no
salvation by any thing or person but by Christ.
the utter impossibility of obtaining salvation by any thing, or by any person,
but by Christ alone. That which Peter taught, Acts 4. 12. Neither is there
salvation in any other, for there is no other Name under Heaven, given amongst
men, by which we must be saved. If there were another way open for salvation,
then there were no such necessity of receiving Christ; but seeing this is not
only a way, but the only way of Gods appointment: seeing, as Naomi once said
to her daughters in Law, when they would needs follow her. Why, says she,
Ruth. 1. 11. Have I any more sons in my Womb, that they may be your Husbands?
So, Has God any more sons in the Womb of his Eternal decree, but Christ
alone, that they may be Mediators for us; Seeing there is no Savior, but He,
therefore there is an utter impossibility of obtaining salvation by any other
person, or thing besides. When the soul comes to see this, it makes way for
the receiving of Christ. As for all the Creatures, David says, No man can by
any means redeem the soul of his brother from death, he must let that alone for
ever. There is no man, or means, or ordinances, but all say of salvation, as
Job brings them in, speaking of wisdom, Job 28. 13, 14, 15. Where shall
wisdom be found? where is the place of understanding? Men know not the price
thereof, nor is it found in the Land of the living. The deep says, It is not
in me, and the sea says, It is not with me; It cannot be got for Gold, neither
shall Silver be weighed for the price thereof. So may I say of Salvation, Who
knows the price thereof? where shall salvation be found? where is the place
of happiness? The Law says, It is not in me. Duties say, It is not in us.
Ordinances say, We cannot give it. Why? It must come only from Jesus Christ.
Therefore the spirit of God usually lets souls see an utter impossibility of
salvation, by any other, than by Christ.

Fifthly, It supposes after all this, a due apprehension 5. It supposes
pardon in and through Christ.
of a probability of obtaining pardon, and grace, in and through Christ. And
this sets the soul a moving toward him, and is an inducement, as to the
humble soul, Lament. 3. 29. To lay its mouth in the dust; if so be, there may
be hope. As to those Mourners in Joel, Joel. 2. 14. Who knows, if God will
return, and repent, and leave a blessing behind him? Here is endeavor arising
from probability. So the Ninevites in the prophecy of Jonah, Jonah 3. 9. Who
can tell if God will turn, and repent of his fierce wrath, that we perish not?
Faith puts it to the venture, and puts it self upon the free grace of
God in Christ for Four grounds of probability to obtain pardon.
mercy; as having a probability, founded upon these four grounds of obtaining
pardon.

First, Upon the abundant goodness of God, of which you 1. The abundant
goodness of God.
read, Psalm. 130. 7. Let Israel hope in the Lord: Why? for with the Lord is
mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption. There is abundant mercy, and
plenteous redemption with God, therefore Israel may hope. This appears to be
the mercy of an Infinite God, therefore he can pardon, and take away the sins
of a finite Creature; here is one ground.

Secondly, Probability of success: It is founded upon the 2. The powerful
Mediation of Jesus Christ.
powerful Mediation of Jesus Christ, Hebr. 7. 25. He is able to save to the
uttermost, those that come to God by Him, seeing he ever lives, to make
Intercession for them. His blood like a mighty Ocean, is able to overflow, as
it were, the mighty Rocks, as well as the lowest Sand. The Sun of
Righteousness is able to scatter the thickest Clouds, as well as the
slenderest mists.

Thirdly, Upon the free and gracious breathings of the 3. The free breatheings
of the holy Ghost.
Holy Ghost, Joh. 3. 8. The wind blows where it lists, thou hear the
sound thereof, and know not whence it comes, nor whither it goes. So it is
with the Spirit. It has breathed in others, and may breathe in thee, when it
pleases him. And therefore the soul resolves hopefully to wait on God, till
the Spirit shall be pleased to breathe upon him; and to that end, it seeks
him in all the means, wherein he is wont to breathe; because the soul knows,
it is just that the Spirit of God should not breathe in any, if he be not
sought in all. If they neglect some one means, the influence of Grace may be
withheld. If any one of the Pipes be cut, the water comes not home to the
Cistern. And God is wont to convey grace to us, by so many Ordinances, as by so
many Pipes; if one Ordinance be neglected, it is just with God to withdraw his
grace. If a soul will hear, but not pray; if he neglects any one Ordinance,
God may refuse to breathe. Therefore the soul groundeth probability upon the
free breathings of the Spirit.

Fourthly, Upon the example of many that have been 4. Upon the example of many
converted before.
converted before. It sees the example of the perishing of a multitude of
sinners, in the story of the Ninivites; and of a multitude of sins, in the
story of Mary Magdalen; and knows the story of mercy, Such were some of you;
but ye are washed, and cleansed, and sanctified, by the Lord Jesus Christ, in
the Spirit of God. These are the apprehensions which our Savior Christ
supposes. All these, more or less, in an ordinary course, taken with
limitation.

Secondly, There are certain acts of the Will, which the 2. It supposes
several Acts of the Will.
receiving of grace includes, which are specially these two: First, a present
choosing of Christ, upon Conjugall terms. Secondly, a trusting on him for ever
after.

First, Receiving of Christ includes in it a present choosing 1. Receiving
Christ, includes our choosing him for our Husband.
of Christ for our Husband, upon Conjugall terms. I take that Metaphor, as
most easy to express it by, because he is received under many notions, and
under this amongst others. As a Wife receives the Man in marriage, so the Soul
receives Christ. It is a Choice, and present Choice, and a present Choice upon
Conjugall terms. This is an act of the Will; Choosing belongs to the Will.
When the Will is enabled by the Spirit of Christ, to choose him for his All in
all, and to make a present choice of him; they are terms, not of the Future,
but of the Present Tense, that make a Marriage. It is not, I promise to make
thee my Wife in time to come, that makes a Contract; but, I do take thee to my
Wife, this is to make a Marriage. It is not to take Christ when I am rich, or
older; but it must be a present choosing of him, that makes the Match: And it
must be upon honorable terms, such as a woman takes the husband upon, so as
to forsake father and mother, and cleave to the husband. Christ did so for us,
and we must do so for Christ. Christ forsook his Father, in some sense, and
came and emptied himself; forsook Heaven, and came down to us. The Word was
made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, that so he might be wedded to his Church upon
earth. There is something like that, we have to do for Christ; the Soul must
forsake all for Christ. As it is said of the Spouse, Psalm. 45. 10. Hearken, O
daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear; forget also thine own people,
and thy father's house. So shall the King desire thy beauty. There must be a
forsaking of our former lusts, and former ways, and former carelessness; a
leaving of all to cleave to Christ. That you may understand it better, allude
to that of Hos. 14. 3. Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses,
neither will we say any more to the works of our hands, Ye are our gods. For in
thee the fatherless finds mercy. Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any
more with Idols? So, when the Soul comes to close with Jesus Christ, The Law
shall not save us, we will not rest upon our own Duties, our services shall not
be our Saviors, the means of grace shall not be our Mediators: What have we to
do any more with Idells? and the lusts of our former ignorance, and
intemperancy, and wantonness, etc? Here a choosing of Christ supposes a
separation from all things else, and a cleaving to him: Being joined to the
Lord, we are one spirit, as the Apostle's phrase is; cleaving to him, so as to
be subject to him, that is, on conjugall terms, on which Christ is to be
received. Ephesians. 4. 24. Therefore as the Church is subject to Christ, so let
the wives be to their own husbands in every thing. We should choose his Yoke as
well as his Crown; his Spirit to guide us, as well as his Blood to redeem us;
to be subject to him, as well as to be protected by him. This is the first
thing included in the receiving of Christ, namely, a present choosing of Christ
upon Conjugall terms.

Secondly, Trust in him for ever after, as our God; so says 2. To trust in him
for ever after, as our God.
the Text, (...), to trust, that is, Continue to believe in his name; because
every one that has received him, continues to believe, continues to trust,
and to rely upon him, and stay himself upon his God, and to lean upon his
Beloved, as the phrase is in the Canticles. As a woman that has got an
husband, has one to trust to for provision, and direction, and protection. If
David's wives be taken away, he will rescue them; if Ahasuerus his wife be in
danger of Haman's plots, her husband will relieve her. The Soul, before
marriage to Christ, was liable to all old debts, the Law had a saying to her,
the Devil had a plea against her; but now she is married, all is laid upon
Christ. No action lies against the wife. Now the soul has an husband, and
accordingly she trusts in Christ, and sends the Devil to Christ her Husband
for an answer. Thus you see what it Supposes and Includes.

Thirdly, See what it Produces, namely, Certain Effects, 3. It supposes
certain Effects, to witness the truth of the former Acts. 1. Receiving Christ
produces Love.
that bear witness to the truth of the former Acts, to make it appear, there
were true Apprehensions in the Understanding, and true Acts in the Will; and
they are diverse.

First, The true receiving of Christ, wheresoever it is, it produces a Prizing
Love, in the first place. It is impossible, but that the soul which has
received Christ indeed, should prize him and love him, because of the beauty
and excellency in him, 1 John 4. 16. compared with verse. 19. We have known and
believed the love that God has given to us. Then follows, We love him,
because he first loved us. Where there is a knowing and believing of God's love
to us, there will be a reciprocal love from us to God. To him that believes
in Christ, Christ is precious. It is not only a love, but a prising love. 1
Pet. 2. 7. To you therefore which believe, he is precious. They that have
received Christ indeed, will set a price upon him, howsoever others value him.
Judas, though he did converse with him, not having received him by faith, What
a price sets he upon him? the price of a Slave, thirty pieces of silver, the
very price that was to be given by a man, that had bought a slave to be his
servant: a goodly price. The Jews that bought him, and Judas that sold him,
make no more of Christ but thus. Now take the Soul, which has indeed received
him, and knows what is in him; such a soul will not set Christ to sale, no,
not upon any terms. Offer her Preferments, Estates, and Kingdoms, and Worlds;
A goodly price for Christ, the soul will say! No, he is infinitely more worth
then all these. To you that believe, Christ is precious, because ye have
received him.

Secondly, It produces a watchful Fear. Whenever 2. It produces a
watchful fear.
the soul receives Christ, it will be afraid to lose him. Having received a
Kingdom that cannot be moved, says the Apostle, Heb. 12. ult. let us have
grace to serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear. One would think,
all fear were now over. No, fear so much the more. The Gospel, that is the
Kingdom of Heaven, which is often so called in Scripture; and it is a Kingdom
that cannot be moved. The Law, that was taken away; but the Gospel, that
cannot be moved, no alteration of that: We must never look for another Gospel,
than what is evidently laid down in Scripture. A man that has received this
Gospel, has received Jesus Christ in it. For this Manna comes down in the
dew of heaven, Christ in the ministry of the Gospel. And having received this
Kingdom, we shall not be moved. Having received Jesus Christ, let us serve him
with reverence and god'y fear, says the Scripture. There will be a fear, where
there has been a receiving of Christ; Kiss the Son. Serve him with fear, and
rejoice with trembling, Psalm. 2. 11, 12. I will allude to Act. 3. 11. ye read
there in the foregoing Verse, of a Creeple, that was healed by Peter and John,
And immediately his feet and ankle bones received strength, and he stood up and
praised God. What does the man mean now, to leave his leaping and skipping, and
come and clasp about Peter and John? In all likelihood, because he was afraid,
when they were gone, his lamenesse would return again to him. Such a
disposition there is in every soul that receives Christ, it is sensible of its
having received health, and strength, and comfort from him: Now, lest his
former lamenesse should return, lest the lusts of his former ignorance should
again prevail, and those terrors of conscience under which it lay, should come
again; the soul is desirous to hold Christ so, as never to let him go. Not that
a soul that has once received Christ, can lose him for ever; but because,
though it cannot wholly lose his presence, yet it may lose a great deal of its
comfortable communion, which it had with Christ, and God in him. Therefore
there will be a watchful fear, lest we should lose those sweet embracements
which we have had from Christ.

Thirdly, This receiving of Christ in truth, produces a 3. It produces a
spiritual life.
spiritual life. He that has the Son has life, he that has not the Son has
not life, 1 John 5. 12. Men are now other kind of creatures than before, they
have motion from another principle then they had before. As, where there is
life, the soul sets the body a working. So, when the soul has Christ, it
receives life, and motion, and appetite, and sense, and grouth from him. This,
true receiving of Christ, produces.

Fourthly, As there is a prising Love, a watchful Fear, and 4. I^ produces
fruit to God.
a Spiritual life; so, It produces fruit to God. Every soul that has
received Christ, is more or less a fruitful soul; and does not render fruit
to it self as formerly, but to God, aiming at him and his glory in what it
does. And this follows upon the former. I told you, It was receiving of
Christ upon Conjugall terms, as a woman receives an husband. And this you
must know, that Christ has always issue by his wives; The Lord Jesus has no
barren Spouse. Every one that receives Christ for an husband, he has issue by
her; that soul brings forth fruit to God, as the Apostle's phrase is; and it
follows upon the marriage, in that expression, Romans 7. 4. Wherefore ye also
are become dead to the Law in the body of Christ, that ye should be married to
another; to God, in that marriage.

Again, It produces society with Christ, Conjugall society, when he has been
received upon Conjugall terms. Husbands 5. It produces Conjugall society with
Christ.
dwell with your Wives, says Peter, 1 Pet. 3. Christ dwells with such a
soul, such a soul converseth with Christ. As it is said of Isaac and Rebecca,
Genesis 26. 8. Abimeleck King of the Philistines looked out at a window, and saw,
and behold Isaac was sporting with Rebecca his Wife. And he concluded from
thence that she was his wife, because he saw her sporting with him, in private.
The soul that has truly received Christ, will solace it self with Christ in
private; not only enjoy him in public Ordinances in the sight of the World,
but in private Communion with him, even in the private duties of his worship.
There will be a society with him.

Lastly, There will be an expectation producing all good 6. It produces
expectation of all good, in, through, and from him.
things in him, and through him, and from him. For he that has not spared his
own Son, but gave him to death for us all, how shall he not, together with him,
give us all good things? Romans 8. 32. He that has Christ, has got the
Fountain, His blood is a fountain opened, in Zachary. He that has the
fountain, may have what water he stands in need of; be it more, or be it
less, be it a dish full, or a paile full, or a Cistern-full: as long as he
has the fountain, he may have what he wants. So it fares with the soul that
has Christ, the soul expects all things from him, for this, and a better
life, only with this caution; That she must make account to him. Expectation
implies a waiting that foll weth upon belief, Isai. 28. 16. Behold, says the
Lord, Expectation defined.
I lay in Sion a corner stone, a precious stone, a sure foundation: he that
believes shall not make haste; Christ now being received, is full of grace. In
Him are all treasures, both of wisdom, and knowledge, and of grace, and
pardon; suppose some of these be not immediately communicated, he that
believes makes not haste. It is in Him, in Christ, therefore I may be content
to wait, I shall have it when he sees his own time; Waiting is a spiritual
expectation of believers; as believing is, of having received. As put case, a
place is void at Court, and two men are suitors for it. One rides, Day and
Night, and tireth Horse after Horse, and makes more haste than good speed, for
fear the place should be gone. The other he takes his leisure, goes to the
Court, but slowly, Why? because he has had the Prince's promise before, and he
knows he has such, and such friends at Court, that will put the King in mind
of it; Which of these two has the better hope? Not he that makes the most
haste, but the other. He confideth, the place shall be his, because he trusts
to the Prince's promise, and relieth upon his friends at Court. I see at
length, we have got to an end of this particular; I beseech you, bring your
souls to this touchstone. Try your selves, whether you have received Christ,
or no, and whether ye be sons, and daughters or no, by what ye receive of
Christ. Suppose, we say. Have thou ever had any due, and serious apprehensions
of the person, and office of Jesus Christ? Have thou been convinced of the
nature and danger of sin? and, upon such conviction, made to see the necessity
of a Savior? The utter impossibility of obtaining salvation, by any thing, or
person, but Christ alone? And have thou after this, seen a probability of
having pardon and grace from Christ, because of the abundant goodness of God,
the Father, and the powerful mediation of God the Son, and the free and
gracious breathings of God the Holy Ghost? Have thou now thrown thy self into
the arms of Christ, or laid thy self at his feet, and say, if I die, I will
die there: as the poor Lepers said, when they went to the Camp of the
Assyrians. If we stay here, we must perish; if we go thither, we can but
perish. Certainly, if we stay in this condition, we must be damned, we will put
it to that, to go to Christ, he can but damn us. We have heard, that the Kings
of Israel, are merciful Kings, and therefore, Benhadad says, we will put
ropes about our necks, and go to him? Have thou acknowledged, that it is just
with God to damn thee, and yet have hope in Israel's God? Have thou said with
Hester, I resolve to go to him, and lay hold upon the golden Scepter, and if I
perish, I perish? Better perish in a way of expectation, then to do, as I do.
Try it, by what this receiving of Christ includes. Was there not a time,
wherein thy Soul made choice of Christ for her Husband, with resolution in the
attendance on Christ to forsake all, and cleave to him; and subject to him in
all things? To receive Jesus Christ, as Lord, not only as Jesus, to deliver
thee from the wrath to come, but as Lord, to be ruled and governed by him? Have
thou learned to trust in him for the payment of all thy debts, and discharge of
all thy sins? to send Law, and Divill to Christ for an answer? Try, what this
receiving of Christ is, by what it produces. Where is thy prizing love to
Christ? Is it more to thee, then thousand worlds? where is thy watchfullnesse?
If thou have a Jewel about thee, thou will take heed, what Company thou come
into. A man that has treasure about him, will be more careful to avoid the
society of Robbers, then such as have no money in their purses; If thou have
received Christ, thou have a Treasure. Oh take heed of coming into such
company, as may occasion the withdrawing of Christ from thee. Where is thy
spiritual life, if thou have received him? Do thou grow, as living things
do? Have thou an Appetite to the word? Do thou desire the sincere milk of the
Word? What fruit do thou bring forth? Is it fruit to God? Has Christ any
Issue by thy soul? what society have thou with Christ? Is there any solacing
thy self in Meditation, and Prayer, and secret Communion between Christ, and
thy soul? And then, do thou expect all things from him? And can thou wait
till God's time comes, to make good all his promises, which are all yea, and
amen, in Christ? I shall leave these things with you, Consider them, And the
Lord give you understanding in all things.

Let us now go on to a further use of Consolation from Use of consolation.
hence, and after that, to the next verse. As there were no going to sea for
any man with Comfort, if there were not some Havens, and Harbors to strike
into, in a storm; so no living in the World, if there were not some comfort to
be fetched from Heaven. Look through all the Scriptures, and ye will hardly
find a safer harbor than this, The relation between God, and believers. He is
their Father, they his Children. They receive Christ, and so become sons. This
will afford comfort to us in several Cases, which I shall briefly run over.

First, In case of weak abilities and performances, when they shall think that
God is their Father, and therefore is 1. Receiving Christ affords comfort in
case of weak Performances.
willing to bear with them, though their performances be but weak, and their
abilities small; according to that, Psalm. 102. 13, 14. Like as a father
pittieth his children, so the Lord pittieth them that fear him. For he knows
our frame, he remembers that we are but dust. God consider; what mould we are
made of, that we are Men, and not Angels; sinful men, and not men in a state
of Perfection. Therefore when we follow on to know him, and go lamenting after
the Lord, as it is said of the men of Israel, Jer. 9. though God discover a
great deal of weakness in our services, yet we find a great deal of acceptance
in him, when he looks upon us as children. The truth is, though our faith be
weak, our God is strong; and from thence comes our safety. As, when a father
carries his little child in his arms, the Infant, with his little feeble
arms, lays hold upon the father; but the safety lies in the father's holding
him, and not in his clasping about the father. So, we hold Christ by the feeble
arm of our faith, but Christ holds us more strongly by his Spirit, and our
safety comes from thence. It is true, our faith is weak, and so our services
are accordingly weak; but still look at God as a Father. Suppose a man have a
son in foreign parts, sent abroad for his education; before he has well
learned the Language, he writes a Letter home to his father. He is but a
scribler, what he writes is written but in broken language, and badly writ.
But it comes from a child, and therefore the father takes it well, and
passes by all the faults. The father bids the child shoot at such a mark;
the child draws the bow, and lets go; the arrow falls a great deal
short of the mark; yet he is encouraged by the father, because he has done his
best. As men are in a condition of belief, so accordingly in a condition of As
our Faith is, so is our Comfort.
comfort. If I can but go to God as a Father, though with a great deal of
infirmity, I may hope to find success. Indeed, Lord, Lord, is often sent away
without a blessing; they cried, Lord, Lord, and had no blessing. But, Father,
Father, that always proceeds from the Spirit of Adoption, by which we cry
Abba. Father; that is never sent away without an answer. Deus non negavit sua
petentibus, says Augustine sweetly; God, that freely offers himself to those
that ask not for him, will be sure to give his good things to them that ask
him, because he is their Father.

Secondly, As in the first place; it ministers comfort thus, 2. In case of
sinful failings.
in case of weak abilities and performances; so, In case of sinful failings. We
are not only weaklings, but sinners in what we do. But yet, Look at God as a
Father, and consider that, Mal. 3. 13. I will spare them, as a father spares
his own son that serves him. If we be sons, serving-sons, that go on to serve
our Father, according to what we have received from him; he will spare us, as a
man spares his son that serves him. Doubtless, many are here, that know the
bowels of parents; let those that do not, consider David's carriage toward
his sinful son Absalom. Absalom takes up arms against his father, and
endeavors to deprive him of his Estate, Crown, and Life. An Army comes
against him, and messengers come and tell David, that Absalom is overthrown.
What enquiry does David make? How fares it with the Host? No, but, Is the
young man Absalom well? And when a second messenger came, and told him, Absalom
was slain, How do his bowels break out at his mouth! My son Absalom, my son,
would God I had died for thee. Let us judge, by this, how God looks at a
failing child, whose bowels are infinitely much more large, than those of
David's. Ye know the Parable of the Prodigal, Luke 15. he had run a wild
course; but resolving with himself to take up, I will go to my father, says
he, and say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee. He
does so. And this word [Father] breaks the heart of him, to whom he made his
address, as ye know the story, He fetched the robes, and the ring, and killed
the fatted calf. Though a prodigal, yet a son still. Our Savior knew the
comfort of this Relation, and therefore directs us to make use of it in his
Prayer, Our Father which art in heaven, for give us our trespasses. That is a
melting word, and therefore this must needs be a comfortable Relation.

Thirdly, This affords Comfort to Believers, In case of 3. In case of
temporal sufferings.
temporal sufferings, and want, and losses, and dangers. Whatsoever our
sufferings be, they come from a Father. And the holy Ghost calls upon us
again and again to consider that, Deuteronomy. 8. 5. Thou shall a so consider in thy
heart, that as a man chastises his son, so the Lord thy God chastises thee.
The father will call for a rod to correct his son, but will not turn him out of
doors. Ye have it at large, Heb. 12. from the 5th. verse to the 11th. Ye have
forgot the exhortation which speaks to you as unto children, My son, despise
not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him;
for whom the Lord loves he chastises, and scourges every son whom he
receives. For they verily for a few days chastise us at their pleasures, but
he for our profit, that we might be partakers of the holiness of God. All
chastisements tend, to make men partakers of the holiness of God. As for the
wants of Believers, whatsoever they be, here is comfort for them, they do not
want a Father. It is the great consolation that Christ gave to his Disciples,
when he was to depart from them, in regard of his corporal presence, Joh. 14.
18. I will not leave you comfortless, but I will come to you: That is, (...),
as the word in the Original signifies; I will not leave you orphans, or
fatherless. A child, though he be a son and heir, yet in his minority is often
kept short; a servant, happily, the steward of a family, has as good allowance
as he. The children of Christ here are in minority, therefore they are in some
wants; but here is their comfort, they have an inheritance laid up for them,
and that is a rich one. They are now in their nonage, when they come to heaven,
they shall have enough. In all dangers let it be considered, what care their
Father takes for them, because they are his children. Are they not all
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of
salvation? An heir of a great family, what shall he need to fear, so long as he
is conversing among his fathers servants? All the creatures are such to God;
and thou being a child, thou art amongst thy Father's servants, and therefore
need to fear no danger from them.

Fourthly, In case of spiritual faintings, and fears, and 4. In case of
spiritual faintings, fears, and desertion*
desertions. The soul of a believer sometimes faints away for fear; David
says, My heart and flesh fail me. Here is now a swounding child, consider what
fathers are wont to do in such cases, how they send out for help presently; all
the house is little enough to look after a child in such a condition. God
himself pittieth his swounding children, and sends his Ministers, yea, his
own Spirit, to speak comfort to such, and to administer some Aquavitae to them,
some water of life, that he may fetch them again out of their faintings.
Sometimes fear possesses a child of God, perhaps of falling into desertion,
as, it is possible, such may befall the dearest of God's Saints, as with Heman,
who thought himself free amongst the dead. God sometimes does this, but sal.
88. 5.
still as a Father. As a father, that sees his child ready to run into a
river, or into the mire, he will take the child, and make him believe he will
throw him in, but it is to make him fearful of being thrown in. So, God makes
his children believe, that he will throw them into hell it self; but it is for
this very end and purpose, that they may never come there, for this fear will
keep them from the ways of hell. Yea, sometimes God is pleased to desert his
own children, Sion says, My God has forgotten me, as it is in Isaiah; but
then it is no more, but as when a father goes behind a door, and suffers his
child to cry after him, and hides himself on purpose to try the affections of
the child, to make him the more eager in the pursuit of his father; which done,
then he discovers himself. Just so it is with God, He withdraws the light
of his countenance, not on purpose to keep it so for ever, but to make it more
endeared to his children. As the Prophet speaks, In a little while I hid Isa.
54. 8.
my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have
mercy on thee, says the Lord thy God, and thy Redeemer.

Lastly, Here is comfort in case of approaching death, a 5. In case of
approaching death.
time when men stand much in need of comfort, when they are to leave all their
outward comforts in this world; therefore they had need of better. Now if a man
can say in assurance of faith, as Christ did, Father, I commend my spirit Luke
23. 46.
into thy hands; Here is an everlasting consolation, a Fort that all the
devils in hell cannot batter. A man that in his lifetime has got
acquaintance with God, may, with confidence, commend his soul to God as to a
Father, when he dies. Other people may leave an estate behind them, and men
may look after that. A man may commend his estate to his friend, and his body
to the grave, and some may have so much charity as to interr that: But whom
shall he commend his soul to? It is not for every man to think, to commend his
spirit to God with confidence: Upon what acquaintance, will God say, can you do
this? Will we trust our Jewels to any, but our best friends? will we put them
into the hands of those, that we never saw in our lives? No. But a man that
has known God for his Father, he will with confidence say, Father, into thy
hands I commend my spirit; I do not only lay my Jewel at thy feet, but put it
into thy hands, that so it may be safe in thy custody. I commend it into thy
hands, out of which, all the devils in hell shall never be able to pull it.
With this confidence, Paul believed. Happy is that soul that is able to say, as
our Savior did, before his Ascension, to his Disciples, I go to my Father, and
to your Father, and to my God and your God. When a man is able to look his
friends in the face, though with a dying look, and shall say, Be of good
comfort, I shall be no loser; I go to my Father, and your Father. Blessed are
the people that are in Joh. 20. 17.
such a case. Blessed are the people whose God is the Lord. Blessed are the
people that have received Jesus Christ aright, and so are become sons of
Adoption. I have now done with that Point, and shall go on.

Verse. 13. Which were born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of
the will of man, but of God.
This verse contains a further description of them that received Christ. They
were described in the 12 Verse by their faith. And in this 13 Verse, they are
described, by their birth. To them that believe in his Name, which were born
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

Their birth: concerning which, we are here told, First, what is not the
efficient Cause of it. Secondly, what is.


First, what is not the efficient Cause of it.

Three things are here removed.

1. Blood. 2. The will of the flesh. 3. The will of man.
Secondly, what is: God, and God only. I shall take the Clauses, as they lie
in order.

First, I shall show; That Believers, as such, are not born of blood. Secondly,
That they are born, not of the will of the flesh. Thirdly, not of the will of
man. But, Fourthly, they are born of God.
First, Believers, as such, They are not born of blood, 1. Believers are not
born of blood.
what is that?

Ye know in our ordinary manner of speech, we are used to make mention, of base
blood, Noble blood, blood Royal; and accordingly, they are said to be born of
blood, to intimate, that they have not grace from their Ancestors. It does not
come to them by descent. We say of many diseases, that such, and such, come of
a blood, because they are derived from parents. They are not born of blood; to
show that the work of grace is not derived from one's Ancestors. Therefore the
word in the original is, (...), we are not born of bloods. We may think it on
purpose to be put in, to meet with that mistake of the bragging of the Jews,
who still boast to be the sons of Abraham, Joh. 6. Now because, they did not so
much bear themselves upon their immediate Progenitors, as upon their
Forefathers far remote; Therefore the Apostle says, not of blood, of
immediate parents, nor of parents long before born: It came from neither of
these. It is an usual manner of speech. As he speaks of a man, that bragged
of his birth, Longo sanguine sincere, To fetch Commendations from the blood of
our Progenitors, of the blood of many genetations together. So that the meaning
of this phrase is, That the new birth comes not by propagation, Grace comes
not by descent, Not of blood. If it had gone along with the Kindred, Certainly,
so holy a Virgin as Mary was, yea, the holy One himself, Christ Jesus, would
not have had any unholy people of his Kindred. And yet such there Three
demonstrations, that believers are not born of blood. 1. Because good parents,
have bad, as well as good Children. 2. Because bad parents have good Children,
and good parents bad Children in a line. 2 Chronicles. 28. 27. 2 Chronicles. 32. 33. 2 Chronicles. 32. 25. 2 Chronicles. 36. 1. 3. Because, the younger many times has the
greatest share in spiritual things. Genesis 4. 4. Genesis 21. 14. Romans 9. 13.
were, John 11. 10. Neither did his Brethren believe in Him.

I shall give you three Demonstrations to make it appear That believers, as
such, are not born of blood.

First, Because many good parents, have bad Children, as well as good ones.
Adam had Cain, as well as Abel. And Abraham, Ismael, as well as Isaac. And
Isaac, Esau, as well as Jacob. And Jacob had Simeon and Levi, as well as Joseph
and Benjamin.

Secondly, It appears, because sometimes good parents have bad Children, and
bad parents have good Children, in a line. Look into the Chronicles, ye shall
find that bad Ahaz had good Hezechiah, good Hezechiah had wicked Manasses, so
he was for a great part of his life. And wicked Manasses, had good Josiah; and
good Josiah, had wicked Jehoaz. Good parents, bad Children, and bad Children,
good parents.

Thirdly, It appears, because the younger many times has the greater share
in spiritual things, whereas, if grace were a natural privilege, the
greatest share would go to them first. The firstborn in all natural
privileges, has a double portion. But the Scriptures, and many times our own
experiences will show, that the firstborn has the least share here;
therefore, this is not a natural privilege. God accepted Abel the younger,
and not Cain. Isaac finds more acceptance then Ismael. God loved Jacob the
younger, and hated Esau the elder, and so in many other instances. Grace does
not come by propagation, Believers are not born of blood.

Whereas, it may be objected, that Parents beget Children Adam, Genesis 5. 3. He
begot a son in his own Likeness, after his own Image. Therefore it should
seem, that godly Parents must needs have godly Children; otherwise, how do they
beget them, after their own Image?

The answer is easy. They beget Children, as men, not, Saints. It is a certain
Rule, Personalia non propagantur. Things that are personal, are not
propagated. Now grace is a personal thing, not a natural thing. A learned,
and a godly man, begets a son, that is a man; but neither learned, nor
godly, because learning is an acquired habit, and godliness is infused. And a
man conveyeth what is natural, not what is acquired. He that is begotten of
him, is not a Scholar, much less a Saint; because holiness is supernatural,
beyond him. As it is with the Corn; it is threshed, and severed from the
Chafe, before it is sown, but then it brings forth the blade, and husk, and
afterward the ear of Corn. The Circumcised parent begets a Child, that is
born uncircumcised, because his Circumcision is not propagated. So it is here,
a father that is free from the power of sin* and guilt of sin, by the work of
grace upon his heart; yet begets a Child, that is contrary to both these.

How then is it said, That if the Root be holy, the branches are holy? That is
a further Objection, that ye have, Romans 11. 16. If the first fruits be holy,
the lump is also holy. If the root be holy, so also is the branches?

This is to be understood not of a personal holiness, Adam; and yet be holy,
in regard of the Covenant made in Abraham, That God would be his God, and the
God of his seed. Well then, if it be thus, that believers, as such, as are not
born of blood; Let it serve to take men off, from their boasting of their
Ancestors and Descent, of coming of this or that Family and Blood: It were
worth the bragging of, if Grace came by Propagation. But seeing it does not,
Non sanguine, sed virtute nitamur, Let us not rely upon Blood, but upon Virtue,
says the Heathen. Let me say, Upon Christ, and, in that sense, upon Blood,
There is one Blood we may rely upon, but it is the Blood of Christ, the Blood
of the everlasting Covenant; otherwise, there is no great difference in point
of Blood, between men and men. Act. 17. 26. God has made of one blood all
nations of men, that dwell on all the face of the earth. All men out of one
blood. The poorest Beggar comes from Adam, who was Lord of all the world, as
well as the greatest Potentate upon earth; so as No glorying in any blood, but
the Blood of Christ.
there is no glorying in any blood, but in the Blood of Christ; he that has a
conscience sprinkled with that, he has cause of glorying; He that glories,
let him glory in this, that he knows me. Says Prudentius, Sanguis Christi
facit hominem esse nobilem; That which makes a man noble; is, to have Christ's
Blood in him, it is to be one of Christ's followers. It was that that ennobled
the Beroeans, Act. 17. 11. These (speaking of the Beroeans) were more noble
than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness
of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily. The word in the Greek is, (...),
These were better born than those of Thessalonica. He is well born that is new
born. Here is a Blood to confide in. This is a Blood that cannot be tainted.
The best blood may be tainted, Great men may become Traitors, and so taint
their blood. Here is a Blood without possibility of tainture, that washes
white wheresoever it comes.

Secondly, Believers, They are not born of the will of the 2. They are not born
of the will of the flesh.
flesh. By the will of the flesh, I understand, the will of a man in the state
of corruption, as long as he is nothing but flesh; That which is born of the
flesh, is flesh, Joh. 3. And then the meaning is, That no man can attain Grace,
or the Newbirth, by the utmost improvement of his own free will, while he is
yet in the state of corruption. No man, by the utmost improvement of nature,
can raise himself to grace. No man, that is yet in the flesh, by the
improvement of the will of the flesh, can become a spiritual man. No creature
can raise it self to an higher rank of creatures; a Stone cannot make it self a
Tree, to have grouth and life; nor can a Tree make it self a Beast, to have
Sense; nor can a Beast make it self a Man, to have Reason; nor can a mere
Rational man make himself a Saint, by the improvement of his own Free Will, as
the holy Ghost tells us, Romans 9. 16. So then, it is not of him that wills,
nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy. Not of him that
wills, by desiring; nor of him that runs, by endeavoring; but of God that
shows mercy. He will have mercy on whom he will have mercy. Romans 9. 15.
He will have mercy on Sion, therefore he puts forth grace to make it free,
otherwise it would be in bondage for ever. This is the great question between
the Arminians, at this day, and us Protestants. The will of man does never
attain grace by its own liberty, but the will of man attaineth liberty by
grace. It is so far free, that the grace of God will make it free; otherwise,
it has no freedom at all to God, much less is it free to raise it self to a
state of grace. As we are not born of blood, so not of the will of the flesh.

That man is not able to do any thing that is good, by the power of his own
free will, I shall demonstrate it, by an Man cannot do good by the power of his
own free will.
argument taken from the impotency of the will of the flesh. The Apostle says
expressly, While we are without Christ, we are without strength, and so unable
to do any spiritual good, Romans 5. 6. When we were yet without strength, in due
time Christ died for the ungodly. No supernatural strength in a natural man.
The will of the flesh can but follow the guidance of the wisdom of the flesh;
now, the wisdom of the flesh, says Paul, that is enmity against God. Therefore
the will of the flesh never rises to friendship with him. Romans 8. 7, 8.
Because the carnal mind, (...), the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God,
for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. So then, they
that are in the flesh, cannot please God. This is a deep mystery, this of the
free will of man: but I am not willing to wade into the depth of the
Controversy; only I shall say something by the way to you.

Know therefore this, that at the first, the freedom of the Freedom of of
will, at first stood in indifferency to good, and evil.
will in intelligent creatures, Angels and Men, stood in an Indifferency to
good and evil; yet so, as look what way the will betaketh it self, to that it
shall be confined for time to come. If it choose good, it shall be permanent in
choosing good; if evil, it shall be able to choose nothing else. The good Angels
chose that which was good, and the bent of their hearts will continue the right
way; therefore now they are confirmed in goodness, and are free to nothing
else. The bad Angels, they chose what was evil; therefore they are now left to
the obduration of their own hearts, and can do nothing, nor will nothing, but
what is evil. Man, who though made in an holy state, yet was mutable; and
having a will subject to change, fell upon the worst part, chose evil, whereas
he might have chosen good; and ever since, all his posterity by nature are able
to do nothing else. Radix peccati, libertas; this freedom of will was the very
root, from whence the first sin sprung. Therefore, ever since the first fall,
the will has been deeper in evil than the understanding. The will is more a
verse from choosing good, than the mind from defiring good; as Medaea.
she said, -- video meliora, proboque Deteriora sequor -- Many things which our
judgments are against, our affections are inclined to. So that now, no man has
farther freedom of will to do good, than his will is made free by grace; so
much free grace as is communicated, so much free will a man has, and not a
whit more. The flesh contributeth nothing to the free will, to do good. Not of
the will of the flesh.

True indeed, in natural things, as eating and drinking; Freedom of will, in
things Natural and Civil, and Outward acts of Religion.
and civil things, as buying, and selling, and marrying, and giving in
marriage; there is a freedom of will to do this or that. It is true also, that
in the outward acts of Religion, the free will of man, assisted by
common-grace, may choose what is good. A man may will to go to Church, rather
than stay at home; and when he is there, he may listen to what is said, and
meditate of what he has heard; and when he is come home, repeat it. A great
deal of use men may have of this freedom, as to the outward act of Religion. It
is for want of improving that power, which God gives to men in such acts, that
they perish. But neither have men abilities, by the improvement of them, nor
free will, to do any of those acts, (when a man, by nature, cannot turn himself
to to any spiritual duty) in a spiritual way; That requires an assistance of
special grace. Neither have they abilities to do those more supernatural
acts, which immediately accompany salvation, in any measure, by the power of
their own free will; they cannot do any outward act of Religion well: The Bonum
and Been cannot be done, without special grace. As, Take an Hatchet that is
sharp; this, in the hand of a common man, will cut, because it has a capacity
that way; but to make a Table, or Stool, or Statue, that, requires influentiam
Artificis; it is not a common hand that can do that, there must be the hand of
an Artificer. So, though the free will of man may do an outward act, in the
worship of God; yet, to do this act well, requires a further influence, than
the common providence of God, assisting all his creatures. So it will be found
much more, if we come to those acts upon which salvation depends. Turning to
Christ, and believing in the Lord Jesus Christ, and loving God for himself;
these, the will of man improved, cannot rise to. No man can repent, till he be
turned, Jer. 39. 19. After that I was turned, I repented; first turned, and
then repented; not, I turned my self first, and repented afterward. As it was
in the first Creation, ye know what is said of Adam, Genesis 2. 23. The Lord God
formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrills the
breath of life, and man became a living soul. Here is a dust-heap, Can that
become a man? No, unless God breathe the breath of life. Here is an
unregenerate man, Can that man become regenerate? No, unless the same power
goes forth, to make a new creature here, that went forth in the first
Creation. Ephesians. 2. 10. We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto
good works. Creation was out of nothing, nothing in corrupt nature will serve
for the new building. There are the faculties and substance of the soul, that
God makes use God makes use of the Faculties, not of the Qualities of the Soul.
of; but the qualities, not one of them will serve. Old things are done away,
all things are become new, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 17. So as, when God
creates grace in the soul, he does something answerable to what he did, when
he breathed life into that dust. Only with this difference, God made Adam at
first in his full stature, a perfect man; whereas, when the new creature is
framed, there must be a growing up to perfection. There is a perfection of
parts indeed, in the first draught of the new creatures; not only a new heart,
but a new tongue, a new hand, and a new understanding, and will, but there
wants a perfection of degrees, which was in Adam. Therefore the Apostle
speaks of growing up to a full stature. But as to the thing in hand; There is
an utter inability in nature, to raise it self to grace, as in that dust, to
make it self a man.

Many Intricac^es are in this point. As I am loath to handle them, so, loath am
I, to wave them altogether; Only, because something happily may not be fit for
this Auditory, let us content our selves with this. That the same power, The
same power that made the Creature, must make the New Creature.
which made man at first, a Creature, must go to make him a New Creature. There
is none of that power in corrupt nature; therefore, men may not be born of the
will of the flesh, Ephesians. 1. 19. speaking of a mighty power, working in them
that believe. What is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward, who
believe, according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in
Christ, when he raised Him from the dead. The same power that went to the
Creation of man, the same power that went to the Resurrection of Christ, must
go to man's Conversion; Faith cannot be wrought without it. Therefore it is
called the faith of the operation of God, Col. 2. 12. Ye are risen with Him,
through the faith of the operation of God. Faith can neither be begotten,
without much power, nor continued without much power, 1 These. 1. 11. Fulfilling
all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with power. So
then, not to entangle our selves in this Controversy, let us make use of what
has been said.

Learn from hence, To detest all the dictates, and Tenants of the Adversaries
of the free grace of God; all To detest the Tenants of the adversaries of
Free Grace.
those Doctrines that ascribe our new birth, either in whole, or in part, to
the will of the flesh. The first great Heretics that were, struck all at the
disparagement of God, and their Heresies were against the Trinity of Persons,
or against the Divinity of Christ, or against the proceeding of the Holy Ghost;
something that concerned God. And when the Divill was beaten from this Hold, he
betook himself to a new one. He would not now disparage God, but advance Man;
as the Pelagians do. As if man by his own will, and liberty might make choice
of Christ. Hence it is, that the proud Dutch man, when he was urged with that
place of the Apostle; Who has made thee to differ? dared to return this
abominable speech (for I can call it no other) Who has made me to differ? Why,
Ego feci meipsum. I have made my self to differ. God gave me Blasphemy.
a power to will, but my will determined it self, to lay hold on Christ. Thus
to teach, That God gives a Posse velle, to have power to do good; but, when
grace has done all it can, a man is left to his own liberty, to choose, or
refuse; What is this, but to ascribe salvation to our selves, more than to God.

Secondly, The willing of good, is good. And a greater The willing of good is
good, etc.
only power to will from God, and have the will of what is good my self, I
give more to Will, than what is due to Grace. God does not only enable us to
will, if we please, but makes us willing, Phil. 2. 13. It is God which works
in you both to will and to do, of his good pleasure. Therefore, while others do
cry up the great Diana of the Pelagians and Arminians, Great is the Free Will
of Man, inabling to do great things for us; Let us, that profess our selves
Disciples of grace, rather cry as the builders of the second Temple, Zach. 4.
Grace, Grace, Great is the Grace of God. We are born not of the will of the
flesh, but of God.

Thirdly, As not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, 3. They are not born
of the will of men.
so not of the will of man. Some obscurity is in this phrase. It is something
hard to clear it, if we look only to our English expression. But know that
both in Hebrew, and in Greek, and Latin, are two words for Man. The one whereof
is raised much higher in its signification, than the other. In the Hebrew, Ish,
and Adam. In Greek, (...), and (...). In Latin, Vir, and Homo, Adam, and (...),
and Homo, These terms are put for man in his lowest condition; when they are
distinct one from another. I will not deny, but they may sometimes be used,
without that difference in Scripture. But now, Ish, and (...), and Vir, import
men of note, Eminent men. The word in the Text is (...), not of the will of
man. As before, he had excluded our own wills, from being able to bring us to
grace; so here, he excludes the will of others, be they never so eminent. Ish
is put for men of eminency, Genesis 45. 11. says Jacob to his Children, Carry
down the Man a present. That is, the Governor of the Land, Joseph. But above
all, an undeniable place is in the Prophe, where ye have both Ish, and Adam.
The mean man boweth down, and the great man humbles himself. Adam is the mean
Man. The great man, that is Ish. So for Homo, and Vir. It is a known story of
Diogenes, that went in the day time, with a Candle, and Lant-horn in the
streets, and being asked, Whither he went? says he, I go to seek a Man. The
reply was, There were enough in the Market place. Nay, says he; I see many
people, but I cannot find a Man amongst them all. As in English, we say, Such a
one, shows himself a Man, that is, exceeding worthily. So then, we are not
born of the will of men, that is, Men, how Eminent soever, be their fathers
never so godly, or Pastors never so able, or the Masters of the family, never
so Eminent. As our own wills cannot bring us to grace, so the will of others
cannot, how eminent soever they be. Men may wish us well, but they cannot
convey grace to us. This I take to be the meaning of this phrase, It is a
truth, that no man is born of the will of men. We may pray for one another, and
instruct one another, and spend many words, and tears, and prayers, for one
another; and yet cannot bring one another to grace for all this. Neither is it
in vain, that the Evangelist inserteth this Clause: Because it is the common
deceit of men; And all they have to show for the hope of salvation, is, that
they live in a good family, and have a godly Father, and a religious Mother, or
a careful Pastor, that takes a great deal of pains amongst them. Micah, what
a glad man was he, though he had been a Thief, Judges 2. 17. For he had stolen
eleven hundred shekles of Silver from his Mother, and he was an Idolater, Verse.
5. For he worshipped moulten gods: yet when he got a Minister to his mind,
Certainly, says he, now know I, that the Lord will do me good, seeing I have a
Levite to my Priest, as if the will of this man could have helped him to the
new birth.

But ye will say, one may be born of the will of men. Paul himself say, he had
begotten them. Though ye have many Teachers, ye have but one Father, says he,
for I have begotten you in Christ through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4. 15. Though ye
have ten Thousand Instructers in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers.
Therefore one may be born of men.

But for that, it is a matter of no great difficulty. The Paul, but yet they
were born of God. Paul was but God's Instrument, but a Remote Agent, the man
that brought them the Gospel: but that which begot them, was the Spirit that
came along from God in the Gospel. Paul begot them Instrumentally, God
Effic^ently. Though Paul was a powerful Minister, whence he had all his power,
you may see. He that wrought effectually in Peter, the same was mighty in me
toward the Gentiles. Paul's ministry was mighty. How came this to pass? Why,
Christ wrought effectually in Peter, and was mighty in Paul. Ministers may
preach out their Lungs, and spend their strength in vain, if God strike not in;
They may fish all night, and take nothing, as Peter did. It is Christ, that
stands at the door, and knocks, as it is in the Revelations, yea, and opens
the door, as well as knocks; God opened the heart of Lydia. Till Christ
speaks Ephata to the ears of men, all the preaching in the World will do them
little, or no good. Be the Charmer never so wise, the deaf Adder stops his
ear, till Christ speaks Ephata.

Come therefore, Let men learn from hence, not to presume Caution, not to
presume, because we live under the means of grace.
under the means by which they live, as if means of grace, should be Authors of
grace to them, as if they could be born of the will of men. Parents may put up
many prayers for their Children; and it is their duties so to do. These prayers
may be a ground of hope to the parents. As Ambrose told Monica, when she
acquainted him with the many tears, and prayers, she had put up for her
son-Augustine; He said, Be of good Comfort, It can hardly be, that so many
prayers, and tears should perish. So a child cannot be born of the will of the
father, be the father never so good a man; Though this may do much, as Samuel
told the men of Israel he would do his duty. God forbid, says he, that I
should cease to pray for you, and to watch over you, 1 Samuel 12. 23, 24. But I
will teach you the good and the right way: only fear the Lord, and serve Him
in truth with all your hearts; for consider, how great things He has done for
you. But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed both you, and your
King. For all his instructions, and prayers, they shall be consumed in their
wickedness; It is a great advantage to live in a godly family, but can this
bring a man to grace? we read of Hypocrites in David's family, Thou Achitophel.
my friend, and familiar, with whom I took sweet Counsel, It was he that
betrayed him. Was there not a devil in Christ's family? I have chosen you
twelve, and one of you is a Devil. What a powerful Minister was the Prophet
Isaiah, Judas.
the most Evangelicall of all the Prophets; and yet see how he cries out of
the unprofitablenesse of his Ministry, as to his people's souls, Isa. 49. 4. I
said, I have labored in vain, and spent my strength for naught, and in vain.
So Paul, though he labored more abundantly then all the Apostles; he was
afraid, he had lost all his labor amongst the Galathians. Therefore says he,
I am afraid, lest I have bestowed on you labor in vain. I may say to you of
this City of London, as it was said to the Rich man of his brethren that were
upon the earth; They have Moses, and the Prophets, let them hear them. Ye will
all assent to this, If a man will say, This City had never more of Moses, and
the Prophets, then at this day: but will this bring you to grace? Can ye be
born of the will of your Ministers, though they wish you never so well, and
take never so much pains for you? No, you must join your own endeavors, with
the Minister's labors, else they will be ineffectuall; yea, God himself must
join his blessing, both to your Endeavors, and our labors; else ye can never
be born again. It must not be of the will of man, but of God; Which I now come
to.

Fourthly, All believers are born of God, and only of God, 4. All believers
are born of God.
All believers are new born; This we must clear to you. There is an inseparable
Connection between faith, and the new birth. So it runs in the Text, (...),
To them that believe in his Name, who were born of God. Faith, and the new
Creature, are so inseparable, that Paul puts the one, for the other. If ye
compare these two places in the Galathians, Gal. 5. 6. with Gal. 6. 15. In
Jesus Christ, neither Circumcision nor uncircumcision avails any thing, but
Faith which works by love. What is that? see the fifteenth Verse of the sixth
Chapter, Neither Circumcision, nor uncircumcision, but a new Creature. New
Creature, and Faith, is all one; where faith is, there is a new Creature. So
then, All believers are new born, and new born of God; because, as ye have
heard already, (which will save me a labor to exemplify this.) It requires a
Divine power to beget a man to Christ, Jam. 1. 18. Of his own will begot he us
with the Word of Truth, Of his own will begot he us. To make a man partaker of
godliness, there must go Divine power, as Peter says, 2 Pet. 1. 3. According
to his Divine power, He has given us all things pertaining to Life, and
Godliness; Such a power as went to the Regeneration requires a greater power
then Creation.
Creation, yea, a greater power then went to the Creation, if a greater can be.
God puts forth a further act of power in Regeneration, then in Creating men,
and the whole World at first; because there was then nothing to resist. God
spoke the Word, and there was no opposition made. Let there be light, and there
was light, Let the waters be gathered together, and they were gathered together
into one Channel. But when God comes here to Convert, all is up in arms,
Corrupt nature struggleth for it self, and the Devil, likely to be thrown out
of his hold, makes the best of it that he can, and musters all his forces to
maintain his possession; here is required a greater power, because of
resistance, which was not in the former work. Would not a man say, if he should
go into a Potters shop, or Glassehouse, that a man might sooner make a thousand
pots, or glasses, then when a pot or glass is broken all to pieces, to make it
whole again; That is a much greater work. This is the case here: In the
Creation, God brought all things out of nothing. Here is but one single work.
But when he comes now to regenerate, he finds men's hearts broken to pieces,
and he must make them sound again. That is a further work, a double work. He
must pull down the old building, and set up a new frame, none of the old, not a
stick will serve. Old things are done away, all things are Cor. 2. 5. 17.
become new. Therefore it is, that all the works of the Creation, though an
Almighty work, is but the finger as it were of God. When I consider the
Heavens, the work of thy fingers. The works of man's Redemption, and
Conversion, require the whole arm. So speaking of God, after the manner of
men, for to him all things are alike easy, Luke 1. 51. He has showed strength
with his arm, speaking of the work of our Redemption by Christ. Who has
believed our Report? To whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? That which is
manifest in the Gospel, that tells us of our Redemption, saying, It is the
arm of God. At the first, it was but a word. Let there be light, and it was so.
The work of our Redemption cost not only words, but tears, and sweat, and
blood, and the Life of our Savior. God breathed the breath of Life into man,
that he might revive him, and become a new Creature. So that this work
considered, one cannot be born again of any, but of God.

I proceed now to the Application. If believers are born This presses
thankfulness, for our new birth.
for their new birth. They have received that from the hands of God, that the
rest of the World are strangers to. They are better born then others; that is
the word, the Apostle uses, Acts 17. 11. We stand engaged to the whole Trinity
for this blessing. Behold what manner of love, the Father has showed unto us?
We owe our new birth to God the Father. And to the Son too, Isai. 9. 6. The
name of Christ is the Everlasting Father. And, to God the Holy Ghost, Joh. 3.
5. Except we be born again of Water, and of the Spirit, born of the Spirit; To
thend, we may be the more 3. Graces and privileges that accompany new birth.
sensible of this inestimable blessing, consider the graces and privileges
that accompany this new birth. I will name but three.

First, Is likeness to God: We are so born of God, as to 1. Is likeness to
God:
bear his Image, to be righteous, as he is righteous, 1 John 2. ult. If ye know
that he is righteous, ye know that every one which does righteousness, is born
of him. It is true of all the Creatures, They are made of God: But it is true
only of Saints, They are born of God. Therefore, though every Creature has
something of God in him; yet a Saint has more: All have the footsteps of God,
but Believers have his Image. They represent him, as a man's son represents his
father. There may be the Image of a man taken in a Picture, that may show
something of him; and his Image in a glass, that shows more, that
represents his motion, which the other does not; But his Image in his son,
that is the most lively of all, that represents his disposition. Such an
Image of God is in every Saint, it represents the quality of God, and the
disposition of him. He is made partaker of the Divine nature.

Secondly, There is in him a love to God, and to the Saints, 2. Love to God,
and to the Saints.
which is another adjunct of the new birth, of which, 1 John 4. 7. compared
with, 1 John 5. 1. verse. Beloved, Let us love one another, for love is of God,
and every one that loves, is born of God, and knows God, Chap. 5. 1.
Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God, and every one
that loves him that begets, loves him that is begotten of him. First, here
is love to God, the Common father of all the Saints. It is true in this Case,
Amor descendit, sed non semper ascendit. Love amongst men descends, It goes
down from the Parent, to the Child; but it does not always ascend from the
Child, to the Parent. But here, as there is a love descending to us, so from us
ascending to God. As the Iron that is touched with the Lodestone, has an
inclination of following the Lodestone: So when God has touched the soul with
Love, it leaves an instinct behind it, of following after God. As every one
that is new born, has a love to God, so has he also to the Saints. He that
loves him that begets, loves him also that is begotten of him. Look as it
is in nature. Light ye know is the prime object of sight. It is the principal
visible object, and the more of light in any thing, the more visible that thing
is. So Christ is the principal object of a Christians love; and the more of
Christ is in any person, the more lovely Christ the principal object of a
Christian's love.
that person is, in a Christian's eyes. The object that stands most in the
light, is most seen; and the Saint, that has most of Christ in him, is most
beloved by every one that is newborn, when they come to discern that
amiablenesse in him.

3. The third thing that accompanies this new birth, is, 3. Victory over
spiritual enemies.
Victory over spiritual enemies, which does exceedingly raise the privilege
of being born of God. Victory over the world, and victory over the devil, ye
have them both, 1 John 5. 4. Whatsoever is born of God, overcommeth the world.
It is true, Regenerate persons may get many a blow and knock from the world,
and many times be foiled too; and from the frowns and flatteries of the world,
a Saint may be worsted. As it is, when a thief sets upon a man in the
highway, and aims at his purse; he may stand in his own defense, and happily
receive some wounds, or blows; but yet, the thief is not able to take his
purse from him. Here a man comes off a conqueror, though not without blows.
So, Whatsoever is born of God, overcomes the world, because, in the issue,
Grace gets the upper-hand. Though he that is born of God may be conquered;
yet, That which is born of God cannot be conquered. It is not, Whosoever is
born of God; but, Whatsoever is born of God. There is an Emphasis in that. As a
victory over the world attends this new birth, so a victory over the devil
too: 1 John 5. 18. We know, that whosoever is born of God, sins not. But he
that is begotten of God, keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not.
He sins not, so as to be touched by that wicked one. Take them together,
that is, He sins not against the holy Ghost; sins not, so as to be
devillified. He that is once a child of God, never becomes a child of the
devil. That is the meaning of that, That wicked one touches him not: Not, but
that That wicked one, the devil, may annoy a Saint, and foil him many times;
but not with that which the Schools call, Tactus qualificativus, such a touch
as alters the nature of a thing. As for example, Men that speak of the
Philosopher's Stone, they suppose it to have such a property in it, as when it
touches the metal, it turns it into Gold. Such a property the Spirit of God
has upon the soul of man; when it touches the soul, it puts a divine
nature into it. Now, says the Apostle, The wicked one touches him not, so as
to alter him, and to turn him into his own nature, and make him as very a
devil as himself; which they, that have sinned against the holy Ghost, do.
Because, even as very a devil as Satan is, he that is once made partaker of
the divine Nature, cannot be touched so, as to be made partaker of the
diabolical nature.

Secondly, This may serve in the next place, To undeceive 2. To undeceive
carnal Professors.
carnal Professors, that stand so much upon their faith, and have no new birth
to show; that say, They have believed ever since they were born; when as
indeed, no man can believe till he be born again. There is an inseparable
connection between these two, Faith, and the New Creature; the Evangelist John
puts them together, To those that believe in his name, who are born of God.
Wheresoever Christ is received by faith, there he does renew the soul, as well
as save it. He brings with him plasters, that do not only hide sin, but
heal it; not only cover it, but cure it. He brings with him not only
pardoning mercy, but purging mercy, and renewing grace. And therefore it is in
vain for men to call themselves believers, if they be not newborn. The Pleas
of carnal Professors. 1. They are baptized.
Some pleas indeed they have, which I will briefly answer.

First, They are baptized, and therefore born again; their baptism is the Laver
of Regeneration. That is all some have to show.

Whether that place, Tit. 3. 5. According to his mercy he saved us, by the
washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost, be meant
primitively of Baptism, yea or no, may be disputed. But I wave that.

Secondly, Those that ascribe most efficacy to Baptism, they say, That Infants
Elect, and only they, do in baptism 2. They only that are Elected, receive
Regeneration in Baptism.
receive a Regeneration. But what kind of Regeneration? whether Potential,
Habitual, or Initial, they know not; not such as will serve their turn, when
they grow up to years; for then they must have an Actual and farther
Regeneration, before they can be saved. Peter tells us expressly, that the
outward washing with water saves none, there must go a farther work to that, 1
Pet. 3. 21. Wherefore the baptism that now is, answering that figure, (which is
not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but a confident Demanding,
which a good conscience makes to God) saves us also, by the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ. That, no man can have, that is not new born. There cannot be a
good conscience, till there be a sprinkling of the blood of Christ. For we are
sprinkled from an evil conscience, Heb. 12. 24. Now a man that is newborn,
when Satan puts in a Plea against him, he can put in his Answer against
Satan's Bill; he is able to plead Sincerity, when he is accused of Hypocrisy,
and to make an apology for himself, against the accusations of the Law. If this
satisfy not, consider one or two places more, to show the vanity of this plea,
Gal. 6. 15. In Christ Jesus, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision; but a new creature. Baptism is, what Circumcision was. Baptism
avails not, but a new Baptism avails not, without a newbirth:
creature. Baptism, without new birth, can bring no man to salvation. One may
be a kind of baptized Turk, as there were circumcised Ellemits in Jerusalem;
that is, Men circumcised in the flesh, and yet Heathens in their dispositions.
Ezekiel. 18. 31. Cast away from you all your transgressions, wherein ye have
transgressed; and make you a new heart, and a new spirit; for why will ye die,
O house of Israel? They must die, unless there were a new spirit, and a new
heart within them: Nothing but death without the new creature, though an
Israelite.

When men are beaten from this, they fall to a second 2d Plea of carnal
Professors.
plea, and pretend to a New Birth; Why? Because they are not so bad as they
have been; some duties they neglected before, but now perform them; some
errors they committed before, but now abstain from them. Therefore surely they
are born of God.

To make Answer to this Plea, we must know, wheresoever Their Plea answered.
this new birth is, there is a farther thing then restraining grace; there is
holiness of life: Ephesians. 4. 24. That ye put on that new man, which after God
is created in righteousness and true holiness. Now holiness goes farther,
than to the abstaining from some evil, and doing of some good. Holiness
reaches to the mortification of lust; where there is a new man, created after
holiness, lust will be pursued, not only to imprisonment, but to death. The
Woolf is not only tied up, but turned into a Lamb; the Sow is not only put
into a pasture, but changed into a Sheep. A woolf tied up, does not so much
mischief as before; a Sow in a pasture is not so swinish and filthy, as when it
walloweth in the mire: but their natures still remain. So it is in restraining
grace, their natures are the same, if not some change in their conversation.
Where the new birth is, there is a change of the heart, and a new nature
wrought; therefore men do duties with delight, and constantly. Men look at
lusts now, not as David did at Absalom, but as Joab did at Absalom, that I may
use that comparison. Asolom, he rebelled, ye know; David and Joab, they both
set themselves against him; but so, as David, though he could not but be
displeased with Absolom's rebellion, yet he carries affection toward him, and
desires, that the young man may be dealt gently withal. On the other side,
Joab, when he gets an opportunity, throws dart upon dart, and never 2 Samuel
18. 14.
leaves till he has slain him. So, ye have many a man, that has some work of
grace upon his heart, that yet has a months mind, and longing after sin: he
would have his sin suppressed, as David would have Absalom, but yet Absalom must
live, though a rebellious son. Many would have sin suppressed, that it may not
expose them to hell and damnation; but all this while their sins must live. But
the new creature is carried out with hatred against sin, therefore it is not
content without its destruction. Mortify your earthly members, says the
Apostle. Such a sin, says the regenerate soul, will have my death, therefore I
will have its death; I will not be content till it be crucified with the lusts
and affections thereof. I shall now proceed to the 14 Verse.

Verse. 14. And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us; and we beheld the
glory thereof, as the glory of the only begotten Son of the Father, full of
Grace and Truth.
Heretofore the Evangelist having proved the Divinity of Christ's manifestation
in the flesh, and the glory of his Person in both Natures.
Jesus Christ, he comes now to tell us of his manifestation in the flesh, and
of the glory of his Person, consisting of both Natures. So as this Verse
calls to us for attention, because it holds forth the Object of our faith,
the Person of Christ, in both his Natures. And certainly, every soul that is
married to Christ, will be affected with his Person, and therefore desirous to
hear of that. The difference between a wife and a harlot is, The wife desires,
and loves the husband's person, therefore cares not for his tokens, unless
his person be enjoyed: The harlot loves the token, and cares not for the
person. It is the property of the Spouse, not to be content with the
Love Tokens of Christ, but with the Person of Christ. And concerning him, ye
have four things laid down here.

First, The Incarnation of Jesus Christ, The Word was made flesh. Secondly, His
Conversation on earth, And dwelt amongst us. Thirdly, Here is a special
manifestation of his glory, And we behold his glory, as the glory of the only
begotten of the Father. Fourthly, The singular Qualifications of his Person,
Full of grace and truth.
First, I shall begin with the Incarnation of Christ, in these words,

And the Word was made flesh.
A Clause, out of which, Bees may suck honey, and Spiders may gather poison.
These words have been a stumbling block to many Heretics; and, on the other
side, a sure and strong hold to many Saints. Some think, that when the children
of Israel were in the land of Goshen, and had some Egyptians mixed with them;
at the same time the Scriptures are light to Saints, darkness to unbelievers.
Hebrews drew wholesome waters out of the fountains, and the Egyptians bloody
water at the same springs; and that it was dark to the Egyptians in the same
house, and light to the Hebrews. If so, methinks, It affords that which may
lead us into the Consideration of this, and the like places of Scripture.
Heretics have darkness, and Believers light. The one draws bloody waters,
and the other wholesome waters out of the same Text of Scripture, as ye shall
hear in the application, what use may be made of this Clause. Apollinarius
says, That because the Word was made flesh. Therefore, Christ took upon his
flesh, the body, but not the soul of a man.

Three things are here to be declared to you.

First, Who is meant by the Word. Secondly, What is meant by the Flesh.
Thirdly, In what sense the word was made Flesh.
First, The divine nature of Christ is in the Word. Secondly, The human nature
of Christ, The Flesh. Thirdly, The personal union, The Word made Flesh.
These are mysteries, by some more spoken of, and less understood. Things that
we cannot be ignorant of, without danger; nor discourse of, without all
Reverence. Things that no Eloquence of man can reach, no soul of man apprehend
in the full latitude of them; Yet some thing we shall speak hereof by God's
assistance.

First, Who is here meant by the Word? I answer, the 1. By the Word, is meant
the second Person in the Trinity.
second person in the Trinity so called, in that known place, There are three
that bear witness in Heaven, the Father, and the Word, and the Spirit; and
these three, are one, 1 John 5. 8. The same person that is called the word, in
the beginning of this Chapter, is said, to be with God. I shall not speak of
that, because heretofore I have been large in it, but come to the second.

Secondly, What is here meant by Flesh? Flesh signifies 2. By Flesh, is meant
the whole man.
the whole man in diverse places of Scripture. Man ye know consists of two
parts, which are sometimes called flesh, and spirit, and sometimes called soul,
and body. Now by a Synecdoche, either of these parts may be put for the whole;
sometimes the soul is put for the whole man. As when it is said, there were so
many souls in the Act. 27. 37. Genesis 46. 27.
ship with Paul. And seventy souls went down into Egypt with Jacob; sometimes
flesh, or body, is put for the whole man, Romans 12. 1. I beseech you brethren,
by the Mercies of God, offer up your bodies a living sacrifice. That is, offer
up your selves. And sometimes, flesh, which is the word in the Text, Romans 3.
20. Therefore, by the deeds of the Law, shall no flesh be justified in his
sight, Compare that with, Psalm. 143. 2. where it is said, In thy sight shall no
man living be justified. No flesh, says Paul. No man, says David; So flesh is
the whole man.

To clear this, some Quaeries would be resolved.

First, whether Christ assumed the nature of man, or 1. Whether Christ assumed
the nature, or person of Man.
the person of a man, the whole man. He did assume the soul, as well as the
body, both under the term, flesh. And indeed, unless, he had assumed the
whole man, the whole man could not have been saved, says Damazen. That which
was not taken, could not be healed. If Christ had not taken the whole man, He
could not have saved the soul.

To the first Quaery, Whether the nature of man, or the person of man?

I answer, The nature of man, and not a single person. He assumed the nature,
and not a single person.
taken the person of a man, then there must have been two persons in Christ; a
person assuming, and a person assumed. Yea then, that only person which Christ
assumed, should have been advanced, and saved; He should have saved that
person, and no other, if he had assumed the person of a man. With us, the soul,
and body, being united, make a person. But in Christ, the soul and body were so
united, as to have their subsistence not of themselves (as in us) but in the
Godhead. No sooner was the soul united in the body, but both soul and body had
subsistence in the second person in the Trinity. So, not the assuming of a
person, but the nature of a man, common to all the sons, and daughters of Adam,
and Eve. Therefore he took not the nature of the Angels, but the seed of
Abraham, Hebr. 2. 16. Seed, the first element of our nature, before our persons
come to have any subsistence.

Secondly, Why did Christ take the nature of man?

I answer, That he might be a fit Mediator. That lesson Why the nature of Man.
the Apostle gives you, Hebr. 2. 14. Because the Children were partakers of
flesh and blood, he also took part of the same, that through death he might
destroy him, that That he might be a fit Mediator.
had the power of death, that is, the Devil. His taking the nature of man,
conduced to his being a Priest; For if he had not been man, he could not have
died. And that he might be a fit Prophet: A Prophet will God raise up to you,
like to me says Moses. It was fit, and convenient for them to have a man
Prophet, because they were not able to hear Angels, unless they died. And that
he might be a fit King: The head of one nature, and members of another, make a
Monster, Hebr. 2. 11. Both he, that sanctifyeth, and they, that are sanctified,
are all of one nature. Christ is of the same nature with those, that are
sanctified and governed by Him.

Thirdly, The third Quaery is, whether did Christ take Whether he took our
nature as before the fall, or as after.
the fall, or our nature clothed with infirmities, as after the fall?

I answer, He took our nature clothed with infirmities, as after the fall;
which is implied in the word Flesh. There Holy Ghost rather chose to He took
our nature, as after the fall.
say, Why, the Word was made flesh, then why, the Word was made man; because it
is according to the phrase of Scripture, when it would speak contemptibly of
man, and show him to be the lowest Creature, to call him, flesh, when it would
set forth the weakness, that man is subject to. To give you one, or two
Instances, instead of many, Psalm. 56. 4. I will not fear what flesh can do unto
me, that is, weak and infirm frail man; what Flesh can do unto me. And again,
Psalm. 78. 39. He remembers that we are but flesh, a wind that passes away,
and comes not again. So then the word was made flesh, that is, took not only
man's nature, but man's infirmities; which are expressed in that word flesh.
And that he did take our nature, with the infirmities thereof, appears by,
Isai. 53. 4. Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows, our
infirmities.

4. The fourth Querie is, Whether Christ did take all the Whether Christ took
all our Infirmities upon him?


I answer, No. Our infirmities are of two sorts; some penal and painful
infirmities; others sinful and culpable infirmities. Those that are culpable
and sinful, Christ did not take; for the Prince of this world came, and had
nothing in Sinful infirmities Christ did not take; nor Penal, as Personal;
but Penal, as Natural.
Personal, proper to some few men and women, as to be inclined by birth to the
Stone, or Gout, or Strangury, or Leprosy, or some other hereditary disease; or
Natural, common to all the sons and daughters of Adam, as to be subject to
pain, and grief, and sorrow, and hunger, and thirst, and cold. The former of
these Christ did not take, because they would have been impediments to him in
his Function; but the latter of these he did take.

5. The fifth Querie is, Why did Christ take these infirmities, flesh? Why did
Christ take these infirmities?


I answer, For diverse ends, which I will but name, and have done. He took
these infirmities of our nature, as well as the nature it self, To show the
truth of his Humanity. He 1. To show the truth of his Humanity.
could. He took them, that he might sanctify them to us. Whatsoever Christ
took, that he sanctified. Says Luther, Christ enriched poverty, by becoming
poor; and glorified shame, by enduring shame for us. 2. He took our
infirmities, That he might set us an example of an holy life. Had not 2. To
give us an example of an holy life.
Christ been subject to passion, he could never have set us an example of
meekness or patience, if he himself had not been liable to passion, yet
without sin. Lastly, He took 3. That we might have access to him with boldness
these infirmities, That we might confide the more in him, and have access to
him with boldness. Consider him an High Priest, that was subject to
infirmities as well as our selves. We have not an high Priest which cannot be
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points touched as
we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come boldly to the throne of grace.
Thus ye see who is meant by the Word, and what is meant by Flesh.

I now proceed to show you, in what sense the Word is said to be made flesh.

First, We must remove a false sense; then, assert the true.

The Word was made flesh. (Take it in the phrase of Athanasius The Word made
flesh by taking the Manhood into God, not by converting the Godhead into Man.
his Creed) Not by conversion of the Godhead into Man, but by the taking of the
Manhood into God. Quod erat permansit, quod non erat assumpsit; They were wont
to sing so in an ancient Liturgy. Christ remains without any change in him,
as God. I speak according to the meaning of that old Aenigmaticall Verse:

Sum, quod eram; quod eram, non sum; nunc dicor utrumque. It is said in the
Person of Christ, I am what I was, to wit, God still; I was not what I am, to
wit, Man; I am called both, to wit, God-Man. To clear it by the application of
the Text, The Word was made flesh. Christ is called the Word, particularly in
reference to that internal word and conceptions, that are in a man's heart.
Now if a man manifest his own conceptions, What does he do? He assumeth a
voice, as it were, and, by that voice, makes men to hear what his conception
is. This Word was that that it was before, yet it was manifested in the flesh,
without any change of what he was. Here ye have the false sense removed.

Let the true sense now be asserted. The Word was made flesh; that is, He
assumed the Human Nature into By assuming the human nature into the union of
his Person.
the union of his person. He that was God before from everlasting, does now
take man into the unity of his Person; only there is this difference in it,
The phrase seems to import something more, because it is said, The Word was
made flesh. And that some Heretics catch at, because, they say, One thing
cannot be made another without some Canaan, water was made wine, and then it
ceased to be water; so, say they, If the Word be made flesh, it must cease to
be the Word, for it is now made another thing.

For Answer to this, first, There is no necessity of translating Made; (...),
The Word became flesh. So, (...), 1 Cor. 9. 20. Unto the Jews I became as a
Jew, says Paul; (...), I became. So, the Word became flesh, by a voluntary
assumption of the Manhood. So then, the Objection is waved, for it lies wholly
in the Translation, The Word was made flesh.

Secondly, Let the Translation stand, yet it will not overthrow Natural
change; and a Civil change; a Physical change, and a Political change. When
one thing indeed is made another by a Physical change, then it cease to be
what it was before, as when the water was made wine. But one person may be made
another, in a way of Political change, and yet continue what it was before:
As, When one that is invested with Titles and Royalties of an higher nature, is
pleased, out of condescension; to assume some lower Title to himself; as, When
a Sovereign Prince is pleased to be made or created Knight of the Garter; when
an English Earl is made a Gentleman of Venice: Here is the King made a Knight,
and the Earl a Gentleman, and yet continue what they were: They have assumed a
lower dignity, without disparagement to what they were before. And some of our
Kings have been made free of this City of London, in some Companies: and it was
an honor to the Company, not a disparagement to the Prince. So it is with
Christ, He honored that Nature he assumed, and not lost that Nature which he
had. Thus you see the meaning of this Clause, The Word was made flesh. Let us
now see what Use may be made of it.

First, We shall apply the whole Clause, and then draw

The whole Clause may be of use, for the confutation of For Confutation of
Heretics.
many Heretics. Our Evangelist here aimed at the confutation of Heretics,
when he writ this Gospel; and this one Clause knocks many of them in the
head. It has been the lot of the Church of Christ, to be always conflicting,
more or less, with that kind of men. For the first three hundred years after
Christ, the great thing then was by Persecution; but after God had stirred up
Constantine, the Devil leaves playing the Lion, and turned to the Fox; what he
could not obtain by force, he now seeks by fraud; and instead of Persecution,
raises up Heresies. And look as now adays, that which should unite all
Christians together, namely, the Lord's Supper, which we therefore call the
Communion, is made the greatest matter of Contention in the world. The
Lutherans and Ca^vinists fall out about Consubstantiation, Lutherans and
Papists about Transubstantiation. The Lord's Supper is made a mere matter of
quarrel, by the subtlety of Satan. So of old, this Personal Union, of which I
have spoken all this while, the two Natures, God and Man, in one Person, was
the great matter of division in the Churches of Christ. Many Heretics struck
at this, and this Text meets with many of them; I shall instance in four, but
not trouble you long about them; but a little is fit to be said, that we may
know what was done in former ages. Great use is of Evangelicall History. There
is the Heresy of

The Arians, All confuted by this Clause.
The Apollinarians, The Nestorians, The Eutychians,
The Arians held, That Jesus Christ was not true God. 1. The Arians opinion
confuted.
This Text calls him the Word, and makes him a Person in the Trinity. It
says, The Word was with God, and the Word was God, and that Word was made
flesh.

The Apollinarians acknowledge him to be God, yea, and 2. The Apollinarians
opinion confuted
Man too; but they held, That he took only the Body of a Man, not the Soul of
a Man; but they say, His Divinity supplied the room of a Soul. We interpret the
word [Flesh] rightly, for the whole human nature. Therefore the Apollinarians
are confuted here too.

The Nestorians grant him to be both God and Man; but 3. The Nestorians opinion
confuted.
then they say, The Godhead made one Person, and the Manhood another Person. We
interpret the word [Made] rightly, according as it holds forth an
Hypostaticall Union. and remember what was said of Christ's assuming, not the
person of man, but the nature of man. That Heresy is then confuted. Here is
God and Man, two Natures, but one Person. 4. The Eutychians opinion confuted.


The Eutychians held but one Person in Christ; then they confounded the
Natures. They say, That the Godhead and Manhood make such a mixture, as to
produce a Third thing. Here they are confuted, by the right understanding of
the Hypostaticall Union. I will not perplex your understandings with these
things; only see the care of the Church of God of old. It met with all these
sorts of Heretics in four Adverbs; the old Councills brought in the word
(...), Truly, to oppose the Arians; that implies, that Christ was true God.
The word (...), Perfectly, to oppose the Sine Naturarum convulsione
Apollinarians, to show, he was perfectly Man, consisting of a Soul, and of a
Body. The word (...), Undividedly, to oppose the Nestorians, to show, that his
Natures were not divided. And then the word (...), Unmixtly, to Inconfuse.
oppose the Eutychians, who so mingled the Natures, as to make a third thing
out of both.

We now come to what remains in the Particulars: See what they will afford us.

First, That which concerns the Divinity of Christ, the 1. The Wisdom and the
Love of God to be admired.
Word; what has been said of that, may serve to fill us all with admiration,
of the love and wisdom of our God, in ordering so, that his own Son, the Second
Person in the Trinity, the Word, should be made flesh for our salvation. God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son. Here is love indeed!
Hardly will a man part with an only son, yet God does; He spared not his own
Son, but gave him to death for us all. And yet, happily, a man may have such a
son, that he cares not for; But what says the voice from Heaven? This is my
beloved Son. And yet he so loved the world, as to part with his beloved Son.
One may have a son that he loves, and yet be displeased with him, as David was
with Absalom; but this Son did please the Father, and yet this Son is given to
die. O the admirable love of God, shining in this, that the Second Person in
the Trinity, is set on work to procure our Redemption! Though Reason could
never have found out such a way, yet, when God has revealed it, Reason, though
but shallow, can see a fitness in it; because there being a necessity, that
the Savior of man should be Man, and an impossibility, that any but God should
save him; and one Person in the Trinity being to be Incarnate: It suiteth to
reason, that the first Person in the Trinity should not be the Mediator; For
who should send him? He is of none, and therefore could not be sent. There must
be one sent to reconcile the Enmity, and another to give gifts to friends; two
proceeding Persons, the Son from the Father, and the Holy Ghost from the Father
and the Son; accordingly, the second Person, which is the Son, he is sent upon
the first errand, to reconcile man to God; and the third Person, the Holy
Ghost, he is sent to give gifts to men, so reconciled. So as to Reason, it is a
suitable, and a very great congruity; That God having made all things by his
Word, should now repair all things by his Word. That as the word of the serpent
deceived man, and brought him to ruin; so the Word of God should restore him,
and bring him to happiness. That he that was the middle person in the Trinity,
should become the Mediator between God, and man; That he that was the express
Image of the Father's person, should restore the Image of God, defaced in man
by his sins. Men may be too curious in such Quaeries, but where there is a
bottom in the love of God, we may safely lose our selves in the admiration of
the wisdom of God, in the Contrivance of the work of our Redemption. That for
the first.

Secondly, From what has been said of the word, flesh, 2. Here is both matter
of Comfort, and matter of Duty.
here, as importing the human nature, and the human nature clothed with
infirmities, we may gather both matter of Comfort, and matter of Duty.

First, Matter of Comfort from each of the two branches; from flesh, as it
imports manhood; from flesh, as it imports infirmity of manhood. The Son
of God has taken our nature upon him, that may Comfort men; It is matter of
Rejoicing to any man, when he hears his friend is preferred. What is so near
to us as our own nature? Behold our nature is preferred by Jesus Christ, to a
union Our nature preferred by Christ, to union in the Godhead.
in the Godhead. Christ sits in Heaven with our nature, and the same flesh
that we have upon us, only glorified. It is that, which all the World cannot
give a sufficient reason of, why the same word in the Hebrew, Rashar, should
signify both flesh, and good Tidings; Divinity will give you a reason, though
Grammar cannot. Christ's taking of flesh upon him, was good Tidings to all the
whole World; therefore, no wonder if one word signify both. Abundance of
comfort may be taken from hence to poor souls, when they think God has
forgotten them; To consider, Is it likely, that Christ that is man, should
forget Man, now He is at the right hand of the Father, clothed in that nature
that we have. When we are troubled to think it is impossible, God and man
should ever be reconciled; Let us consider, that God, and man, did meet in
Christ, therefore it is possible, we may meet; What has been, may be again.
The two natures met in Christ, therefore God may be reconciled to man; yea,
they therefore met, that God might be reconciled to man. He was made Emanuell
God with us; that he might bring God, and us together. When a man is troubled
to think of the Corruptions of his nature, that is so full of defilement, that
it cannot be sanctified; let him withal think, that his nature is capable of
sanctification to the full. Christ received human nature, which was not
polluted, his nature is the same; Therefore, that nature is capable of
sanctification to the uttermost. Many more comforts may be raised from this
Consideration, That he assumed flesh, with the sorrows of it, and the nature of
it; penal infirmities. The consideration of that in general, may give some
comfort to men, because it lets us see, that Christ is able, and willing to
help us, because he has taken our infirmities. Both these the Apostle holds
out, Hebr. 2. ult. It is said, In that he himself had suffered, being tempted,
he is able to succor them that are tempted. He is therefore able, because
himself has been tempted. As a Physician that tries the virtue of some
sovereign Composition upon his own body, he is the better able to cure
another, with that Receipt, because he himself has tried it. Christ has born
our infirmities, therefore he knows better how to support us under them. I,
but is he willing? yes, His willingness may be collected from this, That he
has taken our infirmities, Hebr. 2. 17. He was made like unto his brethren in
all things, that he might be a merciful high Priest. Christ is therefore a
merciful high Priest, because he was made like us in our infirmities. It is a
great invitation to mercy, to see one in the same condition that we our selves
have been in. As she said, Haud ignara mali, miseris succurrere disco, she
Dido. Lib. 3. Aenaeid.
had learned to pity others, because she had born the like miseries her self.
As a woman that has had a Child, can more pity women that are in Travail,
because she has suffered the like pains; than other women can, that never have
brought forth any Children at all. So the Lord Jesus has felt the like
infirmities, the penal, not the sinful; therefore he is likely to pity us,
when we lie under them, Exodus 23. 9. Thou shall not oppress a stranger, for ye
know They that have suffered, can best pity them that are under sufferings.
the heart of a stranger, seeing ye were strangers in the land of Egypt. Christ
knows the heart of a man, under his infirmities, when they are only
painful, and not sinful, because he himself did undergo such in the days
of his flesh. Therefore, this may comfort a man as in general, so in diverse
particular Cases; when we wrestle with infirmities, suppose sorrow of heart, it
was Christ's own case. Time was, when he cried out, Matthew. 26. 38. My soul is
exceeding sorrowful, even to death. The consideration of his sorrow, may help
to sweeten thine, when thou art afflicted in body, and pinched. It was Christ's
case, He himself hungered in the wilderness, and was a thirst at Jacob's well.
He was buffetted, and scourged, yea, Crucified in the end, He felt the nails
and spear. Therefore says Luther, I am ashamed, that men should count my
sufferings any thing, when I think of what Christ endured; So, be our
sufferings never so great, we are thereby made conformable to him, who suffered
the like things for us. And so for poverty, 2 Cor. 8. 9. Ye know the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who, though he were rich, yet for your sakes he became
poor, that you through his poverty might be made rich. The like may be said in
many other Instances: whatsoever infirmity it is, we may expect, Christ will
relieve us against it.

But the soul says, Still you except sin, I would have that taken away. If
Christ take not that away, I am undone.

I told you, Christ took our painful infirmities, and not As Christ took our
painful infirmities, by inherency, so our sinful infirmities by imputation.
too, in another sense; not in the same way, as he took the other. He took our
painful infirmities, in a way of Inherency; and our sinful ones too, in a way
of Iniputation; Quicquid sustulit, tollit, whatsoever Christ took away, he
took. He took away our sins, therefore he took our sins, in one sense, or
other; He could not take our sins, as our sorrows. It was impossible, that sin
should be inherent in Christ; His Divinity was a protection against all sins,
yet He took them away by imputation. Therefore, It is said by the Apostle, God
has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; He knew no sin, and yet is
made sin. How? Not made sin, by committing sin, for Christ was not in a
Capacity of sinning; but made sin, by bearing the Imputation of sin; and so
took upon him the guilt of sin, and not the Inherency of sin.

There be two things in guilt, a worthiness of being punished, and a
destination to punishment; The Demerit, and the Destination.

It is false to say, That Christ took the guilt upon him, in a way of Demerit;
as if Christ himself had been worthy of being punished. For all Demerit
implies sin, either natural, or personal; Now in Christ, was neither
original Corruption, nor actual Rebellion. But the other thing in guilt,
which is, Poenae obligatio, an obligation, and destination to punishment. In
this sense, Christ took guilt, not because of any natural Demerit, but because
of his Communion in that nature, of which the Demerit was found; He voluntarily
became our Surety, and took our Nature, that, in that nature, He might suffer
for our sins. And in this capacity, God does destinate him to punishment; in
this sense, He took our sinful infirmities. And thus ye see, what matter of
comfort this truth affords.

It affords us likewise matter of duty. Lessons of piety, and Lessons of
thankfulness.

First, Lessons of piety: Oh, If Christ the second Person 1 Lessons of piety.
in the Triuity, did put on man, how careful should men be to put on Christ?
Put ye on the Lord Jesus, says the Apostle, not making provision for the
flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans 13. 14. If Christ assumed our human
nature, how should we wrestle with God, to be made partakers of the Divine
nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious
Promises, that by these you might be partakers of the Divine nature, having
escaped the corruptions that are in the World through lusts. If Christ became
thus one flesh with us, how zealous should we be to become one spirit with
Christ? 1 Cor. 6. 17. Even as man, and wife, is one flesh; so he that is joined
to the Lord, is one spirit; So she is married to Christ, and God looks upon
such a soul, as his own daughter, now it is married to his Son; therefore
deals with it, as Caleb did to Achsah. He gives her not only the upper
Land, and nether springs, not only outward blessings, and accommodations, but
comforts, and refreshments with them; not only the nether springs of
Ordinances, but the upper springs of Comforts, and Refreshments in, and by,
those Ordinances.

Secondly, Here are Lessons of thankfulness too. Was the Word made flesh? Did
Christ take our nature? yea, 2 Lessons of thankfullness.
did he take our nature at the worst, after the Fall? What exceeding great
cause have we to bless his Name for ever; for this Condescension of his?
Should all the Princes in the World, have come from their several Thrones, and
have gone a begging from door to door, it was not so much, as for Christ to
become man for our sakes. And he took our nature not in the integrity of it, as
in Adam before his fall, but in the infirmities of it, which came to it by the
fall; As, for a man that can live of himself, to wear a Noble man's Livery,
while this Noble man is in great favor in the Court, and has the King's ear,
this is no such great matter: But when this Noble man is proclaimed a Traitor,
and is cast out of his Prince's favor, then for this man to wear his Cloth,
and own him, this is something hard. This is the Case, for Christ to have
taken our nature as it was in Adam, while he stood clothed in his Integrity,
and flood right in the sight of God; had not been so much, as when Adam was
fallen, and proclaimed Traitor. As Bernard says, Quo pro me vilior, eo mihi
charior, Domine, Lord, thou shall be so much the more dear to me, by how much
the more thou have been vile for me. Here is Condescension indeed, that Christ
should stoop so low to take flesh, and flesh wlth infirmities. You know what
King Ahasuerus did, when he met with the passage in the Chronicles, which laid
open, what good service Mordecay had done for him; says he, What has been
done for this man? and when he saw nothing was done, he thinks presently of
advancing him, Hest. 6. 3. Let us call to our selves, and say, What has been
done for this Jesus, that has done so much for my soul? If nothing at all; It
is time to fall upon this duty, and to think of some way to Testify our
thankfulness to Christ. How shall we do it? Christ is above, we are not able
to reach Him. True, but He has members here on Earth, though He be in Heaven;
He will take it as done to himself, if ye do it to one of them. Would you be
thankful to Christ, be kind to his people. Kings, when they go their
progress, and come to this, and that Town, and are presented with some sum
of Money, or piece of Plate; the Present they receive, to give the people
content, but they give away the thing to some of their Favorites. So it is
with Christ, He gives away the things ye tender him, he takes it well; but he
is content, that his Children should have what you give. He himself stands
in no need of what we can do; but if we do it to his people, he will accept it,
as if it was done to himself, Matthew. 25. 40. Therefore David makes a full
Confession of this, Psalm. 16. 2, 3. Thou art my Lord, says he, my goodness
extends not to thee, but to the Saints on the Earth, and to the Excellent, in
whom is all my delight. You see what use may be made now, of what was said of
the Divine nature of Christ, as he is called the Word; what of his human
nature, as he is said, to be made flesh; and what follows, and what has been
said of the personal union of these two natures.

Ye may from hence, take a view of one of the deepest The greatest mystery in
the World, is the Word made flesh.
Mysteries in all the World; for it is one of the deepest in all Religions, and
the Christian Religion contains such mysteries ^s the world cannot show
besides; all the depths of the world are but shallow to the things of God. Here
is one of the deepest things of God, The Word being made flesh. There are three
great Unions, that are three great Mysteries, the deepest of any that are. The
Substantial union. The Personal union. The Mystical union.


And this is one of them.

First, The Substantial union of three Persons in one 1. The Substantial
union.
Nature, and one Substance: So, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, make but One God.

Secondly, There is the Personal union, of two Natures 2. The Personal union.
in one Person: So, God and Man make but one Christ.

Thirdly, There is the Union of Several, both Persons, 3. The Mystical union.
and Natures, in one Mystical body; and so, Elect Angels, and Men, and Christ
together, make but one Body, whereof Christ is the Head.

Here are the three great Mysteries of Religion. That I speak of, is the second
of these, The Personal union.

In the first of these, Divines use to observe, that there is alius and alius,
but not aliud and aliud; another Person, but not another Thing. The Father is,
Alius a Filio, a distinct Person from the Son; and the Son is, Alius a sancto
Spiritu, a distinct Person from the holy Ghost; but not a distinct Thing. The
Father, Son, and holy Ghost make but one Essence, there is not aliud to be
found in them.

In the Second is aliud, but not alius; a distinct Thing, but not distinct
Persons: The Human Nature is a distinct thing from the Godhead, and the Godhead
a distinct thing from the Manhood, but not a distinct person from the Manhood;
for God and Man make but one Person.

In the Third, the Mystical union, there is both aliud and alius, but not
alienus: There is distinct Things, and distinct Persons; the Angelical Nature
and Human Nature; the persons of Believers, and the Person of Christ: but there
is not alienus amongst them. One of these are united to another in near
relation; they are not aliud, one from another. Though there be different
things, and different persons, there is a union between them. That is one thing
that ye may learn from hence.

Secondly, Ye may learn from hence a ground of that communication of
Properties, which is a very mysterious thing in Religion; that which they call,
Communicatio Idiomatum, a thing not so easily understood. But by reason of this
personal union of the two Natures in Christ, there is a communication of
Properties; that is, That which belongs to the Manhood, may be ascribed and
given to Christ, though denominated from the Godhead; and that that belongs
to the Godhead, may be denominated to Christ, because it belongs to the
Manhood. A man may truly say, The Son of How the Son of Mary made the world,
and how the Son of God shed his blood
Mary made the world. Here Christ is denominated from his human Nature; but it
is Christ as God that made the world, not Christ as the Son of Mary; for he was
not the Son of Mary till many thousand years after the world was made. On the
other side, you may say, The Son of God was crucified, and shed his blood upon
t^^ Cross. Here ye ascribe that to Christ, under the denomination of the Son
of God, which belongs to him as Man; to shed his blood, as God, he has none
to shed. But yet, this may properly be said, because the Person is both God and
Man. It is not without precedent in Scripture, Joh. 3. 13. No man has ascended
up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man which is
in heaven. Christ here, when he conversed upon earth, he said, The Son of man
was in heaven; Why? Because that Person was in heaven according to his Godhead;
and yet the Son of man denominated from the Godhead, is said to be in heaven,
whereas nothing more certain, that Christ-Man was upon earth, and yet in
heaven, as God. And so on the other side, Act. 20. 28. Take heed to the flock,
over which the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God,
which he has purchased with his own blood. God has no blood, yet God is said
to purchase the Church with his blood; because that Person which was God, had
blood to shed, according to his human Nature; though it was sanguis humanus,
yet it was sanguis Dei. It was human blood, yet the blood of that Person, which
was God as well as Man. Now the ground of all this, is that personal union,
The Word being made flesh. Divines have labored much to make this clear,
therefore have invented diverse Comparisons; I shall tell you of one or two of
them. They suppose a flaming fiery Sword; here is a union of the metal and of
the fire, that are met together in this sword; and therefore there may be a
communication of the properties. This fiery thing may be said to cut, and this
sharp thing may be said to burn, because they are so united in one sword. Or
thus, They suppose a man under two capacities, one and the same man that has
skill in two Sciences; suppose he is both a good Physician, and a good Lawyer.
Now one may, in propriety of speech, say, This Physician is a Lawyer, and this
Lawyer is a Physician, because both meet in one man. A man may say, This
Physician is a diligent follower of his Clyent's business, and this Lawyer is
very good at curing his Patients. Or thus, A branch of a Vine is graffed into
the stock of an Olive Tree, and that so, as it takes of each tree: both the
Vine-branch and the Olive bear according to their several natures, yet are in
the union both of one tree; but both Grapes and Olives grow upon it. One may
say, This Vine bears good Olives, and this Olive Tree bears good Grapes,
because united in one tree. So it is in respect of the Manhood united to the
Godhead. This Son of Mary made the world, and this Son of God shed his blood
upon the Cross. But, no more of this, The Word was made flesh.

-- and dwelt amongst us, and we beheld his glory the glory as of the only
begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth. I now go on to what remains,
And dwelt amongst us, (...). The word signifies properly, Dwelling as in a
Tabernacle; (...) signifies a Tent, (...) signifies, to dwell in a Tent or
Tabernacle. Then this Clause, Dwelt amongst us, is capable of a threefold
sense, though, as I suppose, but one is here intended.

There is

a Mystical sense, of these words.
a Spiritual sense, a Civil sense,
First, A Mystical sense, and, according to that, this 1. The Divinity of
Christ dwelt in the human Nature
phrase, Dwelt amongst us, is an amplification of the former, The Word was made
flesh; and implies this, That the Divinity of Christ dwells in the human
Nature as in a Tabernacle, (...), in us; the plural number notes the human
Nature, and implies (as diverse go this way, especially the Greek Fathers, and
the Arabic and Syriack, all give this sense of this place, to intimate) That
the habitation or dwelling that Christ assumed to himself, was not the Person
of man, but the Nature of man; and therefore dwelt in us. There is a place of
Scripture that seems to favor this sense, Col. 2. 9. where ye find it thus
said, In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. As if so be he
should have said, The Godhead dwelt in the body of Christ as in a tabernacle,
or tent, which it had erected for its own habitation. Dwelt, and dwelt bodily.

Secondly, There is a Spiritual sense of this Clause; and 2. Christ dwells
in us by his Spirit.
according to that, the meaning is this. Dwelt in us, namely, by his Spirit, by
influence from heaven; and this way Cajetan goes, Lest men should suspect,
says he, because of what was said before, The Word was made flesh, that now we
are to have none but fleshly communion with the Son of God: Though It was made
flesh, yet he dwelt, (...), in us, by his Spirit, and conversed with us in that
respect; and this is employed in the Praeposition (...). We say not, inter nos;
but, in nobis. If he had meant it of Christ's dwelling in the world, he would
have said, Inter nos; but he says, In nobis: that implies a communication of
himself to our inward man, according to that sense which other Scriptures hold
forth, That Christ-Man dwells in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. 2 Cor. 6.
16. God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be their
God, and they shall be my people.

Thirdly, There is a third sense of these words, that is, a 3. By his
conversing amongst us.
Civil sense. Dwelt amongst us, that is, Conversed amongst us, as one man
converseth with another. He took upon him the form of a servant, and was in the
likeness of man, and carried himself for about 33 years upon earth as a man.
This is his dwelling amongst us, and that is the most proper sense in this
place; though there be a truth in all the former, yet neither of them is here
intended; not the First, which I call the Mystical sense, because the human
Nature of Christ was not assumed like as a Tabernacle or Tent, which is pitched
for a while, and then removed; but as a Mansion. The Divinity took up his
habitation forever in the human Nature. Christ now continues, and shall for
ever, as true Man, as he was when he was born of the Virgin Mary. In that
place, Col. 2. 9. the Apostle uses another word, where he says, that all the
fullness of the Godhead dwells in him bodily; the word is not, (...), as in a
Tabernacle; but, (...), as in a Mansion and abiding place. He so took the human
Nature, as never to lay it down again. Therefore not as in a Tabernacle. As for
the Spiritual sense, that cannot well be the meaning here: Though it be true,
that Christ dwells in the hearts of his Saints, and converseth with their
spirits; yet, the Evangelist speaks of some kind of habitation amongst men;
but this kind of habitation, dwelling in our hearts, was that which was usually
in the Word from the beginning of the world; so he dwelt amongst the Jews, for
they were his beloved people long before he was Incarnate. Besides, this was
ceased when the Evangelist wrote. The Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst
us, (...), habitavit, in the Praeterperfect Tense. If ye take it of Christ's
conversing amongst men upon the face of the earth, he did dwell amongst them
so; but he did not dwell amongst them at this time, that was past; but his
dwelling in his Spirit amongst us, that is not past: Joh. 6. 56. He that eats
my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. It remains
therefore, that the sense of this place is plainly thus (not to seek into
abstruse senses) The Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us; that is,
Conversed amongst men as a man. And therefore that of Cajetan has no validity
in it; for [(...)] does sometimes signify on, as well as in: Act. 18. 11. He
continued there a year and six months, teaching the Word of God amongst them;
(...), and so our Translators, well, have it here. Dwelt, not in, but amongst
us; Well then, The word made flesh, pitched his Tent upon earth, and dwelt
amongst men. If ye will have it in a way of Observation, that must be so. Ye
have the Emphasis of the original words.

For the explication of this, Three sorts of men were wont to dwell in Tents.
And the allusion here may be to all three. Shepherds. Sojourners. Soldiers.


Shepherds, First: Isaiah 38. 12. Mine age is departed, and is removed from me
as a shepherd's Tent.

Sojourners, Secondly: as the Israelites in the wilderness, they dwelt in
Tents, and, in memory of that, they after Tabernacles, Psalm. 120. 5. We is me,
that I sojourn in Mesheck, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar.

Soldiers, Thirdly: And David said to him, Go home unto thine own house. But
Vriah said to David, Is the arc of Israel, and Judah abiding in Tents? And my
Lord abiding in the open field? And shall I go home to my house?

Now Christ was all these three, a Shepherd, a Sojourner, and a Soldier, and
therefore is said, to dwell, in these three respects, as in a Tabernacle.

First, As the great and good Shepherd, for both these 1. Christ the good
Shepherd.
terms are given to him, Joh 10. 11. I am the good shepherd, says he, the good
shepherd gives his Life for his sheep. That is a good shepherd indeed! Other
shepherds they provide food for their sheep, but they cannot give them a
fleece; Christ provideth both food, and fleece for his sheep. And whereas other
shepherds sell their sheep to the slaughter, that they themselves may be
maintained by them; here is a shepherd slaughtered for his sheep, I am the good
shepherd, the good shepherd gives his Life for the sheep. Some other good
shepherds may venture their life for their sheep; As David run a hazard, to
venture his Life to rescue the sheep from the Lion. But Christ did more than
run a hazard, for He gave his Life.

Then Christ dwelt in Tents as a Sojourner. Ye have a 2. Christ a Sojourner.
distinction of Viatores, and Comp chenso es, amongst Divines; They say, that
all the people of God in their Pilgrimage toward Heaven, are Viatores, and the
Saints above in the state of Glory, are Comprehensores, in that they are at
home; now the Lord Jesus Christ he is both. There is that difference between a
Saint in Heaven, and a Saint on this side Heaven. Christ in the days of his
flesh, was at once a Traveller, and a Comprehensor. For he always had the
fruition of God, in that respect he was a Comprehensor; and yet in the 33 years
of his abode in the flesh, he was a Viator, and a Traveller in the way;
therefore he is said, to have drunk of the brook in the way. He speaks of a
sojourner, as one going to, and fro, Joh. 16. 8. I came forth from the Father,
and am come into the World; and again I leave the World, and go to the Father.
Here is his Jistes, as it were several journies, that Christ took in the days
of his Pilgrimage, as a Sojourner.

Thirdly, He pitched his Tents here amongst men, as a 3. Christ a Soldier.
Soldier, for indeed so he is. Ever since the fall, the World has been
divided into two parts, all shall be united then, but now the Devil goes away
with the greatest part, as the Prince of this World, and the Lord Jesus
appeared on the other side, as the Captain of our salvation. Ye have him under
that notion, Hebr. 2. 10. It became him, from whom are all things, and by whom
are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their
salvation perfect through sufferings. Accordingly he appeared to Josuah, Jos.
5. 13. with a sword in his hand, as the Captain of the Lord's hosts. Therefore
it is, that when a man is excommunicated, the Apostle's phrase is, That he may
be delivered up to Satan; because he is now cast our of the visible Church, and
so deduced again unto Satan's government. In all these respects, ye see, both
as a Shepherd, a Sojourner, and a Soldier; Christ is properly said to pitch
his Tents amongst us, which is the importance of the Greek word in the Text.

I shall not pass this over without some Application, The consideration of
Christ's dwelling amongst us, may be of use, to let us see, the Faithfulness
of God for our Encouragement, and the Condescension of Christ for our Imitation.

First, The faithfulness of God, for our encouragement: 1. Gods faithfulness
for our encouragement.
Be pleased to look into Exodus, and Leviticus, you shall find an old promise,
that God would come and dwell amongst his people. It is said in Exodus 12. 43.
I will dwell amongst the Children of Israel, and will be their God. It is said,
Leviticus 26. 12. I will walk amongst you, and will be your God, and ye shall
be my people. Now this promise, is of the nature of diverse, in the Scripture,
that have their graduall accomplishments, and are fulfilled, by piecemeal, by
degrees; I will dwell amongst you, says God, He promised then, when the people
of Israel were in the wilderness. The first fulfilling of this promise was,
when the Tabernacle was made in the wilderness, that was a Testimony of the
presence of God. A further fulfilling of this promise was, when Solomon built
the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 6. 2. I have built an house, and habitation for thee, and
a place for thy dwelling for ever. But when Christ came in the flesh, here was
a farther fulfilling of that promise; Then came He, of whose Body the
Tabernacle, and Temple, were but types. Destroy this Temple, says he, and I
will build it up in three days, speaking of his body; now here is the promise
fulfilled in a remarkable way: and yet there is to be a farther fulfilling of
the same promise still. That ye may see, that God makes good the same promise
many times, diverse times over, Revel. 21. 3. Behold the Tabernacle of God is
with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God
himself shall be with them, and be their God. There is a farther state of
happiness yet to come, wherein this promise is to be made good, That God will
dwell amongst men.

Secondly, see the Condescension of Jesus Christ, 2. Christ's Condescension to
dwell amongst men.
though, He was the delight of his Father from all Eternity, Prove. 8. Yet to
show his delight to the sons of men, he will come and dwell amongst them, Prove.
8. 31. I was by him, as one brought up with him, I was daily his delight,
rejoicing always before him, rejoicing in the habitable parts of the world,
and my delights were with the sons of men. To manifest this, before he did
actually come in the flesh, he was often pleased to take a body for a time, and
to lay it down again; to appear in human shape, praeludere Incarnationi, as
they use to call it; He acted the Prologue of his Incarnation, before he came
really. He appeared to Abraham, and to Joshua. But after he did assume a real
body into personal union with himself, which he did never till now, he took it
of the Virgin Mary. Here is infinite condescension, that he who lay in the
Father's bosom, should not abhor the Virgin's womb. If it were such a
commendation of Moses his faith, Heb. 11. though he were in great pomp at the
Court; yet, by faith he chose rather to suffer afflictions with the people of
God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Though he were a
favorite at Court, yet he would join himself with a sort of poor Brick-makers.
Then, what a condescension is it of the love of God, that he would send his Son
to dwell amongst us, poor dust and ashes!

Then, from Christ's dwelling amongst us as in a tabernacle, 1. As our
Shepherd, he protects us in our fallen condition.
as it refers to his condition as a Shepherd. Something we may learn from
hence; Whom to have recourse to, and to be protected by, in our fallen and
relapsed condition: We were all as sheep going astray, 1 Pet. 1. ult. but are
now returned to the Shepherd of our souls. Poor sheep, going astray, and must
for ever go astray, they cannot know the way to return home. But now, Lo,
Christ comes, dwells, and pitcheth his tents amongst us, that under him we
may have protection. I shall want nothing, says David, for the Lord is my
shepherd, Psalm. 23. ult. Seeing Christ came to pitch his tents, we should hear
his voice; My sheep hear my voice. Now Christ is in heaven, no voice is to be
heard but by the Ministry: therefore all those Exhortations which the Minister
gives to the people, they all come from this great Shepherd, and are
accordingly to be heeded. Eccles. 12. 11. The words of the wise are as goads,
and as nails fastened by the masters of assemblies, which are given by one
shepherd. Those Officers which Christ has fastened in the Church, they are as
nails fastened to the Assemblies. Therefore such as listen to the voice of
inferior shepherd, according to the Word, when this great Shepherd shall
come, they shall receive a Crown of life.

Secondly, Christ pitched his tents amongst us as a Sojourner. 2. Christ, as a
Sojourner, teaches us, to reckon our selves strangers in the world.
This should teach us to be conformed to Christ, even in this particular. He
did but pitch a tent, he did not take up his abode upon the face of the earth.
We must carry our selves as strangers and pilgrims in the world, and not look
at our selves as at home here. Ye know what the Psalmist says, I am a
stranger, Psalm. 39. 12. Hear my prayers, O Lord, and give ear to my cry, hold
not thy peace at my tears; for I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner as
all my fathers were. Ye know what is said of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and
those Patriarks of old; they dwelt in tents, says the Apostle, Heb. 11. 8, 9.
By faith Abraham, when he was called to go out into a place, which he should
after receive for an inheritance, obeyed, and he went out, not knowing whither
he went. By faith he sojourned in the land of promise as in a strange country,
dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same
promise. For he looked for a city which has foundations, whose builder and
maker is God. And so, verse. 16. Now they desired a better country, that is, an
heavenly.

Beloved, not to dwell hear, Look about you, and ye will find nothing but
Tabernacles; no Mansions, till ye come to heaven. While we live, What are our
bodies, but as so many tabernacles to our souls? It is a Scripture-expression,
2 Pet. 1. 13, 14. I think it meet; as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir
you up, knowing that shortly I must put off this tabernacle. While we live, our
bodies are but tabernacles to our souls; and when we are dead, the graves are
but tabernaeles to our bodies. Psalm. 16. 9. Therefore did my heart rejoice, and
my tongue was glad; moreover my body shall rest in hope. Because neither must
our souls remain long in our bodies, nor our bodies in the grave. If we will
have Mansions, we must look to Heaven, In my Father's house are many mansions.
Therefore dream not of mansions here below.

Thirdly, Christ pitched his tent amongst us, as the Captain 3. Christ, as a
Soldier, learneth us to be encouraged
of our salvation. Let this encourage us; we have one that is able to encounter
with Satan, if he bring all his forces into the field together. Let him be a
roaringlion, here is a ruling Lion, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, that can
encounter him; that puts upon us the whole armor of God. They say, that a
very Army of Hearts and Hares, led by a Lion, their Commander, are able to do
great matters, because the Leader puts courage into them by his valor. Let
Christ put courage into us. As that great Commander said, when the Scouts came
and told him, that so many thousands were coming against him, more than they
were: Why, says he, How many thousands do you reckon me for? intimating; that
he was worth many thousands of his enemies. So, For how many thousands do you
reckon Christ, when you go out against the World, and the Flesh, and the
Devil? I pass to the next.

And we beheld his glory, as the glory of the only begotten Son of God.
Here is the special manifestation of Christ's glory. The Disciples beheld the
glory of Christ, as the glory of the only begotten Son of the Father. Let us
take the words as they lie. Here the Spectators were the Disciples of Christ,
they were the men that beheld; and, in that respect, they were the blessed men,
more blessed then the Fathers before them: Matthew. 3. 16, 17. Blessed are your
eyes for they see; and your ears, for they hear. For, verily I say unto you,
that many prophets and righteous men have desired to see those things which ye
see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things which ye hear, and have
not heard them.

We beheld, there is the View. The word is emphaticall, (...), we beheld, as in
a theater, as men behold things presented to them on a Stage; they behold them
with a great deal of earnestness and delight: That the word implies.

Ye have heard what the Object is, the glory of Christ, We beheld his glory,
which is the shining forth of excellency; such appeared in Christ.

The specification of that Object, What kind of glory? Why, the glory as of the
onely-begotten of the Father. Ye read in Scripture of several sorts of glory.

There is the glory of the Celestial bodies, the Sun, 1. Glory of Celestial
bodies.
Moon, and Stars, of which it is said, 1 Cor. 15. 41. There is one glory of the
Sun, another glory of the Moon, and another glory of the Stars; for one Star
differs from another in glory.

We read of the glory of Man, 1 Pet. 1. 24. All flesh is 2. Glory of Man.
grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of the grass. The glory of
Man, because as the Stars, and Sun, and Moon, excel inferior bodies, so they
excel the Beasts; there is a shining forth in him, beyond what is in the
creatures that have no reason.

We read likewise of the glory of the Angels, who are 3. Glory of Angeis.
therefore called the Cherubims of glory, Heb. 9. 5. And over it the Cherubims
of glory, shadowing the Mercy-seat, of which we cannot now speak particularly.

But, there is beyond all these (for all these are but created 4. The Glory of
God.
Glories) there is the glory of God, of which he himself says, He will not
give it to any other. This is the Glory of which we read in the Text, He will
not give it to another, Isa. 42. 4. I am the Lord, that is my name, and my
glory will I not give to another. I, but Christ was himself of the same Nature
with himself; therefore the glory they saw in Christ was the glory as of the
onely-begotten of the Father. Some difference is in these words.

First, In that Christ is said to be the only begotten. Do which were born,
not of blood, nor of flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God? How then is
Christ the only begotten, seeing God has other children, and other begotten
children too? That will not serve the turn, to say, We are adopted Christ's, as
his begotten. Says James, Jam. 1. 18. Of his own will begat he us with the
word of truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits of his creatures. If
God has begotten us, how then is Christ the only begotten of the Father?

I answer, Out of this place of St. James, Of his own will begat he us. There
lies the differences, Christ is the begotten of the Nature of the Father, we
are begotten of the Will of the Father, Of his own will begar he us. Christ is
a Son of eternal generation, we are sons by adoption: He begotten of his
Nature, and we begotten of his Will. And so in that sense Christ is the only
begotten, because the only Natural Son of God.

Still here is a farther difference, We beheld his glory, as the glory of the
only begotten of the Father. In this Particle, (...), that which is but as
another thing, is not the same thing, simile non est idem. Why now we hold out,
and that according to truth, that the glory of Christ was the very self-same
glory which God the Father had; the self-same glory which is due to God, is due
to the Son of God. Therefore it is here said, It was the glory as of the only
begotten.

For that you must know, that the Hebrew Caph, and the [As] in Scripture, one
of Similitude, the other of Identity. There is [as] Similitudinis, and
Veritatis, an [as] of comparison. As for example, If one shall see a Nobleman
richly attired, and bravely attended, to go through the streeets, and say, Such
a Nobleman goes, (...), as a King; here is an [as] of similitude. If the King
himself should be going to Parliament, in great state, we may truly say of him,
he goes in state, (...), as a King. Here is an [as] of Verity and Identity.
The former was but an [as] of similitude. Aand there are many places of
Scripture, where [as] does not note a likeness, but the self-samenesse, (as I
may so speak) an Identity. It is said of John the Baptist, that all the people
looked at him, (...), as a Prophet: Matthew. 14. 5. When Herod.
he would have put him to death, he feared the multitude, because they counted
him, (...), as a prophet. Do you think the multitude looked at John, as if he
had been something like a prophet? No, they took him for a Prophet indeed; yea,
it is expressed, they counted him for a prophet. Phil. 2. 8. the Apostle
speaking of Christ, being found in fashion of a man, he humbled himself. What,
was not Christ really Man? Yes. But he being found, (...), in fashion as a man.
Here [as] is an [as] of Identity, not an [as] of similitude, As a man, that is
really so. As a man, that is the only begotten Son of God, that is, really the
only begotten Son of God. Ye have the words expounded.

Now for the proof of this, The Disciples beheld the glory of Christ, as the
glory of the only begotten Son of God; you shall have their own Testimony, 1 John 1. 1, 2. That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we
have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled
of the Word of Life; for the life was manifested, and we have seen, and bear
witness, and showed unto you, that Eternal Life, which was with the Father,
and was manifested to us. Other men To see Christ, and to see into Christ, is
not the same thing.
they saw Christ, as well as the Disciples did; but not so much into Christ, as
the Disciples did; As the Temple of Solomon was all beautiful without, of
costly work, fair, and comely stones, but within, it was all over-laid with
Gold. The Passengers that went by, they could see the out side of the Temple,
and could not but acknowledge a beautiful frame; but the Priests, that served
within, they saw it all over-laid with Gold, and so saw a farther beauty. All
the Jews, amongst whom Christ conversed, might behold his out side, but the
Disciples had a farther in sight into Christ. We beheld him, that is, we beheld
him, as the word of Life, and saw his glory, that is, as of the only begotten
Son of God; Whereas others saw his glory, that is, as of a Man, that did many
glorious things; but these saw the glory of God, through the Manhood.

For the farther manifestation of this, I shall show you in what things, and at
what time, the Disciples beheld the glory of Christ, and then proceed to
Application.

First, In what things. 1. The things wherein Christ's glory appears. 1. The
glory of Christ seen in his Oracles.
In his Oracles. In his Miracles.


First, In his Oracles, namely his discourses, and Sermons, and Heavenly
sayings, that proceeded out of his mouth. They came from him with such a glory,
as amazed the hearers; and made them acknowledge, that he spoke with authority,
Matthew. 7. 28, 29. It came to pass, when Jesus had enae these sayings, the
people were aston shed at his Doctrine; For he taught them as one having
authority, and not as the Scribes. Here was a dazelling glory shined out from
the words of Christ, in so much, as they could scarce apprehend him; they had
not power to lay hold on him, but returned, and said, Never man spoke like this
Man. What was flatteringly said of Herod, is true of the Lord Jesus Christ, in
regard of his Ministry; The voice of God, and not of man, not of mere man, but
of him, that was both God and Man. So this glory the Apostles saw in his
Oracles, for they conversed with him.

Secondly, In his Miracles: Divine glory shined in them. 2. In his Miracles.
As it is said of the first Miracle he did, Joh. 2. 11. This beginning of
miracles did Jesus in Canaan of Galilee, and manifested forth his glory, and
his Disciples believed on him. And so, when he had raised Lazarus from the
dead, it is said, Joh. 11. 4. This sickness is not to death, but for the glory
of God, that the Son of God might be glorified thereby; The Lord Jesus Christ
intended his own glory in raising of Lazarus (And so by all his other
Miracles.) This was a Divine glory: Because, never any raised the dead, as he
did. Other instances ye have of others, raising some dead ones, as Elisha the
Shunamites son, 2 King. 4. ^3, 34. and Paul, Eutychus, Acts 20. 10. But here is
the difference, Christ raised them by his own power, they by the power of
Christ. So, The glory, as the only begotten of God, appeared only in his
Miracles, and not in theirs Luke 14. 7. It is said of Christ, He touched the
bier, and they stood still, And Christ said, I say to thee, Arise. Here Christ
speaks to men, I say to thee: whereas, what the Apostles did, they acknowledged
it done, not by their own power, but by Christ, Acts 3. 12, 13. And when Peter
saw it, he answered unto the people, Ye men of Israel, why marvail ye at this?
or why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our own power, and holiness,
we had made this man to walk; The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob,
the God of our fathers, has glorified his Son Jesus, whom ye delivered up, and
denied him in the presence of Pilate: His Name, through faith in his Name, has
made this man whole. So as it was the Glory of Jesus, that appeared even in the
Miracles of the Disciples; These are the things wherein he did especially
appear.

For the times: they are these two, 2. The times, when.
The time of his Transfiguration. The time of his Ascension.


First, The Disciples beheld his glory, as the glory of 1. At his
Transfiguration.
the only begotten of the Father, at his Transfiguration; of which ye read,
Matthew. 17. When his Face shined, and his Raiment glittered, having Moses, and
Elias, James, Peter, and John there; who were the spectators of all. This,
Moses had begged long before, and said, Lord show me thy Exodus 33. 13.
glory; Some piece of an answer God gave him, when he passed before him, and
showed some piece of his glory. But here God shows his glory upon mount
Tabor, when Christ was Transfigured; We beheld his glory, namely, at the
Transfiguration. John was one there, and Peter was another, as well as John.
And he speaks dearly of it, 2 Pet. 1. 17. For he tells you of the voice that
came from the excellent glory; saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased, hear him. Referring to that time, and that place, the time of our
Saviors Transfiguration upon that Mount, Mark 9. 2, 3, 4, 5. verse. And after
six days, Jesus takes with him Peter, and James, and John, and leads them
up into an high mountain, apart by themselves, and he was transfigured before
them; and his raiment became shining exceeding white as snow, so as no fuller
on earth can whiten them. And there appeared unto them Elias, with Moses, and
they were talking with Jesus.

The second time, wherein they beheld this glory of Christ; was the time of his
Ascension, which the Disciples 2. At his Ascension.
were spectators of, Acts 2. 9. And when he had spoken these things, while they
beheld him; He was taken up, and a Cloud received him out of their sight. This
cloud was Veh culum Regale, a Royal Chariot, wherein Christ rode up to glory;
And glory was not only the term, to which he went, but he went in a glorious
way. As you may understand that in Timothy, Great is the mystery of godliness.
God manifested in the flesh, seen of angels, believed of in the world, received
up into glory, (...). You see by this time the truth of the Proposition. Let us
see what use we can make of it, and then proceed.

First, take notice of one great end of Christ's Incarnation, He was made
Christ was incarnated, to show his Glory.
flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we beheld his glory. Till then, the glory of
Christ was invisible; but now, by taking flesh, he exposed himself and his
glory to view: God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3. 16. Indeed, the flesh of
Christ was a vail to him, but a mirror and glass to us. To him a Vail, to
observe the glory which he had from all Eternity with God the Father, as the
Son of God; but to us a Mirror, in which we beheld this glory of God, which
was never till now exposed to view, or not so fully. As God is invisible, so
his glory is too dazzling for our weak eyes. But we that cannot behold the Sun
in its sphere, may behold the Sun in a basin of water. We that cannot behold
the glory of God, as in it self, may behold it in Christ, in the veil of his
flesh. Therefore he was manifested, that he might be seen.

Secondly, Be exhorted from hence, to take a view of 2. Let us take a view of
his glory, as the Disciples did.
the glory of Christ, as the Disciples did: We cannot in the same manner, yet
we have one way wherein we may do it: For Christ exposes himself and his glory
to believers in the glass of the Gospel; 2 Cor. 3. ult. But we all with open
face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
image from glory to glory, even a^ by the Spirit of the Lord. To that end, he
has appointed the Ministry of the Word, and furnished his Ministers with
gifts. 2 Cor. 4. 6. God who commanded light to shine out of darkness, has
shined in our hears, that we should give the knowledge of the glory of God in
the face of Jesus Christ. Therefore in your attendance upon the Ministry of the
Gospel, let it be your aim, still to see something of Christ's glory in it:
And do as the Disciples did, We beheld his glory as in a Theater. Let it be our
care to view Christ, and the things of Christ, as they are represented to us in
a Theater. Ye know how greedy men are of such objects, they cannot satisfy
their eyes with seeing Pageants, and such kind of shows; besides, things upon
a Stage are seen with a great deal of delight: Insomuch as Augustine, when he
would exphesse the joys of Christians, in the midst of their greatest sorrow,
has this excellent expression of it, Orantium d^lciores sunt lachrimae, quam
omnium gaudia Theatrorum, says he, The tears of praying Christians have more
sweetness in them, than all the joys of the Theaters, or of the Stages.
Certainly, there never came such a spectacle, never such a thing to be viewed,
as the glory of Christ is, never any thing so well worth the viewing. Let it
therefore be our care to do as the Apostle exhorts us, to be looking up to
Jesus. That is very emphaticall, Heb. 12. 2. Looking unto Jesus, the author and
finisher of our faith; who for the joy that was set before him, endured the
cross, and despised the shame, and is set down at the right hand of God. The
word is, (...), which has a double force in it, (...), and (...); looking off,
first; and then, looking upon. We must look off from the world, which our
hearts are too much glued to, and then look up to Jesus; otherwise, if we busy
our minds too much with carnal things, our hearts will be so full of the
relish of them, as we cannot savor of the things of God. Certainly, brethren,
we have presidents for this; take Paul, a man that busied himself in this great
work, of beholding the glory of Christ, throughout his whole course, after his
conversion; therefore he desired no other learnlng but Christ crucified, 1 Cor.
2. 2. I determined not to know any thing amongst you, save Jesus Christ and him
crucified. He valued no other wealth, The knowledge of Christ to be preferred
before all things.
but the knowledge of Christ, Phil. 3. 8. I count all things but loss and
dross, for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord; for whom I
have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may
win Christ. Where was his learning, and wealth, and joy, and great delight? It
was in the beholding of Christ; he gloried in nothing else, Gal. 6. 14. God
forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Beloved, the Cross of Christ shall be our Crown, if we love to make the glory
of Christ our study.

Thirdly, take this third use into your meditations, of 3. Meditation on
Christ's excellency, raises our apprehensions above all created glories.
the excellency of Christ, raising your apprehensions above all created
glories; for his glory is the glory as of the only begotten of the Father. Ye
wrong Christ, if your apprehensions of him be not higher, than those you have
of any creature. His has a glory far above theirs, above the glory of the
Celestial bodies, and the glory of Men, above the Angels and Cherubims.
Therefore the Apostle takes a great deal of pains, to prefer Christ above the
Angels, that our thoughts may go beyond in the excellency of Christ above any
other creatures. Whence it is, that Joh. 5. 23. all men should honor the Son,
even as they honor the Father. He that honors not the Son, honors not
the Father which has sent him. So I have done with that Clause.

4. The fourth thing in my Text remains, that is, The singular Qualifications
of Christ's Person,

Full of Grace and Truth.
Christ was full of grace and truth, That is our Observation. All sorts of
grace in Christ
It pleased the Father, says the Apostle, Col. 1. 19. that in him should all
fullness dwell; all fullness, of all sorts of grace, whether ye look to the
kinds, or degrees of grace, the fullness of both sorts. There were all kinds of
grace in Christ. Those graces which were scattered amongst the Saints, one
excelling in this grace, another in that; Moses in meekness, Job in patience,
David in thankfulness, and Joseph in chastity, and so in the rest; they are
all united in Christ. So for the measure and degrees of grace, as he has of
all kinds, so the utmost degree of every kind. To Ministers, graces are given
in a scant proportion, and measured out, according as God has allotted to
every one his proportion, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4. 7. Unto every one of
us is grace given, according to the measure of the gift of Christ. But to
Christ himself, it is above measure, Joh. 3. 34. God gave not the Spirit by
measure to him; he does not stand meting it out, but pours it out upon him.
So that look whatsoever grace a human nature, void of sin, is capable of, that
was all poured out upon Christ: Full of grace. It pleased the Father, that in
him should all fullness dwell, (...); that it should be the mansion house of
all fullness, so as there shall be no defect. Adam was full of grace in his
condition, but fell from it; and the Angels full, but many of them turned
Apostates: but Christ has no defect in his Nature, it is a fullness, and a
dwelling fullness. But this is too general. Full, Of what? Full of grace, and
full of truth.

First, Of grace. Grace, is a word of various acceptance, 1. Christ is full of
grace.
and admits of many distinctions: I shall only meddle with such, as are
applicable to this place. Grace is twofold, it is taken either Active or
Passive.

There is Active-grace, Gratia gratis dans, Givinggrace. Passive-grace, Gratia
gratis data, Grace given.

Active grace is that good will, out of which God bestows his benefits upon
the gracious.

Passive grace, grace given, is that which is bestowed, either upon the body,
or upon the soul, or upon the whole person.

First, A grace bestowed upon the bodies of men, and r. Grace bestowed upon the
bodies of men.
that is Beauty, which properly comes under the notion of grace, in that
sense; Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain, Prove. 31. 30. Gratia fallax
est, says the Latin translation, grace is deceitful; taking grace for
beauty. So the Heathens, they called those goddesses of theirs, Charites, the
Graces. That is grace upon the body, but that is the lowest.

Secondly, There is grace bestowed upon the Soul; and 2. Upon the Soul.
those are rather Gifts, tending to Edification, as gifts of Prophecy, and the
like; or to Salvation, as Faith, and Love, and Zeal. The former are called,
(...); the latter, Charites: the former, gifts; the latter, graces, in a strict
sense

Thirdly, There is grace bestowed upon the whole Person, that is, Acceptance.
Ye may call the first, Gracefulness 3. Upon the whole Person.
in the body; the second, Grace in the soul; and the third, Gracefulness in
the person. As when we say, Such a one is gracious at the Court, when he
partaketh of the grace and favor of the King.

Now Christ was full of grace in all these senses.

First, If ye speak of active grace, giving grace; there 1. A fullness of active
grace in Christ.
was a fullness of that in Christ, a fullness of good will, out of which flowed
so many accommodations to the sons of men, both for soul and body. Therefore at
his birth, the Angels sung, Good Will toward men. Whether ye look to his
words, or to his deeds, ye shall find him full of grace, in this sense. If to
his words, ye know what the Evangelist says, Luke 4. 42. They all bare
witness, and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth.
Gracious words. It is prophesied of him, and accordingly he made it good, that
he should not cry, nor his voice be heard in the streets. His cry should not be
like that of Jonah in Niniveh, Jon. 3. 4.
a voice of destruction, or of terror; but if he did cry, it should be of
mercy. If any man thirst, let him come and Isa. 55. 1.
drink. If his voice be heard, it is a voice of grace, inviting sinners to come
to him, Ye that be heavy laden, etc. Grace Matthew. 11. 24.
in all his words.

And so grace in all his Actions, He went about, as the Scripture tells us,
Act. 10. doing good. And so ye know the Evangelicall History. I do not think,
ye can give me an instance of any man, that Christ sent away, in the days of
his flesh, that came to him for mercy, without mercy, He healed them all* Luke
9. 11. And the people, when they knew it, followed him; and he received them,
and spoke unto them of the kingdom of God, and healed them that had need of
healing. So, here is active grace in Christ.

Secondly, If ye look to Passive grace, to grace given; 2. Fullness of Passive
grace in Christ, upon his Body, first.
there was grace given that fell upon his body, which, certainly, was of
excellent frame, full of beauty. Therefore it is said, Thou art fairer than the
sons of men, grace is poured upon thy lips, Psalm. 45. 2. This is not spoken of
the Divinity of Christ, for, in that respect, he was fairer than the Angels;
but of his Humanity, and so he was fairer than the children of men. There was
indeed a time, wherein no beauty was to be seen in him; but he speaks of him
then as upon the Cross, when the ploughers made long furrows upon his back,
and dug deep holes in his sides, as he was besmeared with blood; so no
beauty in him. And, secondly, upon his Soul.


Secondly, Passive grace upon his soul, grace given to that. Whatsoever
Indowment was requisite to fit him for a Mediator, that he had; some understand
by Grace, all the perfections of the Will; and by Truth, all the perfections of
the Understanding. Surely nothing was wanting, either in will, or
understanding^ or affection^, that might render the soul of Christ fully
gracious. It is prophesied in Isaiah 11. 2. The spirit of the Lord shall rest
upon him. He spoke before of a rod of Jesse, and a branch growing out of his
root; So now, What grace was upon his soul? Why, The spirit of the Lord shall
rest upon him, and the spirit of Wisdom, and Understanding, and of Counsel,
and Might, and of Knowledge, and of the Fear of the Lord.

Thirdly, Grace given, such as fills up the whole person, 3. Grace given,
fills up the whole person.
grace of Acceptance. In that sense it is said, Luke 2. 40. speaking of
Christ, The Child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom, and
the grace of God was upon him; that is, the favor of God. So he interprets
it in the last verse of that Chapter; Jesus increased in wisdom, and stature,
and favor with God, and men. We needs must grant it to be so, because, Quod
efficit tale, magis est tale, That which makes another so, is much more so, it
self. Christ is he, that procures acceptance both of our persons, and our
services; and therefore, he himself is much more acceptable with God. Our
persons have no acceptance, but through him. We are said, to be accepted
through the beloved, Ephesians. 1. 6. Our services have no acceptance but through
him. In that place of Peter, we are a spiritual priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 5, 6.
Offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ; So as He
himself is much more accepted. Thus you see, how he is, full of grace.

Let us see now, how Christ is likewise, full of Truth. Christ in the truth,
and the truth in Him.
The truth is said to be in Jesus, and Jesus is said to be in the truth. Truth
is said to be in him, Ephesians. 4. 21. If so be ye have heard him, and been taught
by him, as the truth is in Jesus. He is said to be The truth, John* 14. 6. I am
the way, the Truth, and the Life.

More distinctly, Take truth in what notion you will, it will appear Christ
was, full of truth. Truth is sometimes opposed to Hypocrisy, sometimes to
Error, sometimes to Lying, sometimes to Shadows. Christ was full of truth, in
all these senses.

First, If ye take Truth, as opposed to Hypocrisy, and as 1. Christ is full of
Truth, as opposed to Hypocrisy.
equipollent with sincerity, not with the levened bread of malice, but with the
unlevened bread of sincerity and truth, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5. So Christ
was full of Truth, sincere in all. When he lifted up his eyes, he lifted up his
heart to God. When he bowed his knee, he bowed his soul. When he opened his
mouth, he opened his heart to his hearers. Therefore he is said to be girt
about the loins with faithfulness, and truth; Righteousness, and truth, shall
be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness, the girdle of his reins. As the
girdle girts a man in; so sincerity, and truth, girt in all the actions, and
speeches of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, If ye take Truth, as it stands in opposition 2. As opposed to
Error.
to Error; thus Christ was, full of truth, because all Treasures, both of
wisdom, and knowledge, being hid in him, it was impossible, for him to have
any misapprehension; He conceived rightly of all things, and spoke truly of
all, even his enemies being witnesses. Hear what they say, Matthew. 20. 16. They
sent out to him their Disciples, with the H^rodians, saying, Master, we know
thou art true, and teach the way of God in Truth.

Thirdly, Take Truth, as it stands in opposition to Lying. 3. As opposed to
Lying.
Lie not one to another, says Paul, to the Ephesians; but speak the truth,
every man to his neighbor. So Christ was, full of truth. The Apostle Peter
tells you, That he was a Lamb, without spot, or blemish, he did no sin, 1
Pet. 2. 22. He did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth: It might be
sought for, but was not found. The word imports, it was not found in his
mouth: for many lay at catch for Christ, if they could have trap't him in his
speeches; There was a great deal of watching, but no guile found in his Lips.
He did neither Me^tiri, nor, Mendacium dicere, at any time, which can hardly be
said of any; And yet one thing Jabrinus says, A good man will be sure not to
lie, that is, to speak against his knowledge, and Conscience. A prudent man
will be careful not to tell a lie, nor yet to speak, what is untrue; One that
will not lie, may yet possibly speak an untruth, but Christ did never so much,
as speak an untruth. He was so far from Lying.

Fourthly, If ye take Truth, as it stands in opposition 4. As opposed to
Shadows.
to Shadows, Hebr. 9. 24. Christ is not entered into the Holy place made with
hands, which are the figures of the true, etc. Here is true, opposed to figure,
to shadow. In this sense, Christ is, full of Truth; because he is the substance
of all those shadows, which were under the old Law: which some take to be the
sense of what follows, Joh. 1. 17. The Law came by Moses, but faith, and
truth, by Jesus Christ. Truth is here opposed to the Ceremonial Law, which
contains the shadow, as grace to the Moral; Let us learn something
throughout every branch of this Explication.

First, Seeing Christ is full of grace, in an active sense, full of giving
grace; full of good will to the sons To learn, to have good thoughts of Christ.
of men: Let us all learn to have good thoughts of Christ, not to look at him
in Satan's spectacles, through the glass of unbelief, and
melancholly-apprehensions; as one that is inaccessible, one that will not
pardon, nor entertain poor sinners: So the Devil sometimes presents him, in
such a false glass. But look at him in the glass of the Gospel, that holds
him forth, full of grace. The Holy Ghost, that proceeds from the Father and
the Son, tells you what he is; He came down in the shape of a Lamb, to show
the meekness of Christ. The Disciples they saw him, as full of grace. The
friends of Lazarus saw him, weep over Lazarus. They said, Behold how he loved
him; the same bowels Christ has now in Heaven, as he had upon the Earth. And
if it were possible, that they were capable of enlargement, there are none more
large; now all the provision is laid in, and the meat bought, and the Table
spread, and dishes provided. What does God expect, but that the people should
fall to, and eat? How can we doubt of his good will now, that has done, and
suffered, and prepared so much for us? It is not now to do, it is done already;
therefore we may be surer of his good will, than they, before the price was
paid.

Secondly, Seeing Christ is full of grace, even in regard 2. To look at Beauty
as a blessing.
of his body Look at Beauty as a blessing. This kind of grace is one of the
things that adorned Christ. I say, look at beauty as a blessing, when it
falls upon a body, joined to such a soul as Christ's was; otherwise, it is to
the soul as a rusty sword in a velver scabbard. The beauty of a profane person
is but like the shining of a rotten stick, like the gayness of those weeds in
your cornfieldsd, that make a fair show, yet, if you touch them, they are
offensive, not to be endured. There can no expression equal the foulness of
them in Scripture; it is as Solomon said, Prove. 11. 22. as a jewel of gold in a
swine's snout, so is a fair woman without discretion. But now, where there is a
meeting of the inward graces of the soul, and this outward gracefulness in the
body, there beauty is an ornament. Pulchior est virtus veniens e corp^re
pulcro. Where beauty and godliness be, there grace is more beautiful, in such
a body, in such a person. And the beauty is more graceful, where there is
grace to set it out, where the inside is adorned as well as the outside. It is
an high commendation that the Scripture gives of Abigail, and shows what
beauty is most desirable; a sweet conjunction was found in her, A beautiful
woman, of a good understanding, 1 Samuel 25. 3. The name of his wife was Abigail,
and she was a woman of a good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance.
Such as God has bestowed beauty upon, should be careful not to blemish it, by
any untoward conversation; but to be looking to God both inside and outside.
When ye have good apparel on, ye are loath to stain that; When God has
apparelled your beauty with beauty, take heed of staining that by any
uncleanness whatsoever.

And, in the next place, in that Christ was full of grace 3. To learn to have
recourse to Christ, when we stand in need of grace.
in regard of the soul; We should learn from hence, whom to have recourse to,
when we stand in need of grace, even to this full Fountain; for he received it,
that he might communicate it. He was filled with an overflowing fullness, that
of his fullness we might receive grace for grace, Joh. 1. 17. Christ is full of
grace, as a woman's breast is full of milk, that even aketh for want of being
drawn. Christ, as he is full, so he delights to communicate of his fullness;
therefore it is an ease to him to be drawn. Of this, we shall speak,
God-willing, in its place.

Fourthly, Christ is full of grace, of grace that fell upon 4. To learn, whence
all our acceptance comes.
his whole Person; that is, Full of acceptance with God, a gracious receiving
into favor with God the Father. And this lets us see, whence we are to
fetch all our acceptance. How it comes to pass, that the Saints come to be
so gracious with God? Why, in and through Christ, who is full of grace and
acceptance; They are accepted (as ye heard before) in the beloved. Christ is so
gracious, as to ingratiate all that believe in him. He is God's Favorite, and
brings into favor all such as are allotted to him. None of us can possibly
get the blessing, but in our Elder Brother's garment; Genesis 27. 16.
Jacob took that course, so must we, if we will have a blessing from God. As
Joseph told the Patriarks, They should Genesis 43. 3.
not see his face, except they brought their younger brother Benjamin along
with them; so there is no seeing of the face of God, unless we bring Christ
along with us in the arms of our faith. There is a story, Act. 12. of the men
of Tire, when Herod was displeased with them, how they made use of Blastus the
King's Chamberlain; verse. 20. And Herod was in displeasure with them of Tire
and S^don; but they came with one accord to him: and having made Blastus the
King's Chamberlain their friend, desired peace, because their country was
nourished by the King's country. This is our case. God is highly displeased
with us for our sins, as Herod was with the men of Tire and Sidon; we have our
dependency upon God, as they had upon Herod's country, Their country was
nourished by the King's country. We are undone, if God relieve us not. Now they
are undone; the best way is, to make Blastus their friend, that so Herod being
appeased, they may have peace. We are to go to God by Christ Jesus, that we may
have acceptance with God. He is full of grace, and they shall partake of his
grace and favor; even as Joseph, when he was got in with Pharaoh, he made way
for all his brethren: the Text says, Genesis 47. 2. He took some of his brethren,
and presented them to Pharaoh. Just so does Christ take us, and presents us to
God. The Apostle Peter has a phrase somewhat like it, where he says, 2 Pet.
3. 18. Christ also has once suffered for sin, the just for the unjust, that he
might bring us to God, (...), that he might take us by the hand, and lead us to
God. Now these men being presented by Joseph to Pharaoh, see how Pharaoh
entertaineth them, See, the land is before thee; in the best of the land make
thy father and brethren to dwell. If Christ has once brought us to God, not
only all the good things of the world, but all the promises of the Word, are
before a Saint, when he is brought to God by grace, and so ingratiated with him.

Fifthly, Seeing Christ is full of truth, as it stands in 5. Learn to be like
Christ.
opposition to hypocrisy, learn we to be like him; it is good being of
Christ's fashion. The girdle of his loins is Truth, as ye heard before out of
verse 11. Let it be the girdle of ours, Having your loins girt about with
truth. Be sincere in all we speak and do; otherwise, all our performances, be
they never so glorious, they are but like a fair pair of gilded Organs, that
want wind or bellows to blow them; so are all our performances, if there be no
sincerity to enliven them. All outward services, they are but the carcases of
Devotion, if there want sincerity. Ephesians. 4. 24. It is called, The new man,
created in righteousness, and in the holiness of the truth, (...), so it is in
the Original; it is, a holiness of truth. Otherwise, no holiness at all, if
truth be not there.

Again, If Christ be thus full of truth, as it stands in 2. To go to him for
direction in matters of Opinion.
opposition to error; then we may see from hence, whom to go to for guidance
in all matters of opinion; to Him that is full of truth, that cannot err.
Doceat me Deus qui me fecit, and non qui seipsum ignorant. Let him teach me that
made me; let not him teach me that knows not himself. Every man is a lover of
his own opinion, and apt to miscary; but it is Christ that is full of truth, who
has promised to guide us by his spirit, and to lead us into all truth, Joh.
16. 13.

Again, If Christ be full of truth, as it stands in opposition 3. Matter of
comfort to the people of God,
to lying: Let us learn from hence to gather matter of comfort to all the
people of God. He that is full of truth, and cannot lie, has said to every
poor soul, Come to me ye that are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. If any
man come to me, I will in no wise cast him off. So is it matter of and of
terror to the ungodly.
terror to all ungodly impenitent sinners. He that believes not, is damned
already. He that believes, shall be saved; he that believes not is damned,
the wrath of God abides upon him. And so matter of Imitation for all. If our
Savior, whom we profess our selves to depend upon, and to Matter of Imitation
for all.
be Disciples of, be full of truth, let us be like him. Therein stands the
true Religion, in imitating him whom we worship, says Lactantius. If people be
given to lying, they are more like the devil than Christ: For it is said of
such, Ye are of your father the devil. He is a liar, and the father of it.
Mark, he speaks of his own when he speaks a lie. Now there will be a time, when
every soul shall be ransackt. Take heed, lest the devil find something of his
own, reigning in you. It is said, he came to Christ, The Prince of this world
comes, Joh. 14. 13. and has nothing in me; that is, nothing of his own in
me. He came and searched Christ, but found nothing of his there. Take heed,
lest when he comes to you, he find a lying spirit there, that is his own. As,
when Laban came to search Jacob's tent, to try if he could find any of his own
goods there; if he had, it would have gone ill with Jacob: As, when searchers
come to a ship, and find any prohibited goods there, the owner forfeits all the
lading. If the devil come, and find any thing of his own, he takes that soul
to hell. Without are dogs, and every one that loves and makes a lie, Rev. 22.
15.

Lastly, Seeing Christ is full of truth, as it stands in opposition to
shadows: Let us learn to embrace him, that so we may find the substance. That
is the phrase of the holy Ghost, Prove. 8. 21. where Wisdom speaks thus, That I
may cause those that love me to inherit substance, and I will fill them with
treasures. Christ is not only the substance of all Leviticall shadows, (they
are vanished, we have now nothing to do with them); but there is another sort
of shadows that men dote upon, more than the Jews upon their ceremonial
carnal things, delights of the world, riches, pleasures, and profits; there
are some men that busy themselves in these. What says the holy Ghost of them?
Psalm. 83. 17. Let them be confounded and troubled for ever; yea, let them be
put to shame and perish. All are but shadows, in comparison, no reality. Oh
then, he is a substantial man that inherits, he that leaves to follow after
shadows to inherit Christ; otherwise, all men that busy themselves in things
below, and neglect Christ, they are but like a man that goes into an Orchard,
and, instead of pulling the fruit, he catches at the shadow of the fruit, that
are scattered in the hedge; he hurts himself, and gets not the fruit. Would
ye have Christ, ye must go to God for him; the reality of all is founded in
him. What are the things men dote upon? but either honors, or riches, or
pleasures, the worlds Trinity, as some call those three: We shall find them all
in Christ, Prove. 3. 16, 17. where Wisdom speaks thus (that Wisdom is Christ) In
her right hand are riches and honor. Her ways are ways of pleasantness.
Here is all three, riches, honor, and pleasure; and all found in Wisdom, which
is the Lord Jesus Christ.

Verse. 15. John bare witness of him; He cried, saying, This was he of whom I
spoke, He that comes after me is preferred before me, for he was before me.
16. And of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace.
For this fifteenth verse, which I am now to close with, there are in it these
particulars.

First, The Witnesse-bearer; that is John the Baptist, John bare witness of
him.

Secondly, The manner of his Witnessing, He cried, saying.

Thirdly, The time when he witnessed, which lies couched in these words, This
was he of whom I spoke. I shall open that by, and by.

Fourthly, The matter of his testimony here, He that comes after me is
preferred before me, for he was before me.

I shall begin with the first. The Witnesse-bearer was John the Baptist, of
whom we read, verse. 7. that he came The office of John the Baptist.
for a witness, to bear witness of the Light; and here we find him doing,
what he came for. He came for a witness, and here he bears witness. This is
the Observation.

That a good man will not be wanting, to the duty of his This was his Office,
and ye find him taken up in the discharge of it, and so should every one be;
For we must walk Circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, not to forget the
errand we are sent about. Every blessed man is like that Tree, Psalm. 1. that
brings forth his fruit in his season; which is proper to his Calling, and in
such a time, as is most proper for that fruit, Romans 12. 7, 8. Ye have an
Apostolical Injunction. Let him that has a Ministry, wait upon his ministry;
or he that exhorts upon his exhortation; He that gives, let him do it with
simplicity; he that rules, with diligence; he that shows mercy, with
Cheerfulness. Men lose nothing, by being employed in that service, that
Nothing lost by diligence in God's service.
God calls them to; and men get nothing, by being busy in other men's matters.
One may be over-busie, and yet, in God's account, but an idle person, if he
does not his proper work, 1 Timothy 5. 13. And withal, they learn to be Idle,
wandering about from house to house; and not only idle, but Tatlers also, and
busybodies, speaking things which they ought not. Busy bodies, and yet idle:
Why? why, because busy in matters that concern them not.

The next is the manner of John's witness bearing, He 2. The manner of his
witnesse-bearing.
bare witness, and cried; The Baptist cried in his witnessing of Christ. There
is something remarkable in that, whereas the Scripture contents it self in
other Cases, to say, He opened his mouth, and spoke; here John, Cries. What is
the mystery of this? He is said to cry for some one, or all (perhaps) of these
three Reasons.

First, In reference to a foregoing Prophecy; Isaiah 1. In reference to
foregoing prophecies.
had foretold as much, which is applied in, Matthew. 3. 3. speaking of John the
Baptist, This is he that was spoken of by the Prophet Isaiah; Behold the voice
of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his
paths straight. He foretold, he should have the voice of a Crier; therefore;
this voice is applied to him.

Or Secondly, In reference to the time, when he first began 2. To the time of
his witnessing.
to witness of Christ, and that was, as Philogus tells us, in the year of
Jubilee; under the Law, every fiftieth year, the Jews were to keep a Jubilee,
wherein they were to ordain liberty to their servants, and restore men to their
possessions, that had been mortgaged, Levit. 25. 9, 10. Then shall thou cause
the Trumpet of the Jubilee, to sound in the tenth day of the seventh month; in
the day of atonement, shall ye make the Trumpet sound through all your Land,
unto all the Inhabitants thereof. It shall be a Jubilee unto you, and ye shall
return every man to his possession, and ye shall return every man unto his
family. John, that came to be the Minister of the Gospel, he began in a year
of Jubilee, because he was to proclaim a liberty, that came by Christ; who was
now to be exhibited, and to show himself, because he came, by the Ministry of
the Gospel to restore men to those possessions they had lost in Adam, even to
an Eternal Inheritance, reserved in Heaven for them. The year of Jubilee, was
to be proclaimed by a Trumpet; Therefore, John comes crying. The
Interpretation, receives a strong confirmation of that, Isaiah 58. 1. Cry
aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice, like a Trumpet, and show my people their
transgressions, and the house of Israel their sins. Here John's voice comes,
as a Jubilee-Trumpet, to proclaim liberty to them that were Captive; therefore,
he is said, to Cry.

Thirdly, Crying may refer to the temper of his spirit, 3. To the fervency,
and alacrity in his witnesse-bearing. Exodus 14. 15.
in his witnesse-bearing to Christ; you may note his fervency, or alacrity, or
both. Crying notes fervency, Why Criest thou to me, says God to Moses at the
Red Sea, when Moses was most fervent in spirit; yet we read of nothing he said,
says Augustine. The people cried, and God heard them not, Moses held his
peace, and yet was heard, because there was a louder cry within. Of Christ
himself it is said, In the days of his flesh, He offered up Prayers with
strong cries, and tears. The spirit cries Abba, Father. It is a term of
earnestness, and so of alacrity too, Hos. 12. ult. Cry out, and shout thou
inhabitant of Sion, for great is the Holy one of Israel, in the midst of thee;
John went about this work, with a great deal of earnestness, and delight. He
that leapt in his Mother's Womb, when the news came Luke 1. 41.
of the Conception of Christ; now he leapeth with much more joy, when he
himself came to be the proclaimer of Christ. He himself has the honor to be
the Day Star, that shall usher-in the Sun of Righteousness, to be more then a
Prophet; He pointed at him with the finger, and said, This is the Lamb of God,
that takes away the sins of the World. Let us all learn from hence, to cry up
Christ in our several places, and according to our several capacities; John
did so, when he witnessed of him, to cry up Christ with all the alacrity, and
fervency, that may be. You know how Demetrius, and the Silver-Smiths, criedup
Act. 19. 28.
Diana, of the Ephesians; because they got their Living by making of her
Silver-shrines. The merits of Christ will bring us more, than the shrines of
Diana can bring to them; We shall have Life, and Life Eternal, with this Life.
Therefore, we have more cause to cry up, Great is the Lord Jesus; Great is the
Lord, the Rock of our Salvation, and our Righteousness. And the rather,
because in few words, the best way in the World, to cry down both sin, and
error, is, to cry up Christ. Lust, and Heresy both, will fall like Dagon
before the Ark, if Christ were once up in men's hearts.

There is use, of other Arguments and Considerations, as of the Law, and the
terror of the day of Judgment, and torments of Hell, these have their place;
There is nothing so effectual to draw sinners out of hell, as the setting up
of Christ; when they know Christ is Crucified, they then are crucified with
Christ. A man may be terrified with the threats of the Law, and thoughts of
judgment to come, and yet have an heart filled with lust all this while; If
Christ once come into the heart, he drives out these lusts before him: The
like may be said of Errors, Corrupt opinions. If the Sun of Righteousness
comes in, it is his beams that causes all these shadows to fly away; nothing
so soon, nothing so sure. Instance, in Popery. There may be great use of
preaching, against the particular points of it; against Purgatory,
Transubstantiation, and Worshipping of images. But if once a man could set up
Christ in his heart, How soon would these vanish? Says Calvin, Popery cannot
stand, but where the ignorance of Christ is brought in; for the knowledge of
Christ makes Popery to fall. Christ and Antichrist are like two buckets in a
Well; if the one goes up, the other goes down. Popery cannot thrive in that
soil, where Christ is planted. Thus much from these words, the manner of his
bearing witness, He came crying.

Thirdly, For the Time; that, I told you, lay in these 3. The time when he did
bear witness.
words, This was he of whom I spoke. Whence it is gathered, That John the
Baptist having testified of Christ, when he came to his Baptism, continued his
bearing witness to him, now, when Jesus was gone into the wilderness; which,
ye know, was presently after he was baptized. That difference is between this
Evangelist and the former; he relates what they omitted, and omitteth many of
those things, that they relate. The other had spoken of the testimony that John
gave to Christ, before he made himself known; our Evangelist speaks nothing
of this, but falls upon those Testimonies which he gave to Christ, after he
was made known. Now he was made known at his baptism, This is my beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased. Chemnitius makes it appear plainly, that what John
says in my Text, was spoken after Christ was baptized, when he was drawn aside
into the wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil. I said, This was he; yet he
came after me, and was before me.

Observe from hence this, namely, That the Baptist was honoring Christ, when
the devil was tempting of him John is using all his earnestness and endeavor
to cry him up, to exalt him in the hearts of his hearers. This is a special
piece of Christian prudence, for men to counterwork the devil; to appear so
much the more for Christ, by how much the more Satan and his instruments appear
against him. There should be a kind of Antiperistasis in the soul of every
believer; as in the fire, that burns hottest then, when the air round about
it, is coldest. The middle Region is therefore coldest, because the great heat
of each, takes the reflection from the lower and the upper heat above. Such an
Antiperistasis should be found in Christians, they should be witnesses in the
deadest times, and their hearts should be softest in the hardest times, and
fullest of activity for Christ, in the times of the greatest opposition against
him. As John is a honoring of him, when the Devil is a tempting him. The
reason lies in that enmity, which was put at first between the Serpent, and
the Seed of the woman; for enmities work one against another, contraries expel
one another. The Devil will be sure to cross us if he can, when we go to any
spiritual duty; as, When the high Priest Zachary was standing before the Lord,
then it is said, There was Satan standing at his right hand to resist him,
Zach. 3. 1. Therefore when we see Satan plotting any mischief, we should stand
at his right hand to resist him. We should do what we can for Christ, at such
times more especially. Then our service is most acceptable, and most useful.
For men not to be ashamed of Christ, in the midst of a crooked and an
adulterous generation; yet, for men to appear for Christ, in a backsliding
generation, run through the stories of all times, and ye shall find, this has
been the spirit of the Saints. When Herod sought for Christ, to destroy Matthew.
2. 14.
him in his Infancy, then was Joseph and Mary most careful of him, and took
him into Egypt. When the Priests, When Christ is most opposed, then we should
most appear for Him.
and Levites, and Scribes, and Pharisees, did much oppose him in his Members;
then the Apostle's most of all appeared for him, and tell the Rulers to their
faces, Whether it be better to obey God or man, judge ye. In the Primitive
times, when it was death to bear the name of a Christian, then did Pausanius,
when they asked him what he was, say, My name is Christian, and my surname is
Catholic. His name was Christian, to distinguish him from Heretics, and those
that opposed Christianity. I need not tell you of our Worthies in Queen Mary's
days, that not only by their Writings, but by their Sufferings, witnessed for
Christ, not only in black and white, but in red too. It should be so still;
the very thoughts of their flames should kindle zeal in us. Christ is opposed
even at this day, in many ways, therefore we should strive for him. There are
many tempters and revilers now, therefore Christ should have many Champions
now. Heaven and Earth may both teach us this lesson. Time was, when our Savior
came to the men of Bethlehem, He came to his own, and his own received him not;
they refused to entertain Christ as became him. Then does the Star from heaven
own him, that comes, and shows Matthew. 2. 9.
the Wisemen where he was, and stands before the house. Afterward, when his
own rejected him, Not him, but Barabbas, said they; When the Jews that
pronounced Joh. 18. 40.
him not worthy to live, had got their ends, then the Sun is darkened, and the
Earth quaked; they owned their Lord and Maker then, when the Jews refused him.
The Sun is ashamed to behold the Soldiers; and the earth quaked, as loath to
bear the Soldiers. Thus far of the Witnesse-bearer, the Manner of his
witnessing, and the Time when.

4. The fourth particular remains, namely, The Matter of the Testimony, which
John here gives of Christ, which 4. The matter of John's testimony of Christ.
lies in these words, This was he of whom I spoke, He that comes after me is
preferred before me, for he was before me.

Let us expound the words first.

This was He.
There lies some matter of commendations even in that. So that your great
Orator of Greece, Demosthenes, he accounted it matter of commendations, when
he went in the streets, to have it said, (...), This is Demosthenes. Res est
magnopere laudanda. It is a matter much to be valued, to have one pointed at
with the finger, and to have it said, This is such a man of note. The holy
Ghost speaks it by way of commendations of Moses and Aaron, Exodus 6. 26, 27. ye
have it twice there, These are that Aaron and Moses, to whom the Lord said,
Bring out the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt according to their
armies. These are they which spoke to Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring out the
children of Israel from Egypt. These are that Moses and Aaron. Here it is
thrice. So, This was he, says John. But the commendations he gives, lies
more apparent in the following words, He of whom I spoke, He that comes after
me is preferred before me, for he was before me.

He that comes after me.
Quest. What is that? How does Christ come after John? How is Christ said to
come after John?


Answ. In three respects, which I frame as a ground from this.

First, In regard of his Nativity. Secondly, In regard of his own Ministry.
Thirdly, In regard of his attendance upon the Ministry of John.
First, In regard of his Nativity. Christ was born of the 1. In regard of his
Nativity.
Virgin Mary, some six months after John the Baptist came into the world; so he
came after him in that respect. Luke 1. 36. You may find, that the mother of
John the Baptist was gone with child some six months, when the Virgin Mary had
newly conceived: Behold, thy cosen Elizabeth has conceived, and shall bear a
son, and his name shall be called John. So says the Angel that came to Mary,
and brought the first tidings of Christ our Savior.

Secondly, Christ came after him, In regard of his own 2. In regard of his own
Ministry.
Ministry, and the discharge of that. Christ did not begin to exercise his
Ministry, till John had ended his: Mar. 1. 14. After that John was put in
prison, (where he lost his head) Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the Gospel
of the Kingdom of God. We use to say, that seldom comes a better; but, let not
that proverb occasion despair in any, for here Christ comes after John. It may
be, the people may think themselves undone, now they have lost such a Minister
as John the Baptist. After him comes Christ, even as Elisha comes after Eliah,
with a double portion of the spiritual truths of God, for all that have to do
in the world.

Thirdly, Christ is said to come after John, In regard of 3. In regard of his
attendance upon the Ministry of John.
his attendance upon the Ministry of John the Baptist. (...), That word is
seldom or never to be found in Scripture, as relating to time, but always to
place; and should not be used for: post me, but pone me, as Beza renders it. So
it respects time, After me, in regard of his Nativity, and exercise of his
Ministry, that ye may take in the other. But now, After me; that is, In regard
of his attendancy upon my Ministry. So it was with Christ, who was a hearer of
John the Baptist. Joh. 1. 26. John answered them, saying, I baptize with water;
but there stands one amongst you, whom ye know not. There stands one
amongst you. Therefore Christ was one of John's followers, he stood amongst
John's Disciples here. And, in the Scripture Phrase, the followers of any
Teacher, it is usually said of them, that they go after such a one; because the
Teacher was wont to go before, and the Disciples after, which is the proper
notion of the phrase in that place, Matthew. 16. 24. Then said Jesus to his
disciples, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross, and follow me. The Disciple is said to come after, and to follow the
Teacher. Christ here to come after John, because he was one of his Hearers. Go
we on to the next words.

He that comes after me, is preferred before me.
Namely, In regard of his worth and dignity. The Prince Christ preferred before
John, in regard of his worth and dignity.
comes after the Harbinger, and yet is preferred before him. The Word comes
after the Voice, and yet is preferred before it; for it was a voice during the
time of articulation, and not a word till it be articulated. Christ was the
Prince, and John the Harbinger; Christ, the Sun of righteousness; and John the
Morning Star; Christ the Word, and John the Voice. Though he comes after me, he
was before me. And it is reason he should be preferred before him in dignity,
because he was before him in regard of his Essence, as being God from
everlasting to everlasting, whose going forth is from all eternity. He was not
only before John, but before Abraham; Joh. 8. 58. Before Abraham was, I am.
Before Abraham was, yea, before the World was. Prove. 8. 25, 26. Before the
mountains were settled, or before the hills were brought forth; while as yet he
had not made the earth nor the fields, nor the highest part of the dust of the
world. Ye have John the Baptist telling us in this Chapter, verse. 34. that he
bears witness to the Divinity of Christ; And I saw, and bear record, that this
is the Son of God. Now this he does in this place, He proves, and bears
record, that Christ is the Son of God, because he was before all. That is a
testimony of his Divinity. The sum of all then is this, John's endeavor is, to
prefer Christ before him; that is the thing I would have you to observe. And
it should be the care of every Believer, to prefer and exalt, and set up Christ
above himself. He that came after me, is preferred before me, for he was before
me.

John was put upon this, because the people had a conceit of him, that he was
the Messiah; and therefore he made it his business thoroughly to depresse
himself, to exalt his Savior. I must decrease, but he must increase. I am the
friend of the Bridegroom, but he is the Bridegroom that has the Bride. I
baptize with water, but he with the holy. Ghost. I am the poorest sinner, but
he is the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world. It was the scope
of his Ministry, to prefer Christ before himself, whom the people were apt to
magnify. And so Peter, Act. 3. 12, 13, 14. said, Ye men of Israel, why marvail
ye at this, or why look ye so earnestly upon us, as though by our own power or
holiness we had made this man to walk? The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and
of Jacob, the God of our fathers, has glorified his Son Jesus; whom ye
delivered up, and denied in the presence of Pilat, when he was determined to
let him go. But ye denied the holy One, and the Just, and desired a murderer to
be granted unto you. The four and twenty Elders, in the Revelations, ye find
them casting down their Crowns at the feet of Christ, and giving all praise to
him; Rev. 4. 10, 11. The four and twenty Elders fell down before him that sat
upon the throne, and worshipped him that lives for ever and ever; and cast
their crowns before the throne, saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive
honor, and glory, and power; for thou have created all things, and for thy
pleasure they are, and were created.

The more to blame are they (to make some Use of this, before I end) that
either in point of Salvation, or Edification, ascribe more to themselves than
to Christ, instead of preferring Christ before them, as John did. This Reproof
may concern a great many of us, and, happily, more, than are well aware of it.
For this is truth, that Spanhemius lately said, in one of his Treatises,
Naturaliter aliquid Pelagii, and aliquid Pharisaei in nobis habemus; We have
all by nature something of the Pelagian, and something of the Pharisee in us.
Pelagian-like, we are all apt to ascribe too much to our own free will; and,
Pharisee-like, we are all apt to ascribe to our selves the merits of our good
works. What men are those that maintain, that God has given them a power to
will, but the act of willing they have in themselves? Is not this to ascribe
more to themselves, than to God? Is it not more, actually to will what is good,
than to have a power to will it. Augustine professes himself, once of opinion,
That men were able of themselves to receive the Gospel, when it was preached;
but he was converted from that error, by that place of the Apostle, What have
thou that thou have not received? And, O man, who has made thee to differ? And
yet a Dutchman of late has dared to say, I have made my self to differ from
others. Though God gives me power to will, yet to will is of my self. Here is
something of the Pelagian. See now something of the Pharisee, in those that
pride themselves for their good works, with the neglect of Christ. Ye know what
the Papists do, they ascribe something to their merits. They will give
something to Christ in the beginning, but the carrying on of their works they
will have to themselves. Which Bishop against Perkins says: A father bestows
a Farm upon his son; the son, by his improvement of this Farm, grows so rich,
as he is able to make the purchase of a greater Farm; which he has not from
his father, but has purchased it by his own industry, and improvement of the
stock which his father gave him. So, God does at first bestow a stock of grace
upon us, says he; but we, by the improvement of this grace, are able to
purchase something at God's hands. Who is the Purchaser? whether he that lays
out the money for what is bought, or he that gave the first Farm? So, Who is the
Procurer of Salvation, whether Christ that gives the first grace, or the man
that has so improved that grace, as to purchase Heaven at the hands of God?
All these things are ascribed to the next cause, not to the remore cause.
Christ is the remote cause of salvation, but the man himself is the next cause
of his own salvation and happiness. Here the man is preferred before Christ.
And have we not many amongst our selves? Ask them, How they hope to be saved?
Whereas there is no true answer in the world, but this, Christ in you, the hope
of glory. Christ in me, is my hope to be saved: Yet their common answer is,
They hope to be saved by their prayers, and duties, and good meaning, and good
endeavors. What is this, but to set a man's self above Christ, and to look for
salvation by his own Performances, and not by the merits of his Savior. Men
may sometimes have Christ in their mouths, but look what their hearts run to
when they think of salvation, that many times is their own works. It is a good
saying of Mr. Fox, the Author of the Book of Martyrs, in a Latin Treatise of
his, Nemo magnus est operando, quin Christus; and qui magnus est, magnus est
per fidem in illo: There is none great in works but Christ; and if we will be
great, it must be by faith in him. Others, perhaps, will give you a better
answer, to seem to; yet, in the issue, it comes much to one: They tell you,
They come to salvation by believing in Christ. But ask them, how they come to
believe? Why, because they find so much humiliation in their hearts, and
dependency upon Christ. Here a man sets up belief, whereas in the true
course of things, good works should be made out by the issue of faith. Here is
a kind of bastard-faith, made out as Faith to be manifested by works.
the issue of good works. Certainly, good works may help faith. Faith grows
fat and well-liking, the more it puts forth it self in works of holiness.
But it is faith laying hold upon Christ, that brings in all our comfort.
Therefore he that will go the other way to work, must settle himself on Christ
by faith. He that was mighty in Peter to the circumcision, was mighty in me to
the uncircumcision. Christ was mighty in Paul, and mighty in Peter, they had
great success in their ministry; but, Whom do they thank for it? Christ, and
not themselves. As Joab did, when they had taken Rabbah, 2. Sam. 12. 27. He
sent messengers to David, saying, I have fought against Rabbah, and have taken
the city of waters. Now therefore gather the rest of the people together, and
encamp against the City, and take it; lest I take the City, and it be called by
my name. Joab had taken a great deal of pains in the service, but he would have
his Master David to have all the honor. So, whatsoever pains a Minister, or
any other, has taken in the work of God; he must take heed of setting up
himself: now cast in for Christ, let him have all the praise. There is a Rabbah
taken, when a man is converted, a fort taken out of the Devils hands; who
shall have the praise, the Minister? no, but the Lord Jesus Christ, that gives
the success. Joab he fought, and took the City, but Joab was David's servant,
therefore David must have the praise; All the ability, and grace, that thou
have laid out in this service, they are Christ's, therefore not to be ascribed
to thee. Thou can not go one step, before Christ comes in to thy assistance;
Joab brings the work to perfection, and yet David absent a great way off. The
Lord Jesus Christ is always present, with any that do a good work; therefore,
all the praise is to be given to him. When Peter drew up the multitude of fish,
does he sacrifice to his own Net? no, but he gives the glory of it to the
Lord Christ; though it was Peter's net, and Peter's hand that drew up the net,
yet it was not Peter's strength. Therefore, give to the Lord all the praise,
that so we may prefer Christ before all, as John the Baptist did.

Verse. 16. Of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace.
I shall say something of the Coherence, and then come The Coherence.
to the particulars. I hinted that to you before, wherein I understood this to
seem to relate to the end of the fourteenth verse; where it is said, That
Christ was full of grace* and truth. And here he proves it, He that is the
fountain of grace, must needs be full of it himself, Christ is so; Christ the
fountain of grace.
For of his fullness have we all received, and grace for grace. Only there is
a great doubt, and Controversy, amongst Interpreters; whether these be the
words of John the Baptist, or of John the Evangelist.

Some think them to be a continuation of John the Baptist's Testimony, which I
discoursed to you of, out of the former verse? This was he, of whom I spoke, He
that comes after me, is preferred before me, for he was before me.

Others think, they are the words of John the Evangelist, and cohere with those
words, in the end of the fourteenth verse, Full of Grace, and Truth.

And I rather join with them. Partly, for that reason, and partly, because
that the graces of Christ, which he speaks of here, and in the following verse,
The Law came by Moses, but grace and truth by Jesus Christ, were not so fully
manifested, when John the Baptist spoke, as when John the Evangelist wrote this
Gospel. For the law of Moses, as to the shadows of it, were then expired; The
truth of Christ was then exhibited, the Holy Ghost come down, and abundance of
grace shed abroad all the World over. So that the Evangelist may well say, Of
his fullness we have all received, The Law came by Moses; and now, grace and
truth, is come by Jesus. It was so, (when the Evangelist wrote) in the full
exhibition of it.

The matter in difference is not very great. But let us take them, as to the
Coherence, and then for the parts.

You have in this short verse, abundance of particulars. The general parts,
they are but two, But the latter is subdivided.

First, Here is a storehouse, an Heavenly storehouse of Treasure, that is,
the fullness of Jesus Christ. Of his fullness.

Secondly, The improvement hereof, for the chiefest good of it; We have all
received, even grace for grace. And in this, four particulars.

First, The persons, All we.

Secondly, The participation, Have received.

Thirdly, The proportion, not his fullness, But, of his fullness; de
plenitudine, and not plenitudinem, some share of his fullness.

Fourthly, The treasure it self, which was imparted, that is, Grace for grace.
Of his fullness have we all received, and grace for grace.

I shall now close with the first of these, which is the Magazine, the
Storehouse, the Treasury in the text, namely, The fullness of Christ; whence I
commend to you this Observation; That,

There is abundant fullness in Jesus Christ.
There is an abundant fullness in Jesus Christ, of whom it is said, Col. 2.
19. It pleased the Father, in him should all fullness dwell. All fullness, All
for kind, and All for degree.

And it, therefore, pleased the Father, That all fullness should dwell in him,
because he was to be the head of the All fullness in Christ, as the head of the
body.
body; He is the head of the body the Church, for it pleased the Father, That
in him should all fullness dwell. It concerned Christ to be full of all grace,
because he was to be the head of his Church; As in the natural body, because
the head is to convey sense to all the body, therefore, all the Organs of sense
are placed in the head. The eye whereby we see, and the ear whereby we hear,
and the nose by which we smell, the palate by which we taste; Jesus Christ is to
be the head of the Church. Therefore, all fullness was to be in him; He was to
be an universal Cause, which was to have an universal Influence, therefore,
there must needs be in him an universal fullness. As in the first Adam, there
was a fullness of human nature, and of righteousness too, as long as he stood;
because he was to convey the human nature, together with the Image of God, to
his posterity, if he had continued. So in the second Adam, There was to be a
fullness of grace, because he was to convey all grace to all believers, to the
end of the World. Joseph filled the Granaries of Egypt with Corn; Why? Because
not only Egypt, but all the Countries there about, were to be supplied with
Corn in time of Famine. So it pleased God, that in Christ should all fullness
dwell, That all, Jews, and Gentiles, might come to him for grace; All must go
through the hands of Joseph, to the people: Even as the Liver is full of blood,
because it conveyeth blood to the members of the body. The Sea is full of
water, because it conveyeth water to all the Rivers; And the Sun full of light,
because it conveyeth light to all the Stars. So Christ is full of grace,
because He was to be the Conveyer of grace.

To speak a little more distinctly. There is a threefold fullness in Christ. A
threefold fullness in Christ.


A fullness of Divinity.
A fullness of Sufficiency.
A fullness of Efficacy.
See the distinction, and difference between them.

First, There is in Christ, A fullness of Divinity, and so 1. A fullness of
Divinity.
commonly, it is said, Col. 2. 9. In him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily. There are to be found in others, gifts, and graces, that flow
from the Godhead; These were in Angels, and Adam, and all Saints. But the
Godhead it self, is in Christ. And that, not according to some portion of it;
as the Heathens had a conceit, that the Divinity was dispersed, and scattered.
That one had one part of it, and another, another part. And therefore, they
made many sorts of Gods, because they thought no one sufficient to contain the
whole Deity; therefore, they made Bacchus, and Apollo, and the rest, to have
their several employments. But here is in Christ, not the parts of the
Godhead, but the fullness of the Godhead; In him dwells all the fulness of
the Godhead bodily. Not a parcel, but all and bodily, that is, either really.
If ye take body, as it stands in opposition to shadows, and figures; then
the Godhead is said to dwell in Christ bodily, in opposition to the shadows.
Under the law, the body dwelt figuratively in the Ark; and, thence the glory of
the Lord filled the house. But now it dwells in Christ, as the substance of
all those shadows; It dwells in him bodily: Or if ye take body, as it
sometimes signifies, person, The Hebrews were wont to put the soul for the
whole person; so many souls went down with Jacob into Egypt. The Greeks were
Genesis 46. 27.
wont to put body for the whole person. I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies
of God, present your bodies as a living sacrifice; so then, to dwell bodily,
is, to dwell personally. Now the fullness of the Godhead, dwells personally in
Jesus Christ, because he was the second Person in the Trinity; The Son of God,
as full of the Divinity, as the Father himself was. The fullness of the
Godhead, dwelt as truly in the Son, as in the Father; Now Sonship implies
Identity of nature. As (if it will not be tedious to you)

Four things go to make up a perfect Sonship. There Four things make up a
perfect Sonship.
must be,

1. Similitude. 2. Procession and Production. 3. Life, and 4. Identity.
If any of these be wanting, A person cannot be said to be the son of another;
I say, Similitude, Procession, Life, Identity. There is a likeness, between
the whiteness of the wall, and the whiteness of the snow; but no sonship
between them, because there is no production. The whiteness of the wall, does
not produce the whiteness of the snow. Fire, begets fire, Here is a
production; But the fire is not the son of the fire, because here wants Life.
The body of a living Man breeds worms. Here is a production, and life, but yet
the worm is not the son of Man; because, here is no Identity of nature. The
worm has not the nature of man; There must be a Coherence in all these four,
which you find in Christ, in reference to God the Father. There is a
similitude; He is the express Image 1. Similitude. 2. Procession.
of his Fathers person. There is a procession: For the Son proceeds from the
Father, and is begotten of the Father, from all eternity. There is Life, For,
the Son has Life 3. Life. 4. Identity.
in himself, as himself says. And there is Identity of nature. The very same
essence, with that of the Father; And a greater Identity, then between any man,
and his son. That take along with you too. Take Abraham, and Isaac: Isaac, has
the same nature with Abraham. But, how the same? The same in species, not in
Individualls. The same in kind, not the same Individual nature; For it is
possible, that the father may be saved, and the son damned, or the son saved,
and the father damned. But now, the Lord Jesus Christ is the same Individual
nature with the Father; because but one Deity, and one Divinity, and one
Essence, and the same Person pertakes of the same Individual substance. Here
is the first fullness. The fullness of Divinity.

Secondly, There is in Jesus Christ, A fullness of sufficiency; Secondly, a
fullness of sufficiency.
for the work of the Mediator-ship, which he undertook, as God-man. That which
Divines call the grace of unction. They speak of a double grace that dwells
in Christ, The grace of union, namely, that favor, by which the human Nature
was united Personally to the Godhead. Secondly, The grace of unction; namely,
that anointing with the holy Ghost, which Christ-Man had, who is therefore
said, to be anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows. There is
therefore this fullness of sufficiency, because there was a fullness of
Divinity; there is therefore this grace of unction, because by that grace of
union, Christ is therefore anointed, because the Manhood is so united to the
Divinity. The nearer any thing comes to the Cause, the more it takes of the
Effect. Fire is the cause of heat; therefore the nearer a man stands to the
fire, the hotter he is; the farther off, the less he partakes of the influence
of the fire. The Human Nature having a union with the Godhead, must needs
partake of all grace. Write the letters of the Alphabet upon a seal, and then
put that upon the wax, the wax will bear the image of all the letters. Here is
the Divinity. The Godhead falls upon, as it were, and takes to it self the
whole Manhood; and therefore the Manhood bears the impression of the whole
Godhead, as far as the Manhood is capable. Now indeeed it was necessary, there
should be a fullness of sufficiency in Christ, because, as Mediator, he had
three great Offices to discharge, and every one of them requires a fullness;
without which, he could not have gone through with his work: Accordingly, ye
shall find A threefold fullness in Christ, as to his Offices.
a fullness of power in Christ, as King; a fullness of wisdom in Christ, as
Prophet; and a fullness of righteousness in Christ, as he was the Priest of
his Church; which three make up the fullness of Sufficiency.

There is in Christ as King, a fullness of power. That is 1. As King, the
fullness of Power.
it which he speaks of, Matthew. 28. 18. Jesus came and spoke to them, saying,
All power is given to me in heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore and teach all
Nations, and I will be with you to the end of the world. Christ has all power
in Heaven and Earth, yea, and in Hell too. Of the two former, this place
speaks, All power is given to me in heaven. He has the Angels in heaven at his
command, and can send them out as an heavenly host, to assist his people. All
power is given to him on earth, over all the Princes in the world. Therefore he
is King of kings, and Lord of lords. And this he tells his Apostles, before
he sent them to preach the Gospel, to encourage them. Preach to all Nations;
(all Nations, all Mankind.) All power in heaven and in earth is given to me.
Therefore go preach: I am with you. And as all power in heaven and earth is
given to Christ, as King of the Church; so, all power in Hell. Ye have an
expression that may, happily, bear this sense, Rev. 1. 18. I am he that lives,
and was dead; and behold I am alive for evermore, Amen. And have the keys of
hell, and of death. Christ has the keys of hell, and can send whom he will
thither, and keep whom he will from thence. The Keys argue Power: It is a
metaphor taken from Conquerors; when they take a City, they have the Keys
thereof delivered into their hands, in token the City is now at their command.
If Hell be here taken for the Grave, yet there be other places that show, that
Christ has power over the Devils of hell: That at the name of Jesus every
knee should bow, of things in Phil. 2. 20.
earth, and things under the earth. Christ could not have run through his
Kingly Office; if he had not had this power over devils; because he could not
have been able to have bound the strong man, if he himself had not been
stronger.

There is in Christ, as he is the Prophet of his Church, 2. The fullness of
Wisdom.
the fullness of wisdom; Col. 2. 3. In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge. Though that wisdom the creatures have is but a poor small
moiety; we may have our pounds, perhaps, or not so much: What we have is but as
shillings, and pence, and farthings. All the treasures of wisdom and knowledge
are hid in Christ; and that too, from the very first moment of his Incarnation,
though he did not begin to exercise his Prophetical gifts, till afterward.
But when God, only wise, was pleased to join himself to a Creature, that
Creature was made partaker of the wisdom of God.

There is a place that may seem to stumble some, Luke 2. ult. where it is said,
that Christ increased in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and man. If
he increased in wisdom, then all the treasures of wisdom were not hid in him
from the beginning.

For this: you must know, there is in Christ a twofold An Uncreated wisdom,
and A Created wisdom.


An uncreated wisdom, which belongs to him as the Second Person in the
Trinity; that is always one and the same.

Secondly, There was a created wisdom that did belong to Christ, as Man; and of
that it may be said in some sense, that Christ increased in wisdom. Happily, all
the habits of wisdom were not at once infused into the Human Nature, and there
might be no increase of them; yet, as to act, there might be a grouth. And as
to particular application of wisdom to this and that object, there might be a
grouth in experimental wisdom, though not in habitual wisdom. There was no
time, wherein God did not favor Christ, This is my Matthew. 3. 17.
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: But yet the favor of God was not
manifested to Christ at all times alike; it was manifested more at his
Transfiguration, than when he was in the Garden, when he sweat water and blood;
and more, when the voice came from heaven, and gave that testimony of him, This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; then when he hung upon the
Cross, and cried out, My God, my God, Why have thou forsaken me? In
experimental Mar. 15. 34.
favor Christ grew, and so he might grow in experimental knowledge too. What
if a man might say, The habits of this created knowledge were enlarged in
Christ, because as Christ grew in years, the Human Nature grew in a capacity of
more and more knowledge; and, accordingly, there might be an enlargement in
that sense. If a man cut his name in small letters in the bark of a tree, they
are but small at the first; as the tree grows, the letters grow; and when the
tree comes to the full grouth, the letters stand at a stay too. Thus, the
Human Nature of Christ was extended, as he grew in Nature. But this we are sure
of, In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, as he was a
Prophet.

Thirdly, To this fullness of sufficiency is a third remaining, 3. The fullness
of righteousness.
ing, that is, A fullness of Righteousness, as he was Priest, of which ye read,
Joh. 16. 10. He will convince the world of sin, and righteousness, and
judgment. Of righteousness, because I go to the Father, and ye see me no more.
Here is a clear argument, that there was a fullness of righteousness in Jesus
Christ, because he rose from the dead, and went to the Father, notwithstanding
he had undertaken, as our Surety, to pay our debts. He is now gone to the
Father, up to Heaven. Heaven had been too hot for him, if he had left any thing
to pay. But, He convinced the world of righteousness, because I go to the
Father, and ye shall see me no more; which he could not have done, if all had
not been discharged, which argues, he did fulfill whatsoever he undertook.
Therefore he is called, Jesus the righteous; 1 John 2. 1. If any man sin, we
have an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ the righteous, he is the
propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the
whole world. Had he not been Jesus the righteous, he could not have been Jesus
our propitiation. For we have broken the Law; if he had not fulfilled it for
us, he could not have been a propitiation for our sins; therein lies his
righteousness. Now there is a fullness of righteousness in Jesus Christ,
because he fully answered whatsoever the Law could challenge.

The Law requires a threefold righteousness of us; it The Law requires a
threefold righteousness of us.
requires

An Habitual righteousness.
A Practical righteousness.
A Passive righteousness.
Habitual righteousness, that is a conformity of our 1. Habitual
righteousness
natures to the horridness of the Law. Original sin is against that.

Practical righteousness is a conformity of our lives to 2. Practical
righteousness
the precepts of the Law; and every act seems to be a violation of that.

Passive righteousness, is a conformity of our sufferings, 3. Passive
righteousness
to the threatenings and curse of the Law; which is, Cursed be every one that
continues not in every thing of the Law to do it.

Now, all these are to be found in Christ as our Surety, All these in Christ.
and great high Priest.

There is in him an Habitual righteousness, a conformity 1. Habitual
righteousness
of his Nature to the holiness of the Law; for, He is a Lamb without spot and
blemish. The Law could never have required so much righteousness, as is found
in Him.

For Practical righteousness; there was never any aberration 2. Practical
righteousness Joh. 14. 30.
in his thoughts, words, or deeds. The prince of this world comes, and has
nothing in me.

And for Passive righteousness, there is a conformity of 3. Passive
righteousness
his sufferings to the threats and curse of the Law. What does the Law
threaten? Why, a privation of comfort, which answers to our omission of good;
and an infliction of torment, which answers to our commission of evil. Both
these are to be found in Christ. Time was, when he was deprived of the comforts
and influence, which at other times he had, from the Divinity, so far, as to
cry out, that he was forsaken. And time was, when he lay under torment and
sense of wrath, which made him to sweat water and blood. So, here is a Law
exactly answered, which is, the fullness of righteousness, which is in Christ
as our Priest.

3. The third fullness which is in Christ, is, The fullness 3. The fullness of
Efficacy.
of Efficacy, putting forth it self for the benefit of the Church. Such a
fullness is in Christ, that fills all that come to him, and will not leave
one believing soul empty. A fullness of efficacy. Hence it is, that he is said
to fill all in all: Ephesians. 1. 23. Which is his body, the fullness of him that
fills all in all. Christ fills all Graces in all believers: Whatsoever
there is, either in the Understanding, or Will, or Memory, or any where else,
it is of Christ's putting there. The first Miracle Christ did, was, a filling
of the waterpots with wine; our Evangelist tells us, it was the first Miracle
Ioh. 2. 6.
he did in Canaan. And there was in that Miracle a kind of representation, of
what Christ will do ever after. He began with filling, and goes on with
filling, and ends with filling: Insomuch as there is no believing-soul in the
world, but he puts some fullness into it; every one has its proportion.
Ephesians. 4. 13. Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge
of God, to a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ; Christ here, is Christ Mystical; Christ Mystical, that, is the
Church; He being the Head, and believers the Members. As the fullness of a
Natural body, is made up of the Compleatnesse of every member. Thar is a full
body, when every member is grown to its due proportion; So the Body of Christ
is made up, when there is a fullness in every Believer, answerable to that
state, and relation, and place, which such a member bears in the body of
Christ. All have not the like measure of fullness. One is full, as an arm,
another is full, as an hand, another, as a little finger; yet he has the
fullness of a member. And all these put together, make up the fullness of Christ.

To show you, the fullness of Efficacy; see how Christ In this fullness, Christ
comes in the fullness of the Gospel of peace.
fills those that come to him, and live upon him. He gives them first, a
fullness of blessing. That which ye read of, Romans 15. 29. I am sure, when I
come unto you, I shall come, in the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of
peace. Wheresoever the Gospel of Christ is entertained, there comes a fullness
of blessing. The truth is, All other things in the World are but empty
blessings, in comparison of this. Nay, a man may say, where the Gospel is not
received, there are Cursed Blessings, Mal. 2. 2. says he there. If ye will not
hear, and lay it to heart, to give glory to my Name, says the Lord of Hosts; I
will even send a Curse upon you, and will Curse your blessings. Health, and
riches, and means, and friends, all blessings in themselves; are Cursed
blessings, to them, that forsake the Gospel. Where that is entertained, the
Curse is removed; so, Christ comes with the fullness of the blessing of the
Gospel of peace.

Secondly, He gives them a fullness of Content, suitable 2. In the fullness of
Content.
to their several conditions. I speak of such, as walk in Christ, as well as
those that have received him; and that live up to their principles. I say, a
fullness of content, in their condition. Of this, Paul speaks, Phil. 4. 18. I
have all, (says he) and abound, I am full. It was a sorry pittance, Paul had
in outward respects, and yet he wanted nothing; He has all, he is full. Why
full? why, because he was contented. The first Adam, brought emptiness upon
all the Creatures, and so they all became subject to bondage, and vanity, by
reason of his sin. The second Adam, put a kind of fullness into them. Ye read
of some in Job, of whom it is said; In the midst of their sufferings, they
shall be in straits. And poor Saints, they have in their straits many times, a
sufficiency, because they are contented with their Conditions.

Thirdly, There is, a fullness of spiritual knowledge, 3. In the fullness of
spiritual knowledge.
that Christ conveyeth to his Members, Romans 15. 14. I my self, am persuaded of
you, my brethren, that ye also are full of all goodness, filled with all
knowledge, able also to admonish one another. Though the parts be weak, yet
where Christ has taken possession of the heart, there the soul has a fullness
of spiritual knowledge; The fullness of a small vessel, is fullness, though
small, but yet a fullness. He that has least, has his proportion, and a
fullness in his degree. That which is hardly a fullness, if ye compare him to
any unregenerate man, his parts perhaps are beyond his. They shall all know me,
from the least, to the greatest; I write to you little Children, (says John)
because ye have known the Father, even the least of God's people know him.
Whereas the greatest Scholar in the World, if he has not entertained Christ,
knows him not. There is a fullness in Christ, though little; in comparison
whereof, the greatest Scholars in the World, are but empty men. He knows
Christ, as a man knows Honey, that has tasted it, which is another kind of
knowledge, than he has that has only heard of it, and discoursed of it, and
never tasted of it in his Life.

Again, There is a fullness of the fruits of Righteousness, 4. In the fullness
of the fruits of Righteousness.
Phil. 1. 11. Being filled with the fruits of Righteousness by Jesus Christ, to
the glory, and praise of God. Filled with the fruits of Righteousness. Christ
has no barren Trees in his Orchard, they are all filled with fruit, fruits of
Righteousness; whence it comes to pass, that believers living up to their
principles, as I said before, they follow God fully. As it is said of Caleb,
Numb. 14. 24. My servant Caleb had another spirit with him, and has followed
me fully. They do not follow Christ by halfes; Christ a little, and the World
much; but follow him fully, close with him, even as two plain Superficies.
Suppose two pieces of boards smoothed and plained, they close one with another
in every part; Whereas, a round thing does close only in some one point, if ye
put it to a thing that is plain. If ye lay a round ball upon a smooth Table,
the ball closes to the Table, but it is but in a point. Ye have false-hearted
men, that seem to close with God, and Christ; but it is in this, or that
particular opinion, that may stand with their gain. Whereas the poor soul that
follows God, and Christ, follows him fully in every truth, and every
particular thing, that makes for God, and Christ; so there is a fullness of
obedience, as well as a fullness of knowledge.

Again, There is a fullness of joy; This Christ gives, 5. In the fullness of
joy.
where he communicates himself. He speaks of it, Joh. 16. 24. Hitherto, have
ye asked nothing in my Name, ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be
full. They are but empty joys, that the World gives to its followers; Christ
promises a full joy to them, that seek to him. Therefore it is, that the
members of Christ have a full joy, because they have Communion with him, as
their Head; He is present with them, as in the inward man, and, In his
presence, is fullness of joy. Joy arises from the fruition of some good thing,
which a man knows, and knows himself to have interest in. What so good, as
Christ, who is the chiefest Good? when a poor believer comes to know Christ,
and to be able to say, My beloved is mine, and I am his; Hence Cant. 2. 16.
arises a full joy, because it is a joy in Christ, who is a good, a present
good, a present known good, a present known good which I have interest in;
besides those good things which are to come, that farther fruition of Christ,
which men shall have in another World. In comparison, of which, Paul accounts
himself absent from the Lord, while he is present with the World. Though
themselves be absent, they are present to the eye of faith, which is the
evidence of things not seen, the substance of things hoped for; Therefore Hebr.
11. 1.
in these, they can rejoice, with a full joy. This makes them, to be filled
with everlasting Consolation, and good hope through grace; yea, with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory. So ye see, there is abundant fullness in Jesus
Christ; and also, what sorts of fullness they are.

I proceed to the Application of this truth. If there be Jesus Christ; Then it
holds forth,

First, Matter of Consolation, to those that are within.

Secondly, Matter of Invitation, to them that are without, that they would be
persuaded to come in upon this ground.

First, Here is that, that may comfort them, that are 1. Comfort for them, that
are within.
within; They have a Savior full of all grace, and excellency. And if he be
full, then they are Complete in him: there lies the Comfort. The Apostle
joyneth these two together, Col. 2. 9, 10. In him dwells all the fullness of
the Godhead bodily, and we are complete in him, which is the head of all
Principalities, and Powers; We are complete, if we be in Christ. Why? because
he is full. Upon this ground it was, that Paul could glory in his Wealth;
though but a poor man, and confessed, though he had nothing, he wanted nothing,
2 Cor. 6. 10. As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many
rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. Why so? because he had
Christ, and all things in him. Qui omniahabentem habet, habet omnia; He that
has him, who has all, has all in him. This was Paul's case, as it was Moses
his case, when he was forty days, and nights upon the Mount; he had none, but
God alone with him, he had taken up no provision: There he was. The people
thought Moses was dead, and that he would never come again; therefore, they
fell, upon that ground, to make a Calfe. If he did return, they thought he
would come, and look like a pined starved Creature; Well, Moses comes, beyond
their expectations, and never looked so well in his Life. So well, as they
could not endure to behold the shining of his Countenance; How came Moses to
receive so much vigor upon the Mount, where he had no sustenance? Why, he had
God there, and in him all: This is the great fountain of Consolation. It is a
pleasant thing for a man to have a full heap to go to, where he may take a
purse-full, a bag-full, if need be. A believing soul may go to Jesus Christ,
and take his hands full, his heart full, as much as ever he stands in need
of. It is the condition of many a Christian, to be always on the complaining
hand, though it ought not to be so; for, Cheerfulness is an honor to
Profession.

But thou are apt to complain, Alas for me, I abound in

It is true enough; but thou have him, in whom all fullness dwells. Therefore
what needst thou complain of want? I say, Thou have him, if thou be'st a
believer. As many as received him, to them that believe in his name, to them
gave he power to be the sons of God. Thine are the wants, Of what? Why, of a
finite creature. His is the fullness, Of whom? Of an infinite God. What are thy
wants to his fullness? Certainly, the one is infinitely above the other, even
as God is far above men. Thou art ignorant (so are we all by nature) of God and
of our selves, and the way to heaven. Thou know not what to hold in such and
such a point, and know not what to do in such and such a case: Why, thou
can never want wisdom; If thou receivest of his fullness, there is wisdom for
thee. Christ is made to us of God wisdom, says the Apostle. Certainly, he that
partaketh of Christ's wisdom, shall be wise enough, wise to salvation, as the
Apostle speaks in another place. If Stephen receives of the fullness of
Christ, wisdom for wisdom, then he speaks with such a spiritual wisdom, as all
his enemies are not able to resist. A poor man in the Council of Nice, that
came to encounter with a great Philosopher; he was full of the Spirit of
Christ, and opposed so much power against what the Philosopher said, as he
professed, That while Argument was opposed to Argument, and Syllogism to
Syllogism, I was hard enough for them all. But here comes a man, that speaks in
the power and wisdom of Christ, and I am not able to resist him. Sometimes a
Christian complains of his own weakness, and who has not cause to complain
of that? But then consider, what a fullness of power is in Christ as thy King,
a power, by which he is able to subdue all things to himself, to conquer lust,
and to tread down Satan under thy seet, and to make thee more than a
conqueror, through him that loved thee.

But the thing lies upon thy Conscience, and thou can

Look to Christ, he is full of righteousness, though thou full of guilt. What
can the Law exact of thee, which may not be found in thy Surety? Thou
complainest of an unholy nature, but look to Christ's Nature, there is
habitual righteousness in him; He is a lamb without spot or blemish. Thou have
broken all the Commandments of God; Look to Christ's life, there is a
practical righteousness in him; Satan came, and found nothing in him. The Law
threatens a curse, and death, and hell: How shall this be undergone? Look to
Christ thy Surety, there is a passive righteousness in him; he has answered
the curse of the Law, as well as fulfilled the precepts of the Law. The merit
of all these redound to thee, if thou can but believe. Therefore may the poor
soul say, as David does in the Psalms, I will go out in the strength of the
Lord God. I will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only.

But, How comes it to pass then, if there be such a fullness

It is not for want of fullness in Christ, but it is because Christ, and to our
selves, that we are so empty, notwithstanding the fullness of our Head. It is,
because we do not answer his fullness of worth and grace, with the fullness of
our affection. Fullness should be answered with fullness. As Excellency calls
for Respect; so according to the degrees of the excellency, should be the
degrees of respect. There is a full and abundant grace and merit in Christ,
therefore go with full assurance of faith, when thou go to him.

What is the reason thou art no fuller?

Why, because thou do open thy mouth no wider: Open thy mouth wide, and I
will fill it. Could we believe enough, we should have enough. But Christ says
(as to many of his Patients)* Be it to thee according to thy faith. According
to the measure of thy Bucker, so shall be the proportion of water that thou
drawest out of the Well of Salvation. Christ is the fountain, and his blessings
and graces are the water, and faith is the bucket. A large faith, a faith drawn
out, fetches a large blessing from heaven; and so as he expects fullness of
faith, that coming to a great God, we should look for great things from him,
and not content our selves with outward Mediocrities, but have our faith
exercising it self, in some proportion to the object upon which it acts. So
also, that we should come with the fullness of obedience in our lives, as well
as of faith in our hearts. We should not only draw near with assurance of
faith, but follow God fully, as Caleb did, Numb. 14. get that spirit as was in
Caleb, to follow God fully. We should have great comforts, but we tread awry,
and so wrench our faith. We go after God a little, and the world a great deal:
when we are following God, we are taken off from the pursuit of God. Thence it
is, that our comforts are no more. Suppose the head in the natural body full
of sense and spirits, yet if the lower parts, through which the influence
should be conveyed to the vital parts of the body, be obstructed, the lower
parts may decay for want of the influence of the head; because there is
something that hinders that conveying of them, namely, those obstructions. We
suffer our understandings, and wills, and affections, to be obstructed with the
world, and the things thereof; therefore the fullness of our Head is not
conveyed to us in so full a manner. Herein do I exercise my self, says Paul,
to keep a good conscience, toward God, and toward man. These exercises will
open those obstructions, and so make way for the influence of the Head. That is
the first Use, by way of Consolation to them that are Within.

Secondly, Here is matter of Invitation to them Without, that they would from
hence be persuaded to come in to Matter of Invitation to them, that ^^e Without.
have heard of in other cases. Fullness inviteth, and why should it not do so
in this. The laden Be, that, flies abroad into Gardens and Meadows, Why?
Because they are full of flowers, there is food to be had for them, and
something to carry home to their Hives. Why does the Merchant take such long
voyages to the West Indies, but because that is full of Mines of gold and
silver? And to the East Indies, but because they are full of spices? The sons
of Jacob took a long journey from Canaan into Egypt, because that was full of
corn, and they were loath to starve in their own Land. The Queen of Sh^ba came
a great way to see Solomon, because 1 King. 19. 2.
he was full of wisdom. Will not all these rise up in judgment against us one
day, if we be not invited and drawn in by the fullness of Christ, in whom there
is more sweetness, than in all flowers and spices; more riches, than in all
mines of gold and silver; more excellency and fullness, than of milk and honey
in Canaan, than of corn in Egypt, than of wisdom in Solomon? Therefore
methinks our souls should hasten to him; and the rather, because we all
naturally affect a fullness, and will be seeking it one where or other, either
in Christ, or in the Creature; and man does dream of a fullness in the creature.
That which Agur speaks of, speaking after the manner of men, Prove. 30. 9. Give
me not riches, says he, lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, Who is the
Lord? There is a fullness in wealth, and pleasures, and preferments, that men
may truly affect.

Let the very consideration of the emptiness of this fullness, that is supposed
to be in the creature, be a motive to invite men to come in to Christ; If ye go
not after Christ, ye will go after the high expectations of that fullness,
which will deceive you. This of Christ is a filling fullness. And That, ye may
call a fullness if ye will, but it will prove emptiness in the issue. Solomon
at last comes to this conclusion, Eccles. 1. 14. I have seen all the works
under the Sun, and behold all is vanity, and vexation of spirit; that is,
emptiness, so the word signifies. As empty the creatures are, even as Cisterns
that hold no water, Jer. 1. 13. What refreshing can be had from a cistern, that
has no water in it, or but little? ay, but that little in the issue comes to
nothing, they are broken Cisterns, and all runs out of them, that seems to be
put in broken Cisterns, that can hold no water. There is a mere delusion in all
the creatures, they make fair promises; but when a man comes to seek for
comfort in them, he is like a Traveller, that comes to a Well for water, and
finds nothing but air there, and so cries out, It is an empty Well. I
remember a story of Semiramis, that when she did lie upon her deathbed, she
caused her Monument to be made, and this Verse written upon her Tomb,

Hic fod^at quisquis, si princeps, indiget auro. If any Prince stands in need
of Treasure, let him dig in this Sepulcher, and see what he can find there.
Many years after, Darius passing by, and beholding the Inscription, caused the
Monument to be dug open, where, instead of a great deal of treasure, he
finds another Inscription to this purpose, Had thou not been extremely
covetous, thou would never have dug into this Tomb for nothing. And so
indeed, the creature has no satisfaction in it. A man comes, and thinks to
find much, and he has there nothing, but a sad lesson for himself, to carry
away with him. Wherefore let us no longer play the Prodigal, seeing there is
bread in our Father's house, let us not go to feed upon husks; the creatures
are no better. All is vanity, and worse; they are not only vanity, but
vexation of spirit, which arises from the disappointment of a man's hopes,
when a man is vexed, when he is frustrated; looks for much, and finds a little.
That is his case here, a man looks for contentment, and finds trouble. As our
Savior, in the days of his flesh, it is said, He went to the fig tree
expecting Mar. 11. 13.
fruit, and found none; therefore he was provoked, and cursed the tree. Many a
one leaves the creature with a curse; which he sought after with expectation of
satisfaction from it. Oh! it is a cursed preferment, and pleasure, says he,
even of that very thing, which he thought would have fully satisfied his soul,
when he first enjoyed it. But now, this fullness of Christ is such, as there is
no vanity in it, no vexation from it: nay, so far is it from vexation, that it
gives satisfaction which nothing else can give. Psalm. 36. 8. They shall be
abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou shall make them
to drink of the rivers of thy pleasure. For vexation in the one, here is
satisfaction in the other; and for those drops of pleasure which men find in
the creature, here is rivers of pleasure, such are those everlasting joys that
are in Christ. For the pleasures of the creature, here are Rivers, every man
may have his fill. If it were a Cistern, an Army might come and empty that. But
here is enough, therefore I need not to envy another's satisfaction; there is
enough for all that come to Christ. I have now done with the first Observation,
of the first part of my Text.

The Second has diverse Branches.

The first that offers it self is the Partakers hereof, and those are a great
many; We all, says the Apostle here, We all have received, even grace for
grace,

A short Observation is to be taken from thence, namely, That all the members
of Christ are partakers of some spiritual endowments. We all have received of
his fullness. Not one, but Christ imparts something to, in his measure.
Therefore it is clearly said by the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 7. Unto every one of us
is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Here is grace,
and grace to every one, and grace from Christ to every one; yet, to every one
in his measure, not alike measure to all, but some measure to each. One star,
says the Apostle, differs from another in glory. Not a Star but receives
light from the Sun, the 1 Cor. 15. 41.
one receives more light than the other: Therefore there is a different glory
in the Stars. The Lord Jesus shines upon every believing soul, but not upon
every one in a like luster. You know there was a time, when Esau questioned his
father's store strongly, Have thou but one blessing, my father? Genesis 27* 38*
but, no man needs to question the store of this everlasting Father, he has
more blessings than one, he has some blessings Christ has blessings for every
Member.
for every Member of his, We have all received. Therefore it is said, Mal. 2.
15. And did not he make one? yet had he the residue of the spirit. Some read,
Abundance; and some read, Residue of spirit; both well. God has given
endowments of spirit to an hundred, and he has a residue of spirit for a
thousand more; and when he has endowed a thousand thousands, he has a residue
of spirit for ten thousand millions more. Ephesians. 2. 5. Which is the head. Even
when we were dead in sins, has he quickened us together with Christ, (by grace
ye are saved;) Here is one head, but many members. The Head is Christ, the
Believers, are the members; All the members of the body they are compact
together, says this place. The whole body is joined together by the bones,
that meet in the joints, and let into one another; Compact, by that, which
every joint supplieth. So the souls of believers, as they are all knit to
Christ their Head; so they are let into one another, by a spirit of love. And
something, every joint supplieth; therefore, every joint has its particular
work. As there is a vegetative power in the soul, that puts forth it self
to every member; One member to the proportion of an arm, another of an hand,
another of a finger. So there is a working of the spirit of grace in the whole
body of Christ, that brings every member to its proportion; one to this degree,
another to that, which God has predestined him to. Therefore it is, that the
growth of every member, upon the increase of the body, helps to the edifying of
it self in love; Look then, that as in the body, every member shares with the
soul, that brings it to the perfection, due to that member. So does every
believer, share with the spirit of Christ, in some spiritual indowment, fit
for his station. It may be of great use to us.

First, It may serve as an Antidote, against scornfulnesse, and contempt.
Secondly, As a spur to improve.
First, The consideration of this truth, That all the members of Christ,
partake of some spiritual indowment; (We 1. Spiritual indowments are as
Antidotes to keep us from scorning, and contemning one another.
all have received) serves as an Antidote against scornfulnesse, and contempt
of one another. If every man has received his part, Who art thou that
despisest thy brother? Prove. 17. 5. Who so mocketh the poor, reproacheth his
Maker; And he that is glad at Calamity, shall not be unpunished. It pleases
God to make him so, therefore, to mock him, is to reproach God; so to contemn
the poor Saint for want of those parts, to express himself by, that thou
have, thy reproach is to the Spirit of God. God has purposely dispensed his
gifts, and graces, so that there is no believer but has some, and none that
has all indowments in an eminent way; None has all, that he may not think to
stand alone. And none but has some, that every one may have use of another,
that the highest should not contemn the meanest; The head should not say to the
foot, I have no need of thee. As it is in Countries, Non omnes, fert omnia,
Tell us; one Country produces Wines, another Sugars, another Spices. God has
purposely so done this, that one Kingdom might have interest one with another;
In the like manner, God has ordered things in his mystical body, and given to
all his members several indowments, that they might not contemn one another.
As it is in a material building, where there is a sort of stones laid
together, every one has its use; The lower Story bears up those above it, and
the upper story, keeps the lower from being warped. There is use of all, and so
it is of the members of Christ; Therefore, one should not slight, and contemn
another, God delights to order things so. Though thou may excel another in
diligence, perhaps, yet there is one thing, or other, wherein happily he may
excel thee. For instance; It may be, thou art a better Proficient in the
School of Christ, then such a one; but perhaps, he was begotten into the School
of Christ before thee, that is his honor. Paul accounted it the honor of some
Professors, that they were in Christ before him, and had got the start of him
in that, Romans 16. 7. Salute Andronicus, and Junia my Kinsmen, and my fellow
Prisoners, who are of note amongst the Apostles, who also were in Christ before
me. He valued them in that respect, though he was a Christian of greater parts;
yet they were in Christ before him, therefore, he durst not contemn them. It
may be, thou have been in Christ, before such a one, yet the party may live
more upon Christ, since he was in him, then thou have done. Thou have a greater
stock of habitual grace; but he is a better Husband, with that little stock,
he has. It may be, thou art as abundant in pains, as he, but God has given
him better success, then to thee; in his pains, that so thou may have
something still to value this labor. For, It may be, thou have more assurance
then such a believer has, it is that, that puffs thee up; but stay: It may
be he, whom thou contemnest, may have as much of faith, as thou have of
assurance. That is no paradox. It is possible, one of less degree of faith,
may have a higher degree of assurance for the present, because assurance
depends not upon the degree of believing; but upon the degree of discovered
light: God may come in betimes, with discovered light to one, that has less
habitual grace. We have received the spirit, not of the Law, but of God, by
which we know the things that are freely given us of God. Therefore, assurance
depends upon the light, not upon the grace.

Let this serve in the second place, to be a spur to improvement; 2. We are
all to improve our spiritual graces.
We have all received, therefore, have all something to be accountable for. I
beseech you, says Paul, that ye receive not the grace of God in vain, 2 Cor.
6. 1. If Christ gives a gift, it is to some end; And what is the end? why,
improvement, so says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 7. The manifestation of the
spirit, is given to every man to profit withal; that is, every Christian Man,
and Woman, has something in Him, or her, which manifests their, having the
spirit of God. Therefore it is called, the manifestation of the spirit; And
said to be given to every man: but here is the end, to profit withal. What
Talents a man has received, he must not hide in a Napkin; As it is in the
natural body, That which every member receives, it is for the good of the
whole. The stomach that takes in meat, but not for it self alone, but to
nourish the body; The feet they move, too and from, not for themselves alone,
but to carry the body. The hand that works, not for it self alone, but to
maintain the body; And so it is in the mystical body of Christ, as the Apostle
tells you clearly, 1 Pet. 4. 7. As every man has received the gift, even so
minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of
God. Here is manifold grace; And so dispensed, as every man has received a
gift, and as a good steward. The steward receives the money, that is put into
his hand, not to put up into his own purse, but for the good of the whole
family; Men have received, that they may dispense. Therefore, I say, seeing we
all have received, we are all bound to be useful in our several places,
within We should all, some way or other, be useful to the Church of Christ.
our several spears; not all of the same way, but all in some way, to be
useful to the Church of Christ. This does not open a gap to confusion, it does
not open the Pulpi^-doors to every one, that may say himself to be gifted; but
it calls upon every one in his sphere, to do service to God in his Church. We
are like so many Actors upon a Stage, in the acting of a Comedy; he is not
commended that acts the greatest part, but he that acts his own part best, be
it the part of a King, or of a Servant, either short or long; if he act that
part well, there lies the matter of his praise; and the Servant may have more
commendation for that part he acts, than the King, if he does it well. So it
is here: He that acts his own part well, shall have, Well done good and
faithful servant. As in the natural Matthew. 25. 23.
body, there is a distinction of members; as in Music, the Harmony is made up
of different Sounds and Tunes; they have the Base, and Mean, and Treble. If all
were Treble, where were the Base? and if all Base, where were the Mean? The
Harmony is made up from the consent of all these. So, there is an harmony made
up in the Church of God, but it is from the variety of gifts, that God bestows
upon them. And the Treble has its commendation in Music as well as the Base.
And as in Painting, your dark colors add to the beauty of the Picture, and
deserves praise, if well cast, as well as the fairest color in the whole
Piece. So, many Christians of obscure parts, in comparison, in the conjunction
of the whole, do add to the beauty of the whole.

The next is, The Participation. I will speak a little of 2. Participation.
that.

Have received.
The Observation from hence is this, namely, That whatsoever endowment any man
is partaker of, he has but received it. Before I told you, Every one has
received; now, Whatsoever any one partakes of, it is but received. Of his
fullness have we all received, and grace for grace. 1 Cor. 4. 7. What have thou
that thou have not received? Name the thing, if thou can, that is good; if it
be good, it is received. What have thou, that thou have not received? Go from
the one end of the work of grace to the other, and you shall find all received:
Begin where grace begins, at the Understanding, and those good thoughts that
God puts into the minds of men, by which he turns the mind about; for the
Understanding is the great Wheel. Those thoughts thou have received, as the
Apostle tells you, 2. Cor. 3. 5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to
think any thing, as of our selves; our sufficiency is of God. From good
thoughts in the Understanding, come to good inclinations in the Will; they are
received, Phil. 2. 13. It is God which works in you both to will and to do,
of his good pleasure. Come from good inclinations of the Will, to good words in
the Mouth; why, God puts them in too, or we cannot have them. Isa. 50. 4. The
Lord God has given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to
speak. Come from good words to good works, by which our words are made good; we
fulfill in our actions what we profess: they are also received, Without me ye
can do nothing, says Joh. 15. 5.
Christ. He does not say, It is but little; but, Nothing, just nothing, without
me. These good works, they have different successes, every degree of success is
received; Paul plants, and Apollos waters, but it is God that gives the
success. 1 Cor. 3. 6.
Nay, to make it appear that the success is given, that increase is freely
dispensed, ye shaall often find God giving more success to meaner labors, than
to greater; more success to men of weak abilities, than to men of strong
abilities: because he will have success free, as well as any thing else. As it
was between Rachel and Leah; Rachel was the fairer, but Leah the fruitfuller;
Rachel had more beauty, but Leah more children.

Now to come to the Use, which the Apostle has made Whatsoever we have is
received. Away then Against boasting and proud Opinions.
with boasting, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who made thee to differ from another? What have
thou that thou have not received? Now if thou did receive it, why do thou
glory as if thou had not received it? Away with all proud opinions of men,
that ascribe something to the creature, and something to themselves, that they
have not received of free grace. There is a great deal of difference between
habit acquired, and habit infused. Men speak of grace, as if it were an
acquired habit; and so ascribe much to themselves, and do not take all as
received. Indeed, in acquired habits, the actions well performed, have a kind
of casualty in them; as, if a man learneth to write, his frequent habit
brings him to write. But it is otherwise in infused habits; there, we have
first the habit; then, perform the act: You have first the habit, that, we
receive; then, the acts are produced; and, all is of God. As they say of the
soul, Grace frames all of it self; the free grace of God does all in the soul,
plants the habit, then draws it forth into act, and then blesses those acts,
and then crowns all. And what is the Crown? Why, his own work in us. God
crowns nothing in us, but what he gives us. It is so from first to last, All
is grace. Therefore there is no boasting. Away then with proud opinions, and
glorying of our selves in our conversation. The truth is, this corruption of
nature, though it vent it self much in opinion, yet more in practice. It is too
common a fault for men to play the Swan, when they look into the whiteness of
their own bosoms, without considering the blackness of their feet. Whence is
that whiteness received, if there be any whiteness? It is from God; therefore
glory not, as if thou had not received. Yet, glory in God, but not in thy
self. There is that which will make us to play the Judas with Christ; Christ
gives a bag to Judas, and Judas will filch from Christ. Christ gives us
grace, and we are apt to pocket up all for our selves. We derive all from
Christ, and yet many times we take upon us, as if we had it out of our own
Cisterns: This I did, and said; and this was done by my endeavors. Oh! What
have thou that thou have not received? The Moon receives all its light from
the Sun, and yet the Moon eclipseth the Sun as much as in her lies. Seeing we
receive all from Christ, let him have the praise of all we have, and hope for.
Let this break the pride of our hearts. Beggars must be no boasters. Of his
fullness have we all received, even grace for grace.

Verse. 17. For the Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus
Christ.
18. No man has seen God at any time. The only begotten Son, which is in the
bosom of the Father, he has declared him.
In this 17th. Verse are contained two Assertions.

First, That the Law was given by Moses. Secondly, That Grace and Truth came by
Jesus Christ.
Of these, I shall not here speak any thing; nor of the opposition which is
here made by some, between these two. Whereas Christ and Moses, the Gospel and
the Law, are here opposed by way of Comparison; the one, as more excellent than
the other: Diverse mistake them, as opposed by way of Controversy, as the one
excluding the other; and so gather from hence, That under the Gospel we have
nothing to do with the Law. That, The grace and truth that came by Jesus
Christ, does quite destroy and abolish the Law, that came by Moses.

We might here distinguish of a fourfold estate of Man. A state of Innocence.
A state of Corruption. A state of Preparation. A state of Grace.


And also of the several uses of the Moral Law. First, To justify. Secondly,
To discover sin and guilt. Thirdly, To provoke to sin. Fourthly, To condemn for
sin. Eifthly, To lead to Christ. 1. The Law of use to have justified Adam 2. To
provoke, and condemn, in the state of Corruption. 3. To lead
Sixthly, To direct in the ways of holiness.
First, The Law was of use to have justified Adam in the state of Innocence;
but could never justify any man since. Secondly, The Law is still of use to
provoke, and to condemn, in the state of Corruption. Thirdly, In the state of
Preparation, the Law is still of use, as a Schoolmaster, to lead us to Christ.
us to Christ in the state of preparation. 4. Of little use to condemn, and of
no force to provoke in the state of grace. 5. Of use to correct in that state,
as a rule of life.
Fourthly, It is of small use to Condemn, and of no force to provoke, in the
state of grace.


But yet, Fifthly, even in the state of grace, it is of use to correct, and so,
it is a rule of Life; All these I might discover to you, by diverse arguments.
But my intension is, to consider such places, as are objected to the contrary,
and then to come to the Application, Gal. 3. 19. seems to imply, that the Law
was to continue no longer, then till the coming of Christ; Wherefore then
serves the Law? It was added, because of transgression, till the seed should
come, to whom the promise was made. If by seed, we understand Christ, as is
likely; Then it does rise higher, the Law was added, because of Transgression,
till the seed should come: but then it was to continue no longer.

But the answer is not difficult. First, If ye understand Ceremonial Law, then
that began to vanish; when Christ, (who was the substance) came, now that, even
the Ceremonial Law was added, because of Transgression, is proved in that. All
of the rights of Ceremonies, was such as implied guilt, and sin; yea, it did
not only imply our guilt, but our misery. For the blood was to be poured out,
to show what we all deserved; even to be made sacrifices to the wrath of God,
and fuel for the fire of Hell. But if ye will understand it of the Moral Law,
for it takes in both; Then thus you must distinguish between the matter, and
substance of the Law, and the Ministry of Moses.

The Moral Law, for the matter of it, is perpetual; Morrall Law perpetual to
the end of the World.
It was before Moses, and will be after Moses, even to the end of the World.
But then, if you take the Law, as it implies the Ministry of Moses; In that
respect, there was a ceasing of the Law, when the seed came, because all those
Mosaecall appendixes, to the Moral Law, they then began to vanish. As namely,
to the second Commandment, the whole Ceremonial Law was an Appendix to that;
The fourth Commandment, the seventh days Sabbath, was a Type of Christ,
resting in the grave, the seventh day from the Creation. So as for the matter,
it remains, though as for the Ministry of Moses, there is an end of that. The
great place is urged of those out of the Romans, Romans 7. 6. Now we are
delivered from the Law, that being dead, wherein we were held, that we should
serve in newness of the spirit, and not in the oldnesse of the letter. If we
be delivered from the Law, then we have nothing to do with it, after we have
received the Gospel of Christ, that is the Objection.

Understand the Answer, read the beginning of the Chapter, and ye shall see in
what sense, he says, We are delivered from the Law, namely, from the Law, as
an Husband, begetting sin upon our souls; The Law had a provoking power, to
stir up Concupiscense in Men. Now, says he, we are delivered from the Law in
this sense, because we are under another Husband, namely under Christ. In which
respect, it is said in this Epistle, Chap. 6. 14. That we are not under the
Law, but under grace; namely, not under the provoking power of the Law. That
place may seem Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness, to every on
that believes; If Christ be the end of the Law, Then the Law ended when Christ
came. This is the Objection, but of this we must distinguish a threefold end.
Finis Abolitionis. Finis Adimpletionis. Finis Intentionis.


An end of Abolition. That which kills a man, a sword, end; because, it kills
him. Finis interficiens. threefold.


Secondly, An end of Impletion, As, the end of the Law is charity. What is
that? Love is the fulfilling of the Law.

Thirdly, Finis Intentionis, That is the scope of a thing, that is, at which it
aims; now Christ is the end of the Law, What is that? not the abolishing end.
For he himself tells you, He came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it;
He is an end in these two latter senses, not in the first. He is the scope of
the Law, and the fulfilling of the Law, and in both these senses; The end of
the Law for righteousness, to every one that believes.

First, He is the scope of the Law. The Ceremonial Christ the scope of the Law.
law, that aimed at Christ; and the Moral law aims at Christ too; because it
drives men out of themselves, to seek for a Savior, 2 Cor. 3. 13. speaking of
the vail that was upon Moses his face. Not as Moses, which put a vail over his
face, that the children of Israel could not steadfastly look to the end of that
which was abolished. What was the end of the Law? Says he, the Israelites were
not able to understand Christ, at whom the whole law aimed; there was a vail
upon their face, so as in the Leviticall Rites, and Ceremonial precepts, they
could not see Christ: they could not look to the end of all those Leviticall
Rites, which are now abolished. And this vail, when they come to be Converted,
shall be taken away. Thus, He is the end, that is, the scope of the Law.

Secondly, He is the end; that is, the fulfiller of the Christ the fulfiller of
the Law.
Law. Look what righteousness the law required, that Christ fulfilled, and so
satisfied the law to the utmost, both in the precepts, and curse of it.

Well, Is it so, may some say? If Christ has thus fulfilled

This will have no great weight, if we consider, that Law to different ends.
Indeed, there would be some strength in the Reason, if we should affirm, we are
to observe the Law to the same end, that Christ observed it; We observe the
Law, to testify our thankfulness to Christ, for the salvation we have by him.
Christ obeyed the Law, to testify obedience for us; Therefore, we are bound to
obey so much the more, because Christ obeyed it. Now Christ endured the
punishment, due to our sins; therefore, we that are in Christ, are not liable
to punishment, properly so called, but yet to affliction, under another notion,
as Chastisements, though Christ has endured the Curse for us. And so in active
obedience, we are to Imitate Christ, to do as He did.

I will name one place more, that is 1 Timothy 1. 9. Knowing ing this, that the
Law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless, and disobedient, for
the ungodly, and sinners. Therefore a person justified, says the Objector,
has nothing to do with the Law.

For the meaning of this place, take it clearly thus.

First, Ye cannot understand this place absolutely, as if, Law; for, ye know,
Adam, in his Innocence, had a Law given him. This therefore cannot be denied:
Look how far a man is righteous, he has a principle within him, that even
without a Law it will constrain him to obey: The love of Christ constrains
us, says the Apostle. As far as a man 2 Cor. 5. 14.
walks according to this principle, so far he does not come within the compass
of the Law, as to the penalty of it. A Law, (...), it does not lie against a
righteous man. That is the property of the word. As when it is said, The ax is
laid (...), to the root of the tree, to cut it down. The Law is not laid to a
righteous man, to condemn him. As we say in Suits at Law, A Suit lies against
such a man, in such a Court; that is, (...). Now, says the Apostle, the Law,
in this sense, (...), does not lie against a righteous man. If ye will have the
clear meaning of this, see Gal. 5. 23. The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy,
peace, meekness. Against such there is no law. Make up the meaning betwixt
these two, Gal. 5. 23. and 1 Timothy 1. 9. The Law is not made for a righteous
man. That is, Made to direct him, not to condemn him.

Then, to have done with this, There is no such great cause why the Ministers
of Christ should be afraid of meddling with the Law, in their Sermons: So long
as we preach the Law with the same intent that God gave it, we may preach it
without fear.

God gave the Law with a double subserviency. Before our Conversion, the Law is
subservient to lead a man to Christ; and after our Conversion, the Law is
subservient to direct us in the way to Christ. God gave the Law for The Law
given for Evangelical ends.
Evangelicall ends, and men should preach the Law for Evangelicall ends; not to
set up a covenant of Works, but to drive them out of themselves to Christ; and
then, when they are in Christ, to help to guide them in the way of holiness. To
preach the Law as Christ himself preached it, Matthew. 5. who spent a great part
of that Sermon in the Mount, upon the Law.

And then for People, as well as for Preachers; they need not fear having
respect to the Law. David said, I shall not be ashamed, when I have respect to
all thy commandments. Some seem to be ashamed, to have respect to any of the
commandments of God. Certainly, Brethren, if ye will obey the Law out of
Evangelicall principles, as it was given for Evangelicall ends, you need never
to be afraid of observing it. They are the same precepts to a man converted,
but they are observed out of new principles; yet the precepts continue the
same. Hest. 2. 10. it is said, that she had not yet showed her kindred and
people, as Mordechai had charged her, that she should not show it. She was
obedient to Mordechai, all the while she had been under his government; and
when she was Queen, yet still she does the commandment of Mordechai. When men
are ingraffed into Jesus Christ, they are still bound to do the commandments of
the Law, as before: then they were bound under the curse of it, for fear; but
now out of love. Here the grace of Christ will make them more obedient, because
it teaches them to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts. I have done with this.
Now to the next Verse, which runs thus,

Verse. 18. No man has seen God at any time. The only begotten Son which is in
the bosom of the Father, He has declared Him.
Ye may perceive by what ye read, Joh. 9. how zealous the Jews were for Moses,
and how prejudicial against Christ: Joh. 9. 28, 29. Then they reviled him, and
said, Thou art his disciple, but we are Moses his disciples. We know that God
spoke unto Moses; but as for this fellow, we know him not whence he is. And
therefore the Evangelist here, to take away this misapprehension of theirs,
having in the seventeenth verse preferred Christ before Moses, and the Gospel
before the Law. Because the Jews, that spoke so much of God's speaking to
Moses; and appearing to him, were ready to object, But God spoke face to face
with Moses; Therefore, the Evangelist here prefers Christ, and shows a
greater intimacy between God and Christ, than between God and Moses. No man
has seen God at any time, (no, not Moses) but the only begotten Son. Moses
had some sight of God, but in apparition: He desired to see God face to face,
but was denied; only he was not denied the sight of some similitude of God.
Numb. 12. 8. With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in
dark speeches; and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold. Moses beheld the
similitude of the Lord; but Christ was in the Father's bosom, and so saw him
face to face, as never man saw him.

There are three Assertions in this place.

The first concerns the Invisibility of God, No man has seen God at any time.

The second concerns the Intimacy of Christ with the Father, The only
begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father.

The third concerns the Discovery of the Father by Christ, He has declared
him.

Of these three, in their order.

First, That which concerns the Invisibility of God, No man has seen God at
any time. For the right understanding whereof, ye must know, that God may here
be considered, either in reference to his Essence, or his Counsel, and
accordingly there is a twofold sight of God. A Beatificall vision, and A
Scientificall vision.


A Beatificall vision of God, in reference to his Essence.

And a Scientificall vision of God, in reference to his Counsel.

I dare not exclude neither of these, in reference to the Text, because the
words which follow seem to have Christ in both, The only begotten Son which is
in the bosom of the Christ in the bosom of his Father, when on earth.
Father. That implies Christ to have a beatificall vision of God, in his
Essence, even here upon the face of the earth, because he was then even in the
bosom of the Father. And he must needs see the Essence of God, that is,
essentially God himself. He that has the same essence with the Father, must
needs see the essence of the Father. He is the only begotten Son, therefore he
has the beatificall vision of the Father.

Then, He lies in the bosom of the Father, therefore He has the
scientificall vision of the Father too; in both which respects, he was able to
declare the Father. Speak we then first of this Clause.

No man has seen God at any time, as it refers to the No man, during the state
of mortality, can see God.
beatificall vision of God in his essence. The meaning will be this, No man,
that is, no mere man; for Christ, who is God-Man, must be excepted. No man has
seen God, that is, God in his essence; for God, in apparitions, has been seen
by many. No man has seen God at any time, namely, during his life, during the
state of mortality; so it is to be limited. That answer which God gave to
Moses, Exodus 33. 20. when he desired the sight of God, The Lord said, Thou
can not see my face; for no man shall see me and live; you must take it, in
sensu composito; that is, No man upon the face of the earth shall see me, no
living man, while he lives upon the face of the earth, can see the face of God
in his Essence. Otherwise, there is a time while men do live (and live most
happily) namely, when they are in a state of glory; then they do see the face
of God (then face to face, says Paul) even as the Angels. It is said of them,
that they behold the face of God, Matthew. 18. 20. Christ says there, I say to
you, that in heaven, their Angels do always behold the face of my Father which
is in heaven. So, when men come to be like Angels in a state of glory, they
shall also see the face of God. But no man has seen God at any time, during
this life, God in his Essence. For this we have more than one place of
Scripture; the same words in the Text are repeated in 1 John 4. 12. No man has
seen God at any time. And Paul has a place to the same purpose, 1 Timothy 6. 16.
Who only has immortality, dwelling in light which no man can approach unto,
whom no man has seen, nor can see.

There are but three ways that can be imagined, by which man, in a state of
mortality, can see God in his Essence: either it must be by his Bodily eyes, or
by the eye of Reason, or by the eye of Faith.


But a man cannot see God by any of these, therefore no man can see God in that
sense.

First, No man can see God by his Bodily eye; for the very 1. The eyes of our
bodies cannot behold the Essence of God.
light wherein he dwells, is inaccessible to the eye of sense; we cannot so
much as see our own souls, or the Angels that are inferior spirits; How then
shall we be able, with our bodily eyes, to see the Father of spirits, the Lord
of glory? The Israelites could not so much as endure the shining of Moses his
face; How then can the eye of the body be imagined capable of that infinite
glorious light, that is in the essence of God? And yet there is a place that
speaks, as if a man, in the state of mortality, by his bodily eyes, had seen
God, Genesis 32. 30. Jacob called the name of the place Penuel; for I have seen
God face to face, and my life is preserved. Here is a man in the state of
mortality, that saw God face to face. For this ye must know, that Jacob did
indeed see God, but God in a representation, not God in his essence. He saw the
Second Person in the Trinity in the shape of a man, that wrestled with him.
This was all the sight of God that he had. The Second Person in the Trinity,
before he took the nature of man, took the shape of man; such a shape had
Christ taken here, in which he wrestled with Jacob; and this is that God which
Jacob saw face to face, not God in his essence, but God in a representation.
And that very thing of God, appearing in the Old Testament in a representation,
to the eyes of the body, shows, that he never appeared to them in his
essence, because his representations are many, and his essence is one. He
appeared in a Bush to Moses, and to Eliah in a still Voice; to Jacob as a
Wrestler, to Joshua as a Captain of the Lord's host. These were all
representations, that God was pleased to make of himself; and thus men saw him.
But his essence all this while was invisible, neither could it be diversified
as his representations were, being but one. That is memorable which Isaiah
says, Isa. 6. 5. Mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts. The Jews
took this advantage against him, and said, he was a false Prophet; Why? He
said, he had seen the King, the Lord of hoasts; whereas God says to Moses,
Thou can not see my face and live. Therefore they put him to death. No man
can see God in his essence, and live. But Isaiah saw him, and he said true; but
it was in a representation

Secondly, No man can see God in his essence, no, not by the eye of Reason.
Reason has but three ways, by which it 2. The eye of our Reason cannot behold
him in his Essence. Reason knows God three ways. 1. By way of Causality.
comes to the knowledge of God, and those are known to Scholars by these
names, Via causalitatis, via Remotionis, and via Eminentiae.

First, By way of Causality; and so reason comes to gather of God by all the
creatures which it sees lovely; and looks at all these as effects of God, as
the cause of all, and so comes to the knowledge of God as the first cause. Thus
Reason collects of God: But how far is this from seeing the essence of God?
Reason discovers a God, but not what God is in his Being, only that He is.
For, no effect can show the nature of its cause fully, but either such as
manifests the whole force of the cause, or else such as is of the same kind
with the cause; as burning, that shows the nature of the fire, because the
fire, being a natural agent, burns to the utmost of its power. Therefore
burning shows what nature the fire is of, as carrying the nature of the force
in it. As a child shows the nature of the father, because of the same nature
with the father. But the creatures cannot show God, because they are of effects
different from him. These are parts of the way, but how little proportion is
readd of him? The thunder of his power, who can understand? Neither are the
creatures of the same rank and kind with God, as the child is with the father;
they are all of them finite, God is infinite. So that all that Reason can do
this way, is, to gather, that there is a God, but not what he is.

Secondly, There is the way of Remotion, by looking over 2. By way of Remotion.
all the creatures, and by setting aside whatsoever savours of imperfection in
them, and ascribing the remainder to God. Thus we say, that God is Immortal,
Impassible, Impeccable; because we say, that to die, to suffer, and to sin, are
the imperfections of the creature. God cannot sin, God cannot die, God cannot
lie, God cannot suffer. But this still comes short of seeing God in his
essence; for, by this, we see what God is not, not what he is, by this way of
Remotion.

3. The third way, which is a way of Eminency. Reason 3. By way of Eminency.
goes over the creatures once again, and looks whatsoever is good in them, and
savours of perfection in them; and ascribes that to God, as the Author of those
perfections. So, when it sees in Man, wisdom, and strength, and goodness;
Reason can ascribe to God (as the cause of them) a more eminent goodness, and
wisdom, and strength. And this is the nearest, and the farthest, Reason can go.
And yet in all these, it comes short of the essence of God; because in this
way, it finds out what he is, rather in regard of his qualities, (speaking
after the manner of men) then what he is in his essence. Thus we cannot see God
in his essence, no not by the eye of Reason.

There is only one more, that is, the eye of Faith, which ^. The eye of Faith
cannot apprehend God in his Essence.
goes a great deal further into the knowledge of God, than Reason can; and yet
we cannot apprehend God in his essence, no not by the eye of Faith. Thence it
is, that faith is opposed to sight, 2 Cor. 5. 7. We walk by faith, and not by
sight. Implying, that all the while we have no higher principle than faith in
us, all that while we come short of God, to see him face to face. 1 Cor. 13.
12. Now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face. Then, speaking of
a time after this life, when that which is perfect is come, and that which is
imperfect shall be done away; Then, face to face, not till then. Here, by the
eye of faith, we see as through a glass darkly; These are two excellent
expressions, though something darkened by the Translation. For it is, as through
a glass, and in a riddle; here is the glass to the eye, and the riddle to the
ear; both imply, that faith gives us but a dark knowledge of God, in
comparison of the light of glory. What we see in a glass, we see by
reflection; The Angels see God face to face, by direct beams. We see him as in
a glass, the glass of the Creatures, and of the Scriptures; There shall be no
need of these glasses in Heaven, where all Ordinances shall cease, and God
shall be all, in all. But here, as through a glass, and as in a riddle. What
men apprehend in a riddle, they may have true apprehensions of it; As in the
riddle, that Sampson put Judges 14. 14.
forth. But it does not convey a thing so clearly, as if it were spoken in
plain words; Whatsoever we see, we see it, as in a glass. Whatsoever we hear,
we hear, as in a riddle; but then, face to face, says the Apostle; then we
shall see him, as he is, 1 John So now, ye have had an explication of this
proposition, according to the first sense; That no man has seen God at any
time. That is, No man, in the state of mortality, has a beatificall vision of
God in his Essence.

I proceed now to the second. That, No man here, attaineth No man attaineth a
scientificall vision of God here, in reference to his Counsel.
to a Scientificall vision of God, in reference to his Counsel; That also is
proper to Christ. Compare, if you please, Joh. 6. 46. with Luke 10. 22. In
John, thus of that; No man has seen the Father, save h^^* which is of God, he
has seen the Father. What is that? Luke 10. 22. All things are delivered to me
of my father, and no man knows who the Son is, but the father, and who the
father is, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him; Seeing, is
usually put for knowing in Scripture, and seeing of God, for the knowing of his
Counsel. This, only Christ does. Therefore, called the wonderful Counselor,
Isa. 9. 6. He could not be a Counselor to us, in discovering the great secrets
of God, if he were not first privy to Gods secrets. Who but Christ, could have
made known that way of salvation, which he has opened through his own flesh,
to the way of Heaven. It was impossible, for Angels, or Men, to have found out
a way to have been recovered to God, (when man was once fallen) had not Christ
revealed it; This knowledge of God, no man has. For he says, Romans 11. 34.
(having said, verse. 33. Oh the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom, and
knowledge of God; How unsearchable is his wisdom? He adds,) Who has known
either the mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor? That, is proper
to Christ. No man may assume it; I say no more of it here, because it will come
in again in the next Clause. The only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of
the Father.

Come we now to the Observation, of the invisibility of God; for Application.

First, By way of reproof, we might from hence take occasion of lashing the
Papists in the first place; And in the the disputers of this World, and
especially, the Arminians.

The Papists, First, and that both in point of their Idolatry, Popish Idolatry
reproved:
and of their boasting of their Idolatry.

First, No man has seen God at any time; And yet they presume to make Images
of Him, visible shapes of the Invisible God, Deuteronomy. 4. 15, 16. Take ye good heed
to your selves, for ye saw no manner of similitude, on the day that the Lord
spoke unto you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire, lest you corrupt your
selves, and make you a graven Image; the similitude of any figure, the
likeness of Male, or Female. If we will be worshipping any Image of God, let
us worship Christ, who is the express Image of his Father's Person; And no
Image of God, but Christ, may be worshipped. They were wont to kiss their
Images of old; Ye know what God says of so many souls, who have not bowed the
knee to Baal, nor kissed him. In reference to 1 King. 19. 18.
this, kiss the Son, Psalm. 2. No man has seen God at any time: And yet, if
you believe them, they tell you strange stories of some of their Grandees, that
have seen the blessed Trinity; as they say of one Matinius, that was
continually encompassed with the glorious light, either of the whole Trinity,
or of some glorious Person of the Trinity. As he said of a Jesuit, That he lay
a long time in prison, because, during his lifetime, he had not earnestly
desired to see the glorious Trinity. They shall never make me believe, that God
will discover to any Jesuit of them all, what he denied to his servant Moses.

I come to what is more for Edification, to refute the Arminians refuted.
great disputers of this World; and especially, the Arminians, that speak, as
if they were privy to the Counsels of God, and had a Scientificall vision here
below; and therefore, will believe no more, then they can bring within the
compass of their own reason. Not considering what Job says, Job 33. 12, 13.
Behold, in this thou art not just, I will answer thee, That God is greater then
man; why do thou strive against him? for he gives not account of any of his
matters.

Two Queries are made by Paul, that might stop the mouths of all overcurious
Quaerists in the World. Nay, but oh man, Who art thou, that reply against
God? There are too many, that are ready to reply against God, to chop logic
with their Maker; when they will not believe, what God reveals, because they
cannot fathom it, 1 Cor. 1. 20. Where is the Wise, and the Scribe, and the
Disputer of this World? The disputer of this world, (and, Emphatically, Of this
world;) because, there will be no disputing in the next World. Then comes the
day of (...) Revelation of the righteous judgments of God, as Paul speaks,
Romans 2. When God will make it apparent to every man, that, whatsoever he has
said, is True; and whatsoever he has done, is Just; whether we can believe the
truth of the one, and consent to the Justice of the other, yea, or no.
Therefore, it is good to take the counsel of Augustine; Vis tu disputare
mecum? Potius admirare mecum: Will thou be disputing with me? rather wonder
with me, and cry, Oh Profunditas, Oh the depth! Let us, both thou, and I, agree
in fearing, and trembling at the Counsels of God; lest we, both, perish for our
Curiosity, in searching too far into them. And of all Disputers, none more
guilty in this kind than the Arminians, therefore I name them. Men that take
upon them to state the Decrees of God, as if they had been of his Council,
when he made them; men that seem to wade where Paul was past his depth, which
made him cry, O the depth! They make it clear to you, to give you a reason of
all God's Decrees, if you take for granted what they say. If you ask them, Why
Peter was elected, and Judas not? they say, Because God foresaw Peter would
believe, and Judas not. Why Peter was saved, and Judas not? Because Judas
willed to persevere in sin, and Peter did not. Are not here men of God's
Council, that leave nothing unsearched? Says Paul, when he was discoursing of
these high points, Romans 9. 13, 14. It is written, Jacob have I loved, and Esau
have I hated. What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God? God
forbid. He speaks as a man puzl'd and non-plussed at the thoughts of this,
how God should come to choose Jacob, and hate Esau. He saw no unrighteousness
with God; God has done it, and therefore Just. And yet these people speak, as
if they could have fetched Paul out of his nonplus, which is but to say, That
God foresaw that Jacob would believe, and Esau would not; therefore he loved
the one, and hated the other. So as a man; according to this reckoning, may
learn more in Arminius his School in a few days, then Paul had learned in the
third heavens. Let us take this for a conclusion: As God cann^^ (...) seen in
his Essence, so not known in his Counsels, to any man on this side Heaven.

2. The second Use is this, No man has seen God at any time. Why then, let us
all from hence be set to long for sight of God, a beatificall sight, a
scientificall sight: ye shall have them both there in one place, 1 Cor. 13. 12,
13. Now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face; there is the
beatificall. Now I know in part, but then shall I know even as also I am known;
there is the scientificall. St. John tells you in another place, a speech, that
might set the hearts of the people of God a leaping within them for joy, to
think of that day; 1 John 3. 2. Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it
does Excellent things are spoken of the City of God.
not yet appear what we shall be: but we know, that when he shall appear, we
shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. Who would not long for this
day, and for this appearance? When he shall appear, we shall see him as he is.
No day so joyful as this, to the people of God. The Sabbath, that is a joyful
day; therefore the Saints have learned, to call the Sabbath a delight, as it is
in Isaiah. Behold here a rest for the people of God, an eternal Sabbath, a
Sabbath that has no working-day after it; a Sabbath, which whosoever has once
arrived at, shall rest from his labors for evermore. It was a joyful day,
that, when the people of Israel passed over Jordan, and got into the land of
Canaan, which they had been so long looking for. Think of that spiritual
Canaan, of which the other was but a type, flowing with better milk and honey,
in likeness to God, and vision of God. We shall be like him, and see him as he
is. If Moses longed for that, think what cause the people of God have, to long
for the other, because there, they shall have the sight of God. The year of
Jubilee was a joyful time, before the appearing of Christ. When we shall be
restored to that we fell from in Adam, we shall partake of the glorious liberty
of the sons of God, as the Apostle speaks. But that which is so joyful, is
the sight of God, which cannot be attained till then. The very sight of Ghrist
in the flesh afforded much joy. Simeon got him in his arms, and desired to die,
Now let thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. The
Greeks, Joh. 12. they came to Philip, and said, Sir, we would see Jesus. It was
a joyful sight to see Christ, even in the flesh, What is it then to see Christ
in his glory, and God in his Essence, as far as a finite creature can be
capable of such a sight. If the Disciples upon the Mount were so over-joyed
with the sight of Christ, and two glorified creatures with him, Moses and
Elias, so as Peter forgot himself there; What joy will there be in the souls of
men, that come to see Christ attended with thousand thousand times ten thousand
Saints and Angels, not Christ transfigured, but Christ in his utmost glory?
Wonder not, if I speak but Balbusanter of these things, for all words come
short; let us make it up in affections. Learn to long for this sight, and for
that place where it is attainable.

But then take this with you, before I leave the Point, Caution, how to walk
that we may see God.
Be careful, as you desire to have that, which you cannot attain here, a
beatificall and scientificall sight of God; be careful to walk in Purity, and
in Peace; for the sight of God is promised upon these conditions.

First, In Purity. Matthew. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall
see God. It is not for every eye to see 1. In Purity.
God; the pure in heart, they shall see him. Sore eyes cannot endure to see the
light, impure souls shall never be honored with the sight of God. The Jews,
whom Christ was speaking to here, were men that stood much upon legal
purifications: He puts them off from them, and says, Blessed are the pure
in heart. A man that was not legally pure, might not come to see God in the
Sanctuary; so will moral uncleanness much more keep us from the sight of God
in Heaven. Walk in Purity.

I, and in Peace too; so says the Apostle, Heb. 12. 14. 2. In Peace.
Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which, no man shall see the
Lord. As not without holiness, so not without peace. He that hops to see the
Prince of peace in another world to his comfort, must carry the Son of peace
here. That of Augustine is an excellent speech, which he writes concerning
this subject of seeing God; (in his hundred and twelfth Epistle, where he had
disputed largely about this thing, he takes himself off, and says,) Let us be
wise ^o sobriety, and not be too full of heat. In the carrying on of this
Argument, let us dispute fairly, lest while we seek, in a way of contention and
bitterness, how God may be seen, we lose that peace, without which, God cannot
be seen. Follow peace and holiness, without which, it is impossible to see the
Lord.

I come now to the second thing, the Intimacy of Christ The Intimacy of Christ
with his Father.
with the Father, which lies in these words,

The onely-begotten Son, which lies in the bosom of the Father.
Christ is the only begotten Son, that is in the bosom of the Father: that
lies clearly in my Text. Of his being the only begotten Son, I shall need to
say nothing now, because I spoke before to it upon the fourteenth Verse, And
the Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we beheld his glory, as of
the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth.

This expression is to be opened here, Which is in the bosom of the Father,
(...) which is, not, which was to be before the Incarnation; or, which was to
be in the bosom of the Father, after the Ascension; but, (...), which is in
the bosom of the Father. When these words were uttered; and in every moment of
time; yea, from eternity, Christ is in the bosom of the Father.

The phrase, I take it, implies these three things.

The unity of Natures. The dearnesse of Affections. The communication of
Secrets.
First, It implies unity of Natures; and so there is something 1. To be in the
bosom of the Father, implies unity of Natures
more in (...), then (...); more in unity of Natures, then distinction of
Persons. In the bosom of the Father. The word is, (...), not (...). But, for
the unity of Natures, they use (...). Thus the bosom is the child's place.
Look to the Scripture-expressions. Ye find Moses speaking of himself as a
father, carrying Israel, as a child, in his bosom, Numb. 11. 12. Have I
conceived all this people, have I begotten them, that thou should say unto
me, Carry them in thy bosom? And so, in Nathan's Parable, 2 Samuel 12. 3. A poor
man had nothing, save only a little ewe-lamb, which he had brought and
nourished up, and it grew up together with him, and with his children; it did
eat of his own meat, and drank of his own cup, and lay in his bosom, and was
unto him as a daughter. A daughter in the bosom. And so accordingly here, The
only begotten Son, that is in the bosom of the Father, to show the unity of
Natures that is between the Father and the Son; Christ being God, co-equall
with the Father.

Secondly, As it implies unity of Natures, so it implies 2. It implies
dearnesse of Affection.
dearnesse of Affection. Bosom, as it is for children, so for nearness of
Relation. The wife of thy bosom; and, The husband of thy bosom. Deuteronomy. 28. 54.
His eye shall be evil toward the wife of his bosom; and verse 56. Her eye,
speaking of a wife, shall be evil against the husband of her bosom. Because
of those dear affections, which that nearness of Relation, as that of Marriage
calls for, between man and wife. John, the beloved of the Lord, ye find him
lying nearest Christ, even in his bosom, Joh. 13. 23. And there was leaning on
Jesus his bosom one of his disciples; whom Jesus loved. The posture of leaning
upon Christ's bosom, was an argument that Christ loved him. In this sense,
Jesus is the Son of the Father's bosom, because the Son of the Father's love.
He shall translate us into the kingdom of the Son of his love. This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, says the Voice from heaven. Matthew. 3.
17.


Thirdly, Being in the bosom, implies communication 3. It implies
communication of Secrets.
of Secrets; the bosom is a place for them. It is a speech of Tully to a
friend, that had betrusted him with a secret, Creed mihi, etc. Believe me,
says he, what thou have committed to me, it is in my bosom still, I am not
ungirt, to let it slip out. But Scripture adds this hint too, where it
speaks of the bosom as the place of Secrets, Prove. 17. 23. A wicked man
takes a gift out of the bosom, to pervert the ways of judgment, speaking of
a bribe. Prove. 21. 14. A gift in secret pacifieth anger, and a reward in the
bosom expiateth wrath. Here is secret and bosom all one, as gift and reward
are one. So, Christ lies in the Father's bosom; this intimates his being
conscious to all the Father's secrets. So have ye an opening of this phrase.
Much is to be learned from it. 1. Give the same Worship to Christ as to the
Father.


First, Seeing Christ's being in the bosom of the Father implies unity of
natures, this should teach us to give the same worship to Christ, as we give to
the Father, because there is the same nature in both. It is that, that Christ
expects and calls for, Joh. 5. 23. The Father judges no man, but has
committed all judgment to the Son, that all men should honor the Son, even as
they honor the Father. He that honors not the Son, honors not the Father
which has sent him. Jesus Christ requires the same honor, which we give to
God the Father; it is fit he should have it, and it is fit this honor should
be pleaded for, now in this age, wherein many plead against the Divinity of
Christ. We should give him the same honor that we give to the Father. Heb. 1.
6. When he brings him in as the firstborn of the world, he says, Let all
the Angels in heaven worship him. If they, then how ought all the world to
worship him? We should give him the honor of Invocation, praying to him, as
Stephen did, when they stoned him; he called upon God, and said, Lord Jesus
receive my spirit. As with Worship, and Invocation, so with Faith. It is said,
that Abraham gave glory to God, by believing in him. We should give honor to
Christ, by exercising the act of believing in him; this he called for, Let not
your hearts be troubled; ye Joh. 14. 1. Christ the proper object of Faith.
believe in God, believe also in me. He is the proper object of faith, as he
justifies. Circumferentia fidei est Verbum Dei, sed Centrum est Deus. The
whole Word of God is the circumference of faith; every thing learned in it, is
to be believed: But the center of faith (as the Word justifies) that, is the
Word, God; that, is Jesus Christ, blessed for evermore.

Secondly, His being in the bosom of the Father, implies 2. It teaches us to
set our affections upon Christ.
the dearnesse of affection, between the Father, and the Son. And this teaches
us (who are bound to be followers of God, as dear children) to set our
affections upon Christ, because God does so; He, who is the Son of God's love,
should be the object of our love. God has a bosom for Christ, we should have
a bosom for Christ too; It is said of Ignatius, that, after his death, his
body being opened, the name Jesus was found written in his heart. That is a
fable, yet has a good moral; every soul should have Jesus written in the
heart; because the love of the heart should be bestowed upon Christ, as the
noblest object, and best deserving it.

Again, ye have an expression that comes home, to that in the Text, Cant. 1.
13. (ye shall see where the Church laid Christ;) A bundle of myrrh, is my
well-beloved to me, He shall lie all night between my breasts. Here the Church
makes a room for Christ to lie in her bosom; This is a most significant
expression, This comparing Christ to a bundle of myrrh, which is of a bitter
taste, but a sweet smell. And so, fitter to represent Christ Crucified; in whose
death, there was a concurrence of these two, bitterness, and sweetness.
Nothing so bitter in it self, as the passion of Christ; the token of which, was
the paschall Lamb, which was to be eaten with bitter herbs. He endured more,
then we can comprehend; His own soul only, could know that bitterness. As
there was a great deal of bitterness in it, so a great deal of sweetness too,
as in myrrh; He offered himself to God a sacrifice, of a sweet smelling
savor, Ephesians. 5. 2. says the Apostle. Myrrh, they say, is of special use to
keep from putrefaction, to dry up moist humors; therefore, they took myrrh to
inbalm Christ's body withal; And such dries up the superfluous humors of the
soul. As Physicians say, That in nature, a bundle of myrrh between the breasts
is Cordial; surely, we have no such Cordialls as Christ in the bosom.
Therefore, A bundle of myrrh my beloved is to me, He shall lie all night
between my breasts; Nothing so bitter as my sins were, but the crucifying of
Christ; and yet nothing so sweet, as that Christ was crucified for my sins, to
take them away. Therefore, let us find a bosom to lay Christ in, for the time
to come; If we will be glad of his bosom, when we die. He will be content to
lie in ours now, if we will but receive him; Certainly, it concerns us to
know what we do with our affections: How we bestow our love. Lo, here is an
object, to be beloved, more then the wife of the bosom, more then the husband
of the bosom; Here is the Mediator in the bosom. If any thing will draw-out
love from us, it is the consideration of that love, which he has showed to us;
Love is the Lodestone of love. See how he Amor magnes amoris.
has opened his bosom to us, how he has exceeded all the patterns of love;
We find in Scripture, Rebecca loved Jacob, better then Esau; Therefore, she put
him into a way of getting the blessing. And when Jacob was afraid of the event,
lest his father should curse him, The curse be Genesis 27. 13.
upon me my son, says she; The Lord puts us into a way of getting an
eternal blessing from God the Father, and for the procuring of this, he
himself is become a curse for us. He was made sin for us, and a curse, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him. Jacob loved Rachel, better then
Leah; therefore, was content to serve so many years. For us, the Lord took upon
him the form of a servant, and in that form served for us three and thirty
years, and more, here in the flesh. Jonathan loved David, and, to manifest his
love, he put his own garment upon him; Christ so loved us, as to cloth us
with his own righteousness. David loved Mephibosheth, and therefore set him
at his own Table, to eat bread continually, though he were lame. Christ so
loves us, notwithstanding all our lamenesse, and imperfections, as to provide
a Table for us, where we shall one day sit down with Isaac, and Jacob, in the
Kingdom of Heaven. Beloved, do you provide a room for Christ in your bosoms;
and he will provide a room for you in Abraham's bosom, yea, in his own.

Thirdly, This being in the Fathers bosom, implies Communication 3. It
teaches us to go to Christ for illumination.
of secrets. Let us learn from hence, to go to Christ for Illumination, that he
who knows the secrets of the Father, would discover them to us; so far as
they are necessary for our salvation, or the edification of our brethren.
Whither should we go, but to the great Counselor, for advice? The Disciples
took this course, Luke 11. 1. One of the Disciples, said to him, Lord, teach us
to pray. So, Lord teach us to hear, Lord teach us to meditate, and, Lord teach
us to confer; to go to Christ for all teaching. If any man want wisdom, let
him ask it of God, Jam. 1. 5. Who gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth
not; we cannot be wise to Salvation, unless Christ be made wisdom to us:
otherwise, the Devil will be too hard for us, he is so cunning, and subtle,
as to make fools of us. As soon as a subtle man will cheat a Child of what he
has, so soon will the Devil cheat us; There are wi^es of the Devil, depths
of Satan, mysteries of Iniquity. How shall we be able to shun these, to avoid
the danger of them, if we be not instructed by Him, who knows the secrets of
the Father? As there are mysteries of Iniquity, so of Godliness too. The
Gospel it self, Paul calls it, wisdom in a Mystery; And that even amongst
the perfect, 1 Cor. 2. 6. Howbeit, we speak wisdom amongst them that are
perfect, ver. 7. We speak the wisdom of God in a mystery. Which mystery?
wisdom in a mystery: such, is the Gospel. So mysterious, that one mystery is
wrapped in another; wisdom in a Mystery, and that hid, and that amongst the
perfect. How shall we come to find out this wisdom, if the Lord Jesus, the
wisdom of God, be not made wisdom to us? As there are mysteries in every
point of Doctrine, so there are secrets in every point of Practice; which
without the help of Christ, we cannot come to be made masters of, Psalm. 25. 14.
The secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him; In every duty we can put
our hands to, there is a secret. It is a Common thing to pray, but to pray in
the Holy Ghost, is a great secret; It is a Common thing to come to the Lords
Table but to discern the Lords body, that is a secret. It is a Common thing to
hear the word, but so, as it may be mixed with faith in us, that is a secret; To
keep the Sabbath is a common thing; but, to call the Sabbath a delight, that is
a secret. Would we be acquainted with the secrets of the power of godliness,
let us go to Jesus Christ, who is only conscious to all the secrets of God;
seek to him, that he would reveal them to us by his Spirit; for, He is in the
bosom of the Father. So I have done with the second thing.

I come now to the third thing, concerning the discovery of the Father by
Christ.

He has declared him.
You have heard of a twofold sight of God, a Beatificall, and Scientificall
vision.

A Beatificall Vision, in Reference to his Essence.

A Scientificall Vision, in Reference to his Counsel.

And that Christ, the only begotten Son, may not be excluded from either of
these; the next Clause implies, Which is in the bosom of his Father. I say,
It implies, That Christ the Son has a beatificall vision of God the Father,
even in his essence; here, while upon the face of the earth, amongst the
Children of men. And besides this, He must needs see the essence of God, that
is, essentially, God himself.

And His lying in the bosom of the Father, implies, That he could not but
have the scientificall vision of the Father; Hence we infer, that none is
fitter, to declare the Father, then he that saw the Father, and none more able
to show forth the mind and the Counsel of the Father, then he that lay in the
Father's bosom.

The only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, He has declared
him.
The word in the Original is, (...). There is an Emphasis in the expression,
and Erasmus notes, that (...), de eo dicitur, qui res alioqui latentes, and
obscuras, plane ac dilucide declarat; It is oftentimes spoken of him, that
reveals obscure and hidden things, and makes manifest, things otherwise not
to be revealed. And it is properly to be applied, to Divine and Heavenly
Mysteries; Hence there arises a difference between (...), and (...). The first
is properly applied to divine and heavenly mysteries; the other to vulgar; and
things more obvious, and common. And some think that Christ in the beginning of
this Chapter, is called (...), the Word, because he is (...), the Father's
Interpreter; or he that declares the mind, and will of the Father.

So then, Concerning the discovery of the Father by Christ, two things are to
be observed.

First, The person declaring, Christ. Secondly, The person declared, the
Father.
First, The person declaring. From hence note two things.

The Fitness of the Messenger. The Fullness of the Message.
First, The fitness of the Messenger, by whom in these latter times, the deep
mysteries of the Father's Divine essence, and will, (so far as is necessary
to Salvation) is declared. For Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God, that
lay in the bosom of the Father, who is the express Image of his Person, Heb.
1. 3. has showed to us the Invisible glory, and made it visible; so far, as
we are capable to behold it. An expression you have to confirm this out of the
mouth of Christ himself, Matthew. 11. 27. All things are delivered unto me of my
Father, and no man knows the Son, but the Father, neither knows any man the
Father, save the Son, and he to whom soever the Son will reveal him, Joh. 6.
46. No man has seen the Father, save he that is of God, he has seen the
Father.

Secondly, The fullness of the Message, that Christ has declared, which is
indeed, Every thing necessary for man's Salvation; and whatsoever Christ has
declared, is true, profitable, wholesome, and sufficient. Therefore, no leaving
the Word of Christ, and flying to human Traditions: for says he, Joh. 3. 11.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, we speak that we do know, and testify that we
have seen, And, Hebr. 1. 1. God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners,
spoke in times past unto the fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days
spoken unto us by his Son. The words in the original are, (...), by
piecemeal, darkly, by riddles, and visions formerly: but now, he has clearly
declared, not only himself, by his Son, but whatsoever else (so much as our
frail natures and weak capacities can reach unto) tending to the salvation of
all the Elect of God.

Secondly, The next thing is the Person declared, That is the Father, or the
mind, and will of the Father, or, more plainly: Christ, that lay in the bosom
of the Father, has declared from the Father's bosom, the glorious mystery of
man's Redemption; his Justification by faith, and the way to everlasting
happiness, and glory.

I now go on to as brief an Application.

First, Does Christ declare the mind of the Father? get then Intimacy, and
Familiarity with Jesus Christ; Take Him into thy heart, that lay in the bosom
of the Father. For what greater stay can we have in the time of trouble, and
what more supporting Comfort and consolation in the hour of Temptation, than to
be acquainted with, and united to him, that is the Churches Head; and our Lord,
and Savior, the only begotten Son of God; and to lie in the bosom of the
Father?

Secondly, Take notice of the Dignity of a Christian; that has so able, and so
gracious an Interpreter, even the Eternal Son of God. He it is, that to us
declares the will, and lays open the whole Counsel of his Father.

Thirdly, Let dignity oblige you to duty. If Jesus Christ declares the will of
the Father: then, upon the life of your souls, it exceedingly much concerns
you diligently to observe, and carefully to attend unto what Christ declares;
Learning always to submit to the will of the Father, thus declared by his Son,
that his Name alone may be glorified, and our souls Eternally saved.

FINIS.

