THE ARTICLES OF EXETER, Made on the Rendition thereof.

WITH The Vote of the Honorable House of Commons, in the Approbation of them
of the 6. of May, 1646.

With the Order and Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled, for the Approbation, Publication, and Observation of them, by all
Committees, Judges, and Officers, and others concerned in them, of the 4. of
this instant November. 1647.

a crown

LONDON, Printed for John Williams, at the Crown in Saint Paul's Churchyard.
1647.

Dated at Exeter the 8. day of April, at 10. of the clock at night. 1646.
Articles of Agreement concluded on by Thomas Hammond, Lieutenant-Generall of
the Ordnance, Colonel Sir Hardres Waller, Colonel Edward Harley, Colonel
Lambert, Commissary General Stane, and Major Patson, Scout-master General,
Commissioners on the behalf of the Right Honorable his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, General of the Parliament Forces on the one party: And Sir Henry
Berkley, Sir George Warry, Col: William Ashburnham, Col: Godolphin, Captain
Fitz-Gerard, Master John Were, Robert Walker Esquire and Master Thomas Knot
Merchant, Commissioners on the behalf of Sir John Berkley, Knight, Governor
of the City of Exeter on the other party, touching and concerning the Rendition
of the said City and Garrison as follows.
1. THat the City and Garrison of Exeter, together with the Castle, all Forts,
Mounts, and places of Defense of or belonging to the same, with all Ordnance,
Arms, Ammunition, Provisions and. Furniture of War belonging to the Garrison,
(excepting what shall be excepted in the ensuing Articles) shall be delivered
unto Sir Thomas Fairfax, General of the Parliament Forces, or to any whom he
shall appoint, to receive them for the use of the Parliament, on Monday next
after the date hereof, being the 13. day of this instant April, by twelve of
the Clock at Noone.

2. That if any Officer, Soldier, or any person included in these Articles of
or belonging unto the City or Garrison of Exeter, shall after the conclusion of
these Articles, wrong or plunder in person or goods (in their marching away or
before) any Citizen or Countryman, or any person whatsoever, shall as far as he
is able give satisfaction to the persons so injured at the judgment of his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, if he be not punished before by the present
Governor thereof.

3. That if any Officer, Soldier, or any person (included in these Articles)
shall after the date hereof, wilfully break, deface, spoil or imbezell any
Arms, or other provisions of War whatsoever, by the precedent Articles to be
surrendered as aforesaid, shall lose the benefit of the ensuing Articles.

4. That the Princess Henrietta and her Governesse, with her household, shall
have full liberty to pass with their Plate, Money, and Goods, within twenty
days after the conclusion of this Treaty, (when she shall desire) to any place
within the Continent of England, or Dominion of Wales, at the election of the
Governesse, and there to remain until His Majesty's Pleasure be farther
known touching her settling; And that the Governesse shall have liberty to send
to the King to know his Pleasure herein, accordingly to dispose of her Highness,
within the foresaid limitation of place, and that fit and convenient Carriages
be provided for their passage at reasonable rates.

5. That the Cathedral Church, nor any other Church within the City shall be
defaced, or any thing belonging thereunto spoiled or taken away by any Soldier
or person of either side whatsoever.

6. That the Governor, together with all Lords, Gentlemen, Clergymen,
Chaplains, Officers, Troopers, and Common-Soldiers of the Kings Forces, shall
march out of the City on Monday next the 13. of April, by twelve of the clock
at noone, with their Horses, full Arms, Bag and Baggage, and their Goods,
Colors flying, Drums beating, Matches lighted, Bullets, full Bandoleers, with
sufficient Convoyes to Oxford, or unto Helstone in Cornwall, at their several
elections. And in case the Governor of Oxford shall refuse to receive the
Common-Souldiers that shall march thither: They are there to deliver up their
Arms to the Convoy, and have Passes to repair to their several homes: and
those that march to Helston, are there to be disbanded, and have Passes to
repair to their own homes. Provided that all Troopers and Common Soldiers
which march not as aforesaid, shall deliver up their Arms, (except their
Swords) and have liberty to go unto their own homes with Bag and Baggage, and
shall not be compelled to take up Arms against the King. Provided also, that
all Officers and Gentlemen that shall choose to go to Oxford, and not taking
up Arms, shall repair into the Parliament Quarters within forty days after
the Date hereof, shall enjoy the benefit of these Articles.

7. That all those which shall March unto the places aforesaid, shall have free
Quarter in their march, and not be obliged to march above ten miles a day,
and that such other Soldiers as are Inhabitants in the City, shall have free
liberty to march out, or remain therein, without being compelled to take up
Arms against the King: And if any Soldiers shall fall sick upon their march,
that convenient Carriages, and Accommodations shall be provided for them.

8. That all Lords, Gentlemen, Clergymen, Chaplains, and Officers that shall
choose to go beyond Seas, shall march away with their full Arms for their own
use; and that all common Soldiers shall march away with their full Arms, with
a sufficient convoy unto the Port, which they shall choose for their
transportation, which Arms (except swords) they shall there lay down, and
deliver unto the Governor of the next Garrison belonging to the Parliament;
the said Governor providing for their safety, during the time of their abode
there, where they shall be assisted for the procuring Vessels and Shipping for
their transportation at the accustomed Rates, and shall have free Quarter for
one and twenty days allowed to provide for their passage. After which time
shall be expired, the same Officers and Soldiers paying for their Quarters,
shall have liberty to stay until Shipping be provided, and weather seasonable,
and that during their stay, or before, it shall be permitted, that any two of
them may go to London, to Treat with any foreign Ambassador or Agent, for a
Commission to be entertained beyond the Seas.

9. That neither the Officers, Soldiers, nor any Person whatsoever, in their
going out of the City, shall be reproached, or have any disgraceful speeches
or affronts offered unto them, or any of their Persons wronged, rifled,
searched, or their goods seized, or taken away from them, by any person
whatsoever.

10. That the Governor, Lords, Gentlemen, Clergymen, Chaplains, Commanders,
Officers, and Soldiers comprised in these Articles, shall be allowed and
assisted in providing of sufficient Carriages at reasonable rates, to carry
away their Bag, Baggage and Goods; and that care be taken by the future
Governor of the said City, for the curing of such sick or wounded Officers and
Soldiers, as shall be left in the City, and that upon recovery, they shall
have Passes to repair to their own houses respectively.

11. That the Parliament Forces come not into the City until the Kings Forces
be marched out, except one hundred and fifty Foot, and one Troop of Horse, with
their Officers.

12. That no Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Clergiemen, Chaplains, (excepting
those who are by name excepted by Parliament from Pardon and Composition)
Officers, Citizens, and Soldiers, and all other persons comprised in these
Articles, shall be questioned or accomptable for any act past by them done, (or
by any other done by their procurement) relating unto the unhappy differences
betwixt His Majesty and the Parliament, they submitting themselves to
reasonable and moderate composition for their estates, which the General Sir
Thomas Fairfax shall really endeavor with the Parliament, that it shall not
exceed two years value of any man's real estate respectively; and for
personal, according to the ordinary rule, not exceeding the proportion
aforesaid. Which composition being made, they shall have Indemnity of their
persons, and enjoy their estates, and all other Immunities, without payment of
any 5. or 20. part, or any other Taxes or Impositions, except what shall be
hereafter charged upon them in common with other Subjects of this Kingdom by
Authority of Parliament.

13. That all Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Clergy and Chaplains excepted in the
next precedent Article, shall have liberty to go unto any of the Kings
Garrisons, and to have a safe Conduct for themselves and servants, to go unto
the Parliament, to obtain their Composition for their Estates, and Indemnity
for their persons, which (though it prove ineffectuall) yet nevertheless they
shall have four months time next after the date of these Articles to endeavor
their peace, or to go beyond the Seas, and shall have passes for that purpose.

14. That all Horses, Arms, Money, and other goods whatsoever, taken as
lawful prize of War, before, or during the Seige now in the City, be continued
in the possession of the present possessour.

15. That all Officers, Gentlemen, Citizens, Inhabitants, Clergymen, Chaplains,
Soldiers, and all other persons within the City, during the time of the making
their Compositions, shall have free liberty, either to inhabit within the same
City, or shall have free liberty at any time to depart with their Families,
Goods and Estates, unto any part of the Kingdom in the Parliaments Quarters,
and before Composition made, the Merchants and Tradesmen to enjoy their
Merchandising and Trades. And after Compositions made, all others now
prohibited by Ordinance of Parliament, to enjoy and exercise their professions,
or go beyond the Seas. And that they, and every of them, shall have power to
dispose and sell to their own uses, either by themselves or others, whatsoever
part of their Goods or Estates, they shall not carry or convey away with them;
and all Inhabitants which did inhabit within the City, within seven months
past, having made their Compositions as abovesaid, shall enjoy the benefit of
this, and of the 12. and 22. Articles.

16. That all Charters, Customs, Privileges, Franchises, Liberties, Lands,
Estates, Goods and Depts of the Major, Aldermen, Bayliffes, Comminalty, as a
Corporation, and all Corporations of the said City shall be enjoyed by them:
And that the Ancient Government thereof, remain as formerly.

17. That if any persons, or Inhabitants which are comprised within these
Articles, shall break any of them, that such breach shall only touch and
concern such persons, and they, to make such satisfaction for the same, as the
cause shall require.

18. That all persons comprised within these Articles, shall have upon request,
a Certificate under the hand of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, or the
future Governor of that City, that such persons were in the City, at the time
of the surrendering thereof, and are to have the benefit of these Articles.

19. That His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, give assurance, that all Officers
and Soldiers in the Parliaments Army, and all other under his Command, shall
duly and exactly observe all these Articles. And if they, or any of them, shall
directly, or indirectly violate or infringe the same, upon complaint thereof,
Justice may be done, and reparation made.

20. That the Inhabitants of the City shall be eased, and freed from all free
quarter and billet of Soldiers, except in cases of urgent necessity other then
for lodging, and that to be ordered and disposed by the advice of the Major and
his Deputy.

21. That no Oath, Covenant Protestation or subscription relating thereunto,
shall be imposed upon any person whatsoever comprised within these Articles,
but only such as shall bind all persons aforesaid, not to bear Arms against
the Parliament of England, now sitting at Westminster; nor wilfully do any Act
prejudicial unto their Affairs, whilst they remain in their Quarters, except
the persons aforesaid, shall first render themselves unto the Parlia. who shall
cause them to be secured, if they think fit.

22. That for the further and cleerer understanding of the precedent Articles:
It is hereby declared, that the true meaning of them is, that all persons
comprised within these Articles, shall quietly and peaceably enjoy all their
goods, debts, and movables, during the space of four months, next ensuing:
and be free from all Oaths, Covenants, Protestations, and have liberty within
the time of the said four months, in case they shall not make their
Compositions with the Parliament, and shall be resolved to go beyond the Seas,
to dispose of their said goods, debts, and movables, allowed by these
Articles, and depart the Kingdom, if they think fit, and to have Passes for
that purpose, or otherwise to stay in the Kingdom.

23. That mount Radford, and the Wards in Saint Thomas Parish, with the
Provisions of War thereunto belonging, be delivered unto his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax, or whom he shall appoint, to receive them in assurance of the
performance of the precedent Articles, to morrow by six of the clock in the
afternoon, being the ninth of April. And that four such Gentlemen or Officers
as his Excellency shall approve of, shall be delivered at the same time as
Hostages for the peformance of the foregoing Articles on the one party. And
that at the same time two Hostages be delivered unto Sir John Berkley, Knight,
and Governor of the City of Exeter, such as he shall approve of, or unto whom
he shall appoint, to receive them in assurance of the full performance of the
Articles granted on the other party.

24. Lastly, that these Articles be ratified and confirmed mutually by his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax on the one party, and Sir John Berkley, Knight,
Governor of the City on the other patty.

Given under my hand the 9. day of April. 1646. J do ratify and confirm the
Articles abovesaid, agreed upon by the Commissioners on my part. FAIRFAX.
Ex' Et concordat cum Original'. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Mercurii 6. Maii. 1646.
THe Articles made and agreed upon between Sir Thomas Fairfax, General, and
Sir John Berkley, Governor of Exeter, upon the Rendition of the said City,
etc. to his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, were all this day read, and upon the
Question approved.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Jovis 4. November. 1647.

THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament do approve of the Articles of
Exeter, and Order this Approbation be published, to the end all people
concerned may take notice thereof. And that the Committees, Judges, Officers,
and other persons concerned therein, do take notice thereof, and observe the
same, any Orders or Ordinances to the contrary notwithstanding.

Jo: Brown Cler. Parliamentor.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


