THE Folly and Wisdom OF THE ANCIENTS: IN TWO LETTERS Wonderfully Preserved
for almost 2000 Years. Translated out of the Greek Copy, and Recommended to the
Judicious, to Consider how far the Case therein Expressed, may concern our
Present Times, either Prophetically or Parallel.

BEING TWO LETTERS of ARTAXERXES that Great King, as they are Recorded by
JOSEPHUS, in His 11th. Book, and 6th. Chap.

LONDON, Printed for F. Smith, at the Sign of the prill 11Elephant and Castle,
without Temple Bar. 1661.

THE Folly and Wisdom OF THE ANCIENTS:
The First Letter.
(...) Rex Magnus his Principes and Locorum Presides Ordinati sunt, Haec
scribit. Cum multis imperassem Gentibus, and omni dominaret Orbis-terrae, Volui
non temeritate potentiae elevatus, etc.
The Great King Writes these things, to the Princes and Governors that are
under him, throughout the Nations.
AFter that I became Lord over many Nations, and had Dominion over the whole
World, not lifted up with Presumption of my Authority; but carrying my self
always with Equity and Mildness, I purposed to settle my Subjects continually in
a Quiet Life; and making my Kingdom Peaceable, and Open for Passage, to the
utmost Coasts; to renew Peace, which is desired of all men.

Now, when I asked my Counselors how this might be brought to pass? A man that
excelled in Wisdom among us, and was approved for his constant good Will and
steadfast Fidelity, (...).
and had the honor of the second Place in the Kingdom, Declared unto us, That
in all Nations, throughout the World, there was scattered a certain Malicious
People, that had Laws contrary to all Nations, and continually Despised the
Commandments of Kings, so as the Uniting of our Kingdoms, honorably intended
by us, cannot go forward.

Seeing then we understand, that this People alone, is continually in
opposition unto all men; Differing in the strange manner of their Laws, and
evil affected to our State, working all the mischief they can, that our Kingdom
may not be firmly established: Therefore have we Commanded, That all they that
are signified in writing unto you, shall All, with their Wives and Children, be
utterly destroyed, by the Sword of their Enemies, without all Mercy and Pity,
upon the (...)Day of the Month (...) of this present Year; That they who of
old, and new also, are malicious, may in one Day, with Violence, go into the
Grave, and so ever hereafter, cause our Affairs to be well Settled, and without
trouble.

(...).
Here follows part of the Prayer unto God, in behalf of the People Designed
for Slaughter.
(...).
O Lord, Lord, the King Almighty, for the whole World is in thy Power, and if
thou have appointed to save thy People, there is no man that can gainsay thee;
For thou have made Heaven and Earth, and all the Wondrous things under the
Heaven. Thou art Lord of all things, and there is no man can resist thee which
art the Lord. Thou know all things. And thou know, that it was neither in
Contempt, nor Pride (referring to the first Occasion of the Cruel Decree) for I
could have been content, with good will, for the Salvation of the People, to
have kissed the Soles of his Feet. Him who stirred up the K. to wrath
But I did this, that I might not prefer the Glory of man, above the Glory of
God, neither will I Worship any but Thee, O God, neither will I do it in pride.
And now, O Lord God and King, Spare thy People, for their Eyes are upon us, to
bring us to naught, yea they desire to destroy the Inheritance that has been
Thine from the beginning. Despise not the Portion Thou have Delivered for Thine
own Self. Hear my Prayer, and be Merciful unto Thine Inheritance. Turn our
Sorrow into Joy, that we may Live, O Lord, and Praise Thy Name, and Destroy not
the Mouths of them that Praise Thee, O Lord.

Soon after, a Second Letter, in Opposition to the Former Hasty Decree, thus
follows.
(...) -- etc.
The Great King
unto the Princes and Governors (over his Dominions) unto all our faithful
Subjects, Greeting.
MAny, the more often they are honored with the great Bounty of their Gracious
Princes, the more Proud they are waxen, and endeavor to hurt, not our Subjects
only, but, not being able to bear abundance, do take in hand, to practice also
against those that do them good: And take not only thankfulness away from
among men, but also lifted up with the glorious words of lewd persons, that
were never good, they think to escape the Justice of God, that sees all
things, and hates evil. Oftentimes also, fair speeches of those that are put
in trust to manage their friends Affairs, have caused many that are in
Authority, to be (...).
partakers of innocent blood, and has enwrapped them in remediless Calamities;
beguiling with the falsehood and deceit of their lewd Disposition, the innonency
and goodness of Princes. Now ye may see this as we have Declared, not so much
by ancient Histories, as ye may if ye search what has been wickedly done of
late, through the Pestilent behavior of them that are unworthily placed in
Authority.

And we must take care for the time to come, that our Kingdom may be quiet and
peaceable for all men, both by changing our purposes, and always judging things
that are evident, with more equal proceeding; for a man -- being indeed a
Stranger from our -- Blood, and far distant from our Goodness, and as a
Stranger received of us, had so far forth obtained the Favor that we show
toward every Nation, (...) --
as that he was called our Father, and was continually Honored of all men, as
the next person unto the King. But he not bearing his great Dignity, went about
to deprive us of our Kingdom and Life; having by manyfold and cunning Deceits,
sought of us the Destruction, as well of -- those who saved our Life, and
continually procured our good -- with the whole Nation of them: For by this
means he thought, finding us destitute of Friends, to have translated our
Kingdom to -- others.

But we find, that the People whom this wicked Wretch has delivered to utter
Destruction, (...).
are no evil doers, but live by most Just Laws; And that they be Children of
the Most High, and Most Mighty Living God, who has ordered the Kingdom both to
us and our Progenitors, in the most excellent manner.

Wherefore ye shall do well, not to put in Execution the Letters, sent unto you
by that -- wicked man. -- For he that was the Worker of these things, is Hanged
up at the Gates, etc. -- God who Rules all things, speedily rendering Vengeance
unto him according to his Deserts. Therefore ye shall Publish the Copy of this
Letter, in all Places, that those -- Innocent People may (...) --
freely live after their own Laws: And ye shall aid them against all that rise
against them, and set upon them. For Almighty God has turned to Joy unto them,
the Day wherein the chosen People should have Perished.

FINIS.

