The Arraignment and Trial WITH A DECLARATION of the RANTERS ALSO, Several
Sentences proceedings at the Sessions in the Old Bailey, and Council of War:
their procestations and the hanging of one up by the Thumbs; with diverse
Penalties to be inflicted upon others. The dancing and revelling of Dr.
Buckeridge and his Wife, and other Gent. dancing all in white, in Berkshire,
and their Christmas Carol. A Dispute between a Ranter in Bridewel, and one that
came to see him; with his CREED and PATER NOSTER: and the Names of the false
Gods they worship. As also, a List of many of the Ranters, from whence they are
derived: and of many hundreds of them in England.



Printed by B. A. and published according to order. 1650.

THE TRIAL Of the RANTERS Or a Faithful Chronicle and Narrative of their
confession, lives words, and actions, for many years together, their Creed and
Paternoster, with the several kind of punishments inflicted upon above twenty
of them, together with some arguments, and several other things touching those
that are tried this present Sessions.
HIgh time it was for the Ranters to be whipped and stripped, but alas (says one)
why should we judge of any? and under pretense of scruple of conscience, would
not have the notorious wicked practices of those wicked blasphe-phemous
wretches laid open, or at least wise not in such a plain manner that must needs
render them surpassing vile and filthy, and to help this over the style another
tender hearted creature, says. But is it fit that women should be brought in
under the notion of whores, truly I dare not to say any one is so except I saw
her in the fact, let her carriage and report be what it will, and I will
believe no more but what I see with my eyes, and hear with my ears. These are
such as conceal and cover the fins of Sodom and would have none to cry aloud,
or declare the sins of the people, and where ever I find such as will mince or
lesson sin I shall fear that they are readier to be drawn into a most damnable
opinion (with the Ranters) that sin is no sin rather then to practice and
persevere in the ways of God.

It is not my intent to trouble you with that which has been already
published, for that were to tire the reader with repetitions, therefore will I
discover some passages which have not yet been mentioned in others, and
conclude with the trial of others, and the punishments inflicted.

A journeyman Shoemaker that wrought in St. Martins, did oftentimes utter such
wicked and blasphemous words, that the Shoemaker which set him on work, and his
wife, were oftentimes much terrified and moved to hear his Diabolical
expressions, in which he persisted after often admonition and warning, which
caused his Master to forbear setting him on work any longer: and not long
after, he was taken revelling and blaspheming and carried to Bridewell. Amongst
other speeches of his (which would cause a man's ears tingle to hear) when he
heard any mention of God, he used to laugh, and in a disdainful manner say,
that he believed money, good clothes, good meat and drink, tobacco, and merry
company to be Gods: but he was little beholding to any of these; for his God
allowed him but eight pence or ten pence a day, and that he made him work for;
and he knew not of any thing could be gotten from him by fair means, therefore
he would have a saying to him, and force what he pleased. With many other words
to the same effect, and so blasphemous, that they are not fit to be once so
much as named amongst Christians.

And at another time in his Ranting mood a sober man reproved him for such
wicked words as fell from him, and said that if he had any love to God or fear
of the Devil he durst nor do it, the Shoo-maker, replied to this effect (yet
in broader language) that the Devil was nothing but the backside of God, and
that it was but a scarcrow, and other such like speeches proceeding of the
height Atheism and profaneness, in which lamentable condition it appears that
he still remains, for his late Mistress went but few days since to give him a
visit in Bridewell hoping to have found him penitent, and sorrowful for what
had been past, and when she came thither tshe found him beating Hemp, and asked
him if the making of Shoes were not better, to which he answered yea, and said
that it was her God that brought him thither, then said she, thou may take
notice that my God is just in bring thee to open shame and punishment for thy
wicked and ungodly words and deeds whereby thou have long dishonored him
therefore it is time for thee to be think with thy self, what a sad estate thou
art in if thou repentest not, which words of hers were altogether slighted and
rejected by him and instead of seeing of good to be wrought in him, he said he
was as be was made, and it was not for her to instruct him, if she would give
him any Beer und Tobacco, he would take it, but as for her advice she might
keep it to her self.

This Shoemaker was once a man that was called an Anabaptist; but in life and
conversation was long noted not to make conscience of any thing and it is no
marvel, that when men are given over a loose life and conversation, they are
mere Atheists, and become so impious therein, that they think all things come
by nature, and believe not that there is a Jehovah, which created all things,
and gives a being and preservation to them being created.

And according unto this, one of this viperous generation, in the Church, at
the great St. Hellens, London, got up into the Pulpit, and pretended to make a
Sermon; and read a portion of the Prophet Esaias, where it is said, I the Lord of
H^sts will, ande. In opening which words he said, That it is not said He, but
I; which according to his application, was meant of every man's particular; and
and also blasphemingly said, Thut our Savior Christ was but an ordinary
fellow: and in this kind of wicked profanation he spent the whole time
allotted, to the great disquiet and grief of many honest hearted people which
heard him; and although he were guarded by a party of his own, yet was his hat
turned beside his head, as soon as he came out of the Pulpit: then he hastened
into the Vestry, and a grave and sober man that heard him, demanded, Whether he
would give satisfaction for what he had with so much impudency and blasphemy
spoken? and he engaged his word to meet him before a Magistrate the next day,
at a certain time and place: but he that makes no Conscience of any thing,
cares not for his word, and therefore he observed not the keeping of it. And
many of them are arrived at that height of incorrigible madness and
abominable impudence, that they fear not (in all companies where they come) to
contest that all things were made by nature, that man's soul dies with his
body, that the Scriptures are mere lies and tales, etc.

Another of them taking a piece of boiled beef betwixt his hands, and tearing
it in his hands, gave part thereof to one of his companions, using these words
in derision of the blessed Sacrament) the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

A she Ranter said openly in the hearing of many, (a friend of mine acciden^^ly
one of them) that she should think her self a happy woman, and a superlative
servant of Gods if any man would accompany with her ^arnally.

I shall compare the actions of these and others of their crew, with some that
we read of in former times, which came nearest in opinion and practice to them.

In the year 353. there were discovered a sort of people that came out of
Africa, calling themselves Donatists (as some of these do,) which held many
strange opinions; and though adjudged to be the greatest Heretics of that
time, yet they held forth to the people, that none were pure but themselves.

And in the ninth year of the Reign of K. Hen. 2 Anno 1163. there came into
England one Gerrard a Germain, with many others which denied Matrimony and both
the Sacraments (as many of these do) and Christ himself. This Gerrard himself
had some learning, but the rest were ignorant persons which he misled, they
were examined, and found guilty and received sentence as obstinate Heretics,
for they were marked or stigmatized in the forehead, after that they were all
sharply whipped, which punishment they seemed indeed to receive (with more joy
than these of our time) and by the command of the King and state they were
afterward turned out of prison, and people were forbidden either to harbor or
relieve them, so that with the extremity of the cold of winter and want of food
and harbor, they all died miserably starved with cold and famished with hunger.

There came also into England in the time of Edward 3. Anno Dom* 1349. out of
Holland, Zealand, and parts adjacent about 120 persons with an opinion that a
man might take as many wives as he was able to maintain, and if there were any
Resurrection it was by virtue of the motion of the Planets, yet these last,
were not so brutish as they in our time; for they acknowledged something of God
and met together at certain times to hear exhortations from those which were
esteemed to be best gifted amongst them, and were called Stoics in reference
to the place where they sualy met together; for Stowy in the Greek language
signifies a Porch.

In the 11 year of Queen El^zabeth, there sprung a people in England, which
called themselves the family of love, which held forth an opinion that women
ought to be common: both sects saluted one another at their first meeting, as
the Ranters now do, they spent their time in pleasure and profaneness, for
which two of them did penance at Pauls-Crosse, and there confessed and
detested their wicked and damnable heresies.

In the 33 year of Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1591. One Edward Coppinger and Henry
Archington, repaired to the house of one John Walker, at Broken wharfe, London,
where they found a Northamptonshire young man, named William Hacket, to whom
the said Coppinger and Arthington said, that they were come to anoint him King:
but Hacket replied, that they needed not so to do; for he was already anointed
by the Holy Ghost: and the said Hacket caused Coppinger and Arthington to
believe that he was Jesus Christ; (and some of the Ranters do (at least in
substance) affirm that they are Christ) so they proclaimed him in London, and
at last for these blasphemies, and other things proved against him, he was
hanged in Cheapside.

In the 16 year of the Reign of King James, one John Trusk stood in the Pillory
at Westminster, for strange and blasphemous opinions concerning Christ, and the
Sabbath; as these Ranters have, which esteem every day like, and make a scoff
at such as go to hear or pray, some of them saying, that they can make as good
a Pater noster as the Lords Prayer is, etc.

I shall now come down to the times of our present memory which is hardly able
to record how many they are, and the hellish opinions they have fomented, and
the height they are grown unto, notwithstanding the diligent care which the
civil Magistrate and Officers of the Army have had from time to time to punish
and suppress Blasphemers, and such as walk inordinately; of which might be
instanced above an hundred late examples, all which might be particularly
recited, were it necessary in this place to be inserted; which being not held
fit, I shall only remaind you of some few that are last, and proceed to such
as were this Sessions tried in the Old Bailey. Claxton was a trades man; and
having attained some measure of knowledge, a bold spirit and utterance, he
would have taken on him to become a teacher; but he soon after fell into such
excess of riot, that he came within the compass of being punished by the
Civil Magistrate by whom he was committed to Bridewell where (doubtless) for
many months together he has participated of the custom of the house which is
a punishment not inferior to those that were inflicted in former times on such
kind of offenders, an officer of the army in Scotland, holding strange opinions
of Jesus Christ was cashiered in dishonor, and is not to presume to come into
the army any more on peril, another officer which held that sin was no sin,
had his sword broken over his head, and for ever cashiered, I have also heard
of one more (to the honor of the Court Martial let it be spoken) which for the
height of offcutes proved against him has sentence first to be hung up by the
Thumbs for a good space of time, and after he is cut down to be openly whipped,
and about three weeks or a month since a soldier for his ranting (as its
called) was whipped at a Carts tail from Paul's Church to the Royal Exchange.

Collins, Shakespeare, Waddleworth, and the rest that were taken in Moorlane,
and carried to Bridewel, showed blisters (to the Justices) and a king backs,
and promise amendment for the future; diverse others that were since taken, were
brought to the Sessions, who acknowledge, now they smart, that there is a
heaven and a heil; yet lest they should return with the Dog to the Vomit, and
the Swine to the wallowing in the Mire, it is not amiss that they should taste
a few more of the Prodigals husks, without which, there is little hopes of a
through Reformation: and because such as are able to speak wisely before wise
men, deserve (...) gre^^^er punishment if they are found fools among the
ignorant. And in ^eg^rd some of them were convicted of their evil-words and
uncivil behavior, they are bound to the good behavior for the time to come,
and they are to be whipped and receive further punishment if they be taken again.
As for Cop, who wrote the Plying Roll, and some other of the principal
Ringleaders, to whom much of what has been lately set forth, touching matters
of Blasphemy do relate, are charged in a more capital nature of offending, and
will be brought to their trial in due time. Therefore I shall conclude with a
List of the Ranters before mentioned. A List of the Ranters tried as follows.
Jo. Collins. Jo. Gerrard. Ed. Copinger. Hen. Arthington. F. Ket. Jo. Ask. T.
Shakespeare. M. Waddleworth. Jo. Webb. Eliz. Trule. Jane Waggle. and many others


The last thread which is to be wound upon this bottom is a relation which we
have out of Berkshire, concerning one Dr. Buckeridge who after he had preached
publicly in the Pulpit ame down and went home to his house, and found his wife
and some other women clothed in white with which it appeared that he was well
pleased, for that himself forthwith changed his habit into the like similitude
and joined company with them, and so danced together in their white array, and
were apprehended by some Gentlemen of the Country.

A Christmas Carol.
They prate of God; believe it, Fellow Creature,
There Is no such Bugbear, all was made by Nature:
We know all came of nothing, and shall pass
Into the same condition once it was,
By Natures power: and that they grossly lie,
That say there is hope of immortality:
Let them but tell us what a soul is, then
We will adhere to these madbrain sick men.
FINIS.

