Februar. 1. 1645.

ARTICLES FOR The Surrender of the City OF CHESTER With the Castle and Fort:

AGREED ON Between the Commissioners appointed on the behalf of JOHN Lord BYRON
Field-Marshall-Generall of North Wales, and Governor of CHESTER, on the one
PART,

AND The Commissioners on the behalf of Sir WILLIAM BRERETON Baronet, Commander
in Chief of all the Forces in Cheshire, and at the Leaguer before Chester, on
the other PART.

Published by Authority.

London Printed by Rich. Cotes, 1645.

ARTICLES Concluded and Agreed on the first of February, 1645.
FOR THE Surrender of the City of CHESTER, with the Castle and Fort.
THat the Lord Byron, and all Noblemen, Commanders, Officers, Gentlemen,
Soldiers, and all other persons whatsoever, now residing within the City of
Chester, the Castle and Fort thereof, with all their apparel; hereafter
mentioned: Viz.

I. The Lord Byron with his Horse, and also his Lady, and Servants, his two
Coaches, with four Horses in either of them, for the accommodating of them,
and to such other Ladies and Gentlemen as the said Lord Byron shall think meet,
with fourscore of the said Lords Books and all his Deeds, Evidences,
Manuscripts, and Writings in his possession, the said Lord, his Lady, nor any
of their Attendants, carrying amongst them all above forty pound in money, and
twenty pound in Plate, the rest of the Noblemen, with the Ladies, and Servants,
to March with their Horses, each of the said Ladies attended with four men,
their Horses and Arms, and every such Nobleman carrying with him not above
thirty pound in money, every Knight and Collonell to March with two men, their
Horses and Arms, no such Knight or Colonel to carry above ten pound in money,
every Lieutenant Colonel, Major, and Captains of Horse, with one man, their
Horses and Arms, no such Lieutenant Colonel, Major, or Captain, carrying
with him above five pound in money; every Captain of Foot, Esquire, Graduate,
Preaching M^^ister, Gentlemen of quality, the Advocate and Secretary of the
Army, every of them with his own Horse and Sword (the Ministers without swords)
none of them carrying with him above fifty shillings, and the Ministers to have
all their own Manuscripts, Notes, and Evidences: Lievetenants, Cornets,
Ensigns, and other inferior Officers in Commission, on foot, with every man
his Sword, and not above 20 s. in money, all Troopers, Foot Soldiers,
Gun-powder-makers, Canoneers, and all others not before mentioned, to March
without Horse or Arms, and that none of the persons before mentioned shall in
their march, after they are out of the City, and Liberties thereof, be
plundered, learched, or molested.

II. That all Women of what degree soever, that please to march out of the
City, shall have all their apparel with them, and such Officers wives whose
Husbands are Prisoners or absent, may carry such sums of money with them as are
allowed by these Articles to Commanders, Officers and Gentlemen, of their
Husbands quality, and no more.

III. That none of the Commanders, Officers or Soldiers, or any other, at or
before their marching away out of the City, Castle, or Fort, do injure or
plunder the person, or goods of any, nor carry any thing away out of the said
City, Castle, and Fort, but what is their own, and hereby allowed.

IV. That all Citizens now residing within the City, shall be saved and secured
in their Persons, and their Goods and Estates within the City and Liberties
thereof preserved and kept from the plunder and violence of Soldiers; and have
the like freedom of Trade, as other Towns and Cities under the Parliaments
protection have, and such immunities, as they of right ought to have; and that
every such Merchant and Tradesman of Chester, as shall desire to go into
North Wales, to look after his Goods, shall have a Pass to go thither, and
to return back again, he first giving security, that during his absence, he
will do no act to the prejudice of the Parliament; and that no such Person,
shall at any time without license, carry more with him, then sufficient to
defray the charges of his journey: and that all Citizens and other Inhabitants,
who shall now, or hereafter desire to march forth of the City of Chester, and
not act any thing against the Parliament, his or their wives or families to
have the benefit or privilege of Inhabitants.

V. That such Officers and Soldiers as shall be left sick or wounded in the
City of Chester, or the Castle, or Fort thereof, shall have liberty to stay
until their recovery, and then have passes to Conway, or any of the Kings
Garrisons unblocked up.

VI. That the said Lord Byron, Noblemen, Commanders, Gentlemen, Officers and
Soldiers, and all others that shall march out of the City shall have liberty
to Conway, and five days are allowed them to march thither, with a Convoy of
two hundred Horse: the Welsh Officers and Soldiers to have liberty to march to
their own Homes, all of them to have Free Quarter in their march, and twelve
Carriages, if they shall have occasion to use so many; which Carriages are to
return the sixth day, and that Passes be given them for a safe return to
Chester, and that they be secured until they return thither.

VII. That no Soldier in his march shall be inveigled or enticed from his
Colors or Command, with any promise or inducement whatsoever.

VIII. That all such Persons, Citizens or others who have Families in Chester,
and are now in places remote thence, shall have the like benefit of these
Articles, as those who are now resident in the City.

IX. That the Friends of the Earls of Derby and Litchfield, or of any whose
dead bodies are not yet interred in Chester, shall have two months time to
fetch them thence whither they please, provided that none of them come attended
with above twenty Horse.

X. That no Church within the City, or the Evidences or Writings belonging to
the same, shall be defaced.

XI. That such Irish, as were borne of Irish Parents, and have taken part with
the Rebels in Ireland, and now in the City, shall be rendered Prisoners.

XII. That all those Horses and Arms belonging to those that march out, and
not by these Articles allowed to be taken and carried out of the City: Except
such Horses as are the proper goods of the Citizens and Inhabitants that shall
remain in the City before the delivery of the same, be brought the Horses into
the Castle Court; and the Arms into the Shire-Hall, where Officers shall be
appointed to receive them.

XIII. That in consideration hereof, the said City and Castle, without any
sleighting or defacing thereof, with all the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, and
all other Furniture and Provisions of War therein whatsoever; except what is
allowed to be carried away, and formerly herein mentioned, with the County
Palatine Seal, Sword, and all the Records in the City and Castle, without
diminution, imbezling, or defacing, be delivered to the said Sir William
Brereton, or such as he shall appoint for the use of King and Parliament, upon
Tuesday next, being the third of this instant February by ten of the clock in
the forenoone.

XIV. That the Fort, with all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition, and
Provision therein of what sort soever, not formerly granted or allowed of, upon
the signing of these Articles, be delivered to Sir William Brereton, or such as
he shall appoint.

XV. That upon signing of these Articles, all Prisoners in the City, Castle,
and Fort, that have bin in Arms for the Parliament, or Imprisoned for adhering
thereunto, shall be immediately set at liberty.

XVI. That the Convoy shall not receive any injury in their going or coming
back, and shall have three days allowed them for their return.

XVII. That if any person concerned in any of these Articles, shall violate any
part of them, such Persons shall lose the benefit of all the said Articles.

XVIII. That upon signing of these Articles, sufficient Hostages, such as shall
be approved be given for the performance of all the said Articles.

Signed by the Commissioners appointed by the Right Honorable John Lord Byron.
Peter Griffith. Tho. Cholmeley John Werden. Edmund Verney. Robinson. Hen.
Leigh. Tho. Morten. Tho. Bridges. Ed. Blease. William Ince. John Johnson. Tho.
Thropp.


FINIS.

