ARTICLES OF ACCVSATION AND IMPEACHMENT Of the House of Commons, and all the
Commons of ENGLAND AGAINST William Pierce Doctor of Divinity and Bishop of
Bath and Wells.

London, Printed for George Thomlinson, and are to be sold in the Old Bailey.
1642.

Articles of Accusation and impeachment by the Commons House of Parliament
against William Pierce, Doctor of Divinity, and Bishop of Bath and Wells.
1.THat he has by his own arbitrary power against Law since he was Bishop of
Bath and wells (being about ten years space) of purpose to keep the people in
ignorance, and hinder the Salvation of their Souls which he should promote,
suppressed all Lectures within his Diocese, both in Market Towns and
elsewhere, as well those that the Ministers kept in their several cures, as
others that were maintained by several yearly stipends (given by the
founders) our of their piety and devotion, for such goodness or by the
voluntary assistance of neighbor Ministers; some of which Among these he has
suppersed the ancient weekly lecture at the City of Bath, whither many Nobles,
and other strangers rosort, especially in the spring and fall, who by reason of
their sickness, both desire and need preaching for the consolation and
instruction of their souls, of which now they are there destitute, to their
great discomfort.
Lectures had continued for 50.40.30. years, without interruption, and where
countenanced by his predecessors, who used to preach at some of them in their
turns.

2. That in stead of encouraging he has suspended, excommunicated and
otherwise vexed the said Lectures; glorying in this so doing and thanking God
that he had not a Lecture left in all his Diocese; the very name whereof he
sa^d he disliked, and affirmed unto Master Cunnant a Minister, who desired a
continuance of a Lecture, that he would not leave one within his Diocese; the
Bishop alleging, that though there was need of Preaching in the infancy of
the Church of the Apostles time, yet now their was no such need; and thereupon
required the said Minister upon his Canonical obedience, not to Preach: and in
like manner he dealt with many other godly Ministers within his Diocese. And
in par^icular he suspended Mastere Devenish the Minister of Bridgewater, for
preaching the Lecture in his own Church on the market day there, (which
Lecture had continued from Queen Elizabeth's time till then;) and refused to
absolve him, till he had promised never to preach it more; upon which promise,
the said Bishop absolved him with this admonition of our Savior, most
profanely applied, John 5.14. I dare say no Commentator whatsoever, ever made
so ill an application of this Text.
Go thy way sin no more, least a worse thing happen to thee. And not content
to put down Lectures in his own Diocese, he has indeavored the suppression
of them in others by conventing some ministers of his Diocese before him, as
namely one Master Cunnant and Master Stickland) and threatening to suspend them
for preaching their turns at Lectures in other Diocesses near them.

3. That in opposition to Preaching, and the Sirituall cood of the peoples
Souls, It appears by Act, 20.20.31. Act. 2 46.^3. and 4. and 5. Lu. 21 37.38.
Ioh. 8 22.19.47.2, tim 4.2. by Basil. Magnus Hexaemeron. Hom. 2.7 8.9. and Hom.
in Psalm. 114. by Saint Chrysostom. Hom. 10.22. and 34. in Genesis Ad Pop. Antioch.
Hom. 19.13. and 5. De saceidotio. l. 6. hom. de Lazaro. by Augusti Concio. 2.
in Psalm. 68. Tract. 16.18. and 21. in Joan. and other Fathers, that Christ, his
Apostles, and the Fathers preached every day, and forenoone and afternoon on
the Lo^ds day, how dare then this prelate thus to affront their practice?
he has most impiously, and against Law put down all afternoon Sermons on
the Lords day, throughout his Diocese, and charged the Ministers both public
in his visitation, and privately, not to preach at all on the Lords day on the
afternoon, upon any occasion under pain of suspension: after which charge he
suspended one Master Cornish a Minister, only for preaching a funera^l Sermon
on a Lords day Evening.

4. That diverse godly Ministers of his Diocese, being restrained from
Preaching did thereupon take great pains, to Chatechise the people in the
principals of Religion, on the Lords day in the afterno^ne, enlarging
themselves upon the questions and answers of the Catechism, in the
Common Prayer book, for the peoples better instruction, using some short
prayers before or after that exercise: of which the said Bish^p having
in^elligence conven^ed the said Ministers before him, reproving them sharply
for the same, threatening to punish them if they persisted in that way, which he
said, was a Chatechisme Sermon-wise, and as if they preached; charging them
that they should ask no questions, nor receive any other answers from the
people but such as were contained in the Catechism in the Service book, which
some not observing, were convented threupon before the said Bishop, and
punished, as namely Master Barret Rector of Barwick, who was enjoined Penance
for transgressing the Bishops said order; and likewise Humphrey Blake,
Churchwarden of Bridgewater, was enjoined penance by the Bishop, for not
presenting Master Devenish Minister there, for that he expounded upon the
Church-Catechisme on the Lords day in the afternoon, and made a short prayer
before he began the same; the Bishop alleging, that it was against his order
and command, as is abovesaid.

5. That he has both by precept and example most profanely opposed the due
sanctification of the Lords day, by approving and allowing of profane Wakes
and Revels on that day, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, for
which purpose he O profane Impiety and Injustice, to punish ministers for
preaching, Catechizing, and doing that which God enioynes them.
commanded afternoon service on the Lords day not to be long, that so the
people might not be hindered from their Recreations; pressed and enjoined all
the Ministers in his Diocese in their proper persons, to read the book of
sports, in their several parish Churches, in the midst of Divine Service at
morning prayer on the Lords day, contray to the words, and perport of the said
book, which some Ministers (as Master Humphry Chambers, and Master Thomas
refusing to do, Impiety and profaneness which no age can pattern, many
minister have been suspended and censured for shortning the Service, that they
might preach the longer, and yet they are commanded to cor^al it by this
Bishop, that the people might have more time to play in Gods own day
he therefore suspended them both from their Office and Benefice and kept them
excommunicated for diverse years, notwithstanding the said book was by the
Bishops Order published in their churches by others he convented the ministers
of Beererockham before him for having two Sermons on the said parish Revell
day, alleging that it was a hinderance, to the said Revell, and to the (...)
of the Church-Ale, provided to be spent on that day. He converted and punished
one Master Thomas ^^ford a Minister, for Preaching at the Parish of Mountagu,
upon the Revell day upon the Praphet Ioels exhortation, to fasting, weeping and
mourning, charging him, that not only his Sermon, but his very Text was A
pious, ^pall reason, fitter for an Alewife then a Bishop an Atheist then a
Prelate.
scandalous to the Revell, and gave offense to the meeting. And or the same
reason, the said Bishop commanded the said Church-warde's of the Parish of
Batcombe, to blot out of the Church wall, this Text of Scripture therein
written, taken out of Esaias 58.13.14. O blasphemy why was not the Revell rather
scandalous to the text.
If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my
holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord honorable, and
shall honor him, not doing the own waie^s nor finding thine own pleasure,
nor speaking thine own words, then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord;
and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth and feed thee
with heritage of Jacob thy Father, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.
And he likewise caused to be rased out this clause in Doctor Bisse his monument
in that Church, formerly P^stor there; he was an enemy to heathenish Revell. To
countenance which Revells, the said Bishop (in opposition to the orders of the
Judges of Assise, and Justices of Peace of Somersetshire, for the suppressing
of Sports and Revells and their Petition to the King, to that purpose) did call
before him diverse ministers of his Diocese and presented unto them a writing
in approbation and commendations of the said sports and Revells, whereupon many
of the said Ministers subscribed their names, by the Bishops persuasions, which
writing the said Bishop sent up to the Archbishop of Canterbury, who after the
receipt thereof suppressed the Justices Petition. And partly after the book
for sports and Revells on the Lords day was published.

6. That he has both by example and cammand, contrary to the Laws of the
Land, introduced into all or most Churches in his Diocese sundry Innovations
in the Rives and Ceremonies of the Church, and other new inventions of his
own, tending to Popery and Superstition: (as namely, setting up of Alters, and
enjoining the seats about them to be taken away, saying, O the desperate
impiety and profaneness of this Bishop, who might as well obliterate this
Scripture out of the Bible, as out of the Church wall. This speech he borrowed
from Canterbury, who might do well to prove that God almighty sits actually on
the Lords Table, and that as well when there is no Communion there, as when
there is.
none shall sit equal with or above God Almighty; bowing and crin^ing to the
said Altars, (and reading the second and third service at the Alter) and
enjoined the strict observation of them under the heaviest Censures of the
Church; in so much that the Communion Table of Stretton in his Diocese, which
he had caused to be railed in Altarwise, being brought down again in his
former place and not turned to the East, thereupon no Communion was there
permitted to the Parishioners on Palme-Sunday and Easterday 1637. the minister
having received an Order from the said Bishop, O monstrous superstition
sacrilege and impiety, to deprive the people of the Sacrament, because the
Table stood not after his new ^ancy No age I am certain yields such a president.
not to administer the Communion until the Table was again set up Alterwise:
and caused deverse to be punished for not standing up at the Gospel and Gloria
Patri. And he has likewise forced diverse parishes, as Tanto Shepton Mallet,
and others, to their intolerable cost, to set up Organs, It seems his Lordship
delighted more in piping then preaching, and will have men go merrily dancing
not mouthing to heaven.
where there were none at all, or not a long time before; causing the
Churchwarden, to levy money toward the building of them, upon the Parishioners
against their wills and punishing them in his Ecclesiastical Court that would
not pay toward them, and that he has put the County of Somerset to excessive
oxpences, by reason of such Innovations as aforesaid.

7. That he has contrary to Law, vexed and molested in his Ecclesiastical
Courts diverse of the Clergy and Laity of his Diocese for trivial and small
matters; excommunicated and vexed diverse Churchwardens, for not railing in the
communion Table, and placing it Alterwise against the East wall of the
Chancell; and by name, the Churchwardens of Beckington; whom he not
excommunicated, but likewise caused them and others to be unjustly indicted at
the open Assizes held in the County in Lent, 1636. as for a Riot in hindering
the removing of the Table in that Church putting the said Parish to the expense
of 1800. pound or more, and not absolving the Churchwardens from their
excommunion till the they had done such open and ignominious penance, as the
said Bishop enjoined them, in three eminent Parish Churches within his Diocese
as likewise at the Market-crosse at Wells. The performance of which penance
wrought so far upon James Wheeler one of the said Churchwardens that
thereupon he fell into a consumption through grief, and so dyed; saying often
before his death, that the performance of the said penance being so
ignominious and against his Conscience, was the cause of his death; and by his
vexatious suites in his Ecclesiastical Courts he has raised his Registers
office in former Bishops time not worth above 60, pound per annum, to the value
of 3 or 4 hundred pounds or more by the year.

8. That the said Bishop has undoubtedly and against Law, pressed the Oaths
Ex Officio upon diverse inhabitants of Wells without complaint or accusation,
and likewise the Oath of Deanes Rural, with other unlawful Oaths, both upon
the Clergy and Laity within his Diocese, and other places; and suspended and
excommunicated diverse of them that ref^sed to take the said Oaths: and that
not only in his Consistory Court but in his own private Chamber, there being
none but a R^g^ster with him.

9. That he has for his own Lucre and gain extorted diverse sums of money
against Law, as of one Fort one of the Churchwardens of South Pederton twenty
pounds. And also of one Master Francklyn the sorne of three pounds (besides the
some of ten pounds given in Fees and rewards to the Bishops servants) for
instituting him into the Personage of Standerweeke. And has likewise exacted
the sum of six shillings eight pence or more, of diverse Churchwardens and
Parishes within his Diocese, only for not ringing the Bells when he passed
through the bounds of their several Parishes, in his Uisitation, though
privately without giving them any notice of his coming that way,

10. That he has against Law deferred and denied Institutions upon
presentations to Benefices, practicing in the interim under hand to consetre
the sonie upon his Son servants, or other dependants, and to deprive the
Patrons of their rights: and has even by force, against all law and equity,
conseired some of the Benefices upon his son, servants, and dependants, viz
upon his son, the Parsonage of Buckland, and endeavored by the lik force to
confer the Personage of Standerweeke upon his said son, and other Parsonage
upon his servants and a lives and did against Law and by force conferr the
Uicarage of Hynstridge upon his servant Flamstead.

11. That he has it ampered with witnesses examined by and before him upon
Oath, to make them testify untruths, and has falsified their depositions,
setting down his own words, and what he would have them depose, instead of
what they test^fied; as namely in the Case of the Church wardens of Becking^on,
and in that of M. I^nes Minister of Beer^rocombe.

12. (...) is a common vexer, persecuter and molester of worthy and (...)
Ministers, and a countenancer of those who are negligent (...) as namely, he
has vexed and, persecuted, Mr, Chambers Mr, Thomas Mr. Croake, Mr. Newton, Mr.
Barnard, Mr. Cunnant, Mr. Roswell, and many, other good and pa^^efull Ministers
of the Diocese, (...) him Chaplain Mr. Egl^rf^^ld Gawler, and (...) with
other vicious Ministers, and Mr: (...) and others (...)

13. If (...) said Bishop according to Law, did severely exact and impose upon
lives of the Clergy within his Diocese, the new Oath prescribed by thesixt
Canon of the late pretended Synod and caused and and enforced them to take the
said illegal Oath, himself kissing the Seal or the Commission which
authorized him to exact the faid Oath of his Clergy, and kneeling down upon
his knees took the Oath first,and their administered it to others; saying, that
he was glad in his heart that this Oath was imposed upon all the Clergy of
England for now the true Children of the Church, would be known, from the
spurious and Bastards. And (...) has (...) to confer Orders upon such who
refused to take the Oath, as namely upon one Mr. Gibbens. And has enforced the
said Oath upon diverse, he has ordained Ministers since the making thereof.

14. That the said Bishop was a great fomenter and incourager of the
late-divisions and wa^res between the Kingdoms of England and Scotland
conventing and urging the Clergy of his Diocese to contribute a a liberal
benevolence toward the maintenance of the said wars, using this speech as
one motive to induce them to this contribution; that it was Bishop Hall labors
to excuse it, in his Answer to the vindication. p. 14.15. as if the Bishop
mean: it only in a less evil construction, as referring to the northern use of
that quarrel, not our prosecution, when as it is most clear by the words and
circumstances, that he meant quite contrary
Bellum Episcopale and ^ing that what eve^ cause the King had expressed in the
Declaration (...) in (...) this war was for us, meaning us the Bishops. And
whereas some of the Clergy (...) the payment of so large a Benevolence as the
said Bishop demanded, in regard of their poverty, and because they were still
in their first fruits, when they were free from Subsidies, the said Bishop
threamed by his power to put more Names and Horses upon them, saying that as
they would not (...) the King with their purses, they should serve him with
their Arms. And thereupon compelled them to pay the sums he demanded of them
is against Law as namely Mr. Roswell Mr. James, Mr. Abbot, and others, And not
contented herewith, the said Bishop pretending that there was diverse poor
Uicars and Ministers in his Diocese that were not able to pay the benevolence,
so that he could not raise the sum he expected thereupon directed his
letters to diverse of his welthier Clergy, causing some of them to pay a Which
some of the County conceive he has pursed up or discharged his own share in
this contribution therewith.
fee and contribution.

15. That the said Bishop not content with this first benevolence has since
that compelled diverse of his Clergy to pay all or part of the six illegal
subsidies or benevolences imposed by the late pretended Synod, without
confirmation of Parliament, threatening to excommunicate and deprive them ipso
facto who failed payment of it at the days prefixed by the Synod and sent out
a process to Mr. Newton, minister of Taunton (even whiles the said Town was
much visited by the pestilence) long before the said Subsidy or Benevolence was
due, to enjoyne him to pay it punctually at the day, or else he would inflict
on him the penalties prescribed by this Synod; and used these speeches, that if
they did not pay the said Subsidies or Benevolence they should be ground to
powder.

16. And the said Commons by Protestation saving to themselves the liberty of
exhibiting at any time hereafter any other accusation or impeachment against
the said Bishop; And also of replying to the answers that he said Bishop shall
make unto the said Articles, or to any of them, and of offering proofs also of
the premises or any of them, or any other impeachment or occasion that shall
be exhibited by them (as the cause shall according to the course of Parliaments
require) do pray that the said Bishop may be put to answer to all and every
the premises. And that such proceedings, examinations, trials, and judgments
may be upon every of them had and used, as is agreeable to Law and Justice.

By these Articles of impeachment you may easily discover what a desperately
profane, impious, turbulent Pilate the Bishop is, even such a one, whom no age
(I think) in many particulars is able to parallel, whose prodigiously profane
speeches and actions proclaies to all the world, that our present Pilates
impieties have made them fit for judgment; yea good for nothing but to be cast
out and trampled under feet of men, as the very excrements and off-scourings
of all things.

FJNJS.

