THE ARTICLES AND CHARGE PROVED IN PARLIAMENT AGAINST Doctor Walton, Minister
of St. Martins Orgars in Cannon street.

Wherein his subtle tricks, and popish Innovations are discovered; as also the
consultations, and assistance he has had therein by the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Bishop of Rochester, Mr. Brough, and Mr. Baker to effect the
same.

As also his impudence in defaming the Honorable members of the house of
Commons, by scandalous aspersions and abusive language.

LONDON, Printed 1641.

To the Honorable the house of Commons assembled in Parliament. The humble
Petition of the Parishioners of St. Martins Orgar London,
HVmbly beseeches this honorable Assembly, to take into their serious and
religious consideration, your petitioners extreme sufferings, by the violence
and wrongs done unto them, by Bryan Walton Doctor in Divinity their Parson, but
a man of an unquiet and unpeaceable carriage, making differences with his
Parishioners, both by the new way of officiating in his Function to the
scandal and offense of many, and his eager prosecution of such of his
Parishioners as are not of his party and opinion, and also by his greedy and
covetous gaining into his power by indirect means the disposition of a great
part of the Rents and proffits of the Church lands, which are directed for
other employment, whose turbulent courses, and troublesome carriage is such,
that your Petitioners have but little comfort from him for matter of
conscience, nor quiet in their temporal estate and abiding.

1 That the said Doctor Walton about the end of March 1637. did in despite and
malice toward diverse of his Parishioners, whom he knew well would be troubled
at it, repair to the said Church of St. Martins Orgar, accompanied, for the
better countenancing of his unlawful act, with Mr. Doctor Warner, now Lord
Bishop of Rochester, Doctor Brough, and Doctor Baker, together also with two
other men, whose names your Petitioners have learned to be Hayward and Smith,
and then sent for Mr. Gore then Churchwarden, who being come, they commanded
him in the Kings name, and in the name of the Lord Archbishops grace of
Canterbury, forthwith to take the Communion Table, which then stood in the
midst of the Chancell compassed in on all sides with a very fair rail, and to
set it, and mount it up under the East window in form of an Altar; Mr. Gore
for that they made show to come with authority, desired to have sight of their
warrant, No, they had it, but he should not see it; Whereupon Mr. Gore did deny
to obey their Command; then came Doctor Warner to the Table in a ryotous way,
and calling to the rest to help him, they together took hold of the Table,
lifted it over the Railes, and carried and placed it under the East window; And
the said Doctor Walton threatened the said Mr. Gore, that if he should cause the
Table to be removed back again to the place where it did stand, that he
should be punished for it in the high Commission court; Whereof Mr. Gore being
fearful, knowing well the malice of the man, suffered it to stand where the
said Doctor had placed it, and where it now stands raised up with several
ascents and degrees in the fashion of an Altar, to the scandal and
coffeehouse of the Parishioners, whom he causes to come thither to receive
the Sacrament; And for the morning service, part thereof he reads, or causes
to be read in the usual reading pew, and thereof all that are present may be
partakers, a second part he carries with him to the Altar where it is read,
but so that a great part of his parishioners scarce hear more then a sound or
noise, and in stead thereof their eyes observations are taken up with his lowly
incurvation and bowing toward the Altar, which he often uses, and until the
Sermon be ended, his Curates station is appointed to be at the Altar in his
Surplice, and then concludes with a third part of Service.

2. The said Doctor has refused to administer the sacrament of Baptism to
Infants, who have been presented in the Church for that purpose, on the holy
day before divine Service, though he has been beforehand made acquainted
therewith and desired; For what cause your Petitioners know not, other then
that their parents were not in his favor.

3. He neither preaches nor catechiseth on Sundays in the afternoones, nor
will permit the Petitioners to procure a Preacher, though at their own charge,
yet he puts into an account which he makes in the spiritual Court twenty
pounds for afternoones Sermons, which is allowed him there, he is non-resident
all the Summer, and commits the charge of your Petitioners souls to an
ignorant Curate, maintaining him no otherwise then with a salary catched out of
the Revenue of the Parish-lands, which he does in this manner, wherein also
lies another grievance. One William Cromer Knight, 10. H. 6. gave diverse
Tenements in London to God, and the said Church, and to John Nicholl then
Parson and his successors for ever, to find therewith a Chaplain to pray for
his soul, and to keep an Anniversary, and the residue to repair the Church
and Ornaments, which Tenements by reason of the superstitious use aforesaid
were seized into the hands of E. 6. upon the Statute of Chantries, and granted
away. These lands of late years, at the great charge and labor of the
Parishioners, have bin recovered by Judgment upon Argument in the Kings Bench,
and for maintenance of that suit the Parish has been forced to sell other
houses; It fortuned that near about the end of this suite the Doctor comes to
be Parson there, And then as if the lands were all his own, he falls to
letting of Leases, and taking Fines, which he puts into his own purse. This
wrong to the Parish, occasioned a suit with him in his Majesty's high court of
Chancerie; Where upon hearing, a reference was made to Sir Edward Littleton
then Solicitour general, now Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and to
Mr. Chute being then the Counsel on both sides to settle the business, who
not only allowed the Doctor to go away with the Fines he had taken by making
Leases at undervalues of the houses recovered at the parish charges, but giving
faith to an Affidavit by him then made of a bill of great disbursments out of
his own purse expended in the recovery of the said houses, gave allowance of
them also, and upon their report to the Court a Decree was passed, and now he
takes and receives all the rents and proffits to his own use, accounts not at
all to the Parish, but keeps them strangers to all, as if it concerned them
not: Whereas the Decree allows charges to your Petitioners as well as to him,
and directs that de futuro, in the Leases that should be made, the
Churchwardens for the time being should be named, and though the Rents are
directed to be made paiable to the Doctor and his successors, yet they are to
be delivered over to remain in the hands of the Churchwardens, for the
reimbursing the parishioners their charges expended about the recovery of the
said Lands, and the rest to be employed by the Parson and Churchwardens, for
the performance of the charitable uses aforesaid, appointed by the Will of the
said Cromer; Thus it stands decreed; And the said Doctor, though this Decree
is made by his own consent, and is so expressed in the very Decree, finds this
way to elude it; He makes his address by Petition to the Lord Archbishops
grace of Canterbury, and prays that he might retain in his hands forty
marks per annum without account, and that twenty pounds per annum only might
be allowed toward the repair of the said Church, and for Ornaments and other
uses; Upon this petition an Act is made by Sir John Lamb, directed by his
Grace, and entered into a Registry, whereby Mr. Doctor Waltons desire is
accomplished, and the Parish deprived of so much, and the Decree in Chancery
made frustrate; And by this contrivance and device, against Law, against the
Will of the Donor, and against the Decree in Chancery, the said Parson has
wrought and procured for himself and his Successors the Tenements aforesaid,
which out of Lease are worth above two hundred pounds per annum, whereby your
Petitioners are defeated of their charges, and the Church of its right, and in
such a way as is without president or example, all which the Petitioners can
make plainly appear by the Decree in Chancery, and the Petition of the said
Doctor, and order of the said Archbishop of Canterbury, and by his unjust
accounts made in the Ecclesiastical Courts, wherein all his demands are
allowed, ready to be produced to this honorable Assembly: And that posterity
may be the more deceived, he has taken the boldness, as if it were a thing
of undeniable truth, to assume to himself the title of recovering the
possessions of the Church, and has caused this untrue Inscription to be set up
in the East window over the Altar, (viz.) Sir William Cromer Knight Anno 1431.
gave to the Parson of this Church and his Successors for ever, all his lands
and tenements in the parishes of St. Swithin and St. Olaves Hart-street London,
toward the daily Celebration of divine Service, and reparation of this Church
and Chancell, and the Ornaments thereof, which lands being taken away the first
of E. 6. were in part recovered to the said Church, for the said uses, by the
said Brian Walton now Incumbent, and with the profits thereof this Church and
Chancell were repaired, Anno Dom. 1637. and over that Inscription the said
Brian Walton has set his own Arms and the said Cromers, and gives the charge
thereof in account in the spiritual Court, to be allowed out of the rents of
the said Church lands.

4. The said Doctor not content with the usual Tithes of the Parish which have
been paid according to the Statute, to gain an Augmentation of 2s. 9d. in the
pound, according to the very value of men's houses, he has preferred several
Petitions to the King, and to the Lord Major of London, and commenced several
suites in the Ecclesiastical Courts, and very lately (viz.) upon the sixteenth
of November 1640. preferred his bills in Chancery against one of the
Parishioners for the said 2. shillings 9. pence in the pound, and formerly
preferred a bill there, and never proceeded therein, merely to vex and weary
out the Petitioners, making them to forsake their dwellings; He exacteth with
threatenings tithes of many poor people, and of such as receive the alms of
the Parish, and yet has another Benefice of 200. pounds per annum, or
thereabout, in Essex.

5. He turmoileth the Petitioners with Informations and Excommunications,
prosecuting them in the high Commission upon that extorted, and selfe-accusing
oath Ex officio, framing diverse Articles against them containing diverse charges
of several natures, making your Petitioners a prey to Officers, and though
wronged, yet left at last without relief; for although some of your
Petitioners after sentence of Excommunication against them, (with much
difficulty) have obtained their absolution, and delivered the same to the
Curate or Clerk, yet the said Doctor getting knowledge thereof, has not
forborne to publish the Excommunication, and forbidden the Curate to declare
the Absolution, and such is his power and countenance in the high Commission,
and other Ecclesiastical Courts, that he daily gets heart and encouragement to
vex your Petitioners in these Courts, glorying and rejoicing in his vexation of
his Parishioners, who are committed to him for better purposes.

6. The said Doctor appropriateth to himself diverse Pews in the Chancell, and
has caused diverse of the most ancient Pewes to be cut up, to make way, and
open passage to the said Altar, and although the Petitioners to prevent the
said disturbance, procured the Chancellours command for stay of his intended
work, yet presuming upon his favor in those Ecelesiasticall courts, with a
high hand he proceeded, and did finish his work; he appropriateth to himself
the upper part of the North and South Isles of the Church for burial, digging
Vaults, and taking great sums of money, of some more, of some less, and of
whom he pleases, for their burial there, making promises and warrantees to
defend them against the parish, or whomsoever should gainsay; he has cut, and
caused to be cut and defaced the Table of Rates for Burials and Weddings, and
other Parish duties, usually hanging in the Vestry, and since the defacing
thereof, he exacteth extraordinary sums of money for burial both of strangers
and parishioners, and has caused their Vestry book to be carried into the
high Commission Court, where it has remained three or four years, which
book he has both enterlined at his pleasure, and crossed out his own name
subscribed to certain Orders, and has gotten into his possession, and
wrongfully detaines from the Parish their evidences and writings which belong
not to him, to the great detriment of the parishioners, and disorderly carriage
of the Parish affairs, and he forbids and puts down their
Vestry-meetings.

7. The turbulency and malignity of this man's spirit appears also in this,
that he disgracefully and contemptuously asperseth those persons of quality
and worth, which at this time serve the Commonwealth in the Honorable house
of Parliament, as men chosen for the Knights and Burgesses of this City,
affirming that the City had chosen Soame because he would not pay Ship Money,
Vassal because he would not pay the King his customs, Penington because he
entertaines silenced Ministers, and Cradocke to send them over into New England.

Now forasmuch as the rehearsed innovations, usurpations, vexations, and wrongs
tend to the high dishonor of God, blemish and scandal to the Religion
established, and the peaceable government of the Church, as also to the great
distraction and disturbance of the Petitioners in the service of God, causing
great disorder, trouble, and charge to the Petitioners, and the grief of their
hearts, in that they cannot enjoy the Ordinances of God in their purity,
without the interposing and mingling of such Ceremonies introduced by the said
Doctor,

The Petitioners humbly beseech this Honorable Assembly to examine their
abuses, and to take some course for their Reformation, that your Petitioners
may as their Predecessors and Ancestors have done serve God in quiet, and
enjoy themselves and their own peace, being set free from the oppressions and
troubles, wherewith the said Doctor has made them too well acquainted; And
that the Lands and rents may be enjoyed and employed to the good and religious
uses intended by the first Donor, and since confirmed by the Decree of the
Honorable Court of Chancerie,

And your Petitioners as in duty bound shall continue their prayers for the
happy success of your great designs.

FINIS.

