THE ARRAIGNMENT, Trial, Conviction, and Confession of Francis Deane a Salter,
and of John Faulkner a Strong-water man, (both Annabaptists, and lately
received into that Sect) for the Murder of one Mr. Daniel a Soliciter, who was
cruelly murdered one night in Elbow-lane, they being apprehended were brought
to Newgate on the 24th. day of January last, and for which Fact were Executed
at Tyburne on Monday last, being the 17. of April. 1643.

Also whereunto is added an Anabaptists Sermon, which was preached at the
Re-baptizing of a Brother at the new or holy Jordan, as they call it near Bow*
or Hackny River; Together with the manner how they use to perform their
Anabaptisticall Ceremonies.

April 19 Printed at London for Richard Harper. 1643.

The Confession of Francis Deane, etc.
Great and wonderfulll are the works of Almighty God, who ^nly searches the
hearts and Reins of all men; and therefore ^^^spicuously knows the very
thoughts and strength of ^^n: for let man's vain apprehensions be never so
cunning ^o cont^ive, his policy to conceal, or his boldness to outf^ce any
secret act committed, yet Gods unsounded and incomprehensible wisdom, which
can be no way circumscribed, is able ^t ^ll ^imes, and upon all occasions, as
well to publish, as to punish it in the open eye of the world, of which, as well
those times past, as these present, have and do afford us remarkable examples.
I will begin with the sin before I come to the fact. Now for the execrablenesse
of the sin of murder: we find in Genesis 4.11. God speaking to Caine after the
slaughter of his brother Abel, in this manner* Now therefore thou art cursed
from the earth, which has opened her mouth to receive thy brothers blond from
thine hand. As also Deuteronomy. 27.24. Cursed be he that smites his neighbor
secretly: and all the people shall say Amen. If this monstrous sin be so
heinous in the sight of God, betwixt neighbor and neighbor, or if commmitted
by one stranger upon another, how much mo^e horrid appears it in Gods eyes,
you may read, Gen: 9.5 At the hand of man, even at the hand of a man's brother,
will I require the life of man: for who so sheddeth man's blond, by man shall
his blond be shed; for in the im^ge of God made he man, etc Likewise Numb.
35.31 M^reover, you shall take no recompense for the life of the murderer which
is worthy to dye, for he shall be worthy to dye. But to leave all histories in
this k^nd, I will come to the matter or subject of this sad and lamentable
murder committed by Francis Deane and his confederates. The 13. of April, the
Sessions of Oyer and Terminer being holden for the City of London and
Middlesex, at the usual place in the Old Baily, after many inditements being
read, amongst which was the indictment read of this Francis Deane a Salter, and
John Faulkner a Strong-water-man; which indictment being publicly read before
them in the presence of the L. Major, the Kings Sergeant, and other Justices of
the Peace, which being read, they both of them pleaded not guilty; upon which
they put themselves to be cleared or con^icted upon God and and their Country:
Then the Jury being present, and the witnesses called, i^ was plainly proved
that first the said Mr. Daniel and Mr. Dear had been all or most part of the
day together a drinking; and that the said Mr. Daniel and this Deane had many
fallings out about this Deanes Wives sister, who who was a rich widow, whom
this said Daniel bare affection unto, and being her Solicitor in diverse
businesses for her, harsh wo^ds passed between them, then this Deans upon his
confession, did give the said Daniel a fierce blow on the head with a Pole-axe,
that he instantly dyed in the place. Upon which be the said Deane and Falkner
was found guilty; Dean of wilful murder, Falkner as accessory to three murder
in concealing it so long, and hiding and obscuting and advising the said Deane
to fly to Oxford, or some other place, for a certain time, for bloody fact
they were condemnd to be hanged at Tiburne: now follows Deans confession a^ the
place of execution: Mr. Deane being come the place of execution and having the
rope tied about his neck, and the Hangman being to fasten it to the tree,
Deane standing up in the Cart said. Gentlemen, here I come to lose my life, and
now let me g^v^ you some satisfaction to quiet and sati^fie my one mind, it
being the last time that ever I shall speak in this world: I am here come by
law to dye for a fact, the murdering of one Mr. D^niel, so it is, I met with
him at the Exchange that day this accident befell, I had been drinking at
several places before, and we went together to drink tow^rds my abode aft^r
in two several places, and continued at the last t^ll about 8 or 9 a clock,
and there was many hasty words, some past betwixt us, in so much, that at the
last he drew his discourse to those, that he would not leave me nor my sister,
worth a groate before, he had done, (if she would not marry him) my sister
being otherways dispos^d on, for she was to marry a Gentleman at Watford, his
estate being worth 2000. pound, and thereupon he had a blow from me, and none
but, my self guilty of it, and whereas one Sh^ar^s who is imprisoned in
Newgate about this business he was altogether innocent of any f^st or act
herein, and I do take it wholly to be my fact, and that ^r. Faulk^^r by law
b^ing condemned and to suffer with me, he is also free from the fact and act;
only that he knowing me the actor, he did not reveal it. I went after the
committing this fact to Oxford, where there being some which had formerly known
me, accused me to authority that I was an Anabaptist, for which I was forced
to forsake that place, for fear of being discovered for my murder, or for
being questioned for my Religion. I confess I was baptized (a new) a month
before this fact was acted, and after and for which I was grieved in mind and
much troubled about it: I do heartily pray that all here present may take
warning by my death, and that they suffer no small sins to enter, for they
will beget bigger, as this in me has done, and this I know, that I was born
in sin, and without the great providence of God assisting man, he is subject
daily to fall into great sins: and in this am I now taken: Many tumu^tuous
st^rring about the horses, h^s voice was lessened, but after this 51. Psalm was
^ung and read by him, having a book in his hand, to the other prisoners he
pr^yed very ardently and strongly, and so dyed very penitently, there was with
him executed a popish P^i^st, who was hanged, drawn, and quarterd, and one
Captain Thomas Eaton a Scotchman for killing Captain Car near Westminster, the
law found guilty in his act, Faulkner who was this Deans friend. All of t^em
dyed very penitent sinners, desiring God to forgive them, and al good people j
in with them in prayer, which they did, and so they dyed, and the Law and their
enemies I hope were satisfied.

The Anabaptisticall Sermon.
The Text, Wash and be clean.
BEloved, I am fil^ed with much zealous joy to behold so great an Assembly
gathered together in this Chamber to hear me discover unto you new Doctrine
upon the receiving of a n^w Member or Brother into our assembly; who before had
only the bare rags of Adam, and bap^ized by the ceremony of Antichrist, whose
idolatrous customs which have bin used, has drawn Gods heavy judgments upon
us, for want of knowledge, being blinded with natural corruptions: but I will
cease my disc^ourse at this time concerning that point, and will handle it in
it is proper places, and come to the text. The words which I will present unto
your observation shall be few in number, but weighty in substance, namely
these, Wash and be clean.

The first of my Text, that is water, for the word wash does naturally imply
water, since we cannot wash without water, but we may have water and yet be so
slovenly that we seldom wash at all. But this word wash in my text does
signify our rebaptizing of our children, wherein the action is to wash, that is
not to sprinkle them with a little idolatrous water out of a Font or Basin; but
to pour water on their heads, nay to dip them in water over head and ears,
for such dipping will fetch the saltness of sin out of their natures; and
then follows the consequent of this action, Wash and be clean? But first I will
describe unto you the several sorts of washers, then speak particularly of
washing, and after washing I may very well conclude with, and be clean.

There are as many sorts of washers as there are contaminated people; careless
people, and foolish people.

Contaminated people are ^ll the wicked and reprobate, whose estates and lands
are ours by propriety and right, being Gods children, and that it properly
belongs to us; who because they are not so pure as we are, so holy as we be;
they wash themselves to no purpose, and are like the sign of the Lab^ur in
vain, for it is uupossi^le to wash them white or clean; But we that are
brethren of the elect; we may wash our selves in a R^ver from the spots of our
Carnality in every River, as Bow River, Hackny River, and other Rivers are to
us a clear Jordan, wherein we may baptize one another as we mean to do this
day our late lost brother; Now you careless sort of washers, are such as care
not for this washing, they think it enough to be ^e washed or rather watered
with a little superfluous water at their Chrisnings as they call it, and by the
Priest in the presence of three Gossips to be Tom-nam'd, Iohn-nam'd,
Dick-nam'd, or rather Nick-nam'd, for we hold it utterly unlawful to baptize
any until they come to full years of understanding, that they may answer for
themselves, and conform themselves to live according to that name and baptism
which they have received; for little John as long as he is in his infancy is not
worthy to be named any thing but Jack, and so Richard may be called Dick, as a
Blacke-bird that is kept in a Cage, and so all children that are christened
before they come to ripe years of understanding may be all called Nick, for
their names are no names, but very Nicknames and By-names, till the baptized
can answer the Baptizer, and speak his own name, as the spirit does approve
of his name, for how many in their younger days were baptized, and now grown
men, and ashamed of their Antichristian nam s, and run after their names like
new begotten and regenerated Christians. We may read of whole households that
were baptized, and indeed it was a great policy in those times not to baptized
by any name until they come to full years.

And therefore though in former times Christnings and Gossipings did cost a
great deal of money to make a William or a Robert, which afterward proved a
wicked Will, and a plundering Robert, like Prince Robers, let us increase and
multiply as fast as we c^n, but christen or baptize none of our children until
they are ready to be married themselves, then let us call our daughters Hanua,
Dorca; Mary, Lydia, Ruth, and Priscilla, and our sons Nathaniel, Moses,
Benoms, Annanias, Manasses, Obadiah, and other such like Scripture names: let
us be wiser then our forefathers, and walk out unto Rivers round about
London, all which shall become spiritual Jordans unto the faithful: I my
self will lead you the way and show you the manner of it, your need not fear
drowning, for if you should tread amiss, and fall into a Whitlepit, (for there
are many whitle-pits in Hackney and Bow Rivers, yet I can recover you again;
and I will bring you out, the Righteous you know many times, but suppose you
should fall over head and cares, yet you should come out again a good
Christian, in the regenerating water of either of these Rivers.

Now for the last part of my division, which was concerning foolish people and
w^shers, I account that all women are foolish washers, two peny-worth of Soape
is a great charge to them, and does much trouble their consciencs because they
wash nothing but linen clothes and foul rags, but let us not stick for any
charge that may conduce to the clensing of our souls, but as we are sanctified
creatures, so let us be pure and holy in our conversation, and wash our hands
clean of all sin. There are other foolish washers, or sluttish washers, so
that the best Linen put into their hands shall escape a scouring or a washing,
and the old dirt shall be apparent in them; but we though remain as sinful as
ever, we must under the veil of Religion have a few failings, and yet
conditioned for holiness, and surely we have it, at least in the opinion of
the world, we must be close in our actions, and study only the mysterious arts
of seeing, for opinion in matters of Religion cannot err; we are held to be
religious men, and therefore such we are indeed, but yet we must not join
hands, heads, or hearts with the wicked, for they are reprobate people ordained
only to destruction, and Tophet is prepared for such, and such are those
C^valliers whose inhumane cruelties the like were never heard of; but we are a
holy and religious people, and the severest eye of Justice cannot discern a
wrinckle, much less a spot in our actions. So me loose people, ig^orant and
wicked rep^obates scoff at us as if we were not half so holy as we would be
believed to be, they have with narrow eyes observed our actions, and finding
them counterfeit they call us Round-he^ds; we are round indeed and sound. Those
sacred garments religion, which showed nothing but decency (I mean^ Surplices)
are not to be esteemed so much as my Wives ^pron, and woe be unto the women's
hand^ (for (...) they would rot from her wr^sts) that should wash a
superstiticus Surplisse. The Drunkard may be placed in the list of foolish
washers, swallowing all the gains of h^s Trade by washing his throat with good
liquor, ^ut let our d^aughts though few be costly, and of the best liquor we
can get; and as in other matters let us at our holy feast make conjunction
amongst our selves, and in the unity of the spirit join our money for the
relief of our poor brethren, and for some wine which is best for the season,
so we may wash our throats at a far cheaper rate than the reprobates do, and
besi^es such washing of our throats after a good dinner or great feast, will
make us strong in the spirit, for the wine will fill our brains with diverse
good motions, and quicken us in the daily exercises of Religion, so that when
our stomachs are well warmed therewith we shall find our selves exceedingly
comforted to proceed in the ways of godliness, but walk not out of your
chambers least the wind take you, and you stumble into errors as the wicked
do.

My Masters, some of you (I believe,) when you sit down at the Table come with
unwashed hands, for Tradesmen eat our meat often with dirty fingers and foul
hands, our hands must be clean washed to show the purity of our profession; let
therefore the Cook when he comes into an holy assembly wash or lick his
fingers: I washed my hands this morning because I would handle the Text the
better, cleanenesse does become the Gospel, and clean fingers turning over
the Gospel do not pol^ute the cleanness or leaves of it. Besides, when a
feast is made what do all the best sort of guests? they are very careful to
wash their hands before their coming thither, and after the feast is done be
it dinner or supper what does custom place next upon the Table? verily a fair
Basin and Ewer, and what to do? why the reason is, to make all the guests wash
their hands; and the words of my Text are, wash and be clean. This word clean
is taken in diverse senses, for first if a man owe me money upon a Bill or Bond,
and afterward absent himself and run away, it may be very well said he is gone
clean out of sight, and clean away. If a man cannot relish his meat, he is
clean out of taste. Some say our religion is clean contrary to the protestant
profession, but such are clean out of the way, but if we should be persecuted
again by Bishops as formerly we have bin, we would run clean out of England
unto Amsterdam; but we are all clean people, full of the purity of the spirit,
our sins are but motes in Gods eyes, but our brothers sins are beams that
have so put out the sight of his divine Justice, that he cannot or will not see
our small iniquities. But some will say, how know we that we are clean? the
spirit does inwardly testify unto us our goodness, our Prayers are so full of
divine charms that they can at Gods hands command audience; we are better than
others whom we despise, and will not mingle our selves with the reprobate, but
keep clean out of their company. I must confess unto you I am glad to see the
fruits of our Preaching in the general reformation which it has wrought, our
servants go clean and handsome in their apparel, and their Round heads (as
the wicked call them) were their round clean b^nds: I am glad to see your
servants being of durty moyling trades so neat and clean in their apparel,
it does m^ke them most certainly appear very pure in this Congregation, and
therefore it seems that they have washed, and washed to purpose, and so I have
made the Text good, Wash and be clean. N^y, our bands are clean and neat,
making us look with religious faces, whereby we are accounted clear godly
men. I will no m^re look back unto what I have delivered, for the spirit does
give us plenty of matters, and cursed is he that puts his hand to the Plough
and looks back, therefore I will not look back any more upon my Text,
sufficient has our handling thereof bin: and I see plainly that all or most
of of you have washed your selves, and therefore are clean: And so I have done
with my (...), and fall to the action and occasion of this our Assembly, even
the re-baptiz^ng of a brother, whose eyes have bin blinded, and whose mind and
will has bin darkened; and being come to this holy pl^ce, I desire all of you
here present to take notice, that this our brother is received to the R^ver
Io^^an called the old FooRd near Bow, and how the new ^^rdan or place of
happiness, for unless all be thus rebaptized stark nak^d, and diped as well
head as tail as you are, none can be saved; and so I pray you good Brethren
excite as many as you can, now thou art baptized to come out of their Popish
opinion, thinking to be saved by their former baptizing, and so God bless you,
go thrive and grow rich in the world.

FINIS.

