ARTICLES TO UNITE THE Catholics and Evangelicks, (Or LUTHERANS.)

Agreed on (according to the Treaty of peace at Munster,) and sent to the Pope
by the Elector of Ments: assented to by the Electors of Collen and Trier, and
the Princes of Hessen and Durmestadt: Inclined to by Spain and France; To which
the Jesuits at Rome have given their consent, and the Pope seems willing to
conform thereto: From which Union the Calvinists are excepted, as too greatly
erroneous.

Translated out of the Dutch Copy.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1661.

Articles to unite the Catholics and Evangelicks, (or Lutherans.) Agreed on
(according to the Treaty of Peace at Munster) and sent to the Pope by the
Elector of Ments: Assented to by the Electors of Collen and Trier, and the
Princes of Hellen and Durmestadt: Inclined to by Spain and France: To which the
Jesuits at Rome have given their consent, and the Pope seems willing to
conform thereto: From which Union the Calvinists are excepted, as too greatly
erroneous.
THe Elector of Ments has according to what was agreed on at the Treaty of
Peace at Munster, done his best to unite the Catholic and Evangelick in
Religion; to this end he has sent the Here Van Wallendorpe to the Pope at
Rome, with Proposals for uniting all Christendom; the Elector of Collen, and
Trier, and the Princes of Hessen and Durmestadt will assist him therein; Spain
and France will incline to it; the Pope will accommodate himself thereto; and
the Jesuits at Rome have given their consent; and these following Articles are
made.

I.
A Synod shall be held of the contrary persuasions in Religion, consisting of
twenty four persons in all: they shall take an Oath against calumniating one
another, and be under the penalty of Litigants, and whoever shall not maintain
modesty, discretion, and decorum, shall straight be deprived of sitting.

II.
These twenty four shall review the ancient Copies of the Scriptures, and
compare and examine by them the Popish Breviarie, and the Augustine Confession;
and most voices determine from Article to Article.

III.
The Catholic Mass shall henceforth be read in the proper language of each
Country: and the said twenty four shall impartially consider how to unite the
Catholics and the Evangelicks in the point of the Mass.

IV.
These Evangelicks shall for distinction from the old Catholics, be named
Reformed Catholics, and the Pope in Rome allow even them a particular Church.

V.
The Pope shall be owned, and entitled the Chief Priest of all Christendom,
and shall let himself be advised by the Reformed Catholics, and use some of
them, such as are qualified, for his Privy Counselors.

VI.
Whoever writes scandalously against either of these Religions, shall be
trampled on by all Christendom.

VII.
The Lords supper shall be received in both species, both by old and Reformed
Catholics.

VIII.
For Auricular Confession, the greatest Consideration was had of the Spanish
and Italian, amongst whom it shall be held up till the union be effected, then
it may be laid by; but who finds himself touched in Conscience, may use it.

IX.
Healthful men shall abstain forty days before Easter from Flesh, to be
better prepured to meditate on the Passion of our Savior.

X.
For Invocation of Saints, they shall strive to reduce it to what it was in the
Primitive Church.

XI.
In Processions, they shall use known Dutch Hymns: and instead of the Mass,
they shall keep to a certain use of prayers, to thank God for his benefits.

XII.
For Purgatory, let every one believe as he will.

XIII.
Bishops and Priests may Marry, not Monks, nor Nunns.

XIV.
The Reformed Catholics may in their own Lands and Jurisdictions, set the
Archbishop or Superintendent over all other Ecclesiastical persons, only upon
any deep question they may ask the Popes opinion, but without prejudice to
their own Jurisdictions.

XV.
The Calvinists, greatly erroneous in the Doctrine of the Covenant of Grace,
the Sacrament, and the person of Christ, cannot be admitted to this union,
unless they resolve better in those things.

XVI.
Though the Greek Church do err much about the person of the Holy Ghost, yet
can they not be excluded out of whole Christendom.

XVII.
The Scripture shall without any exposition be used, as the Judge of this
Controversy in Religion; and the Articles shall be grounded upon the single,
naked words of the Texts in the Bible; which Texts shall be drawn out of the
Primitive Church, and the seventy two Interpreters: To this end, shall the said
persons translate and Print a new Bible, reviewed by the Hebrew, Syriack,
Arabic, and the Manuscripts and Bibles of the first Fathers; and the Pope
shall not be considered in balance to the Bible, nor shall it be believed he
is infallible; but shall by all Ecclesiastical persons, be only accounted an
Ecclesiastical person; and his Counselors shall consist of the several
persuasions, who shall comport themselves toward one another, as the Accessors
did at Spiers; and in weighty cases of Conscience, shall regulate themselves by
holy Scriptures.

FINIS.

