THE ARTICLES AND CHARGE OF THE Officers and Soldiers IN THE ARMY CONCERNING
The Kings Majesty, and all Persons whatsoever, who shall endeavor to
re-inthrone Him, or to act or speak in His Majesty's behalf, till He shall be
acquitted of the guilt of shedding innocent Blood.

And their Declaration and Proposals, concerning King, Lords, and Commoners;
presented to the Lord General Fairfax. With his Excellencies Letter to the
Parliament, concerning ^^e ARMY.

Read in the House of Commons on Wednesday last, October 18. 1648.

Commanded to be Printed and Published by the Authority and Consent of the
Officers and Soldiers in the Army, October. 20. 1648.

THE DECLARATION OF THE ARMY Concerning all persons whatsoever, either in
Parliament or elsewhere, who endeavor the re-inthroning of the King.
WE the Officers and Soldiers under the immediate conduct of his Excellency
the Lord Genesis Fairfax, do declare, That we are as desirous of a safe and well
grounded peace, and that a final end were put to all the troubles and miseries
of the Commonwealth, as any sort of men whatsoever: Yet considering,

1 That there is no justice done against the Abettors of the late Rebellion, as
Holland, Buckingham, Laughorn, Poyer, and their Accomplices: or of the
Confederates with the Apostate Scots: and indeed little Justice by the
Parliament done upon any Offenders of that kind. By which we have too much
cause to fear, that there may be a party in the Parliament abetting and
correspoding with (if not guilty of) the same Designs.

2 That notwithstanding the King has betrayed the trust reposed in him, and
raised war against this Nation to inslave it, violating his Oaths, and
trampling underfoot our Laws (then which no Engagement non taken can be more
binding:) notwithstanding he is guilty of all the bloodshed in these intestine
wars, as may appear by hie own confession in his late agreeing to the Parl.
first proposition: being also a person who was so far concluded incapable to
govern, that the Parl. voted that no address should be made to him. There is
yet a prevalent party of his Creatures, who in parliament and else where, act
His Design, and are (as we conceive) the Authors of our present Distractions.

3 That through the evil designs and practices of the foresaid party, the
intolerable burden of free quarter is continued upon the people
notwithstanding the unreasonable taxes daily extorted from them, in the name of
pay for the Army: By which means we are not only rendered odious to others, but
a burden to our selves not being able to cloth our selves, shoe our horses, or
free our Arms.

We therefore cannot think any thing can be safely done in order to a peace,
until some speedy and effectual course be taken, which we humbly desire your
Excellency will be pleased to your utmost power, to endeavor, 1. That there
may be a strict scrutiny, for the more full discovery of such persons as were
contrivers or encouragers of the Rebellions aforesaid, and that Justice
speedily be executed on them according to the late Orders of Parliament. 2 That
impartial and speedy Justice may be done upon all criminal persons, and
especially upon such as have or shall endevor to obstruct the course thereof, or
have betrayed their trust, or bin Authors of shedding that innocent blood,
which calls to Heaven for vengeance, that so we may be at peace with God. 3
That the same fault may have the same punishment, in the person of King or
Lord, as in the person of the poorest Commoner. 4 That all such may be
proceeded against as Traitors, who act or speak in the Kings behalf, 'till he
shall be acquitted of the guilt of shedding innocent blood. 5 That the Army may
speedily have their pay, or a present course be taken against those who
unjustly with hold it; and that they may have the Arrears due since Ian. 25.
before they be ordered to pay quarters, and effectual provision made for the
payment of former Arreares. 6 That the intolerable oppression of free quarter
be immediately taken off, and that for the time to come whilst there is
necessity for an Army, there may be Assignations given to each Regiment, Troop
and Company, which may be constant during the establishments of the Army, that
the money may not pass from hand to hand till it is half imbezelled, but be
paid immediately from the Countries to the Soldiery, that so all free quarter
for ever avoided, it may return from the Soldier to the Countryman again.

And now fearing lest the inveterate malice of our adversaries should asperse
us with a design to destroy Magistracy and propriety; we cannot but declare,
that we shall constantly endeavor to def^nd them both with our lives and
fortunes, and in expectation of your Excellencies favor in the premises, we
shall ever pray, etc.

Subscribed in the name of the Officers and Soldiery of Com. G. Iretons
Regiment. H. CLARE.

New propositions concerning the King.
1 That we have both matter of deep humiliation before God, and thank giving to
him, when we consider his gracious dispensation toward us; in preserving a
remnant from following the evil courses of the time, and that he was pleased
so soon after a great defection and backsliding in the land, to put us into a
condition to resist the force and fury of our enemies: in which particular, we
look upon our Brethren of England to be the chief Instruments therein.

2 That whatsoever power God has already, or shall hereafter put into our
hands, we shall improve it for settling and propagating Religion, and promoting
the work of Reformation according to the Covenant, and in particular, to have
the liberties of the Kirk ratified, which have bin many ways incroached upon
and violated.

3 To vindicate and establish the liberty and property of the Subjects, who
have been most grievously oppressed in their consciences, persons, and estates.

4 That we shall endeavor the Kings Majesty's restitution to the exercise of
his Poyall power, as soon as He shall give security for settling Religion in the
manner expressed in the Desires of the Kirk, and shall give satisfaction in
such other things as shall be found necessary for the peace and safety of the
kingdoms.

5 That the late unlaw full Engagement against England shall be disclaimed, and
disavowed by the supreme Authority of this Kingdon, it being most destructive
to Relsgion, Crown, and Kingdoms.

6 That the peace and union of the two Kingdoms may be strengthened and
confirmed.

7 That we shall endeavor to purge out of all the Judicatories in this Land,
malignancy and profaneness, and use all other good means, that Justice may
be equally and impartially administered to all subjects whatsoever within his
Majesty's Realms and Dominions.

8. That we will faithfully endeavor to have a free Parliament, consisting of
such persons as have not been accessory to, and furtherers of the late
Engagement, for which end we do again hereby require that in the election of
Commissioners from Buroughs and Shires to the Parliament, the rules and
directions set down in our Acts of thee 22 of September last, and the 4. of
this instant month of October, may be punctually observed throughout the
Kingdom.

And we call the searcher of hearts to record that these are our real and true
intentions, and that we do not, nor shall by the grace of God pursue any
private ends or interests of our own; and we trust the Lord our God who knows
the sincerity of our resolutions, who has also had mercy upon us, and has
begun to do so graciously for us, will assist us herein, until his work shall
be accomplished.

This Declaration and Proposals were Ordered to be forthwith printed and
published; and communicated to the Citizens of London, and the rest of His
Majesty's liege People within the Realm of England.

Signed, T. HENDERSON.

On Wednesday October. 18. A Letter were read in the House of Commons, from the
Lord Genesis Fairfax, intimating, the present proceedings of the Army and how that
several Petitions are promoting amongst the soldiery, purporting the great
difficulties which they had undergone this Summer, in subduing their enemies,
and received very little pay, yet understood taxes were generally paid,
desiring that the Army be divided into the Counties proportionable to the tax
they pay, and also that their Arreas may be thought of, especially the last.
Upon reading the said Letter, the Commons spent much time in debate thereof,
and came to this result.

Resolved, etc. That the desires of the Soldiery be forthwith satisfied, and
that speedy care be taken for settling their Arrears.

FINIS.

