ARTICLES Of IMPEACHMENT Against Sir JOHN GVRNEY Knight. Lord Mayor of London,
who was committed to the Tower by the High Court of Parliament, on Monday the
11. of July, 1642.

Wherein is declared the several misdemeanors which has been committed by
him since his coming into Office.

Whereunto is annexed Several matters of Note concerning the Earl of
Stamford, Sir Arthur Haslerigge, and the Lord Brooks.

Members of the Honorable Assembly of Parliament, Likewise the humble Petition
of the County of Leicester, Presented to the said Houses, touching Mr.
Hastings, Son to the Earl of Huntington.

Likewise His Majesty's Resolution concerning the Earl of Warwick.

Oordered that this be Printed and Published.

Hen. Elsinge, Cler. Parl. D. C.



July, 12. LONDON, Printed for J. H. and T. Ryder, 1642.

Great satisfaction concerning the Imprisonment of the Lord MAYOR of London,
which was committed to the Tower, etc.
IT is no wonder that Ignarant men fall so often into a Praemunire, and one
liable to undergo the sincerity of the Law for petty Crimes, when the great
men whose wit and judgments are acquainted with the queint falacies of this
sick Sat, and so misled and suffer themselves to be guilty of so much error,
but it is no wonder, for Honor is such a painted pill covered with tempting
sweets that it that it in chants, nay wraps the Soul in pleasing slumbers, and
in a dull and Lethargicke leprosy, inchaines them in a pleasing Servitude, and
makes them slaves forever, so it has happened with many great men of late, but
the mast remarkable is the Lord Major of this City, who having been honored
by his by his Majesty in an unusual manner, thought that honor would bear
him out in all things, but he found the contrary, for on Frdy last he was
called to the Lords House, to answnr a charge against him, of many high
misdemeanors commiited by him since he came into his Office, and afrer the
reading of his first charge, by reason of other business he was ordered to
appeore on Monday, which was accordingly performed, and coming to the Bar
his Charge was read which contained these particulars.

1. That the said Lord Major has bin a mover of Sedition in the Kingdom. 2 In
that he caused the Kings Proclation concerning the Commission of Array. 3. That
he had made diverse breaches of his Oath concerning the Affairs of the City.
The Lords and Commons received a Petition from the County of Liecester,
wherein was declared the great danger they were in by reason that Mr. Hastings
had proclaimed himself High Sherisse of that County, and endcavoured to raise
what Forces he possibly can, desiring Parliament to send down Commissioners
with Commissions to men of trust to be commandeders over them, which was
likewise taken into serjous consideration.

Likewise a Letter was read in the House of Commons, that came from the Lord
Brook, Lord Lievetennant of the County of Warwick, declaring that the Trained
Bands of that County, did very willingly appear, and with great readiness did
obey the Ordinance of the of Parliament concerning the Misisia, and that there
appeared one thousand and seven hundred Volunteers, and that the Earl of
Northamptan was expected to appear with the Commission of Array, to oppose him
in that Ordinac^, but as yet he had not appeared.

The Earl of Stamford likewise came to the House, and acquainted them that all
the Jesuits and Popists in that County, did conspire together to ruin him and
his House, and that he was forced to keep in his House in Liecestor, and to
keep a hundred and fifty Soldiers at his own charge to defend himself, for
that Mr. Hastings with an hundred Horse had made many attempts upon his House,
whereupon he had order for the Leavying of five hundred Faote, and a hundred
Horse, to suppress^ them.

Likewise they voted that the Commission of Array, granted by his Majesty, was
illegal, and contrary to the propriety of the Subject.

Ordered that this be printed and published.

Hen. Elsing D.C.

His Majesty's Resolution concerning the Earl of Warwick.
His Majesty taking into consideration the Government of his Navy Royal, his
will and pleasure was, That Sir John Pennington should have the place of
Admiralship resigned unto him, being against his Majesty's will and pleasure,
that the Earl of Warwick should enjoy that place any longer, and to that end
and purpose did send a Message to the Earl of Warwick to give up his place,
and that he should obey his special Command, which was, that he should
resign his place to Sir John Pennington, the said Sir John being near unto
him, exhecting the ^ecei^ thereof.

His Majesty were likewise resolved, that he should not enjoy that place any
longer, but that he ssiould obey His Command therein.

Ordered that this be Printed, and published.

John Brown, Cler. Parl.

FINIS.

