The Arraignement of SVPERSTITION, OR A DISCOVERSE Between a Protestant, a
Glasier, and a Separatist.

Concerning The pulling down of Church-Windowes.

Showing, The good mind of the Protestant, the Indifferency of the Glasier,
and the purity and zeal of the Seperatist.

London, Printed for T. B. and F. C. 1641.

A Dialogue or discourse between a Protestant, a Glasier, and a Separatist.
Separatist. Come honist Glasier, we must crave your aid
To help us pull these popish windows down,
And set new glass for which you shall be paid,
For sure the Lord on us for them does frown
And truly brethren should we let them stand,
I fear 'twill bring a terror to this land.

Glasier. I hope not so Sir, these are ancient things
That long have stood in former ages past
Since Churches were, at least, since Christian Kings
Had government, they still in Churches last,
Least by mishap some cracks or pieces shattered,
But now it seems they all must down be battered

Seperatist. What should they else, they do but bar the light
The Lord has sent, and trouble much our sight
That scarce at noone day we can see to read
The holy Bible for the paint and lead,
It Is like a popish tabernacle painted,
I do not like a thing so much besainted.

Protestant. When these old windows were at first new painted
'Twas to adorn, the Church in seemly way
Whereas you say they are so much befainted,
It Is but the pictures of the saints not they,
But yet I think if they were saints indeed,
You Would pull them down, or else you would make them bleed.

Glaster. Sir, you say true, and truly in my mind,
A day will come, when some will pay for all,
For if old time, again should turn the wind,
And papistry into our land recall,
Where they should come again to say their masses,
They Would wish us hanged, for pulling down their glasses.

Separatist. It Is no matter, what weigh we their wishes.
Flowers will grow you know where serpents hisses,
And light will shine to us that truth does handle,
While they in darkness sit, and hold the candle;
Give us the light, let them in darkness mass it,
It Is now our right, when it is theirs, let them new glass it.

Protestant. This is even just according to this world,
What Is min's, mine own, and no man is the better,
But when I am dead, and in my grave is hurled,
Where Is then my right, or who is then my debtor;
What in this world we do unjustly graple,
I fear ith next, it will make our bones to rattle.

Glasier. Me thinks it is pity ancient monuments
Because they are popish; that is the harm they do,
Should from the Churches thus be torn and rent,
Then pull down Churches they are popish too;
For surely they were built in popish times,
And still are guilty of some popish signs.

Protestant. Glasiers be merry, golden days are come,
Drink off old sherry, let your diamonds run
On white and green, no yellowes, blewes, nor reds,
Shall dim your sights, or trouble more your heads;
It Is better ordered till the day of doom,
We banish colors to the sea of Room.

Separatist. But yet not so I do not like that way,
Fearing the Pope, a mass for us should say;
And we be guilty of their Idolatry,
Should so be damned to hell eternally;
Therefore to bar the dangers that may fall,
It Is better break them into pieces small.

Glasier. Nay better then us glasiers them detain,
For being broke, they will do no man good,
They may perhaps in time come up again,
And we may pitch them where before they stood,
For sure 'twil vex our heads thrice more to make the^
Then now it will your consciences to break them.

Protestant. Were I a Glasier, sure I now might live
With ruins of Church windows, and might give
A yearly pention to those hungry souls
That daily walk within the Church of P^ules,
And make Saint Peter from the painted gl sse,
Through clear white day to see an English mass.

Glasier. Were you a Glasier it would vex your mind,
To see such curious windows broken here,
Seeing they hurt no man in any kind;
And sure they cost our ancient fathers dear,
But were Saint Peter here set with Saint Paul
You Would pull them down, nay Crucifix and all.

Separatist. What Is Paul or Peter unto any here,
Or what is the crucifix, or Mary's peer;
Why should we suffer in our Church to stand,
Such fabulous Idols made by mortal band
The Lord forbids it, and we must obey,
Fearing least people unto them should pray.

Protestant. See here is the picture of our Gracious Queen
Elizabeth of famous memory,
Which picture is in many Churches seen,
As a memorial to eternity:
It is no Idol, yet by mortal hand,
It Is marv'le your zeal will suffer it to stand.

Separatist. Sir, that is a picture that may well deserve
(For that the Church she did so well preserve,
From popish errors, and from other crimes)
A lasting memory in all our times,
Should we that picture seek for to deface,
We wrong our Church, likewise contemn his grace.

Glasier. Sir, let me ask you one thing by the way,
Is not our savior Christ head of his Church;
And does not he preserve it night and day,
From all invading enemies, foul lurch
Yet we his picture from his Churches raze,
And think thereby we do him no disgrace.

Protestant. Me thinks it is a comely desent thing,
To see our Saviors picture in the Church
And Saints in every light or window seen;
The more to a dorne and beautify this Church,
For in my mind, that place would best beseem
A Saviors picture, then a pictured Queen,

Separist. The Lord defend me, thou art one of hope,
And, an adopted son unto the Pope,
Thy faith is feeble, and thy state is weak,
Thou do so fondly and profanely speak,
Truly I fear the Lord has thee forsaken,
Thou art so much with popish relics taken.

Protestant. It seems all is popish that is not like to you,
Sir, we are protestants, Professors true,
Of Christian faith, though we seem not to raze
These ancient things, our Churches to deface;
For sure our fathers lived in Popish days,
(Long before we) that first these things did raise.

Separist. You sail too far upon the Popish sea,
Your ship is Cract, your ankor at decay,
Your sails are fair, yet made of rotten Cloth,
Your mast is high, and for to stoop it is loath,
But it must bend, the Lord says, they that climb
Unless by faith, will fall in a short time.

Protestant. Sir, your deceived we do not love to climb,
Though we have faith, but love not to presume,
And we have hope will bring us home in time,
Whilst you at rovers fail to meet the moon
Your faith's Eclipst your hope is fled it is strange
Your charity and zeal should love to range

Glasier Perhaps their gone to some Astronomer
To try the planntes or to meet their fate
Or else perchance they are gone to Amsterdamne
To Ananias or some other mate,
If faith be sick and hopes weak stomach wamble,
Then charity and Zeal may well go ramble.

Separist. Learned and profane sons to iniquity,
To Ieere a man of Zeall and piety,
The Lord will curse such superstitious fools,
And cast them out from Ananias Schools:
I think you some of Romes impestuous store,
Who loves the painted Glass loves Idols more.

Protestant Proud Brother peace, the paint placed in Glass,
Shows better far, then in your sisters face,
Which if upon themselves they did bestow,
You Will love them well, yea you will saint them too,
And if the spirit move, not think it a miss,
Upon them to bestow a holy kiss.

Separist. Blasphemous words from superstitious tongue,
Had ever piety and Zeal such wrong
By superfluous and profane report,
Thus to revile the anointed of the Lord,
Trvely He leave such children of the Devil,
Fearing the Lord should curse me for your evil.

Glasier. What need these ieers, you talk of profanation,
Impiety, and things not now in fashion,
End your foul faction, here amend
What is amiss on both sides, do not spend
your Talents Idely, let an end be made,
Live by your Zeal, and I will by my trade.

FINIS.

