THE ARAIGNMENT and Impeachment of Major General Massy, Sir William Waller,
Col. Poyntz, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir John Maynard, Ant* Nichols, and one
Cheisty, the Scotch Secretary, (lately taken at Sea by the Vice Admiral) with
dives other surreptitious Members of the Commons in Parliament, the Court of
Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London; as namely Col. Sutton,
Major Banes, Cap. Cox, now in safe custody, and other Citizens of meaner rank
and quality of the Presbyterian Faction.

Wi^h a fresh discovery of their late treasonous plots, and horrid designs
against the Parliament, the Army, the Famous City of London, and consequently
of the whole Kingdom, in engaging them in a second cruel and bloody War.

Wherein the Conspirators are araigned, convicted, and condemned, according to
their several crimes.

Also a thanfull Remembrance of the late success it has pleased the Almighty
to confer upon our ever Renowned General, Sir Thomas Fairfax, and his Council
of War, against that Viperous brood of rigid Presbyters.

Printed in the Year, 1647. Aug: 23.

The Arraignement, etc.
ALthough I know it is no safe way in a time like this, to write truth of men
or manners, especially those who are the known Authors of Bloody Tragedies, and
other horrid treacheries, acted on the dismal Theater of a languishing
Kingdom, yet in compassion to my abused Country, and in a professed hate to
all the enemies thereof, I have adventured once more to present to your viewes,
a Mirror or looking glass, wherein you may see the crafty devices of diverse
Shimeies, Rabshakeies, Ishmaels, Achitophels, with all their M^chiavilian plots
and policies, hammered out, and contrvied in the Devils fencing School, where
that Hydra-headed crew of stigmaticke furies, the Prinists, Massites, and
Wallites, meant to play their master prize.

The Charge.
The first weapon they play withal, is a Cudgel, to cudgel into the peoples
heads, that the Independents, Anabaptists, Sectaries, Heretics, Schismatics,
and the like (names better befitting the Presbyters, then so faithful a
people) were many of them in places of public trust and power, and of the
Common counsel, and must speedily be removed (if they intend to thrive in
their treasonable designs) therefore with much urgeney, they persuaded the
Parliament speedy to slight all such Garrisons where any such faithful men
were placed, and to newmould the Common counsel of the City, else they could
proceed no further, but must cross their Cudgels, and give over: and if they
effected the same, they resolved to introduce into their places, debauched and
dissolute persons, the better to drive on their own treasonable designs,
which they speedily effected, and procured an Ord. for the same. Yet this would
not carry it, unless they could invent a way to make odious the Army, to the
Parliament and people, and consequently cause them to disband, and break into
pieces, without any consideration of arreers, only a months pay, even whilst
they themselves went about to raise or form a new force, under presence of the
service of Ireland, when indeed it was to serve their own treasonous designs
in England. This plot, though carried on with much cunning, was no sooner
discovered by the faithfulness of the Army, bu^ as speedily communicated to
the Parliament, who speedily joined with them in the suspension of many corrupt
Members, guilty of the treasonous delighes before mentioned: who consequently
were impeached, and testrained from sitting in the House, as Judges in their
own came, or ex^^cising their power in Committees, till their caus^s should be
tried. After which (at the Cities request) the Army withdrew at a distance from
the City: in the mean while, these impeached Members, pretending to av^^d any
disturbance or interruption in retarding the public aff^yres of the Kingdom,
obtained Passes to travel, though the Army presumed of the ca^e of the Houses
for their forth coming to be tried, when the weighty affairs of the Kingdom
were settled.

Yet as men loath to give over, when they had taken such pains to advance
their plots, they instead of traveling (taking the advantage of the distance
of the Army) traveled and brought forth a new device, which was to contrive
and set a foot a secret combination, in a mischievous and desperate vow and
engagement, under the notion of a Petition to the Major and Aldermen etc.
consisting of a factious party of Citizens. Commanders, Officers, Young men,
Apprentices, with a solemn engagement annexed thereto: This grist was carried
to the Miller, by the servant one Bellamy a Bookseller, at the Old Exchange,
where it was grownd and molded into a form, with a space left to every sheet
for the setting their hands: great numbers of them were Printed and dispersed
all over the City with all speed, under a feigned Religion a pretense for all
treasons, rebellions, etc.
pretense of the Preservation of Religion, his Majesty's honor, the
Privileges of Parliament, the Liberties of the Subject, all in great danger,
and like to be destroyed for rather then these fat-headed Citizens,
Apprentices, and others, would let them want destroying, they resolved to
destroy one of them themselves; viz. the Privileges of Parliament which they
roundly went about to do, and did effect; and resolved to destroy the rest, so
soon as possibly they could: but the great obstacle is, They cannot get the
King to London, without nearer approach of the Army, -- else they could hardly
make use of him and his party, to lay the foundation of a new war, even upon
the ruins of the common interest of the Kingdom. Soon after July 23. the
Lords and Commons did adjudge and declare, the said engagers, and all that
should promote or abet the said engagement, to be guilty of high treason: three
days after, a Petition was brought to the Parliament by the Shiriffes, some
Aldermen, and Common counsel men, in the name of the City of London, to recall
the said Declaration, and to return the Militia into those hands in which it
was put by Ordinance of the fourth of May; which Petition was presently
followed and backed by a tumultuous confluence of Apprentices, and diverse other
dissolute, desperate, and riotous persons, who committed most horrid and
unheard of violence, upon both Houses, forcing them to Vote what they pleased;
and yet no order taken by the They were sent to, and had notice thereof.
Major, Shiriffes, or Authority of the City, to suppress the said tumultuous
rowt, (or releeve the Parliament from their violence) by which means both
Speakers, with most of the Lords, and faithful Commons, were feign to fly to
the Army for refuge and protection,

In the mean time these tumultuous routs backed by the impeached Members,
chose new Speakers, and caused themselves again to be voted into the service
of the House, and to set up a Committee for safety, for the most part of the
very men impeached, appointed to join with the pretended City Militia, whose
power was obtained by the tumultuous force and violence aforesaid, who assumed
powers to vote as they pleased, to appoint Chief Commanders, and Officers, and
to lift and raise Soldiers, both horse and foot to leavy a new war in
prosecution and maintenance of the aforesaid treasonable engagement; likewise
the City Declaration, approved of by the said Committee to be published and
read in Churches, to exhort the people to take up Arms to oppose the advance
of the Army toward London, though they come only for restitution of the
Speakers, and other Members of both Houses, lately driven away, and in
pursuance of their just Privileges and Freedoms, and to prevent a new war
in the Kingdom against the Parliament and their Army, for the destruction of
them both, which may more evidently appear, considering that the chief
Actours and Promoters of this treasonous engagement ^^^e the very men that were
most active, and most trusty, and employed in these treacherous preparations
for leavying a new war.

What say thou Major General Massey, art thou guilty or not guilty of this
charge exhibited against thee, and the rest of thy impeached brethren? If thou
art (as it is most likely) thou will much eclipse and darken thy former valor,
lately expressed in an hyperbulous, and thin witted paper-pellet (entitled
Virtue and valor vindicated, fathered by R.C. upon I.H.) thy noble (or 105)
friend, who writes as follows, page 3, What had become of Parliament,
Kingdom, Religion, Laws, Liberties, all, had not thou (Renowned Impe of
war) taken Mars himself by the beard, and stopped that Imperial Army in their
full careere, whose vast bulk covered the declining West, and stroke terror
at a distance to the uttermost corners of the Kingdom? Who was he that like
St. George preserved that Virgin City Gloucester from the al-devouring panch of
Dragon Mynne? Was it not Massey that dismantled nine Royal Garrisons in storm
of fire condenced with leaden hail, the loss of one of which did make his As
dutiful as Absolon, oson.
King shed tears? Was it not Massey whose thunderbolt did break the ice of
Winters frozen fury in the Danish Forests; that goard great Gorings body
thorrow and thorrow, and with his Mirmidons routed the proud Hoptonian powers,
and thunder-hunted his proud insulting foes in warlike sport like fearful
Partridges ore the Mountains: The very same man? Was it not victorious Sir
William, that from his very enemies purchased (through blood and sweat) that
glorious Title, of William the Conqueror? and can these brave Heroes be ru^^^
^f ^uc^ cu^se^ crimes? surely it cannot be, though (...) shrewd suspicion of
some such (...)? Who drew his all conquering sword, and slow an unarmed aged
man, was is not Pointz, one of these valiant Reformadoes, since run away with
the rest lest deserved justice should promote them for such brave atchivements?
Who was it that so providently provided for his journey before hand and sirkind
up a mass of gold, and plundered jewels? Was not it my Lady what dee call
her, or her Will. some are not afraid to whisper so.

How many times have men of your condition untimely miscarried (as the Hothams)
Carew, and others, even before your faces, and still you remain unmoved;
diverse able and active men great wrastlers, and as cunning gamesters as your
selves, such as were seldom foiled whilst they used fair play, now of late
taking a wrong hold, by a slip had their necks broke (to the grief of all that
knew them) who might have lived still, and lived well, had they been well
affected; we cannot deny but many of you have purchased honor, and might
still have maintained the same, had you not been perverse against reason,
against sense, against the light of your own consciences, and the judgments
of all honest and understanding Christians, you had questionless shunned the
infamy and ruin that now attends and follows you, from which you cannot fly.
But since you have proceeded thus far in mischief, it is high time for the
Parliamant, and Army, to look about them, and use all the means, they can, (as
I hope they will not be backward) to charm such pestilent vipers, which If not
done in time will make all our hearts to ache, and when too late, to blame our
own selves: Gods cause must and will prevail, maugre the malice of all that
oppose it, or such a judgment will overtake this Land, that will cause all our
ears to tingle, and make us a byword and reproach to all Nations. Vale.

Postscript.
Now let me instead of a Postscript take up the words of the children of Israel
in the like case to ours; If the Lord had not been on our sides, how had they
swallowed us up, and with us our chiefest glory? How has the Lord strengthened
the hands of our renowned General Sir Thomas Fairefax, what success has
continually waited upon that ever Honorable Commander Liev. General Crumwell,
in all his ^chivements since the beginning of these wars, and it is the Lord
of Hosts that has done all this for us, and not the sinful arm of flesh, and
doubtless will do greater things then these for us? O therefore let us show
our selves thankful unto him, and praise his holy name who with his alseeing
eye has brought to light, and confounded all the devices, and hell-hatched
plots and conspiracies contrived against us, this Kingdom, and City, by these
cruel enemies to peace and truth, who thought nothing less, then to make
themselves happy by the ruins of others.

FINIS.

