THE ARTICLES OF THE RENDITION OF Edenburgh-Castle TO THE Lord General
CROMWELL, AND The manner of the Enemies marching out December. 24. 1650.

With a Particular of the Ordnance, and Arms taken therein.

ALSO The taking of another strong Castle, called, Kinmore-castle, by a party
from Carlisle.

With the Articles of surrender, and the particulars taken in the Castle, and
their march.

Published by Authority.

Oct: 31 LONDON, Printed by E. Griffin in the Old Bailey. 1650.

SIR,
THe greatest part of the time since Thursday last (when the Articles enclosed
were agreed of for the rendition of Edinburgh Castle) has been in ordering of
things in relation to their Marching out this day. There has been a
continual passing to and from the Castle with Trunkes, and other goods for
these four or five days; and yet for all that there are many more goods left
for the inhabitants hereabouts, and much more those Scots who dwell far off,
and now come over in great numbers, who must have further time; and the General
has engaged that they shall not loose any of them after our Soldiers have
possession of the Castle, but have free liberty to fetch them out; it is verily
believed that there was more Money, Plate, and Rich Household stuff in this
Castle, then in any one part of Scotland besides, yet such has been the
civility of our Soldiers, that they have not in the least interrupted the
Inhabitants, or taken away any of their goods; so that considering the
impregnall strength of the place, the great loss of men we must have had, in
case we had stormed it (if we had carried it that way which was almost
impossible) and the love of the people which we now have gained by this civil
usage, it was the best course that could have been taken; and if it were pu^ in
the Balance, would not appear to be of much less consequence, then the
defeat at Downhill near Dunbar. This day Col. Dundas Marched out of the Castle
with 120 men, all Musketeers, their Colors flying (which was one red Ensign)
one Drum beating, the greatest part of them marched to Leith and intend for
Fife. Lieu^. Col. White with some companies of Foot took possession of the
Castle, we have as yet no account what number of Arms, Ammunition, or Provision
is in it. The number of the Ordnance is enclosed. Col. Fenwick Governor of
Berwick for the present is to take the Government thereof. His Excellency with
many Officers went into the Castle this afternoon to view it. There are taken
in it the particulars enclosed. By reason of the great Winds, the Soldiers
that came out of the Castle, could not get into Fife, but were forced to stay
in Leith this night with a guard. Diverse of the Foot laid down their Arms,
and will not engage any more against our Army. Before their going out of the
Castle, there were two Barrels of Gun powder blown up, which killed two of
their Men.

December. 19. 1650. Articles Treated of, concluded, and agreed upon by Major
Andrew Abbernethe, and Captain Robert Henderson of the one party, on the
behalf of Walter Dundasse Esqu. Governor of the Castle of Edinburgh: and by
Col. George Monk, and Lieut. Col. Francis White on the other party, on the
behalf of his Excellency the Lord Genesis Cromwell for the Rendition of the said
Castle, according to the Articles ensuing.

1. That the Castle of Edinburgh, with the Cannon, Arms, Ammunition, and
Magazeenes, and furniture of war (except what shall be excepted in the ensuing
Articles be rendered to his Excellency the Lord Genesis Cromwell, or whom he shall
appoint on Tuesday next being the 24. of this present December, by 12 of the
Clock, without wilful spoil or embezillment. 2. That the Public Registers,
Public Movables, private Evidences and Writs be transported to Fife or
Sterling; and that Wagons and Ships be provided for the transporting of them.
3. That for all the goods in the Castle belonging to any person whatsoever, an
Edict may be proclaimed to the people about Edinburgh, to come own, and receive
their own; and if any be at a far distance or dead, a place may be provided in
the Town of Edinburgh for keeping the same until they be owned, and after
owning, they have liberty to carry them where they please. 4. That all persons
whatsoever not belonging to the Garrison, as men, women, and children, may have
liberty to go whether they will without trouble, and there have the free
exercise of their callings and Employments with safety, both to themselves and
goods. 5. That the Governor of the said Castle, and all Military Officers,
Commanders and Soldiers, of whatsoever condition (none excepted) may depart
without any molestation with their Arms and Baggage, with Drums beating, and
Colors flying, Matches lighted at both ends, and Ball in their mouths, as
they usually are wont to march, and all their goods with a free conduct to
Brunt Island in Fife; or if any of the foresaid persons desire to transport
themselves and goods any where else for their greater convenience, it may be
with freedom granted. 6. That all Officers and Soldiers, as well sick as
hurt, shall have free liberty to remain in Edinburgh till they recover, and to
enjoy the benefit of these Articles. 7. That the number of Horse and Wagons, as
many as the Governor shall need for his own particular use, as also for the
Officers and Soldiers, shall be sent them for the carrying of the aforesaid
baggage, to the aforesaid places. 8. That Capt. Lieut. Car, Lievt. Stretton,
Thomas Brindy Gunner, and Patrick Summerall Gunner be sent to his Excellency
the Lord Genesis Cromwell this present Thursday, by 12 of the Clock for Hostages,
for the performance of the afore-written Articles; and that the General shall
keep Sentinels about the Castle, under the Rock.
Andrew Abbernethe, R. Henderson.

I do approve, ratify, and confirm the Articles above written.

W. Dundasse.


A List of the Great Guns taken in Edinburgh Castle December. 24. 1650.
Three Iron Guns, besides the Great Mag. Five Cannons of 7. 9. 24. livers. Two
Culverins. Two Demi Culverins. Two Minions. Two Falcons. Three 3 Livers,
Brass. 28. Short Brass Munkeys alias Dogs. 10 Iron Munkeys: Two Pittars. In
all 67.
Ten thousand Arms, with other Provision and Victuals a great quanty, we cannot
as yet give the particulars thereof.



By Letters from Carlisle December. 25. as follows, A party of Horse and Dragoons
was sent from this Garrison, confisting of about 1000. to Garrison Dunfrieze in
Scotland, where they are in a quiet condition. There were diverse Cavaliere
Lords and Gentlemen, with some 400 Attendants met there with a purpose to raise
some Forces for their King, but upon the advance of this party they left the
Town and went to their own homes, which makes me conjecture they like not the
dancing of the Scotch Jigge at Sterling this jocund time of Christmas. Just now
a Packet came to me from my Lieut. Colonel at Dumfrieze, which gives me an
account of the parties procedings there under his command, which he sent into
Gallaway to prevent the gathering of the Enemy in those parts. To give you the
particulars will be too teadious, only this I will say, That they have been very
active, the Lord going along with them, so that they have done their business
and they write to me that there is not much considerable to be done in that
part of Scotland, only the Garrisoning of some Castles for convenience of
passage, and awing the Country. They have taken the strong Castle of Kinmore,
whose Articles are as follows:

December. 22. 1650. Articles concluded and agreed upon the day and year
abovesaid, betwixt the Lord Kinmore Governor of his Castle of Kinmore, on the
one party: and Cap. Dowson, Cap. Crackenthorpe, and Cap. Nary, on the other
party, for the Parliament of England.

IMprimis, It is concluded and agreed upon that the said Lord Kinmore shall
forthwith deliver up to the said Cap. Dowson, Cap. Crackenthorp, and Cap. Nary,
his Castle of Kinmore, with all the Arms and Ammunition, for the use of his
Excellency the Lord Genesis Cromwell. 2. It is concluded and agreed upon, that the
said Lord Kinmore shall have all his Housholdstuffe, of what sort soever,
within the said Castle, secured to his proper use, either within such Rooms of
his said Castle as he shall choose, or by conveying them away to some other
place, provided it be within fourteen days. 3. That the Lord Kinmore, with
such as are now in Arms with him in the said Castle, whose names are under
written. shall have liberty to repair to their own homes without any
disturbance to their Persons or Estates, acting nothing prejudicial to the
Army of England, or shall have seven days, (the morrow being the 23 of this
instant being the first) to dispose of themselves, their Horses, and Arms,
without let or molestation by any belonging to his Excellencies Army.
Kenmore. English.
Man. Dowson. Rich. Crackenthorp John Nary.
Robert Lord Kenmore. Rob. Glendoning. Jo. Glendoning. Rob. Gourden. Ja.
Gourden. Alex. Maxwell. Geo. Heriot. James Gibson. Patrick Merdock.

The rest of the Common Soldiers are likewise to have the benefit of the
aforesaid Articles.


A Note of the Arms and Ammunition taken in the Expedition from Dumfreze into
Gallaway by the aforesaid Captains.
At Killobright, and thence carred to Kenmore.
Three barrels of Powder, Match proportionable. All the Arms found there were
broken, because there was not conveyance for them.
Taken at Kenmore-Castle.
Sixty Muskets and Firelocks, eight Pikes, eight great barrels of Powder, each
containing near three ordinary Barrels, Match and Ball proportionable. Great
store of Meal, and Beef. Taken on the March about forty Horse, and some
prisoners.


FINIS.

