THE ARRAIGNMENT AND ACQUITTALL OF Sr. Edward Mosely BARONET, Indicted at the
Kings Bench Bar for a Rape, upon the Body of Mistress Anne Swinnerton.

January 28, 1647.

Taken by a Reporter there present, who heard all the Circumstances thereof,
whereof this is a true Copy.

LONDON, Printed by E.G. for W.L. 1647.

This trial was taken the 28 day of January, in the 23 Year of King CHARLES,
An. Dom. 1647.
SIR Edward Mosely Barronet endited for Felony and Rape, upon the Body of one
Anne Swinnerton, (Wife to one Mr. Swinnerton, a Gentleman of Grays Inn) This
trial was taken the 28th day of January, in the 23 year of King Charles. An.
Dom. 1647. Before Mr. Justice Bacon and Master Justice Rolls in Hillary Term
in, Baneo Regis.

First* Sir Edward Mosely, appeared at the Bar and pleaded not guilty; Then
Master Swinnerton and his Wife appeard to give evidence, Then the Court
demanded of Master Swinnerton what council he had ready to open the
Indictment, Master Swinnerton answered, that there had been such tampering with
him and his witnesses to stop the prosecution, That he could get no Lawyers to
open his Wifes case. The Court asked him whether he had spoken with any Lawyers
to be of his council, He said he had, but none would undertake it, only
Master Cook had promised him that he would open the Indictment for him, but
he appears not, So that by the tampering of Sir Edward Mosely, Master Louder,
Master Ia. Win-Stanly, Master Blore, and Master Brownnell and twenty more, none
would assist him in the maintaining of the Indictment. These Gentlemen before
named appeared in Court, and did not deny, but that they did use what means
they could (in a fair way) to put up the business, betwixt Sir Edward Mosely
and Mistress Swinnerton, which they conceived they might lawfully do, believing
it could not possibly be a Rape, having had intelligence of some former
passages in it; Then the Court said, Master Swinnerton if you had desired
council, the Court would have assigned you council. Then Master Swinnerton
proceeded with his evidence (saying) coming home to my Chamber, about six of
the clock in April 1647. I found Sir Edward Mosely came rushing out of my
Chamber, and I entering saw my Wife thrown upon the ground, with all her
clothes torn, the Bed-cloathes torn and hanging half way upon the ground,
my Wife crying and wringing her hands, with her clothes all torn off her head,
her wrist sprained, Sir Edward Mosely having thrown her violently upon the
ground, whereupon (seeing her in this condition) I asked her what was the
matter, she said Sir Edward Mosely had Ravished her, Master Swinnerton further
informed the Court, That Sir Edward Mosely two or three days before he did the
Rape, said that he would ravish my Wife though he were sure to be hanged for
it, Then Mistress Swinnerton began her evidence, saying, upon my Oath here I
swear, That he said he would force me to my Bed, and then he swore God
damme him; He would lie with me though he were sure to die for it, Then he
takes me and carries me to a narrow place, betwixt the wall of the Bed, and
with his hands forced my hands behind me, and lay with me whether I would or
no, Then Sir Edward Mosely interrupted her, saying, did not your Husband come
to the Chamber door at that time you pretended you were Ravished, and knocked at
the Door, and I would have opened the Door for him, whereupon you said it is
my Husband; Let the drunken sot stay without, and would not suffer me to open
the Door, and asked her whether she did not say so, she said it was false,
Then the Court demanded of Master Swinnerton what he said to his Wife when he
found her in this manner, Master Swinnerton answered, I said that if she were
ravished as she said she was, she must take her Oath of it, and indite him
for it, and if she did not he would believe, that she had played the Whore
with him, and he would turn her off, and live no more with her, and she
should be Sir Edward Moselies Whore altogether, but (said he) being desirous
to be further satisfied in the business I often sought for Sir Edward Mosely,
but could not find him, for he had fled away from his Chamber.

One day I met him accidentally in Holborne, and desired to speak a word with
him, he said he knew my business, but he was in have and could not stay; Then
I told him I had earnest business with him, and I must speak with him, he
told me he suspected I had some design to arrest him, and would not be
persuaded to stay, then I pressed him that if he would go and drink a cup of Ale
with me, he should come in no danger concerning any arrest at all; and if he
then would give me satisfaction, I would not prosecute the Law against him: The
Court demanded of him what he meant by satisfaction, Master Swinnerton
answered, only to know what he could say to excuse himself, the Court said,
why, would you believe him before your Wife? Master Swinnerton answered, my
meaning was; if he could satisfy me that my Wife was consenting to it, I had
rather wave the prosecution, then bring my Wife and my self upon the Stage,
and this was my intent and no other.

Then the Court asked Sir Edward Moseley how Master Swinnertons Wife came to be
so with her clothes torn and ruffed in this manner (none but he and she
being in the Room) Sir Edward Moseley answered, she always went very ill
favourdly in her apparel: Then the Court asked Mistress Swinnerton whether
there were any in the room but Sir Edward and her self, She answered, a
little before there was my Maid, but I had sent her to the Bakers house for
bread for my Children, and in the mean while he lay with me against my will.

Then the Court asked the Maid what she could say, she said, when I came from
the Bakers, and entering into the chamber, I found my Mistress crying, and
wringing her hands, saying she was undone; Also I heard Sir Edward Moseley say,
before I went to the Bakers, that he would lie with my Mistress though he were
sure to be hanged for it, and at all times he was wont to be very uncivil
and rude when he came into the Chamber, once he came into the Chamber when I
was there alone, truly I durst not stay in the Chamber, for I always observed,
He was so lecherously given that any Woman were she never so mean would
serve his turn; At this time he came into the Chamber a little before I went
to the Bakers, I observed he would feign have thrown my Mistress upon the Bed
when I was there, but my Mistress would not yield to it, but grew very angry
with him, and said he was a rogue, and spit in his face, yet he would not let
her alone, whereupon I told him, if he would not be more civil, I would call
my Master, and if he came he would crack his crown for using my Mistress so
uncivilly, Sir Edward Mosely answered he cared not a fart for my Master, and
that for me I was a base Jade, and he would make me kiss his, etc. what
said the Court, but the Maid having some modesty could not bring it out, then
said her Mistress, he said she should kiss something that was about him, what
was that said the Court again, Master Swinnerton answered, he said he would
make her kiss his Arse, then the Court said to the Maid, you must not be so
nice in speaking of the truth, being upon your Oath, Mistress Swinnerton said
then came Master Ja. Winstanley to tamper with me from Sir Edward Moseley, and
told me if I pleased to accept a hundred pounds, I should have it, if I would
be reconciled to Sir Edward Moseley; Then the Maid said, my Mistress made this
answer, she cared not for Money: Mistress Swinnerton said, it is true I said
so; and this I said, If Sir Edward Moseley would down upon his knees and
confess that he had wronged me, I would not prosecute him; But also I resolved
that he should wear a Paper upon his Breast, or upon his Hatt, acknowledging
the injury he had done unto me: if he would do so I would forgive him. Then
said she, Master Ia. Winstanley desired to know where the place was in the
room where I was ravished; where-upon I showed him. Master Ia. Winstanley
answered, this was such a place for such a business, that if I had the
strongest woman in England, I could ravish her here whether she would or no.

Then the Prosecutors for the King having ended their evidence: The Court asked
Sir Edward Moseley what he could say for himself; He said, he had many
witnesses, and desired that they might be examined what they could say in his
behalf.

Then Master Kilvert was called in, who appeared; The Court said, Master
Kilvert though you be not upon your Oath, you must speak the truth in the
fear of God, Master Kilvert answered, I know it my Lord; what I shall say
here, I speak it in the presence of God, and I shall speak no more then what
is truth: Mistress Swinnerton seeing of him, said I hope no body will believe
what this Knave Kilvert will say, for he is a Knave known to all the Court,
and all that hear him. Then Master Kilvert went on with his evidence, saying,
I thank God this is the second time I ever came in this woman's company; the
first time was at the Fleece Tavern in Covent Garden, where she came to a
Dinner to meet with Sir Edward Moseley: As soon as she had set down at the
Table, she said, that this Room had bin a very lucky Room to her, for once
before in this Room, she had received three hundred pounds for the
composition of a Rape, which she charged a Reverend Divine withal, I shall
not stick to name the man, she said it was Doctor Belcanquell; this Doctor I
knew him to be a reverend man, and to my knowledge is long since dead, and in
Heaven; and for this Rape, she said then, she would not take under two
thousand pounds for a composition of Sir Edward Moseley, which she said was
little enough, he having three thousand pounds a year. Mistress Swinnerton
hearing of this clapped her hands at him, and said, he was a Knave, and a
Rascal, and all was false which he said.

Then the Court said to her, Mistress Swinnerton you should carry your self
soberly and moderately, otherwise you will disparage all your witnesses. Then
the Court asked her whether she did meet at this Tavern (having affirmed
before that she never was in Sir Edward Moselys company but in her own
chamber) whereupon she staggered at it a little and loath to confess it, at
last she answered, True, she was there, but this Rascal Kilvert had bewitched
her to come thither. Master Kilvert said further, after she had sat a while
at the Table, she takes her stool and removes it to sit next to Sir Edward
Moseley, and there falls hugging and embracing him; whereupon said he, surely
Lady whereas you say Sir Edward has ravished you, I do believe rather you have
ravished him, otherwise you would not make so much of him, so Master Kilvert
made an end of his evidence.

Then Master Wood another witness, said he met her at Islington in Sir Edward
Moseleys company, and there she confessed to him that Sir Edward Moseley had
many times left the Key of his Chamber with her, to go to him when she
pleased; and she said, she had often made use of it. Then said this witness,
after I had seriously looked upon her, and seeing of her a woman of that
strength and body, I said, I wondered Sir Edward Moseley should ravish her: She
said, do you wonder at that, why? do you take me behind the Bed there* (there
being a Bed in the Room) and see whether you may not do it.

Another witness said that she had confessed to him that Sir Edward Moseley
once lay with her, with her consent; afterward she asked him, now what will
you give my Maid you must give her something? he answered, I Will give her forty
shillings, whereupon she said, forty shillings, that is base, you cannot give
her less then ten pound and a Silk Petticoate; But says she, when he went
forth of Doors, she said he gave her nothing but a Groat, and so basely went
his way.

Another Witness said he heard her say, (that it being generally known that
Sir Edward Moseley had ravished her) she was like to loose many of her best
customers in Town.

Another Witness said he heard Swinnerton say, that if she would not take her
Oath that she was ravished by him she should never be no Wife of his: Afterward
Mr. Ia Winstanly was called into the Court, He said, it is true she took me,
and showed me the place where she was ravished. He woundring how Sir Edward
being but a little Man and she such a lusty Woman should be ravished by him!
Why said she should you wonder at that? Then she put her Leg between my
Legs, and put her other Leg setting her Foot against the Wall, saying now
in this posture as you see me here, I my self could ravish any Woman
whatsoever.

Another Witness said, the night before she went to prefer the Bill of
Indictment against Sir Edward Moseley, she confessed she had like to have been
distracted and run mad, for fear the Grand Jury should find the Bill.

Two other Witnesses affirmed upon their credit, whereas it was said by Master
Swinnerton and his Wife, That Sir Edward Moseley fled from his Chamber
immediately after the act was done, They said they had daily recourse to his
Chamber, and walked to and fro with him, sometimes in Grayes. Innewalkes,
sometimes to Westminster, and to other places in the Town for six Weeks
together, after this pretended Rape, and many times they saw Mistress Swinnerton
stand at her own door looking upon him, as he past by (which was but six
steps from Sir Edwards Chamber door) and never questioned about it, but
oftentimes (they said) seeing her stand watching there, they feared she would
go up to him, and tempt him to wickedness.

Then evidence being given on both sides, the Jury went from the Bar and
returned, and gave their Verdict, That Sir Edward Moseley was not guilty, Then
the Court said Sir Edward Moseley, take heed what company you keep hereafter,
Let this be a warning to you, you see in what danger you bring your self to in
keeping ill Company.

FINIS.
Jmprimatur Gilbert Mabbot.

February 8.1647.


