THE ARTICLES AND CHARGE OF THE ARMY, EXHIBITED In Parliament against the Kings
Majesty, the Prince of Wales, and the Duke of York;

Read in both Houses yesterday, November. 21. 1648.

AND Their Declaration and Resolution (sent to the Citizens of London) showing
the manner how they will dispose of the Crown of England.

WITH Their Proposals touching the declaring of their Highnesses incapable of
any government or trust whatsoever, and to stand exild, and be banished for ever
as Enemies and Traitors. And to dye without mercy, if ever after taken, in case
they come not in at the hour set down and prefixed. And the Generals
Declaration touching the King.

AGreed upon by the General Council of the Army; and commanded to be printed
and published.

22 nouemb. Signed T. FAIRFAX.



London, Printed for C.W. near the Royal Exchange, 1648.

A DECLARATION FROM THE ARMY Agreed upon by his Excellency, and the General
Council of the Army.
WHereas through the blessing of God upon the endeavors and actions of the
Army they are become Conquerours and Subduers of the Enemies of peace and
freedom, and therefore conceive themselves bound in conscience and judgment to
preserve this Nation from future slavery, and to bring all Offenders to
condign punishment.

The Charge and Proposals of the Army.
1 That the capital and grand Authors of our troubles, the person of the King
may be speedily brought to Justice, for the Treason, blood, and mischief he is
already guilty of. 2 That a timely and peremptory day may be set for the Prince
of Wales, and the Duke of York to come in, and render themselves, by which time
if they do not, that then they may be immediately declared incapable of any
government or trust whatso^ever, and to stand exild for ever, as enemies and
traitors, to dye without mercy, if ever after taken. And if they or either of
them, renders themselves within the said time, that then the Prince for his
capital delinquency (being in appearance next to his Fathers) and himself and
the Duke to be proceeded against in Justice, or remitted according as they
shall give satisfaction. But however that the Estate and Revenue of the Crown
may be sequestered, and all the matter of costly pomp suspended for a good
number of years, while the desolations and spoils of the poor people may be
repaired for ease of the peoples contributions, 3 That Justice be executed on
a competent number of his chief Instruments that are in the power of the Parl.
so that their exemption from pardon may not be a mockery of Justice in the
face of God and Man. 4. That the rest of the Delinquents (English) may upon
rendition of themselves to Justice, have mercy extended to them for their
lives, and fines set upon them with moderation, and those that have compounded,
to be freed from Suits, Arrests, etc. Now after Justice thus done upon the
forementioned particulars, we propound further for settling of the peace of the
Kingdoms, viz.

1 That a speedy period may be put to this Parl. and teat the power thereof may
again return to the people, by, and whom it was first constituted, and
provision for future, Annual or Biennial, upon grounds of common right
freedom, and safety.

2 That no Delinquents may elect or be elected, at least for some time, and
that there may be a certainty of their sitting, meeting, and ending.

3 That it be declared, that as to the whole interest of the Commons of
England; they are the supreme power, for the making, clearing, or repealing
Laws; for making War or Peace, and for final judgment in civil things without
further appeal; and that all the Commons of England, and all Officers of
Justice, and Ministers of State, shall for the outward man, and outward things
be concluded thereby; provided, these things be reserved from, and not
entrusted in the said Representatives.

1 The questioning or censuring of any man, for any thing said or done, in
relation to the late wars, but such cases as before mentioned.

2 The rendering up, or giving, or taking away of any of the Foundations of
Right, Liberty, and safety to the People, contained in a settlement and
agreement; which to be above Law, and to be signed unto by the People.

That no King; or other public Officer be hereafter admitted, without
subscribing to this settlement.

SIR,
HIs Majesty (on Friday last) at a Conference with his Council, declared his
great averseness, for the abolishing of Episcopacy, and declaring against the
negotiation of Ireland.

It is supposed, that His Majesty has many scruples against the Army as
appears by his Declaration on Satturday last, (occasioned by a Rumor of the
Armies seizing on his Royal person, and taking him into custody, till
assurance be given for their future provisions, and safety, intimating that his
heart was possessed with many fears and instancing his dream of diverse passages
appearing visible, touching the proceedings of the Army, and that he had a
great suspicion of their proceedings and actions, desiring the Lords to protect
his sacred Person and to direct and gutde them in the ways of faith and
righteousness.

And in the close of their disputation, his Majesty further declared he would
endeavor to give all possible satisfaction to the Army in all things by them
desired (as far as he could dispense withal in honor and conscience) and
therefore desired that his condegressions, and overturnes in the Treaty, should
be forthwith expedited, to the Commanders in chief of each Regiments, to be
published at the head thereof, and dispersed throughout the several Counties.

Newport November. 19. 1648.
A Message from his Maj. loyal subjects, in the Kingdom of Scotland to his
liege people in the Kingdom of England.
Right Honorable,
As we are very sensible of the benefit and advantage afforded to this
Kingdom, against the enemies to the peace and happiness of both Nations, by
the coming hither of the Force under the command of Lieutenant General
Cromwell, and Maj. General Lambart, so we hold it fitting when the condition
of our affairs and posture of our Forces have now permitted their return, to
render them them this deserved testimony, and to acknowledge that the
deportment of the General Officers, under Officers and soldiers in their
coming into this Kingdom, during their abode amodgst us, and in their return
to England has been so fair and civil and with so much tenderness to avoid
all causes of offense, and to preserve a right understanding, betwixt the
Kingdoms, that we trust by their carriage the Malignant and disaffected shall
be much convinced and disappointed, and the amity of both Kingdoms strengthened
and confirmed which we shall likewise on our part inviolably study to preferve,
and to witness ihat we are:

Your very affectionate friends and humble servants, London Canc.
Edinburgh, 7. Novem. 1648. Signed in the name, and by command of the Committee
of Estates.
A Message from the army,
Right Honorable,
THe Agents of the Army are drawing up the Representation of the respective
Regiments to present to his Excellency, wherein they Declare their unanimous
Resolutions for the putting of a final end and period to all differences
whatsoever now in dispute between his Majesty and the parliament, and that a
peace be suddenly concluded of, and his Majesty re-invested, provided that
assurance may be given for future safety and liberties, both to the Army and
Kingdom.

The Generals Declaration.
Mr. Speaker, The General Council of Officers at their late meeting here have
unanimously aagreed upon a Remonstrance, to be presented to you and in regard
it concerns matters of highest and present importance to your self, to Us and
the whole Kingdom; I do, at the desire of the Officers, and in the behalf of
them, and my self most earnestly entreat that it may have a present reading,
and the things propounded therein may be timely considered.

Your most humble servant, T. FAIRFAX.
St. Albans 21. November. 1648.
FINIS.

