A LETTER WRITTEN BY John Ashburnham Esquire, from Carisbrook Castle in the
Isle of Wight, November. 26. 1647. TO William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the
Honorable House OF COMMONS.

LONDON. Printed for Richard Royston. 1647.

A LETTER WRITTEN BY Mr. JOHN ASHBURNHAM Esquire. At Carisbrook Castle in the Isle
of VVight, November. 26. 1647. TO M. WILLIAM LENTHALL Esquire. Speaker to the
Honorable House of COMMONS.
SIR,
HAving heard what Colonel Whalley related to the Honorable House of Commons,
concerning the Kings giving (and withdrawing) of his Word, for his not leaving
the Army without their consent, has had doubtful interpretations, I have
thought it my duty to set down unto you plainly the matter of fact, to the end,
that all the world may see how free His Majesty is from having done any thing
against His promise, it being my particular duty so to do, because I was the
occasion that drew on His Majesty's engagement.

Soon after I came to wait on His Majesty at Wooborne, Colonel Whalley came to
me, as he said, by command from the Army, to desire that I would give my Word,
that His Majesty would not depart from them, without their consent: To which I
replied, that I was willing to give my Word accordingly, until I should
retract the same. For at that time, and long after, the King was so civilly
used by the Army, that I was confident the King would not disavow me in it. In
which I found I was not deceived; For as soon as I had acquainted His Majesty
therewith, He was pleased immediately to send for Colonel Whalley, and having
enquired of him, what passed between him and me, His Majesty said to the
Colonel, that He did willingly confirm the engagement which I had made. Of
which there was never more question, until many weeks after His Majesty came
to Hampton Court.

When the differences of the Army grew great, and an active and powerful Party
thereof daily menacing violence to His Majesty's person, His Majesty commanded
me to retract the Engagement, which I had formerly given, alleging that
Colonel Whalley affirmed to him, that the Officers of the Army had so little
power to preserve Him, as that they were scarce able to keep themselves from
affronts.

Whereupon, having found Colonel Whalley walking by the River side near
Hampton Court, I told him, That I came to withdraw that Word, which I had given
him, for His Majesty's not leaving the Army, without their consent.

The Colonel said, Why then the King does so too: and I told him, you are to
understand it so. He added it was very fairly done, and he would take notice of
it accordingly.

And lastly, asking the reasons why I did this; I replied, I found there was
now no other language spoken in Court, but Scotch; and that there was a Party
in the Army that began to run to all extremities. That though I was confident,
His Majesty would never stir from them willingly; yet He might be forced away,
and I was not willing to hazard my Honor, nor my Life, neither for Scot, nor
Adjutator.

And to show you that Colonel Whalley rightly apprehended what I meant, he soon
after went to the Headquarter, where he declared unto them, (as I am credibly
informed) That the King and my self, had withdrawn our Words, and therefore
desired that stricter Guards might be put about His Majesty, which was done
accordingly.

And further to show you, That the Colonel himself, made no question that the
King had retracted His Word, it will clearly appear by this, as His Majesty was
pleased to assure me: When His Majesty's Children came to Hampton Court, the
strict Guards which were newly set about His Majesty's person, behaved
themselves so rudely, that they much troubled the Princess. Of which she
complaining to the King, He called Colonel Whalley unto Him, and bade him take
order, that his Guards should no more perturb His Childrens rest. Whereupon, he
smilingly answered, That if His Majesty would re-ingage Himself, He should have
no more Guards than formerly. But His Majesty told him, that He would not,
until the Army gave Him good reason so to do: For He held it a point of
Honor, not to be engaged to those, who had used Him so harshly, as they had
done of late.

And therefore the King said, He did not speak to him to remove the Guards, but
only that His Children might take their rest, when they came to see Him.

Whereupon, Colonel Whalley promised that he would give strict commands
accordingly.

Colonel Whalley likewise spoke to Master Leg of His Majesty's Bedchamber,
saying, That the King found fault with the disturbance which the Guards gave;
and that if the King would re-ingage himself, the Guards should be taken off.

To which Master Leg replied nothing at that time; but after told him, That he
would be an humble suitor to His Majesty to re-ingage Himself, so that he could
procure from the Army, the re-admittance of all His Majesty's Attendance lately
forbidden the Court, and that there might be no more Guards upon Him than
formerly.

Which the Colonel declined, saying, That it was necessary that those Guards
should remain, for the security of His Majesty's person. Which passage I have
received from Master Leg.

Besides these I could give more instances, as Colonel Whalley's desiring His
Majesty to forbear riding abroad, immediately upon the withdrawing of His
Word, etc. But I hope these may serve, to show the clearness of His Majesty's
dis-ingagement. And truly had I not been fully satisfied that His Majesty was
free from that engagement, such is my tenderness of His Majesty's honor, that
I should not very willingly (though at all times ready, according to my duty,
to use my best endeavors for the preservation of His Majesty's life) have
waited on him at this time.

Sir, I hope this will find no less credit with you, and all men, then there
is truth in this Relation, which is offered to you by

Sir, Your humble servant JOHN ASHBURNHAM.

FINIS.

