THE ARTICLES OF THE RENDITION OF ELIZABETH-CASTLE in the I Will of JERSEY; And
the total reducement of that Island to the obedience of the Parliament of
ENGLAND.

The several Summons, Answers, and Replies passed between Col. Heane Commander
in chief for the Parliament, and the late Governor, Sir George Carteret.

With the particulars of an extraordinary quantity of Ordnance, Arms,
Ammunition, provision of Victual, and other rich stores found at the surrender.

LONDON, Printed by Edw. Griffin in the Old Bailey. 1651.

Worthy Sir,
I Have here enclosed sent you the summons, with the several Answers and
Replies between Coll. Heane, and Sir George Carteret, as also the Articles upon
which Elizabeth Castle was surrendered the 15 instant, with an inventory of what
Ordnance, Arms, Ammunitions and furniture of war, and the several stores we
found in it after the delivery: there were in it of French, Germans, Danes,
Switzers, Scots, Dutch, Irish, English, and Islanders 340, and as proper men as
ever my eyes beheld; they marched not forth in the Island according to the
Articles, but went by boat out of the Castle, aboard the Vessel provided for
them, and the 16 instant set sail for St. Mallo in France, and carried with
them between twenty and thirty horse; they left us under the Castle 7 or 8
vessels, most of which are not serviceable, and truly without vanity it may be
said, it is the strongest place in the Parliaments possession, its situation
being at such a distance from the main land; and a firm rock, that all the
engines possibly to be invented cannot hurt it, the late Govervour thereof
after the Articles were concluded confessed, that this Master ( as he called him,
meaning Charles Stuart) sent him word from France, that he was not in a
condition to relieve him; and therefore wished him to make as honorable terms
for himself, as he could.

We have Intelligence by Passengers from France, that the Hunter Friggot of 22.
Guns, the biggest that Carteret had formerly belonging to this Island is gone
for England with an intention to submit to the Parliament; and to that purpose
the Seamen put their Captain (one Lendall) a shore in France. If French Wine
might be Landed in England, I could send from hence both White, and Clarret, if
an Order could be procured, 40, 50 or 100 Tuns.

Hillaries in the Isle of Iersey the 18. December. 1651.
SIr, Although I have hitherto received no encouragement from you either by
Message or writing, yet my conscience incites me as a Christian, and Soldier
to invite you again, and offer you an opportunity to show you obedience to the
Parl. of the Common wealth of England, by delivering up Elizabeth Castle to me
for their use, I also offer you my endeavors to reconcile you to the English
nation, whose affection formerly your self and your Ancestors have enjoyed. I
bless the Lord the Parliament have nothing to do but to reduce this Castle,
and that of Garnsey: therefore you cannot think I am necessitated to Court you.
Sir your punctillo of Honor will not balance the loss of one of your
Soldiers; and the late sad experience of the death of some poor Soldiers of
yours has been sufficient to let you know that it might have bin prevented,
and another Granado may have the like Commission, from the most high, to whose
Council I refer you, desiring your answer, and remain,

Sir, Your humble servant, Ja. Heane.
St. Hillery, October. 3.
For Sir Geo. Carterett, Governor of Elizabeth castle, these.
SIr, I have received your Letter by your trumpet, an answer whereunto I will
send you back by my own, wishing that you will take care that hereafter when
any Message shall be sent from either party to the other none of yours approach
our works, such advantage being unhandsome and against the descipline of War.

Your humble servant, Geo. Carteret.
Elizabeth castle, 3 Dec. 1651.
For Col. Heane, Commander in chief of the English forces in Jersey, these.
SIr, Although the Consideration of any Damage we are like to receive by your
Granado's, or advantage which you may imagine to have hitherto gained upon us,
be too weak an argument to incline me to harbor your desire, yet I conceive
it not amiss to hear what you have to propose unto me, to which end I leave
it to your choice to send unto me some fit persons sufficiently empowered by you
with whom I may Confer, or to let me send others to you, for the like number of
Hostages to be sent hither, and remain here while they shall be with you, of
this and of the time I expect your answer.

Your humble servant, Geo. Carteret.
Elizabeth castle, 5 December.
SIr, You were pleased by your last to mention Advantages taken by me upon
sending my Drum or Trumpet, which makes me take notice of sending to the Beale
which lies as well within my Command as yours; at the same time you sent forth
your Drum to me; I have considered the particulars in your Letter, and shall
appoint Major Ashby, Captain Yardley, and Lievt. Pigeon Lieut. of horse,
empowered to treat with you for the surrender of Elizabeth Castle, so as you
send me Sir Philip Carteret, Mr. Hampton senior, and Captain Pawlet; whom I
expect to morrow at the opening of the Bridge, and do engage my honor for
their safe protection, and the immediate dispatch of my Commissioners to you;
and so I remain,

Your humble servant Ja. Heane.
St Hillary 5 December. 1651.
SIr, I accept of the three Gentlemen whom you have proposed to come hither to
treat with me, and albeit the Hostages you demand, be of differing quality from
you, yet I am unwilling to raise any scruple in that particular; only I desire
that when I send them to you, they may be met half way by those you send
hither, with whom I desire you will send three horse men and a Trumpet to
receive mine, for the like number I intend to send to bring yours to me; and
that to be upon the return of my Trumpeter if you approve of it; and as you
have engaged your honor to me, for the safe return of the Hostages whom I
shall send to you, I likewise engage you mine for those you shall dispatch to
me,

Your humble servant Geo. Carteret.
Elizabeth castle this 6 December. 1651.
SIr, I have sent you three Gentlemen mentioned in my last, with such
Propositions as I have at present thought of, giving them liberty until Monday,
in the mean time I resolve the acts of hostility shall cease on my part, so as
you do the like, and forbear lading or sending any Vessel from the Castle
during the Treaty; leaving you and my Commissioners to the counsel of the
Almighty, and remain,

Sir Your humble servant Ja. Heane.
St. Hillery 6 December. 1651.
SIr, One of my Commissioners coming out from you, informs me that you take
exception, partly at their Articles, partly at their Power, although power to
conclude was more then you desired: yet I gave them power to treat and conclude
was more then you desired: yet I gave them power to treat and conclude,
according to those particular instructions I had at that time given them, but
if what I have offered be so little worth, I resolve to give them further to
comply with your desires, so far as I may maintain the honor of the State that
sent me, and keep my reputation as a soldier spotless; only I desire to know
the end of your demands, that so I may enable them to conclude in half an hour,
otherwise I desire you to send back my Commissioners, and I shall send back
your Gentlemen, that as here resting your debtor for your civilities, and
remain,

Your humble servant Ja. Heane.
St. Hillery 8 December. 1651
SIr, I have have received your letter by Major Ashby, it shall not be my fault
if we do not agree, and make a good conclusion with your Commissioners, and
they may take what time they please, to stay or return to you; in the mean time
I send back Capt. Paulet to remain with you.

Your humble servant Geo. Carteret.
Castle Elizabeth 8 December. 1651.
Articles of Agreement for the Rendition of Elizabeth Castle, Indented, made,
and conclude, between Col. James Heane Commander in chief of all the Forces
in the Isle of Iersey, on the behalf of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England of the one party, and Sir George Carteret Knight and Barronet Governor
of the said Castle Elizabeth of the other party, 12. December, 1651.
1. THat Sir George Carteret shall be indempnified for all Acts done during the
time of the late War until this day, and shall peaceably and quietly enjoy all
his Goods, Chattels, Leases, Houses, and grants which were lawfully his own,
when the Parliament Forces entered this Island, and shall have liberty to
dispose of the said Estate, and every part thereof to his best advantage,
without paying Composition for the same; dna to live and abide if he please in
the Parliament Dominions, without siad Sir George Carteret shall have liberty to
go into France, and return without molestation; and that he shall have and
enjoy for ever the grant of the manor of Melecher bearing date at Westminster
the eighth year of the late King which was made unto him for, and in
consideration of his good service against the Turks, composition free, all
other Lands, Rents, and Revenues formerly belonging to the said King excepted
in this, and al other Articles; and that he shall have one of the Vessels now
under the Castle, which he shall please to choose, with all that belongs to it
for his proper use.

2. That all those who are at present in the Castle called Elizabeth, shall
enjoy all their goods and personal estates within the Parliaments quarters as
they now are, and be indempnified in their persons and estates for all acts
done, during the late war until this present day, and shall have liberty, and
nine months time to perfect their composition, which is not to exceed two
years value of their Lands, according to the qualification made by Ordinance
of Parliament, and shall be made in the Island by such as the Parliament shall
appoint for those of the Island, and in England for the English and others, and
that no oath shall be demanded of them, they acting nothing to the prejudice of
the Parliament upon pain of forfeiture of their Estates, and those that have
no Estates of such bonds for security, as shall be reasonably demanded of them,
if they stay longer in the Parliaments quarters; and that no action, Suite, or
Arrest shall be Commenc't, brought or executed against the said Sir George
Carteret, or any of the persons aforesaid, for any debt, or pretense
whatsoever, until the exspiration of nine months ensuing the date hereof,
provided by this Article, that it shall be left to the pleasure of the
Parliament, whether Sir Philip Carteret shall compound or not for the Island of
Sarke.

3. That no rent paid heretofore by virtue of the Authority then in being
within this Isle be redemanded, or any person questioned for payment, or
receiving the same.

4. That such as shall desire to live beyond the Seas, shall have the same
benefit of their Estates as if they were present, and that such as shall desire
to sell them, shall have permission to do it with their best convenience and
advantage, and shall have effectual Passes granted them, as occasion shall
require for transporting of themselves, their monyes and goods to what place
they please, they first compounding as aforesaid.

5. That Mistress Mo^tire and her children, and the late wife and children of
Mr. Thomas Seal deceased, shall have liberty and Passes to come home and enjoy
their estates in this Isle free from composition; and that John Brown servant
to Sir George Carteret, shall enjoy his Estate in the said Isle without
composition, it not exceeding eight pounds per annum.

6. That if Sir George Carteret, or any other person now within the said
Castle, shall desire to repair to Virginia, or any other Plantation in America,
or to send others thither, shall have Passes for themselves and their servants
and goods to go thither unmolested and live there quietly, they acting nothing
against the Parliament and Commonwealth of England.

7. That Sir George Carteret, and all Officers by Sea and Land, as well
Commissionated as reformed, and Soldiers, Gentlmen, and al others residing
within the said Castle, shall march forth with their Horses and Arms of al
sorts to some convenient place within the Island, with Colors flying, Drums
beating, Matches lighted at both ends, Bal in mouth, and there deliver them up
to such person as Col. Heane shall appoint, excepting and reserving to al
private Soldiers their Swords, and Captains and Commissionate Officers, and
Gentlemen their Horses, Swords, Back, breasts and Pistols; and all persons
whatsoever before mentioned, shall enjoy their wearing Apparel of al sorts with all their pay, evidences, and Books of accounts without being subject to
plunder, or search for those things they shall carry about them by any person
whatsoever, and that al sick and wounded persons that shall be left in the said
Castle at the time of surrender shall have due care taken for their recovery.

8. That al prisoners on both sides having relation to this Island be forthwith
set at liberty, and have Passes given them to travel for their several homes.

9. That al such in the said Castle as shall desire to be transported for France
or England, shall have Vessels provided by Col. Heane at the Parliaments charge
for that purpose, and provision allowed them during their passage.

10. That if any Officer, Soldier, or other person comprehended in these
Arcicles shall violate the same, or any branch thereof, it shall extend only to
the person so offending, and not be charged on any other of his party.

11. That an Order of Parliament shall with convenient speed be procured by Col.
Heane for ratification of these Articles.

12. That Sir George Carteret shall deliver up, or cause to be delivered to
Col. James Heane, or to such persons as he shall appoint for the use of the
Parliament, and Common wealth of England, the aforesaid Castle called
Elizabeth, with all the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, and Utensils of War,
stores, and provisions of all sorts, and all goods and things whatsoever now
within the same, with the Writings, Records, etc. belonging to the Jurisdiction
of this Isle, also all the Vessels, Shallops, Boats, etc. with their
Appurtenances now under the said Castle, without spoil or imbezlement, upon
Monday at 12. of the Clock at noone, being the 15. of this instant December,
wind and weather, providing to go to Saint Mallo, excepting his Household
Goods, Moneys, and Plate particularly and properly belonging to him, whereof an
Inventory shall be taken, and in the mean time all things to remain as they
now are without any further Communication on either side, unless by consent of
both parties.

An Inventory of all the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, and stores of Provision
in Elizabeth Castle, at the time of the surrender of the same.
Ordinance of Brass 17.

1. Demi Cannon, 6. Whole Culverin, 2. Culverin Cuts, 1. Sakor, 1. Minion, 3.
Faulcon, 2. Faulconets, 1. Stock Foul.

Ordnance of Iron, 36.

1. Demi Canon Cut, 1. Demi Canon Drake, 6. whole Culverin, 1. Culverin Cut, 3.
Culverin Drakes, 11. Demi Culverin, 6. Sakor, 2. Sakor Cuts, 2. Faulcon Cuts,
3. Faulconets.

Inall 53. Pieces.

Muskets 450. Sword 40. Bandaleers, 100. Colors. Rests for Muskets 30 Powder
64. Barrels. Match 5000. Great Shot 1000. Musket Shot 100 l. weight, Lead 4.
Tun, Iron 2. Tun, 1 Gun with complete furniture.

Provisions of Victuals.

Biscuit 60. Hogsheads. Wheat 6. Quarters. Barley 4. Quarters. Malt 20.
Quarters. Pease 36. Bushels. Porke 50. Sides. Poor John 60000 French Barley 3.
Hogsheads. Spanish Wine 4. Pipes. French Wine 10. Hogsheads. Beer 4. Tuns.
Salt 60. Quarters. Po^dered Beef 8. Hogsheads. 2. Fat Oxen. 2. Fat Hoggs
living.

FINIS.

