ARTICLES FOR THE Surrender of Colchester AND All the Ordnance, Arms and
Ammunition.

With a Letter of Submission from the Earl of Norwich, the Lord Capell, etc.
to his Excellency the Lord Fairfax.

ALSO The taking of the whole Party of the Scottish Horse which fled with Duke
Hamilton to Utcester in Staffordshire, by the Lord Gray and Major General
Lambert, with the particulars thereof, viz.

TAKEN
Duke Hamilton. 17. Lords. 7. Colonells. 3. Lievtenant-Colonells. 20. Captains.
100. other Officers. 20. Colors. 3500. Prisoners. 3500. Horse. 6. Wagons of
the Dukes laden with treasure, with his George, rich Skarfe, and good store of
other Booty.
Printed for R. A. 1648. Aug ye 27th

The Earl of Norwich, Lord Capell, and Sir Charles Lucas their letter of
Submission to his Excellency the Lord Fairfax.
My Lord,
HAving hitherto acted the duty of Soldiers and Gentlemen, we must acknowledge
the truth of what is intimated by your Lordship, that there is a great
alteration between our conditions and yours since the first overture of a
treaty, wherefore according to your Lordships admission, we have sent Sir
WILLIAM COMPTON, Sir ABRAHAM SHIPMAN, Colonel HAMOND, Colonel TUKE, and
Colonel AYLOFF, to treat and conclude upon the circumstances necessary for the
clearing, and orderly performance of that which your Lordship by your last has
offered, we bei^^ resolved to commit our selves your Lordships prisoners,

Colchester Aug. 27. 1648. Your servants, Norwich. Arthur Capell. Charles Lucas.

According to your Lordships desire, we have sent you the Committee.



For the Lord FAIRFAX.
A letter, with the Articles for the surrender of the town of Colchester to his
Excellency the Lord Fairfax on the 28. of August 1648.
Sir,
ALthough the Earl of Norwich, the Lord Capell, Sir Charles Lucas and the rest
of the Officers in Colchester at the concluding so long a Siege, had the height
of spirit to demand very high conditions on Friday and Saturday, yet as
breathing their last in this their desperate condition, they now condescend to
lower terms then was once offered them, for when our Army came first against
the town the Lord-General tendered conditions not only very good to the private
soldiers, but that all Officers under the degree of a Captain, should have
liberty to march away; but since they have showed so much obstinacy such
conditions were refused to be given them, they have now submitted to sorrender
the said town with all the Forts, Ordnance, etc. to his Excellency the L. Genesis
Fairfax, and such as he shall appoint upon cerraine Articles: the heads of
which do here follow.

Jmprimis, That the E. of Norwich, the L. Goring, the L. Capell, the Lord
Loughborough, Sir Charles Lucas, Colonel Lunsford, and the rest of the
Commanders and Officers in the said town of Colchester above the degree of a
Corporal shall on Monday at 4. of the clock in the afternoon being the 28. of
this instant August, become prisoners of war at mercy to his Excellency the
Lord Fairfax. 2. That all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition in the said Town
shall be delivered up to such as his Excellency shall appoint to receive the
same at the time aforesaid, except such single Arms as the private soldiers
march a mile out of town with, where they are to lay down their Arms and
receive passes to go to their homes, with an engagement to submit to Ordinances
of Parliament. 3. That the Committee Men and such Officers and Soldiers as
they had in the Town of the Parliaments party should be set at liberty without
any further prejudice to their persons. 4. That the Jnhabitants of the town
should be freed from plunder and violence. 5. That Hostages be delivered for
the performance of the Articles, and the Lord Fairfax his men are to march into
the Town as the others march out.
In the town are above tweenty pieces of Ordnance, five thousand arms, and
ammunition; thus blessed be God, you see how it has pleased GodJto disperse
those many clouds of danger which hung over the heads of the Parliament, and
whole Kingdom; for what day has passed for six or seven days together, that
has not produced intelligence of some extraordinary success? as to instance
some of them, first, the regaining of Tinmouth Castle after the Governor had
revolted. Secondly, the routing of the Prince his forces landed near Deal by
Col. Rich. Thirdly, the taking of Sir Henry Lingen, and dissipating all his
strength which would ere this have swelled into a great body, if they had not
been dispersed in the nick of time. Fourthly, that most eminent and remarkable
victory obtained by Lievt. Genesis Cromwell. Fifthly, the taking of this town of
Colchester, whose standing out thus long was the glory (or rather matter of
boast) of the malignant party. Lastly, the taking of Duke Hamilton and 3000.
and 500. horse and arms by Major-Gen. Lambert, and the L. Gray, the particulars
whereof are further set down in this ensuing Letter,

From the Leaguer, Aug. 28. 1648.
SIR,
I Can now give you a full account of the utter overthrow of that part of the
Scots Army which fled Southwards, with Duke Hamilton, which were at their
marching over Chester above four thousand, and beside what the County had
gleaned of them in their march to Utcester, they were not less then 3500.
which being surrounded by the County on Thursday last, came up the Lord Gray of
Groby and Major General Lambert, they beset the town, the Duke sued for
conditions (having put himself into the protection of the Mayor of the said
town of Utcester) but his condition suited not to granting of his desires; So
the Lord Gray with his Leicestershire horse, and Major General Lambert with
the forces he brought with him out of the North (all well mounted and as
resolved as any,) fell in upon the Scots at both ends of the town, and at
their first approach gave fire at some distance, which the Scots answered not
but by submission, yiedling themselves prisoners, Colonel Wait a Member of the
House of Commons had the honor to take the Duke himself prisoner, and had his
sword and skarfe; The Lord of Traquaire and his Son, as also Sir Marmaduke
Langdale and eight other Commanders were formerly taken, and we hear that 17.
of the Scots Lords are taken since they were routed. And at this time (besides
the Duke) was taken 7. Colonells diverse Lords, about 3. Lieutenant Colonells,
20. Captains 100. other Officers about 20. Colors 3500. horse and as many
prisoners, their horse were exceedingly tired, and the riders (for the most
part very poor fellows) having little money or clothes except what they got
since they came into England, neither had their Commanders much money about
them, or in their portmantles: six of the Dukes Wagons, in which was thought
to be their only treasure were taken by the County before they came to
Utcester; The Duke is in the custody of the Lord Gray, the Colonells, other
Officers and private Soldiers carried some to Leicester, some to Nottingham,
and other places for safety. 300. of them are brought to this town.

Stafford 26. August 1648.

