The Attestation OF THE MINISTERS Of the County of NORFOLK, and City of
Norwich. In Vindication of the Ancient Truths of Jesus Christ, and prosecution
of the Solemn COVENANT: AGAINST The spreading Errors, and prodigious
Blasphemies that are scattered abroad in these licentious Days.

As it was Represented to the Ministers of the Province of LONDON, June 9. 1648.

Concurring with them in their public Testimony.

LONDON, Printed by R. Cotes for Michael Spark, at the sign of the Bible in
Gre^^A^^^^, 1648.

THE Attestation of the Ministers OF THE County of Norfolk, and City of
Norwich: In Vindication of the Ancient Truths of JESUS CHRIST.
Reverend and much esteemed Brethren in the Lord,
WE your Brethren and Fellow Laborers in the work of the Lord, within the
County of Norfolk, and County and City of Norwich, having gladly perused your
late exemplary and gracious Testimony to the saving Truths of Jesus Christ, and
to our Solemn League and Covenant, as also against the Errors, Heresies, and
Blasphemies, which have spread in these unhappy times, through the too great
connivence at them, cannot but from the ground of our hearts, thankfully render
eternal praises to the God of all Grace and Truth, for his grace made manifest
to you, and his truth attested by your in moving your Spirits so seasonably to
own and bear witness to those Divine and Fundamental Truths, which many
through ignorance or wilful blindness, have endeavored to trample under
foot, to the great dishonor of God, and to the eclipsing of the glorious light
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: To this so faithful Testimony of yours, should
we not cheerfully and unanimously subscribe our hands; and seal it with our
bloods (if the Lord should call us thereunto) we could not but judge our
selves unworthy of, and unfaithful in the high and holy callings of our
Ministry. We therefore witness to God, Angels, and Men, the constant desires
and longings of our souls, to be strengthened in the Lord, and in the power of
his might, to live and dye with you in the defense of the Truths of Jesus
Christ: Go on therefore (Reverend and beloved Brethren) being in nothing
terrified by the legions of the Churches-Enemies: still stand Sentinels for the
Church of the Lord Jesus Christ in this Kingdom, to give us the Alarm as the
adversaries shall farther appear, till the mouth of all wickedness be stopped,
and the tongues of those that speak perverse things, nothing doubting but that
we (though the weakest and most unworthy of the messengers of Jesus Christ)
are of the same spirit with you, and steadfast to our Solemn League and
Covenant, and to the ancient Truths of Jesus Christ. With which resolution
praying the God of Grace to double his Spirit of zeal upon you, and all that
stand up in the defense of his precious Truths, making you further
isntrumental in promoting the Lords work; We rest, subscribing our selves,

Your Fellow Laborers who are also ready through the strength of our God to be
Fellow Sufferers with you, Robert. RObert Peck Minister of the of Word God at
Hingham William Stinnet Minister of Gods word in John's of Maddermarket in
Norwich Rich. Johnson Minister of the word at Ketringham Ioh. Martin Minister
of the word at Edgefield Elias Crabtree Minister of the word at Dickle borough
John Carter Pastor of Peter's of Mancroft Norwich John Brinsley Ministers of the
word at great Yarmouth John Swain Ministers of the word at great Yarmouth
Isaac Rose Minister of the word at Hadskow Hugh More Pastor of Burston John
Boys Pastor of Tivesdale Richard More Minister of the word at Dis. Nath.
Iocelyn Minister of the word at Hardingham Rice Allison Minister of the word at
Cleyjuxta mare Ed. Brom Minister of the word at South-reps William Hall
Minister of the word at Hevingham Nic. Pit Minister of the Gospel at Bunwell
Tho. Sap Minister of the word at Larlingford Rob. Daliel Minister of the word
at Roughton cum Hanworth Tho. Iackson Minister of the word at Itteringhan John
Bond Pastor of Holt John Collings Minister of Gods word in Saviors Parish in
Norwich Tho. Henant Minister of the word at Smal-borough Thomas Theoderick
Minister of the word at Rockland-tasts Rich. Asteley Minister of Melton Will.
Lamb Minister of the word at Merston Edw. Dawney Minister of the word at
Salt-house Robert Watson Minister of the word at Baking stroppe John Harmer
Minister of Saxlingham Will. Young Minister of Kettlestone John Yates Rector
of Stifkey Sam. Smith Minister of the word at Sydesterue Rich. Wels Minister of
the Gospel at Fakenham. Tho. Tofs Minister of the word at Michaels of the Plea
in Norwich John Butler Minister at Oldton Edw. VVorseley Minister of the word
at Runton cum Beeston Regis Nath. Michel Minister of the word at Edenthorpe
John Smith Minister of Gods word at Aylmerton Rich. Breviter Minister at
VValcot.


FINIS.

