At the Committee of the Militia of London the 3d. of June, 1648.
Ordered, That Major General Skippon be desired to give Orders to Colonel
Manwaring and Colonel Webb, and the rest of the Gentlemen, to the effect, as
is in the following Writing. London, have (upon a motion made to them from
diverse persons Inhabitants in this City) given full power and authority to Me
to give Orders to all such as shall voluntarily Mount and Arm themselves or
Friends, as a guard to my person, to assist in the suppressing of Tumults and
disorders for the safety of Parliament and City: I do hereby appoint the new
Artillery-Ground to be their place of General Randezvouz in case of Alarm,
unless some other place be hereafter expressly appointed; where they shall
receive such further Order as the necessities and urgency of their foresaid
employment shall require.

Philip Skippon.

At the Committee of the Militia the Tenth of June, 1648.
ORDERED, Skippon be Captain of the Volunteer-Horse who willingly offer and
List themselves under his Command for the safety of Parliament and City, and
for the present, till such time as this Committee shall see cause to recall
this Order.

And the said Major-Generall Skippon is hereby desired and ordered to acquaint
this Committee with the numbers of them, as they shall increase to the number
of Two hundred; and not exceed that number, but by the approbation of this
Committee.

And this Committee does further Order and Declare, That this voluntary action
of any that find Horse in this manner, shall not be made use of as a motive or
occasion to the compelling any of them to find Horse hereafter.

Signed in the Name and by the warrant of the Committee of the Militia London,
By Adam Banckes Clerk to the said Committee.

At the Committee of the Militia London, the Twentyeth of June. 1648.
WHereas this Committee have formerly granted, That two hundred Volunteers
might Arm and Mount themselves under the command of Major-Generall Skippon: The
same number is hereby confirmed and enlarged to the number of Three hundred
Horse as formerly.

Signed in the Name and by the warrant of the Committee of the Militia of
London: By Adam Banckes Clerk to the said Committee.

At the Committee of the Militia of London, the 2 of August, 1648.
THe Committee of the Militia London, for the better satisfying of their fellow
Citizens, and removing all jealousies in the City, have thought fit to publish
these several Orders above mentioned, for the inlisting and exercising of the
Volunteer Horse, under Colonel Manwaring and Colonel Webb, which have been
commanded by Major General Skippon, and the said Committee conceive, that
these Horse have done very good service for preventing and suppressing of
Tumults, and think fit to continue them till further Order.

Signed in the Name and by the warrant of the Committee of the Militia London,
By Adam Banckes Clerk to the said Committee.

Aug. 2 London Printed by Richard Cotes.


