A Brief Description OF THE Fifth Monarchy, OR KINGDOM, That shortly is to
come into the World.

The Monarch, Subjects, Officers, and Laws thereof, and the surpassing Glory,
Amplitude, Unity, and Peace of that Kingdom.

When the Kingdom and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the
whole Heaven shall be given to the people, the Saints of the Most high, whose
Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Sovereigns shall serve and obey
him.

And in the Conclusion there is added a Prognostic of the time when this fifth
Kingdom shall begin.

By WILLIAM ASPINWALL, N. E.

2 Pet. 3.13. Nevertheless, we according to his promise, look for New Heavens,
and a new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness.

Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12. Be wise therefore O ye Kings: be instructed ye Judges of
the Earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son
least he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a
little.

Psalm. 76.12. For, he will cut off the Spirit of Princes; he is terrible to the
Kings of the Earth.

Job 12.21. He pours contempt upon Princes: he is terrible to the Kings of
the Earth.

LONDON: Printed by M. Simmons, and are to be sold by Livewell Chapman at the
Crown in Popes head-Alley. 1653.

A Brief Description of the Fifth Monarchy.
IN handling this Subject I shall observe this method. 1 I shall show that
there is such a thing to be expected in the world, as a fifth Monarchy. 2 Who
shall be the Monarch, or absolute Sovereign thereof. 3 Who are the Subjects
and Offices of this Kingdom. 4 Who is the Lawgiver, and what are the Laws of
this Kingdom. 5 And lastly, The necessity and benefit of this Kingdom, and
all this briefly from Scripture Light.

1 Therefore, that there is such a thing as a fifth Monarchy to be expected in
the world, is evident from Daniels vision, Dan. 7. where he saw four Beasts,
interpreted to be four Kings or Kingdoms, v. 17.23. or four sorts of Monarchy,
and all of them arising out of the earth, or modelled and molded by humane
prudence. The last of which Beasts or Monarchies, is differenced from the other
three former Monarchies, by the extent of it, and by a distribution of the ten
horns, or Kings that shall arise out of this Monarchy, v. 23, 24. And the last
of those horns or Kings, is differenced from the rest of the horns, by the
extent of his sovereignty over 3 Kingdoms, v. 8.24. and by his fierce and
arrogant persecution of the Saints, v. 25. and by a determinate extirpation of
his Kingdom and Sovereignty, and the reason thereof, v. 9, 10, 11, 26. All
which was fulfilled in Charles, late King, or absolute sovereign of 3 Kingdoms,
a fierce and arrogant Tyrant and persecuter of the Saints, whose dominion
continued till the judgment was set, to wit the Parliament, and High Court of
Justice, who slew the Beast, and utterly overthrew his dominion, by an Act made
against Kingly power. The Beast or chief Sovereign, was slain or beheaded, v.
11. and his Body, that is, all relics of royal power, which are as karkasses
of royalty, all of them first or last must be demolished and destroyed. This is
the doom of the little horn, or sovereign of 3 Kingdoms, and has been
fulfilled to a jot. And the karkasses of royalty have begun to be demolished,
and more and more will be till they be utterly destroyed. As touching the other 7
Kings, or horns under this fourth Monarchy, they have a little prolonging in
life granted after the death of Charles Stuart, and and the destruction of all
Images and karkasses of royalty, in those Nations. But the space will be short,
it will be but for a season and time, v. 12. and then will their lives go for
it, as well as Charles, and then these four Monarchies being destroyed, the
fifth Kingdom or Monarchy follows immediately, v. 27. The Kingdom, and
dominion, and greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given
to the people, the Saints of the most high, whose Kingdom is an everlasting
Kingdom. And this I call the fifth Monarchy, which in extent is more large then
the foregoing Monarchies, for all Nations shall serve and obey him, Dan. 2 35.
and Dan. 7.27. Psalm. 72.11. and 47.2. And for durance it shall continue as long
as the world lasts, it shall never be destroyed, Dan. 2.44. and 7.27. Luke
1.33. Ps. 72.8. Mic. 4.7. Zech. 9.10. Act. 1.7. Isa. 9.7. So that it is
certain that such a Monarchy or Kingdom shall be in the world.

If it be Objected, That the Kingdom spoken in the foregoing Scriptures, is
only a spiritual Kingdom or Government exercised in the Church, which in
Scripture Language is also called the Kingdom of God, or of Christ, or of
Heaven.

I answer, That Christ does indeed exercise his Kingly power in his Church, and
the discipline thereof, but not only there. He also puts forth acts of Kingly
power, as acts of judgment and justice, in relation to Civil Government, and of
that Esaias speaks expressly, Isa. 9.7. Yea this new Monarchy or stone cut out of
the Mountain without hands, shall crush and break in pieces all the other four
Monarchies, Dan. 2.34.45. which is inconsistent with Church Power. Moreover,
David shows that this Dominion is universal, Psa: 72.8, where the word used for
Dominion, cannot rightly be applied to Church Power, neither can the obeisance
and worship yielded to this Dominion, Ps. 72.9.11. nor the prorection of the
subjects of this Kingdom from force and violence, v. 12, 13, 14. nor the
tribute and presents rendered thereunto by several Nations, well suit with
Church Power, but manifestly argue a Dominion in reference to Civil power. If
it be yet said that all these expressions are Metaphorical, I deny it, nor can
it be safe for us to coin metaphors of Scripture, where no necessity does
require it. Had it been the purpose of the holy Ghost to hold forth Christ's
spiritual Government in the Churches, he could have expressed himself in proper
phrases and words. Wherefore I conclude, that it is safest for us to take the
plain meaning of the words, unless the holy Ghost had elsewhere declared
himself to the contrary. And let this suffice to show that such a thing shall
be in the world as a fifth Monarchy, after the destruction and dissolution of
the four Beasts, or Monarchies.

2 Touching the Monarch or Sovereign King of this Kingdom, I affirm that
Jesus Christ shall be the Monarch, or absolute King and Sovereign, according
as it is writtten, Revel. 11 15. The Kingdoms of this world are become [the
Kingdomes] of the Lord and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and
ever. Isa. 9.6. Unto us a Child is borne, unto us a Son is given, and the
Government shall be on his shoulder, and his name shall be called Wonderful,
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. Of
the increase of his Government and Peace [there shall be] no end, upon the
Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom to order it, and to stablish it with
judgment and justice from henceforth and for ever: The zeal of the Lord of
hosts will perform this. And Daniel speaking of the same time, and the same
Kingdom or absolute sovereignty, says, I saw in the night, visions, and behold
with the clouds of Heaven, as it were the Son of man was coming, and he came to
the ancient of days, and he brought him near before him; and to him was given
absolute sovereignty, and glory, and a Kingdom, and all people, Nations and
languages shall serve him; his absolute sovereignty is an everlasting
sovereignty that passes not away, and his Kingdom that which shall not be
destroyed, Dan. 7.13, 14. And the Angel which was sent to Mary the Virgin, said
to her, Behold thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and
shall call his name Jesus, he shall be great, and shall be called the Son of
the highest, and the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of his father
David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his
Kingdom there shall be no end, Luke 1.31, 32, 29. Zachary also prophesying of
the same time, and same Monarchy, says, Jehovah shall be King over all the
earth; in that day shall there be one Jehovah, and his name one, Zec. 14.9. And
he means that Christ alone shall then be universal sovereign, and no name or
authority acknowledged or exercised, but his alone. And Paul prophesying of
this very Monarchy, charge Timothy with a most solemn charge, That he observe
his command [in that Book] spotless, and unrebukable, until the appearing of
our Lord Jesus Christ, which in his time he shall show, who is the blessed and
only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6.13, 14, 15. And
thus is Christ described when he makes war, and does righteously judge that
mother of harlots (which is the very stump of the fourth Monarchy) He is Lord
of Lords, and King of Kings, and on his vesture, and on his thigh, has this
name written, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 17.14. and 19.11.16. He
must reign, till he has put all his enemies under his feet, 1 Cor. 15.25.27.
No things or persons shall be exempted from his sovereignty, his Father only
excepted, By all which it is evident, that Christ Jesus shall be the absolute
sovereign in this Kingdom, and that not only in relation to Church Power, but
also in reference to Civil and Military power. Not that I am of their
judgment, who say, That Christ shall reign personally upon earth 1000 years,
but his Saints shall be his Vicegerents during the time of this Monarchy,
according as it is written, Dan. 7.27. And the Kingdom, and absolute
sovereignty, and greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be
given to the people, to the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is an
everlasting Kingdom, and all soveraignties (or sovereigns) shall serve and
obey him.

Now the Saints who shall exercise and manage this supremacy of power, in the
first rise of this fifth Monarchy (as appears to me most probable) are such as
have been actors with Christ in warring against the whore, who are called,
chosen, and faithful, Rev. 17.14. I mean the Lambs Military Officers, with whom
he betrusteth the Militia, or supreme power of his Kingdom, Rev. 19.14. who
for many reasons may seem most meet to manage the supreme power, as the Judges
of old, and after them David a man of war did, until the Churches be settled
in Peace. The supreme authority I conceive will rather be placed in others, who
as the supreme Council of the State or Nation, are to manage the affairs of
State, and to study how they may enlarge the Kingdom of Christ, and demolish
the Kingdom of Antichrist, or the relics and remainders thereof. And to them
it will appertain to constitute faithful and choice men, fearing God, and
hating covetousnes, in every City, to execute justice and judgment according
to the Statutes and Laws of this only potentate and absolute sovereign. To
them also it apertains to displace and censure such as prove unfaithful. To
them also it belongs to call meet men unto all public places of trust, and to
call them to a due account thereof.

This I conceive to be the office and duty of the supreme Authority, or Council
of the State, and the supreme power is to encourage them, and strengthen their
hands in this work, until Melchizedeck become King of Salem, I mean till Christ
have settled his people in peace. Then shall they beat their swords into
ploughshears, and their spears into pruning hooks: Nation shall not lift up
sword against Nation, neither shall they learn war any more, Isa. 2.4. Mic.
4.3. And in that peaceable state will the Churches continue for a thousand
years, and the Saints shall reign with Christ, or for him, Rev. 20.4. After
which, Gog and Magog, the last public enemies of the Saints in this world,
shall engage against them, Rev. 20.7, 8. Ezekiel. 38. and 39. which adversaries
being destroyed, the Churches shall continue in peace and purity, until
Christ's coming to judgment, as appears by the parable of the ten virgins, Mat.
25. for that is a special Prophecy of those last times.

3. The next thing to be cleared is, who are the subjects and Officers of this
Kingdom or Monarchy? And that will appear from the words of David, Psa. 72.9,
10, 11. They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him, and his
enemies shall lick the dust. The Kings of Tarshish and of the Isles shall bring
presents: the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts: yea all Kings shall
bow down before him, all Nations shall serve him. And Psa. 110.2, 3. Jehovah
shall send the scepter of thy strength out of Zion: rule thou in the midst of
thine enemies. Thy people [shall be] willing in the day of thy power, in the
beauties of holiness, from the womb of the morning: thou have the dew of thy
youth. So you see all Nations shall be his subjects, and all people in all
Nations of what degree soever, shall yield obeisance to him, even the
Governors themselves. Yea his very enemies shall lick the dust, they shall be
subject too.

As for the Officers of this Kingdom, they are of two sorts; either they are
supreme, or subordinate. The supreme Officers are either Kings, Rulers, or
Governors, as the word (...) does also signify; or the supreme Council of
State, Psa. 72.10, 11. Isa. 1.26. The subordinate Officers are, either Judges,
Overseers, or Exactors, Isa. 1.26. and 60.17. These all of them that exercise
any place of Authority, power or trust, whether Civil or Military, within this
dominion, must be Saints, Dan. 7.27. Rev. 19.14.

The supreme Councillors and Judges under them, shall be holy men, thoroughly
purged, Isa. 1.25, 26. The words are very emphaticall, I will refine according
to purity, thy tyn; alluding to the manner of Refiners of metal, who melt
their metal upon the test until the tyn or allay be separated or wasted, and
the metal reduced to its finenes. Even so will God deal with his peoples
Judges and Councillors, and by consequence with all other inferior Officers,
until he has reduced them to the Primitive purity, and if yet any dross
should remain, he will put them on the test and refine them anew, till the work
be done. And how will God do this? Verily God has a fire in Zion, and his
furnace in Jerusalem, Isa 31.9. to wit, in his Churches, and there will he
test them, and refine them, and if any pride or hypocrisy hang about them, he
will either burn it or them, in his oven or furnace, Mal* 4. till at length he
awe the spirits of men, that either they shall not dare to join to the
fellowship of the Churches, or not dare to accept such Officers, unles they be
refined indeed. O that men in place of authority, power or trust, Civil or
Military, would seriously consider what and with whom they have to do in these
refining times!

Now all subordinate Officers, whether Judges, Clerks, etc. Collectors of
Customs, and Tributes, Treasurers, etc. are places of trust, and comprehended
under that name of Exactors, and unto these the wisdom of God saw it needful
to add Visitors, or Overseers, not only to have inspection into their actions,
but to control or restrain them, and if cause require, to acquaint the supreme
authority or Council, whose office it is to call them to account, and censure
them according to their merit, placing faithful men in their steads, and so
preserve the Civil Government sound and upright. These Overseers or Visitors
are as eyes, both to the Exactors, to inform them their duties, and to the
supreme Council, to inform them of miscarriages and corruptions, and therefore
ought to be men of singular wisdom, courage, faithfulness, and integrity. Which
office of inspection will be a wholesome preservative to the spirits of men.

Now that choice men may be designed unto this service, observe the rule which
Jehojadah (who at that time had the supreme authority and power in his hand, as
Guardian to the young King) took in appointing Visitors for the house of God, 2 Chronicles. 23.18. He did it by the hands of the chief Officers in the Church, or
upon their recommendation, and the Churches approbation. For, as was said
before, the Church is Gods furnace, and they have a test to try the spirits of
such as they recommend unto the supreme authority, unto whom it appertains to
call upon the Churches, and the Overseers thereof, to recommend faithful and
able men unto them for such employments, whether Exactors or Visitors. And
truly as these Visitors are to be put upon the test by the Church, so should
all other Officers be tried by the test, and thoroughly purged and refined from
their dross and tyn, and so recommended by the Churches. And till this be
done, til a Nation come up to this height, that all their supreme and
subordinate Officers be tested and tried, and refined from their tyn, and so
recommended by the Churches to such services, I say til then, they cannot be
deemed to be under the fifth Monarchy, but are still parts and members of the
fourth Monarchy, which must be broken in pieces every toe of it, and still
tested in the furnace, till the tyn be taken away, til then a Nation cannot be
called the City of righteousness, the faithful City, Isa. 1.26.

Oh! how should this awaken the spirits of all that are Israelites indeed, in
whose spirit is no guile, to strive with holy emulation, to com under this
form. And were this care taken amongst us in these Nations of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, to purge and test all Officers, supreme and subordinate,
civil, and military, so that none might be employed in any place of authority,
power, or trust, but Saints more pure then the gold of Ophir, how renouned
should we be amongst them that wait for the appearing of Jesus Christ, how
dreadful and terrible to carnal men, both in these and neighbor Nations? How
formidable in all expeditions by Sea and land? So that the very Kings of the
earth, and great men, and rich men, and chief Captains, and the mighty men, and
every bondman, and every free man [that is not thus refined] would hide them
selves in dens, and in the rocks of the Mountains, and say to the Mountains
and to the Rocks fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the
Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb; for the great day of his wrath is come,
and who shall be able to stand, Rev. 6.15, 16, 17.

Methinks if God were pleased to wind up the hearts of Rulers, Councellers,
and people unto this height, and open their hearts and ears to such a voice as
this from heaven, saying, Come up hither, Rev. 11.12. I should with much faith
and confidence, aver, that a tenth part of the City (which is spiritually
called Sodeme, and Egypt) was fallen already.

I know humane prudence, and carnal reason, will hardly digest such a
proposition as this of a through purgation (adjudging it more safe to do it by
degrees) until the beginning of this fifth Monarchy, or a little before. But
let none be deceived with such carnal reasonings. It would be wholesome and safe
for men in chief places of authority and power, to follow Paul's example in
another case, Consult not with flesh and blood (though sanctified) but if God
by some voice from heaven, I mean out of his Churches, say Come up hither, Rev.
11.12, 13. follow his call, and fear not enemies; though you see them, and they
see you ascend up to heaven, you shall be safe. Some commotion or earthquake
will ensue, but no detriment to you that obey the voice from heaven. The
detriment will be to the enemies themselves, the tenth part of the City shall fall
immediately, and some men of name amongst them shall be slain, and the rest shall
be affrighted, and give glory to the God of heaven. And what danger can be to
the Saints in all this, let all men judge, it will undoubtedly cause the name of
Christ, yea and their names also, that are fellow-workers with Christ, to be
magnified, from the rising of the sun, to the going down thereof.

4 In the fourth place I shall declare who is the Lawgiver, and what Laws the
Saints shall have for administration of judgment and justice in the time of this
fifth Monarchy. For as in earthly Monarchies, such as these beasts in Daniel
did prefigure, there is some person or persons that are acknowledged to have a
Legislative power, and some Statutes, Laws, or Edicts made by that power to
regulat their proceedings in civil Courts: so in this Monarchy there is a
proper subject of Legislative power, and certain Rules or Statute, to regulat
all Officers in their Administrations. And because these are of such a nature,
as ever hold proportion, and such as is the Lawgiver, such are the Laws or
Rules given by that power, I shall first and principally endeavor to show who
must be the Lawgiver, and only of right can challenge this Legislative power.

And let me crave leave without regreat or offense to any godly mind, to avouch
for an irrefragable truth, that in this fifth Monarchy Christ alone has this
Legislative power, and none but he. So says Isaiah, chapter 33.22. Jehovah is our
Legislator, or Lawgiver: to wit, that Jehovah which was to be born of the
virgin without the help of man, of whom Jacob prophesies, Genesis 49.10. that
before Shiloh (to wit, the Messiah) came from between his feet, there should no
Lawgiver come from between the feet of Judah; and yet many Kings and Princes
came from between Judahs feet, that is, were born and sprung out of his loins,
and yet none of them, nor all of them, had any Legislative power til Shiloh
came. I shall not need to spend time to prove Shiloh to be the promised Messiah,
being a truth generally received both of Jews and Christians. And til this time
God preserved that tribe or septer distinct. And Christ himself says. Mat.
28.18. All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth, if all power, then
Legislative power. This his right by donation from the father, as also is
judicial power, Job. 5.22.27. and none can challenge power to either without
delegation from Christ. Judicial power I find delegated unto Ministers of
Justice, Isa. 1.17. and 1 K. 6.12. Ezekiel. 45.9. but Legislative power Christ
has not any where delegated to any person or persons that I find since the
world began, but reserveth that as a peculiar Royalty to himself. And therefore
(...) or absolute sovereignty is given to him, Dan. 7.14. His will, word, or
command, is a law to the subject, this is absolute sovereignty, and such as
Christ will not allow to any of his subjects. He knows it were not safe nor
wholesome, because of the imperfection of men's wisdom, and inconstancy of their
judgments. But to be regulated by Christ, and to receive Laws from him, with
whom is no unrighteousnes or shadow of change, is the privilege, honor, and
safety of saints, for his will is certain, and it is always good. And this will be
the perfect state and model of Civil Governments under the fifth Monarchy,
Christ alone shall be Lawgiver, and if he be the Lawgiver alone, you may easily
conclude that he will own no other Laws but what himself has given, which
though they be few and brief, yet are they completely sufficient and perfect,
other wise it would reflect upon the wisdom of faithfulness of this only
Potentate, as Paul calls him, 1 Timothy 6.15. I shall not need to express
particularly the Laws, but leave it to every subject to make diligent search
for them where they lie scattered up and down in the holy Scriptures. And if
this will shortly be the glory and liberty, and safety of this fifth Monarchy,
let every godly mind equally poysed, that waits and prays for the coming of
this Kingdom, as our Savior teaches us, Mat. 6.10. let them judge whether it
would not be for our honor and safety to model and conform our civil state
according to this form and platform, we being cast upon the end of the fourth
Monarchy that is already begun to break, and will suddenly come to ruin.

But it will be said, That this and sundry other Nations have been accustomed to
have Parliaments, Dyets, etc. consisting of a number of select men, as a
Representative of the State, with Legislative power.

It Is true, de facto, such has bin the usage of this, and sundry other
Nations, during the fourth Monarchy, but de jure, let the Scripture judge.
Clear it is Christ had this Legislative power conferred on him by the Father,
Mat. 28.13. And who can assume this power out of Christ's hand, without
delegation from him, but it will be an incroachment upon his Royalty? If it be
said, they assume it not, but the people give it them. I demand what power have
the people so to do? or When did Christ betrust the people with power to make
Laws; otherwise they can have no such power to confer, and it is not
impossible for them to give more then is originally, and intrinsecally in
themselves. And this is all the trust which I find committed to Princes or
people, to execute judgment and justice, Jer. 22 3. Ezech. 45.9. 1 Kings 6.12.

What use then will there be in this fifth Monarchy of Parliaments, dyets, etc.
if Legislative power be denied them?

There will be great and necessary use of supreme Councels, as has been showed;
for 1 They ought carefully to provide that wise, godly, and faithful Judges and
Justices, be placed in all meet places of the Nation, to execute judgment and
justice, according to the judicials given by Christ. 2 They are to constitute
Exactors and Visitors, I mean all subordinate Officers in all places of power
and trust, and to see they be men thoroughly purged and refined. And for that
end it will be meet to send unto the several Churches (which are Gods refining
houses) to commend unto them, by the hands of their known Officers, men of
integrity, thoroughly tested, and fit for such and such employments. Not to
gratify friends and acquaintance, much less men that carry an outward
splendour in the world, and out of a corrupt and covetous principle seek to
crowd themselves into places of gain and profit. 3 They are to displace unfit
or unfaithful persons, for Cujus est instituere, ejus est destituere, and if
cause be, to censure and punish them. 4 They are to act in all matters of
Council, touching war and peace, and transactions with foreign States. All
which duly attended unto, will be work enough for the chief Councels of State. As
for the names of Parliaments and Dyets, etc. though there be no evil in the
names, yet I suppose they will be laid aside in the time of this fifth Monarchy,
when men begin more to affect the language of Canaan, then the imitation of
idolatrous Nations.

If we should only take the Judicials to be our rules for justice and
judgment, it would make the Government arbitrary; for the judicials are few
and short, and will not reach all cases, or at least, much will lie in the
breast of the Judges, who are to interpret and apply those general Rules to
particular cases, and that will be dangerous.

The Laws indeed are few and brief, and therefore require a spirit of wisdom,
and of the fear of the Lord, in such as are to execute justice and judgment,
according to those Laws and Rules: Men that are to be designed to such work,
should be such as walk close with God, and are well versed in Gods law, rather
then in humane Laws. 2. I answer, that though the Laws be few and brief, yet
they are perfect and sufficient, and so large, as the wisdom of God judged
needful for regulating Judgment in all Ages and Nations. For no action or case
does, or possibly can fall out in this or other Nations, by sea or land, but
the like did, or possibly might fall out in the land of Israel, Eccl. 1.9. and
yet they had no other Laws or Rules of Judgment, but what now remains to all
posterity. Nevertheless that people were counted even by the Nations to be the
only free and wire people in respect of their Statutes and Judicials, Deuteronomy.
4.5, 6, 7, 8. And truly had the wisdom of God judged it needful, he could have
compiled a larger systeme or body of Laws for direction of his people.
Wherefore from his silence we may safely conclude, that no more were needful:
And Paul does avouch that the Scripture is complete to furnish a Christian to
every good work, 2 Timothy 3.17.

And whereas the object. presumes it would leave the government arbitrary, if
the application of those general rules, be left to the Judges understanding
and application of the Rule: I answer, there is less cause of fear, that men
in whom the fear of God dwells (having a promise of assistance from God, 2 Chr.
19 11.) should mistake the perfect laws of God, then that Students at Law and
Judges should mistake the the imperfect Laws and dictates of men, which have
not the like promise of Divine assistance. But suppose a sincere-hearted man,
in some obscure and difficult cases should mis-apply the rule of Judgment; or
which is worse, suppose the Judge through corruption pervert judgment, either of
which may possibly fall out, yet that will not argue the government arbitrary.
For who knows not that Judges can mistake, and through corruption pervert the
laws of men, and yet the government is not counted arbitrary, because it has
bounds and limits, even so is it in the other case. Besides, the danger
pretended is far less if we be regulated by Gods book of Statutes, then if we
follow our own. For if the Judge be corrupt, he is punishable; and if he
mistake, it is but the Judges personal failing, and that of ignorance, and
such sins God does not charge upon the Nation. But if the Nation, or the
Representative of a Nation, make Laws dissonant to Gods Law, or make
mis-interpretations of Gods Law, and enact the same for Laws, it will turn to
sin to the Nation, and Christ will visit it as an incroachment upon his
royalty, 2 K. 16.7, 8. Ezekiel. 43.7, 8. Christ counts it a karkas of Kingly power
to set up their posts by his posts, and Mic. 6.16. does complain that the
statutes of Omri* were kept.

And let any that fear God answer me, Can any statutes made by men, be equally
perfect as Gods statutes be? or can it be conceived that the wisest of the sons
of men should excogitat a more complete system, or body of Laws, then Christ
the wisdom of the father, has don? I suppose there is none but will answer
negatively. And if so, then what need men desire a more ample body of Laws? or
what should hinder the Nations, now toward the end of the fourth Monarchy,
from conforming themselves to this platform of civil Government, which Christ
will shortly erect in this fifth Monarchy here spoken of?

As touching things of a middle nature, which you carry this way or another
way, without breach of any rule of righteousness (as for instance, to secure
their fields by a common fence, or by a keeper, and many such like things) they
are not to be regulated by Laws, but by Covenants amongst the neighborhood,
for their mutual good, and the breach of that Covenant, is a trespass, and
punishable by the Law.

5 The fifth and last thing I proposed to consideration, is the necessity and
benefit of this Monarchy and model of Civil Government, according to the will
and word of Christ alone.

There is a threefold necessity of the coming of this Kingdom.

1 That the will of God may be done in earth, as it is done in heaven, which
cannot be expected til this Kingdom come, Mat. 6.10. Thy Kingdom come, thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Why, can that possible be? yes
verily, according to the meaning of that Petition, which intends not a
conformity to the Angels and Saints in heaven, in respect of the perfection of
our obedience to the rule, for that is not attainable in this life, but it has
respect to the perfection of the rule of our obedience, to wit, the will, and
word, and law of God, which is one and the same to them and us, and shall
certainly be attained to in this world, in the time of this fifth Monarchy, we
shall have no other rules of obedience, then the Angels in heaven, to wit, the
will and word of Christ, that blessed and only Potentate, unto whom all power
in heaven and earth is given. And truly that Petition excludes all Statutes,
Ordinances, and Acts of Parliaments, Dyets, etc. out of this fifth Monarchy, as
well as out of heaven. And I believe there is no man does conceive that the
Angels or Saints in heaven, are guided by any Acts or Edicts, made in any
convention of States here below, no more shall they be ruled in such a way,
when this Monarchy is set up, there shall be but one Lord, and his name one.

2 There is a necessity of the coming of this Kingdom, that the Saints may be
conformable to their head, Romans 8.24. and have their time of reigning with him,
as they have had of suffering, 2 Timothy 2.12. Ap. 20.4.

3. There is a necessity of the coming of this Kingdom, that the Creation may
be delivered from the vanity and bondage, whereto Christ saw meet to subject
them, in hope of deliverance, Romans 8.19. to 23. For during these Monarchies,
men have ruled by their own laws, Edicts, and wills, yea the whole Creation was
subjected to their rule; but yet they groaned under this as under a bondage,
earnestly waiting for the manifestation of the Sons of God, when the dominion
will be conferred upon Saints, that they may no more be subject to the wills and
pleasures of men, but to the will of Christ the only potentate, and this is
called The glorious liberty of the Sons of God. The benefits of this Monarchy
are exceeding great, both in respect of spiritual and temporal blessings. It
far exceeds all other Monarchies, both in the perfect constitution of all civil
and ecclesiastical administrations, and in the fruits and effects of both. In
the Commonwealth there shall be no Tyranny, Isa. 35.9. but full of brotherly
love, mercy and truth, Isa. 65 25. and 11, 6, 7, 8. Rev. 22.2. their leaves or
their words shall be of a healing virtue. Their Officers shall do righteously,
Isa. 11.4, 5. Isa. 1.25.26. and 60.17. And from all these flows peace and
tranquillity, Psalm. 85.10. and 72.7. Isa. 14.13. cessation of wars, Isa. 2.4.
Mic. 4.3. Hos. 2.18. Isa. 33.20, 21. store of provisions, Hos. 2.21, 22, 23.
Psa. 67.6. Amos 9.13, 14. and treasure, Isa 60.17. And all these blessings
shall be accompanied with health, Isa. 33.24. and holiness, Zech. 14.20, 21. This
will be the glory and happiness of the Saints under the fifth Monarchy, in
relation to civil Government.

As for the Churches, their membere shall be all precious as gold, Rev. 21.18,
19.20, 21. their administrations pure, Rev. 22.1. their light clear without
darkness, Rev. 22.5. and 21.11. Isa. 60.19. all idolatry and false light done
away, Isa. 2.20. Zech. 13, 2, 3, 4. in all their assemblies shall appear a
manifest presence of God, Isa. 4.5. and that which is more then all these, they
shall be full of the joy of the holy Ghost, rejoicing with joy unspeakable, and
full of glory, for so much I conceive is included in that phrase, Isa. 4.5.
(...) for above all the glory [shalbe] a covering, or bride-tent, or Chamber of
love. Alluding to the manner of the Jews, who at their marriages spread a tent
or covering, for the Bridegroom and his Spouse to solace themselves in their
mutual embraces, which is the highest of all earthly joys. In like manner will
the Lord reveal himself to his people in the bed of his Ordinances, and there
will be a mutual and reciprocal return of love, Cant. 7.12. until the Saints be
filled with joy unspeakable, and full of glory, Isa. 62.5. 1 Pet. 1 8. which
seems to be a peculiar privilege reserved for that Monarchy, and for that
season, more then for any other.

Having thus declared and proved, That such a Kingdom shall be, and the
Sovereign, Subjects, Officers, and Laws of that Kingdom, I shall in a word
give some hint of the time when this Kingdom shall begin.
KNow therefore that the uttermost durance of Antichrists dominion, will be in
the year 1673. as I have proved from Scripture in a brief Chronology, ready to
be put forth. Ere which time it will be necessary that the ten horns, or
Kings, which are the strength of the Beast, be broken off, which work is
already begun in the Beheading of Charles, late King of three Kingdoms, Anno
1648. according to that in Dan. 7.11 24.26. and the rest of the Horns or Kings
are to continue but a little longer, v. 12. Now this Kingdom of Christ which I
call the fifth Monarchy, shall begin a little before the fourth Monarchy be
destroyed, Dan. 2.44. For which end it is set up of God, to consume and break
in pieces the other Kingdoms It shall fill the whole earth, and shall stand
for ever, such will be the prevalency thereof against all opposition, the
universality and durance of this Kingdom.

But to come yet a little nearer to the first rise of this Monarchy, it is
said, That judgment was given to the Saints, and they executed judgment on
the little horn, Dan. 7.22.26. which was fulfilled 1648. and this is not the
beginning of the fifth Monarchy, but it comes near it, for Daniel speaks de
futuro, That the Kingdom, and Dominion, and greatness of the Kingdom under
the whole Heaven shall be given to the Saints.

As for the precise year, I dare not determine, but this I say, that when God
awakens the Saints and Witnesses to hearken to a voice from Heaven, that is,
from the Churches, saying Come up hither, Rev. 11.12. when they are content to
forget their old forms of Government, Civil and Ecclesiastical, called the
first Heavens, and first Earth, Rev. 21.1. Isa. 65.17. when I say the Saints
are come to this pitch, that they will have no Laws, Statutes, or Rules of
Government in the Church or Civil State, but what Christ has given in his
word, even from thenceforth does this fifth Monarchy begin, which Peter calls
the new Heavens, and new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.13. Of
this Paul prophesies, Heb. 12.27. that not only the Earth, but also the
Heaven, to wit, the Government, Civil and Ecclesiastical, should be shaken
toward the end of the fourth Monarchy, under which he then wrote. And by
shaking he means removing of them, that the Kingdom of Christ incapable of
shaking, might come in room thereof. And verily there has been a great shaking
already, and more yet remains, for the work will not be wholly finished until
the Jews be called, and the fulness of the Nations come in. For which let
all Saints pray, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, and let thy Kingdom come,
(that) thy will may be done in earth, as it is done in heaven, Rev. 22.17. Mat.
6.10.

FINIS.

