Gray Hayres CROWNED WITH GRACE. A SERMON Preached at Redriff, Aug. 1. 1654. At
the Funeral of that Reverend, eminently Learned and faithful Minister of
JESUS CHRIST Mr THOMAS GATAKER

PROVE. 20. 29. The beauty of old men, is their gray head. PROVE. 12. 26. The
righteous is more excellent then his neighbor. ISA. 43. 4. Since thou wast
precious in my sight, thou have been honorable. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for
George Sawbridge at the Sign of the Bible on Ludgate Hill. M. DC. LV.

To the Reverend, and my much HONORED BRETHREN, the Presbyterian MINISTERS of
the Gospel within the Province of LONDON.
Brethren,
THe sad occasion of this Sermon, and not any opinion of its worth, has moved
me to presume upon this Dedication. I know that you are sensible of the smart
of that providence, which having, not long since, removed worthy Dr Gouge and
M. Whitaker, has also taken from us famous Mr Gataker; and the rather, because
they all were not only members of, but also cordial friends unto our
Provincial Assembly. And these our late losses, may well mind us of Mr George
Walker. M. Herbert Palmer. M Edwards. M John Gere. M. Robrough. M. Love, etc.
the death of many more of our brethren, whose hearts, heads and hands, went
along with us in the setting up and exercising of the Presbyterian Government
in our respective Congregations, with mutual assistance, Classical and
Provincial, both for the Ordination of Ministers, and the more pure
administration of the Sacraments.

Hereby doubtless the Lords voice cries to the City, Mic. 6. 9.
more particularly unto us the Ministers thereof: Oh, that his Majesty would
make us men of wisdom, exemplartly to see his Name! This is the advice of the
Holy Ghost, Hear the rod and who has appointed it.

Brethren, I will not undertake to teach you who are able to instruct others,
what use should be made of these doleful dispensations. Have we not cause to
complain, that we did neither thankfully prize, nor fruitfully improve their
Ministerial gifts, graces and experiences, as we should and might have done?

And seeing they (though dead) do still speak, by their useful Books printed,
or their holy Lives remembered, or by both; should not we be conscientious
imitators of their constancy and fidelity, in those ways of holy truth,
discipline and worship, which were heartily approved by them, even unto their
death?

Moreover, Because so many active members of our Province are translated, ought
not we who survive, to strengthen one another hands the rather, unto double
industry, with undaunted courage, in our whole Ministerial employment, and to
be the more affectionately frequent in prayer, that our good God would make up
our loss, by the more abundant communications of his peculiar grace?

And although this saying may be sighed out with sorrow, we heretofore had the
society and assistance of the forementioned fellow-helpers, because now we have
them not: yet may it also be a matter of encouragement, because our
Presbyterian path, has been trodden without fainting (yea with joy,) by the
foot of them, whose remembrance will be as a sweet perfume unto posterity.
Having spoken thus much, give me leave (upon the same account,) Mr Cortwright.
M. Hildersham. M. Dod. M. Gleaver. M. Dorrell. M. John Paget. M. Bradshaw. M.
Ball, etc.
to mind you of some few good old Nonconformists (unto whom many more might be
added) who many years since (when under Prelaticall power and oppression)
endeavored, by preaching, printing, praying and suffering, to introduce this
Presbyterian government which we do now exercise. Though those men disliked the
use of superstitious Ceremonies, yet they opposed their tenants and practice,
who separated from the Church of England, condemning it, and the Ministry of it
as Antichristian: But they studiously sought to maintain the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace, whose labors God blessed to the conversion of
thousands of souls and to the maintaining of the power of godliness all their
days, and whose profitable Works do still praise them in the gate? But what
need I look so far backward, seeing we can easily remember a great company
who formerly joined with us here in London, in setting up and exercising Dr
Harris. D. Arrowsmith. D. Tuckney. D. Wilkinson. D. Chambers. D. Wallis. M.
Lea. M. Timothy Dod. M. Cawdry. M. Blake. M. Burgess. M. Gower. M. Roberts. M.
Burdall. M. Strickland. M. Cauton. M. Fisher. M. Allen Gear, etc.
the Presbyterian government (besides the many others in the several parts of
the Land) who now are of chief note for Learning and Piety, in both
Universities and other places; whose hearts and prayers (I am confident) still
go along with us, for our encouragement.

As this bright clowd of so many witnesses (some in Heaven and some on earth)
may be relieving unto our mourning hearts under our great loss; so (blessed be
God) we have not yet cause to complain with the Prophet, that there is no
cluster Mic. 7. 1, 2.
: for though much contempt is cast upon us (by many, who rather seek great
things for themselves in the world, then the things of Jesus Christ) as an
inconsiderable number, yet we have (I will speak it to the praise of the Lord)
threescore Presbyterian Ministers within the precincts of our Province, who
preach profitably, and live godly, who are not tainted with the erroneous
tenants either of the Arminians, Antinomians or Anabaptists. And the most high
will (I humbly hope) incouragingly appear farther for us in these paths, which
(as our consciences be persuaded) are chalked out in the Scriptures of truth,
for the welfare of his Churches, and the honor of his own Name by Jesus
Christ. Upon all the glory shall be a defense. Isa. 4. 5.


I will conclude this my address unto you (my much honored brethren) with this
hearty prayer, that you may hold on in this good old way, till you be
gray headed; nothing doubting, but that your heary heads will be a Crown of
glory, being found in these ways of righteousness.

Your loving brother, and fellow labourer in the work of the Gospel, SIMEON
ASH.
November. 24th 1654.
PROVE. 16. 31. The hoary head is a Crown of glory, if it be found in the way of
righteousness.
WHosoever knew this Reverend man (either by his own acquaintance or the true
Report of others) whose Funeral does occasion this great Assembly, will
acknowledge that my Text is suitable unto the occasion of our meeting. The Lord
make my Sermon as serviceable as I know my Text to be seasonable.

These Proverbs are grave Sentences full of worth and weight, which are the
rather to be pondered seriously because of the Authors wisdom and authority;
The Proverbs of Solomon, the Son of David, King of Israel; They are entire
Prove. 1. 1.
Propositions (especially from the beginning of the 10th Chapter) and therefore
(for the most part) to be considered without any context or coherence at all.
Every Proverb is like a precious Pearl tending to enrich all them with
spiritual wisdom, who shall make faithful improvement thereof through Gods
special grace.

In the handling of this Proverb (which I have chosen to be the matter of my
present discourse) I desire you to attend

1. The division of the Text.

2. The interpretation of the words.

3. And the divine truth from hence tendered unto our consideration.

The parts of the Text (being an entire Proposition) are two.

1. The Subject.

2. The Predicate.

The Subject or the matter spoken unto is, The hoary head. And the Predicate or
that which is asserted lies in the words following, It is a Crown of glory if
it be found in a way of righteousness. Wherein two things are notable.

1. The high commendation given of old age, The hoary head is a Crown of glory.

3. The limitation which is warily added, If it be found in the way of
righteousness.

Thus from the Text divided I put forward to the explication of the words
herein used; And because the proposition is conditional, I will first open the
words in the assertion, and secondly, those which are in the condition.

First, In the assertion two things are inquirable.

1. What is meant by the hoary head?

2. What is to be understood by the Crown of glory?

In this phrase the hoary head there is a double Metonymy.

1. A Metonymy of the effect for the cause, viz. hoary head put for old age the
cause thereof.

2. And a Metonymy of the adjunct for the subject, the hoary hairs for the
person upon whom they are to be found.

There is also a Synecdoche in the expression, viz. one part put for the whole;
The head for the whole person aged.

And the language is likewise Metaphorical, for man in his declining age
seems to be compared unto the Winter, the latter part of the year, wherein
the superficies of the earth is white, being covered with hoary frost. This
Interpretation is according to sundry parallel passages in the holy Scriptures.
I am (said Samuel) old and gray headed; And with 1 Samuel 12. 2. Job 15. 14.
us (said Eliphaz) are the gray headed and very aged men much elder then thy
Father. Therefore the Rhetoric being taken off the words, it appears, that
by the hoary head is signified the aged person.

If enquiry be made, what is meant by the Crown of glory? I answer, that there
is an Hebraism in the words, viz. a Crown of glory put for a glorious Crown:
The word glory notes credit or excellency, as when the strength of the young
man Prove. 20. 19.
is called his glory. Some do render the phrase, A Diadem of glory, The Diadem
properly signifying a wreathed hatband, Diadema a (...) circum, and (...) ligo.
with which the ancient Kings did content themselves, as thinking that a Crown
only belonged to their gods. Let it be noted that it is more then a garland
which may belong to some Conqueror in one exploit, though in all other regards
a person mean and considerable. The Crown is appropriated rather unto Kings and
Queens amongst the children of men, Corona dccoris, est metaphora a regibus.
Cartw. Corona ornatissima vel ornatus vtl Corona ornans. Pisc.
and here it is set upon the head of the aged person to betoken peculiar honor
appertaining to old age; Although the phrase is variously rendered by
Interpreters a Crown of glory, a Crown of comeliness, a Crown of ornament, yet
the sense is the same in the judgment of all, viz. that old age is honorable.
And to this purpose is the Crown applied unto others in the holy Scriptures,
viz. by Solomon unto Parents and their children mutually. Childrens children
are the Crown of Prove. 17. 6. Phil. 4. 1.
old men, and the glory of children are their Parents; and upon the same
account the Apostle Paul calls the Philippians his Crown, esteeming it his
high honor that they were brought to Christ by his Ministry.

Secondly, In the condition annexed, If found in the way of righteousness,
there are three things enquirable, viz.

1. What is signified by righteousness.

2. What the word way does suggest.

3. What is hinted in this expression, viz. of being found in this way.

For the first, I will not spend time in reporting either the various
acceptions or uses of the word Righteousness in the holy Scriptures. In this
place it notes a careful conformity unto the revealed will of God, all whose
Commandments are righteousness; In which respect Moses says, This shall Psa.
119. 138. Dan. 6. 25.
be our righteousness if we observe to do all these Commandments. For in so
doing we do suum cuique trihuere, give every one their right, viz. God, our
selves, and our neighbors, receive due respect by obedience rendered unto laws
divine.

Now before I apply Righteousness in this sense unto the truth in the Text, I
must necessarily distinguish betwixt righteousness Legal and Evangelical.

1. Legal righteousness consists in a complete conformity unto Laws divine in
their utmost latitude; And thus our Eccl. 7. 29. 1 John 2. 1.
first Parents were habitually righteous at their first creation, and our
blessed Savior was actually Christ the Righteous, But all Adams posterity fall
short hereof both in their nature and practice. As in the estate of
unregeneracy the Apostle concludes all under sin, and says both of Jews and
Gentiles, There is none righteous, no not one; So in the estate of
Regeneration, Romans 3. 9, 10.
so many are the imperfections of them who are most complete on earth, that in
the sense aforesaid they cannot be accounted righteous. Though David is called
a man after Gods own heart, yet his prayer and testimony do attest Act. 13. 22.
Psa. 143. 2.
this truth, Enter not into judgment with thy Servant, O Lord, for in thy
sight shall no man living be justified.

2. But in a Gospel sense, according to the indulgence and construction of free
rich grace, Gods gracious servants are said to be righteous. Thus God himself
speaks of Noah, Thee have I seen righteous before me. And this character the
Genesis 7. 1. Luke 1. 6.
holy Ghost gives of Zechary and Elizabeth, They were both righteous before
God. And this Evangelicall righteousness does consist 1. partly in their
sincere endeavor to reach perfection, in which respect they are described to
be such Isa. 51. 1.
who follow after righteousness, whereupon God accepting the will for the deed
does call them rigbteous. 2. And principally, in the imputation of Christ's
righteousness unto them upon 2 Cor. 5. 21. Phil. 3. 9. Jer. 23. 6.
their humble fiduciall closures with him by faith unfeigned, who is the Lord
our righteousness; Now of this righteousness is the Text to be understood.

The se second Quaery was, What does the word way suggest?

I answer, That Gods Servants being as strangers and sojourners Psa. 39. 12.
in this world, and their life being a traveling toward heaven Heb. 11. 9, 10,
13, 14.
their long home, where they look for their everlasting abode; their holy
conversation on earth is ealled their way, which suggesteth both the activity
and progress of Gods grace in the fruits thereof. This Solomon seems to
speak unto, very clearly and fully, The path of the righteous is as Prove. 4. 18.
the shining light which shines more and more unto the perfect day.

And to the third demand, I answer, That a person may be said to be found in
the way of righteousness, when there is conspicuity and permanency in a godly
conversation; when the candle of grace lighted in the heart does discover it
self by its shining, and is kept burning (according to the advice of Christ)
that men may see his good works, as it is said, that Mat. 5. 16. Act. 11. 23.
Paul saw the grace of God, in the Christians at Antioch; so here when the seed
of righteousness rooted in the hearts of aged persons does so bud and
fructify in their lives that such who converse with them do or may find
apparent effocts of Gods grace in them, then they are found in the way of
righteousness. I shall not bestow any more words, or time, in the Exposition
of the Text, but proceed according to promise, unto the handling of that
seasonable Point of Doctrine which is held forth from this Text. The hoary head
is a Crown of glory if it be found in the way of righteousness.

That Old age attended with the power of grace and the practice Doct.
of Religion, is a matter of much honor and commendation.

Let it be considered from the language in the Text how far this Truth does
extend, viz. indefinitely to all aged persons who be truly pious;

1. Of both Sexes, both men and women.

2. Of all ranks and conditions in the world, whether high or low, rich or
poor, whether more nobly descended or more mean and contemptible in regard of
descent, whether on the Throne or at the footstool.

3. Of all qualities, in regard of natural or acquired accomplishments,
whether corporally beautified, or deformed, whether more or less enriched with
the ornaments of the mind, viz. learning and other abilities for employment
either in Church or in Commonwealth.

4. Of all callings and negotiations amongst men, whether sacred or civil,
whether by land or sea, whether in times of war or peace.

5. And this truth, in this latitude, has been, is, and will be appliable unto
all aged persons, found in the way of righteousness, in all the ages of the
world. This is notable from the Original, for as the proposition is universal
in reference to all hoary heads found in the way of righteousness, so there is
no verb to limit it unto any term of time, either past, present, or to come,
but the holy Ghost asserts this truth, in relation to all ages and times of the
world: That heretofore, and for the present, and for the future, the hoary head
in the way of holiness, has been, and now is, and hereafter to the end of the
world will be a Crown of glory.

I shall proceed gradually in the proof of the Point, in reference Quo magis
homo festinat ad finem, tento est vere venerabilior, Clem. Alexand. Eccl. 12.
5. Flores camiterii. Isa. 9. 15. Genesis 25. 8. Judge. 8. 32. 2 Chro. 29. 28. Summa
est, senectutem illam praesertim quae piis a Deo donatur, honorandam esse.
Cartwr. in Text. Prove. 12. 26. Acts 21. 16. Luke 2. 36, 37.
to the two branches of it.

First, Old age in it self, is a matter of commendation: The beauty of old men
is the gray head: In which respect (as some Expositors judge) the hoary head is
compared by Solomon, to the Almond tree flourishing, when the white blossoms do
render it very beautiful. And hence also it is, that according to the Heraldry
observed in the holy Scripture, the Ancient and the Honorable are both placed
together, and many of Gods Worthies there recorded, have this character of
honor put upon them, that they died in a good old age and full of days (viz.)
Abraham, Gideon, David.

Secondly, The addition of holiness unto the hoary head, adds much unto the
glory of the aged person: and this the holy Ghost does chiefly intend in the
Text. For the righteous eatenus, because righteous, is more excellent then his
neighbor. And therefore under this Notion, many are registered in holy writ to
their everlasting credit in the Church of Christ, ( viz.) Mnason of Cyprus that
old Disciple; and Anna, a Prophetess of a great age, a widow of about
fourscore and four years, who departed not from the Temple, but served God,
with fastings and prayers night and day.

Now that righteousness gives weight unto the Crown which aged persons do
wear, may be abundantly manifested.

1. Because it is one part of Gods image in man, with which Eccl. 7. 29. Romans
3. 20. Ephesians. 4. 24.
he was adorned at his first creation, which was his glory, lost by his fall,
and which is restored by his Regeneration. The new man, after God, is created
in righteousness.

2. Because aged persons, thus qualified, are the Emblems of God himself, who
is called the ancient of days; and of Jesus Dan 7. 9, 13.
Christ, in whose metaphorical description, this is one expression; His head
and his hairs were white like wool. Rev. 1. 14.


3. Because the righteous are admitted into near relation and affection with
God who is their Father, and loves them Matthew. 13. 43. Psalm. 146. 8.
dearly. The Lord loves the righteous. The righteous shall shine in the
Kingdom of their Father. Now it was David's honor (as he valued it) to be Son
in law to King Saul: And who 1 Samuel 18. 23.
does not judge, that it was much to the repute of Daniel, to be called A man
beloved by the Lord. Since thou becamest Dan. 9. 21. Isa. 43. 4.
mine (says God himself to his people) and wast precious in my sight, thou
have been honorable.

From these three heads of Arguments jointly considered, the truth under hand,
may be undeniably concluded. That the hoary head is a Crown of glory, if it be
found in the way of righteousness.

The Application follows, which I will give, in manifold Uses, under four
heads.

The first sort of Uses are for Information in three particulars Use 1.
Information.
well worthy our consideration.

1. Hence it follows, that no qualification whatsoever, wherewith the
children of men can possibly be adorned, is of so great worth as godliness;
because this is said to set a glorious Crown upon the heads of them who are
blessed with it. I grant that there are many natural ornaments and acquired
accomplishments, which may gain respect, but it is righteousness which wins
the Crown. Therefore Solomon says not, The hoary head is a Crown of glory, if
found in the way of raised parts, of great learning, of martial courage, of
large commands in the world, or of successful trading to become wealthy, but
if it be found in the way of righteousness. Though people who are under no
higher principles then sense and humane reason are of another opinion: They
bless Psalm. 10. 3. Mal. 3. 15. Psalm. 49. 6. with 18.
the covetous whom God abhors, and they do call the proud happy, because set
up, when others are abased; because delivered when others are in distress: yea
though many boasting themselves in the multitude of their riches, do bless
their own souls; yet both God and all those whose judgments are guided by his
word, are of another mind. My text tells you the thoughts of wise Solomon,
and if you will hearken unto his father David, you shall understand, that his
apprehensions were not different. The Saints (says he) and the excellent in
whom is all my delight. Whence it is notable, that the Psalm. 16. 2.
Psalmist there does not only express his judgment personally, but he typically
reports the sense of Christ, to give to understand, that himself a man
according to Gods heart, yea and Christ Jesus infinitely above himself, give
this estimate of holy persons, that they are incomparably excellent. And if
this be not sufficient to clear the truth of my inference, consider his
confident assertion to Saul his Courtiers, who prided themselves in their
Courtship, and despised him as a man rejected. Know that the Lord has set
apart him that is Psalm. 4. 3. Exodus 19. 5. with ca. 33. 16.
godly for himself: whereas all other persons whatsoever are looked upon by the
Lord as lumber, these are his peculiar treasure.

2. The second corollary is this: If righteousness be a Crown, though it be
attained in old age only, then how much more honorable are they, who have been
found in the way of righteousness all their life long; from their youth, till
their heads are gray. This great commendation, did appertain Psalm. 71. 18, 18
unto David. O God (says he) thou have taught me from my youth, and hitherto
have I declared thy wondrous works. Now when I am gray headed, O God forsake me
not. And this honor St Paul puts upon Andronicus and Junia, They are of
note among the Apostles, who also were in Christ before me. It makes Romans 16.
7.
very much to the credit of Christians, when grace which blossomed upon them in
the spring of their youth, does abide green and flourishing in the winter of
their age; This might be many ways illustrated, 1. They have served the Lord
sundry Apprentiships; It is an honor to stand (to have a settled abode as
servants) before Kings: Thus the Queen of Sheba Pro. 22. 29.
expresses her self in reference unto them who always waited upon King
Solomon, Happy are thy men, and happy are 1 Kin. 10. 8.
these thy Servants who stand continually before thee. Now this, and greater
then this, is the renown of them who have been for many years not only
retainers but dwelling-servants with the Almighty. 2. They have often been in
the field with Christ their Captain, they have fought many battles, and have
received many wounds under his Colors and command: The holy Ghost has seen
cause to record in holy Pages some of David's Worthies who had made many brave
adventures, and 2 Samuel 23.
done famous exploits in years past and gone. And what more ordinary then for
Soldiers to set forth their own commendations, by relating how many years
attending on the Army, with hazards run and wounds received; Now the old
Soldiers Enumerat milec vulnera.
of Jesus Christ are much more worthy high respect, having been found all along
in the ways of righteousness; Such a standard bearer was Samuel who received
press-money 1 Samuel 3.
from God while he was a child, and could when grayheaded so plead his
righteousness that it will be always remembered to his credit and reputation.
I am old and grayheaded, 1 Samuel 12. 2, 3.
Behold, here I am, witness against me before the Lord, and before his
Anointed; whose Ox have I taken, or whose Ass have I taken, or whom have I
defrauded? whom have I oppressed, or of whose hand have I received any bribe to
blind mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it you: But alas how few amongst
them who have had power in their hands can we find, that in their age are thus
found in ways of righteousness? 3. They have endured manifold oppositions,
losses, and hardships from cruel persecutors; Many hot Summers have scorched
them, and many cold winters have pinched them, they have suffered much from
open enemies and fained friends, because of their courageous faithfulness to
Jesus Christ, not daring to depart from the way of righteousness. The Apostle
Paul reckons up his sufferings as so many Ensigns of honor, I will glory
also; (says he,) And in what 1 Cor. 12. 18.
does he glory? why, he tells you, In stripes above measure, in prisons more
frequent, in deaths often: Of the Jews five times I 23,
received forty stripes save one: Thrice was I beaten with rods, 24,
once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have been
in the deep; In journeying often, in perils of 25,
waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by mine own Countrymen, in perils by
the Heathen, in perils in the City, in perils 26,
in the Wilderness, in perils in the Sea, in perils amongst false brethren; In
weariness and painfulnesse, in watchings often, 27.
in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness: And Paul the
aged and now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ. Philem. 9.
Thus this ancient Champion of Christ seems to look upon his several many
years hardships as so many Pearls with which his Crown was beautified and
enriched. And doubtless they are so in the account of all them whose
judgments are rectified by the word of truth.

The Third Consequence or Use of Information is this, That it is a very
advantageous service to be instrumental in promoting the work of
Gospel-righteousnesse in the hearts and ways of men, because by means hereof
they receive no less then a Crown of glory. Hence it was that Saint Paul
writes thus to Philemon, Thou owe unto me thine own self; Philem. 19.
How infinitely beyond all sublunary accomodations are the revenues which come
in by grace! The Crown is the highest honor that can be bestowed upon the
children of men, and no gain is comparable to that which is received by
godliness; Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise 1 Timothy
4. 8.
of the life that now is, and of that which is to come; yea, the greatest
profit which we are capable to receive from God himself, is to be made
partakers of his holiness, and the fruit Heb. 12. 10, 11.
of righteousness is from peculiar paternall love, proper to them whom God
does discipline as his Adopted children: This I note, both to discover unto the
people of the world who are their best Friends, and to work in their hearts
more high estimations of the Ministers of the Gospel whom God has ordained to
bring sinuers to Christ, that they might be 2 Cor. 5. 19, 21
the righteousness of God in him. And howsoever the carnal and unthankful
world disregard us, yet the Lord does so highly value this our work, that he
will certainly abundantly recompense it, They who turn many to righteousness
shall shine Dan. 12. 12.
as the Stars for ever and ever: Whereas men do most esteem and most liberally
reward such who are instruments to restore their health, to raise their outward
estates, and to prefer them unto places of greatness in the world; The most
high God who sets a higher price upon holiness, will make it manifest at
the last day, that those who study to bring men into the ways of
righteousness shall be most advanced. It has been looked upon as an
honorable employment to set the Crown on a Kings head, and doubtless it is no
less but far greater to be an instrument according to divine institution to
crown sinners with righteousness. Consider that this was foretold by an Angel
as an exceeding great honor to be put upon John the Baptist Christ's harbinger,
Many of Luke 1. 16, 17.
the Children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God, and he shall go
before them in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the disobedient to the
wisdom of the Just.

The fourth and last inference by way of Information is this, viz. That
therefore the death of aged godly persons should be much lamented. David and
all Israel wept over dead Abner upon this consideration, A great man is fallen;
2 Samuel 3. 31, 34, 58.
Now who are to be esteemed great if not those who are rightfully crowned? And
such are the aged being found in the way of righteousness. The Prophet Isaiah
brings in the ancient amongst those persons of highest place and power, Isa.
3. 2.
whose removal does weaken both Church and State. And this is one strain in
Jeremiah his Lamentations, The Crown is fallen; Now in a safe sense, though not
the same, Lam. 5. 16.
we may apply it unto the death of the meanest, whose hoary heads were found in
the way of righteousness; but it is singularly applicable, when an ancient,
prudent, pious Minister is translated by death: Such a providence upon the
death of Isa. 3. 2. 2 Kin. 2. 12.
Elijah caused Elisha to cry out, My Father, My Father, the Charet of Israel
and the horsemen thereof. And truly such occasion of mourning is administered
this day upon our loss of the Reverend, Learned, and godly man, whose Funeral
we now celebrate. Neither does his death alone but the dissolution of sundry
other grave and gracious Ministers of the Mr Walker. Dr Gouge. Mr Whitaker
Gospel, not long since, in the Neighborhood, call for our tears and
lamentations before the Lord. The Lord rightly affect us with these strokes,
and give us the sanctified improvement of them through his grace.

The second Use follows, which is for reproof of three Use 2. Of Reproof.
sorts of people.

1. Of those aged persons who seem to be ashamed of their old age, by taking
courses to hide it, that they might be accounted young, whereas my Text tells
us, that the hoary head is a Crown, and the same wise Solomon says elsewhere,
Pro. 20. 29.
The beauty of old men is the gray-head: And the Apostle Paul speaks of his
old age as his credit, and that which should render him the more respectfull,
Being such a one as Philem. 9. Illi canos tingendo, praecipuam reverentiae
praerogativam dedecore afficium. Vellendi sunt non pili, sed cupiditaces. Clem.
Alex.
Paul the aged. Some of the Ancients took occasion in their days to blame very
sharply such persons who either picked out their gray hairs, or else did color
them artificially, that they might not be reputed old; And this advice was
added to the reproof, that they should rather pluck up their lusts then pick
out their gray hairs, as rendering them many thousand times more unlovely and
dishonorable: Believe it you gray headed persons, that your covetousness,
frowardness, hypocrisy, and unrighteousness do make you reproachful, whereas
your age with holiness would be your honor.

2. Of those whose wicked conversation does cast dis-reputation upon the Crown
which God by their many years has set upon their heads. That Proverb is
appliable unto them, As a Jewel of Gold in a Swines snout, so is a fair woman
Prove. 11. 22. Dignitas in indigno, est ornamentum in luto.
which is without discretion. Complexion does not so much beautify as folly
does blemish such a person: In like manner it is very unseemly to see silver
hairs soyled with a sinful, debauched conversation; How do oaths, lies,
scurrilous cursed speeches and other wickednesses cast mire and fasten rust
upon the Crown of old age. In dealing with these grayheaded sinners I may apply
those words of Moses, Do ye thus reward the Lord ye foolish people and unwise?
Is this the requital Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
which you return unto God for his many years patience exercised toward you,
and the manifold experiences with long-continued goodness showred down upon
you? Do not you your selves look for better fruit from the trees which you have
carefully preserved many winters, and painfully watered many Summers? But if
these convincing expostulations will not awaken and reform these people who are
weather-beaten in wickedness, and by long soaking in sin are habituated to do
evil, I must mind them of that heavy message delivered from the Lord by the
Prophet Isaiah, The sinner being an hundred years old is accursed. The old
impenitent Isa. 69. 20.
sinner, whatsoever his place, his parts, or his respect in the world be, is
accursed. Gods curse is not only threatened, but already in a great measure
executed upon him, He is cursed, cursed in his soul, and cursed in all his
enjoyments and concernments, during the time of his impenitency and
unreformednesse. Patientia laesae, vertitur in surorem.
Here I might be large in discovering the expressions of divine displeasure
against people, old in evils as in years, whose decayed, decrepid, withered,
weakened bodies might expect pity. The Prophet Jeremiah says, I am full of
Jer. 6. 11.
the fury of the Lord, I will pour it forth upon the aged and him that is full
of days. And Gods threatening runs thus, that neither he himself nor those
whom he will incense against them, shall have any compassion upon the old man,
or him that 2 Chro. 36. 17. Deuteronomy. 32. 25.
stoopeth for age or the man of gray hairs.

3. Of them who make the aged the objects of their derision. Mr Cartwright has
this note upon the Text, that God has by this Crown of gray hairs vindicated
the aged from all the discredit which their stooping or other infirmities might
seem to expose them unto: And it is observed by some Natant Hebraei non
senilem, sed decrepitam significari aetatem. Cajet. in Text.
that though decrepid old age be suggested in the language of the Text, yet
Solomon does assign it the Crown. This I suggest the rather to give a check
unto the young wanton wits which are apt to break jests upon the aged, because
of some seeming uncomelinesses which accompany that condition of life. Guilty
in this kind was he who scoffingly asked the old man whose body was crooked by
reason of old age, Whether he would sell him a bow? These green heads do not
consider the greatness of this sin in Gods account, who puts this fault into
the catalogue of such miscarriages which usher in desolating judgments, viz.
The child shall behave himself Isa. 4. 5.
proudly against the ancient; And this sin is the more heinous and provoking,
when those aged persons are abused, whose near Relations, Offices of honor,
accompanied with the power of godliness, do call for all expressions of
respect and esteem. Solomon is smart in his reproof of children, who in this
kind offend toward their natural parents, The eye that mocketh at his Father
and despises to obey his mother, the Pro. 30. 17.
Ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it. How
many times are those brought unto the Gallows (as the confessions of some in
such cases have manifested) through Gods just judgment who have been
chargeable with guilt of this kind? And how heavy was the hand of God upon
many little children for mocking Elisha the Prophet, There came forth little
children out of the City, and mocked 2 Kin. 2. 23, 24
him, and said unto him, Go up thy bald-head, Go up thou baldhead; And he
turned back, and locked upon them, and cursed them in the Name of the Lord, and
there came forth two she-bears out of the wood, and tare forty and two
children of them. How far this derision of the man of God did reach, I now
enquire not, whether to his Function, with relation to his Master Elijah lately
taken up into heaven, or only unto his baldness, But this is notable, that
childishness and ignorance will not secure such from divine revenge who do
dare to deride the aged: What therefore may they expect who have more years on
their backs, and should have more grace in their hearts, then to adventure upon
this sinful provocation. But yet there is a higher step of aggravation to be
added, viz. when righteousness it self which is the chiefest Crown of the
aged, is the object of men's derision; when merely the tenderness of men's
consciences and their exact walking according to the Word of God does lay them
open unto the jears of men. The Apostle tells us that such despise not man 1
These. 4. 7, 8.
only but God also, and he renders a double reason thereof, viz. because God
has called us to holiness, and has likewise given us his Spirit to work it:
I remember the words of Solomon, which are appliable to my purpose, whosoever
mocketh the Prove. 17. 5.
poor reproacheth his maker; And the speech (as Mr Cartwright notes upon the
place) extends unto jearing at any bodily defect or deformity whatsoever,
whereof God is willing to be accounted the Author. How much more will the Lord
interpret those derisions to reach himself, which people shall dare to cast
upon his own image in his servants, which is Quiopus aliquod ridet, ridet
illius opificem. Mercer
their Crown and beauty? For if God take himself to be concerned in the
creatures affliction, how much more then in that which tends to his perfection?
This way of wickedness argues a graceless frame of heart, and to them who
walk in it may be applied the sharp words of the Prophet, Against whom do you
sport your selves? Against whom make you a wide Isa. 57. 4.
mouth, and draw out the tongue? Are ye not children of transgression, a false
seed? Ishmael by mocking Isaac made way Gal, 4. 29, 30. with Genesis 21. 9, 10.
Psa. 1. 11.
for his own rejection, and doubtless they are not far from ruin who have
traveled so long in sin that they are got into the Chair of Scorners; When I
remember the heavy curse given out against Cham for mocking his old Father Jer.
9. 21, 22, 25
Noah (for it is conceived that he was thus far guilty) when in an uncomely
posture by reason of his drunkenness; I tremble to think what will become of
them who break brinish jests with profane Satyricall spirits upon Gods
servants for their sanctity. We read in holy Story that Michol David's wife
despised him in her heart, and spoke tauntingly to him upon his zealous dancing
before the Lord, and the holy Ghost has concluded the History with this
report, Therefore 2 Samuel 6. 16, 20, 23.
Michol the daughter of Saul had no child unto the day of her death. And
ordinarily this cursed course is attended with the heavy curse of everlasting
spiritual barrenness. The Lord grant that these hints may through his
blessing, give some check unto that profane boldness, which too frequently
breaks forth amongst the children of men.

I proceed to the third Use which shall be for trial; For Use 3. Of
Examination.
it much concerns all sorts to know how this righteousness may be discerned,
which is a Crown of glory to the hoary head. The necessity of this enquiry may
be manifested by these two considerations.

1. Because there are several mistakes in this matter of righteousness amongst
men. For there are many who only appear outwardly to be righteous, when the
inside discovers Mat. 23. 28.
the contrary, being full of hypocrisy. And there is something like unto
justice, which is highly esteemed amongst men, though it be abomination in the
sight of God. Luke 16. 15.


2. That we may neither arrogate nor deny this Crown to our selves groundlesly,
and also that we may be the better able to judge unto whom we are bound to give
this honor which God has put upon them. For as it is the duty of all, so it
is the care of Gods people in this particular (as in other cases) to guide
themselves by discretion and judgment. Psa. 112. 5. Four notes of the
righteous.


Now those whom God accounts truly righteous may be known,

1. By their unlimited respect unto Gods whole will revealed in his word, as
the rule of their obedience for the matter of it. This is the character given
of Zachary and Elizabeth, They were both righteous before God, walking in all
the Commandments Luke 1. 6.
and Ordinances of the Lord: Therefore here the Query must be, both What is the
rule of our conversation? and Whether our endeavors be extended according to
the rules of the Scripture universally? For multitudes steer their course
rather according to the compass of humane Ordinances Isa. 29. 15.
then divine Institutions; And amongst them who seem to have recourse unto
Scripture guidance, many are merely partial, picking and choosing according to
their pleasure, as Herod who heard John the Baptist, and did many things, but
Mar. 6. 20. Matthew. 19. 20, 21, 22.
there was one defect which undid him. And the like might be observed concerning
the young man, who fell short in regard of his worldly-mindedness.

2. By minding the manner, together with the matter of their obedience. To this
purpose are the words of Moses, This shall be our righteousness if we observe
to do all these Commandments Deuteronomy. 6. 25.
before the Lord our God as he has commanded us. As this Scripture speaks to
the former note, viz. there is an observing to do all, q. d. there is a respect
unto all Gods commands, as David expresses it, So it suggesteth reference
Psalm. 119. 6.
to the modality with the materiality of our performances. A principle of
righteousness will move a man to do Quemadmodum Calv. Sicut, Vatab. Isa. 1.
17.
Gods Commandments as before him, and as he has commanded: Whereas his Majesty
requires that good duties should be well done, they esteem it just and equal
to endeavor this, not daring to satisfy themselves with outwardnesse and
formality, opus operatum will not down with the person who is regularly
righteous; Therefore people in the proof of their righteousness must consider
what care they take to be reverent, humble, affectionate, spiritual and
upright in their services before the Lord.

3. By laboring after growth in grace and a more full conformity unto the Laws
of the Lord and his deservings; The path of the righteous (says Solomon) is as
the shining light Pro. 4. 18.
which shines more and more unto the perfect day. The Sun does not more
naturally in its progress move toward high noon, then a gracious heart
works toward perfection. The Apostle Paul having reported his own practice
in pressing forward toward the mark, adds, that those who are sincere are
thus minded, and he calls them perfect because thus they Phil. 3. 23, 14, 15.
are in their own aims and endeavors, as in divine acceptance. Because (as Mr
Bayns expresses it) they take up their arrows always on this side the white,
therefore they strive to shoot better that they might hit the white, that they
might in all regards exactly answer the mind and expectation of the Lord in
their conversation; Therefore those are far from righteousness who stroke
their own heads as though they had fully accomplished the mind of God, and
speak the language of the Laodicean, I am rich and increased with Rev. 3. 17.
goods, and have need of nothing; Setting aside their staves, as though they
were got to their journeys end, not looking after increase of grace, as though
they had gained enough already Ubi incipis, nolle ficri mel or, ibi defines
esse bonus.
to serve their turn. And it will be no violation of the Law of charity to
affirm, that he was never truly good who does not strive to be better.

4. By an humble self denying dependence upon Jesus Christ, looking for divine
acceptance through him alone. The holy Apostle notwithstanding his
unreproveable course before his conversion (as to men, and according to his
light) and his unwearied industry upon his spiritual change, to hit the mark,
at which he sincerely levelled, attended with a holy life, free from outward
scandal, yet this, this was in his eye and endeavor, to be found in Christ
(says he) not having Phil. 3. 9.
mine own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the
faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. And thus it is
also with all other Christians who are Evangelically righteous, because they do
daily experience their own defects both in the matter, manner, measure, and end
of their obedience, both to the Commandments of the first and second table,
therefore in their addresses unto God either for recompense or acceptance, they
take up the words of the holy Martyr, None but Christ, None but Christ. This
our Apostle himself asserteth, speaking of others as of himself, We rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in Phil. 3. 3.
the flesh, etc. And he is bold to conclude those to be void of true
righteousness who do trust unto their own parts, privileges, or performances
whatsoever: Israel which followed after the Law of righteousness has not
attained to the Law of Romans 9. 31, 32.
Righteousness; wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith but as it were
by the works of the Law. By these four characters of the person who is
Evangelically righteous, being faithfully applied, we may be able to know in
regard of our selves, and to guess in reference unto others (upon conversings
with them) unto whom the Crown of glory (set upon the hoary head found in the
way of righteousness) does appertain.

The last Use follows which is for Exhortation, and it is Use 4. Of
Exhortation.
to be directed,

1. To them who are old.

2. To them who are young.

I shall begin with the aged, both such who are unrighteous and such who are in
the way of righteousness.

First, The aged persons who abide irreligious are to be persuaded to endeavor
a change both of heart and life; Hearken unto me you who are far from
righteousness; Remember Isa 46. 12. Qui pulcher esse velit, ei quod est in
homine pulcherrimum, adornandum est, nempe men's, quam oportet, pulchriorem, and
magis decoram ostendere. Clem Alexand. 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25 Aetas senectutis est
vita immaeulata. Venerabilis senectus virtutum non annorum numero, computata.
Non omnis canities promiscue. Jun. and Trem. in Text. Rev. 12. 9. and 20. 2.
Vtrumque simul Sumptum. Merc. in Text. 1 Samuel 15. 30.
the forementioned particulars, wherein true righteousness does consist, and
strive with all your strength to attain them, as you do desire a Crown of
glory. The Apostle Paul propounds the practice of such who run a race to obtain
a corruptible Crown, as an argument to press the like duty. And
Scripture-Histories together with the Stories of all ages do record the strange
adventures, yea, attempts both ungodly and unnatural to advance unto a Crown:
Should not we therefore in the way of God seek this Crown of glory? Now that my
advice may be the more prevalent, let these considerations be well weighed.

1. That the greatest age attainable on earth without righteousness will not
procure this Crown; Antiquity without piety does yield no more credit then the
devil is capable of, who is often called the Old Serpent, having had many
thousand years continuance in the world: But when holiness is annexed to the
hoary hairs, they honor the head with a Crown. How ambitious are proud men
(like Saul) to be honored amongst the people. Therefore as the laborious Be
sucketh honey out of weeds, let us graciously improve such like examples, to
provoke our selves to seek the honor which comes in by righteousness.

2. This righteousness which is attended with a Crown of glory upon earth will
undoubtedly bring that which is very much better in heaven. Hearken what our
Savior promises, The righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom
Mat. 13. 43.
of their Father. And observe the expectation of David upon this account, As
for me I will behold thy face in righteousness, Psa. 17. 15.
I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness. Though I may not spend
words in illustrating these passages, yet I wish that the aged would seriously
consider how much is comprehended in this glorification and this satisfaction
assured upon the righteous at the general resurrection.

3. Who does not (upon such grounds as have been hinted) desire to die the
death of the righteous, as that wretch Number. 23. 10.
Balaam did? therefore wisdom would work endeavors to attain righteousness
in the time of life. I remember a passage in the promise made by the Angel
concerning the success of John the Baptist his Ministry, He shall turn the
disobedient Luke 1. 17.
to the wisdom of the Just; There is singular wisdom amongst the righteous;
as in other regards, so herein, because as they intend the best good as their
end, so they seek to accomplish it, not only by wishings and wouldings, but by
the real use of the means sanctified for the obtaining thereof. Let us
therefore herein make, imitation.

4. The unrighteous shall not find any favor with God, because of their gray
heads when he comes to judgment. Somewhat was before suggested to this
purpose, therefore now I will only mention two Scriptures, which may be
awakening to aged persons sleeping in security. Though a Eccl. 8. 12, 13.
sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet it shall not
be well with the wicked: Forbearance is no acquittance, but God will be sooner
or later upon their bones with blows of vengeance; And their shutting out of
heaven is so certain, that the Apostle takes it for granted that none will
question it, Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit 1 Cor. 6. 9.
the Kingdom of God? How can you old people give credit to these expressions of
divine severity without resolutions to look out after righteousness?

5. You aged ones are the greatest monuments of divine patience, which should
lead you unto repentance; and the Apostle gives in two considerations, to
add strength unto this argument, viz.

1. Because otherwise your hearts will be more and more obdurate, and your
selves become less and less able to reform.

2. Because through your abuse of Gods forbearance his wrath will be kindled
and increased against you. Weigh I pray you his words, Despisest thou the
riches of his goodness Romans 2. 4, 5.
and forbearance, and long-suffering? not knowing that the goodness of God
leads thee to repentance; But after thy hardness and impenitent heart,
treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of
the righteous judgment of Jer. 13. 23.
God: I have been the more earnest in pressing the reformation of the aged
sinners, because it is attained with difficulty through their accustomed
continuance in wickedness.

Secondly, I shall bend my advice to the aged who are through Gods grace really
righteous. These persons are to be persuaded unto real gratitude to the Lord,
who has set a Crown of glory upon their gray-heads. The Psalmist calls Psa.
148. 12, 13 Senes ad gratiarum actionem excitare.
upon old men to praise the Name of the Lord; This is one of Mr Cartwright
inferences from the Text. And doubtless such aged people have abundant cause
to be thankful unto the Almighty. 1. For drawing forth the thread of their
lives to so great a length. 2. And especially for converting them unto the way
of righteousness.

First, You may be moved to praise God for your old age by these Meditations.

1. Because his Highness is the maintainer of our lives, and the lengthener of
our days. Notwithstanding the means Deuteronomy. 30. 20. Act. 17. 28.
used whether ordinary or extraordinary, food, Physic, etc. to continue our
days upon earth, yet it must be acknowledged that the Lord holds our soul in
life. And here let it be Psalm. 66. 9. Deuteronomy. 8. 3.
remembered, that Gods blessing gives strength to bread, and efficacy unto all
other means of health. Consider also how much of Gods wisdom, power,
goodness, patience, etc. has been daily, yea hourly exercised for your
preservation. Mind likewise from how many thousands of dangers his hand of
providence has secured you, both in the time of foolhardy youth and unwieldy
old age. Upon such like thoughts the holy Psalmist thus expresses himself to
the Lord, Let my mouth be filled with thy praise and with thy honor Psalm. 71.
6, 8. 9.
all the day.

2. Because by strokes of death ten thousand have fallen on your sides, on your
right hands, and yet it does not come Psa. 91. 7.
nigh to you. What multitudes of men and women, and children more likely to
have lived long then your selves, are dead and gone, but your selves still
abide in the Land of the living? The good young King Josiah is deadly wounded
by an Arrow; And old Eli the Priest of the Lord fell from his 2 Chro. 35. 23,
24. 1 Samuel 4. 18.
seat backward, and his neck brake; What great numbers have lost their lives,
some in war, and others in times of peace; yea, very many, much more fitted for
the service of Church and Commonwealth then your selves. In this regard you
should look upon your selves as reserved to magnify the God of your lives and
mercies.

3. It is threatened as a judgment upon a Family when there is not left one
aged person belonging to it; There shall not be an old man in thy House; These
words speak much displeasure 1 Samuel 2. 31.
against Eli; Whereas it is an honor to have old stakes standing to support a
Family which issued out of an ancient stock; Like as old Oaks are accounted an
ornament to a Park, though they bear neither fruit nor leaves. This is one
promise made to the man who fears God, Thou shall Psa. 128. 6. Pro. 17. 5.
live to see thy childrens children. And Solomon tells us, The glory of children
are their Fathers.

4. Because your many years have enriched you with manifold Et senes magis
experientia valent, itaque major little solet esse dignitar. Mercer.
experiences, and this is judged by some Expositors to add much unto the Crown
of old age. This I might enlarge, by manifesting the advantages of old men's
experiences, both in reference unto their own comfort, and the service of
others: The holy Psalmist relieveth his drooping spirit, in an estate of
desertion, by improving of Gods ancient administrations. I have considered the
days of old, the years of ancient Psa. 77. 5, 10, 11. Plena est voluptatis
senectus, Si illa scias uti. Seneca.
times. I will remember the years of the right hand of the most High, I will
remember thy wonders of old. Yea the Heathen could knowingly speak of the sweet
fruits of old age if men had wisdom to reap them. And all ages do demonstrate,
that ancient men, are most meet by their grave counsels to be serviceable unto
the public. This Reverend man (whose Funeral we now celebrate, was wont to
say, That a few gray hairs would do more work then many young locks. Besides
other proofs hereof, the History concerning the different advice given to
Rehoboam, by his young and old Counselors, will 1 Kin. 12. 6, 8.
sufficiently witness this truth.

These considerations may quicken the godly aged to gratitude for their hory
heads: but I must add, that they have much more cause to magnify God, for
making them godly, because old age may be the gift of common bounty, whereas
righteousness is the product of peculiar grace. The wicked may become Job 21.
7. Mat. 13. 43.
old, but the righteous are the adopted children of God and the heirs of
heavens glory; Therefore their souls should praise the Lord, because when their
lives are redeemed from Psa. 30. 11. with 4.
destruction, they are also crowned with loving-kindenesse and tender mercies.
Now that I may prevail with you to honor God whose hoary heads are crowned
with righteousness, I will briefly propound to your most serious thoughts
these following meditations.

1. That your selves in the estate of depraved nature were of that number of
whom it is most truly said, There is none Romans 3. 9, 10.
righteous, no not one, and that this righteousness which is your Ephesians. 5 9.
Crown was the fruit of Gods Spirit; Therefore the glory thereof is due unto
the Lord and not unto your selves, because he and not your selves has made the
difference betwixt 1 Cor. 4. 7.
you and others.

2. That the greatest part of mankind does abide in the ways of
unrighteousness; The whole world (says the Apostle) 1 John 5. 19. Genesis 18. 32.
lies in wickedness; The small number of ten righteous persons could not be
found in Sodom and Gomorrha with their Suburbs; And before the Flood God
himself could not espy any other besides Noah, Thee only have I seen righteous
before Genesis 7. 1.
me in this age; Now by how much the more rare righteousness is amongst men,
by so much the more thankful should we be if God has wrought it in us.

3. Can you remember either your own many, strong, and long-continued
resistances made against divine assaults, or the manifold Providence and
Ordinances, by means whereof you have been brought into the way of
righteousness; May not Christ speak unto you as once to Jerusalem, How Mar.
23. 37.
often would I and ye would not? yea, for a long time might not this be charged
upon you, You always resisted the holy Ghost? Act. 7. 51.
And by how many hammerings and humblings, by what showrs and Sunshine, by what
shakings with meltings in the Ministry of the Gospel have you been won to the
Lord; Now should not all this patience and goodness of God lead you unto
thankfulness?

4. Lastly, Take notice of the various and precious privileges whereof you are
made partakers by means of righteousness; These I will only mention without
amplification: Pro. 3. 16. and 4. 22. Genesis 15. 15. Job 5. 26.
Hereupon you may be confident.

1. That your lives are lengthened, not only by common providence, but in the
pursuance of special promises made unto them who have received peculiar grace.

2. That you shall be supplied with all necessary accommodations in your
passage to heaven; These are Christ's own words unto them who seek
righteousness, All these things shall be added unto you. Mat. 6. 33. (...).


3. That you shall undoubtedly persevere to glory, The righteous shall hold on
his way.

4. That all occurrences shall be sanctified to your spiritual Job 17. 9.
advantage, Say ye to the righteous that it shall be well Isa. 3. 10.
with him.

5. That Gods vigilant eye of providence shall never be withdrawn from you, in
which respect you may be the rather Job 36. 7.
assured of the seasonable and full accomplishment of all his promises.

6. That upon Natures dissolution your souls shall be perfect, Heb. 12. 22.
and that at the general Resurrection your bodies and souls shall inherit life
eternal. Now who can beleevingly look upon Mat. 15. 46. Express thankfulness
by a conversation ordered according to Scripture.
himself interested in these glorious obligations of Gods grace without a
thankful heart?

If by these many Arguments the hearts of any aged ones, being resolved upon
gratitude, shall enquire how they may in realities express their thankfulness
unto the Lord, both for his long-sufferance and loving-kindenesse toward them.
My answer is this, That you shall be regularly and acceptably thankful unto
God both for your gray-hairs and your graces, by studying and endeavoring such
a frame of heart and course of life as may answer that counsel which himself
has left on record for your guidance in the holy Scriptures which I shall
plainly and faithfully impart unto you. But before I mention particulars to
direct your behavior, I shall premise these two things to move attention with
resolutions to practice them.

1. That howsoever, too often, men themselves do not observe when gray hairs
are here and there upon them, and Hos. 7. 9.
many times the aged may seem youthful unto others; yet God does take exact
and particular notice of every aged person in the world. The holy Ghost
records when Joshua waxed old, and was stricken in age, and about what time
Josh. 23. 1. 1 Samuel 17. 12. Genesis 17. Luke 2.
Jesse (the Father of David) went for an old man in Israel. The like I might
discover in regard of Abraham, Sarah, Anna, But I forbear.

2. That the Lord does punctually observe all the good, Genesis 17. 24. 1 Chro. 23
1. 1 Kin. 13. 11. Genesis 19. 4. Eze. 23. 43.
and all the evils of them who are stricken in years, whether they be his own
people or others. This I enlarge not by specifying instances, because the naked
quotations may be sufficient.

Having thus briefly premised these things, I proceed to the directions which I
find registered in the Word of God, that the aged may know how to order their
conversation in some measure of answerablenesse unto that Crown of glory which
the Lord by his grace and their gray hairs has put upon them.

In general, They must be of such behavior as becomes Tit. 2. 3.
holiness, whether they be aged men or women, therefore they ought to advance
and express the power of Gods grace by a diligent improvement of all such
means as God has sanctified. The Apostle John writes to the Fathers who were
knowing men, that they might become more holy. 1 John 2. 13, 14 Luke 2. 37.
And old Anna, though truly good, yet waited daily at the Temple, that she
might grow better. This I might persuade by many Arguments.

1. There is no one who has lived the longest and has Dr Tailor on Tit. 2. 2.
made the best proficiency in Christ's School, that is come to that pillar on
which he may write, Ne plus ultra; But when he has summed up all his rich
endowments, shall find cause to conclude with the words of the Apostle, Not as
Phil. 3. 12.
though I were already perfect.

2. The grievances of old age are such, and so many, as will call for the
exercise of the strongest graces attainable in this life. Solomon reckons up
some of them, and tells the aged person, that they will take away the
pleasures of his Eccl. 12. 2. 3, 4, 5.
life; Then all the faith, patience, and other graces which have been gained
will be found weak enough, to wield, the burdens of that estate: This, this
was the only support of the Psalmist, when strength and heart did fail, that
God was the strength of his heart, and his portion (to live upon) for ever.
Psa. 73. 26.
In this respect pains should be taken, that as the outward man decays, the
inward man may be renewed daily. 2 Cor. 3. 16.


3. The aged will lie open unto derision and disrespect in regard of the
imperfections and weaknesses which attend that condition of life, therefore
they should labor by eminency of holiness to secure their credit amongst all
sorts of people whatsoever; For nothing does more awe the hearts of the
children of men then the power of godliness appearing in the conversations of
Gods Servants; As Paul advised young Timothy hereby to prevent contempt, Let no
man despise thee, 1 Timothy 4. 12.
but be an example of the believers in word and conversation, etc. So by means
hereof Job had won great estimation amongst all sorts; The young men saw me and
hid themselves, and the Job. 29. 8.
aged arose and stood up.

4. The miscarriages of old people are in Gods account the more heinous,
because they have had most frequent and most ancient experiences of his
goodness. By this circumstance the evils of Israel are once and again
aggravated. God carried them all the days of old, but they rebelled and vexed
Isa. 63. 9, 10.
his holy Spirit: Know that it is an evil thing (more then ordinarily evil)
that my fear is not in thee, for of old time I have Jer. 2. 19, 20.
broken thy yoke, etc.

5. And I might add that their wickedness will do much Persenem vitiosum
religio sancta destruitur. Bern.
more mischief tending more to the dishonor of God and the infection of
others. In all these regards it nearly concerns them whom God has crowned
with age and the profession of his Name, to heed their conversation, that it
may be suitable unto that dignity which the Lord has put upon them. It may
well become every one of them upon this account, frequently and affectionately
to make David's prayer, Now I am old and gray headed, O Lord forsake me not,
Psa. 71. 18.
until I have showed thy strength unto this generation, and thy power to every
one that is to come. This in general, the particulars follow.

First, The aged should be full of knowledge as they are full of years; This is
taken for granted in many Scripturepassages, With the ancient is wisdom, and
in length of days is Job 12. 12. Isa. 3. 2.
understanding; And thence it is that the ancient and the prudent are
conjoined. Ignorance is much more excusable in the young, who may thus plead,
We are but of yesterday, Job. 8. 9.
and know nothing, because our days upon earth are a shadow; but an old
Ignoramus is a thing intolerable: Better is a poor and wise child, then an old
and foolish King. When God has Eccl. 4. 13.
set a Crown upon a man's head, and he knows not how to wear it; Honor (says
Solomon) is unseemly for a fool: And Prove. 26. 1.
this disgrace is the greater when means of knowledge are enjoyed, yea, enjoyed
for many years. You (says the Apostle to some who were members of the Church
at Corinth) have not the knowledge of God. I speak this to your shame. And 1
Cor. 15. 34.
in like manner he greatens this defect in others; When for the time ye ought
to be teachers of others, ye have need that one teach Heb. 5. 12.
you again which be the first principles of the Oracles of God: Remember how
sharply Christ reproves Nicodemus, Art thou a Master in Israel and know not
these things? It would Joh. 3. 10.
be accounted a great disparagement unto a young man having served out an
Apprentiship, to be unacquainted with the mysteries of his Trade; Now fifty
years is above seven years in Sabbath-daies, and yet how many of that age (who
have had an addition of many weekly Lecture-daies) are yet palpably ignorant in
the mysteries of salvation? These things I suggest to shame the aged unto
endeavors to become rich in understanding.

Secondly, They should not only be knowing but fruitful, The righteous shall
flourish like the palm tree, they shall bring Psa. 92. 12, 14.
forth fruit in old age, they shall be fat and flourishing. This may upon good
ground be looked for, from them who are truly good, for though the natural
radical heat does abate in old persons, yet the spiritual vigor which they
receive from Christ decaieth not. His branches shall spread and his Hos. 14. 6,
8.
beauty shall be as the Olive Tree, for from me is thy fruit found. Although
age takes them off from sundry emploiments, yet they should be doing something
according to their abilities. The holy Ghost tells us of an old man who came
from his work out of the field at even; In the evening of our age, toward
Judge. 19. 16.
Sunsetting, we should be found acting in one kind or other for God; and
happy is that Servant whom his Lord Luke 12. 43.
when he comes shall find so doing. Here I will instance in three particulars.

1. The aged must be Teachers of good things, Days should speak, and the
multitude of years should teach wisdom; This Tit. 2. 3, 4. Job 3. 2. 7. Gen,
49. Deuteronomy. 32. Josh. 23. 1. Job 29. 15. Mat. 12. 35. and 13. 52. 1 Timothy 4. 7.
was the practice of old Jacob, Moses, Joshua, etc. And Job reports this as a
ground of his comfort, I was eyes to the blind, unto me men gave ear, and
waited, and kept silence at my counsel. You must bring forth of your treasure
good things, both new and old, and not trifle out the latter part of your days
in telling old wives Fables.

2. They must communicate their experiences, Hear this, ye old men, Has this
been in your days? Tell ye your children Joel. 1. 2, 3.
of it, and let your children tell their children, and their children another
generation. This has been the custom of Gods Psa. 78. 1. Psa. 66. 16, 20.
Number. 33. 1, 2.
Worthies in all ages, according to his command, whereby themselves have
received comfort, others benefit, and God glory. And this I seriously persuade,
though I have not leisure to enlarge it. Let future ages understand the most
remarkable passages of Gods Providence which you have experienced, whereby sin
may be rendered odious, and Christ with the ways of faith and holiness may be
represented precious to the souls of succeeding ages.

3. They should endeavor to clear both their own credit and consciences, in
reference unto all their conversings in the world. This I propound from the
example of Samuel, when he was old and gray headed, pointing only at the Story,
1 Samuel 12. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
which is well worth consideration and imitation. And in this practice let the
honor of Religion be rather vindicated then your own. Give God the glory of
your own unreprovable conversation, and for your known miscarriages express
your repentance, which will produce both present inward peace and future
reputation.

Thirdly, The aged should possess their souls with patience, This is one of
the particulars which St Paul advises Titus to press upon old men, viz. that
they be sound in patience. This Tit. 2. 2.
grace of patience considered under a threefold notion, is needful, and would
be commendable in them.

1. Patience in waiting for the full accomplishment of all Gods Promises. You
have need of Patience (says the Apostle) Heb. 10. 35.
that after ye have done the will of God, you might receive the promise. And St
James propounds the practice of the Husbandman to persuade this; Behold, the
Husbandman waits Iam. 5. 7.
for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience for it. I may tell
you whose heads are gray, whose lives have been a long seed-time in ways of
well-doing, Behold, the fields are Ioh. 4. 35.
white already to harvest; Your time of reaping is at hand, therefore hold up
your heads and hopes in a patient expectation of your recompense of reward.

2. Patience in forbearing those who load you with provocations. In this case
let David be your Example, who silently 2 Samuel 16. 10.
without yielding unto motions made for revenge, submitted unto that affliction
with which God did exercise him, through the cursings of Shimei. With how much
contempt does the Lion (the King of Beasts) pass on his way, notwithstanding
the barkings of angry dogs? Therefore you aged ones who are crowned both with
gray-hairs and graces, Look upon your selves as ready to set foot into your
palace, and to take possession of the Kingdom prepared for you; and hereupon
with a holy scorn slieght all the clamors and snarlings of them, who speak evil
of you because you refuse 1 Pet. 4. 1, 4.
to run with them into the same excess of riot.

3. Especially Patience in a calm and cheerful bearing of all those infirmities
and afflictions which are wont to accompany old age. Remember that your age is
your Crown, and therefore carry it with contentment, though it cause your heads
to ache. M. Cartwright upon my Text has this note, Adversus senectutis
incommoda, and difficultates, recreare debet.
That the holy Ghost does purposely tell the aged, that the hoary head is a
Crown, that by this consideration he might releeve them under all the
grievances which attend that condition of life. M. Muffet upon my Text speaks
thus, Old age is born up by these two staves, 1. Life well-spent, 2. Hope of
future glory. And Bishop Hall has this expression in his Meditations and Vows:
I account old age the best age, 1. Because the inconveniences of it are only
bodily, with a better estate of mind. 2. Because nearer to dissolution.
Hereunto he adds this Story, When a man told a Philosopher, that he was sorry
to see him so old: he returned this answer, Be sorry rather that ever I was
young to be a fool: Many such like Meditations might be added to check
frowardness, to maintain patience under all the pressures of old age, but I
shall refer to the forementioned privileges which appertain unto them whose
hoary heads are found in the way of righteousness.

Fourthly, They should be sound in faith; 1. Both in the doctrine Tit. 2. 2.
of faith, in the truth of the Scripture, having had long time for trial, to
discern betwixt things which differ, and therefore in reference to Fundamentals
at least they should be able to say with David to God, Concerning these thy
Testimonies, Psa. 119. 152. Romans 4. 19. Luke 2. 25. Deuteronomy. 34. 1.
I have known of old that thou have founded them for ever. 2. And in the grace
of faith, being strong in confidence, whereby they shall with old Abraham
glorify God, and with old Simeon go singing to heaven; It was an easy thing
with Moses to die when God had showed him the promised Land: And it is a good
sight to behold ancient Christians carried out of this world with full sail of
assurance, hearing them to speak, as Job did, I know that my Redeemer lives,
Job 19. 25, 26, 27.
and though after my skin worms destroy my flesh, yet in my flesh I shall see
God, whom I shall see for my self, etc. It well becomes them likewise in times
of trouble to plead their old experiences with bold confidence, Why
withdrawest thou Psa. 74. 11, 12. and 71. 17, 19, 21
thine hand, even thy right hand, pluck it out of thy hosome, for God is my
King of old. Whereas their infidelity is the more inexcusable in it self, and
the more provoking unto God, because manifold providence both in former and
later years, have evidenced unto them Gods power and truth; They Psa. 106. 21,
22 23, 24.
forgot God their Savior which had done great things in Egypt, wondrous things
in the Land of Ham, and terrible things by the Red Sea, therefore he said that
he would destroy them, etc. they believed not his Word. And hence it was that
both Moses Numb. 20. 12. Luke 1. 18.
and old Zechary were so severely dealt with for their incredulity.

Fifthly, They should be sound in charity, This the Apnstle Tit. 2. 2.
adds to the former. And it is very reasonable in many regards; for as they
have long lived upon Gods love, so they have received most kindenesses from men
in manifold exigences, and the necessities of their old age do call for
continued and renewed compassion from time to time. Here I shall only touch
upon three Rules to guide this grace in its exercise.

1. For purity, their love should be most enlarged upon the account of piety.
As it was the praise of Titus, that his 2 Cor. 7. 15.
inward affection was more abundant whilst he remembered the obedience of the
Corinthians; When special kindness is showed toward them who are of the
household of faith. Gal. 6. 10.


2. For perpetuity, they must not be weary of works of charity: Gal. 6. 9.
Charitas quae defini potest nunquam vera fuit. Aug.
And doubtless if love be true it will be constant, for a friend loves at all
times.

3. For quantity, it should be increased, and it will be to their high
commendation if their works of mercy (as of other kinds) be more at the last
then at the first. And therefore Rev. 2. 19.
covetousness should be cashiered, as the cutthroat of charity.

Moreover, I might persuade from the authority of Saint Paul, sobriety,
temperance, and gravity. For temperance let Tit. 2. 2. 2 Samuel 19. 35.
old Barzillai be an example unto the aged, whose moderation in reference to
the dainties of a Court tendered unto him, was very great. And let the sad
consequences of Noah Genesis 9. 21. Alto aetas alios mores postulat.
his intemperance give caution for sobriety unto all ancient persons
whatsoever. As for gravity, it is a virtue opposed to lightness and apishnesse;
It should be expressed in countenance, speech, and apparel, etc. But these
things I must not enlarge. And I will only name what the Apostle adds in
relation to old women. They must not be false accusers; His word suggests that
false accusers are devil-like, having (...). Tit. 2. 3. Ioh. 8. 44. Iam. 3. 6.
tongues set on fire by hell. This may be a sufficient watchword to warn them
to keep at a distance from such exorbitances; The last thing which I will
advise all ancient persons unto, is constancy and perseverance in ways of
righteousness, according to all the former directions; I would propound the
resolution of David when old and gray headed for your imitation, I will hope
continually, and will yet praise thee more and Psa. 71. 9. - 14.
more, etc. You should be unmovable like unto old Oaks, deeply rooted, which
are not turned hither and thither, this way and that way, by every contrary
wind. Remember the speech of old Polycarpus when tempted to Apostasy, God
has been my good Master for 85 years, therefore I will not forsake him: As
Arguments to move endeavors after steadiness both in the profession and
practice of the truth, take these short particulars into your serious
consideration.

1. In the winter of your age, you may probably be assaulted with violent
storms. When thou shall be old (says Christ to Peter) another shall gird thee
and carry thee whither Ioh. 21. 18, 19.
thou would not: This spoke he, fignifying by what death he should glorify
God.

2. You are in danger of declining. Good old Ely toward 1 Samuel 2. 22. with
cap. 3. 13.
the end of his life was woefully cooled in his zeal for God, as his indulgence
toward his Sons, did manifest. And when Solomon was old, his wives turned away
his heart after other 1 King. 11. 4.
gods, and his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, as was the heart of
David his father. These examples may give you an Alarm; for neither high
parts, nor saving grace, will secure you from porttall apostacy, therefore you
should be watchful.

3. God does not change or abate in his goodness toward you, but he speaks
unto you as to old Israel. You are borne Isa. 46. 3, 4.
by me from the belly which are carried from the womb. And even to your old age
I am he, and even to hoar hairs will I carry you. Now should not Gods
immutability in his favors notwithstanding your great unworthiness, engage
you strongly to hold close unto his Majesty without any backslidings!

4. Your fruitfullnesse in age, will add to your comfort when you die, and to
your honor afterward. The promise of God speaks thus much: Thou shall come
to thy grave in Job 5. 26.
a full age, like as a shock of Corn comes in in his season. Unto which might
be added St Paul's experience; I have fought a 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: Henceforth is
laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Mortem plenus expeto.
Seneca.
Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day.

Having finished my Exhortation to the aged, I shall direct my counsel unto
them who are young; wherein I will be the shorter, because I have been so large
in the former, and I will cast mine advice under three heads.

First, To seek the lengthening of their lives, that they may attain the Crown
of glory, which belongs to the hoary head.

And for this end,

1. Let them warily decline all life-endangering practices. I will instance in
some. Quarrellings, fightings, whereby many in the flower of their age lose
their lives, whereof there are sad experiences every where. Whoredom is another
life-shortning Pro. 2. 18. Pro. 7. 11.
sin: Solomon tells us, that the Harlots house inclines to death, and her
paths unto the dead. And he foretells the young man, what will be the
consequence of that course; Thou shall mourn at the last, when thy flesh and
thy body are consumed. And unto both the former, I may add drunkenness and
gluttony, for as the strength of nature is wasted, and the body is filled with
diseases through intemperancy; and by reason hereof the forementioned evils of
quarelling and whoring are much fomented. The words of Solomon are here
considerable: Pro. 23. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34.
Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has contentions, who has wounds, who has
redness of eyes! They that tarry long at the wine, they that go to seek mixed
wine, etc. At the last it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder.
Thine eyes shall behold strange women, yea thou shall be as he that lies down
in the midst of the sea, or as he that lies upon the top of a mast. Finally,
Take heed of all such ways of wickedness, which may justly bring you under
the Magistrates sword, or expose you to the deadly blows of divine displeasure:
Bloody Psalm. 55. 23.
and deceitful men shall not live out half their days.

2. Let them betake themselves unto such courses, whereunto God has promised
length of days. The Lord in the fifth Commandment, persuades every child to
honor and obey his parents, upon this consideration, that thy days Deu. 5. 16.
may be prolonged. Yea the whole course of obedientiall conformity unto all
Gods Commandments, is pressed by this argument; What man is he that desires
life, and loves many Ps. 34. 12, 13, 14.
days that he may see good? keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from
speaking guile. Depart from evil and do good. And Diodate. Contingere solum iis
qui just viverunt, etc. quod sit (...). Piscator. Hujus vitae brevitas,
longiore in summa beatitate, vita compensatur. Cart. 2 Timothy 2. 22.
some Expositors do suggest from my Text, that walking in the way of
righteousness, is a means to obtain the honor of an hoary head. God
ordinarily grants long life unto good men. This is most certain, that God
will either lengthen the lives of such upon earth, or else crown them with life
eternal in Heaven. This lets in the second head of advice to be bestowed upon
young persons.

Secondly, To seek righteousness. This was St Paul's counsel unto young
Timothy, Follow righteousness. And the doctrine under hand is a strong
argument to back it, which David pressed upon his son Solomon, when young and
tender; who speaking of sanctifying grace under the name of wisdom, uses
these words; Exalt her and she shall promote Prove. 4. 3, 4, with v. 8, 9.
thee, she shall bring thee to honor when thou do embrace her. She shall
give to thine head an ornament, a Crown shall she deliver to thee.
Righteousness therefore will be a Crown of glory, unto the green-headed, as
well as unto the gray headed, which should move the young to look out after it.

Now that my persuasion may be the more prevalent with young ones, I shall
commend these following particulars unto their serious consideration.

1. Gods express command: Remember now thy Creator Eccl. 12. 1.
in the days of thy youth. If you acknowledge his Sovereignty over you, as
your Maker, is it not rational that you should suddenly submit unto his
government?

2. The examples of such young ones, who came in unto 2 Chronicles. 34. Dan. 1. and
3. 2 Timothy 3. 15.
God graciously in the morning of their age: Josiah, Daniel, Shadrack, Meshach
and Abednego, as also Timothy; but especially set Christ before your eyes, who
when he was Luke 2. 42, 51.
twelve years old, did famously express the power of grace. Do you judge
godliness commendable in them, wherefore then do you not endeavor imitation?

3. The advantages of seeking grace betimes, early in the Heb. 3. 7, 8, 13. Qui
non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit. 1 King. 14. 3, with 13. Mark. 10. 21.
Discipulum minimum Christus amavit plurimum. Joh. 21. 20. Pro. 22. 6. Quo semel
est imbutae recens, Joh. 15. 8. 1 Cor. 15. 58.
morning of youth. I shall name some of them without enlargement ( viz.) The
work will be to your selves the more easy (as the bowing of the twig while
tender,) and to God the more acceptable, when the first fruits are consecrated
unto his Majesty. Christ is said to love the moral young man; and it is
conjectured, that John had the more tender respect, because he came unto Christ
so soon. The gracious seasonings in youth, will also make the conversation more
savoury afterward: And the sooner you undertake Gods service, the more glory
you shall bring unto his Name, the larger recompense likewise your selves shall
receive. Finally, this will be an encouragement, unto your hopeful addresses
unto the Lord, as need may require. Mark David's manner of pleading in prayer; O
God thou have taught me from my youth, and hitherto I have declared thy
wondrous works. Now Psa. 71. 17, 18.
also when I am old and gray headed O God forsake me not.

4. The necessity of endeavoring to be godly in the time of youth. This might
be sundry ways manifested: Because then most subject to satisfy many sinful
corrruptions. As the boiling pots cast up the most scum, so in the heat of
youth, there are strongest inclinations to passions, revenge, lasciviousness,
intemperance. etc. In which respect the Apostle saw cause to give Timothy this
counsel; Fly youthful lusts, but follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace,
etc. And the 2 Timothy 2. 22.
breaking forth of wickedness in youth, will breed bitter complaints in old
age. As the aged are wont to feel pain in those bones which were bruised or
broken, when they were young. Thou writest bitter things against me (says Job)
and make me Job 13. 26.
to possess the iniquities of my youth. Ephraim also makes pitiful moan,
bearing the reproach of youth. Yea, suppose you Jer. 31. 19.
should be secured from all gross evils, while young; yet if ever the Lord
bring you home unto himself, by the power of Nimis sero, ad te veni Domine.
an effectual calling, this will be a cut upon your hearts (as it was to
Augustine,) that you came in to God no sooner. How will you bewail your folly
and great ingratitude unto Mal. 1. 8, 13, 14
God, that the devil has been gratified by your first fruits, and that only
the refuse, dregs, and withered stuff of old age, is reserved for God. And if
the Lord should punish your obstinacy in youth, with final impenitence, how
sad would your reckoning be at the last day? for this is most certain, that
when you have sowed your wild oats, and satisfied the sinful desires of youth,
for all these things God will bring you Eccl. 11. 9.
to judgment. The Lord give young ones to dwell upon these meditations, and to
lay them seriously unto their hearts. Here I might justly take up a great
lamentation, considering that aversness unto the power of piety, which is every
where to be found amongst young people, notwithstanding instructions,
convictions, ministerial persuasions, together with some motions of Gods Spirit
upon their hearts, with which their souls are assaulted for good from time to
time. They will acknowledge the reasonableness of our advice; they will shed
tears Impius and foelix, sic simul esse cupit.
being reproved for their regardlesnesse of God and of their own souls; yea
they will make fair promises of amendment for time to come. But, alas, alas,
poor foolish creatures, how careless in seeking to keep these spiritual sparks
alive in their own bosoms. How soon do these good motions die within Bonum
quaris, malum facis, in contraria curris. August. Inter mortis metum and vitae
tormenta miscre fluctuant. Seneca.
them. They would have the Crown tendered, but will not resolutely hold on in
the use of Gods means to obtain it. Fain they would save their souls, and yet
satisfy their sinful lusts also. And thus they fluctuate as a wave upon the
sea, carried hither and thither by contrary winds. Whereas they should upon a
serious consideration (whether it be better to serve God or the devil, to save
the soul, or to hazard the loss of it unto eternity) work themselves unto an
unmovable determination, to seek the Crown of glory in the way of
righteousness.

Thirdly, To yield due, reverent respect unto aged persons, especially to such
in whom the power of grace does most eminently appear. Mr Cartwright upon my
Text presses this duty, arguing from our honoring them whom men Crown, unto
such to whom God assigns the Crown of glory. As there should be
testifications of high respect unto all such, so especially 1. To our natural
parents Honor thy Father Exodus 20. 12. 1 Timothy 5. 17.
and thy Mother. 2. And to those whose Office and faithfulness in discharging
it, does call for double honor.

Now this honorable respect of the aged (especially if godly) must be
expressed,

1. By reverent gestures: Thou shall rise up before the hoary Lev. 19. 32.
head, and honor the face of the old man.

2. By giving them the precedencie, in speaking in all cases to be debated.
Elihu said, I am young and ye are very old, Job 32. 6, 7. Adolescens bis
interrogatus respondeat. Bern.
wherefore I was afraid and durst not show mine opinion. I said, Days should
speak and multitude of years should teach wisdom.

3. By testimonies of due estimation to their persons, even at those times when
there may be occasion to blame some of their practices. Rebuke not an Elder,
but entreat him as a Father. 1 Timothy 5. 1.


4. By submitting unto their grave and gracious counsels. Likewise ye younger,
submit your selves unto the elder. The Apostle 1 Pet. 5. 5. Philem. 9.
styles himself Paul the aged, to prevail with Philemon to yield unto his
advice.

5. By preferring them (if in all other regards comparison be equal) in
discoveries of love and estimation. As it was agreed upon betwixt Paul and the
Disciples, that he should rather lodge at the house of Mnason an old Disciple,
then any Acts 21. 16.
where else. By thus doing, we shall witness to the world that our judgments
are rectified, and our conversations are ordered by the word of truth, and that
therefore we account the hoary-head to be a Crown of glory, if it be found in
the way of righteousness.

Now having concluded my discourse upon the Text, I know it is expected, that I
should speak unto the occasion of our meeting concerning this Reverend Father
(whose Funeral we now celebrate) I will premise this, that a full Narrative of
his long well-spent Life, cannot be expected from my report at this time, but I
hope that it will in due time be drawn up and handed unto you for his
honorable remembrance, and for imitation unto posterity, by One who wasfully
acquainted both with his Life and Death.

In general this I dare assert with confidence (wherein I doubt not your
consent) that his hoary head was a Crown of glory, for it was found in the way
of righteousness. Through Gods good providence, he had a long time worn this
his Crown, for he was well nigh Fourscore years old. Notwithstanding this his
great age, yet (through unusual divine indulgence) his strength was not labor
and sorrow, for he Psalm. 90. 10.
was neither afflicted with the Stone, or Gowt, or Cramp, or any Cough; but he
labored only (as I have often heard him say) under the disease of weak old
age. That which is recorded of Abraham, may be applied to him, That he died in
a Genesis 25. 8.
good old age, an old man and full of years. Neither were the abilities of his
mind abated, but his understanding and memory continued strong, even unto his
end. As all his Works published, do proclaim his incomparable learning in all
kinds: so those which were lately printed do witness that Academicall studies
(when he was young) were fresh and ready for improvement in his old age. And
the promise made to the righteous man, was verified in him, He shall bring
forth Psalm. 92. 14.
fruit in old age, he shall be fat and flourishing. In all which regards,
whether we consider the continued healthful frame of his body, or the
uninterrupted fruitfullnesse of the gifts and graces of his spirit, it may be
truly said of him, in reference to his death. That he is come to his grave in a
full age, like as a Job 5. 26.
shock of Corn comes in in his season. But that I may not anticipate the
intended Narrative of his whole Life, I shall only declare two or three
passages toward the end of his days. When he looked upon the weakening
distempers (which had caused him to keep his bed) as the Arrest of death, he
was pleased (through his love to my worthless self) to give order that I
should be certified of his weakness, that he might be remembered before the
Lord in my prayers; and also that I might be requested, as from himself, to
perform the like office of respect for him, which I had lately done for his
Reverend neighbor Mr Whitaker, by preaching his Funeral Sermon. Upon this
intelligence the next morning I hastened unto him, to witness mine unfeigned
love and honorable respect of him, as also to put this work (which I have now
performed) with his approbation, upon an abler hand: but finding him altogether
unwilling to excuse me, I thought it more meet to undertake it, then to
distemper his spirit by my refusal. By reason of his very great weakness he
could not speak much, but that which he said was weighty and savoury, which I
will faithfully relate: His words were these; I am now conflicting with my last
Adversary, though I believe the sting is taken out. Nature will struggle, but I
humbly submit unto the good pleasure of God. I heartily beg the pardon of my
many sins, especially of my want of sedulity and fidelity in my public and
private charge, hoping to be washed with Christ's blood, and desiring to be
translated out of this restless condition. I expect daily, yea hourly to be
translated into that everlasting rest, which God has prepared for them who are
interested in his Christ: And I pray God to bless you, and his whole Ministry
every where.

These were his last words unto me, upon which I might much enlarge my self;
but I leave the improvement hereof, and of his laborious exemplary Life, unto
your conscientious endeavors. Although he be now dead, yet he still lives by
his worthy Works already printed, unto which I hope many more (which be left
ready for the Press) will be added for future profit in the Church of Christ.
I conclude, with hearty desires, that this sad providence, in his death, may be
sanctified unto us all, and especially unto his nearest Relations, through Gods
rich grace in Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
The Narrative of the Life and Death of Mr GATAKER.
Mr THOMAS GATAKER or GATACRE (for so he wrote himself, till of later years to
prevent miscalling occasioned frequently by the view of the letters he changed
it into GATAKER) was a branch of an ancient Family, so firmly by Gods
providence planted in Shropshire, that the stock has continued in the same
House, carrying the Name of its owner, and known by the title of Gatacre-Hall,
by an uninterrupted succession from the time of K. Edward the Confessor. His
Father Mr Thomas Gatacre (being not the eldest son of William Gatacre) was
designed by his Parents to the study of the Law, in order to which he was a
student at the Temple. During the course of that institution, he occasionally
coming to visit some Kindred (then high in place and power,) was often present
at the examination of some Christian confessors of the Gospel, in those severe
times wherein Satan armed all his forces to suppress that dawning light which
threatened ruin to his kingdom of darkness. The harshnesse of those
proceedings, together with the constancy of the good, though simple Christians,
that with evidence of truth and resolution of mind maintained Faith and a good
conscience, were of great moment with him to facilitate the entertainment of
that purer doctrine of the Gospel which began to shine into his soul. This
being apprehended by his Parents, they jealous of his change, sent him over to
Lorain in Flanders, and to win him to a compliance in religion, settled upon him
an estate in Lease of 100lb per annum old rent. but like St Paul, Phil. 3. he
counted all outward advantages as nothing in comparison of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus. Therefore his Father perceiving his unchangeable steadfastness in
that choice (which had nothing to prejudice it but the seeming novelty,)
recalled him, and with great displeasure revoked his own Grant, which yet could
not take effect without the Sons consent. But the young disciple had already
learned the hard lesson of self-denial and forsaking all to follow Christ.
Therefore to preserve his conscience, he gave up that which had been the bait
of Apostasy. Now the Lord (that has promised to his faithful followers
satisfaction for all their losses) raised him up Friends, by whose means and
advice he pursued his studies at Oxford, and in process of time, (when not only
the clouds of ignorance and superstition were dispelled, but also the showers
of blood were blown over) he took upon him the public Ministry of the Gospel.
He was household Chaplain to Robert Earl of Leicester, and Pastor of St Edmunds
in Lumbertstreet London. In that Parsonage-house by his Wife Margaret, being of
an honest Family of the Pigots in Hertfordshire, (among other Children) he had
this Son Thomas, born Sept 4. A. D 1574.

In his Childhood he was so addicted to those means which his Parents applied
him unto, for the implanting in him the seeds of good literature, that he
needed a bridle rather then a spur; for his love of Learning (equal to that
admirable capacity wherewith the Father of Lights had furnished him) was so
active in the acquiring of it, that his Father has often gently chidden him
from his book. Neither were his nimble wit, (...). Greg. Naz. Epitrph. Basil.
sharp reason, and vast memory perverted to be the instruments of that
debauchery wherewith the corruption of our nature does too often stain and
deflower our first days: for he had a lovely gravity in his young
conversation; so that, what Greg. Nazianzen said of the great Basil, might be
averred of him, that he held forth Learning beyond his age, and a fixedness of
Manners more considerable then his Learning.

Having happily dispatched his tyrocinnia of first exercises in the
Grammer-Schools (wherein he overcame by strange industry the difficulties which
that age, destitute of many helps our present days enjoy, conflicted withal;
and outstripped many that ran in the same course,) before he had completed
sixteen years. A. D. 1590. He was by his Father placed in St John's College in
Cambridge. Not long after his settlement there, his Father (being called by God
to receive the reward of his labors) left him not wholly destitute, yet not
sufficiently provided for any long continuance of his studies there. But God
that has engaged his truth and mercy to the upright, even for their seed also
( Psalm. 112. 1, 2.) (especially when the Son does not degenerate or thwart
the providence of God, by a forfeiture of his title to the Promises,) provided
friends and means for him, who was by an hidden counsel then designed to be an
instrument of doing service to the Church of Christ. Thus the fruit was not
nipped in a promising bud, by the frost of want.

Now, not from mere favor, but from merit (upon the proof of his Learning) he
was chosen Scholar of that worthy Society, wherein he continued his Studies
with unwearied diligence and happy success, till he with Abilities answerable
to his Degree, commenced Master of Arts. Take for an instance of his Industry
this ( viz. that he was a constant Auditor of that eminent Light of Learning Mr
Jo. Boys, who read a Greek Lecture in his bed to certain young Students that
preferred antelucana studia before their rest and ease. The Notes of those
praelections he kept as a treasure, and being visited by Mr Boys many years
after, he produced them, to the no small joy of the good old man, who professed
himself made some years younger by that entertainment.

Then was contracted that straight friendship betwixt Mr Gataker and that
faithful servant of Christ Mr Rich. Stock, which continued until the death of
this Reverend Minister, as appears by the testimony given unto him at his
Funeral.

An evidence of the good esteem which Mr Gataker had now acquired for his
Learning and Piety was this, that a College being then to be erected by the
munificence of the Countess of Sussex, the Trustees of that Foundress (Persons
eminent for Zeal and Prudence,) did choose him to be one of that Society. They
transplanted him into that new Nursery of Arts and Religion, being confident
that he would (as he did by Christ's assistance) prove fruitful for the
ornament and benefit of that Seminary. Indeed they laid hold of him before the
house was fit for inhabitants, fearing lest so fair and promising a flower
should be taken up by some other hand. But while the College was in building
(that he might not lose any opportunity of doing good,) he retired to Mr
William Aylofes house in Essex, who had gained him that he might instruct both
himself in the Hebrew Tongue, and his eldest Son in Literature proper to his
age. In this Family, partly by his own inclination, and partly by the
encouragement of the Governors thereof, he performed holy Duties for the
instruction of the whole household, expounding a portion of Scripture every
morning, that the Sun of Righteousness might as constantly arise, as the day
brake in upon them. In this Exercise, whereby he labored and proficere and
prodesse (both to edify others and himself) he dispatched the Epistles of the
Apostles, the Prophecies of Isaiah, and a good part of the book of Job,
rendering the Text out of the Original Languages, and thence delivering clear
explications,, and also deducing useful observations. Dr Stern then Suffragan
of Colchester (visiting the Mistress of the Family, to whom he was nearly
related,) happened to be present at this Exercise, when Mr Gataker explicated
the first Chapter of St Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians, which is known to be
most pregnant of deep divine mysteries. This portion of holy Writ he treated
upon with so happy elucidations, that the judicious Doctor much satisfied with
the performance, and admiring the indowments of Mr Gataker, exhorted him
instantly to take holy Orders, whereby those Gifts might be authorized for
public use, and improved for the building up of the Church, and withal
offered him his assistance in that business. But he well weighing the burden of
that Calling, and modestly judging of his own ability, which he conceived
disproportionable to that Office (to the full discharge whereof the Apostle
has set, (...); who is sufficient?) thanked the Doctor for his kind offer, but
deferred the matter to further confideration. Afterward by the advice of the
Reverend Mr Hen. Alvey, formerly his Tutor, and in this business taken for a
Counselor, upon his remonstrance of diverse reasons, and the instances of Dr
Stern afresh reiterated, he assented to be Ordained by the said Suffragan.

The Fabric of Sidney-Sussex-Colledge being now consummated, he betook himself
to the station designed him, and to the work depending thereon, wherein his
pains for seasoning young Students with principles of piety and learning were
both great and prosperous; for some of them that watered their gardens at his
Spring, or lighted their Lamps at his Light, grew up to eminency, as M. Jo.
Hoyl and M. Tho. Pell afterward worthy Fellows of the same Society.

About that time certain persons zealous of promoting the glory of God and
gaining souls to Christ, that lay in a sad condition through the defect of
Pastors able to teach and lead the people in the ways of truth, life, and
peace, especially M. Abdias Ashton of St John's, and M. William Bedel of
Emmanuel, set on foot a design of preaching in places adjacent to the
University even to a considerable distance; These invited M. Gataker to be a
partner in this labor; Being drawn in and encouraged by them, he preached
every Lords day at Everton (a village in the meeting-confines of Cambridge,
Bedford, and Huntingtonshire) where a decrepid man (reported to be 30. years
above an 100.) sustained the Name of Vicar, Vix magni nominis umbra. Here a
Family of Burgoins resident in that place deserves this Honorable
remembrance, that M. Roger Burgoin during that time used M. Gataker with great
humanity, which by him was construed to be the effect of his piety.

After half a year thus religiously employed with manifestation of a public
spirit, finding some causes to retire from the University, at the motion of M.
Ashton abovementioned (that had been Tutor) he removed to Sir William Cooks
Family then resident in London. This place and employment occasioned the more
public discovery of his Ministerial gifts, with the singular approbation of
many persons of note, not only for outward estate, but also for affection unto,
and judgment in Religion: Hereupon the Lecturers place at Lincolns Inn
falling void, some principal persons of that Honorable Society (which had
been his Auditors occasionally) made addresses unto him, inviting him to that
place, offering their assistances, and alleging the facility of his
Introduction by the Lord Chief Justice Pophams interessing himself in the
business, whom they knew both to have loved the Father Thomas Gataker (being
his intimate once, and contemporary in the studies of Law) and to favor the
Son very highly for his own worth and work in the Ministry. But he according to
his usual modesty declined the undertaking, and resisted the importunities
even of his Friend M. Stock, till D. Mountague Master of Sydney-Colledge,
repairing to London, and being acquainted with the design in hand (though he
had it in his thoughts to invite M. Gatacre back to the College, that he might
read an Hebrew Lecture that had a Salary annexed by the Lord Harrington, yet
(laying that aside) pressed M. Gataker with Arguments and Authority, encouraged
him against his own diffidence, and wrought him at last to an assent that
without any suit made by him the Lord Popham should recommend him to that
society. Thus was he chosen Preacher at Lincolns Inn, where he spent ten years
to the advancement of piety, and with a happy Reformation of some abuses of the
Lords day, as he himself testifies in his Apologetical discourse against Lilly,
page 16, 17.

But notwithstanding that Engagement M. Gataker did not totally abandon the
Family of Sir William Cook, to whose Lady he was near by blood, and dear to
both, upon the account of his pious labors amongst them. Therefore in the
vacations being disengaged from attendance at the Inn of Court, he resided in
that Family, exercising his Ministry either in their Chapel or in the
Parish Church, as occasion required; and this with an Apostolical mind, not
for filthy lucre, but freely making the Gospel a burden only to the dispenser:
Yet such was the devotion of that religious pair, that they also would not
serve God without cost, for they afterward in consideration of those pains
freely taken settled upon M. Gataker an Annuity of 20lb per annum, which he
indeed received for some few years, but after (for certain Reasons) remitted
unto the Heir of that Family, forbearing to use the Right he had, and
forbidding his Executor to claim any Arrears of that Annuity. This is mentiooed
the rather that the generous temper of his Christian Soul aiming at the highest
good of others more then his own temporal advantage, and infinitely removed
from sordid acquisition of gain, or the prostitution of his sacred Function
unto secular designs, may be opposed to stop the impudent clamor of some whose
consciences being both galled and cauterized, prompted them to calumniate him
as guilty of covetousness. But his own pen writ the best Apology, as indeed
(according to that of Nazianzen) they that give him a just character and due
Greg. Epita. Basil.
commendation, had need to have also his Eloquence.

While he attended on that Flock at Lincolns-Inne, Sir William Sidley a Learned
Mecaenas and pious Patron of the Church offered him a fair Benefice, and
because M. Gataker declined the burden of a Pastoral Cure, and pleaded an
unwillingnesse to be taken off from those worthy Gentlemen (of whose favor he
had good experience) he endeavored to persuade him that the taking of an
assistant would salve all inconveniences, so that he needed not to desert the
Society which in Term-time only, required his labors. But he that poised that
burden in the Scale of the Sanctuary, always thought that one Cure of souls
was enough for one man, and adventured the unkind resentment of the Noble
Gentleman upon the refusal, rather then the accumulation of preferments.

After ten years labors profitably employed at Lincolns Inn, not only for the
benefit of the then living Servants of God, but also for the behoof of
posterity, especially by that Learned Discouse of Lots there and then
conceived, and formed (wherein what satisfaction is given to conscience in many
cases, let the judicious acknowledge) M. Gataker thence removed to undertake
the Rectory of Rotherhith in Surry, of the grounds, motive, and manner whereof
he himself has largely given an account to the world in his Apologetick
against Lilly, p. 44. 48. of which this is the Sum.

The Rectory of Redrith in Surry (as it is commonly called) being void, and one
of an infamous life laboring hard to succeed in it (in order to which he
before the Incumbents death had set on foot a transaction with the mother of
certain Orphans in whose hands the Patronage was supposed to rest,) some of the
Religious Inhabitants valuing the means of grace above all other enjoyments,
cast their eyes and thoughts upon M. Gataker, to gain whom they added to their
own entreaties the mediation of his good Friend M. Richard Stock. And when he
had by many reasons remonstrated unto him, that God did call him to the work,
whose honor and Ordinances might suffer prejudice by the intrusion of an
unworthy man, he at last suffered himself to be persuaded to engage himself in
that charge, which being represented to Sir Henry Hobart then Attorney-Generall
by M. Randolph Crew (afterward Lord Chief Justice.) Sir Henry that before
favored other pretensions to gratify some Tenants of his in the Parish, did
yet readily embrace the motion concerning settling of M. Gataker there,
according to his contentment, and wrote a Letter to the Bishop for the removal
of all obstructions that lay in the way or might hinder the acceptance of the
Presentation of M. Gataker, which signed with the hands of all the three
Brethren who had Right in that Advocation, was tendered on his behalf.

The report of his remove was no welcome news to many of that society, who fain
would retain him, some whereof offered an enlargement of his maintenance for an
argument to keep him, and others represented the consistence of both
employments by the help of an Assistant. But he that made not his Ministry
(...) a mere Trade of living here (as Gregory Naz. complained some did in his
time, and too many in our times do,) nor would multiply burdens when he deemed
himself unfit for the least, would not be wrought to a new resolution.
Therefore Ann. Dom. 1611. commending his former charge to the grace of God, he
betook himself to the sole attendance on that Flock of which God had now made
him overseer. His industry in discharge thereof was constant and great,
notwithstanding an almost perpetual headache, wherewith God had exercised him
from his very youth, and for which he had this only poor comfort from his
Physicians, Dr Goulston his singular good friend (with whom he communicated his
studies on Galen, and to whom he contributed his assistance for the edition of
some parts of Galen,) often telling him, that the incurable disease of age
would be the remedy of his distemper, because together with the abatement of
natural heat, his indisposition would grow less vigorous or violent. To the
work of his Ministry in public upon the Sabbath, he added a weekly
Catecheticall Lecture on Friday in the evening, designed by him to lay the
foundation of saving knowledge in the hearts of Children, a certain number
whereof every Lecture day did give an account of their knowledge by set Answers
to Questions delivered out unto them beforehand for their instruction. ( This
course of holding a sound form of words, agreeable to the doctrine of the
Gospel consigned in holy writ, of what importance it is, we may conclude from
that ignorance and error that have invaded the Church of later times, these
mischiefs being imputable scarce to any thing so much as to the omission of
that useful duty of Catechizing.) But that exercise was performed by him, with
such an accurate and methodicall explication of the whole body of Divinity,
that Christians of riper years and long standing in Christ's School, did resort
to be partakers of those discourses, wherein their well exercised senses found
not only milk fit for Children, but also solid meat suitable to grown men in
Christ. This he continued till he had absolved a perfect summary of Theology,
and gave it over when he observed the least part of his Auditory to be those
for Solunt ultr^^^ae putere ^^^rces. Hieron.
whom he mainly intended the work, his Parishioners being grown to a neglect at
least of his free labors in that kind.

Mr Gatakers constant retirement in his study, made the choice of a help meet
for him, that might oversee his Family, a necessary act of prudence. Therefore
not long before he left Lincolns-Inne, he married the Widow of M. William
Cupper, to whose two Daughters he was so providently kind in their education
and disposing in marriage to two Divines of note, and continued such a fatherly
love to them and theirs, that the world mistook them for his own children. That
Wife died in childbed of a Son, that bore the Fathers Name, who after that he
had seen the most remote parts of the world wherewith we keep commerce,
returned home to his Father and died in peace.

The same motive still being in force, he after a decent interval of
widdowhood, chose to himself the Daughter of a Reverend Divine M. Charles
Pinner, who was then brought up in the worthy and religious Family of M. Ellis
Crisp, Brother to Mrs Pinner. It pleased God to give him a Son by her (who in
process of time was dedicated to Gods work in the Ministry) but immediately to
take away the Mother, so that the Mothers Funerals and Child's Baptism were
celebrated together: Thus our wise and gracious Father tempers the cup for his
Children, lest they should surfeit upon earthly enjoyments, as they might easily
do if they were mere and unmixt with occasions of sorrow.

He remained then for many years in a disconsolate solitude, till he again
adventured and married a Gentlewoman of a very considerable Family, being
Sister to Sr George, and Sr John Farwell, and of a good esteem for understanding
and piety. By her he had three Children, whereof a Son and a Daughter were
carried to the ground before their Mother, but the third yet lives to walk by
the light of her Fathers life and doctrine. This Gentlewoman being of a
contemplative mind fell into a Consumption, which wasted the body so that the
soul took flight from thence to Heaven.

Last of all he took to Wife a Citizens Widow, whose comfortable conversation
he enjoyed twenty four years, but without Issue by her. The love to her was one
motive, why he retreated out of his Parsonage-house to another habitation of
his own revenue; for supposing that she might be the survivor, he would make a
convenient provision for her that she might not be subject to another courtesy
for removal. And that affection extended it self in great liberality to diverse
of her kindred that were capable of support from him, both in her life time and
since her decease. Her he survived two years within a few days, and because he
numbered his days with wisdom, presuming that the time was approaching of his
soul being married to the Lamb, he could not endure to listen unto the motion of
some that advised him to a new entanglement in the world.

Having thus related his several Marriages, in a continued Narrative; I must
step back to the report of some passages, in time antecedent unto the last of
them.

In the year 1620, having a justifiable curiosity to see our neighbor Church
in the united Provinces, and something of the other Provinces in Belgium, he
took the advantage of the Truce then between the Spaniard and the Hollander,
for a free passage between both countries: Therefore with his entire friend
Capt. Josua Downing, and an old acquaintance M. Roger Acts 21. 16.
Hughs (his Mnason, whose house he used frequently in London) he took his
voyage, taking withal a Nephew of his being a young Student to be a partaker
of that travel. His Mother then alive had some fears, lest he being a known
adversary to the Popish cause (which he had mortally wounded with various
weapons) should suffer inconvenience from that generation of vipers, whose
virulent malice often prompts them to base courses of secret revenge. But God
was his guide and his shield, and prospered his journey so, that within a
month (for they took boat July 13. and returned safe Aug. 14.) he had viewed
the most considerable places in the Low Countries. In this travel he gave
better satisfaction to the English Church at Middleburgh, where he gave way to
the importunity of friends, desiring to hear him as well as glad to see him,
then he did to the English Papists in Flanders, with whom he had diverse
debates, wherein he drove some to a confusion whom he could not gain to
conversion.

Anno 1642. a violent fit of the Colic assaulted him, and brought him to the
very brink of the grave: but God brought him back again that he might do him
further service. For the year ensuing, before he had well recovered his
strength, he was called by the Parliament to sit as one of that Assembly, which
was summoned to be consulted about Religion; where his endeavors for promoting
Truth and suppressing Error were sincere and serious: And his study of Peace
with modesty was in this remarkable, that when his Reafons delivered concerning
Christ's obedience in order to our Justification (wherein he differed from his
brethren) could not obtain assent from the major part which determined the
Question contrary to his sense, his own love of unity imposed upon him silence;
and wrought him likewise unto resolutions, not to publish his discourses of
that subject from Romans 3. 28. that he might not publicly diseover his dissent
from the Votes of that Reverend Assembly.

During his attendance upon the work of that Convention, the Earl of Manchester
(being acquainted with his great worth and fitness in regard of his Learning in
all kinds, for Academicall transactions) offered him the Mastership of Trinity
College in Cambridg, which is the greatest preferment of that University: for
that Noble Lord being entrusted by the Parliament, with the care of that
Academy, was not passionately transported with a blind partiality of men's
persons, upon any sinister respects, but desired to prefer them, whom he judged
most worthy and most hopeful to do Christ service there: and therefore being
persuaded that M. Gataker might (both in regard of his gravity and vast
Scholasticall abilities) be a choice ornament of that University, and a fair
Copy for others to write by, he was very desirous to place him there. But this
good man (though often importuned by many friends, to accept of the motion)
according to his accustomed modesty, with many thanks unto the Earl, refused to
undertake that place of much honor, service, and outward advantage, pleading
together with his unworthiness, the weakness of his body by reason of age, and
thereupon his inability to take journies. And because he looked upon himself as
having one foot in the grave, he humbly desired, that a younger man might be
thought upon, more likely to be long serviceable then himself, in that place of
great eminency and trust. And indeed the sense of his own weakness was not a
vain presage of his decays, for not long after he was again surprised with the
Colic, which before had shaken him and made his crazy body less able to endure
new conflicts: and these were so sharp, that his restoration appeared
desperate, not only to his other friends, but also to his Physicians. Yet it
pleased God chastening him sore, not to give Psalm. 118. 8.
him over unto death. His studies which seemed to have been as his meat and
drink in his health, were his physic too, when he Greg. Naz. de Basilio in
Epitaph (...).
was sick; for while he was confined to his chamber, he fitted for the world
the Dissertation de Tetragrammato, and a Grammatical discourse de Bivocalibus.
And though this for the subject be not comparable with the other, yet it may be
averred that what he did by the bye, and for the refreshment of his languishing
body and mind, was more worth then the main work of many students.

But after a long time of being prisoner to his own home, he by Gods assistance
recovered so much strength as to go to Gods house. And now he believed himself
bound to employ his Ministerial gifts in Gods service: Therefore he again
adventured into the Pulpit, where he spent himself so far, that he streyned a
vein in his lungs, for which being then about Seventy three years old, he
suffered an emission of blood, by which and other means God enabled him to
overpass that danger. But when he had recruited his veins and sinews with fresh
ability, he unwilling to fall under the woe for not preaching, acted more
according 1 Cor. 9. 16.
to the willingness of the spirit then proportionably to the weakness of his
flesh, till a relapse into that spitting of blood (for which he again permitted
a vein to be opened for revulsion,) laid on him the necessity of forbearing the
Pulpit. But he never gave over the administration of Sacraments, nor his usual
short discourses at Funerals suitable to the occasion (whenever he was
solicited unto them,) though those shorter exercises of his Lungs were painful
and wastfull of that oil, which like a burning light he spent for enlightening
others. The main of his time now was spent in study, and that designed not to a
mere entertainment of himself in a quiet privacy, but to the public benefit of
the present Church and posterity, as, among other Works, those exquisite
Annotations on the Prophecies of Esaias, and of Jeremy with his Lamentations, do
abundantly testify. And we should have gained more by his latest industry, if
the malicious slanders of the enemies to the truth had not diverted his studies
to some necessary Apologies. Neither did he, being disenabled to preach, desert
his flock, or betray it into the power of Wolves, that would make a prey of
precious souls: For troubled at the apprehension of the possibility that the
foundation which he had laid (after the example of the wise master builder St
Paul) might either not be built upon, or ripped up, he retained the Title of
Rector with a charge beyond the Revenue (as it was sometime paid,) till
provision was made of a faithful and orthodox Minister to whom he might
devolve both burden and benefit.

To his care of feeding his flock in public, very agreeable was his diligence
to instruct his family in private: for on Friday night weekly he did expound
after supper that short Catechism which he had published for the use of his
Parishioners; in which course he so laid forth the Nature and Attributes of
God, the conditions of man entire and corrupt, the means of his fall and
recovery, the nature of Faith and Repentance, with the doctrine of the
Sacraments, that his Parlour was one of the best schools for a young student to
learn Divinity. And indeed his house was a private semminary for diverse young
Gentlemen of this Nation, and more foreigners did resort to him and sojourn
with him, to receive from him advice and advancement in their studies: And many
that afterward were eminent in the Churches both here and abroad, were brought
up under his eye at least, as Paul was at Gamaliels feet.

Persons of note that had been his Assistants;

M. Young. M. Goodal Minister at Horton by Colebrook. M. Symonds, (of whom yet
in these later times of division M. Gataker has been observed to say, It was
pity that our Church had lost him, intimating his turning aside to ways of
separation.) Mr. Grayle, and others yet living laborers in Gods vineyard.

Of foreigners that sojourned with him, and were as ambitious of being
entertained by him, as of being admitted to an Academy, these were some:

M. Thyloin, after a reverend Pastor of the Dutch Church in London, (whose
Son was brought by his Mother but a fortnight before M. Gatakers decease,
entreating the same good office in the behalf of him, which the Father had with
much comfort enjoyed.) M. Peter's, M. And. Demetrius, M. Hornbeck, M. Rich, M.
Swerd, M. Wittefrungel, M. Severinus Benzon, M. George De Mey, D. Treschovius.

The strength of his Memory was extraordinary, as may appear by this
demonstration ( viz.) That though he used no Commonplace book; yet he had in
readiness whatsoever he had read, as his manifold quotations do manifest.

His gifts for Edification may be conjectured by his Works extant, in which he
has showed himself most like the ingenuous and industrious Be, for the rare
extraction of all manner of knowledge from almost all Authors, and the solid
digestion of it first, and then storing it up for the public good. His polite
literature was admired by the great lights of Learning abroad, as the excellent
Salmasius and others, with whom he held correspondence. And the exercise of it
with condescension to children has been enjoyed with wonder and pleasure at
his visitation at Tunbridg School with the Right Worshipful Company of
Skinners the worthy Patrons thereof. That, which made all his knowledge both
useful and grateful, was, that he was neither vain in ostentation, nor
morose, nor illiberal in reservation. But beyond all he sacrificed his Talents
to God, while he made Hagar serve Sarah, and contributed the Egyptian spoils
(all his foreign Learning) to the building of the Tabernacle: for with a
strange felicity, he made his humane literature, (both his moral and critical
studies,) become subservient to Religion, and instrumental to the explication
of heavenly Truths.

His graces of Sanctification were very eminent in all conditions, to all
purposes, and toward all relations. In his life, as to his private course, most
remarkable were his Piety, Humility and Charity.

His Piety appeared, not only by his diligence in preaching, but also by his
own frequenting Gods Ordinances dispensed by others; in order to which he did
once at least weekly repair to some Lecture in London, so long as he had
liberty to look beyond the bounds of his own Parish. A sign of that Piety, was
his great devotion in observing the Lords day, which he consecrated totally
(excepting the seasons of repast) unto holy employments. And a fruit of it was
his free contribution upon diverse occasions to the maintaining of the Lords
house of Prayer. And because there is a connection of sacred persons and things,
his love to religious and faithful Ministers may be looked upon as an act of
Piety as well as of Charity.

An evident instance of his zeal for Gods glory, was a constant consideration
of Gods Churches abroad, with a diligent inquiry after their estate, and a
tender sense of their affliction, which begat that meditation on Amos 6. 6.
entitled Sorrow for Sion His eager desire of a Reformation of things amiss
amongst us, was doubtless acceptable to God, though this sinful nation is yet
unworthy to have it satisfied. One special and proper effect of his Piety, I
take to be that Holiness of life expressed in a constant tenor of good duties,
with the abridgment of his liberty in things indifferent, especially of
recreations (for he understood no recreation besides study, and made the
amaener part of studies, the sauce to the more austere) that he might give no
scandal to the good, nor encouragement to the bad, citing often those two
golden Rules of St Paul, All things are lawful, 1 Cor. 9. 6. and 10. 23.
but all things are not convenient or expedient; and, All things are lawful,
but all things edify not.

His Humility was apparent:

1. In that low esteem he had of his own gifts, which all that knew him
admired. He was a true Moses, that took not any notice of the shining luster of
his own countenance: like a fair ear of Corn laden with grain, he bended his
head downward: for he had nothing of the Pharisaicall temper, either to advance
himself, or to vilify his meaner-gifted brethren.

2. In his freedom from ambition of outward advantages; for he declined not
only large means in the Country, but also Vt de Marcello Virg. Aen. 9. Hunc
tantum terris ostendent fata nec ultra, Esse sinent --
both Ecclesiastical dignities, and Courtly preferments. For he studiously
waved the counsel of some that had given notice of him to that hopeful Prince
Henry (whom God only showed to this Land, and snatched away to himself,) and
had it in design to make way for his being admitted Chaplain to his Highness.
For the same reason he constantly declined public appearances, so that he
could not without much reluctance, be drawn by those who had interest in him
unto more solemn Assemblies.

3. In his meek conversation with the meanest Christians, for he refused not to
treat with the poorest Christian that repaired unto him for counsel or
satisfaction.

His Charity was large, though for the most part secret, both in giving and
forgiving to poor persons; for he would not permit it to blaze, only allowed it
to shine, when his example was requisite to lighten and lead others to glorify
God and gratify men. In redemption of Captives, relief of poor Protestants,
especially those of the Ministry; to the repairs of public or common losses
and general calamities, and to the setting forward of any good work, he was
strangely liberal, the fruit whereof the Lord returned into his own bosom,
according to his own word, that the liberal shall be made fat. For he did not
so exhaust himself in his life, but that in his last Will, he did also bequeath
unto the poor of the Parish of Redrith 50lb, to Ten of his Brethren in the
Ministry, whose wants and distresses, especially if occasioned by the iniquity
of the times, he did consider with compassion, 50lb; i. e. to each of them 5lb;
and to eight Widows of Ministers 5lb apeece, in all 40lb to them. Thus his good
works both went before him, and followed him also to Heaven, whereby likewise
he has left behind him the luster of a good Name, for the imitation of them
who survive.

Justice is presupposed to Charity, for God hates robbery for Isa. 6^ 8.
sacrifice. And Mr Gataker was exactly just in giving every man his due, though
he remitted of his own right very frequently, so that he was according to the
Hebrew phrase, imitated by the writers of the N. T. a just man, that is, a
kind, equitable person, of a mild disposition; no severe exacter of his own,
and a free dispenser of Gods gifts, so that his Righteousness endures for ever,
both to his honor upon earth, and to his happiness in Heaven.

In and about his death, to which the course of his declining days leads us,
eminent were his Patience and Faith, the latter attended with a deep sense of
his own sins, which he acknowledged unto God, and to him only was that
confession needful: for as to men his conversation was, as a Bishops ought to
be, irreprovable. 1 Timothy 3. 2.


The first stage to his decease (for morhus est via ad mortem) was a fainting
fit that surprised him on Friday night July 7th, or rather on Saturday morning
July 8th. This he made no great account of (for he disturbed not the rest of a
servant by calling for assistance) because he had at sundry times such deliquia
or faintings, wherein he gave Nature leave to work out her victory over those
vapors or viscous humors that oppressed her. Yet thus far he made use of it,
that he compared his infirmity to that of Seneca, which according to his
relation, the Physicians of that age called meditationem mortis, and wished it
might prove to him a preparation for his dissolution. The indisposition not
ceasing with that fit, discovered it self within a short time to be a Tertian,
which how gentle soever, yet falling upon a person of his age and crazy temper
(that had long supported a weak frame with a very regular course of diet) made
his condition doubtful to his Phisician, one of learning and worth, that
employed his best care and skill about that Patient, that he looked on as a
considerable Person to the whole Church.

July 17. Having published his Will, and taken such order as he thought fit for
the settlement of his outward estate, he composed himself to God. His Tertian,
growing too strong for Nature and Art both, resolved it self into an almost
continued Fever, the extreme heat whereof was very painful: Yet during those
conflicts he showed a sweet calmness of mind, a heart weaned from the world,
to which he had no affection, though he had a remembrance exactly serving for
ordering his Charity even to the last; and in one word, he represented a soul
wholly submitting to Gods good pleasure. He professed more then once, that no
outward thing troubled him so much, as the condition of that Reverend Minister
Mr Sainthill, who had but lately undertaken Mr Gatakers Charge, upon the
uncertain title of Life, which now failing so early, besides the expectation of
his friends, that Minister he foresaw was likely to be unsettled and to suffer
some inconvenience.

Though friends and Physicians give him encouraging words at visits, yet he
sensible of his inward decays, could not be flattered into vain hopes of long
continuance, earnestly contending that he was not to expect miracles. His
expectation of Gods dismission was so fixed, that being consulted whether he
would appoint any one Person to perform the last office for him; he not
startled at the question, appointed Mr Ash to be entreated to undertake that
work, because he had done the same at his last Wives funerals. And one
opportunity casually offered it self to set forward that design: for July 18.
Mr Ash out of a kind respect to Mr Gataker, sent him two Funeral Sermons
preached by him, one at Mr Whitakers, the other at Dr Spurstows Childs
interment. This gave occasion to Mr Gataker (in the return for that favor) to
request the last that he could be capable of. Upon the receipt of a Letter to
that purpose, Mr. Ash on the Saturday following, visited his deer and dying
friend; who then told him, That he found him conflicting with his last
adversary. He knew the sting was pulled out, but nature would struggle. These
and other expressions Mr Ash writ down and related at the end of his Sermon.

That day being 22th of July in the afternoon, he called for some Papers of Mr
Baxters, sent to him by the Author, with a desire of his judgment concerning
them: He wished some short Notes (for the perusal of them had been his last
work) to be read over to him, in which something he altered; and having
dictated a Letter to that his Learned and much Reverend Friend, appointed that
with the Animadversions enclosed to be sent unto him: So vigorous was his mind
in a body drooping and dropping into the dust.

He had now given over the use of Physic, as to any prolongation of life, for
he said he would struggle no more, because he found, that what was prescribed
for the refreshing of nature, oppressed it rather, therefore he would wait the
Lords leisure. An ancient servant that attended on him, desiring leave to
rectify the bedcloathes, and saying withal, Sr, Your head does not lie right;
he answered, It will lie right in my Coffin.

July 25. at One in the morning, death began to seize on his left foot, from
which the spirits retiring, he felt the deadness of that part, and a very sharp
pain in the part of the leg adjoining to it. He called for his Son, and told
him he feared he should have a difficult death. He then commanded two Surgeons
to be sent for to look upon his leg, whom he required to tell him, whether or
no his foot were any whit discolored. It seems he had conceived some fear of a
Gangrene, but being satisfied that there could not be any ground for such an
apprehension, he rested with patience. In the evening of that day, being
visited by Mr Sainthil, and lying in great anguish with violence of heat, he
prayed for pity and patience, support here, and a comfortable issue.

July 26. Early in the morning, full of pain, gasping and panting, he cried
out, How long Lord, how long? come speedily. But though death had made an
incroachment upon his outward perishing part, yet his inward man felt no decay:
for with a full use of reason, he that morning ordered the continuation of a
weekly relief to certain poor, and also of some small monthly Pensions to some
Widows for a season, caused his Physician to be consulted about taking
something that might procure rest, was erected to a more cheerful disposition;
inquired after News, and discoursed freely, yet confessed himself to be in pain.
About three of the Clock that afternoon, feeling some great change after that
putting forth of nature, he called for his Sister, Son and Daughter, to
receive his last charge: Thus he spoke unto them; My heart fails, and my
strength fails, but God is my fortress and the strong rock of my salvation:
Into thy hands therefore I commend my soul; for thou have redeemed me oh God of
Truth. To his Son he turned his discourse thus; Son you have a great
charge, look to it, instruct your Wife and family in the fear of God, and
discharge your Ministry conscientiously. To his Sister (a Gentlewoman two years
elder then himself) he said; Sister, I thought you might have gone before me,
but God calls for me first, I hope we shall meet in Heaven, I pray God bless
you. His Daughter he admonished to mind the world less and God more, for that
all things without piety and the true fear of God are worth nothing. He advised
that his Son Draper (being a man of means) would entertain some godly
Minister into his house, to teach his children and instruct his family. He
exhorted them all to concord: which he hoped the rather, because he had
clearly settled his Estate, so as to prevent differences. He enlarged himself
in each a little, wishing all to lay to heart the words of a dying man. After
this he desired that all should withdraw, and leave him to his rest, which he
hoped was at hand: but all his conflicts were not yet accomplished.

July 27. His voice began to be less intelligible, the putrid preternatural
heat having furred up his mouth, as is usual in Fevers: yet his understanding
and senses also were very quick and active. About six of the Clock in the
evening, he called for his Son to recommend his soul unto God by prayer, and
endeavored to express what he desired, but not so clearly as to be well
understood: yet by his gestures he gave assurance, that he understood
perfectly, and concurred fervently with the devotions used on his behalf.
Within an hour after, nature being quite spent, he gave up the Ghost, and was
translated into that Rest which he so often and earnestly had desired to find
in another world, because he could obtain none in this. Greg. Naz. in Epitaph.
parentis. (...),


Thus after the 43 years inspection of this pious and diligent Pastor of
Redrith, he left his flock, returning to the great and chief Shepherd of our
souls, from his gracious hands to receive an incorruptible Crown of glory: And
of his flock I may take up the words of Greg. Naz. to Basil, concerning the
condition of that Church whereof Gregory's Father had been Bishop; You see how
full of sadness and trouble this destitute flock appears -- making question
whether ever it shall enjoy another discreet shepherd, but very confident it
shall not receive an equal to their deceased Paster, and resolved to acquiesce
satisfied in their lot, if they can obtain one that shall be not much worse.

For his Person, the express whereof (though often importuned by deer friends)
he would never allow to be taken either by pencil or sculpture: He was of a
middle stature, of a thin body, and of a lively countenance, fresh complexion,
that looked young when he came to teach at Lincolns Inn, and yet was gray
betimes, that made him be thought elder then he was, because he had long
appeared ancient in the eye of the world; of a choicely temperate diet; of a
free and cheerful conversation, addicted to study, but not secluding himself
from fit company; of a quick apprehension, sharp reason, solid judgment, vast
memory, which by Gods mercy continued fresh to the last of his days: He was
helluo librorum, one that did not vainly increase his Library for show, but
chose Books for use, which he made of them so happily, that he had conquered a
strange portion of Learning, and made it serve him upon all occasions. He was
not so great a Treasurer, as a free dispencer of those riches of the mind,
which he did communicate readily, expeditely, clearly. He was an ornament of
the University, and of that Society designed for the study of Law; a light of
the Church, the Salt of the place where he abode: a loving Husband, a discreet
Parent, a faithful Friend, a kind Neighbor, a courteous entertainer of
strangers, a candid encourager of Students, a stout Champion for the Truth, yet
a lover of Peace, preserving the unity of Charity where there was a difference
of judgment; an adversary to novel fancies as well as to antiquated
superstitions in Religion: of a Christian magnanimity to despise the world, and
therefore resolute through bad report as well as good to maintain a clear
conscience. Briefly, he was a faithful Shepherd, and a fit myrror for
Pastors, as well as an exact pattern for people; Satur vitae tanquam conviva
recedit. Hor.
who having almost completed 80 years, departed full of life, but being dead
yet speaks in his living monuments of sound Learning.

A Catalogue of the Works of Mr THOMAS GATAKER B. D. now extant.
OF the nature and use of Lots 4o. 1. Edit. 1619. 2d Edit. reviewed, corrected
and enlarged, 1627. A just defense of the same against Mr J. Balmford 4o, 1623.
Thomae Gatakeri Londinatis Antithesis, partim Gulielmi Amesii, partim Gisberti
Voetii de Sort Thesibus reposita, 4o 1638. A discourse of Transubstantiation,
with a Defense thereof, 4o 1624.. David's Instructor. The Christian man's care.
The Spiritual watch. The Gain of Godliness, with Self-Sufficiency. The Just
man's Joy, with Signs of Sincerity. Jacobs Thankefullness. David's Remembrancer.
Noah's Obedience. An Anniversary Memorial of Englands delivery in 88. Sorrow for
Sion. Gods Parley with Princes, with an Appeal from them to him. Eleazers
Prayer, a Marriage Sermon. A good Wife Gods gift. A Wife indeed. Marriage
Duties. Deaths Advantage. The benefit of a Good Name, and a Good End. Abraham's
Decease. Jeroboams Sons Decease. Christian Constancy Crowned by Christ.
These published first severally in 4o, were after collected into one Volume in
Folio. The Decease of Lazarus in 4o. St Stephens last Will and Testament 4o. A
Defense of Mr Bradshaw against J. Can 4o. Gods Eye on his Israel 4o. A
Mistake removed, and Free Grace, etc. in Answer to J. Saltmarsh 4o, 1646.
Shadows without Substance, a Rejoinder adversus eundem 4o, 1646. Mysterious
Clouds and Mists, etc. an Answer to J. Simpson 4o, 1648. M. Anthony Wottous
Defense. 8o. 1641. A true Relation of Passages between Mr Wotton and Mr Walker
4o, 1642. An Answer to Mr. G. Walkers Vindication 4o, 1642. A Vindication of
the Annotations on Jer. 10. 2. 4o, 1653. A Discourse Apologetical 4o, 1654.
Marcus Antoninus Imp. cum Commentario 4o, 1652. De Novi Instrumenti Stylo
Dissertatio adversus Pfochenii diatribam. 4o, 1648. Cinnus, sive Adversaria
Miscellanea Lib. 6. 4o, 1651. De Baptismatis Infantilis vi and efficacia
disceptatio inter D. S. Wardum and Th. Gatakerum 8o, 1652. T. G. Strictura in
D. Davenantii Epistolam 8o, 1654. De Tetragrammato 8o. Ejusdem Vindicatio
adversus Capellum 8o. De Bivocalibus dissertatio Philologica 8o.
Animadversiones in J. Piscatoris and L. Lucij scripta adversaria de causa
meritoria Justificationis, cum responsione ad L. Lucij vindicias 12o 1641.
Francisci Gomari disputationis Elencticae, de Justificationis materia and
forma, Elenchus 8o. 1640. Stricturae in Barth. Wegelini Sangallensis de
Obedientia Christi disputationem Theologicam 8o 1653. The Prophcies of Isaiah,
Jeremiah, with the Lamentations, which were the portion assigned him in the
great work of Notes upon the Bible.
A PIOUS EPIGRAM OF Mr GATAKER:
Presumed to be His, both because it is a just expression of the intimate frame
of his soul, and because it is found written with some alterations of the words
by his own hand, and that not long before his end, as appears by the spelling.
I Thirst for thirstiness; I weep for tears;
Well pleased I am to be displeased thus:
The only thing I fear is want of fears;
Suspecting I am not suspicious.
I cannot choos but live, because I die;
And, when I am not ded, how glad am I!
Yet, when I am thus glad for sens of pain,
And careful am, lest I should careless be,
Then do I griev for being glad again,
And fear lest carelesnes take care from me.
Amids these restles thoughts this rest I find,
For those that rest not here, there is rest behind.
In Funere THOME GATAKERI S. T. B. Viri Doctissimi Octogenarii Vegeti and
venerandi Senis.
QValiter ales Arabs longae pertaesa senectae,
Et cupiens vitam morte parare novam,
Vndique congesto pretiosa in funera thure,
Ardet in optato victima grata rogo:
Sic inter Sacros famae and virtutes odores
Exuvias ponis tu Gatakere tuas.
Spiritus eluso tumulo remeavit ad astra,
Circumfert nomen Fama per ora virum.
Tu Magnus quoties evolvitur Antoninus,
Scilicet a Doctis usque legere viris.
Non tua sat tristi deflerem funera versu,
Sufficeret totas si mihi Camus aquas.
Ast aliqua volui cineres tibi spargere gutta;
Hanc tibi non ficti pignus amoris habe.
G. DILLINGAMUS T. B. Coll. Eman. Praef.

In obitum Reverendi admodum senis, and praestantissimi Theologi, nec minus
pietate quam omnifaria eruditione eximii, THOMAe GATAKERI, Sacrae Theologiae
Baccalaurei, and Ecclesiae Rotheriensis prope Londinum Pastoris vigilantissimi
Epicedium.
QVo fugis, (ah!) Phoebi and Musarum magne Sacerdos?
O quid agis? sic tecum una coelumque diemque
Eripis Anglorum ex oculis, servasque sepulchro
Doctrinae jubar, and miseros in nocte relinquis?
Vidimus (en!) atras vel te vivente tenebras
Ingruere, and densas paulatim crescere nubes;
Te semel extincto quanta haec caligo futura est!
Lumine tam grandi aut quid non metuamus adempto?
Hei mihi, nunc iterum invisum caput exeret Orco
Horrida barbaries, imaque excita barathro
Desidia, and Lethe, and languor, so^iusque soporis
Torpor iners, rudis error, and ignorantia matter,
Et soror, and conjux vitii, velut agmine facto
In nos juncta ruent, post quam te fata tulerunt,
Gentis Apollineae columen: Tu nempe domare
Herculea hanc Hydram dextra, divine, solebas,
Ingenuique acie, and calamo configere monstra,
(Hae tibi erant arts) and Lernam pellere mundo;
Tam been cavisti ne barbara secla redirent,
Discutiens caecas Linguarum Luce tenebras.
Scilicet haec pridem didicit te praeside clerus,
Exemploque tuo, stolido quae aenigmata vulgo,
Philologo licet esse pio; legisse profanos,
Non facit: and veteres fas est versare poetas,
Fasque illis etiam, Christi qui castra sequuntur,
Colligere and sacras Gentili e stercore gemmas,
Aegypti spolia atque aurum. Sic Paulus Aratum,
Sic and Aristophanem Chrysostomus, and Gatakerus
Euripidem, and magnum (quid, Zoile, frendis?) Homerum,
Et Sophoclem, and quem non Graecorum heroa revolvit;
Cuncta animo expendens, Critices and pumice limans,
Omnia pervolitans, mistas and floribus herbas
Delibat patiens, herbas apis instar amaras,
Mellificans, nectarque bibit sine fell salubres
Et carpit succos, and Cinnum conficit ore.
Quot, quantosque duces e Gentibus, atque tribunos
Ille catenatos disponit margin longo,
Ingentis animas, captivaque nomina ducit
Post Evangelii currum, Christique triumpho
Et Latium, and doctas famulari cogit Athenas!
Sic ille, Hesperiae ditatus munere gazae;
Nec minus ex Orient potens, seu forte Jehovae
Vindicet Augustum nomen vocalibus ornans
Rite suis, sacramque superstitione Tetractyn
Liberet, and caeci castiget dogmata verpi:
Seu doceat Graecos Eoo ex sonte rigatos,
Saepe etiam and Pauli phrasin ex Orient petitam,
Et tessellatos Hebraeo idiomate libros
Foederis ille Novi, frustra obnitente Phoceno.
Nunc etiam cordi est Aurelius unus and alter,
Quos ille inter se solerti indagine mentis
Comparat, and quantum aeficerit Antoninus
Advertit, quantumque Stoam superaverit Hippo,
Et Paulus Senecam, and quantum a cognomine Marco
Distet Philosophus, tamen hic non sordidus author
Morum, and divini radens confinia very;
Propterea and noster limaque and luce, ejusque
Dignatur curis, (opus aere perennius omni, and
Marmore) and egregiis mire centonibus ornat.
Nec minus intere a coeli mysteria pandit
Sedulus e rostris, and Christum personat ore,
Ore, sed and scriptis; quot enim monumenta reliquit
Mysta sacer? quot sermones, quos fuderat ardor
Entheus, aeternae divina volumine famae?
Denique, nec vocis tonitru quam fulgure vitae
Clarior, exemplo morum, and probitate coruscat
Exornatque fidem factis, and verba coronat.
Talis eras, Gatakere Pater, dum vita manebat,
Vita chare magis; transcendens computa Mosis,
Atque vigorem aequans, veget a viridique senecta,
Ingenio florens etiam vergentibus annis,
Tertius inter nos, dum vixti Varro superstes,
( E reliquis alter Themidos decus, alter Iernes.)
Doctrinam at superans meritis, and pectore puro, and
Moribus integris: O mentis aoumine felix,
Sed pietate magis! debetur laurea doctis,
Sed major sanctis. O terque quaterque beat!
(...). Anag. (...).
O felix quicunque bonus! sic itur ad astra.
Macte ergo virtute tua, Pater; i pede fausto,
Quo tua te pietas simul and doctrina vocavit.
I bonus, i felix, caelestibus utere fatis;
Praemia virtutis sic nominis omen habebis.
JAC. DUPORT Collegii Sanctae atque individuae Trinitatis apud Cantabrigienses
senior Socius.

DESIDERIUM; SIVE, In morte GATAKERIANA Fletus.
ERgone stylo Sulcandus Dei Fundus?
Hoc enim prope nomen sonat.
Ergone votorum plaustris in coelum evohenda Dei Messis?
Hoc enim excidium indicat.
Ergone lacrymarum nimbis irrigandum Dei semen?
Hoc enim sepulchrum monet.
At vero impares nimis sumus tantae Agriculturae,
Nec arista haec nostro indiget vehiculo:
Fundamur igitur in fletus, viator.
Mecum flebis, ubi flendum noveris.
Flebimus Gatakerum:
(Scilicet Te nobis (Bone vir) non Tibi:)
Seculi nostri Desiderium and futuri.
At fortius expetunt superi,
Suosque continuo in amplexus rapiunt.
Nobis desiderare est carere.
Quanta, quanta jactura!
Adsideas, querule Mercator,
Et discas tandem naufragia vera.
Perijt, (si tamen hoc sit perire,)
Pius, Probus, Literatus:
Quae triasunt omnia.
Hunc desideramus, lugemus has virtutes;
Raramque simul in senectute senectutem.
Pium quis dubitat? accersivit Coelun.
Probum quis negat? testantur superstites.
Eruditum quis rogat? loquuntur scripta.
Viator, huc oculos.
En amicam istam litigationem de Magno Tetragrammato
Salmuriensi cum Capella initam.
Cessavit vero tandem de Nomine lis, Rem tenet.
Tranquillam ecce in re Baptismali argumentorum vim,
Wardum qua petijt Cantabrigiensem;
Strenuum hunc, and virum Majorum gentium.
Sed and hanc litem diremit utrumque amplexum Coelum.
Validam dein and impetuosam cerne machinam,
Qua dum Astrorum Aristocratiam deturbare satagit,
Infamem istam Tyrannidem,
Et habenas revocare in manus Monarchae Jovis,
Insiliunt undique astrorum (uti audiunt) periti,
Novisque suis impetunt argumentis,
Dicterijs and Spurcitie.
Ille autem discessit Astra propius intuiturus:
Desiderantque jam Astrologi in quem venenum exscreent.
Nobilem tandem and ultimum en tibi laborem,
(Certo oculis nostris ultimum)
Antoninum Optumum Maxumum,
(Ingens Imperij decus, and Musarum delicias)
Quem alii in Maedium tulere, luce donatum.
Detineo Te, Viator?
Catervatim cerne quae scripsit quaeque est Meditatus,
Tuisque demum relaturus abi,
Caeteros parasse sibi Bibliothecas, Gatakerum fecisse.
Quod si haec talia nobiscum flere renuas.
At saltem vices tuas defle.
Jacet hic Viatorum Desiderium,
Advenarum Hospes frequens, lubensque:
Necessum jam ut fleas,
Abeasque.
A. M.

ON THE Death of the most Reverend, Learned, Holy Mr THOMAS GATAKER.
NExt to my dear, and dearer Uncle than M. Richard Dugard B. D. Rector of
Fulleeby in Lincolnshire, a long time Fellow of Sidney College in Cambridge, as
also M. Gataker was.

I could express though I were more then Man;
Whose Life by all so preciously esteemed
I with mine own would gladly have redeemed:
And were not Death well undergone to save
So great a Treasure from the hungry Grave?
Next unto Him, my Soul does mourning wear
For his dear Friend the Famous Gataker.
Till now the Adage I did scarce believe,
Which says, To fronts we must no credence give.
To my great grief too true I find it now,
So much deceived by his smoother brow;
Which with the Rose and Lilly that did deck
His, and would have becom'd a Ladies cheek,
Did promise fair, and made me hope that He
Might raise eight Decads to a Century.
Doubtless most perfect was the Harmony
Of's Elements, as was his Symmetry:
Thus Body and Soul in him were bravely met
And matched, but that the one though very neat,
No large dimensions had, the other was
More like an Angel closed in such a case.
A neat small mansion this does entertain
Sometimes a stately Lady with her Train.
He was (ah killing word, He was! alas,
That now I cannot say, He is, but was.)
A Living Star, and that as eminent
As any shined in the British Firmament.
But that is too modest and angust; It Is thought
That even Europe, though so fully fraught
With rarely Learned Children, yet has none
That could in all things parallel This Son.
Believe I do, more truly none then He
Could ere be called a Living Library.
His industry long since had treasured
All Learning in his comprehensive Head;
The crucified three Languages spoke aloud
His matchless skill, and seemed of Him proud.
The Arts a better Master have not known;
The Fathers, Councils, Schoolmen, were his own.
All Neoterick Worthies he did know
As perfectly as they themselves could do.
Now though he were (none ever more then He)
A perfect Body of Divinity,
And such a Phoenix, yet his Lowliness
Was such as if he had been nothing less.
Great Parts and Acquisitions commonly
Attended are with a proud Tympany,
So were not his, but such that God he knew,
And knew himself, and his mean Brother too.
Nor did his worth lie buried in his Breast,
As Misers Gold's confined to their Chest:
His light did shine as freely as the Suns,
Or as the water from the fountain runs;
Witness his Pulpit-pains, which never did cease
Till Sickness served him with a Writ of Ease,
And pains in's house, which a Gymnasium
Or Schola Illustris was, whither did come
Many from far, whose joy it was to sit,
And reap rare notions at Gamaliels feet,
And Pains at's Pen; his most transcendent Pen,
Which does demonstrate Him a Man of Men.
As God did once the Cherubims employ,
Armed with a flaming Sword to guard the way
O'th Tree of Life, So did he this man raise
With his choice Pen to vindicate his ways,
And sacred Truth; which none could ever do
More faithfully, for he refused to know
His dearest friends, (as Levi once,) though none
Were more exact in that Relation.
He knew that Truth most Lovely is, and that
What ere we weigh, It must preponderate.
And as his Pen was often militant
(Nor less triumphant,) so edificant
It also was; like those blessed Builders, who
Stood on their Guard, and stoutly builded too.
What Pious, Precious Pieces have there come
(All trimmd with richest Fringe) out of his Loome!
But above all his Notes on the first pair
Of Major Prophets justly valued are,
As the most golden Key that ere was made
To open Gods deep Treasure therein laid.
How does the Church in Them rejoice! how grieve
That he did not a greater measure give
Of such like Quintessentiall Annotations!
Too soon he left us in the Lamentations.
But now he leaves us worse leaving us quite,
And bidding us for evermore Good Night.
It must be night when such a Sun does set,
A Night of Woe and Lamentation Great.
Which is the more, because we greatly fear
We nere shall see another GATAKER.
Whose Grave may proudly say, Lo, here does lie
Great Gataker, that University.
THO. DUGARD, M. A. R. B.

NEque Funeri Tanti Viri, neque Muneri
Meo Colentis arbitror factum satis,
Vernaculis nisi paucula adjiciam modis
Latialibus vestita saltem vocibus.
At quum perinde, ut displicet silentium,
Non Verba suppetant, paria votis, mihi:
Visum est ab ipso mutuari Mortuo
Quae vivus olim fudit: Et sic optime
Illius expedire se Lauds valent,
Vt proprio Sol explicat se Lumine.
Squalida luctifico tundantur pactor a planctu: Habeutur hi versus D. Gatakeri,
inter alios tum ipsius tum aliorum in calce Prlectionum D. Whitakeri de
Ecclesia.

Perfundat teneras lacryma salsa genas.
Omnibus in vicis adsit pullata caterva:
Pellantur subito gaudia cuncta procul.
A terris superas abiit Whitakerus ad auras,
Aetatis nostrae gloria, fama, decus.
Quo magis ornatum vix fando accepimus unquam
Doctrina, ingenio, religione, fide.
Linguarum nemo plus cognitione valebat.
Arsoniam spectas? Tullius alter erat.
Cum Graiis quisquis sermones nectere Graios
Audiret, patrio crederet ore loqui.
Hebraeae nemo felicius abdita linguae
Exploret sensus elicitatve probos.
Ingenium quantum, facundia quanta, quot esset
Artibus excultus, scripta relicta docent.
Praecipue ornabat divina scientia mentem,
Atque huic juncta soror religionis amor.
Fidus praeco Dei, humani figmenta cerebri
Rejecit, pendens semper ab ore Dei.
Sincere populo divina oracula tradens
Ad Christum docuit quae via recta ferat.
Exemplum pietatis erat, virtutis imago,
Doctrinae culmen, religionis apex.
Men's humilis: purusque animus: patiensque laborum
Corpus: and immuneris vita referta bonis:
Frons hilaris: faciles aures: pectusque fidele:
Sermo pacificus: lingua diserta fuit:
Os verax: mites oculi: gravitate refulgens
Vultus: cor placidum: dextra benigna bonis.
Cum virtute atque art alios superaverit omnes,
Haec, dubium, laus an latior illa si^t.
Sed quid ego conor Whitakeri exponere lauds,
Quem laudare satis nemo poeta queat?
Quid laudo, cujus cunctas celebratur ad oras
Nomen, quae Christi numina sancta colunt:
Cujus scripta diserta, opus aere perennius omni, Anno Dom. 1594.

Jam passim volitant docta per ora virum?
Scripserat haec quondam Gatakerus de Whitakero,
Heroes quum superas scanderet ille domos.
Scriberet haec pariter Whitakerus de Gatakero,
Si nunc in vivis esset ut ante fuit.
Convenisse tibi constat Whitakere, vicissim
Quam been convenient and Gatakere tibi!
T. D.

ON THE Death of the Excellently Learned and Pious Mr GATAKER.
IF Man created Upright so had stood,
Should This, though less Ill, yet have had more Good?
For what, while militant on earth, he knew,
Angels themselves desire to look into.
And above Natures best his Grace so high,
Has of her worst obtaind the Victory.
Whereto while Death it self Perfection gives,
By's Doctrine and Example still he lives,
With us too: though departed, that is, gone,
(Having learned all here) where more is to be known.
W. W.

Carmen Elegiacum in obitum Mri THOMAE GATAKERI, Rdi Theologi, politioris
literaturae Fautoris simul ac Restauratoris optimi.
OCcidit heu! summi fulgoris stella corruscans,
Occidit, ut surgat stella decora poli.
Lumina non pereunt, e terra sumpta, fruuntur
Majori coelis luce, micante Deo.
Vixit, and ignaros, potuit quoscunque, docebat
Tam vitae exemplo, quam prece, voce, manu.
Juppiter in terris, lingua sua flumina vibrans,
Voce tonans, pravos terruit; inde pii.
Justitiae celebrem retulit pietate Noachum
Praeconem; Moses moribus alter erat.
Quam docuit, didicit Gatakerus! vivere multos
In Christo docuit, sic didicitque mori.
Docto scribenti calamo de sortibus olim
Supremum tandem sors tulit atra diem.
Non sic fata solent: quae te Gatakere merentem
Siverunt Juvenem, maesta tulere senem.
Vllo si doluit Pietas, vel maesta querelas
Tempore perfudit, jam been flere decet.
Si literae lacrymas unquam sparsere politae,
Cum fulcrum recedit, jam doluisse licet.
Te dolet Vrbs celebris, dolet Anglia maesta Prophetam
Ereptum templis te decus ipsa suis.
Cuncti te flemus, te ploraremus in aevum,
Si non constaret te coluisse Deum.
EPITAPHIUM.
HIc situs est, qui dum docuit, dum scripsit, ab omni
Omnigenae laudis puncta recepit. Abit:
Intravit coelum postquam Gatakerus amaenum,
Quod loquar? omnigenae puncta salutis habet.
Expirantis GATAKERI Apostrophe ad Fratres superstites, Pastores Anglicanos.
THOMAS GATAKERUS, Anagr. Urge, make have to us.
FArewell; bright-shining-stars! yet ere I part,
I Will leave the sense of my last gasping heart,
With you dear souls: For strayt my spirit must
Be throned in bliss, my body turned to dust.
Behold the wildbore-hereticks, whose power
Deeply's engaged Gods vineyard to devour.
Urge, and be valiant: 2 Pet. 2. 5.
Noah's now had need
Prove mighty Nimrods to run down this breed.
Behold ye Fox-like-Schismaticks, who trade
2 Cant 15.
Gods vine to ruin; Ah our Church is made
A den of theeving Foxes: These conspire
Like Sampsons Foxes to set all on fire.
Urge here, pursue them by all means you may,
Dumb-dogs prove useless to devour this prey.
Since Sheepe-skin-Wolves do ramble; Sheepheards look
Now to your Lambs, use well your Sheepheards crook.
The Tyger-Ranters rage: This Hectors face
Is much disguised to th'Churches sad disgrace.
Pluck off his vizard, and unrip his state,
That all Gods flock may see this Tigers fate.
Romes ravenous bloodhounds, from their hellish den
Are raised by th'sound of th'Devils horn: oh then
You Isreal's Watchmen! their hid traces find;
Wound them, and make them leave their prey behind.
The Pope has got Arithmetic in's Crown,
Who multiplies his Popedoms up and down.
Each Church erects a chair: it is sad to see
So many plead infallibilitye.
Divide and multiply, this Artist cries,
From such division, do my sums arise.
United force is strong, let your band be
A threefold cord of love and unity.
See and condole our shaken Churches state,
Which walking-earth-quakes tottered have of late:
These sure would counted be an heavenly nation,
'Cause all their motion is mere trepidation.
Isa. 66.
Who trembles at Gods word shall favor find
Whilst word-less Quakers shall go down the wind.
Urge here, fear not, in the strength of God be strong,
A quaking host can never stand out long.
The Church a Lilly is amongst thorns: oh strive
To lop these thorns and make the Lilly thrive.
Ye Pilots are i'th'Churches Ship; sail on
Though through a sea of blood to mount Sion.
And now methinks grim death 'gins to appear,
Which once was dismal, now my soul does cheer.
Its sting is gone, and now 'twill me advance,
To just men's souls made perfect, in one glance.
My last sand's run, my life i will breathe out thus,
Urge Souls in preaching and make have to us.
Urge God in praying and make have to us.
Urge Christ in all things and make have to us.
J. STILLINGFLEETE D. Joh. Coll. Cant. Socius.

On the Death of that Reverend and eminently Learned Divine Mr THOMAS GATAKER.
Who Is this that lies thus breathless? doleful sight!
The worthy Gataker; That beauteous light
Has left our Hemisphere. Ah! he is gone,
Who was the glory deemed of Helicon.
The Muses joy is fled; a magazine
Of Learning's here blown up. The Sisters nine,
Could they but rate their loss, (such has it been)
With tears they would make an other Hippocrene.
Poor house of clay! oh, how it empty lies!
The furniture's removed to Paradise.
Angels have hence convigh'd the jewell-mind;
Naught but the cabinet is left behind.
Adieu young Nestor; seldom have we seen
An head so gray, and parts so fresh and green.
His speech to deck such flowers he could bring,
In ages winter one would swear 'twere spring:
But now, for florid language, we may find,
Dumb Rhetoric; with silence cries her: mind,
Oh! mind your latter ends; death's sometimes late,
But who could ere his life perpetuate?
We thought his preaching done, but here we have
One Sermon more, and for his text, the grave.
Be faithful, you, who Sions walls do keep,
Watchmen themselves must once be laid to sleep.
W. TWYNE Fell. of St Joh. Coll. in Camb.

In obitum Viri Clariff. Doctissimique Mri THOMAE GATAKERI (...).
PLectro paulisper posito festiva sonante,
Jam melos, attonitae modulantur triste Camaenae,
Ingeminatque Caput praeclarum linquere terras;
Tum sic effatae, Quae vestram insania mentem
Exagitat, Parcae, vel quae malesana medullas
Intus agit rabies, ut converratis in unum
Quisquilias, gemmasque Rosam Carpatis, and algam?
Delicias mundi, secli miracula quaevis
Haud secus ac faeces vulgi, Sordesque profanas
Amoveatis? adhuc tantaene sororibus irae?
Quo tandem effugit, quaeve occupat iste locorum
Abdita, qui quondam praeclara nominis omnes
Fama praestinxit, nulli pietate secundus?
Men's polita, Deum proles germana, Minervae
Mercuriique domus, Musis and digna teneri
Pieria, ac charitum seeds and hortus amaenus!
Tam docto Calamo referunt accepta Camaenae
Cedro digna, sed and meruere insculpier auro.
Hic, quoniam Culmen virtutis Contigit altum,
Quo nullum patitur sublimius infera moles
Terrestris, seeds quaerit recipitque Deorum.
Hunc inter populos illustris fama perennat,
Longeque transfert multum venerabile nomen.
J. T.

Ad Tumulum THO. GATAKERI, Londinatis, S. S. Theol. Bacc.
EXuviae cujus? GATAKERI. Plura refer
Haud opus: ad lauds vox ea sola satis.
GUIL. DUGARD, Schola Merc. Sciss. Moderator.

FINIS.

