

THE ATACHMENT EXAMINATION AND CONFESSION OF A Frenchman upon Christmas day,
concerning Trechetie intended against London, upon Tuesday, December. the 27,
1641.

Also the Examination and Confession of seven Papists, who were taken by the
Watch on Friday night, and brought before the Magistrates, who said there
should be an alteration suddenly.

WITH A REPORT FROM Abbington town in Barkshire, being a Relation of what
harm the Thunder and Lightning did on Thursday last, upon the body of Humphrey
Richardson, a rich miserable Farmer. With an exhortation for England to repent.

Also how the barn of the aforesaid man was burned down.

Warranted by John Andrews Esquire. Justice of peace and Coram living in the
same shire.

London, Printed for William Bowden, 1641.

THE ATTACHMENT Examination, and Confession of a Frenchman, upon Christmas
day, 1641,
Upon Christmas day being saturday, did a Frenchman take water at the
Parliament stairs, to be conveyed to London ridge, but by the way he thus
reported to the watermen, that it would be a bloody day for London, either
upon the next day being sunday, or else upon monday, which the watermen
hearing, they made no answer, but so soon as they ^ame to land, they ceazed
upon him, sending for the constable, who because it was Sermon time they
carried him unto the Church, and then had order from the Churchwardens to
keep him in the vestry, until the Sermon was finished, which he did.

Sermon being ended, the Churchwardens and others asked him, if the Report
concerning him were true or no, he answered, that he could not deny what he
had spoken, for there was four men of no mean quality knew it to be true as
well as himself.

Whereupon he was carried before Sir John Lentall, who resolved to have him
further examined before the Honorable Court of Parliament.

A true Report from Abbing town in Barkshire.
WHat we have deserved at Gods have for our sins, is not to be disputed; for
why, our wickedness does dally abound, ann our sins are laid open before him.

Religion claims his due, and Truth does sue Justice, our consciences do
accuse us, and our Mrrors do witness against us, the Lord of host the God, we
have very much offended.

O consider, oh man, that although God should lay his greatest affliction upon
thee, yet have thou deserved it, should he send the plague, as he did in the
time of King David, it were but thy desert, should he send Famine, as he did to
Jerusalem, or should he send the sword, as he did to the Germans, yet were
it but thy desert.

O then consider oh man, how gracious God has bin unto thee, and although he
has touched thee; yet has he not wounded thee to the heart. I speak to
Englishmen, which in some measure have received afflictions.

First of all by the Pestilence. Secondly by the sword abroad, and it is to be
feared, that unless we speedily repent, worse things will happen unto us.

Jerusalem had many warnings, and we have had no less, Germany had some
signs, but we have had more: we had once a Judah which cut of the head of
proud Olopherns, curbing the insolency of papisticall spaniards, who thought
for to have brought to confusion: we had once a Solomon which ruled his people
wisely, and now have we the issue of David sitting upon the Throne, which
delights in peace, piety, and equity.

And yet cannot we be centented, nor will we be ruled, but delight in Error.
Luxury, and Pride, also here is Covetousness too much worshipped amongst us
(my expression is to be excused) wuich brings me to a story which I hope will
be read by all those which are affected to that strain: I mean thr Devils
Traffic, for Avarice; as once a wise man said is no otherwise.

In Bark-shire in the town of Abbington lived one Humphrey Richardson a very
rich Farmer, his riches did more abound then his goodness: as will be approved
by this ensuing story.

This year, the Lord be praised has bin sufficiently supplied with wheat and
grain, which the aforesaid Miser perceiving, and had very much Land and plenty
of corn, he resolved to hoard up his store until a scarcity should come, like
unto the rich-man in the Gospel, he was resolved to build greater barnes, but
see how God prevented him.

Upon Thursday being the 23. of December, was a very great storm, with much
Thunder and Lightning, being apparent also in London.

That very day did the Lightning ceaze upon the barn of the aforenamed Miser,
and burned up all his corn, and he himself going about to get men to quench
the fire was flaine by a Thunderbolt: by which let all Misers take warning,
and not delight to make a scarcity of plenty, least God show the like judgment
upon them.

All this is warranted by John Andrews Esquire; Justice of Peace and Coram, living
in Abbington.

THE E^amination and Confession of seven Papists, which were taken by the Watch
upon Friday night.
THere were also taken upon Friday night by the watch seven lusty fellows, who
when they were brought before the Magistrates and examined where they had
been. they most peremptorily answered at Mass: then they asked them, if they
were not Confederates with those villains which invented and plotted treachery
against the City, they answered no, buttere long they should find a great
alteration.

FINIS.

