LIVING LOVES BETWIXT CHRIST AND DYING CHRISTIANS. A SERMON Preached At M.
Magdalene Bermondsey in Southwark, near London, June 6. 1654. At the Funeral of
that faithful Servant of Christ Mr. Jeremiah Whitaker, Minister of the Gospel,
and Pastor of the Church there.

With a Narative of his Exemplarily holy Life and Death.

By SIMEON ASH, his much endeared Friend and Brother.

Together with POEMS and ELEGIES on his Death, by diverse Ministers in the City
of LONDON.

The Righteous perish and no man lays it to heart, and merciful men are taken
away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come.
He shall enter into Peace, they shall rest in their beds, each one walking in
his uprightness. Isai. 57. 1, 2 London, Printed by T. M. for Ralph Smith, at
the Bible in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1654.

The Licencer's Epistle to the READER.
IT is reported in the life of Ambrose, that when he Ambrosii vita per Paulinum
scripta, flebat amarissime quotiescunque forte nuntiatum illi fuerat de
cujuscunque sancti obitu sacerdotis, etc. Isa. 57. 1.
heard of the death of any holy Ministers, he would weep very bitterly. The
like I read of Philo, that when he came into any Town or Village, and heard of
the death of any good man there dwelling, he would mourn exceedingly, because
of the great loss that place and the whole Church of Christ had received
thereby. How much more cause have we of this age to lament our condition, who
have in few years lost so many precious Saints, and so many Reverend, Learned,
and godly Ministers; Surely this sad providence of God speaks with a loud
voice, that miseries and calamities are hasting upon this Nation. For the
righteous perish ( says the Prophet) and no man lays it to heart, and
merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away
from the evil to come. Thus Austin died a little before Hippo ( wherein he
dwelt) was taken. And Paraeus, before Heilderbergh was sacked. And Luther
immediately before Germany was overrun with wa^ and bloodshed* Mr. Scuddar. Mr.
Gresl^. Mr. Ferrihj. Mr. Ludlam. Mr. Not. Ward. Dr. Gouge. Dr. Hill. Mr.
Walker. Mr. Conaut. Mr. Wilson. Mr. Paramoor. Mr. Gataker. etc.
And now of late years many eminent Lights have been extinguished in this
Nation, to fore signify the great darkness that is coming upon us. Amongst
which, I cannot but reckon my revere^d brother Mr. Jeremiah (...).
Whitaker, at whose Funeral this ensuing Sermon was preached. If I should enter
upon his commendation, I might truly say what Nazianzene does of his sister
Gorgonia, That I have more cause to fear least I should speak below, then above
the Truth; for he was a burning and a shining light in this our Israel; a
Messenger and an Interpreter, one among a thousand; a Bezaleel in Gods
Tabernacle, a true Nathanael, that by his integrity, humility, constancy,
charity, publicknesse, and peaceablenesse of spirit, and by his diligence and
faithfulness in preaching the Gospel, made his life both amiable and
desirable. He was (yet not he, but the grace of God with him) (...). Naz.
Oration Funebris in laudem Patris sui, etc. (...).
And though I will not say what Nazianzene says of Athanasius, that to commend
him, were to commend Virtue, because all Virtues were contracted in him; yet
this I will say (which is also said of Athanasius, That he was) (...), An
Adamant and a Lodestone. To all that conversed with him he was as a Lodestone
to draw their hearts to love him: but in the cause of God, and in reference to
the truths of Christ he is as an unconquerable Adamant. He was a Jeremiah both
in mourning for and witnessing against the sins of the times. He was a second
Whitaker, though not so eminent in learning as to be (what is In vita D.
Whitakeri Oration Funebris.
said of him) Mundi miraculum, Academiae oraculum; yet he was (which is also
said of him) sound in the faith, one that had no private opinion, that did not
in veteri via novam semitam quaerere, seek out new paths of his own, but kept
the old way and the old path, That had a great wit without any mixture of
madness.

It is very disputable to me, whether he preached more by the heavenlynesse of
his Doctrine, or by the holiness of his life. Sure I am, he had this peculiar
dispensation, That he preached as effectually by his death, as by his life or
Doctrine. For the manner of his sickness and death speaks to all that saw
it, or shall now know it by reading this Sermon.

1. That the best of men are subject to the worst of Diseases: That all things
come alike to all, that no man knows love or hatred by all that is before him.

2. That though the Lord cause his chlldren to pass through the waters and
through the fire, yet he will be with them, so as the waters shall not overflow
them, nor the fire burn them. Though they are troubled on every side, yet they
are not distressed; though perplexed, yet not in despair, though persecuted,
yet not forsaken; though cast down, yet not destroyed. For so great was the
patience that God measured out to this our dear Brother, that though he
groaned, yet he never grumbled; though he often mourned, yet he never murmured;
nay, though he often roared by reason of the greatness of his pain, yet he
always justified and magnified God; and this he did so constantly, and in such
a degree and proportion, that as it is said of Job, so it will be said by the
Saints that succeed us, for their mutual consolation and encouragement; Ye have
heard of the patience of Whitaker: He had an ulcerated flesh, but a sound and
whole spirit, and that made him bear his infirmity; he had a stone in the
bladder, but a very tender and soft heart; he had a body gangrened, but a soul
unbelepred with sin. I heard him often say with thankfulness, That under all
his bodily sufferings, he had a blessed calmnesse, and quietness in his
spirit; that God spoke peace; that though he roared for pain, yet the devil was
chained up from roaring upon him.

It was no small delight to me to behold the tears that were shed at his
Funeral. Not that I was glad that there was such cause of sorrow, but to see
(in these days, especially wherein the godly Ministry is so much undervalued)
a Minister that neither lived undesired, nor died unlamented: of whom it may be
said, as is of Stephen, That devout men carried Stephen to his burial, and made
great lamentation over him. But I will not detein the Reader from beholding
these things more largely related in the following Sermon, by one that was his
fidus Achates, and as dear to him as Jonathan to David. The Lord sanctify this
example to all that shall hear of it, and fit us his Ministers that supervive,
to preach and live as he did, To fight a good fight, to finish our course, and
to keep the faith, that so we may at last obtain a crown of righteousness
which the righteous Judge will give at the last day to all that love his
appearing.

So prays Your servant in the work of the Ministry EDM. CALAMY.

To the Right Honorable ELIZABETH, Countess Dowager of Exeter.
MADAM,
HOw irresistible is the power of love and importunity? The holy Scriptures do
plentifully manifest, that divine love does set Gods All (whether within or
without himself) on work for his childrens good, and that his childrens
importunity has in all Ages prevailed with his Omnipotency, to appear for
their comfort: And multitudes of daily experience do evidence the prevalency of
these two Arguments among the sons of men. My self makes one instance for the
verifying hereof, by preaching at Reverend, worthy Mr. Whitakers Funeral, and
by printing my Sermon with the Narrative of his mem^rable life; both which come
abroad with enlargements; because streights of time, and the discomposednesse
of my spirit through grief, would not suffer me thus fully to dilate upon in
the Pulpit. Madam, I am confident that your Ladyship can of your own knowledge,
not only attest the truth of most passages in my Narrative, but add also much
more from your own observation, which will render his memory precious unto
posterity.

And will your Honor give me leave to give some further account unto the
world, wherefore I have presumed to dedicate unto your Ladyship these
expressions of my great respect to my precious much endeared brother Mr.
Jeremiah Whitaker; Gratitude is at the bottom of this Dedication. Madam, As I
shall always really acknowledge your Honors favor toward my worthless self;
so I judge it meet to make known upon this occasion that more then many thanks
are most due unto your Ladyship from all Mr. Whitakers Relations, for your many
and great testimonies of your constant respects unto him all his life long
since your first acquaintance with him. I have often heard him mention before
the Lord with praises and prayers, your Honors abundant kindnesses, both unto
himself and his family, which I believe are on record in heaven to be fully
recompensed in due time, because they were the products of your sincere love
unto him, as the faithful Minister of Jesus Christ. Madam, there are not many
who be so deeply sensible as your self of the great loss sustained by the
death of this holy man of God: What mine own loss is, I had rather express it
before the Lord, then publish it unto the world. He was ( Madam) a faithful
servant to your immortal soul, the well are whereof God in mercy has given you
to mind much more then all matters sublunary whatsoever. In reference hereunto,
he was your wise counselor, in all your doubts and difficulties, your
compassionate comforter; in all straights and sorrows, your vigilant Physician
to prevent spiritual sickness and infection; your zealous Incourager in all
ways of holy service, and a daily Remembrancer of you and yours before the
Throne of Grace. Though these things speak your loss, which may warrantably
afflict your heart, yet I beseech you (good Madam) consider with comfort, that
notwithstanding this bucket be broken (as Dr. Preston was wont to express it)
nevertheless the fountain of light, life, grace, strength, comfort and
satisfaction is still at hand, ever full, and always flowing. He who is now
removed out of the Land of the living (to be serviceable by preaching, praying,
conference no more) was only one of those golden pipes through which the God of
your mercies conveyed relief sweetly and seasonably unto your soul: the
wel-head is not removed, and many other choice conveyances of grace and
consolation from Christ be still continued to you. Let this therefore be the
language of your faith. The Lord lives, and blessed be the (...) o^ my
salvations, who will never forsake nor fail the soul which in humility and
faithfulness does depend upon his Majesty. And ( Madam) Mr. Whitaker his rich
receipts of much sanctifying grace, strong confidence, invincible patience,
undaunted courage, un-interrupted peace, with pure elevating joys from the
Lord may encourage the hopes of the poorest Christians to expect great things
from heaven, according to their necessities and desires, because God is no
respecter of persons, but free and liberal in the communications of his
peculiar goodness. These are the words of his grace, Open thy mouth wide, and
I will fill it, Psalm. 81. 10. If any man thirst, let him come unto me and
drink. He that believes on me (as the Scripture has said) out of his belly
shall flow rivers of living water, Joh. 7. 37, 38. The Almighty has given you
some tastes of that incomparable fruit which comes from the Land of promise,
that you may be encouraged to hold on in the way thither with cheerfulness and
perseverance. Madam, It is no small addition unto your honor here, and it will
undoubtedly make to your happiness hereafter, that you do own God in unwearied
attendance upon his sacred Ordinances, laying forth your self for his name
faithfully with that prudence, self-denial, and plainness of heart wherewith he
has adorned you, through his rich mercy in Jesus Christ. Madam, I humbly beg
pardon for this my boldness, and crave leave to subscribe my self

(Madam) Your Honors humble Servant, SIMEON ASH.

JOHN 11. 11. Our friend Lazarus sleeps.
THese are the words of Christ concerning Lazarus: and they speak 1. His
relation. 2. His dissolution.

First, the relation was friendship, wherein we are to observe,

1. How far this friendship was extended, viz. both unto Christ, and to his
Disciples, our friend. It is not my friend, or your friend, but our friend,
both yours and mine.

2. That this friendship was acknowledged by Christ himself, not only while
Lazarus was yet alive, but even now when he was dead, Our friend Lazarus
sleeps.

In the second part of the Text ( viz. Lazarus's dissolution) we may note

1. The truth asserted ( viz.) that Lazarus though a friend both to Christ and
to his Disciples, yet he was dead.

2. The Metaphor whereby it is expressed, which is taken from natural sleep. He
sleeps.

3. The notice which our Savior took of Lazarus his decease. This he reports
unto his Disciples, he says unto them* Our friend Lazarus sleeps.

Thus from this plain division of the Text, I proceed unto the observations
which do from hence offer themselves naturally unto our consideration. And the
doctrines will be six in number, viz. three from each part, into which the Text
has been divided.

viz. That there is a mutual friendship betwixt Christ and true Christians. Our
Lord himself here calls Lazarus friend. And that this friendship was mutual,
it is evident from this history.

First, the love of Lazarus toward the Lord Jesus was witnessed by the many
entertainments and hearty welcomes which he received at his house. And the
friendship of Christ unto Lazarus is attested by his sisters, formerly, He whom
thou love is sick, ver. 3. and by this our Evangelist; Jesus loved Martha,
and her sister and Lazarus, ver. 5. And the Jews said, Behold how he loved him.
ver. 36. yea our Savior himself in the Text calls him friend.

Now as it was betwixt Christ and Lazarus, so is it likewise betwixt Christ and
all real Christians; their friendship is mutual. The word friend expresses
love, and this love has its vicissitude amongst friends. As tennise balls with
rackets are banded and returned to and fro, so love amongst cordial friends
has its intercourse, it is received (...) amicus, qui amat, vel qui amatur.
Steph. Thesau. Joh. 15. 13. John 15. 14.
with acceptance, and returned with requitals. Greater love has no man then
this, that a man lay down his life for his friends. This expresses Christ his
love to his Christian friends. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command
you. This speaks the love and friendship of Christians to Christ. And you
must know that this affection of love was not only betwixt Christ and some
peculiar Christians, to Christ, as his Disciples and Lazarus; but betwixt him
and all other sound-hearted Christians also. When he preached to a very great
multitude of people, having warned them to take heed of hypocrisy, he uses
this compellation, I say unto you Luke 12. 1, 5.
my friends. And long before his incarnation, this was the language of Christ
(the essential Wisdom of the Father,) I love them that love me. Whereas it is
sometimes said of Prove. 8. 17.
our friends, that they have only one soul in several bodies* it is most
true, being applied unto Christ and singlehearted Christians. The Spirit of God
dwells in them; and Anima est, non ubi animat, sed ubi amat. Romans 8. 9.
if any man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

As friends, being, in point of friendship, acted by the same principles, they
will and nill the same things: So Eadem velle and nolle est firma amicitia.
it is with Jesus Christ and those who are unfeigned friends unto him. As the
Apostle Paul thus advised the Philippians, Let the same mind be in you that was
in Christ; so Phil. 2. 5. 1 Cor. 2. 16.
he affirms of the Saints at Corinth, that they had the mind of Christ.

The obligations of love are so strong upon friends, that they can heartily say
one to another, I am as thou art. The 2 Chr^n. 18. 3. Esaias 41 8.
Lord accounted Abraham his friend, and it is considerable how God and Abraham
being friends did communicate themselves, with their All unto each other.

As God by way of Covenant promises to be an all-sufficient Genesis 17. 1. Chap.
11. 3.
portion unto him, to bless those who bless him, and to curse such who curse
him, and to bestow Canaan (the land 2 Chronicles. 20. 9.
flowing with milk and honey) upon him: so Abraham gave up himself wholly to be
at Gods disposing, in regard of his habitation, to dwell where his Majesty
would settle him; Genesis 12. 1, 5.
and in respect of his relations, to command his children and his household
after him to keep the way of the Lord, to do justice Genesis 18. 19.
and judgment. In this manner Christ and believers, they are for each others,
with their All, even as for themselves. I Cant. 2. 16.
am my beloveds (says the loving, beloved Spouse) and my beloved is mine. They
are the same 1. In their wills. As they in things most difficult and cross to
themselves (in appearance) do say, The will of the Lord be done; So Christ is
Acts 21. 14.
ready to speak unto them in reference to the regular motions of their wills,
as once to the woman of Canaan, Be it Mat. 15. 28.
unto thee even as thou will.

2. In their desires. As these are their breathings; there is Psalm. 73. 25.
Cant. 7. 16.
none upon earth that I desire besides thee; So his desires are toward them.
Not long before his departure from his Apostles, to evidence his desires of
spiritual fellowship with Luke 22 15. (...).
them, He said unto them, with desire I have desired to eat this Passover with
you before I suffer*

3 And in their designs. As this is in their eyes and aims, Phil. 1. 20.
that whether by life or death Christ may be magnified in them: Jer. 32. 40, 41.
So he will never turn from them to do them good, but will rejoice over them to
do them good.

These are brief hints in reference to the doctrine, more generally considered.
In the more distinct handling of it, both the branches are to be taken apart,
and particularly to be discoursed upon.

And here give me leave to premise the reasons wherefore I shall discourse of
this mutual friendship under the notion of love, in a latitude: viz. because,
1. The word Friend (as we already hinted) speaks love. 2. In this History
these phrases signify the same thing; viz. friend Lazarus, and Lazarus loved.
3. And the holy Ghost elsewhere uses these words indifferently, viz. friend,
beloved.

The first branch of the doctrine is this, That real rightbred Branch 1.
Christians are friends unto Christ His endeared Spouse speaks this openly;
This is my beloved, and this is my Cant 5. 16.
friend, O Daughters of Jerusalem. Answerable whereunto is the language of the
Gospel-Prophet, a song of my beloved Esaias 5* 1.
to his vineyard. Let it be noted that Christ is not looked upon and loved as
an ordinary friend, but as a friend extraordinary, either a friend already
married, or one affected singularly with expectations of marriage. The virgins
love Cant. 1. 3.
thee. And indeed, none do love Christ sincerely, who do not love him
singularly, superlatively. Let his own words be well weighed; He that loves
father or mother more then Matthew. 10. 37. Certe: illi non aman^ Christum, qui
aliquid plus quam Christum amant. Aug.
me, is not worthy of me; and he that loves son or daughter more then me is
not worthy of me.

This assertion is bottomed upon good reason, because Christ both in his own
personal excellencies, and communicated advantages, is infinitely better then
any creature with its fairest amiabilities whatsoever.

Now this their love is not blind, but it abounds in all judgment and
knowledge, as will be manifest by these four Phil. 1. 9.
reasons following.

My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among Cant. 5. 10.
ten thousand. His head is as the most fine gold. And having metaphorically
commended him from the head to the foot, she thus concludes, This is my
beloved, and this is verse. 19.
my friend.

His graces which are like to a most fragrant perfume, do in am our the hearts
of all them who are truly spiritual. Because of the savor of thy good
ointments, thy Name is as an Cant. 1. 3.
ointment powered forth, therefore do the Virgins love thee. And in the song of
conjugal loves, this is rendered as the reason of those sparklings, Thou art
fairer then the children of Psalm. 45. 2.
men. As there was not among the children of Israel a goodlier person then Saul
(from the shoulders upwards he was higher 1 Samuel 9. 2.
then any of the people) So Jesus Christ does wonderfully overtop and exceed
in all rich endowments, the most amiable creatures in the world. And as in all
Israel there was 2 Samuel 14. 25.
none to be so much praised as Absalom for his beauty (from the sole of his
foot even to the crown of his head there was no blemish in him) and this might
be some reason of David's great love toward him:) So in the Lord Jesus, there
are perfect beauties without the least blemishes: He is altogether lovely. No
wonder therefore that wise, knowing Christians do choose and value, and embrace
him with vigorous loves.



We read that Jonathans soul was knit to the soul of David, 1 Samuel 18. 1.
and that he loved him as his own soul, because upon a Duel he had encountered
and conquered the Monster Goliath, who had blasphemed God and vilified his
people. Now this service was low and inconsiderable, being compared with
Christ's renowned exploits, who hand to hand combated with the devil in the
wilderness for the space of forty days, Luke 4. 2. Col. 2. 15.
who spoiled principalities and Powers, made a show of them openly, triumphing
over them in his cross; Who did bear up bravely against the power of
darkness to be quelled under the weight of divine justice to be satisfied, and
under the flames of his Fathers displeasure to be quenched. These and the like
rare actings of Christ being pondered by Christians do draw forth their hearts
in friendship toward him. He himself says, Therefore does my Father love me,
because I John 10. 17.
lay down my life. And how can newborn Christians, partakers of the divine
Nature, be otherwise affected upon the same account toward their blessed
Master?

David's heart gives out loves to the Lord, because upon his prayers he had
delivered his eyes from tears, and his feet Psalm. 116* 1, 8.
from falling. Now Christ has rescued his people from wrath to come, and that
without respect to their requests, yea before they sought him.

Our Savior himself gives this as the reason wherefore the sinful woman loved
him, Many sins are forgiven her, Luk 7. 47. 1 Samuel 19. 5.
therefore she loved much. And Jonathan by this Argument labors to win Saul's
heart toward David, Because the Lord by him wrought a great salvation to all
Israel.

In this respect the Apostle Paul was rationally under the 2 Cor. 5. 14.
constraint of commanding Loves to Christ, because of quickening grace received
by his death.

Now if I should here discover our large enjoyments from Christ, it would
abundantly appear to every ingenuous soul, that there is sufficient cause
wherefore he should be accounted and affected as an incomparable friend.

By him we are delivered from sin and hell (as is hinted even now) from the
curse of the Law, the hater of God, the Gal* 3. 13. Ephesians. 2. 14, 16. Gal. 1. 4.
1 Cor. 15. 55. Ephesians. 1. 3, 6. 1 Cor. 1. 30. and 2. 1, 20.
deadly snares of the world, and the poison-sting of death. We are blessed with
all spiritual blessings in heavenly places. We are accepted in the Beloved. He
is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. And all
the Promises of God are in him Yea, and in him Amen. How rationally therefore
does living love to Christ spring out of this root?

bundle of myrrh between their breasts; but he reserveth the best wine for Cant.
2. 13.
the last. Whatsoever for kind, or for measure the believing John 2 10.
Christians comforts are here, yet to be with Christ in heaven Phil. 1. 13.
will be far better; and this, this in glory is looked for through Christ. This
consideration causes their love unto Christ to break forth in a great flame.
Let the words of the Apostle be weighed for the evidence hereof, who having
spoken both of the Inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, 1 Pet 1. 3, 4.
that fades not away, reserved in heaven, as also of the assured Perseverance
through Gods Power, and all this by Christ, he adds, Whom having not seen, yet
ye love. Ingenuous 1 Pet. 1. 8.
Christians duly weighing the worth of their future happiness, dearly
purchased by Christ, and undoubtedly to be possessed by them through Christ, do
hereupon practically conclude, that nothing can be imagined more reasonable
then this, that they should love him as their special friend.

Thus from confirmation, I proceed to the Application of this Truth by way of
Use; which I will propound under three heads; viz. 1. Information. 2.
Examination 3. Exhortation.

Slips in Christianity. As Judas, etc.

Our Savior speaks roundly unto such: If God were Joh. 8. 42.
your Father, you would love me. And if God be not their Father, they are
questionless the devils children, children of the curse. How open and express
are the words of the Apostle to this purpose? If any man love not the Lord
Jesus, let 1 Cor. 16. 22.
him be Anathema Maran-atha. The heavy and lasting maledictions of God hang
over the heads of all them who love not Christ. This is the great severity of
God against such who are not friends unto Christ: and that the righteousness
of his Majesty herein may be manifested, I wish that this may be minded, viz.
that unfriendliness to the Lord Jesus in Gospel Times (wherein his excellencies
and deservings are so fully laid open) does proceed either from 1. Infidelity.
Or 2. Contumacy. Either people hearing from Scripture of Christ's loveliness, do
give God the lie to his face by not believing him, or else their disregard of
Christ arises from malignity and stubbornness of will, though they yield to
the report of his incomparable worth. And 1 John 5. 10. Non a c^citate mentis,
sed a pravitatecordis. Aug.
both these are daring, and God-incensing provocations.

Now if any shall be awakened by these flashes of Gods anger, to enquire, Who
are to be judged persons void of love to Jesus Christ? I shall refer them for
satisfaction to Christ's own words, both the parable, and his exposition of it.
The Parable is this, The Citizens hated him, and sent a message after him
saying, We will not have this man to reign Luke 19 14.
over us. And the Application made is thus expressed, Those mine enemies, which
would not that I should reign over them, bring them hither and slay them
before me. Therefore all such verse. 27.
are proclaimed Christ's enemies, Christ-haters, (even by Christ himself,) who
refuse to submit unto him as their Lord and King.

Its no uncharitableness, but judgment according to the Word of truth, to
determine those to be no friends unto Christ, whose resolutions are rather to
order their lives according to customs, humane traditions, their own humors,
and the practices of the multitude, then according to the commands and counsels
of Christ.



1. Because many profess much love outwardly, whose hearts affect him not
unfainedly. As David describes some counterfeit Courtiers, whose words were
soft like oil, when there were drawn swords in their bosoms: Never was Christ
more in men's mouths with smooth language then Psalm. 55. 21.
now, when their lives speak treachery against him. Thus Judas calls him
Master, and gives him a kiss, yet was no friend. Have I not chosen twelve
(says Christ) and yet John 6. 79.
one is a devil? What Sugered words did the devil use, when he designed the
ruin of Adam, and of all his posterity!

2. Because the comforts of the Gospel do appertain to them alone whose love is
without dissimulation. The Apostles benediction was this, Grace be with all
them who Ephesians. 6. 14.
love our Lord Jesus in sincerity* The rich privileges of grace are
appropriated unto Christ's cordial friend.

3. Because Christ (whose eyes are like unto flames of Rev. 1. 14.
fire) does discern clearly, all them that are false friends, though they
pretend fair. We read of many who believed John 2. 23, 24, 25.
when they saw his miracles, but Jesus did not commit himself unto them,
because he knew all men, and needed not that any should testify of man; for he
knew what was in man.

4* Because we cannot tell how soon we shall be called to the scrutiny. The
Lord may be awakening our consciences, and setting them as upon a rack;
propound that question unto us, which he asked Peter once, and again, and the
third time, Love thou me? But though he should John 27. 15.
not deal thus with us in our life time, yet be sure we shall be examined upon
our departure hence, for after death Heb. 9 27.
comes judgment infallibly. Therefore it will be our wisdom in the ways of
self-renuing, to say as Job did, When God visits, Job ^^. 14.
what shall I answer him?

5. Because by serious self-reflections we may attain such full assurance of
our love unto Christ, that we may with confidence speak with Peter, Lord, thou
know all Joh. 21. 17.
things, thou know that I love thee.

Having thus moved the examination of your love to Christ, I proceed to give in
some discoveries of Christ's loving friends; and the rather because according to
Gods institution, we Ministers are set up amongst people to try Jer. 6. 29.
their ways.

And the characters of love being many, I shall be the shorter in them all.
True it is, that men's love burning in their bosoms, they many times better
express themselves Amor est inter ea quae melius sentiuntur, qua^ definiuntur.
by sense then Arguments; yet God having in his word held forth manifold Signs
of sincere love, it is our duty to make our use of them.

1. Love to Christ is always accompanied with hatred of sin. Ye that love
the Lord, hate evil. And the Apostle Psalm. 97. 10.
his connection is observable, Let love be without dissimulation, Romans 12. 9.
abhorring that which is evil: The ground hereof is manifold. First, because
Christ hates all sin, he Quomodo amas Christum, cum adhuc amas quod in t^
odit Christus*Berr.
suffered death for sin, and is dishonored by it. Therefore it is not
possible, that love unto Christ, and love unto sin should peaceably* lodge
together in the same bosom.

2 Love to Christ is attended with care to prevent whatsoever might be
injurious or displeasing unto him. Thus the loving Spouse lays this command
upon all under her Authority. I charge you that you awake not my Beloved till
be please. In like manner Jonathans love pleads Cant. 3.
with Saul for David's life. Let not the King sin against his servant, against
David: wherefore will thou sin against innocent 1 Samuel 19. 4, 5.
blood, to slay David without a cause? And Jacobs Genesis 33.
affections did project the preservation of his near relation from ruin. Hence
it appears therefore, that people of Gallio his temper, do not love Christ,
who care not Acts 18. 17.
what wrongs are done to Christ, in the liberty or purity of his Ordinances and
comfort of his servants, if themselves can sleep warm in their own
well-feathered nests.

3. Love to Christ discovered it self by solicitous enquiries after the mind
of Christ, fearing least through mistakes he might be provoked. How inquisitive
were his Apostles to know his pleasure in all particulars, relating Mat. 26. 17.
to the Passover? The Disciples came unto Jesus, saying, Where will thou that
we prepare for thee to eat the Passover? And how t^morous was Abraham (Gods
friend) lest he might Cen. 18. Res est soliciti plena timo^is amor.
by overmuch boldness incense him, when he was mediating for Sodom! Shall they
therefore be accounted friends to Christ who walk at all adventures, without
any fears of his frown, or enquiries after his will?

4. Love causes flowings forth of thoughts upon its object. The beatings of
the pulse are according to the heat in the heart. In the Song of Loves this is
the first Psalm. 45. 1.
clause, My heart is inditing of a good matter. I speak of the things which I
have made concerning the King. Sparks do not more naturally arise out of a
flaming furnace, then musings upon Christ from the soul which is fired with
loves toward him. With how much intention, frequency Amor meus est pondus meum.
and steadiness do people think upon the persons and things which are greatly
loved! This consideration therefore casts them off as no friends to Christ, of
whom it may be Psalm. 10. 4.
truly said, in respect of diligent meditation, The Lord is not in all their
thoughts.

5. Longings after Christ, together with satisfactions while he is ab^ent, are
evidences of love unto him. The Cant. 3. and 5. Amor currit p^r desiderium. Aug.
loving Spouse shakes off sloth, gets out of bed in the night, and goes abroad
to seek him whom her soul loved Neither ease in a warm bed, nor chamber*
comforts, nor City-contentments could satisfy her. Her Beloved she must have,
and her Beloved she will have, for she is sick of love. Love like the
Lodestone is attractive, and the needle touched with it, will uncessantly move
till it stand directly Northward. In like manner will the heart which is well
warmed with love to Christ: this is its language, Whom have I in heaven but
thee? and there is none that I desire on earth Psalm. 73. 25.
besides thee. Give me Christ, or I die.

6. Contentation in the enjoyment of Christ does demonstrate (...) quasi (...),
valdeacquiesco. Amor quiescit per gaudium. Aug. Ad De^m, apud qu^m invenies
summam tranquillitatem. Vatabl. in Ps. 116. 7. Cant. 8. 5. Cant. 1. 13. Phil.
3. 3.
love: Some note this from the Greek word, which signifies Love, viz. that
wherein the heart takes rest. When any thing comes to its center* there it is
quiet and still: So it is with the heart which loves God. This was David's
meaning, as some Expositors judge, when he having expressed his love to God,
speaks thus in an holy Soliloquy, Return to thy rest O my soul. This rest the
loving Christian attaineth in Christ by complacency and dependency. The Spouse
leans (rests her self) upon her Beloved, and he for delight is a bundle of
myrrh between her breasts: whereunto the words of the Apostle suit very well,
We have ^o confidence in the flesh, but rejoice in Christ Jesus. For the soul
which possesses Christ, and knows what it has, in having him, will say, I
have enough, I have all, I need no more; for in him all wants are either
supplied or sanctified. In him justifying grace will make up all defects in
service. And what is wanting in the streams of creature enjoyments, is given
in with more sweetness in the full fountain of his Al-sufficiency.

7. Communication of secrets speaks friendship. Haman Esther 5. 10. and 6. 13.
does unbosome himself to his friends, by laying open unto them all his
concernments, both cross and comfortable. And Christ bids him who was
dispossessed of a devil, Go home to thy friends, and tell them how great things
God has Mark 5. 19.
done for thee.

We can put that into a friends bosom which we would not have blazed abroad in
the world. Thus Christ's friends do tell him of all their troubles, fears,
wants, temptations, lusts, as also of their comforts, receipts, experiences;
upon all occasions they step unto him, and he knows from them by prayer how
things go with 1 Samuel 1. 15. Psalm. 103. 4.
them, whether by encouragement or discouragement in their course.

I here remember the speech of Sampsons wife, when he concealed what she
desired to know, How can thou say, I love thee, when thy heart is not with
me? And doubtless Judges 16* 15.
our estrangement from Christ, in not laying open our selves upon all occasions
before him, does more then intimate our unfriendliness.

8. Readiness to comply with Christ's command will undeniably prove that we are
his friends. Our Lord is often upon this Argument: You are my friends if you do
whatsoever I command you, He that has my Commandments John 15. 15. and 14. 21,
23. (...), or ab (...).
and keeps them, he it is that loves me. If any man love me, he will keep my
words. Thus Abraham made it manifest that he was Gods friend, by being ready to
offer up Isaac upon his call. And the Apostle speaks of the labor of love,
because love will not withdrw from any work, wherein God sees cause to employ
his friends. The woman who Heb. 9. 10.
loved Christ much, will wash his feet, and wipe them with the hair of her
head. This is the language of Love, I Luke 7. 38.
account no work too mean, wherein I* may serve Christ.

9. Love is content to be at any cost for Christ. Hearken unto the expressions
of the loving Spouse, At our gates Cant. 7. 13.
are all manner of pleasant fruits, new and old, which I have laid up for thee,
O my beloved. And I would cause thee to Cant. 8. 2.
drink of spiced wine, and of the juice of Pomgranates. The best of all kinds,
and the best of the best is provided for Christ, if he be Beloved. She who
loved much, brought a Box of ointment very costly. In like manner, whatever
Luke 7. 37. with John 12. 1 2 Samuel 24. 24.
duties Christ's friends discharge, or whatever Ordinances they frequent, they
are wont to say with David, I will not offer to the Lord that which costs me
nothing. They scorn to give him the chaff and bran, when others eat the Kidneys
of wheat. To be warm and vigorous in creature communion, and all a-mort, chil
and cold conversing with Christ, is an abomination to Christ's friends.

10. Love is liberal and free, not grudging any kindness laid forth for a
friend. This is the love of God, (says the beloved 1 John 5. 3.
Disciple) that we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous.

When the most is done and endured for Christ, the soul says, How little have
I either acted or suffered for Christ? Oh that it had been more, Oh that it had
been more! How little is all my service, how small are all my disbursments for
Christ? When Jacob had passed two Apprentiships for Rachel, under a sour Uncle
and churlish Master, wherein he had been pinched with cold, and parched with
heat, They seemed to him but a few days, Genesis 29. 10.
for the love he bare unto her. And when Jonathan had stripped himself of the
robe that was upon him, and gave it to 1 Samuel 18. 3.
David, and his garments, even to his sword, and to his bow, and to his girdle,
we read not of any repinings afterward; and the reason was, because he loved
him, as his own soul* Christ's friends look upon him as deserving over and over
again, infinitely more then they shall ever be able to requite, and therefore
are troubled that Christ has had so little service, never repenting that he
has received so much. They know that God gives liberally James 1. 5.
and upbraideth not. Worthy Doctor Sibs was wont to say, Supposing a
possibility of sorrow in heaven, this would be the grief of the Saints there,
that they have done so little for Christ upon earth, from whom they have
received so much.

11. Love makes courageous for Christ. Every one knows that St. Paul was
Christ's cordial friend, which he expressed by his magnanimity. I am ready not
to be bound Acts 21. 13. Phil. 3. Discipulus plus amat Christum quam timet
gehennam, Bern. Amanti nihil impossible, nihil difficile. Aug.
only, but to die at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus, for whom I have
suffered the loss of all. Much was lost already, and life it self was now at
stake, Let all go (says Love) for Christ.

Love looks upon nothing as impossible, or as too difficult to be undertaken.
The fearful Hen will fly fiercely at the devouring Creatures which would
devour her chickens; and the timorous sheep will turn head upon a mastiff dog,
to secure her beloved Lamb. Love is strong Cant. 8. 6, 7.
as death, many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it.
Mary, whose bosom was full of burning love to Christ, is a rare example of
that metal and fortitude which love breeds in Christ's friends. She seeking
Christ's dead body, and meeting with the Gardener (as she imagined) she speaks
thus: Sir, if thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou have laid him, and
I will John 20. 15.
take him away. Neither the ghastly looks of a dead body could affright, nor
the weight of it discourage her resolutions to bear it away. Though she was not
able (good soul) by her own strength to carry such a burden, yet her love made
her confident that she could do it, and therefore was resolved to undertake it.

12. All these forementioned actings and adventures of love in Christ's friends,
do arise, neither only nor principally from self-advantages received from him,
but from his excellencies, and respect to his honor. Because of Cant. 1. 3.
the savor of thy good ointments, thy Name is an ointment poured forth,
therefore do the Virgins love thee. And in this, Saint Paul centered as the
last end of his love, that Jesus Christ might be magnified in him, whether by
life or Phil. 1. 20. John 6. 26.
death; Whereas when Christ is looked after rather for loaves then for his
divine loveliness, it is rather to be judged a trucking with him, then a loving
of him. When men seek Est mercatura non amicitia, Amor amicitiae non acquiescit
in aliqua extrinseca adoptione, sed quaerit amatum. Aqui,
only to serve their turn of Christ, as it were by merchandising, they may be
called friends to themselves, but will never be reputed faithful friends unto
him. This discovery lies inward and close in our bosoms: in which regard, the
more cautiousnesse is needful, that we may not be deceived.

Lastly, and for our help in the former, I add this (as the conclusion of this
search* upon which I have held you so long) That sincere friendship unto
Christ, will raise rejoycings in our hearts upon his advancement, though this
may seem to tend to our personal detriment. Here the words of Christ to his
drooping Disciples, fearing that themselves should be damnified by his
departure from them, are very considerable; If you loved me, you would John 14.
28.
rejoice because I said, I go unto the Father. John the Baptist is a rare
instance to evidence this character of true friendship: for he being told that
Christ was likely to carry away credit from him, returned this answer. He that
has Joh. 3. 29. 30.
the Bride is the bridegroom; but the friend of the Bridegroom, which stands
and hears him, rejoices greatly because of the Bridegrooms voice: This my
joy therefore is fulfilled. He must increase, but I must decrease. And the
Apostle Paul Phil. 5. 16, 18.
was another example of this ingenuous love. Some (says he) preach Christ of
envy and strife, supposing to add affliction unto my bonds: Notwithstanding
Christ is preached: and I therein do rejoice, and will rejoice. Make
application hereof, and ask your selves this question, whether you can be
content that Christ should be set upon your shoulders, and that your credit
should be cropped, rather then it should hinder his shine and prospect? can you
lay your selves down in the dust, that the crown may be s^t upon Christ's head?
can you willingly be little or nothing in the account of the world, that Christ
may be all in all among the children of men? By sincere answers returned upon
serious considerations of all these foregoing particulars, you may be able to
give a right judgment of your own estate, whether you be in deed and in truth
friends to Jesus Christ.

David knew not how to desire more at the hand of God. Look thou upon me and be
merciful unto me, as thou usest Psalm. 119. 132.
to do unto those that love thy name.

Shall I mention (and do little more then mention) some particulars?

1. Thus you shall work your selves into Christ's bosom, (which will be no small
advantage) I love them that love P^ov. 8. 17.
me, said our Lord long since. It is reported that Vespasian commanded a large
recompense to be given unto a woman Item Vespasiano adamato.
that fell in love with him, and ordered that it should be recorded, that such
a sum of money was given upon that account. More beautiful will Christ be unto
his friends. That I may cause those that love me to inherit substance, and I
Prove. 8. 21.
will fill their Treasures: Riches, substantial riches, substantial riches
making treasures: and all this by the right of inheritance, shall be the reward
of them who love Christ.

2. Hereupon you may confidently expect familiar fellowship with Christ and his
Father, which is the Christians Heaven upon Earth, If any man love me, my
Father will love him, and I will love him, and manifest my self to him, and
Joh. 14. 21, 23.
we will come unto him, and make our abode with him.

3. Hence issues assurance, that all events and exercises shall prove,
spiritually advantageous. Also we know that Romans 8. 28.
all things work together for good unto them who love God. Every wind will
undoubtedly bring in their profit, and their gain shall come in at every door.

4. And the Crown of glory is promised to them who love the James 1. 12.
Lord.

Now if you shall demand, How may we kindle the fire of love in our breasts
toward Christ? I answer,

1. By informing your selves from the Scripture concerning Christ his
worthiness, both in his person, relations, and several Administrations as
Mediator betwixt God and man. As this is his own advice, Search the John 5. 39.
Scriptures, for they testify of me: So by the manifestations of him, friendly
affections are kindled toward him. Witness the experience of such who during
their ignorance of Christ were so far from loving him, that they accounted
the love of others groundless, yet understanding his unparalled beauties,
fell in love with him. This is open and apparent by comparing Cant. 5. 9. with
ver. 10. to the end, and with Chap. 6. 1. The words being Prove. 14. 20.
many, I refer you to the reading of them. The rich has many friends (says
Solomon) And are not all the riches of earth and heaven in Christ's possession
and at his disposing?

2. By presenting often unto your view by meditation Psalm 39. 3.
all things amiable in Christ. While I mused (says the Psalmist) the fire
burned. Looking causes loving, The eye Lam. 3. 51.
affect the heart: By blowing a spark becomes a flame. As Abraham's servant
brought forth Jewels of silver, and Genesis 24. 53.
Jewels of go^d to win Rebecca her heart toward Isaac; So should we spread
before our souls frequently those things which are enjoyed i^ Christ, that our
hearts may be enamoured with him. Ponder upon his own expressions, I love them
that love me, and those that seek me early shall find Prove. 8. 17, 18, 19.
me. Riches and honor are with me: yea, durable riches and Righteousness. My
fruit is better then Gold, yea then fine Gold, and my revenues then choice
Silver. Dwell upon these and the like considerations, and the Lord bless them
to the end for which propounded, that your souls may flame forth loves upon the
Lord Jesus.

The second Branch of the Doctrine follows; viz. That Branch 2.
Christ is a loving friend unto all true Christians.

Howsoever he here calls Lazarus his special friend, and the Apostles were so
accounted in some way of peculiarity, Henceforth I call you not servants, but I
have called John 15 15.
you friends. Yet this compellation, and this amiable relation belongs unto
all faithful Christians likewise. He loved all his own in the world; which is
plain also, by that Joh. 13. 1.
gracious invitation, Eat O friends, and drink O Beloved, Cant. 5. 1.
wherein he intends to take in all living Christians.

Now if the reason be demanded, Wherefore Christ is so good a friend unto
believing Christians? I answer,

Gal. 3. 16.
compact betwixt the Father and himself. The Covenant was primarily betwixt God
and Christ, whereupon they were committed to his trust for the praise of
glorious grace. And He therefore loved them because his own. This our Lord
himself Joh. 13. 1.
does more then intimate in his most heavenly prayer, wherein expressing his
respect to his Fathers honor, together with abundant love toward the Elect,
he does very often touch upon them as given unto him by the Father. And Joh.
17. 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11. 12, 24
upon this account it was that he thus speaks of the communion which he had
with his Father before the foundations of the world were laid. I was by him as
one brought Pro. 8. 30. 31.
up with him, and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him
Rejoicing in the habitable parts of his earth, and my delights were with the
sons of men.

Titus 2. 14.
of them, that they might be brought in to friendly fellowship with him. It is
commonly said, that the mother loves those children most which cost her the
most pain when she brought them into the world. The Prophet calls the fruit
of the womb, Beloved. And that is very Hos. 9. 16.
considerable to this purpose which the Evangelical Prophet foretold of Christ,
He shall see of the travel of his Isa. 53. 11. 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20
soul, and shall be satisfied. We are Christ's by redemption, and in this regard
also we are his beloved friends, and highly esteemed by him above others, as
the Prophet witnesses, Since thou wast precious in my sight, I loved thee,
Isa. 43. 4.
etc.

espousing the believing Corinthians 2 Cor. 11. 2. Hosea 2. 19.
unto him as their husband. And as this is done in loving kindness and mercy,
so because of this relation, Christ is propounded as an example of great love.
Husbands, love Ephesians. 5. 25.
your wives, even as Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for it.

1 Cor. 12. 12.
of his body mystical. As the body is one, and has many members, so also is
Christ. And upon this ground likewise is Christ's love to his people inferred,
No man ever yet Ephesians. 5. 29 30.
hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord his
Church: For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bone.

praise waits for him in Zion: and Psalm. 65. 1. Psalm. 22. 30. Exodus 19. 5.
Mal. 3. 17. 2 Cor. 8. 23.
this is the seed which shall serve him. As before his incarnation they are
called Gods peculiar treasure, and his Jewels; so since his Ascension the
Apostle Paul styles them the Glory of Christ. And in this regard a principle
of divine self-love does incline the Lord Christ to be a friend unto believers.

For the illustration of this truth, know, that this love of Christ is
fourfold; viz. 1. Of his eternal purpose. 2. Of Benevolence. 3. Of Complacency,
4. Of Compassion.

1. There is a love of divine good pleasure appertaining unto Gods people: In
this sense God says, Jacob have Amor benepla* citi.
I loved: and in the pursuit hereof the Lord in due time converteth Romans 9. 13.
them unto himself; I have loved thee with an everlasting Jer. 31. 3.
love, therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee.

2. The Lord loves them with the love of benevolence, Amor benevolen^i^e.
communicating to them, together with himself and his loves, his All, for their
comfort: Who loved me (says Saint Paul) and gave himself for me. All are
yours; and Gal 2. 20. 1 Cor. 3. 21. 2 Cor. 4. 15.
all things are for your sakes, says the same Apostle. Christ himself being
the heir of all things, both in heaven and earth, the fountain both of grace
and comfort, brings along with himself all needful accommodations, terrestrial,
celestial, whether they concern this life, or that which is to come. How
liberal was Gods love to Abraham his friend, giving all Canaan to him and his
seed after 1 Chronicles. 20. 7.
him!

3. The Lord embraces them with a love of delight Amor Amiciti^.
and complacency, he himself having made them lovely by putting upon them his
own robes and ornaments, both by justifying and sanctifying grace. This is
taught by Ps. 45. 9, 11, 13.
sundry expressions in that Song of Loves. The Kings Daughter is all glorious
within, her clothing is of wrought Gold. Upon thy right hand did stand the
Queen in Gold of Ophir: so shall the King greatly desire thy beauty. And to the
same purpose does the Prophet Ezekiel metaphorically hold for this truth, I
washed thee with water, yea, I thoroughly washed away thy blood from thee, and I
anointed thee with oil: I clothed thee also with broidered work, I Ezekiel. 16.
9, 10, 11, 12, 13 14
girded thee about with fine linen, and covered thee with silk, I decked thee
also with Ornaments, and I put bracelets upon thy hand, and a chain on thy
neck: And I put a Jewel on thy fore head, and earrings in thy ears, and a
beautiful crown on thy head. Thus wast thou decked with Gold and Silver, and
thy raiment was of fine linen and silk, and broidered work, and thou wast
exceeding beautiful; and thy renown went forth among the Heathen for thy
beauty, for it was perfect through my comeliness put upon thee, says the Lord
God. Therefore though the Elect themselves are rather loathsome then delightful
in their unregenerate estate, yet being covered with Christ his righteousness,
and adorned with the graces Tit. 3. 3. (...).
of his holy Spirit, they are friends in whom he takes much delight. Hereupon
the Church is called Hephzibah, Isa. 62. 4.
for the Lord delights in her.

4. Christ expresses toward them the love of compassion, Amor misericordiae.
Isa. 63. 9.
sympathizing with them in all their sorrows and sufferings: in all their
affliction he was afflicted. As in reference to his friend Lazarus, being
brought to the place Joh. 11. 35, 36.
where he was buried, Jesus wept. And hence the Jews inferred this conclusion,
behold how he loved him!

David a cordial upon the death of his child, bestows upon him Solomon, with
this assurance 2 Samuel 12. 24, 25.
that he loved him, whereupon he was called Jedi^iah; And for the chearing of
Daniels heart, he was told once and again, that he was greatly beloved by the
Lord. Now Dan. 3. 23. and 10. 11, 19.
this refreshing reaches all Gospel-Christians universally.

In the serving out of this cordial, I will briefly endeavor to lay before you

1. The Characters of Christ's beloved friends. 2. The comforts hence deducible
for their relief.
First, for these signs of Christ's beloved friends, I refer you to the review
and application of the particulars in the former branch of the Doctrine, for
the discovery of such who are his loving friends. For this is most certain,
that Christ loves all those who love him. And I add Prove. 8. 17.
these two further evidences of them who are beloved of Christ.

1. Those who are beloved of the Lord are called to be Saints. Romans 1. 7.
Two things are considerable in the quotation, viz.

That these Saints are not so titularly only (because so reputed and nominated
among men;) but Saints in reality and practice, being persons whose hearts are
separated from common pollutions, raised above creature contents, to mind the
matters of God in good earnest: in which respect they are called his Saints
devoted unto him Psalm 56. 5.
peculiarly.

And this calling is not alone external (for thousands who continue haters of
God, are called upon, to lay down Isa. 65. 2, 3.
their arms of rebellion, and to submit unto the government of Christ) but it
is a calling internal and efficacious, conquering the soul to come in unto
Christ, leaving all in resolution, affection, and endeavor for him. Therefore
in the application of this, note, the Quere should be, which way the strongest
stream of mind and will do run? whether sin -- ward, world-ward, or Godward?
and what is the greatest design, driven on by project and practice, whether to
satisfy lusts, and to grow great in the world, or to conform unto laws divine,
and to advance Christ's glory.

2. The Apostle Paul conjoyneth faithful and beloved. 1 Timothy 6. 2.
Persons beloved by the Lord, are faithful to the Lord. And this fidelity does
evidence it self by two things especially.

1. By cleaving inseparably unto the guidance of God, when others are swayed by
the multitude, swimming down the tide of times. In this regard in times of
general Apostasy, Judah is said to continue faithful with the Saints, holding
close to his will in holy worship, when Hos. 11. 12. with chap. 5. 11.
Ephraim followed men's traditions and commandments.

2. By intending Gods glory more then personal advantage in course of life and
conversation.

And in this respect the Apostle speaking of the servants duty, does place
purloyning, in opposition to good fidelity; Tit. 2. 10.
that servant who purseth his Masters gain, he is not faithful. If these
things were brought home by an unpartial application, how many would be found
in these times not befriended by Christ, though they would be cried up as his
chiefest favorites among men?

Secondly, the comforts which belong unto such whom Christ affects as his
friends, may be considered under two heads, viz.

1. The quality of his love toward them. 2. The efficiency

First, his love them ward, for quality is,

1. Most cordial. They are the dearly beloved of his soul. Jer. 12. 7.
It is not lip-love, love from the teeth outward, but love from the heart-root.

2. Most large: it passes knowledge, it exceeds all dimensions. Ephesians. 3. 19.
Whereas never greater love was expressed, then Joh. 15. 13.
that a man should die for his friend. Christ commends his love as much more,
because he died for sinners, and for enemies. Romans 5. 6. 7, 8


3. Most refreshing. This love is not only sweeter then Cant. 1. 3. Psalm. 63. 3.
wine, but also better then life, yea better then lives, as the Original
imports. All the comforts of life natural and civil, all the comforts of the
several ages and conditions of life are not comparable to this love.

4 Most constant; whom he loves once, he loves to the Joh. 1. 31.
end. This Christ did cast in to cheer his Disciples, being to depart from
them. No opposition, loss, or change whatsoever, can possibly separate beloved
Christians from this love, Romans 8. 55
which the Apostle mentions as a matter of high joy and holy triumph. Whereas
Solomon tells us, that a friend Prove. 17. 17. and 18. 24.
loves at all times, and that there is a friend that sticks closer then a
brother; this may most truly be applied unto our loving friend Christ Jesus.
This the Text suggesteth; for Christ did not only love Lazarus while he lived,
but called him friend, even now when he was dead, Our friend Lazarus sleeps.

Secondly, the efficiency of his love is admirably comfortable, to all such who
enjoy it. For first, it works their deliverance from whasoever may be
grievous and dangerous. He loved us, and washed us from our sins in his blood.
Rev. 1. 5. Gal. 3. 13. 1 These. 1. 10.
And hence follows deliverance from the curse of the Law, and from the wrath to
come.

Secondly, it procures whatsoever may be joyous unto a spiritual heart.

1. He has made us (upon this account) Kings and Priests unto God and his
Father. Rev. 1. 6.


2. He feeds the soul plentifully by the dainties of sacred Ordinances; Eat O
my friends, and drink, yea drink Cant. 5. 1.
abundantly, O my beloved.

3. This his love running through all providence, makes blessings the more
sweet, and supporteth the sinking soul under crosses. As Hezekiah's recovery
was the Isa. 38. 17. Heb. 12. 5, 6.
more pleasant, because God in love to his soul wrought it: so the Apostle puts
this as a prop under a fainting afflicted Christian, that the Lord corrects
with paternal love.

4. And his love will prepare his beloved for glory. Christ loved the Church
that he might sanctify it, with the washing of water by the word* that he
might present it to Ephesians. 5. 26.
himself a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing,
but that it might be holy and without blemish. If unto all these (which I
mentioned without enlargement) we add the complacency which he takes in all
communications of his love, it will be a great addition to their joy. The Lord
will rejoice over thee, he will rest in his love, he will Zeph. 3. 17.
joy over thee with singing. God seems to take such content in his loving
transactions them-ward, as though he desired nothing more.

Let the friends of Jesus Christ feed and feast themselves with these
expressions and provisions of his love.



1. Whereas Solomon tells us (What every days experience also speaks) that
many seek the Rulers favor; Prove. 10. 6. and 29. 26. 1 Timothy 6. 15. Mat. 28.
18. Prove. 8. 15, 16.
Jesus Christ is the King of kings, and the Lord of lords, the only potentate
unto whom all authority in heaven and earth is committed, by whom Kings reign,
Princes rule, and all the Judges of the earth.

2. That it will be an high honor to be called Gods friend. In holy story
Hushai and Zabud have this title of 2 Samuel 15 27. 1 Kings 4. 5.
respect put upon them, that they were the kings friends. And it will be for
the everlasting credit of father Abraham, that he is recorded in sacred pages,
to be the friend of God. Isa. 41. 8.


3. That Christ is and ever will be in favor with God, to make and to
maintain our peace with his Majesty, though we frequently, and fearfully do
provoke him every day. The inhabitants of Tire and Sidon made Blastus Acts 12.
20.
the Kings chamberlain their friend, when Herod was highly displeased with
them, because their country was nourished by the Kings country. And is not
our dependence more upon God? And do not we hourly give the Almighty great
occasion to reject us, yea to take up arms against us? And is there any one,
either on earth or in heaven, that can assuage Gods anger, and procure his
favor, besides Jesus Christ? Therefore should means be used to make him our
friend.

4. The people of God conceiving hope that Christ regards us, they will be
encouraged with the more affectionate confidence to pray for us in the times of
our need. As the sisters of Lazarus making address unto him in the behalf of
their dear brother, pleaded this, Lord, he whom thou Joh. 11. 3.
love, is sick.

5. Hereby we shall be heartned with the more hope to apply our selves unto God
by prayer for our selves. Our Savior suggesteth this in the parable of the
man, who goes Luke 11. 5. 6, 9.
at midnight to his friend to borrow bread; he applies it to encourage prayer.

6. Because all our creature-friends may either fall off by unfaithfulness, or
forsake us by death or be forced from us other ways. This the doleful
complaints of sundry dear unto the Lord recorded in Scripture, do declare: My
lovers and my friends stand aloof from my sore, and my Psalm. 38. 11. and 88.
18. 1 King. 16. 11. Luke 16.
kinsmen stand aloof off, Lover and friend thou have put far from me, and my
acquaintance into darkness. Upon this consideration, the humane prudence of
the unjust Steward is commended, in projecting to provide friends against the
time of need. How far our experience at this day speaks our loss of
creature-friends, viz. of some by death, and of others by an unfaithful
deserting, I forbear to speak: But I do upon this consideration move your care
to gain the friendship of Christ, who will love and live for ever: Now if
these arguments shall force resolutions in your bosoms to seek Christ's love,
and thereupon means to attain it, shall be enquired after; I give these short
directions.

1. Accept of God, and of Gospel-righteousnesse with him, by a self-outing, and
a Christ-prizing faith. The Scripture says, Abraham believed God, and it was
imputed Jam. 2. 23.
unto him for righteousness, and he was called the friend of God.

2. Upon the serious consideration of his worthiness, and hopeful expectations
of happiness by him; labor to endear Christ unto your hearts. Although our
love to him does not merit his love, yet it will clearly make manifestation
thereof unto our souls. I love them (says he) who love me. Prove. 8. 17.


3. And (as an expression of your love) submit obediently unto his government,
studiously conforming unto all his commands. This is his own promise which he
will perform infallibly. He that has my Commandments and Joh. 14. 21.
keeps them, he it is that loves me, and I will love him.

To him be glory and Romans 16.
dominion for ever, and ever, Amen. From whence might be noted,

1. That the glory to be returned unto Christ for his love should not be verbal
only, but real also, expressed by subjection unto his dominion.

2. That this obediential gratitude should not be confined to term of time, but
extended unto eternity, for ever and ever.

3. And all Christians should heartily give in their assent and attestation
hereto by annexing their Amen.

In the amplification of this persuasion, I might call you back to the review
both of the proof of this doctrine, and of the qualities and efficiency of his
love, spoken unto, in the first Use: But that I may not tautologize by telling
the same things again, I wish you to meditate upon these particulars which will
yet further commend Christ's love, and may call you forth in thankfulness for
it.

1. His love was primary to us, and ours secundary, succeeding it, as the
effect and consequence thereof, we loved 1 John 4. 19.
him, because he loved us first. If he had not fired our hearts with the flames
of his love, we should never have bestowed one spark of spiritual affection
upon him.

2. His love was free, when there was much loathsomeness, and no loveliness at
all in us. When thou wast Ezekiel. 16. 5, 6. 7, 8.
cast out in the open field, to the loathing of thy person in the day that thou
wast born. And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thy blood, when
thou wast naked and bare. Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee,
behold thy time was the time of love.

3. His love works him unto a familiar conversing with them, which himself
expresses by feasting with them, He brought me into the banqueting house, and
his banner over Cant. 1. 4.
me was love; I will sup with them, and the, shall sup with me: Rev. 3. 20.
and by acquainting them with himself, I will manifest my Joh. 14 21.
self unto them: as also by revealing his secrets, I have called you friends:
for all things that I have heard of my Father, I Joh. 15. 15.
have made known unto you. As also by conjugal embracings: His left hand is
under my head, and his right hand does embrace Cant. 2. 6.
me.

Now if Christ's beloved friends, thankfully disposed toward him for his love,
shall demand how their gratitude should be really discovered? I answer in the
words of Solomon; A man that has friends, must show himself friendly: Prove.
18. 24.
which is done,

1. By a cautious declining of whatsoever may be offensive unto him; as the
returning of evil for good is very sinful, and a practice prejudicial to our
selves, so is it taken very unkindly by the Lord. Thus David complains of
Achitophel, (and as some conceive, Christ of Judas) My friend that did eat of
my bread, has lifted up his heel against Psalm 41. 9. (...).
me. As Caesar was most afflicted with the wound received from his own sons
hands. And thou my son too!

Therefore upon remembrance of Christ's kindness learn to beat back temptations
as Joseph did. How then shall I do this wickedness, and sin against the Lord
Genesis 39 9.


2. By an inseparable adherence unto Christ in days of deepest difficulty and
danger. The servant engaged to his Master by his favors, is willing to have
his ear bored, that he may dwell with him for ever. Ruth upon the receipt
Exodus 21. 5, 6.
of less love a great deal from Naomi her mother in law, takes up this
resolution, Nothing shall part thee and me Ruth 1. 16.
but death. God forbid that ever we by our Apostasy should give Christ occasion
to speak by way of reproach to us as Absalon did to Hushai (deserting David, as
he apprehended) Is this thy kindness to thy friend? Why wentest 2 Samuel 16. 17.
not thou with thy friend? So be you sure that this one circumstance will gripe
your hearts with great grief for your backslidings. As Peter in this regard
wept bitterly, because he Mat. 26. 75.
had denied, and deserted Christ, so good a Master, so well deserving a friend.

3. By unfeigned love unto all them, who are the beloved friends of Christ* This
is the inference of Saint John, from this consideration under discourse, that
therefore we ought to love one another, and we ought to lay down our lives for
the brethren. But of this more in the doctrine 1 John 4. 11. and 3. 16.
following.

all Christ's friends are mutually loving friends unto one another. As Christ
here says not, my friend, but our friend Lazarus, thereby intending to declare
the friendship which was betwixt Lazarus and his Disciples, as betwixt himself
and Lazarus.

In the proof of this doctrine, I will point at two particulars (which I
conceive this instance under hand may hint.)

1. That there is friendlinesse and love amongst all good Christians. In this
respect the Apostle Paul in his Ephesians. 1. 15.
Epistle to the Ephesians, joyneth their faith in Christ, and Philem. 5.
their love to all Saints. And in his Epistle to Philemon, he connexeth his
love to Christ, and his love to all Saints. Yea, our Savior makes this the
livery whereby his servants may be distinguished from others. By this shall
Joh. 13 35.
all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to another.

2. That there is a peculiarity of friendly respect in Christians unto Christ's
Ministers, as here in Lazarus toward Christ his Apostles. This is observable
in the Letter sent from Jerusalem to Antioch, wherein their expression of
special love is recorded; viz. Our beloved Barnabas Acts 15. 25.
and Paul.

But I will not deal with the Doctrine in both these branches distinctly. The
handling of it more generally (for brevity sake) shall be alone undertaken.

And the Reasons of the point are four.

David was ready to show kindness to the house of Saul for Jonathans sake. 2 Samuel 9. 1.


And among themselves they are related many P^ilemon 16. 1 Pet. 3. 8. and 2.
17. 1 Cor. 12. 25.
ways most nearly. They are brethren, and the brotherhood is to be loved. And
they are fellowmembers, and therefore to have mutual respect one to another.

This 1 John 4 21.
command we have from him, that he who loves God, loves his brother also. A
new Commandment I give unto you, John 13. 34. and 15. 12.
That ye love one another, as I have loved you, that ye love one another. And
again, This is my Commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you.

1 John 5. 1.
expressed by their holy conversation.

The Apostle John asserts this, That every one who loves him that begat,
loves him also that is begotten of him. Because the child is the picture (as
it were) of his father, therefore beloved for his fathers sake.

I here forbear to discover how Believers begotten again 1 Pet. 1. 3. Isa. 9.
6. 1 Cor. 15. 49.
by Christ (as the everlasting Father) do bear his image; but this I propound
as the reason of Christians mutual love.

As the inward affection of Titus was more abundant toward 2 Cor. 7. 15.
the Corinthians whilst he remembered their obedience; And as it is reported of
Beucer and Calvin, that they loved all them in whom they could espy aliquid
Christi, any thing of Christ: So doubtless it is with all others who are
friends unto Christ.

Paul calls this love, Col. 1. 8.
love in the Spirit. And the Apostle Saint John discoursing of this Christian
affection, and consequently of Gods dwelling in us (being thereby evidenced)
gives in this as the confirmation of both, Because he has given us of his
Spirit. 1 John 4. 12, 13.


This I place as the last Argument, because it is the true reason which makes
all the former concluding: For neither spiritual relation, nor divine
injunction, nor Christ's image upon the Christians soul, could have any
commanding influence to draw forth this holy love amongst Believers, if God did
not cooperate by the power of the holy Ghost.

Thus from the confirmation I proceed to the Application of the Doctrine; which
I shall make in four Uses; viz. 1. Conviction. 2. Examination. 3. Comfort. 4.
Exhortation.



First, Such who are rather enemies, then friends unto the people of God, as
their own consciences witness to themselves, and their practices proclaim to
the world, this being their design and endeavor (if they could effect it) to
ruinate them in their comforts and lives altogether; They have said (in their
desires, though not with their lips) Come let us cut them off from being a
Nation, that the Psalm. 83. 4.
name of Israel may be no more in remembrance. Whatsoever show of love unto
Christ these persons make among men, doubtless they are adversaries to him, as
sundry passages, surrounding the last quotation do clearly express. Keep not
Psalm. 83. 1, 2, 5.
thou silence O God, hold not thy peace, and be not still O God. Lo thine
enemies make a tumult, and they that hate thee, have lift up the head, they are
confederate against thee. As 2 Samuel 3 17.
Joab took Abner aside to speak peaceably, but smote him under the fifth rib
that he died; So these, though they smile upon Christ's face with a salute, yet
they stab his body; or (as one wittily expresses it) they kiss the mouth and
tread upon the toes. Such unfriendlinesse to godly Christians,

1. Argues an unregenerate estate. The upright in his Prove. 29. 27.
way is an abomination to the wicked. And he that loves not those who are like
God, is one of the children of the Devil. 1 John 3. 10.


2. And is not consistent with meetnesse to be made partakers Col. 1. 1^.
of the inheritance of Saints in light. For it is not a heaven, but a hell
rather to be confined to the company of 1 John 3. 14, 15.
such as are hated. He that loves not his brother abides in death, etc.

As this doctrine falls thus heavy upon all those who are enemies, rather then
friends unto ordinary Christians: so upon such especially who are professed
adversaries to the Ministers of Christ. You know how the holy Ghost does
stigmatize Ahab, who hated Michaiah, that he was a man who sold himself to do
wickedness; whereas unto true Gospel. 1 Kings 21. Romans 10. 15.
Believers the very feet of them are beautiful who bring the glad tidings of
peace.

Secondly, those much more are by this doctrine set aside as no friends to
Christ, who are Boutefeuz and Incendiaries, seeking to kindle coals of
contentions, and to increase the flames of discontent and animosities among the
people of God. This practice proves them to be Factors for the Devil, and
exposes them to the wrath of God. It was an evil spirit that made division
betwixt Abimelech and the men of Shechem. The Devil is pictured with a cloven
foot, Judge. 9. 27.
to signify that it is his work to cause and continue divisions in the world;
And those who sow those seeds of discord are Prove. 6. 16, 19.
reckoned by Solomon among them whom the Lord hates, and who are an
abomination unto him.



Therefore take those discoveries of them who are right in their loves to real
Christians.

First, from the object of love, viz. Sanctif^ing grace. There are many lovely
qualifications in Gods faithful servants, Mark. 6. 20.
which an ingenuous moral man may value; as Herod reverenced John the Baptist;
but it is holiness which is the loadstone to draw the love of the regenerate
Christian. Because Saints, therefore excellent in a gracious eye. And hence
Psalm. 16. 2. Ephesians. 1. 15. 2 Cor. 7 15.
follows universality of Love to all such, and the abounding of respect
according to the increase of Grace.

Secondly, from the qualities of his friendship: It is accompanied,

1. With an honorable estimation of them. The heirs of heaven do honor such
who sear the Lord. Psalm. 15. 4. Psalm. 16. 2.


2. And with complacency, All my delight (says David) is in them.

Thirdly, from the Effects of this love; viz.

1. Readiness to perform real offices for their comfort. Thus S. Paul proved
the sincerity of the Corinthians love, by 2 Cor. 8. 8, 24.
their contribution, for the relief of poor Saints.

2. And compassionate sympathies when they are in trouble. To him that is
afflicted pity should be showed from his Job 6. 14.
friend. By this David did demonstrate his real respects unto some who ill
deserved them, When they were sick, my clothing Psalm. 35. 13, 14.
was sackcloth, I behaved my self as though he had been my friend.

These short hints I leave to your amplification and faithful application, that
your selves may understand whether your love unto godly Christians be such as
will evidence your regenerate estate.

sincerity unto God, not doubting but that Christ himself will give the like
testimony unto them herein, as he did unto Lazarus in the Text. Our friend.

For 1. It is no small privilege to partake in the love of all heavens
favorites, and this love is mutual: Those who are cordial friends to
Christians, are cordially beloved by Christians, which is a matter of much joy
to them who will consider it, as in other regards, so because their love
draws our prayers unto God, as need requires. Psalm. 122. 6, ^.


2. From hence they may infallibly conclude their regeneration by special
grace. Let us love one another, (says Saint John) for love is of God, and
every one that loves 1 John 4. 7. Noscitur ex socio, etc. 2 Timothy 3 3.
is born of God. Whereas persons under the power of depraved nature, are
despisers of them who are good.

3. And, as they may upon this evidence lay claim to the comforts of grace
upon earth, so may they raise confidence of future glory in heaven. We know
that we 1 John 3. 14.
have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren.



First, to love Christians, because they are like unto Christ, and belonging
unto him in the nearest relations. The holy Ghost is often and earnest in this
persuasion, 1 Pet. 2. 17. and 3. 8. Col. 3. 14.
Love the brotherhood, love as brethren: and above all things put on charity,
which is the bond of perfectness.

As helps herein, let these meditations be molded believingly upon your
hearts. 1. That they are in regard of spiritual beauties, the lovelyest people
under the Sun, Exceeding beautiful. The Church is called the fairest among
Ezekiel. 16. 13. Cant. 6. 1. and 5.
women. And this is not the judgment of persons subject to mistakes, but even
of Christ himself, which he gives in, again and again, both as a ground of his
own love, and requiring attention unto his testimony. Behold thou art Cant. 1.
15, 16. and 4. 7.
fair my beloved, behold thou art fair; behold thou art fair, yea pleasant.
Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee.

Therefore that you may beget love in your bosoms toward Saints, do not so
much pore upon their blemishes as their beauties, look rather upon their virtue
then their vices; as Titus by remembering the obedience, rather then the
disobedience of the Corinthians, found his affections enlarged 2 Cor. 7. 15.
toward them.

2. That the obligations of love which the Gospel has laid upon you, are many,
and commanding. Here I will only name (without enlargement) the particulars,
whereby Saint Paul persuades the Christian Ephesians, to keep Ephesians. 4 3, 4, 5, 6
the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. There is one body, and one
spirit, one baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through
all, and in you all.

3. That no persons whatsoever, have been, or are likely to be, so useful to
your selves and to the public, as these Saints and servants of the most high
God. This argument Paul presses upon Philemon, to move his affections toward
Phil. 11.
converted Onesimus, because now (says he) profitable to thee and me.

These are repairers of breaches, and restorers of paths to Isa. 58. 12. Isa.
1. 9.
dwell in. And these are the remnant, which if God had not left, we should have
been like unto Sodom and Gomorrah.

I forbear to report how they bestead the public,

1. By their prayers. As if Moses had not stood up in the breach to turn away
Gods wrath, Israel had been destroyed. Psalm. 106. 13.


2 And by their presence, As God told Lot, he could do nothing till he removed
from Sodom. By this reason Genesis 19. 22.
Jonathan speaks to move Readiness bowels toward David, For he did put his life
in his hand, and slew the Philistine, and 1 Samuel 18. 5.
the Lord wrought a great salvation for all Israel.

Secondly, I might from this doctrine deal with all sorts by persuasion to
endeavor to become godly, that they may be admitted as friends into the
bosoms of Gods people. Although I know that there are higher ends to be
intended in undertaking the practice of piety, viz. Gods glory, and our own
salvation; yet this consideration under hand would not be slighted, if these
particulars (which I shall only name) were well weighed.

1. That the love of Gods people toward us will Phil. 1. 4, 6.
produce their frequent and fervent addresses unto heaven for us according to
our serviceable necessities.

1. That their applications unto the Lord, are very Job 42. 8.
prevalent in regard of their great favor with his Highness.

2. Their love will work them unto readiness in any other kind to serve us
with their interests and abilities, Heb. 6. 10.
counsels and communication of their experiences, as opportunity may be offered.

3. And their expressions of loving respect may administer some relief unto the
faint hopes of self-suspecting souls, because they are to be looked upon as
best able (in regard of their principles and experiments) to judge of the
spiritual conditions of other Christians.

I proceed to the third circumstance, considerable in the first part of the
Text, viz. That Christ himself does testify the forementioned relation of
friendship betwixt Lazarus and himself with his Disciples: Our friend.

That Jesus Christ knows and acknowledges them particularly, who are friends
unto himself and his peculiar people. The Lord knows them that are his. This
2 Timothy 1. 14.
knowledge comprehends observation, approbation, and commemoration As he owned
Lazarus here, his friend; So likewise he did his Disciples under the relation
of Matthew. 28. 10.
brotherhood after his Resurrection, Go tell my brethren. And since his
Ascension into glory, such is his respect unto all sanctified ones, That he is
not ashamed to call them Heb. 10. 11.
brethren.

If more clear Scripture Proof be demanded, let these two passages be observed.

1. That Christ knows who love him, while they are alive. This is manifest by
Peter's attestation, Lord, thou know that I love thee. Joh. 21. 15, 16, 17.


2. That the Lord remembers after the death of his friends, that they were so
during life. As dead Lazarus is thus spoken of, Our friend. And long after
Abraham's decease, God speaking of Israel, thus expresses himself, The Isa. 41.
8.
seed of Abraham my friend.



1. God knows his friends, because himself makes them so. And therefore
because he understands his own actions, he cannot be ignorant in whose bosoms
there Psalm. 33. 14, 15.
are these friendly dispositions.

2. And God will acknowledge them, because he has undertaken torecompence
them. He is not unrighteous to forget labors of love. Heb. 6. 10.


The Application follows.

This consideration may be a cooling card unto two sorts of people.

If men's hearts condemn them, Gods is greater and knows all. There will be
many 1 John 3. 20.
rejected at the last day, who have pretended much respect to Christ. Man. 7.
22, 23.


2. To all those who are ashamed to own Christ in his cause, and his friends in
their holy conversation: for all these our Lord observes, and of them he will
be ashamed when he comes in the glory of Mark 3. 32.
his Father with the holy Angels. And I leave it to your consideration, how
miserable their case will be at the last day, when Christ who knows all his
friends and foes, shall separate the sheep and the Matthew. 25. 32.
goats, And shall come to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that
are ungodly amongst them Jude 15.
of all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all
their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him; And of the
individual unfriendly neglects of his necessitous servants: these must depart
with a curse from Christ, and go away into everlasting Mat. 25. 41. 46.
punishment.

testimony of their own consciences 2 Co^. 1. 12.
will in this case reflect refreshing; and this will be a great addition unto
their comfort, that expressions of friendly respect both to God and his
servants, are thus observed, and will be acknowledged. The Lord himself to
en^ourage Israel in captivity, gives them to Jer. 24 5.
understand that he will own them in that estate. No doubt it was good news to
Cornelius, when he heard Acts 10. 4.
from heaven, Thy Prayers and thine Alms are come for a memorial before God. So
the Psalmist cheareth himself by this consideration, I have preached
Righteousness in the Psalm. 40 9* 10.
great Congregation. Lo I have not refrained my lips, O Lord thou know it.

This consolation will be admirably sweet at two seasons.

First, When we may be injuriously suspected and censured for falsnesse and
unfaithfulness, either to God, or to his people. How well was it for Mordecai
Esther 2. 21.
(when himself with his Contrymen, were decryed and condemned as enemies to
the State) that his fidelity in a particular instance was recorded? And to
bring this home to the knowledge that God takes of his servants sincerity: J^b
being reproached Job 23. 10.
as an hypocrite, has recourse to this, He knows the way that I take. And
Jeremiah being suspected to be one ill-affected toward the place where he
lived, makes this appeal to the Lord, Jer. 17. 16.
I have not desired the woeful day, thou know.

Secondly, At the day of Judgment, when God will measure out unto people
according to their ways.

The Prophet Malachy having mentioned both Gods hearing the good conferences of
such who fear his Name in evil times, and the book of Remembrance recording
all; he adds, And these shall be mine Mal. 3. 16, 17.
says the Lord of Hosts, in the day when I make up my jewels, etc. And this
cordial is contained in Paul's Prayer for Onesiphorus, The Lord give mercy to
the house of Onesiphorus, for he refreshed me, and was 2 Timothy 1. 16, 17, 18.
not ashamed of my chain; But when he was at Rome, he sought me diligently,
and found me. The Lord grant unto him, that he may find mercy of the Lord in
that day.

But most comfortable is that full promise of Christ himself unto all such who
are friendly unto him in his Matthew. 25. 34. 40. 46.
relations, recorded in Matthew 25. from ver. 34. to ver. 40. from whence these
particulars are worthy consideration.

1. That he will at the last day remember all the individual offices of
friendship to his members, and will mention much that themselves never minded.
And they shall say, when saw we thee an hungered, Ver. 37.
etc.

2. That all acts of love and pity toward his relations (even the least and
lowest) shall be interpreted as a special kindness showed unto himself, In as
Ver. 40.
much as you have done it to one of the least of these my brethren, you have
done it unto me.

3. And the recompense shall be exceeding great. Then shall the King say, Come
ye blessed of my Father, inherit Verse 34. 46.
the Kingdom prepared for you. And the Righteous shall go into eternal life.



First, to real friendlinesse both unto Christ, and to all those who peculiarly
belong unto him. Suppose ye saw Christ sitting in a chair of Majesty, and
heard him speaking thus in the audience of all the inhabitants on earth, Who is
on my side! Let all my faithful friends gather themselves before me: In this
case would not multitudes come in with professions and protestations of love?
Now it is thus in truth: for our Lord looks from heaven, and considers
exactly who are his friends, and who are not. Therefore bethink your selves
what you will do. And if you be content to come in to Christ as faithful
friends, then befriend (for his sake,) those especially Gal. 6. 10.
who are of his household, for this will be observed and rewarded. Therefore my
beloved, be ye steadfast and 1 Cor. 15. 58.
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as you know
that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

Secondly, to beware of all kinds of doubling and hypocrisy both in the
profession and practice of love, whether toward Christ or faithful Christians.

It is the admonition of the Apostle, Let love be Romans 12. 9.
without dissimulation. And the Doctrine is a strong Argument to back it,
because of the notice which our Savior takes thereof. Christ himself by this
consideration moves sincerity in all services, whether of piety toward God,
or charity toward men, because an eye Mat^h. 6. 4, 6.
from heaven does epsy whatsoever is done on earth with greatest secrecy.

This motive will be the more prevalent, if we mind Christ, who as the Judge
of all men, will manifest and recompense Luke 12 1, 2. 2 Cor. 5. 9, 10.
their services according to their nature and manner of performance.

The second part of my Text follows; in the handling whereof I shall be the
shorter, because I have been so large in the former.

Lazarus sleeps. In the division of the Text there were three things noted
thence; which I shall speak unto very briefly, in three points of Doctrine.

That such who are Christ's, and his peoples friends, are subject to death.

This word [ Sleepeth] is by our Evangelist himself thus Verse 13. Verse 14.
expounded, Jesus spoke of his death: and it is added, Jesus says to them
plainly, Lazarus is dead.

There is no need of Scripture quotations here, because experiences from age to
age every where give in sufficient proof of this Truth. When the Apostle Heb.
11. 13.
had particularized many Worthies as examples of faith and holiness, he adds
these words, All these died.



1. Because of Adams sin transmitted, Sin enters into the world, and death by
sin; Romans 5. 12.


2. And by reason of Gods determination, with reference to his own glory, many
ways to be manifested in the consequence of death, It is appointed unto men
once to die, and after this the judgment, (For upon these Heb. 9 27.
accounts the wicked who are Christ's enemies do die also)

But there are peculiar Reasons wherefore Christ's and the Churches friends do
die.

I will not here speak unto that which was extraordinary in this death of
Lazarus; viz. for the glory of God, Verse 15.
that the Son of God might be glorified thereby, and for the sakes of them who
should believe, upon the observation Ver. 4.
of Christ's power in a miraculous raising him from the dead)

I will only instance in those ends which God intends in a way more ordinary,
with respect unto his people themselves.

1. Sometimes that they may be secured from common calamities coming upon the
world. As men do house their cattle before the storm falls; Thus God takes
away Isa. 57. 1.
the righteous from the evil to come, whereof the case of Josiah is a famous
instance. 2 Chro. 34. 28.


2. That they may rest from their labors, both of service Rev. 14. 13.
and suffering, when their task and exercises are over; when their work is
done, and the Lord has sufficiently proved and purged them by variety of
providence, both cross and comfortable, in this world, then he calls them
off this stage, and causes their departure hence.

3. That they might enjoy immediate communion with Christ in heaven, which is
far better then the best condition Phil. 1. 23. Heb. 12. 23.
attainable in this life; and that their spirits might be made perfect in
glory, before the day of the general Resurrection, when their souls and bodies
shall be reunited.

There are many profitable Uses to be made of this Doctrine, Application.
which I shall only point at.

Use 1. Therefore natural death is not the greatest evil, neither are those
comforts whereof death does deprive the best good; because it is absurd to
imagine that the most godly should undergo the heaviest evils, and be stripped of
the chiefest comforts. This inference is obvious, and might be usefully
enlarged. But I must forbear.

Use 2. Therefore death is not always to be looked upon, as a demonstration of
Gods anger against them who die: neither is any sickness bringing death, to be
judged a sign of divine wrath and severity. Lazarus Verse 3.
Christ's friend died, and it was said before, He whom thou love, is sick.
This is alleged as the reason of the death of Jeroboams child, because there
was some goodness in him. 1 Kings 14. 13.
Hezekiah was sick unto death; and it is conjectured, that his disease was the
Plague, both because of the swelling mentioned, and the medicine advised. Let
them take Isa. 38. 21.
a lump of figs, and lay it for a plaster upon the boil; And how sad Jobs
condition was, I need not to relate, who yet (according to Gods own testimony)
was a man of incomparable piety: Satan smote Job with sore boiles, from Job 1.
8. and 2. 3. Job 2. 7, 8.
the sole of the foot unto his crown. And he took him a potsheard to scrape
himself withal, and he late down among the ashes. This I do rather note, 1.
Because people are subject to censure severely those who undergo unusual
afflictions. When the Barbarians saw the venomous beast Acts 8. 4.
hang on Paul's hand, they said among themselves, No doubt this man is a
murderer, vengeance suffers not him to live. 2. Because by this uncharitable
censoriousnesse, men do expose themselves unto Gods displeasure. Hence it was,
that the Lord thus spoke unto Eliphaz the Temanite, My wrath is Job 42. 7.
kindled against thee, and against thy two friends, for you have not spoken of
me the thing that is right.

Use 3. Therefore Gods people should the rather hold up with hope, comfort, and
patience under all sorts of their sufferings here, because their death (which
is certain) will put a period, an end unto all. Though the Sea Nubecula est,
and cito transibit.
be stormy, yet the voyage is short, we shall ere long come safe to shore. For
this cause we faint not, though the outward man perish (suppose rotting and
unsavory, 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17.
etc.) for this light affliction is but for a moment.

Do you not remember how the holy Martyr comforted his fellow-sufferer, ( viz.)
that death would cure the one of his blindness, and the other of his lameness?
And doubtless in this sense, it may be said safely, that death unto the godly
is the best Physician, curing them perfectly of all diseases whatsoever.
Therefore cheer up, ye Saints of God, under all your grievances, upon the
thought of death. Say to your selves, as the good Martyr did, But one style or
two more, and then I am at my journeys end.

Use 4. Therefore Gods servants should be the more industrious in doing all the
good which possibly they can, with speed, because they must die, and death will
take them off their work. This is Solomon's inference, Whatsoever thine hand
finds to do, do it with thy might; for there Eccles. 9. 10.
is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou
go. How did our Savior bestirre himself, when he knew that his hour was
come? What a great deal Joh. 13. 1.
of good work did he then dispatch in a short time? And it seems to be the
reason, why Paul at Troas preached till midnight, because he was ready to
depart on the morrow. The Acts 20. 7.
nearer unto the center, the swifter is the motion. Famous Doctor Sibbs would
say, Could we suppose sorrow in heaven, this would be our sorrow there, that we
did no more work for God, before we came thither to receive so great wages.

Use 5. Therefore we all should be persuaded, to improve our Christian friends,
both Ministers and others* in all their gifts, graces and experiences, so much
as may be, and that with speed, because they must die: Upon this ground the
Prophet Zachary quickens obedience, Thus says the Lord of hosts, Turn ye
now Zach. 1. 4, 5.
from your evil ways, -- Your fathers where are they? And the Prophets, do
they live for ever? Our Savior is often in this exhortation, having foretold
his own departure, Yet a little while is the light with you, walk while John
12. 35. Ephesians. 5. 8. Mat. 5. 16. John 5. 35.
you have the light. As all godly ones are called light: So Ministers are the
lights of the world; John was a burning, and a shining light: Beloved, death
will blow out these your candles, and your Torches; therefore while they live,
while they give out their shine and their light, make a profitable use of them,
to Gods honor and your own souls welfare.

Use 6. Therefore I hence exhort all the friends of Christ, to prepare
themselves for death, and to maintain upon their Spirits a prepared posture
for natures dissolution. Although I know, that they being united unto Christ,
and reconciled to God through him, they Rev. 14. 13.
shall undoubtedly (whenever they die) be translated from earth to heaven:
yet there is something more to Luke 16. 22.
be minded by Christians, that they may be ready to die. How much might be
comprised in Jobs expression, All Job 14. 14.
the days of mine appointed time will I wait until my change shall come? I
shall not undertake to discover; but I desire to leave these four words of
advice, in the bosoms of Christians, in tendency unto their preparation for
death. 1. Seek well grounded assurance of your interest in Christ, and of
undoubted title unto heaven, through him. This foundation being laid, Paul
could triumph over death, -- Oh death, where is thy sting? thanks be to 1 Cor.
15 55.
God, who has given us victory through Jesus Christ. And Simeon could sing
when ready to die, Now let thou thy Luke 2. 19, 30.
servant depart in peace; For mine eyes have seen thy salvation. Whereas there
are sad shiverings upon some gracious hearts, when death looks in at the
windows, because they question their admission into heaven, upon natures
dissolution.

2. Take heed of all scandalous sins, sins against conscience, the
commission whereof may blemish Religion, and lie as blocks of offense in the
ways of others. It is conceived by some Divines, that in this regard Saint
Paul died with the more confidence, because after his conversion he was no way
scandalous: I have fought the 2 Timothy 4. 7. 8.
good fight, and I have kept the faith, and henceforth is laid up for me a
Crown of righteousness. Whereas Peter having dishonored Christ, disgraced his
profession, wounded his own conscience, and prejudiced others (how far we
know not) by his fearful, threefold denial; was so full of perplexity, that
Christ saw cause (before Joh. 21. 15, 19
the foretelling of his death) to confirm his heart in helping on the
discovery of his sincere love, notwithstanding that sad offensive Apostasy.
Broken bones, though knit, will ache toward change of weather. And the
remembrance of scandalous miscariages, may occasion anguish in the bosoms of
dying Saints.

3. Settle your outward estate and concernments, according to divine prudence
and holy principles, remembering that you must be accountable unto the Lord,
(whose stewards you are) how you dispose of the things of this life Luke. 16. 2.
with which he has entrusted you. This was Gods own advice unto Hezekiah. Thus
says the Lord, set thine house i^ Esaias 38. 1.
order, for thou shall die.

Many good people dear unto God, upon this neglect are less comfortable to
themselves, and less serviceabl^ unto others upon their deathbeds, because
they suspe^ the many sad consequences of their not endeavoring t^ prevent
sin and trouble by an orderly settling of all the^ earthly enjoyments.

4. Leave with gracious gravity and seriousness, charges Appropinquante morte
multo es divinior.
and convictions upon the consciences of your nearest relations, that Christ,
heaven and their immortal souls may be principally cared for. Warn your
friends to beware of the sins of the times, and of their own inclinations.
Communicate your experiences for future profit, prudently. Here I might
expatiate upon the examples of Jacob blessing Genesis 49. Deuteronomy. 31. 2. and 32. and
33. Josh. 23. 1, 2. and 24. 1. -- Joh. 13. 1. and 14. and 15. and 16. and 17.
his sons, when on his deathbed; of Moses and of Joshua their plain dealing
with Israel, when ready to die; yea, and of Christ himself: But I am
necessitated to abbreviate these things with this hearty request, that my
friendly, faithful counsel in these things may not be forgotten.

And do not (I pray you,) do not defer these things, for death may steal
upon you suddenly, unexpectedly, as a man falls asleep sometimes, when he
thought not of it.

This lets in the next point.

Doct. 2. That Christ's friends by death, do fall asleep. The Protomartyr
Stephen his death is thus expressed: He Act. 7 60. 1 Co^. 15. 16, 18, 20, 51.
fell asleep. And the Apostle Paul does often in the fifteenth Chapter of his
first Epistle to the Corinthians, attest this truth.

This sleep is not to be applied unto the soul after its Eccles. 12. 7. Luke
23. 43. Phil. 1. 23. Heb. 12. 23.
departure from the body (as some fondly dream;) for it goes to God
immediately, forthwith enjoys fellowship with Christ, and becomes perfect;
But it belongs to the dead body, laid in the grave, which in this regard (...).
Mr. Calamy his Sermon upon Acts 7. 60.
is called a sleeping place. I shall not dilate upon the resemblance betwixt
death and sleep, which is fully done by others: But I will only touch upon two
things which are here intended. 1. Death is a sleep unto the godly, because
thereby they are laid to rest. There is a Verse 13.
taking of rest by sleep. They shall rest in their beds, says the Prophet,
speaking of the death of righteous ones. And Isa. 57. 2.
they rest from their labors, (so says the Spirit) who die in the Lord. 2.
Because their bodies shall be raised, as Rev. 14. 15.
men are awakened out of sleep: This is expressed in the words which
immediately follow the Text: Our friend Lazarus sleeps; but I go that I may
awake him out of sleep. And the Apostle Paul is much upon this Metaphor, Cor.
15.
in that place where he undertaketh to prove the Resurrection.

Use 1. Therefore true believers, real Saints should not be afraid to die.

I grant that death unto nature is the King of fears, and it has its
poisonous sting with which it will wound the wicked, whom it does usher into
hell. This (with many other useful truths relating unto death) is admirably Dr.
Tuckney his Sermons upon 1. Cor. 15. 55.
laid open of late by a worthy servant of Christ; and it would be a digression,
if I should undertake that discovery: But I only move Gods people, to arm
themselves against the sinking fear of death, because unto them it is no worse
then falling asleep. And indeed there is great need of this counsel among Gods
own servants every where, who like foolish children are afraid to put off their
clothes, and go to bed in a dark chamber. As Baxter in his Saints everlasting
rest.
Herein the forementioned Author, and others, have administered much good help,
in which regard I may be silent.

Use 2. Neither let us mourn immoderately because of the death of our
Christian friends; seeing they are only fallen asleep. When our Savior had
spoken the Verse 12.
words of the Text, Then said his Disciples, If he sleep, he shall do well. And
by the argument the Apostle seeks to prevail with the Thessalonians, that they
might not mourn excessively upon such occasion. For those who sleep in Jesus,
will God bring with him. Then he adds, 1 These. 4. 13, 14 17, 18.
We shall be ever with the Lord; wherefore comfort one another with these
words. Love moves joy, when our weak, weary, pained, diseased friends are
fallen into a sound sweet sleep. This consideration therefore should cheer our
drooping spirits, in reference unto godly friends, who died in the Lord. Let us
mind this the rather, because God who propounds this ground of comfort,
observes both when we have need of this cordial, and also what improvement we
make thereof, as it follows in the next and last Doctrine, which remains to
be handled.

Doct. 3. The Lord knows when his own and his Churches friends do fall asleep
by death. As Christ, though now at a bodily distance from Bethany, the place of
Lazarus his abode, yet told his Disciples of his death, Our friend Lazarus
sleeps. As God spoke this to Joshuah, My Josh. 1. 2.
servant Moses is dead.

This truth may be concluded strongly by these arguments.

Reas. 1. Because Christ has the keys of death Rev. 1. 18.
in keeping; the soul cannot be let out of the body, without his leave. And he
knows all his own grants.

Reas. 2. Because he also has power in heaven, keeping (as it were) the gate
hereof, into which none can enter without his allowance. This is manifest by
his promise to the penitent thief: This day thou shall be with me in Paradise.
Therefore he exactly observes, when any persons or person Luke 23. 43.
has admission thither.

Use 1. Hence the deity of Christ may be proved undeniably; for though there be
thousands dying hourly in the several places of the world, yet Christ knows
particularly, 1. Both their qualification, whether his friends and his Churches
friends, or no. 2. And the time, when every one of them gives up the ghost. As
the instance under discourse does evince. 1. He understood infallibly that
Lazarus was a faithful friend, both unto himself and his servants: Our friend
Lazarus. 2. And though he was not corporeally present with Lazarus in the place
where he died, yet he knew without any creature-intelligence, that now he was
fallen asleep by death.

Use 2. This truth speaks manifold comforts unto Gods children: For, 1. This
hints his respect to them; Precious in Psalm. 116. 15. ^.
the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. He will not suffer any of
them to lose life without his special observation thereof, together with causes
and concomitants therein considerable.

2. It suggests his care of every soul; when it removes out of the body the
place of its habitation, it shall not miscary or be lost through Christ's
regardlessenesse. Though thousands of devils may watch to intercept the soul,
yet Christ who observes when it leaves the body, will undoubtedly, according
to his charge and promise, secure its Passages to glory. This is a Cordial to
the poorest Christian, for there is no respect of persons with the Lord. It
came to pass that the beggar died, and was carried by the Angels into Luke 16.
22.
Abraham's bosom. And,

3. It may relieve the sad hearts of godly ones, mourning for their loss in
the death of their dear Christian friends; for their God and Savior is quickly
and fully acquainted with this their affliction: he saw when our beloved
relations breathed out their last gasp. Questionless it cheered Hagar, when
she understood that God took notice, when the bottle was empty; and heard the
cry of Ishmael, because he wanted water. And you may be Genesis 21. 16, 17.
confident, that Christ who understands when your Parents, your Pastors, your
yoakfellows, your friends die; he does also consider what counsel, what
comfort, what supports, what supplies, what encouragements you be deprived of
by means of their death. Is not this a choice Cordial to Gods children, that
their heavenly Father knows they need such things? Mat. 6. 32.


Use 3. Lastly, this Doctrine yields matter of seasonable and needful
admonition. Therefore upon the death of Gods servants, we should seek after
such dispositions, as may be pleasing unto his Majesty, who observes together
with such providence, how we are affected therewith.

Here then I would advise two particulars, wherein I entreat the Lord to make
us serious.

1. To be rightly affected with such like dispensations, laying to heart the
public loss sustained, when the friends of Christ and his servants are taken
away by death. The Lord observes and complains, when people do not herein
answer his expectation, The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart.
And our love unto Esaias 57. 1.
the public, together with the consideration of the great use of such persons,
would help forward our humiliation in such cases. You heard before that they
are friends to Christ, and much befriended by Christ, yea, that they are lovers
of the cause and people of God. Now is not the death of such to be bewailed?
When Elijah went up by a whirlewinde to heaven, Elisha 2 King. 1. 11, 12
saw it, and he cried, My father, my father, the Charet of Israel, and the
horsemen thereof. And when Elisha was 2 Kin. 13. 11, 14
sick, Joash (though not a good man) wept over him, and said, Oh my father, my
father, the Charet of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. Because they believed
that the public safety depended much upon the interest of godly men in God,
therefore their death was thus lamented. And truly such friends of God are the
chief stakes in the hedge, and maine pillars in the building, both of Church
and Commonwealth. Therefore in such cases, it may well become us to imitate
the devout men, who Acts 8. 2.
carried Stephen to his grave, and made great lamentation for him.

2. To imitate the deceased Saints in their graces and holy conversation; we
should lay their lives, as so many fair copies before our eyes, and labor to
write after them, by conscientious imitation. The Apostle having given in a
catalogue of Old-Testament-beleevers, who in their several places and ages did
worthily, he earnestly persuades Christians to be followers of them. And Heb.
11. compared with Heb. 12. 1.
seeing God has given us to behold the beauty of holiness, and the power of
godliness in their courses, it will much aggravate our sin, if we labor not
to be like them.

This leads me to that which you all look for, ( viz) to spread before you
the exemplary life of Master Jeremiah Whitaker the late Pastor of this place,
whose Funeral has occasioned this great Assembly and my Sermon; in reference
unto whom, that I may speak unto your edification, I will (with the change of
one word only) undertake my Text again, Our friend Whitaker sleeps. And truly
I am very confident, that if Jesus Christ was here in his bodily presence among
us, he would not be unwilling to speak these words, Our friend Whitaker
sleeps. Before I begin my Narrative, I crave leave to premise this, ( viz.)
that though (in some respects) I know a more meet man might have been chosen
for this work; who could have done it more exactly and gracefully: yet I
acknowledge that my self am not the unmeetest, considering my long and
familiar acquaintance with him, especially if this be added, ( viz.) that in
Summer was twelve-moneth -- I riding with him unto Tunbridge Wells, he was
pleased to give me the History of his life, from his youth till that time; and
since that time, it is well known to many, that no one has had more frequent
and familiar converse with him, then my self. Oh how often, and with what
meltings has he poured forth his heart into my bosom, in reference to all
concernments, personal, relative, private, public, comfortable and
uncomfortable, which have deeply affected him! My forgetfulness will
necessitate the omission of many things, and my faithfulness with prudence
command me to conceal much of that, which to my heart spoke aloud his great
goodness and high commendations. I will suggest the sum of what I judge most
convenient to discover, in the report whereof my soul desires (I hope) to
honor God, and to profit his people.

He was borne at Wakefield in Yorkshire in the year 1599. When he was sixteen
years old, he was sent to Cambridge, and placed a Sizar in Sydney College,
where he was much valued for his pregnant parts, and Scholarship. At twenty
years of age, having commenced Bachelor of Arts, he was sent unto Okeham (the
chief Town in Rutlandshire) to teach the Free School there. About four years
after he married Chephtzibah the daughter of Master William Peachy Minister of
Okeham, an eminent linguist, a godly man, and (as I am informed) a painful
Preacher of the Gospel, who dearly loved, and highly valued Master Whitaker,
from his first acquaintance to his end; whose affections to him, wrought on the
marriage betwixt him and his daughter. By whom God gave him four sons and
three daughters; one son died at Cambridge, two are ordained Ministers, and
the other is to be educated for the Ministry. Having stayed about seven years
at Okeham, he was removed unto a Pastoral charge at Stretton in the same
County, where he continued thirteen years, from whence he was called to Mary
Magdalen Bermondsey, (with the approbation of many godly Ministers, whom he
consulted in the case) where he after twelve years spent in his Ministerial
charge finished his course upon the first day of June, 1654. and fell asleep in
Jesus. He was betwixt fifty five and fifty six years old when the Lord was
pleased to take him unto himself. He was buried in Bermondsey Church June the
sixth, with expressions of much love from a very great multitude of godly
persons, both Ministers and others of several ranks and conditions, who
attended his corpse to the grave. By reason of much study, and manifold
employments in his calling, he was filled with various bodily distempers from
his youth. In the latter part of his time, he was for sundry years exercised
frequently with the painful diseases of the gowt and of the stone.
Notwithstanding the reiteration of these tormenting pains, he attended upon
his Ministry both at home and abroad, while he was able to creep into the
Pulpit, or to crawle unto the Congregation.

But about the beginning of November last past, the violent pain of the stone
did in such measure and manner arrest him, that from that time, he continued
Gods prisoner in his bed, or chamber, till he was set free by a long expected
death. Most Physicians in the City were consulted, and were from time to time
very ready to serve him with their advice: who did unanimously conclude, his
sharp pains to proceed originally from an ulcer in the kidneys, but
immediately from an ulcer in the neck of the bladder, caused by a continual
flux of ulcerous matter dropping down upon that part. And by reason of the
acuteness and quickness of the sense there, his pains were almost altogether
in that place, though the fountain of them was from the kidneys. Toward his
end, (about two months) the pain grew more extreme, yet divine indulgence
vouchsafed some abatements and intermissions, both in the night and day. As his
death drew nigh, his fits of pain were more frequent, either every half hour,
or many times every quarter, yea, two or three times in a quarter of an hour,
whereby nature being quite spent he died in the Lord. After his death, Master
Holiard opend his body in the presence of Dr. Cox, Dr. Micklethwaite, and Dr.
Bevoyr, (some other more ancient Doctors would have been there, if either their
being out of Town, or present urgent occasions had not hindered) who found both
his kidneys full of ulcers, and one was swelled to an extreme bigness, by the
abundance of purulent matter in it. Upon the neck of his bladder, they found a
stone, (which was about an inch and an half long, and one inch broad, weighing
above two ownces, when first taken out, and withal, an ulcer which was
gangrened, and this was judged the cause of his death. All other parts of his
body were found firm and sound. Now that which I shall relate concerning him
in all those places and changes of life wherein God disposed of him, I will
cast under the several heads upon which I did discourse in my Sermon. And this
method I do the rather resolve upon, both because it best suits with mine own
thoughts, and may prove the most profitable unto them who shall be pleased to
read the Sermon, when they perceive the maine parts thereof, applied and
verefied in this providential Text, Our friend Whitaker sleeps.

The first Head, He loved Christ. He loved Christ, 1. Quickly. 2. Strongly. 3.
Constantly. The Lord did win his heart unto himself, while he was a Scholar at
Wakerfield, where he had his education. For then and there his affections did
flow out toward those who were most religiously disposed, with whom he went
frequently eight or ten Miles to hear a wakening-soul-warming Sermon, and he
was wont to join with them in prayers and other holy exercises. And being able
to take Sermon-notes, both understandingly and largely, he was very helpful to
Christians in the repeating of what they had publicly heard, being from his
childhood full of affections in whatsoever business he undertook. Thus this
plant did both blossom and put forth fruit quickly, which providence did
afterward make a very fruitful tree. For the more clear discovery of his
abundant love to Jesus Christ, I will give these demonstrations.

First, from his early, and constant vigorous workings of heart toward the
calling and work of the Ministry; because he always conceived, that therein a
Christian might enjoy most fellowship with Christ, and do him the best Joh. 21.
15, 17.
service. And he considered Christ's speech to Peter, If thou love me, feed my
sheep, feed my lambs.

Here I judge these particulars very worthy of consideration. 1. That while he
was a Grammar-Scholar, this calling he chose; and though his father endeavored
often and earnestly to divert his thoughts from the Ministry, yet he was
unmovable in his desires to be a Minister. 2. That he never repented of this
his choice, but would all his life long, upon all occasions, magnify this his
office. I have many times heard him speak these words, I had much rather Romans
11. 13.
be a Preacher of the Gospel, then an Emperor. And when a motion was once made
to him for a Mastership in the University, he readily returned this answer, My
heart does more desire to be a constant Preacher, then to be the Master of any
College in the world. 3. That when he was motioned to marry her whom God
afterward made his wife; he was the rather inclined to accept the motion,
because she was daughter to a pious, painful, learned Minister of the Gospel,
and would occasionally tell his friends, that he was the better pleased with
his choice, because of that relation. 4. That he was never so well pleased with
any employment, as that of his Ministry. In the Pulpit he still was like a
fish in the water. Though many times he went halting and full of pain thither;
yet he would not manifest any sense of distemper, while he was there. How often
has he gone upon crutches unto the Congregation of his own people, to fulfill
his Ministry! yea, once (at least of my knowledge) he adventured to Preach at
Michaels Cornhil, when he was scarce able to get into the Pulpit, and his
friends with much difficulty helped him out of the Church homeward. 5. That
when he was by extreme pains taken off from his Ministry, he would sometimes
profess unto some special friends, that the pain felt was not so grievous to
his Spirit, as his inability (by reason thereof) to manage his wonted work.
Many times these were his words, If I could but Preach, I should be much
better. And he would rejoice with cheerfulness, and thankfulness, when in the
times of his weakness, he found not himself more distempered by his
preaching, and would mention such experiences as arguments to move his friends
to yield unto his preaching, when they did dissuade it as prejudicial 6. He did
zealously, upon all occasions, both in public and private defend the office of
a Gospel Ministry, and especially amongst those persons, and in such places,
where (as he conceived) there was most need. This passage fell from him with
affection, in one of his morning Lectures at Westminster: Though I have read
and heard of some good men, who unadvisedly in their passion have persecuted
the persons of some godly Ministers, (as Asa was angry with the Seer, and cast
him into prison) yet I never knew, I never read, nor heard of any godly person,
who did dare to oppose the calling of the Ministry. And whereas at the end of
his Sermon, a soldier (expressing himself dissatisfied with the Sermon) came
to him in private and asked him, whether he meant this Ministry of England, as
now constituted? he returned this answer, Although I will not justify the
calling of every individual Minister in the Church of England ( as you dare not
justify the Saintship of every member in your independent Congregations) yet I
will be ready when and where you please to maintain the office and calling of
Englands Ministry at this day. 7. And that he continued unchanged in this his
estimation of the calling Ministerial, may be manifested by one passage in his
last Will and Testament, (though it was not long) which I will put down in his
own words, writ with his own hand: For my son Jeremiah, my desire is, that he
be bred a Scholar, and that the Lord would spiritualy incline his heart, freely
to give up himself to the Lord, to serve him in the work of the Ministry,
which calling and employment (though now despised) I do esteem above all other
in the world, and do commend it to all mine, that if the Lord bless them with
sons, they would commend this calling to their posterity. Before I pass from
this my first demonstration of his love to Christ, I heartily desire, that this
may be seriously considered, whether there be not herein much to credit and
encourage the Ministry of the Gospel; That a learned man, and so eminent for
piety, who also had thoroughly studied the Controversies of the times against
the Ministry, should upon his deathbed, give such a testimony unto it, when
he daily expected to make up his account before God, and also give so great
encouragement unto his posterity, to undertake this calling now, even now when
such disgrace is cast upon it, and when the Ministers settled maintenance is
threatened to be taken from them? And may not those men who know Mr. Whitaker's
worth be hereby awed, and moved to take heed how they oppose or slight that
calling of men, whom he (living and dying) judged to be so highly honored by
God himself? To all this add, that it was an ordained Ministry, which he thus
valued, as is evident by these two things (as by many living testimonies,) viz.
1. That he joined with the Classis whereof he was a member in ordaining
Ministers. 2. That he had an hand in the book lately published by the Province
of London in the defense of such a Ministry, not only by assent, but also by
assistance.

Secondly, his love to Christ was proclaimed, by his unwearied laboriousnesse
in his Ministerial services. 1. While he continued Schoolmaster at Okeham, he
undertook a Lecture there weekly, besides many Sermons preached occasionally in
neighbor Congregations. 2. During his abode at Stretton, besides his Pastoral
employment twice every Sabbath, his constant weekly Preaching at Okeham, he was
a principal prop to hold up the Lectures in the neighborhood. His manner was
to set apart every holy day (if but one in the week) as a day of seeking God,
in reference to the necessities of the times, and no man was more frequent in
assisting in days of humiliation in private, both in Rutland shire, and the
adjacent Counties, when ever invited thereto. 3. And since Gods good providence
brought him to the neighborhood of London, he was in labors more abundant (2
Cor. 11. 23.) For the most part, his set task was four Sermons weekly, ( viz.)
two at home, and two elsewhere, ( viz.) at Westminster and Christ's Church
London, or Westminster and Stepney, (since he laid down Christ's Church Lecture)
together with two Sermons every quarter at Michael Cornhil. Add hereto his
Preaching monthly at the morning-exercise, or assistance on the fast day at
the conclusion thereof, besides occasional Sermons for preparation to the
Sacrament at his own place, and at Funerals, both at home and abroad: Yea, I
will close up the evidencing of the labors of his love, with this true report,
( viz.) that he would never deny any motion for preaching, and praying, if God
gave bodily ability, and other unavoidable occasions did not necessarily
hinder. Many week-dayes he preached twice, yea, then when he attended the work
of the Assembly of Divines, ( viz.) the morning-exercise, either at Westminster
or elsewhere, and afterward in the afternoon. I here remember the commendation
which St. Paul gave of Epaphroditus, in his Epistle to the Philippians; For the
work of the Lord he was nigh unto Phil. 2. 30.
death, not regarding his life. How far this is appliable to painful Mr.
Whitaker, multitudes do well know, yea, many conceive that his painful
distempers (which hastened his removal from us) were caused and increased by
his many constant labors in this kind. Neither were his Sermons jejune and
dry, because thus frequent; but always full of Scripturestrength, savoury and
affectionate, as his Auditors will testify.

Thirdly, Such was his love to Christ, that his public Employments did not
take him off from family duties, nor from more private exercises of communion
with God. His ordinary course was, together with prayers, to expound some parts
of the holy Scriptures in his own family twice every day: and beside other
parts of Scripture which he daily read in secret, he usually read over all the
Epistles in the Greek Testament twice every fourtnight: yea when by reason of
pain and weakness he himself could not read, he herein employed others for his
help. Hence it was that he was a man mighty in the Scriptures (like unto
Apollo, Acts 18. 24.) as was observed by all who conversed with him. And this
course he earnestly commended to the practice of his dearly beloved eldest son,
as an excellent means to make him both a ready and a profitable Preacher.

Fourthly, His courage in Christ's Cause did much commend his love, whereof I
will suggest these evidences.

1. While he lived in Rutland-shire, he refused to read the book allowing of
sports upon the Sabbath, though it was with commands and threatenings pressed
upon him. And when he was called to give in his answer, about the collection
amongst Ministers to maintain the War against Scotland, he openly told the
Bishop or Chancellor that his conscience could not yield thereto. This his
answer exposing him to great danger both to lose living and liberty in those
times, a neighbor through misguided love (compassionating him and his family)
paid the money, and subscribed Mr. Whitakers name without his knowledge. This
he was long ignorant of; and when he heard it, he expressed, with many
complaints, much grief of heart.

2. Since our times of woeful desertion and Apostasy both from Gospel Truths
and practices, he would undauntedly in private conferences and in his public
Ministry express his dislike, yea, detestation thereof to the faces of them
who too much favored Error, Heresies and ranting courses, though he knew that
thereby he did run hazards and procure many frowns. He refused to subscribe
the late Engagement, though thereby he was in danger to be taken off from his
Westminster Lecture. And if his Sermons preached there, upon Ephesians. 2. 2, 3.
(concerning men's walking according to the course of this world, etc. fulfilling
the lusts of the flesh etc.) could be collected and published, thereby it would
be manifest that Mr. Whitaker in love unto his Lord Christ, was a man of good
metal and magnanimity.

3. One more private proof of the good man's valiant love to Christ I will make
bold to insert; because my self can knowingly attest its truth* Since these
stormy days, wherein the liberty and livelihood of Ministers have been
maligned and struck at, he riding with an intimate friend by Tiburn, (which he
had not known or not observed before) demanded what that was? and answer being
made this is Tiburn, where many Malefactors have lost their lives, he stopped
his horse, and uttered these words with great affection, O what a shame is it
that so many thousands should die for the satisfaction of their lusts, and so
few be found willing to lay down their lives for Christ* Why should not we in a
good Cause, and upon a good call, be ready to be hanged for Jesus Christ? It
would be everlasting honor; and it is a thousand times better to die for
Christ, to be hanged, to be burnt for Christ, then to die in our beds. And how
much he condemned life, in respect unto Christ Jesus, there are many who from
his own mouth can witness.

Fifthly, So great was his love unto his God and Savior, that he maintained
and expressed high estimations, and honorable thoughts of his Majesty, when
under tormenting providence, nothing being more feared then this, lest he
should do or speak any dishonours unto his Name. These were some breathings of
his large love, when through pain he was, as in the fire, and upon the Rack,
Good Lord, keep me from dishonouring thy Name by impatiency. O, who would not
even in burnings have honorable thoughts of God! Who that knows thee would
not fear thee, O Lord, love thee, and honor thee! Lord, thou give me no
cause to have any hand thought of thee! Blessed be God, there is nothing of
hell in all this. Blessed be his Name for Jesus Christ, and the revelation of
the everlasting Gospel. Who knows the power of thy wrath? If it be so heavy
upon thy servant here, how heavy shall it be to all those who shall endure it
without mixture? Blessed be God for the peace of mine inward man, when my
outward man is so full of trouble. This is a bitter cup, but it is of my
Fathers mixture, and shall I not drink it? yea, Lord, through thy strength I
will: this is my burden; and I will bear it. Upon any abatement of his
pains, he was constantly much in blessing God, using these and such like
expressions* O! what a mercy is it that there is any mitigation, any
intermission! Lord, make me thankful. And turning himself toward those who
stood by, he would speak thus. O help me to be thankful! O lift up a prayer for
me that I may be thankful! O what a mercy is this! How much worse might this
affliction have been! I might have been distracted or laid roaring under
disquietnesse of spirit. By these workings of his spirit (which my self and
others do well remember, and I could heartily wish that all the rest had been
recorded) who perceives not the sparklings of his love to God? I will annex
one more, which has much affected my heart, viz. these words he has often
spoken to me; Brother, through mercy I have not one repining thought against
God.

Now upon all these considerations, I appeal unto the consciences of all
ingenuous ones, whether there be not ground* to believe, that Christ (if here
with us) would give him the honor of this compellation, My loving friend
Whitaker.

The second head of my Narrative follows, That Christ loved Mr. Whitaker.
(For as I discovered in my Sermon, this love is always mutual.) The discovery
hereof will be clear upon a double account, viz.

1. Because of the graces with which he was enriched.

2. Because of the Comforts with which he was refreshed.

As for the first. Love Tokens are real messengers of his love who sends
them: and what surer signs of divine love then the graces of the holy Ghost?
Now of these the Lord had given him, in measure, more then ordinary. That which
was hinted before in his love to the Lord Jesus, (expressed by laborious,
courageous endeavors to advance his praise, and to continue communion with
him) does manifest that he was very rich in Grace; but thereunto I will add
five more graces which were very shining in his crown.

1. Tenderness of heart. Who ever knew man of a more melting frame before God,
whether in confessions, petitions, or thanksgivings? Is there any one living
that can say, I have sometimes joined with him in Prayer, and he shed no
tears? How did his own sinfulness, (though no more then the ordinary
imperfections of the fairest Saints on earth) the evils of the times, and the
testimonies of Gods displeasure breaking out, break his heart into pieces?
Truly I believe that for the space of many years, he did never come off from
the serious consideration of these things with dry eyes. And how many thousands
would account it a sign of much love from Christ, if they could find such
thawings in their frozen breasts?

2. Meekness of spirit. With this precious Jewel he was adorned richly. Who
ever saw him transported by passion, on a fire through foolish anger, or
disguised by discontent? Though he would be warm for God; yet he was a man of a
cool spirit, meek, like Moses, in all his own concernments. Among many other
manifestations hereof, this one was remarkable, that when upon warm disputes
with men of dissenting principles and opinions, his spirit was so even, that
unhansome provocations would not discompose him. Hereof I could give instances;
but I must forbear.

3. For Patience he may well be called a second Job. Many who saw him under his
racking pains, so frequently reiterated, and so long continued, are confident
that God did put him, and keep him in his furnace to be a pattern of patience
unto posterity. It Is true, he did roar many times till his throat was dry, but
who ever heard him speak one word of murmuring or discontent because of Gods
afflicting providence? He himself indeed would sometimes through tenderness
charge himself of impatiency, because he made a noise, whereas that expressed
only Natures sensiblenesse, not sinful frowardness. And when (accusing himself
in that kind causelessly) he was minded of Christ's roarings, though free from
all sin, he would be silent. I confess that in desires to be dissolved, he
would take up Jobs complaint: Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery,
and life unto the bitter in soul? Which long for death, but it comes not, and
dig for it more then for hid treasures, etc. for my sighing comes before I
eat, and my roarings are poured out like waters, Job 3. 20, 24. But he always
concluded with submission unto the good pleasure of God. When he had been asked
how he did? this was frequently his answer, The bush always burning, but not
consumed; and though my pains be above the strength of nature, yet they are
not above the supports of grace.

4. The Lord gave him so much of the Spirit of grace and supplications, that
his soul was never out of tune for that service. Most of his words when under
torment, were holy complaints and prayers to God: some of them I will record,
that they may not be forgotten. O my God help! Father of mercies pity! Do not
contend for ever, consider my frame, that I am but dust! My God that has made
heaven and earth help me! O give me patience, and inflict what thou will! If my
patience was more, my pain would be less. Dear Savior, where are thy bowels!
Why do thou make me an astonishment to my self and others? Why do thou
cover thy self with a thick cloud, that our prayers cannot pass? Blessed is
the man that endures temptation. Lord, this is a sad temptation; stand by me
and say, It is enough! Am I not thy servant? Consider, Lord, that I am thy
servant. O these bitter waters of Marah! Lord, drop sweet comfort into these
bitter waters of Marah. O the blood of sprinkling, Lord: Lord, the blood of
sprinkling! That blood which extinguisheth the fire of thine anger, O that it
might allay my burning pains! I am in a fiery furnace; Lord, be with me, as
thou wast with the three children, bring me out refined from sin. When I have
sailed through the Ocean of these pains, and look back, I see none of these
can be wanting. I fly unto thee, O God, hide me under the shadow of thy wings
till these terrible storms be over-past.

5. God added Humility as a crown to all his other Graces, which did shine very
bright in the eyes of all who were acquainted with him. Hence it was, that he
would converse familiarly with the poorest Christians, and with them who were
of low parts for knowledge. This his ordinary expression of himself before God,
spoke loud: Poor worm, sinful wretch! O pardon my transgressions, for they are
very great. Hereupon he would weep much when he was told how much he was prayed
for, wondering at Gods goodness, that so worthless a wretch should have so
much interest in the hearts and prayers of the people of the Lord. And his
language in his Will reports how little he was in his own eyes: The words are
there, I desire that at my Funeral there may be no pomp, but that so poor a
worthless wretch may be privately laid in the ground.

Thus from the rare Graces received, I proceed to the rich Comforts vouchsafed,
as manifestations of Christ's singular love toward this Saint of the most High
God. O what kisses of Christ's mouth, and what embraces from the arms of his
love were bestowed upon this man of God! He enjoyed all along his affl^cted
condition, an uninterrupted assurance of Gods fatherly love in Christ. In his
addresses to God he constantly claimed propriety, My God, and my Father. His
inward peace and joy, were the support of his heart under all his g^inding
pains. He was confident of mercies mixtures with all his grievous distempers,
not at all doubting of the Sanctification of them through grace. Thus he spoke
many times in his Applications to God: Consider and save me, for I am thine.
How long, Lord, how long shall I not be remembered? yea, I am remembered, blessed
be thy Name. This is a fiery chariot, but it will carry me to heaven. Blessed
be God that has supported me hitherto, and he that has delivered, will
deliver. Thou, Lord, never forgettest them that put their trust in thee.
Always when the extremity of pain was over, he would, with smiles speak of
Gods mercies. Though trembling took hold upon him when his violent pains
began, yet he would with confidence say, Now in the strength of the mighty God
I will undergo these pains. O my God put under thine everlasting arms, and
strengthen me. Many times he has told me, that notwithstanding all his
rentings and roarings (from which he expected no deliverance but by death) he
would not for a thousand worlds change estates with the greatest man on earth,
whom he looked upon as in a way of sin. And let me tell you one providence of
fatherly indulgence toward him* That Satan never shaked his confidence, nor
assaulted his hopes, all the time of his tiresome, irksome exercise. There is
but one passage more which I shall point at under this second head of my
Narrative, viz. That he accounted all these inward chearings the fruits of
Prayers made for him, though God saw cause to deny that ease and recovery to
his body which was much begged; withal valuing those spiritual cordials much
beyond deliverance from the Gowt and Stone, and death it self.

All these things I have the rather mentioned, to prevent that discouragement
or offense, which some may be too apt to take at the continuance of his
wasting, tormenting pains, notwithstanding his own godliness, and the
uncessant Prayers, both ordinary and extraordinary, which were made unto God in
his behalf: for he found the sweet fruits of them in his own bosom, when he
felt the continuance and increase of his bodily griefs.

I proceed to the third head of my promised Narrative, which will speak Mr.
Whitakers love to his Fellow Christians. He was a man made up (as it were) of
love: His delight was in the Saints upon earth, whom he esteemed most
excellent, and their society was a constant cordial unto his spirit. H^s
f^equent visits of them who were in trouble, and his stirring up others to the
like practice, were testimonies of his friendship. His love was not only
verbal, but real. Truly I know no man of his estate more liberal. He would
often say. It Is a brave thing when a man with a full estate has a charitable
heart. Sometimes upon special occasions he himself has given away all the
money he had in his house. It was not unusual with him to give twenty shillings
unto a poor Saint, and he had many experiences of Gods gracious returns in such
cases. By his Will he gave 20. l. to the godly poor of his own Parish.

There were two cases wherein his loves were most enlarged to the people of
God, whereof I shall give in two instances. The one when their sufferings were
public. He has often told me that Englands late breach with Scotland, and the
blood shed, with other sad consequences thereof, had taken such impression upon
his heart, that the sorrow would never be removed till his death. And the
sufferings both in Holland and England, upon our late Sea Fights, were great
burdens upon his spirit. The other case was in reference to the inward
perplexity of such as were afflicted in mind. Having moved me the week before
his death to bestow a visit upon one in that condition, the morning before his
death, (when speech was grievous in respect of his weaknesses) he asked me
whether I had remembered the party troubled in spirit? which is a remarkable
evidence of strong loves. Besides all that has been mentioned, I could relate
his many wrestlings with God to prevent the flood of troubles which he
apprehended the Protestant Churches are now in danger to be overflowed withal;
as also his compassionate respect to Congregations in the Country, who were
like sheep wandering upon the barren mountains without a shepherd.

The fourth head of my Narrative should hold forth the love which he received
from the Saints of God. What godly heart that either knew him, or heard of his
fame, did not love him? I will not speak of the frequent friendly visits of the
Religious ones in the neighborhood round about. I never heard of any man so
much prayed for, both in public and private. There was no particular case so
frequently, so affectionately spread before God in most of the Congregations
about London as his. Three days were set apart by Ministers, and many other
praying friends to seek God in his behalf; one in private, and two in public,
which also were observed much better then such days usually are; yea, in
remote Countries, besides the ordinary prayers made for him, there were some
Fasts kept, with special reference to his affliction. The multitude of people
attending his Funeral, with the many weeping eyes, did witness how much he was
beloved. Here I might remember the readiness of London-Ministers to supply his
place at home, and Lectures elsewhere, as also the willingness of
fellow-Lecturers at Westminster to preach for him there, when he himself by
reason of weakness could not possibly do his own work: But I may be silent,
for still every where upon the naming of him, love is some way discovered by
such who had knowledge of him.

Though I have related much concerning the worth of this good man; yet my
conscience tells me, that I have rather been defective then excessive in my
relation. I have not told you of his humility, expressed by fears, lest Gods
people praying for him should speak too well of him before the Lord. Neither
have I mentioned his selfdenial, never daring to look after great matters in
the world, whereby he condemns many whose self-seeking in earthly advantages,
rendereth them very offensive and unsavory in the Church of Christ. Toward
his end neither faith nor patience did abate, though his grievous pains were
more frequent and violent; in which regards his longings for death were much
increased, yet attended with holy submission unto the good pleasure of God:
These were some of his expressions, O my God, break open the prison-door, and
set my poor captive soul free; but enable me willingly to wait thy time! I
desire to be dissolved; never did any man more desire life then I do death!
When will that time come, when I shall neither sin more, nor sorrow more? When
shall mortality put on immortality? When shall this earthly be dissolved, that
I may be clothed upon with that house which is from heaven? Blessed are the
dead which die in the Lord, for they rest from their labors, and follow the
Lamb wheresoever he goes.

The Sabbath seven-night before God released him, though his pains were very
sharp, yet he bestowed most part of the time of public Ordinances in prayer
with those that were with him, and his petitions were most for Ministers, that
God would cloth his Ordinances with his own power, and enable Ministers to
speak unto the souls of people. Then also he did with many tears bewail his
detainment from the Sanctuary and Sabbath-opportunities, which had been his
delight; professing also, that his being taken off from service was a greater
affliction to him then all his pains. And because this apprehension, ( viz. his
unserviceablenesse) did much afflict him; therefore this was often suggested to
him, (which also was relieving to his spirit,) viz. that now by the practice of
Faith, Patience, Contentment, and Spiritualnesse (which he had formerly
preached) he was very profitable unto them who did visit him, and might also
prove very advantageous unto others who might be acquainted therewith, through
Gods grace by Christ. So great was his tender respect unto his friends, that
when his pains were coming with violence, he would entreat them to withdraw
from him, that they might not be grieved with his roarings. He would often
bless God, that his compassionate friends were not necessitated to abide within
the reach of his doleful lamentations.

I hearing, the night before God translated him, that he was not likely to live
another day, I went early in the morning to take my leave of him (whom my soul
loved) and found his bodily strength almost spent. And because he could not
speak without difficulty, I spoke the more unto him, in relation to the
approach of his happy hoped for change: my discourse through Gods mercy was
refreshing unto his spirit. Minding him that many of his friends intended to
set apart that day in seeking the Lord for him, I asked him in what things
especially he desired to be remembered before the Throne of Grace? His answer
was, Do not complain, but bless God for me, and entreat him to open the
prison-door. Hereupon laying my hand upon his cold hand, covered with a clammy
sweat, I took my last farewell with an aching heart: and upon my departure from
him, these were his last words unto me, Brother, I thank you, I pray God bless
you, and I bless God for you.

That day was spent in addresses to God for him at Peter's Cornhil, where Mr.
Newcomen quickened and guided our prayers in his Sermon from John 11. wherein
he insisted especially upon these words, Lord, behold, he whom thou love is
sick, ver. 4. And Mr. Jenkyn endeavored to moderate and regulate our sorrows
from Luke 23. 28. Weep not for me.

Thus his friends having by prayers, with praises (on his behalf) given him up
to God, and having prepared their hearts for their loss of him, the Lord was
pleased that evening to take him unto himself.

And now our friend Whitaker sleeps. 1. He is dead, that speaks sorrow. 2.
His death is a sleep, this yields relief.

First, His death is ground of lamentation, because Christ and his Church have
now one friend less on earth to be serviceable unto both. I would awaken your
hearts unto sensiblenesse under this great loss, and therefore wish that his
great parts, many interests, frequent opportunities of service, together with
the unmovable faithfulness of his heart to improve all for good, may be duly
remembered, viz.

1. As for his Abilities, he was an universal Scholar, both in the Arts and
Original Languages; by much study he had digested the whole Body of Divinity,
he was well acquainted both with the Schoolmen and the Fathers, a good
Disputant, judicious in Cases of Conscience, and second unto none in
acquaintance with the holy Scripture.

2. He had much interest in the hearts of persons of chiefest places and power
in the Nation: for the plainness of his spirit, together with the power of
godliness (which did shine in his conversation) gained him much Authority in
the consciences of all sorts with whom he conversed, whether in the City or
Country.

3. And his opportunities of service were many, not only in Southwark, but also
in London, Westminster, Stepney, where he had much employment.

We read when Dorcas was dead, that the widows stood weeping, and showing the
coats which she had made, Acts 9. 39. and that upon Paul's departure the people
wept, because they should see his face no more, Acts 20. 38. And is there not
reason that we should be in like manner affected, remembering how truth has
been defended, error confuted, holiness cherished, wickedness checked, the
cause of the poor pleaded, and the violence of some passionate spirits allayed
by Mr. Whitaker? But now this able, publick-spirited man must be serviceable on
earth no more; now we shall not be edified by his Ministry any more, nor
warmed by his prayers any more, nor cheared by his company and conference any
more. But let us moderate our sorrow by this following consideration, That our
friend Whitaker is not dead, but sleeps: For this assures us both of his
present ease, and future Resurrection. Now being asleep he is well, he rests,
(as in a bed) and we shall not see his pale face, his weeping eyes, his
trembling hands any more, we shall no more hear his deep groans, and doleful
lamentations. He is fallen asleep in the Lord, and he and we shall have a
better meeting at the general Resurrection then ever heretofore, and then shall
we ever be with the Lord. Therefore let us comfort one another with these
words, 1 These. 4. 15, 18.

I have but one thing more to hint; viz. That Christ now knows that this our
precious friend sleeps From whence I infer, 1. Comfort. 2. Counsel. This may
be chearing unto all his mourning Relations, Domestical, Pastoral, Classical.
For Christ understands that his wife has lost a dear husband, his children
an indulgent father, his people a faithful Pastor, the Classis a chief Pillar,
and all good Christians a real friend.

And seeing Christ (considering that Mr. Whitaker is dead) does also observe
how we all are affected with this providence; therefore I beseech you, and
beseech you again, to study in good earnest the gracious improvement of this
sad dispensation. Let us hear the voice of this rod, repentingly remember the
forfeitures made of this blessing, and make conscionable imitation of the good
example he has left us.

Though Mr. Whitaker is dead, yet his holy life speaks. My Narrative has
told much of that which it speaks, and my prayers are, that it may speak
(through the concurrence of Gods grace) that unto all our hearts, which may be
for spiritual and eternal benefit by Christ.

FINIS.
POEMS, And ELEGIES On the Death of Mr. JEREMIAH WHITAKER.
On the Death of my dear Friend Mr. Jeremiah Whitaker.
IF death be but a servant sent to call
The souls of Saints to their original:
Dear St thine was a noble soul, to whom
Three Messengers were sent to call thee home;
A stone, an ulcer, and a gangrene too,
Three deaths to haste^ that which one should do.
'Twas not because thy soul was deeper set
Then ours within its house of clay; nor yet
Because thou were unwilling to depart
Thither; where long before had been thine hear^*
They were not sent to hale by violence
A soul that lingered when 'twas called hence.
God showed how welcome one death was to thee
Who did, so meekly entertain all three.
Thus many deaths Gods Israel did enclose,
The sea before, behind a sea of foes,
On either side the jaws of mountains high.
No way from death but unto death to fly.
Not to destroy them, but to let them see
The power of love, which then would se^ them free.
Thus Jobs four Messengers which did relate
The doleful story of his ruined state
And his three friends, which acted Satan's part
(He on his flesh, and these upon his heart)
Who by disputing him unto a curse
Would make his spirits torments the far worse,
Were by Gods wise disposal sent to show
The strength he on his Champion would bestow.
Thus Painters put dark grounds, where they intend
To overlay with finest gold, and lend
By deeper shadows luster to that face,
On which they mean their choicest skill to place.
Thus workmen season much with sun and wind
Those greatest beams which must the building bind
Whilst smaler pieces happily are put in
When they come bleeding from the wood and green.
Often where is greatest grace, God's pleased to send
Great conflicts those great graces to commend
As the six fingered Giants sword did bring
The more renown to little David's sling.
The vanquished Lion, and the conquered Bear
Prepared that holy head a Crown to wear.
The Angel wrastled first, and then did bless
And made the greater servant to the less.
Pain was to great for thee, Gods grace for pain,
And made the greater serve the less again.
Thy pains served thee to glory, and did sit
The head on which a Crown of life must sit.
This is Gods method to fetch joy from grief,
To turn our sorrows unto our relief,
To save by killing and to bring to shore
By the ships planks which was quite broke before.
And thus a barren womb first took the seed
Which did six hundred thousand people breed.
That seed too must from knife and alter rise,
And be before a fire a sacrifice.
Great Preacher of thine heavenly Fathers will
Thy tongue did many years with Manna fill.
Thy life out-preacht thy tongue, O blessed strife!
Thy sickness the best Sermon of thy life.
Before each Doctrine must be proved anew,
Thine end was one great proof that all was true.
Before thou preached by weeks, but now by hours,
Each minute taught thy mourning Auditors,
Each patient groan, and each believing eye
Was a new Sermon in Brachygraphy.
When nature roars without repining words,
Grace in the mouth when in the bowels swords,
In midst of torments to triumph over hell,
To feel Gods Arrows, yet his praises tell.
Through thickest clouds to see the brightest light,
In blackest darkness to have clearest sight,
And with our Lord to cry, my God, my God
Upon a Cross under the sharpest rod.
This is indeed to preach; this is to show
Faiths triumph over natures greatest woe.
Then welcome fiery Serpe^ts scortching sting,
Which did thee thus to the brazen Serpent bring.
Then welcome Whale, which though it first devour,
Renders at last the Prophet to the shore.
Well might thou bear the stone which death did throw,
Who had the white stone the new name to show:
Well might thou be with such an ulcer calm
Whose soul was healed before with heavens balm.
When spirits wounds are cured though nature groan,
An heart of flesh can heal a back of stone:
Let conscience have her feast, and let flesh roar,
This pain shall make the others joy the more,
As many times those flowers most fragrant smell
Which nearest to so^e noisome weeds do dwell.
Thus have you seen the forge most clearly glow,
On which the Smith does drops of water throw.
Keen frosts make fire the hotter, and deep night
Causes celestial lamps to shine more bright.
And by a dear Antiperistasis,
The child's distress sweetens the father kiss.
A wounded body yields to a sound soul
The joys of this do the others pains control.
As in the day that the Sun beams appear
All other lesser stars do disappear.
When heaven shines and divine love does* reign,
The soul is not at leisure to complain.
Internal joys his heart so well composes,
That they have judged their flames a bed of Roses.
Mr. Gataker. Mr. Whitaker.
But what shall England do from whence are lopt,
Two of her richest acres to heaven dropped.
By loss of these two acres she is more poor,
Then if she'had lost a hundred Lordships more.
'Twere a good purchase to gain these again,
By giving to the sea all Lincoln-fen.
Two little mines of gold do far surpass
Huge Manors where the whole vesture is but grass.
Learn we by them what al men will once say,
One Perch of heaven, 's worth the whole globe of clay.
Ed. Reynolds. D. D.

To the memory of Mr. Jeremy Whitaker powerful in Prayer and Preaching, pious
in life, patient in sickness, etc.
NAy, now forbear; for pity sake give over,
You that would make the Clergy none, or poor:
We are made miserable enough this year,
That we have lost our Reverend Whitaker;
Los^e above Deans and Chapters! had but he
Lived still and preached -- Ziba take all (for me.)
Nay I believe, had Sacrilegious hands
Fingered our poor Remains of Tyths, and Lands
Whilst he survived they had but sinned in vain,
Whitaker would have prayed them back again,
As Luther did a young man's soul repeal
Given to the Devil under hand and Seal.
A Chariot and an Horsman we have lost
In whose each single prayer incamptan Host.
How have I heard him (on some solemn day
When doubtful War could make all London pray)
Mount up to heaven with armed cries and tears,
And rout as far as York the Cavileers,
Have you not seen an early-rising Lark
Spring from her turf, making the Sun her mark;
Shooting her self aloft, yet highe^, higher,
Till she had sung her self into heavens Quire?
Thus would he rise in prayer, and in a trice
His soul become a Bird of Paradise,
And if our faint devotions prayers be;
What can we call his less then Ecstasy?
On his Preaching.
If with the Almighty he prevailed so,
Wonder not that he wonders wrought below;
The son of consolation, and of thunder
Met both in him, in others are asunder.
He was (like Luke) Physician of both kinds,
Wrought cures upon men's bodies and their minds.
The falling sickness of Apostasy,
Dropsy of drunkenness, prides trimpany,
The Megrim of opinions new, or old,
Palsy of unbelief, Charities Cold,
Lusts burning Fever, Angers Calenture,
The Colic in the conscience he could cure:
Set the souls broken bone^; by holy Art
He has dissolved the stone in many a heart
Harder then that he died of. -- O come in,
Ye multitudes whom he has healed of sin,
And thereby made his debtors -- pay him now
Some of those tears which he laid out for you;
Interest-tears I mean, for should you all
Weep over him both use, and principal
'Twould wash away the stone, which covers him
And make his Coffin (like an Ark) to swim.
Now wipe thine eyes (my Muse) and stop thy verse,
(Thy ink can only serve to black his hearse)
Yet (stay) I Will drop one tear, sigh one sigh more,
It Is this: Although my Poetry be poor,
O what a mighty Prophet should ^ be,
Had this Elija's mantle fallen to me!
Oh might I live his life! I Would be content
His sore diseases too should me torment,
And if his Patience could mine become,
I would not be afraid of Martyrdom.
Robert Wild.

Upon the Pious, and painful Preacher Mr. Jeremy Whitaker.
An Epitaph.
I Eremy's not here into the dungeon thrown,
It Is heavens Whit-acre (only) newly Mown;
Now Angel-reapers gathered have to Barn
The seedsman of Gods Word like full ripe Corn.
In tears he sowed, and now the heavenly Q^ire
To give him joy of Harvest all conspire.
In his sick bed this Paradox we found,
The thorny, and the stony are good ground.
The gowt and stone (as milstones) ground the man
To finest flower for Mancher; here no Bran
These sisting times could find: nere did man say,
The Preacher spoke as mealy-mouthed to day.
Gallants (you mealy heads and capes that have)
Go take perfumed powder from his grave,
The dust off's feet was beautiful, and he
Your powder; and your looking-glass may be.
His life a Sermon was, his dust does cry
All flesh is grass, go home, and learn to die.
England may ever glory, Rome despair
In Whit ac^e in the Pulpit, and in the Chair.
Thomas Hodges, B. D.

An Elegy upon the Death of Mr Whitaker.
IF passion can make Poets, or grief raise
Expressions great enough to speak thy praise,
Then might ^, Whitaker, thy worth rehearse;
And with my strowings deck thy sacred Hearse.
A Synod's only fit to speak thy fall,
And bear a part in this their Funeral.
Divines must grieve that with thee tomb'd does lie.
What now we vainly seek, Divinity.
If we would hear such prayers as could heaven move
And tune the spheres into a Quire of love
Sweeter then Angels Anthemes, then we must
Ransack thy grave, and reinspire thy dust.
There scattered lies that voice, which could inspire
All hearts, and fill them with an holy fire
As flames get flames: Who thunder did defy
Six words of thine could melt, and purify
Such Callous souls, which at their sins never vexed.
Did find thy Sermons keener then the Text.
Thy Doctrine still was edged against men's crimes
And served to lance the ulcers of the times:
Who now shall teach the wicked their sad doomes?
Or else convince that faith by hearing comes?
For whosoever heard thee, were caught by the ear
And went out converts, that came curious there.
But those who n^'re were wearied with thy voice
Do now complain of too much length and noise.
For since, blessed O^ator, thou parted'st hence,
The Pulpit only suffers violence.
Edw. Bagshaw.

On the much lamented death of that Reverend man of God, Mr. Jeremiah Whitaker,
his dear friend and old neighbor, both in City and Country.
IF Reason, Virtue, Wisdom make a man,
If Faith, Hope, Charity the Christian;
If faithful, useful, cheerful grace a friend,
Arts, Tongues, choice Wit, rare Memory commend
The Scholar; if Humanity, Divinity,
Candor, Humility, bowels, integrity;
If parts, pains, zeal, sound Doctrine, utterance, tears,
Faith, courage, prudence, patience, fasting, prayers,
Success crown Preacher; Lo, of thousands ten
That Man, Friend, Christian, Scholar, Preacher then.
Never in times unfixt a man more fixed;
Never in heart so pure, graces more mixed;
Mildnes with boldness, courage with courtesy;
High parts, low thoughts, yielding with constancy:
Well to conceive and speak, to speak and do,
And do so much, so much to suffer too.
For Love a Jonathan, for Truth Nathanael;
For Meekness Moses* and for courage Daniel;
Called when a child a second Jeremiah;
For spirit, prayer, power the third Eliah,
For firmness C^phas, for sympathy a Paul,
For pains, success exceeding most or all.
One thing was lacking yet to make him higher,
As gold, or Job, he must into the fire.
As gold, or Job he was unto the last,
For patience proved, Integrity held fast.
Who ere saw such sharp pains? heard such sweet prayers?
Strong cries, but stronger faith, praises with tears?
Ou^ Lord by suffering did to perfection grow:
In suffering obedience he did learn and show,
This man of God came to that altitude
By suffering, of sore pains, that multitude.
The racking Gowt and the tormenting Stone,
In Kidneys Ulcers two, in bladder one,
Made pains sharp, sore, long, thick, but respite small;
Yet faith and patience overcame them all.
Now after well spent life, and restless pains,
And heaven assured, we reckon death for gains:
Death when by self desired, by friends bewayl'd,
And a sweet memory left have still prevailed
To call dead happy. Then our loss to thee
Was greatest gains complete felicity.
Weep Berm'sey, London wail, mourn England all,
He^e did thy Crown, Chariots and Horsemen fall.
John Sheffield, Pastor of Swithins London-stone.

Of the same Author.
OLd Jeremy a Prophet was and child,
Yet was a brazen wall and Pillar styled.
He lived in troublous times, sad changes saw,
He suffered much, yet kept he fast Gods Law.
By all good honored by enemies approved:
By many censured, by none faulty proved.
He dealt with persons highest, and with low;
He warned all, but wished no man's woe.
Son of Contenti^n called when of peace,
The greatest friend and of his Lands increase.
He preached much of Christ and Gospel-days,
The Covenant new he taught, and its rich grace.
Yet was his last a doleful lamentation,
Sad to himself, sadder to the Nation.
Thou art or wast the same. His Baruch he
Companion had to him, let me to thee.
An Elegy upon the much lamented death of my late dear and reverend Friend Mr.
Jeremiah Whitaker.
ENgland will soon grow poor, if in one year
Kent lose a Wilson, we a Whitaker.
A Thames, and Medway from our heads arise,
Their streams our tears, their channels are our eyes.
Our many losses call for tears, not fewer;
The breast a Basin makes the eye an Ewer.
No longer (now) shall Isis part the Borough
From London, since that both sides meet in sorrow.
Not (as of old) by striving whether side
Should for their own obtain the Silver tide;
No, not to gain the water we will contend;
But we will by weeping strive who most can spend.
Conduits give wine (indeed) when the Crown's put on,
Now run they tears, because our Crown is gone.
Our Friends Decease and Death our troubles were,
We nor his Sickness, nor his Medicines bear.
His Pulpit he esteemed his rest, his bed;
We thought his bed a Pulpit, where he read
Lectures of patience; these he loudly uttered,
By silence often he groaned, but never muttered.
Of mournful Magdalen, Bermonsey bears
The name, and with her Title has her tears,
And our dear Whitaker was Jeremy
In name, in weeping, and in Prophecy;
But he (no Prophet now) no sackcloth wears,
His work is done, and so are all his tears.
May Bermonsey of him the late possessor
Mourn for her sins, but joy in his successor.
GUIL. JENKYN, Pastor of Blackfriars, London.

Upon the Death of the Reverend, his never to be forgotten friend, Mr Jeremiah
Whitaker.
O That affection could but make a Poet!
If grief could rhyme with Art, sure I should do it,
(Though so disused to versify.) We Will try:
The Subject's sad, and so's the Poetry.
The tender son that never spoke before,
To save his fathers life turned Orator.
Shall I forbear in silence? Write I must,
When such a friend lies sleeping in the dust.
The blessed Saint, dear Jeremy is gone,
And who shall write his lamentation?
Had we his eyes (which always showry were)
Such is our loss, each word should have a tear!
Another Whitaker in a Coffin placed,
The first the Chair, and this the Pulpit graced.
Reader, would know his worth, then cast thy eye
Upon the Narrative; there is his excellency.
Rings hold not Histories; who can rehearse
His vast perfection in a narrow Verse!
Take Virtues, Graces, Gifts, and all you can,
All are concentred in this holy man.
A brighter star in all our orb there is none,
None do exceed, few equal him that is gone.
Ah pious soul! What mortal man can speak out
Thy rare humility! Who ere meanly thought
Of thee besides thy self? What moved thy passions,
But Eulogies and Commendations?
It Is well the art gone from us, should thou but look
Into and read thy praises in this book,
I Am sure by this thou would be somewhat moved,
And Simeon himself should be reproved.
He speaks thy worth so much, and yet but little
It Is scarce enough (but true to every tittle.)
Thy personal endowments who would commend,
Should neither know where to begin nor end.
Thy Minister'al accomplishments were rare,
Thy constant pains, thy diligence, thy care
For souls in holy things. who can express?
Thou might have longer lived, had thou lived less.
O melting Suppliant! who e're did know
Thy prayers to heaven without some tears to go?
The secret ravishings which poor souls have found
When from thy mouth the Word of life did sound!
Our very Pulpits wonder where thou art,
In which thou did such spiritual gifts impart:
But it is enough! we will weep the rest; we can
Launch out no farther in this Ocean.
Could prayers and tears have kept thee here, thy stay
It had been longer in this house of clay.
Prayer barred thee in some time, till death would throw
Open the door by force to let thee go;
At last thy soul did find the way to bliss,
And now is steeped in heavens happiness.
O blessed change for thee! the painful bed
Is now a Throne, where not a tear is shed.
No dismal groa^ings now from thee do come,
But everlasting Triumphs in their room.
Farewell (blessed Saint) farewell, and since it is thus;
We Will have to thee, thou will not come to us.
THO. JACOMB. of M. Ludg.

Upon the death of the reverend, Learned, and Faithful Servant of Jesus Christ,
Mr. Jeremiah Whitaker, late Minister of Magdalene Bermonsey in Southwark.
WHat speaks this sudden storm of brinish tears?
What means this doleful volley in mine ears?
Is the Sun darkened? Do the Lamps above,
Resolve their fiery station to remove,
And shine no more on earth? Does the Creation
Intend to melt it self with Lamentation?
The holy Whitaker is stepped away,
Late Angel of the Church of Bermonsey.
A Pillar in Gods house, a sweet Musician
That gladded drooping hearts; A soul-Physician,
A Sun whose beams did consolation shine,
A faithful, skilful guide, a rare Divine.
He was a Watchman could not well be blamed;
A workman needed not to be ashamed.
No Proteus, that could change to every shape,
No servile spirited Preacher, that could scrape
And cringe to please the lusts of wanton men:
He could not say, and then unsay again.
Learned, yet very humble, prudent, dear
To God, to men; meek, holy, wise, sincere.
He loved the Truth, he hated Heresy,
A strong opposer of all Blasphemy.
His heart was toward a holy Reformation,
But set against a godless toleration
Of lewd Opinions. Great was his care
To keep the holy Covenant which he swear.
The marrow of Gods O acles was i^ him,
No Scripture Mystery was hidden from him.
Cases of Conscience he could well unty,
Scruples and Doubts from Scripture satisfy.
His holy Function was his consolation,
His Pulpit work to him was recreation.
His prayers were zealous, heavenly steeped in tear:
His Doctrine Orthodox, convincing clear.
Full of the spirit of life and Power, his words
Did pierce like nails, did cut like sharpened swords:
He durst tell Ahab of his great oppression;
What! do thou kill and after take possession?
He durst tell Herod though it cost his life,
It Is wickedness to take thy brothers wife.
Had strangers heard him Preach, they would have sed,
Sure John the Baptist's risen from the dead.
His carriage holy, harmless, free from strife,
His Sermons were imprinted in his life.
His body was infirm, diseased, weary,
His soul still vigorous, active, strong and cheary.
The more the Cabinet did waste and wear,
The brighter did the Jewel still appear.
Goodness of nature made the world admire him,
The brightness of his grace made Saints desire him.
The Church on earth has lost a precious plant,
The Church in heaven has gained a glorious Saint.
Ra. Robinson, Minister of Mary Wolnoth, Lumbard street London.

Jeremiah Whitaker.
ANAGRAM, I have hit everi Mark.
THou did not shoot at rovers in the dark,
Thy polisht shaft could hit the smallest mark,
Gods glory was thy scope, his Word thy guide,
His stable Spirit did teach thee to divide
The word of truth aright: A signal Teacher,
An useful, pious, fruitful, powerful Preacher
God made thee to his Chu^th. None better knew
Then Whitaker to carve to each his due:
The mark of saving grace was first obtained,
And now the mark of glory thou have gained:
Enjoy it; and let other Archers see
Thy happy pattern, and take aim by thee.
Ra. Robinson Minister of Mary Wolnoth; Lombardstreet, London.

Upon the death of his most dear friend, that eminent servant and Minister of
Jesus Christ, Mr. Jeremiah Whitaker, Pastor of Mary Magdalen Bermonsey in
Southwark.
THus Cedars fall, thus Stars do disappear,
Prophets though Angels, yet but mortals are.
Our Prophet Jeremy's dead, and now there is none
That Is fit to make his Lamentation.
Plato once wished that virtue could appear
To mortal eyes, his wish was granted here.
If any Breviator would comprize
All virtues in a word, then let his eyes
Be fixed here, keep Whitaker in mind.
And there you have the virtues all defined.
Or would you know what all the graces are?
In short hand writing, they make Whitaker.
Would any have the Bible in a word,
And what the vastest comments can afford?
Read Whitakers Works, peruse his conversation,
And there is the Bible and the Interpretation;
That Book was in his breast so well ingrost,
He could restore it, if it had been lost.
He that by thee (blessed Saint) shall calculate.
Will find that Miracles are not out of dare.
Who e're was so far blessed to hear him teaching
Was prone to think a Seraphim was preaching.
'Twas Austin's wish i'th'Pulpit Paul to hear;
He had been satisfied, had thou been there.
Me thought when thy sweet soul was poured out
In fervent prayer, I began to doubt
Whether Elias was come down again,
And mounting heavenward with his fiery train.
In this thou did excel; he scaled the sort
Alone, but thou thy hearers did transport.
But whither goes my doleful Muse? to span
I'th'hollow of thy f^st the Ocean.
Or to describe his boundless hidden worth?
Nor tongue nor pen can set his praises forth.
This only I will add, he that would draw
His Portraiture, must use Apelles Law,
When to paint Lady Venus with a grace,
This beauty gave a hand, that gave a face;
The third a color gave, the next a feature,
Al joined together made that lovely creature.
In the same manner, whosoever would paint
The beauty of this thrice illustrious Saint,
Must rifle all the world, and look apart
For that which shines most in each noble heart.
One must Humility give, another Zeal,
Another Prudence brethrens rents to heal.
Learning a fourth in its highest elevation.
A fifth must give a spotless conversation.
His preaching one man cannot imitate;
Here we must have Beza's triumvirate.
And when we'ave traveled all the world to find
Or make a copy of this matchless mind,
When other men's perfections al do fail,
We must with that old Limner draw a vail
Upon his peerlesse parts, or for the rest,
Say, here lies that which cannot be expressed.
Sic flevit Mat. Poole Minister of Michaels at the Quern in London.

An Epitaph.
HEre lies Saint Whitaker, the rest
Cannot, need not be expressed.
Great sorrows noise not, Give some years
For the world to speak in tears.
First this age must vent its grief
In sighs, the next may find relief,
And join their sorrows to compute
Till grief returning strikes them mute,
And makes them silently confess
Their loss; his worth was fathom'esse.
Another Epitaph.
UNder this stone intombed lies
An heap of contrarieties,
One that is dead, yet does remain
For person, place, and work the same.
His precious person was combined
Of soul and body firmly joined.
So still these parts though distant, yet
In Christ are to each other knit.
To earth his body was confined,
Always heaven had and has his mind,
His work was preaching, so it is still,
And preach his name for ever will.
Mat Poole.

To the memory of the learned that eminently Religious Minister of the Gospel
(his Reverend brother deceased) Mr. Jeremiah Whitaker.
WHitaker sleeps; spices you need not bring
For's body; death it self's embalmed to him.
Ah blessed Saint! his Sermons were not done
When preached, he lived the Application:
When sick, his pangs were mercy, for when e're
A sigh was breathed out, God breathed in a prayer.
Lie gently on him dust, this seed is sown
To spring again at the Resurrection.
Oh for a verse in black! Reader prepare thus
For every drop of ink to melt a tear.
Yet stay, with grief there is cause of joy: then
Joy shall shed tears for him, and grief for us.
Benjamin Needler. Minister of the Gospel at Margarce Moses Friday-street, Land.

In obitum eximii tam Doctrina quam pietate Theologi, Jeremiae Whitakeri,
funebre 'ETKOIA 'STIKON.
Dr. Gouge. Dr. Walker. Mr. Whitaker.
DEfleat occiduos aetas ingrata Prophetas,
Liquit Evangelicum collapsa synastria caelum:
Lugentem and moesto Whitakerus funere mundum
Deseruit; lachrymis squallentem liquerit urbem:
Jam pereat mendax de florido opinio seclo,
Mortuus hic Vates nostrum sepelivit honorem,
Corruit and Verax foecundi gloria rostri:
Patronum amisit Pauper, populusque Lutherum,
Amisitque pium mutilata ecclesia gnatum,
Pastorem coetus, Patrem amisere Ministri:
Gens mala praeconem, immotam synodusque columnam.
J. Wells, Old Jewry Land. Pastor.

To the memory of his dear friend and Pastor, Mr. Jeremiah Whitaker, deceased.
BEhold the shadow whose admired worth
Nor pen, nor tongue is able to set forth!
He whose vast soul walked through the Isle of Man,
Is here confined in a shorter span.
Whose worth the world though 'twere as big again
Were much too short and narrow to contain.
Sweet were his life and death, his well spent days
Began with goodness, and expired with praise:
His lamp was ever burning, never hid;
And when his tongue preached not, his actions did;
And to his death he still fought faiths good fight,
And then his Lamp exchanged his borrowed light
For an immortal luster, and here lies,
Enshrined, not dead, for Virtue never dies.
R. B. Parishioner.

Upon the Life and Death of that precious Servant of God, Mr. Jeremiah
Whitaker, whose name (like that of his Lord and Master) is an ointment poured
forth.
JEREMIAH WHITAKER, or Etymology.
He shall exalt God. His work, Jer. 20. 13. God shall exalt him. His wages,
Jer. 5. 10.
White-aker.
A field white for Harvest, John 4. 35. His fitness for Heaven.
Blessed Saint, how well thy name and worth agree!
In name and office thou art Jeremie.
A God-exalter, and by God exalted;
A Priest, a Prophet: one that never halted
Twixt God and Baal, twixt the truth and error,
Nor could be made to start for hope or terror.
Heroic Champion, thou deaths venomous sting
Have conquered, and with Christ now raign'st as King.
A wise and faithful Labourer for thy Lord,
To gather in his harvest by the word,
Thou have approved thy self to Earth and Heaven,
Witness thy life and Doctrine purged from Leaven.
Both Labourer and Harvest were thy part;
The former living, this thou dying art.
The Field being for Harvest, Jer. White-aker
Is reapt, and of a better soil partaker.
Thy melting tears now cordial-water be.
Let me thy sorrows taste, thy joys to see.
Roger Drake Pastor of Peter's West-cheap.

A Funeral Elegy upon the reverend his dear deceased friend, Master Jeremiah
Whitaker.
O Let me weep, and even like a spring
Unto the sea of grief some tribute bring.
These cheeks of mine with tears bedewed shall swell
For this Seraphique St. who lately fell.
To lose a Friend is sad, but for our Nation
To lose a Jeremy is Lamentation.
Could he from death some way released be
His virtues surely might have set him free;
But 'twas a debt; and what enflamed desire
Had he to leave his mantle and fly higher!
How shall I praise his worth, and not dispraise?
Say more, and not say less? darkning his rays.
Meekness, humility in this Orb shined,
In him the chain of Graces was combined:
How was he fired with zeal, even from his youth,
And though he lost all, would hold fast the truth.
With Jeremy he was a man of strife,
Yet not for Tyths but Souls: this was his life;
A downright, upright man he was, a Star
Whose sacred influence diffused far:
And that of these an end I may enclose,
His faith in Christ he solely did repose.
This made him when he felt the sharpest pain
Upon the flinty rack, not to complain;
Nay when he at the point of death did lie,
Did as the milky Swan most gently die.
What did he die? his soul as in a C^ll,
In heavens bright Paradise is gone to dwell
Among the Cherubims, where he does ring
With them that jointly Hallelujahs sing:
Where he for tears in joy does much increase,
Pleasure does him of former pain release;
He never shall of Stone, or Ulcer hear,
He never need any more sickness fear.
Dear Saint! I sooner had adorned thy hearse,
But grief first vents by weeping, then by verse.
Thomas Watson, Pastor of Stephens Walbrook, London.

Upon the Death of that reverend Divine, Mr. Jeremiah Whiraker.
STay and lament all you that travel by;
It Is sin to pass, and not to cast an eye
Upon this mournful spectacle, the hearse
Of one whose name can dignifie a verse.
Lo here the exuvium of that heavenly soul,
Who living did by' s words and works control
The power of sin and Satan and whose breath
Redeemed poor souls from darkness, and from death.
And by his pious Doctrine did convince
The sly Temptations of that airy Prince.
He whose whole life was a continued Tract
Of practical Divinity, each Act
A Sermon, and each word an explanation;
So that his Audionts might, by imitation
Of him, and of his life, to Heaven come,
Although they had been deaf, or he bin dumb.
But that Almighty power who from above
Does all things order, and in whom we move
Wrapped all these treasures up in brittle Clay;
Death gav't a crack, and so took all away.
And now our griefs amount to such a sum
That to express them best is to be Dumb.
They that can count their wealth, are counted poor,
And who can speak his griefs can suffer more.
It Is diminution to his worth, to weep
With single tears, we his whole flock of sheep
Join in one Lamentation, and let fall
Our general tears at this sad Funeral
Of our Dear Shepherd, in whose fatal grave
Both he and we one joint interment have.
From hence there is no return for him to us,
But we must by degrees all follow thus.
He Is gone before to usher us, now dead
What all his life he wrought is perfected,
Living he showed the way to heaven, whither
Now dead he is gone to clear our passage thither.
Parishioners of Bermonsey.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Reader,
BEsides the oversights of the Printer in false spelling, ill pointing, and
misquoting some Scripture proofs, thou art entreated to correct these Errata's
following. p. 4. l. 8. for me, r. was. p. 6. l. 25. for hater, r. hatred. and
l. 26. r. poisonous sting. p. 8. l. 9. r. in the. p. 9. l. 4. r. friends, and
l. 13. for be, r. by, and l. 20. r. reviewing. p. 10. l. 3. for First, r. viz.
and l. 17. r. relations, and l. 23. r. discovers, and l. 24. r. lest, p. 11.
l. 7. for diligent r. affectionate, and l. 9. r. dissatisfactions. p. 13. l. 4.
r. of my. p. 16. l. 27. for beautiful. r. bountiful. p. 13. l. 33. for him, r.
himself. and l. 34. r. which did cost. p. 20. l. 9. r. being also the
fountain. p. 21. l. 23. for these, r. the, p. 24. l. 12, r. which I have, p.
36. l. 22. for gods r. God. p. 46. l. 26. r. this, p. 47. l. 11. r. in his, p.
53. l. 1. r. Sermons, p. 58. l. 22. r. contemned.


