Imprimatur.

Libellus cui Titulus [The Plain-mans Devotion Part. I.

Jan. 5. 1687. H. Maurice.

THE Plain-Man's DEVOTION.

PART. I.

Being a METHOD OF Daily Devotion.

Fitted to the meanest Capacities.

By the Author of the Plain-mans Reply to the Catholic Missionaries.

LONDON. Printed by T. B. for R. Wild at the Bible and Crown on Ludgate Hill.
1688. Price 2d.

THE Country-Parson TO THE PLAIN-MAN.
HAving been instrumental, through God's Blessing, to fix your Belief, I shall
now proceed, by the same gracious assistance, to direct your Practice. And do
very cheerfully comply with an invitation to so useful a Task, as being fully
convinced; That it is much more profitable, both for me and my Parish, to spend
my time in Devotion and practical Discourses, then in these unpleasing Disputes.

Now the more effectually to persuade you to a holy and Religious Life,
pray-seriously consider this short Admonition.

You must not always be in this world; but in a very little time (perhaps
before to Morrow-morning) you may be removed into the next. And then you will
unalterably be fixed in an Eternal State, either of Happiness or Misery.

Now as in all other Cases prudence does direct you to provide for the worst,
so chiefly it ought in the concern of your Soul. Wherein if you do miscarry,
the mistake will be very fatal: you are utterly ruined,

Let me therefore beg of you (and I do it in Christ's stead) immediately to
break off your Sins by Repentance. And resolve without delay to make your Peace
with God, before you go hence and be no more seen.

To assist you in this necessary work, is the charitable Design of these little
Papers. Wherein I shall in the most familiar manner even lead you by the hand;
and shall show you step by step what I would have you to do. And if with an
honest and sincere heart, you will observe these following Directions; I trust
we shall comfortably meet at the Day of the Lord Jesus.

A METHOD OF Daily Devotion.
IN the Morning when you first awake, offer up your first Thoughts and Words to
God, saying,

Glory be to God the Father, who has made me and all the world.

Glory be to God the Son, who has redeemed me and all Mankind.

Glory be to God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifies me, and all the elect people
of God.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three Persons and one God: have mercy
upon me a miserable Sinner:

As you are rising, say,

I laid me down and slept, and rose up again, for the Lord sustained me. [Psal.
3. 5.]

Whilst you are putting on your Clothes, consider what you are to do that Day.
And if any Company or Business which you are to be engaged in, shall be likely
to tempt or to draw you to any Sin; As to Intemperance in Meats or Drink; to
Lust, Anger, etc. then arm your self with resolutions against it, and say,

Lord, lead me not into Temptation, but deliver me from Evil.

I do renounce the Devil and all his works; the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked
World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh. I believe all the Articles of the
Christian Faith. And I will keep Gods holy will and Commandments, and walk in
the same all the Days of my Life.

All this, O my God, I am bound by the vow of my Baptism to believe and do; and
by thy help so I will.

As soon as you are dressed, kneel down by your Bedside; and with great
Reverence and Devotion, as in Gods presence, say your Prayers thus; or in the
like manner.

Morning Prayer for a Private Person.
I Bless and Praise thy holy Name, most gracious God, for all thy mercies
bestowed upon me, from the time of my Birth to this present moment. I thank
thee for the Preservation of the last Night; and for the sweet sleep and
refreshment which I have enjoyed. O pardon and forgive me my manifold Sins
[particularly -- here mention the greatest of thy Sins.] I am truly sorry that
I have offended thee; and do fully resolve to do so no more Assist me this day
in the works of my Calling; and prosper all my lawful undertakings. Give me
Grace to be true and just in all my dealings; and to do unto all men, as I
would they should do unto me. Help me to be contented with my present
Condition. To be diligent in all my Duties. Watchful against all Temptations.
So humble and modest, chaste and temperate, and so moderate in my most lawful
enjoyments, that they never become a snare to me. Lord, I live here in a
troublesome sinful world: But do thou take me into thy Protection, and then I am
safe, Guide me by thy counsel here, and at last bring me to thy Glory. And this
I humbly beg for the sake of Jesus Christ, my dear Lord and only Savior, who
has taught me thus to Pray,

Our Father, etc.
After Breakfast (at which the greatest part of the Household are supposed to
be present) let the Master of the Family, or some other by his appointment,
distinctly and devoutly read this, or the like, following Prayer.

Morning Prayer for a Family.
O Holy Lord God Almighty; before whom all Knees do bend, and to whom all
Creatures in Heaven and Earth do bow and obey. Behold here poor, impotent,
guilty Creatures humbly prostrate before thy Throne: Adoring thy Greatness; and
admiring thy Goodness: and desiring nothing more than faithfully to serve thee
all the days of our Lives. For thou only art Holy; Thou only art the Lord: And
Glory be to thee O Lord most High.

Praised be thy Name O Lord, from the rising up of the Sun to the going down of
the same. Thou art our God, and we will thank thee: Thou art our God, and we
will praise thee. We laid us down and slept, and rose up again, for the Lord
sustained us. Thou have lightened our Eyes, that we slept not in Death. Thou
have delivered us from the Terrors of the Night, and from the Evil that walks
in Darkness. From Fire and Robbery, and all other sad Accidents. Thou renowest
thy Mercies to us every Morning; and has given us one Day more, to serve thee
and call upon thy Name.

O Lord our heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting God, who have safely
brought us to the beginning of this Day; defend us in the same by thy mighty
Power; and grant that this Day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kind
of Danger; but that all our doings may be ordered by thy Governance, to do
always that is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

And we beg thy Blessing for all Mankind. More particularly for these Kingdoms
in which we live. Bless, save and defend the King, and all the Royal Family,
with all Orders of men amongst us, both in Church and State. Bless all our
Friends and kind Relations. Those that have done us any Good; Lord reward them.
Those that have done or wished us any Evil; Father forgive them.

Comfort all those who are any ways afflicted or distressed in mind, body, or
(...) Give them patience (...) their sufferings, (...) issue out of all their
^fflictions.

These mercies, and whatever else thou know to be most convenient for us, we
do humbly beg, in the name, and for the sake of Christ Jesus, our only Mediator
and Intercessor; who has taught us thus to Pray,

Our Father, etc.
Prayers being finished; as you go first out of your Doors, or as you return
into the House, say,

Lord, Bless my going out and my coming in, from this time forth for evermore.
[Psal. 121. 8.] When you harness your Horses; or take the Plough into your
hand; or begin any other work, say,

Prosper thou the work of my hands, O Lord, O prosper thou my handiwork.
[Psalm. 90. 17.] HAving thus commended your selves to God, you are now under
his care and protection. And may comfortably expect his Blessing upon you and
yours. Which, he for his part, will most certainly grant; provided, that you
lead the rest of the Day according to this beginning. In order to which, be
very careful First of your

Thoughts.
IF any idle, wandering and impertinent Thoughts; any wanton, lustful, and
lascivious Thoughts; any envious, murdering, and malicious Thoughts shall
arise in your hearts; then presently reject them, by thinking upon something
else, and say,

Lord cleanse the Thoughts of my heart by the inspiration of thy holy Spirit.

Secondly, Take heed of your

Words.
1. BEware of horrid Cursing and profane Swearing. And do not think to excuse
such extravagance by saying; I was provoked; or I am naturally Passionate: It
is my Temper, and I cannot help it. Which in plain English is this. I have a
mind to curse and to swear, and I will do it. Know therefore that God has
given you Reason, and the Grace of his Holy Spirit, whereby to curb your
natures, and restrain your vicious Inclinations, both in this and every other
Instance.

2. To be noted for Lying (besides the Sin and Guilt in respect of God) will
make you useless to the world. No Body will trust you. Or, if they can help it,
will ever meddle with you. I advise you therefore ( Children and Servants) when
you have committed a fault, do not dare to excuse it with a Lie; but confefs it
freely. And then both your Parents and Masters, if they are prudent Persons,
will more cheerfully forgive you.

3. Let no filthy Communication proceed out of your Mouth. Avoid all obscene
lascivious Discourse as you would the Plague; for it is as infectious, and
kindles such a fire of Lust, as without repentance will certainly bring you to
the fire of Hell.

4. Avoid that prattling Gossipping humor of talking about other men's matters,
and censuring their Affairs. But study to be quiet, and to do your own
Business. And if Religion will not restrain you; then be admonished in point of
prudence, that Silence is soon answered.

For the better regulating of your

Actions.
OBserve that Golden Rule of our Blessed Savior; Whatsoever you would that men
should do to you, do ye even so to them. Mat. 7. 12. Let this teach you to be
true and just in all your dealings. To be very punctual and exact in all your
Promises and Bargains. Not to go beyond or defraud your Brother in any matter,
for the Lord is the avenger of all such. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6.

2. Take heed of excessive Drinking; which too often concludes your Bargains.
And if your head shall be stronger than your Neighbors, then to abuse his
weakness, and to impose upon him under such Circumstances, is a very base and
dishonest practice.

3. Beware of immoderate Anger; or (as you phrase it) of being in Passion: the
consequents of which are many times dismal and amazing. For you may do that in
the height of a Provocation which, if it does not cut you off in the midst of
your Days, will bring your gray hairs with sorrow to the Grave. When therefore
your Children or your Servants have committed a fault, be not either too rash,
or too severe in your Censures; but treat them with Reason, and argue the Case
calmly with them. And if after fair Admonitions they will not regard you; then
it will be prudent to dismiss such Servants, and correct your Children.

4. Let young Persons be admonished to flee youthful Lusts: and to take heed of
all filthy polluting practices* which are very displeasing to a pure and holy
God. Remember your Baptismal vow In which you did renounce the carnal desires
of the flesh, so that you will not follow nor be led by them. Where observe.
You did not promise never to have those Desires (for whilst you are young and
healthful it cannot be otherwise) but you only promised, not to follow nor be
led by them, i. e. not to gratify those Desires and Inclinations in any
unlawful way, not to be led and prompted by them to commit any Sin; or to do
any thing which God has forbidden. If therefore; after Prayers, Fasting, hard
Labor, and other Methods of Mortification, you are still troublesome and
uneasy; then make use of the last Remedy; which becomes a Duty to those, who
cannot live innocently without it I shall commend it to you in St. Paul's words.
If they can not contain, let them Marry for it is better to Marry than t^ burn.
1 Cor. 7. 9. Marriage is honorable in all, and the Be^ undefiled: but
Whoremonger and Adulterers God will judge. Heb. 13. 4.

Being tempted to uncleanness, or any other Sin; lift up your heart unto God,
and say,

O Thou who art faithful, do not suffer me to be tempted above that I am able;
but with the Temptation also make a way to escape, that I may be able to bear
it. 1 Cor. 10. 13.

5. Take heed and beware of COVETOVSNESS. Luke 12. 15. For the love of Money is
the root of all evil: which while some coveted after they have erred from the
Faith, and pierced themselves through with many Sorrows. 1 Timothy 6. 10. Be not
deceived -- nor Theives, nor COVETOVS -- nor Extortioners shall inherit the
Kingdom of God* 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.

From these and many other places of Scripture, you are plainly convinced; that
Covetousness is a most perplexing and destructive practice. And as such would
more carefully be avoided by you were it not so difficult to convince you of
your guilt. For should I propose this Question to every Individual in the whole
Parish; Are you guilty of this Sin of Covetousness? I should doubtless fine a
great number of frugal* careful, provident Persons; b^ not a Covetous man
among^^ you all. And therefore, for your conviction, I shall brie^ly show you
what Covetousness is, and when a man may be truly said to be guilty of that Sin.

COVETOVSNESS is an irregular unlawful Desire, of geting and keeping wealth.

Now your Desires are then irregular and unlawful, when they do transgress
those bounds and limits, which Almighty God by his Laws has prescribed to them.

For God, who is a God of Order, has established this method. Seek ye first
the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, Mat. 6. 33. Whether ye eat or drink,
or whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31.

Intimating; That the chief end and design, the great business for which you
are sent into the Word; it is to Glorify God, by saving of your Souls. And
therefore when God is dishonored, and the welfare of your Souls is neglected;
then are your desires or your actions irregular and unlawful.

Particularly; If these Desires shall once prompt you, to cozen and cheat and
defraud your Neighbor in any instance whatsoever: As, By telling Lies to help
out a good Bargain; By false Weights and Measures; By not paying Servants and
Workmens wages; By not discharging just Debts when it is in your power; but
keeping other men's Money, to their prejudice, that you your selves may trade
with it; In these and many other Instances you are apparently Covetous.

Nay further; Though you can truly affirm, as you often boast, that you never
wronged any man living: But are most just and punctual in all your dealings;
and were never worse then your word. Yet if your desire of getting an Estate
shall be so eager, that you shall neglect the Duties of Religion! If, for
Instance, you cannot stay to say your Prayers in a Morning for fear of
neglecting your work! And if when you come into Gods House, there to attend his
immediate Service, you are then thinking of your worldly Concerns; how you may
turn your Penny, and contrive your Affairs to the best advantage! If the
Festivals and Fasts of the Church (those Market-days for your Souls) shall be a
burden to you; saying with those in the Prophet; When will the New Mood be
gone, that we may sell Corn? and the Sabbath that we may set forth Wheat? Amos
8. 5.

If the care and concern for your Bodies, which should be subordinate to that
of your Souls, shall be thus preferred before it; your desires are then
irregular and unlawful, and you are evidently guilty of this Sin of
Covetousness.

Nay yet further; Though your Estates may be very honestly gotten; yet if you
do not use them as you ought, nor employ them to those ends for which they were
given, you are still Covetous.

Now the only end of wealth, is to supply our occasions, and to enable us to do
good both to our selves and others.

He therefore that lives meanly and below his Estate, when there is no reason
so to do. That shall pinch and pine his own body, by denying it those necessary
refreshments it wants. That shall neglect the Education and the Marriage of his
Children; as resolving to part with his money and his life together. Finally,
He who shall transgress that most necessary Duty, of being charitable to the
Poor, and relieving those that are in Distress; his Gold and his Silver, for
want of use, is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against him.
James 5. 3.

Let your Conversation be without Covetousness; and be content with such things
as ye have: for he has said, I will nev^^ leave thee nor forsake thee. Heb.
13. 5.

Be careful for nothing: but in every thing by prayer and supplication with
thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God. and the peace of God
which passes all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds through
Christ Jesus. Phil. 4. 6, 7.

Being returned home in the Evening, and your work being finished; before you
go to Bed, let the Master of the Family again call his Household together. And I
wish I could persuade you, every night to read some portion of Holy Scripture.
But lest that should seem too great a burden upon the Weekday, I shall reserve
it as a proper Task for the Lord's Day and the Festivals of the Church (for the
due observation of which I do purpose, God willing, to give you particular
Directions in another Paper.) However though you may want time, or are too much
wearied to read in your Bible, yet pray do not omit to commend your selves to
Gods Protection, in this or the like manner.

Evening Prayer for a Family.
ALmighty and Everlasting God; and in Jesus Christ our most Merciful and
Gracious Father. We thy poor unworthy Creatures, do most humbly present our
selves before thee: to confess our sins, and to beg thy pardon. To acknowledge
thy mercies, and to bewail our abuses of them.

We have transgressed our Duty to Thee, our Neighbor, and our selves: and that
both in Thought, in Word and in Deed: by doing those Things which thou have
expressly forbidden; and by neglecting those Duties thou have commanded us. And
this not only through Ignorance and Frailty, but sometimes knowingly and
wilfully; with repeated vows and resolutions to the contrary. Nay, O Lord, we
have despised that Goodness of thine which should lead us to Repentance:
hardening our hearts against all those means, which thou have used for our
amendment.

And now, Lord, what can we expect having done these Things, but to be utterly
abhorred and forsaken by thee? that is indeed the due reward of our Sins. But,
O Lord, there is mercy with thee that thou may be feared.

O fit us for that mercy, by giving us a deep and hearty Repentance; a sincere
Contrition; a true sorrow for, and perfect hatred of, all our sins, with a firm
resolution to forsake them. And then, according to thy Goodness, let thine
anger and thy wrath be turned away from us. Look upon us in thy Son, our
Blessed Savior; and for the Merits of his Sufferings pardon all our Sins.

And since we are not able of our selves so much as to think one good Thought;
we beseech thee to work in us both to will and to do according to thy good
pleasure. And by the Grace of thy Holy Spirit, do thou so renew and purify our
hearts, that we may become new Creatures; utterly forsaking every evil way, and
living in constant, sincere, universal Obedience to thee all the rest of our
Days.

Make us humble and modest: patient and submissive: chaste and temperate: just
and righteous: kind and charitable: diligent in our Callings; and zealous for
thy Glory. That so having behaved our selves as good and faithful Servants, we
may by thy mercy at the last be received into the joy of our Lord.

And we desire, thou know, the good all Mankind as well as our own.
Particularly we implore thy Mercies toward these Kingdoms wherein we live.
Remember not Lord our Offenses, nor the Offenses of our Forefathers; but spare
us good Lord, and have patience with us, if perhaps we may bring forth better
fruit, becoming thy holy Gospel, and all the care thou have taken about us.
Lord save and defend the King, and establish his Throne in Righteousness: that
we may see many happy days under his Government. Hear the daily Prayers of thy
Church for him; That he may always incline to thy will, and walk in thy way:
and study to preserve thy People committed to his charge, in Wealth, Peace and
Godliness. And grant, that we and all his Subjects (duly considering whose
Authory he has) may faithfully serve, honor, and humbly obey him, in thee,
and for thee, according to thy blessed word and Ordinance.

Bless him and us in all his Relations; in his Council; in all the Nobility,
Clergy, Gentry and Commonalty. That every one of them may uprightly and
zealously do their Duty; to the maintenance of thy true Religion, and the
peace and welfare of these Nations.

Comfort all those who are any ways afflicted or distressed, in Mind, Body, or
Estate, especially those who suffer for the Testimony of a good Conscience;
give them patience under their Sufferings; and an happy issue out of all their
Afflictions.

Let thy Blessings rest upon this Family, and all that are near and dear to us.
Grant both to them and us whatsoever thou see necessary, either for our
Bodies or our Souls.

And we desire to return our thankful acknowledgments, for all thy mercies both
Spiritual and Temporal. Particularly; for thy Preservation of us all this Day
past. Let the same good Providence watch over us this Night. Keep us by thy
Grace from all works of Darkness; and defend us by thy Power from all Dangers.
From Fire and Robbery, and all other sad Accidents. Grant us moderate
refreshing sleep, such as may fit us for thy Service the Day following. That
after the few Days and Nights we have to pass in this world, we may come to thy
eternal rest together with Christ Jesus. In whose blessed Name and Words we
further Pray, saying

Our Father, etc.
After Prayers the whole Family does betake themselves to their rest. And being
come into your Chamber, sit down a little, and consider how you have spent the
Day past. Glance over in your Thoughts what you have said and done, Observe
likewise what particular Blessing and Deliverance you have received. If your
Behavior has been regular; Bless God for it. If sinful and extravagant in any
instance, do not dare to go into your Bed, till you have begged his Pardon. Many
as healthful as your self have been found dead the next Morning. Kneel down
therefore, and distinctly say this, or the like Prayer.

Evening Prayer for a private Person.
I Bless and praise thy holy Name, most Gracious God, for all thy mercies
bestowed upon me, from the time of my Birth to this present moment. I thank
thee for the Preservation of the Day past. Blessed be thy Name for my continued
health, and food and raiment. Blessed be thy Name that my Bones are not broken:
that I am not now groaning under the sorest pains, but that I live at ease, and
dwell in safety Night and Day.

O Pardon and forgive me my manifold Sins [partiticularly -- [ There mention
the sins of the day past.] I am truly sorry that I have thus offended thee; and
do fully purpose to do so no more.

Assist me, by thy Grace and holy Spirit, to make good these pious Resolutions:
and with an honest sincerity to continue in my Duty, both toward thee my God,
and toward my Neighbor.

I beg thy Blessing for [ my Wife and Children, my Husband and Children, Father
and Mother, Brethren and Sisters, Master Mistress -- You must name these
Relations, according as you stand related.] O that all my friends may be thine.
And if I have any Enemies; Father forgive them.

Relieve and comfort all those that are in any Distress. Make the Earth to
bring forth its increase in due season, and let all honest and industrious
People be succeeded in their Labors.

Take me into thy care and protection this Night. And when I shall awaken again
in the Morning; help me to employ all my renewed strength to thy honor and
Glory; through Jesus Christ: in whose Blessed name and words I commend my self
to thy infinite mercies, saying,

Our Father, etc.
This Prayer may be likewise said in the Family; when there is not time, by
reason of some extraordinary occasions, for the other. But then you must change
the number: saying all along ( we) for ( I) and ( us) for ( me) and ( our) for
( my) etc.

At your going to Bed, say,

I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest, for it is thou, Lord, only that
make me dwell in safety, Psalm. 4. 9.

Having composed your self to sleep, close your Eyes with the last words of
your Blessed Savivour, saying.

Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit. Luke 23. 46.

I have given you no Directions about* Children; since your own prudence will
best suggest such Instructions, as are most suitable to their different
Capacities* But let me beg of you, both as to Children and Servants, to take up
Joshua's resolution; As for me and my House, we will serve the Lord*

FINIS.

