SSTATA.

THE Repugnancy and Inconsistency OF THE MAINTENANCE OF AN Orthodox MINISTRY,
And Tolleration of HERETICAL OPINIONS.

2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. What fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? What communion has light with darkness? What concord has
Christ with Belial? What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols?

Ephesians. 5.11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather reprove them.

Galat. 5.19, 20. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these,
etc. variance, wrath, strife, divisions, heresies.

Isaiah. 5.20, 21. Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put
darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter. Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in
their own sight.

Printed in the Year, 1659.

1. FRom rational principles it is clear, that those things that are of
contrary qualities are inconsistent, because they expel one the other, as
fire, and water, light, and darkness, the introduction, or coming in of the
one, is the destruction of the other, there is such an antipathy betwixt some
Trees, that they will not grow and prosper near one unto the other; the strings
made of the guts of the Wolf and the Lamb, will not hold together in one
instrument; an Orthodox Ministry, and heretical Opinions, are as opposite;
therefore the tolleration of these latter, must needs overthrow the former.

2 Their ends are contrary as their principles and qualities which actuate
them; of the Ministry, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, 14.
the perfecting of the Saints, edification of the body of Christ, keeping Men
from being always children, carried about with every wind of Doctrine, etc.
of heresy, and error, the unsetling of the Saints, overthrow of the body of
Christ, making Men, and keeping them, children; and, like the waves of the Sea,
turned this way, and that way, with every blast of erroneous Doctrine.

How absurd therefore is it? For a Physician to say he will cure such a man
perfectly, keep him in a sound constitution of his body, and yet give him leave
to eat any thing. For a Gardener, or Husbandman, to say, they will look to the
prosperity, and fruitfullnesse of their Trees, Herbs, Flowers, Corn, and yet
suffer the suckers weeds to grow, and overgrow the rest. For Statesmen to say,
they will take care of the Commonweal, and suffer the commotions, and
troubles therein, with their causes, (which heresies and errors too have no
small influence into) to abound: This is like the practice of late, the Act for
sanctification of the Lords day, (a Mock-act, smelling strongly of hypocrisy,
that most odious sin to God and good Men) and yet, men might meet any where
to profane it, and draw others so to do, by their wicked doctrines, and
practices. Should the Lord Major of London, say, he will be very diligent, for
the preservation of the City, from the Plague, and other infections and
noisome Diseases, and yet suffer all the Carrions and nastin^sse to lie in the
streets; who will believe him? So, if our Governors will say, they will do
all for the truth, nothing against it, and yet bear with that which is most
against it, who will be induced to imagine the possibility of it?

3. What has been the practice of pious Princes, amongst the Jews,
Christians, the Scriptures, and Ecclesiastical Histories, abundantly witness;
They did, not only set up, and maintain the true, and pure worship of God;
but removed every thing that was destructive, and impeditive thereof, and this
they did, by command from God, which is still in force: the ground, and reason
thereof, being still in force, and there being no repeal thereof. Do any
think, that God is not zealous now for his glory, as heretofore? and should
not his Deputy be so too? By what artifices, has the POPE held up his bundle
of Heresies? by hindering, remooveing, destroying that which would destroy it.

Master NEWCOMB'S Sermon, on the fifth day of November, 1642. The BOHEMIAN
PERSECUTION. CONTZENS ARTIFICE, to expel the protestant Religion, and the
Practices of our Bishops, and the BOHEMIAN PAPISTS, according thereunto, are
stale odious things; and why then, should they be imitated, by those, that
profess such great love to the PROTESTANT RELIGION? Can it arise from better
Principles? Or produce any better fruit? Let all unprejudiced reasonable Men
judge.

4 From the event, or rather natural effect, which it always produced, it
has over-throwne the Ministry, and consequently the worship of God, (which
consequence many will deny even against sense and experience) in all places and
ages of the world, under all modells and forms of government, and laid those
various governments together with the people under them in the dust. Look upon
the Jewish Nation beautified so exceedingly, and beloved of her God, the Queen
and Princess of the Provinces, did not her Kings and rulers by suffering Idols,
as many as their Cities, cause her most glorious and jealous husband to depart
from her, and give her a bill of divorce, and deliver her into the hands of her
enemies, and did not her misery come in at this door, the pollution of, y^a
trampling under foot her Priesthood, and all the holy appointments of God by
that Toleration. Did it not presently after the rejection and crucifixion of
their expected Messiah, the fruit of their many sects and divisions bring
inevitable desolation upon them, under which they lie to this day. Did n^^ the
pol^^heisme of the Heathens, like a worm, eat asund^r the roots of their
seemingly eternally settled Monarchies, commonwealths, and Nations? Is it not
in the mouths of most? That the Toleration of sports on the Lords day, winking
at the Bishops introduction of Popery, out off Charles Steward, him and his,
stubbed up Episcopacy, Roose and Branch, which would have rooted up the godly
Ministry. Have you so soon forgotten, that this Carnal Stratagem, in the
late Lord Protectors days, (who therein laid the foundation of all our
misery.) blasted the Ministry, and rendered it very unsuccessfull. The
consideration whereof, probably, sunck his spirit, and hastened his death, and
has he not provided ill, for his posterity, hereby: though he thought to have
established it? But you will say, our neighbors of Holland prosper,
notwithstanding their practicing the same. How can you say so? Have not you
been under God, the instruments of his vengeance upon them? have they not lost
the power of godliness; do we not follow them apace; can we look upon them,
but as a people hastening to their period? and shall we dream of an exemption,
from their plagues, being guilty of their sins; allowed of and established by a
Law; what can be objected, from scripture unwrested, and right reason, I know
not. What has been, to the unhallowed violation, of the divine oracles, and
abuse of reason, has been fully answered by those, that have wrote, of the
Magistrates power in taking care for the observation of the whole Law of God,
and against the Toleration of all, or, some erroneous opinions: And the so much
merely pretended liberty of conscience. I will not, actum agere, but pray you
to look into them. Wherefore consider, O ye heads, of the Tribes of our
Israel, in whom is the quintessence of reason, is it suitable to your wisdom,
to make resolves, militant, one against the other: Destructive one of another?
Should not the wisdom of the only wise God, and his authority preponderate
your conceits, Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12. Fourth and Fifth Commandment, Rev. 2.2.20.
and make you stoop and yield submissively to him? Would you not have others
yield obedience to you, in your lawful commands? and will you not give the
same to Jehovah the righteous Lawgiver and Judge of the World; Though you have
power to cast down Monarchies here on earth, are you so fool hardy, as to
kick against the pricks, in opposing his supreme Monarchical Sovereignty;
must you not be brought to his bar in the most glorious Parliament of Angels,
and Saints that ever will sit; how will you answer Christ, for preserring your
own imaginations before his revealed will, in his word; for designing, any of
you, the erecting the Idols, you dote upon, and adore, upon the ruins, and
blood of Millions in these Nations. What evasions, and distinctions, will help
you? When you are required to give an account, of the hinderance of the
propagation of the Gospel, conversion of souls, and the glory accrewing to
God thereby. How will you answer the people, that have trusted you with all
that is dear to them? How will you still the Clamor of their own
consciences? Which will speak, out, one day, when you will have more leisure
to hear them. With what heart can you, now, or will you hereafter hear, the
Lamentable cries of the souls murdered by your bloody hands? Have you no
bowels of pity and compassion in you? Have you greater mercy for the wolves
then the sheep? O cruel bloody mercyes! Where is the sincerity of your love to
that Christ you own if you are to seed hi^ sheep, as Christians, and see
them, fed as Magistrates, with wholesome food, will you let them graze any
where, on any po^sonous and banefull herb? Our love to Christ here i^ best
(...), by our love to his members, and should not his truth be (...) to you,
then your lives, estates, etc. Much more opinion? and can you love it, and
hug its enemies in your own bosoms, and in others? is it not very sinful,
to Tolerate evil in your selves? much more in others, most of all to enact it
by a Law. The good Lord, keep you, from further kindling his wrath, that has
burnt already, so hot, and so long, against these three Nations, hastening to
there final consumption. Amen Amen.

FINIS.

