An Account of the taking John Penruddock, Esquire Mr. Hugh Grove, and others, at
Southmolton in the County of Devon, March 15.1654. by Col. Vnton Crokes Troop
of Horse.
And the true state of the pretended Articles of Mr. Penruddock, etc.
MR. Penruddock, Mr. Grove, with the Commander in Chief and others, had taken
up their Quarters at the Falcon Inn, and about ten a clock at night the
Colonel possessed the Town with his Forces, and divided his Soldiers to
several stations, and with a party aflaulted the Falcon Inn, where for a time
a hot dispute was made, from the House, but at length they sallyed forth and
skumished, and cried Quarter, and some were hurt, and Mr. Grove was taken
prisoner, and others endeavored to escape, and afterward Mr. Penruddock upon
search in the house was taken Prisoner, and conveyed a Prisoner to the Guard,
the Colonel all this while not speaking with them.

Afterward, the Col. being busy in reducing the Forces in the George Inn,
word being brought unto him, that Mr. Penruddock was taken, the Col. sent for
him from the Guard, and told him that he heard that he was a Commander, and
wished him to use his power with them in the George, to yield without effusion
of any more blood, telling him, that if they would yield, he would give them
Quarter, and intercede to the Protector for their lives.

And soon after, the Colonel and Mr. Penruddock went to the George Inn, where
all that Mr. Penruddock could say or do, prevailed nothing, they within
reviling him, telling him he had betrayed them, and said that they abhorred
his motion, and fired upon him for a farewell.

The Col. afterward proceeded by force to the reducement of the Inn, and sent
to the Mayor of the Town for his assistance, and resolved to try the utmost
extremity by fire and Sword: And all things were prepared and ready for
execution, and they from the house discharged a volley of shot, which did some
execution, Mr. Mayor being shot in the buttocks, and went home. And this was
all that came upon Mr. Penruddocks endeavors.

After some farther procedure, made by the Col. They in the George Inn being
reduced to all extremity, they in the Inn desired a parley, and that granted,
they desired Life, Liberty and Estate, and to keep their moneys. The Col.
answered, that those conditions were Paramount his power, but that if they
would immediately yield themselves prisoners, and come forth in the street, he
would so intercede to the Protector, that they should not be injured by any
power under Heaven, either in Life, Liberty or Estate. Here were the only
conditions, and made with those in the George Inn only, nothing at all
relating to Mr. Penruddock or Mr. Grove, who were prisoners long before.

Hereupon 5. persons, viz. Mr. Wake, two of the Mr. Colliers, and two others
came out of the George to the Col. and undertook that 28. men horse and arms
would immediately follow them, and so many in the George should be delivered
up; and the Col. appointing some of his own men to take an account of the men
at the door the 5. persons only came forth, the rest came not to the Col. to
the door, but took an opportunity, and escaped out at the back doors: or hid
themselves in hay mowes or other places.

The Colonel thus abused, and so free of all treaty; and yet conceiving and
finding those 5. persons to be men of worth and valor, would not take any
advantage against them; but continued his resolution to intercede to the
Protector for them, which he did as effectually as he could, and saved their
Lives and Estates, although they were condemned unto death, the Col. using his
utmost endeavors to have had them set at Liberty also, but could not prevail,
although his Importunities were great and many on their behalf, as is evident
and known.

When Mr. Penruddock heard of this success at the George Inn, and that the
Colonel had promised to intercede for the Lives of those 5. Gentlemen: He
told the Col. that he ought to be included, because he had used his endeavor
to reduce them, although it took no effect. The Col. replied, that there were
no Articles given, only a promise to intercede for those 5 persons, and that as
for the rest in the Inn after the said 5 persons came out, they would not stay
the result, but had made their escape, and left the said 5 persons to mercy.

Mr. Penruddock insisted still, to have had formal Articles made in writing,
for his own advantage, after he was a Prisoner, never pretending to any
before, or to any afterward, but for using his endeavor to persuade the said
surrender, which took no effect. And yet the Col. used all the means he could
to have saved his Life also as a Gent. of great hopes and fortune. But could
never be drawn by him to betray his trust, though tempted with 500. 1. then
with a 1000. 1. then with his whole Estate, too mean considerations to weigh
down truth and honesty.

And whereas it has been by some alleged, that the Colonel should say, to
some of the Prisoners, that if their General Wagstaffe had been there, he
should have been used as they were, but that now he was likely to fare worse.
It was spoken only to this purpose, that had he been with them, he should
have had air Quarter as a soldier, but being escaped, he might be abused, or
miscarry by other hands.

And whereas also it has been reported, that the Protector should say; that
had the Col. gave Articles, he would have allowed them; The Protector never
said any such thing to the Col. but on the contrary, wrote under his hand, that
he would not spare Mr. Penruddock upon any consideration whatsoever, But a full
discovery of the whole design.

These things the Col. can make appear, by the intercourse of Letters betwixt
the Protector, Mr. Penruddock and himself, and by sufficient witnesses, and
Appeals to the Honorable Lords, whether these Interloquatory passages in furore
belli, and dark night, can in the least amount to Articles, or whether upon
these surmises, the Col. ought in the least to be clouded or blemished; He
protesting in the sight of God, that he never signed or sealed any Articles
whatsoever, or ever made any promise, than as to those 5. persons as aforesaid.

A more full and exact account of all that passed, he hopes shortly to present
to the view of the world, for the full clearing of his injured innocence, if
he may be so permitted to do.


