APETITION DELIVERED IN TO THE LORDS SPIRITVALL AND TEMPORAL, BY SIR THOMAS
ASTON, BARONET, FROM THE COUNTY PALATINE OF CHESTER CONCERNING EPISCOPACY; To
the High and Honorable Court of Parliament.
The Nobility, Knights, Gentry, Ministers, Freeholders, and Inhabitants of the
County Palatine of Chester, whose names are subscribed in the several
Schedules hereunto annexed.

Humbly show;
THat whereas diverse Petitions have lately been carried about this County,
against the present form of Church government, (and the hands of many persons
of ordinary quality solicited to the same, with pretense to be presented to
this Honorable Assembly) which we conceiving not so much to aim at
reformation as absolute innovation of government, and such as must give a great
advantage to the adversaries of our Religion, we held it our duty to disavow
them all.

And humbly pray, that we incur no miscensure, if any such clamours have
(without our privitie) assumed the name of the County.

We, as others, are sensible of the common grievances of the Kingdom, and
have just cause to rejoice at, and acknowledge with thankfulness, the pious
care which is already taken for the suppressing of the growth of Popery, the
better supply of able Ministers, and the remooving of all innovation; and we
doubt not but in your great Wisdoms, you will regulate the rigor of
Ecclesiastical Courts, to suit with the temper of our Laws, and the nature of
freemen.

Yet when we consider, that Bishops were instituted in the time of the
Apostles; That they were the great lights of the Church in all the first
general Counsels; That so many of them sowed the seeds of Religion in their
bloods, and rescued Christianity from utter extirpation in the primitive
Heathen persecutions; That to them we owe the redemption of the purity of the
Gospel we now profess from Romish corruption; That many of them for the
propagation of the truth, became such glorious Martyrs; That diverse of them
(lately and) yet living with us, have been so great assertors of our Religion
against its common enemy of Rome; And that their government has been so long
approved, so often established by the common and statute-lawes of this Kingdom;
And as yet nothing in their doctrine (generally taught) dissonant from the Word
of God, or the Articles ratified by Law. In this case to call their government
a perpetual vassalage, an intolerable bondage; And (prima facie and inaudita
altera part) to pray the present removal of them, or (as in some of their
Petitions) to seek the utter dissolution and ruin of their offices (as
Antichristian) we cannot conceive to relish of justice or charity, nor can
we join with them.

But on the contrary, when we consider the tenor of such writings, as in the
name of Petitions, are spread amongst the common people; the tenants preached
publicly in Pulpits, and the contents of many printed Pamphlets, swarming
amongst us; all of them dangerously exciting a disobedience to the established
form of government, and their several intimations of the desire of the power
of the keys, and that their Congregations may execute Ecclesiastical censures
within themselves, we cannot but express our just fears, that their desire
is to introduce an absolute innovation of Presbyterall Government, whereby we
who are now governed by the Canon and Civil Laws, dispensed by twenty-six
Ordinaries (easily responsall to Parliaments for any deviation from the rule of
Law) conceive we should become exposed to the mere arbitrary government of a
numerous Presbytery, who together with their ruling Elders, will arise to near
forty thousand Church Governors, and with their adherents, must needs bear so
great a sway in the Commonwealth, that if future inconvenience shall be found
in that government, we humbly offer to consideration, how these shall be
reducible by Parliaments, how consistent with a Monarchy, and how dangerously
conducible to an Anarchy, which we have just cause to pray against, as fearing
the consequences would prove the utter loss of learning and Laws, which must
necessarily produce an extirmination of Nobility, Gentry, and order, if not of
Religion.

With what vehemence of spirit, these things are prosecuted, and how plausibly
such popular infusions spread as incline to a paritie, we held it our duty to
represent to this Honorable Assembly; And humbly pray, That some such present
course be taken, as in your Wisdoms shall be thought fit to suppress the
future dispersing of such dangerous discontents amongst the common people. We
having great cause to fear, that of all the distempers that at present
threaten the welfare of this State, there is none more worthy the mature and
grave consideration of this Honorable Assembly, then to stop the Torrent of
such spirits before they swell beyond the bounds of Government: Then we doubt
not but his Majesty persevering in his gracious inclination to hear the
complaints, and relieve the grievances of his Subjects in frequent Parliaments,
it will so unite the head and the body, so indissolubly cement the affections
of his people to our Royal Sovereign, that without any other change of
Government, he can never want revenue nor we justice.

We have presumed to annex a Copy of a Petition (or Libell) dispersed, and
certain positions preached in this County, Which we conceive imply matter of
dangerous consequence to the peace both of Church and State. All which we
humbly submit to your great Judgments, praying they may be read.

And shall ever pray, etc.

Subscribed to this Petition, Four Noblemen. Knight Baronets, Knights and
Esquires, fourscore and odd. Divines, threescore and ten. Gentlemen, three
hundred and odd. Freeholders and other Inhabitants above six thousand. All of
the same County.


Printed for John Aston. 1641.


