A SECOND LETTER Sent from John Ash Esquire, a Member of the House of Commons,
to the Honorable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons
in Parliament. Concerning diverse Messages, and passages between the Marquess
Hartford, Lord Pawlet, Lord Seymour, Lord Coventry, and others his Majesty's
Commissioners: And the Deputy Lievtenants and other Commissioners for the
County of Somerset. Together with diverse Propositions for peace, by the
Commissioners and Deputy Lievtenants for that County. And the Lord Hartford,
Lord Pawlet, Lord Seymour, and others Answer thereunto. Ordered by the Commons
in Parliament that this be forthwith printed and published.

H. Elsyn. Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

LONDON, Printed by A. N. for Ed. Husbands. and I. Frank, 1642. August 16.

A second Letter sent from John Ash Esquire, a Member of the House of Commons,
to the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons,
SIR,
IN my last sent you by Master Coombs you received, a full relation of all that
was done by his Majesty's loyal Subjects, and the Parliaments most faithful
Friends and servants here in this part of the County of Somerset, you shall now
receive an account of what passed between your Committees and Deputy
Lievtenants and the Lord Marquess Hartford, the Lords and others his Majesty's
Commissioners.

Upon Friday, the fifth of this instant August, about twelve of the clock,
there was sent from the Lord Marquess and the Commissioners unto your
Committees and Deputy Lievtenants then in the field near Chewton, Anthony
Stocker, William Basset, and Richard Brown, three Justices of the Peace, of
this County, who went but that very morning to Wells, upon a Letter which they
produced unto us sent unto them from the Marquess, wherein they were desired
to come unto Wells, to preserve the peace of the Country. These three
Messengers told us that they had a Message to deliver us from the Lord
Marquess, and the Commissioners which they were willing to bring unto us,
because (as they conceived) it did conduce to the peace of the Country, and
thereupon delivered the message in writing, a Coppie whereof is herewith sent
you, and at the same time they delivered us a Declaration, which the Lord
Marquess and the Commissioners had caused to be published for the satisfaction
of the Country, in which is especially set out those several passages at
Shepton Mallet upon Monday, the first of this month, the Declaration we do
likewise send you, which when you have compared and examined with our relation
formerly sent you touching the same matter, you may then see the errors and
mistakes committed by the Commissioners contained in the said Declaration. When
your Committees and Deputy Lievtenants had perused this Declaration and
Message, for that Master Strode, Master Pyne, Master Rogers, and Master Francis
were not come unto us, and some of them were principally concerned in that of
Shepton Mallet, we thought fit to return the Commissioners for the present
this answer, which we here send you, promising them a more full answer the next
day, by which time we did hope to enjoy the company, and have the advice and
consent of those Gentlemen abovenamed, for we expected them every hour, but
they came not unto us at all. When your Committees and Deputy-Lievtenants had
delivered unto the messengers their said Answer. They the Messengers did
propose that a course should be taken, that the peace might be kept between us
during this time, that the Commissioners were to expect our next Answer, and
thereupon was added the last clause in this our first answer, upon this
condition that they the three messengers should engage that the like assurance
should be given us from the Lord Marquess, and the other Commissioners, or
else to receive timely advertisement by them, whereby we might have time to
put our selves in some readiness for our safety and defense, which the
Messengers consenting unto they departed; And in the evening (by which time all
our Companies were marched from Chewton unto a Hill above, and in view of the
Town of Wels) the same Messengers came again unto us, and brought the
Warrant for our safety under the Lord Marquess, and some of the Commissioners
hands, which writing we likewise do herewithall send unto you. The next
morning we made ready our answer to their first Message which was digested
into propositions, and about ten of the clock sent the same into Wels by
four Gentlemen, Master Giles Hungerford, Master William Air, Master George
Bompfield, the Master Prickman, who were attended by our Trumpetter, and so
brought safe to the Lord Marquess, and delivered him the Propositions, from
whom they received this Answer, That the Answer and propositions were of a very
high Concernment, and therefore his Lordship and the Commissioners did desire
time to consider of them, but would give their reply by two of the clock at
the farthest, and send the same unto us by Messengers of their own; The
Meslage and Propositions you shall receive herewithall.

After the Lords and Gentlemen had received these our Propositions, they then
(as we were informed) made ready all things for their departure, and hastened
away with speed, yet to keep the people in expectation whilst they might with
the more safety depart the Town, They sent us up to the Hill by three
Gentlemen, Master Stocker, Master Seymour, and master Button an answer to our
Propositions, but before their messengers came from them, all their Carriages
were gone out of the Town, and the Lords and Gentlemen ready to take horse,
the answer we have herewith sent unto you.

But by that time we had received, and read this their Lordships reply, there
came Messengers unto us from the Major and Citizens of Wells, who assured us
that the Lord Marquess and all the company were gone, and had left the Town,
and therefore petitioned us, that the Sould^ers might not come down, nor
attempt any thing against them. Upon which relation the Soldiers looking round
the Country, they espied the Lord Marquess and all the company marching away,
and gone about three miles off, near unto a Town called Glassenbury, since
which time we have received certain intelligence from one that continued with
them unto this very day; That they marched that night unto Somerton, a Town
near unto Sir John Fowells house, from which place went the Lord Paulet, and
many other Gentlemen from the Marquess unto their homes: The Lord Marquess
and those that were left, stayed at Somerton until Monday morning, and then
left that Town, and are gone and settled at Sherborne, as we are credibly
informed. Sir Ralfe Hopton and Sir Francis Dodington with some others resolving
not to leave the Lord Marquess, but to keep under his protection, for that
the whole Country do take Sir Ralph Hopton for no better then a Rebel. There
are reports that they intend to return into this County again to be avenged
for this affront: Very probable it is, that they go about to get more strength
to come into this County or into Wiltshire, for Shirborne is not far distant
from that part of Wilts, where the Lord Cottington, the Lord Arundell of
Warder, the Lord Sturton, the Deane of Windsor, the Earl of Marlborow, Master
Coventry, and Master Edward Seimour, neighbor altogether; And a strong report
has been these ten days, that they will very speedily put their Commission
in execution about Sarum and Warminster; Wherefore it is held most necessary,
that both Counties stand upon their guard, and that those Noble Earls of
Bedford and Pembroke be hastened away into the Country with such Commanders,
and other strength as you shall think fit to supply us withal; Sir, we are
lost and spoiled, if we have not Commanders, for though the Country people be
stout and resolved, yet we are not able to maintain the cause, and support our
courage, without expert men that can lead and advise us. We shall therefore
comfort our selves with the speedy expectation of their arrival, and shall
pray for your safeties as our own, which shall be the constant employment of

Freshford 8. Aug. 1642. Your most humble and loving Servant, JOHN ASH.
Sir, This Letter is written by the consent and approbation of Sir Edward
Hungerford, though he be not present to subscribe it, the other Committees and
Deputies being busily employed in several parts of the County to make all safe
if they can.



The first Message sent from the Lord Marquess of Hertford, and the
Commissioners, by Mr. Stocker, Mr. Bassit, and Mr. Brown.
YOu are to signify to those whom you shall find assembled, That my Lo:
Marquess Hertford, and the rest of the Commissioners take notice of a great
number of people gathered together from diverse places in a warlike manner, with
Arms, Ammunition, and Ordnance, contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom, and
against the peace thereof; His Lordship therefore requires in His Majesty's
name, and upon your Allegiance, that every man depart peaceably to his own
home; which if they shall refuse to do, and so be a means of the breach of the
peace, and raising a war within this Kingdom, the evil which may come of it,
must rest upon their own heads; and that you may understand his Lordships
inclination, and intentions to preserve the peace, this Gentleman has
direction to deliver unto you a Declaration under his Lordships and the
Commissioners hands, which they will observe in all points, unless they shall
be forced for their own defense to the contrary. And you are further to give
them notice, that yesterday some few horse going out to open the passages
hereabouts, which were stopped by armed men, and meeting many hundreds of men
armed with Muskets, Pikes, Bullets, Match lighted, marching; some of the
Gentlemen that went out by my Lord Marquesses and the Commissioners
appointment, sent to them a desire to treat; and thereupon three or four of
them meeting with as many of the other, they desired them to return their armed
men, and some of them to come and speak with my Lord Marquess and the
Commissioners, who would give them all just satisfaction: They took time to
consider of it, and at last returned answer, that they would come on, and make
their way; and so marching, when they came within Musket shot they gave fire
upon them, and so continued till they came within the reach of the Carabines,
who then gave fire upon them also; by which means, the blood which was shed,
must light on their own heads; for we desire nothing but peace: Whereunto if
you shall agree, and dismiss your Assemblies, and advance no further, there
will be an end of the Distractions of this Country, which God Almighty grant.

Hertford. Paulet. Seymour. J. Coventry. John Stowell. Ferdinando Gorges. Henry
Berkley. Ralph Hopton. John Poulet.
Fran: Dodington. Charles Berkley. Francis Hawly. Will: Walrond. Tho: Smith.
Edw: Kirton. Edmund Windham.


The Committees and Deputy Lieutenants first Answer to the Lords Commissioners
Message.
THe Committee and Deputy Lieutenants are all desirous of peace, and their
coming hither is to preserve the peace of this County, which they conceive has
been broken, since the repair of the Lords Commissioners, and the Cavaliers
into this Country, to the other particulars of their Lordships Message, which
does charge the said Committees and Deputies with the breach of the peace, and
some of them with unwarrantable and disorderly behavior at Shipton Mallet,
whereof (they hope to make it appear) they are not guilty; as also, for the way
propounded by their Lordships for the settling of this desired peace, the same
being of great consequence, and many of the Committee not yet come, whose
presence is hourly expected, they desire to respite until to morrow, and then
they will return a more full Answer unto their Lordships, and in the mean time
they will take care that the peace shall not be broken by them.

Dated the 5th of August, 1642. And subscribed by Us, Edw: Hungerford. John
Horner. Alexander Popham. Rich: Cole. Robert Harlyn. John Hipsley. John Ash.


The second Message sent from the Lo: Marquess and the other Commissioners by
Mr. Stocker, Mr. Bassit, and Mr. Brown, upon the delivery of the Committees
first Answer.
WE the Kings Commissioners will not fail to keep the Peace till we hear your
further Answer.

Hertford. F. Seynour. Jo. Poulet. J. Coventry. Edw: Berkley. Charles Berkley.


The last Message and Answer of the Committees and Deputy Lieutenant, sent unto
the Lords and other Commissioners, by Giles Hung^rf^rd, William T^rre, Esquire
George Barryfield, Prickman Gent.
The Propositions of the Committee and Deputy Lieutenants, in answer to the
Message sent from the Lords and others His Majesty's Commissioners at Wels, the
fifth of August. 1642.
1. THat his Lordship would be pleased to present unto His Majesty, the humble
Petition of this County, for the withdrawing the Commission of Array, or any
other Commission in opposition to the Ordinance of the Militia.

2. That all the Troopers, Cavaliers, and other Soldiers now enterrained, and
under his Lordships Command at Wels, be forthwith disarmed, disbanded, and
cashierd, and their Arms be put in sase custody until some further course be
taken therewith by the King or both Houses of Parliament.

3. That those Gentlemen of the House of Commons, and others which have been
the principal Incendiaries and Authors of this combustion, (now with his
Lordship) may be sent to the Parliament, to answer their delinquency.

4. That all the Arms which have been seized, and taken away from several men,
and out of several men's houses, by virtue of any Commission granted to his
Lordship, and the other Commissioners, be forthwith restored to the owners, and
satisfaction made to such as have received any damage by the Soldiers and
Cavaliers, since the coming of the said Commissioners.

5. That such Gentlemen and others as have been taken, and kept as prisoners,
may be forthwith discharged.

These we offer to their Lordships, and other His Majesty's Commissioners, as
most conducing to the peace of this County, and the whole Kingdom, and unless
they be forthwith yielded unto, we do much doubt whither it will be in our
power to keep the Soldiers from assaulting the Town.

The People in general being apprehensive of, and much incensed by the late
accidents, occasioned since the bringing of these Commissions into this
County, by seizing of Arms, maiming some, and murdering others, the report
whereof, has spread far and nigh, and has brought many hither out of their
Counties to rescue this from their miseries, least the same Evils fall upon
themselves afterward.

August the 6th, 1642. And subscribed by Us. Edw: Hungerford. John Horner.
Alexander Popham. Rich. Cole. Robert Harbyn. John Hipsley. John Ash.


The Lords and others the Commissioners reply unto the Committees and Deputy
Lieutenants Propositions.
1. TO the first Proposition, it is in your power to offer what Petition you
please to His Majesty, for withdrawing the Commission of Array, or any other;
And if you desire to have the Execution of the Commission of Array to be
forborne, in the mean time his Lordship and the Commissioners of this County,
will be contented for the peace of this County, to forbear the Execution
thereof, so as you forbear the Ordinance for the Militia.

2. To the second, his Lordship has no Soldiers entertained in pay, but those
of the Trained Bands, and some Volunteers which he will disband, if you will do
the like; And where there are with us two Troops of horse raised by His
Majesty, we must leave them to His Majesty's disposal, but if you desire to
have them removed from thence, we will yield unto it.

3. To the third, we know of no Incendiaries or Authors of combustion amongst
us; and did not expect that in a Treaty of Pacification, such false and
scandalous Terms should be used.

4. To the fourth, we know of no Arms or goods taken, and if any shall
hereafter appear to us, we will cause restitution to be made, if you will do
the like.

5. To the fifth, we have delivered (before the making of the Propositions)
such prisoners as were with us.

This we return in Answer to yours.

Edw. Rodney. Edw. Berkley. Francis Dodington. Edw. Kirton. Hertford. Francis
Seymour. Paulet. John Coventry. Henry Berkley. Edmond Windham.

Copia vera.
FINIS.

