An ACCOUNT of the TRIAL OF THE LORD MOHUN, For the MURDER of Mr. William
Mountford, (As to the Manner and Form thereof,)
Who was Tried in Westminster Hall, the 31 th of January, 1692. Before the
Right Honorable the Marquess of Carmarthen, Lord President of the Council,
Constituted Lord High Steward on that Occasion.
2. febr. 1692/3.
THE Place for the appearance of the Lord Mohun, was the great Hall at
Westminster, where there was a Throne Erected for the King, on each side
whereof, is a Cabionet enclosed about with Boards, and within, with Arras,
before that, are the Seats for the Peers or House of Lords, and Sacks of Wool
for the Judges, (who were there present, not as Judges of the Noble Lord, the
Prisoner, but to assist with their Council in matters of Law that may arise)
before them were Ten Stages of Seats extending further than the midst of the
Hall, for the Members of the House of Commons, and other Gentlemen, to whom the
Peers gave their Tickets, each Peer having Eight Tickets to dispose off as he
thought fit; at the end of all, was a Desk closed about, and set apart for the
Lord Mohun and his Council. His Grace, the Marquess of Carmarthen, as Lord High
Steward of England, sat apart by himself.

Tuesday, The 31st. of January, between the Hours of Eight and Nine, the Lord
Mohun came from the Tower in the Lord Lieutenant's Coach, accompanied with his
Lordship, and a sufficient Guard; and being brought into Court, The Sergeant at
Arms makes Proclamation in the following manner. O yes, O yes, O yes. My Lord
High Steward of England, his Grace, does straightly charge and command all
manner of Persons to keep silence, and to give ear to the King's Majesty's
Commission to his Grace my Lord High Steward of England, upon pain of
Imprisonment.

Then the Commission is Read, his Grace and all the Peers standing up
Bare-Headed.

Then the Staff being carried between Garter King at Arms, and the Gentleman
Usher of the Black Rod, is with three profound Reve^ences delivered upon the
Knee to his Grace, and by him re-delivered to the GentlemanUssher of the Black
Rod, to hold during the service.

Then the Sergeant at Arms makes a Second ^^oclamation. O yes, His Grace my
Lord High Steward of England, does straightly Charge and Command all manner of
Persons here present, except Peers, Privy-Councellors, and the Reverend Judges,
now assistant, to be Uncovered.

Then the Sergeant at Arms makes a Third Proclamation in this Form.

O yes. My Lord High Steward of England his Grace, straightly Charge and
Commands all Justices, and Commissioners, and all and every other Person and
Persons, to whom any Writ or Precept has been directed for the certifying of
any Indictment or Reward, before his Grace my Lord High Steward of England,
That they do certify and bring in the same forthwith, according to the Tenor of
the same Writ and Precept, to them or any of them directed, upon Pain and Peril
shall fall thereon.

Then the Lord High Steward his Grace, orders the Lieutenant of the Tower to be
called for, to return his Precept, and bring his Prisoner to the Bar.

Sergeant at Arms. Lieutenant of the Tower of London, Return thy Writ and
Precept to thee directed, together with the Body of thy Prisoner forthwith,
upon Pain and Peril shall fall thereon.

The Peers give in their Verdict to the Lord High Steward Siratim, beginning
with the Puisne or Youngest Peer, and so forward.

The Verdict being Recorded, and the Trial over, the Sergeant at Arms makes
Proclamation in the following Form.

Sergeant at Arms. O yes. My Lord High Steward of England his Grace, straightly
Wills and Commands all manner of Persons here present, to depart hence in
God's Peace and the King's; for his Grace, my Lord High Steward of England
dissolves his Commission.

God Save the King and Queen. At which Words, his Grace taking the White Staff
from the Usher of the Black Rod, held it over his own Head, and broke it in
two: Thereby dissolving the Court.



London, Printed in the Year, 1692.


