DAVID'S Enemies discovered.

Who of him make SONGS, but without the Spirit and without understanding, as
the Drunkard did which he declares of in Psalm. 69. 12.

OR, A TRUE DISCOVERY of that Custom and Form which the PRIESTS of this
Generation would make an Ordinance of, to blind the eyes of the simple, as this
priest Clapham: in his 6 Arguments, which is here answered, by us who suffer
for the Truth, whose names according to the flesh are Christopher Atkinson.
George Whitehead.

Also a brief REPLY unto Frederick Woodall's three Principles and Resolves; and
with Replies to his Answers, to several Queries propounded to him, that to the
simple the truth may be cleared, from one who for the Captivated seeds sake
suffers now in outward bonds in Norwitch Castle, whose name in the flesh is
Richard Hubberthorne.

LONDON: Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black spread-(...) West end of Paul's.
1655.

A Paper being brought into our hands which was given forth by one of the
Priests whose name is Jonathan Clapham, who to uphold his deceit and
Imaginations, and carnal observatirns, In imitation from that which the true
worshippers which worshipped in spirit and truth without for me or letter
witnessed, and spoke forth when redemption they did see, and so were they hid,
from such as would make a Custom and a trade upon what they spoke forth, who
lived the life of what they sung and spoke, (in the spirit,) who lived not in
Custom nor in Imitation of others, neither did they boast themselves in
another man's Line made ready to their hands, but as they received the spirit so
walked they in the spirit, and with it they sang, and by it they spoke, and 2
Cor. 10. 13, 14, 15, 16. 2 Timothy 3. ^. Jude 19.
by the spirit they knew what time it did signify, and such as was sensual
who had not the spirit but the form, they denied and witnessed against them,
and such now with the same spirit do we witness against, and to clear the truth
and lay open the deceit of this generation of Priests, who make a Custom and a
trade of Scriptures, who take peoples money for that which is no bread, but for
dishonest gain destroys souls, and keeps poor people in blindness and
darkness, by their Inventions and vain Imaginations, that under their Dark
Ministry poor people are ever learning, never able to come to the knowledge of
the truth, and for their sakes who by these blind guides are led in blindness,
Are we moved to answer something to this Priest Clapham's Arguments, as he
calls them, that they that never saw, might see his nakedness uncovered, by
which Arguments he is going about to maintain, singing of David's conditions a
Custom, which are Answered as follows, etc.

SInging of Psalms was once an Ordinance of God Priest. Argument 1.
in the Church and a part of divine worship, and (1) was never repealed under
the Gospel, (2) nor was of a Tipicall nature and use as was the ceremonies,
and to cease with them, (3) but ever reckoned among morrall and perpetual
duties, as prayer, and learning the word, see Psalm. 59. 1, 2, 6, 7. (4) such a
duty as the very light in all men taught them to practice, witness the custom
of all nations, See Godwin, Romans Antiqu. and read Homer's himnes, Horaces odes,
etc. which shows it to be of an universal and perpetual obligation,
therefore it continues an ordinance of God still, as well as prayer and
learning the word, and should not be abolished under the Gospel.

They who witness the Gospel are come, to the ministration Answer.
of the spirit which is the end of all shadows, which shadowed forth the life,
who came to witness the Church in God, 1 These. 1* and of this church the saints
were ordained members, and this church was not a temple made with hands, where
once singing was, which was to cease with its worship, and the songs of that
temple was to be turned into Howling, Amos 8. 3. but they who are members of
the church which is in God they sing with one spirit, being thereunto called by
the Lord, which was not moral but spiritual, and they did not bring old
Authors to prove their Actions by, as thou do, but in that they worshipped
which was before Authors was, and before Oxford and Cambridge was, which thou
and thy generation have your Ministry from, and their word and Gospel was not
the letter, which thou and thy generation makes a trade upon, and by the same
spirit they sang by which the Gospel was preached, and there was no division,
and they made not a Custom of other men's conditions, as to get them into rhyme
and meeter and give them forth unto a company of blind people as thou and thy
generation do, and their singing was with the spirit, and with understanding,
which we own, but thee we do deny and all thy generation, woe give people
David's conditions to sing in a meeter, where David did mourn and where he was
afflicted ye sing, and where he quaked* and trembled, and prayed, and
prophesied, these ye sing, and tell God you do so, and here you make a custom
like a stage play upon David's conditions, and scoffs and scorns at them now
who witness Quaking and trembling, and this we deny for this is both without
the spirit and without understanding.

The prophesies in Scripture that foretell the state of the Priest. Arg. 2.
Church in the new Testament, do speak of Psalms to be used, there as a part
of Gods worship Psalm. 98. 1, 2. Psalm. 100. 1, 2. Psalm. 100. 1, 2, 3. where
mention is made of the Gentiles, when converted, singng Psalms to God, Romans
15. 9. see Isa. 26. 1. and 35. 10. Rev. 14. 5. and 15. 3.

The prophesies in scripture that foretell the state of the Answer.
church, do not prophecy as psalms to be used as a part of Gods worship, nor
such a word there is spoken in them* for the prophesies were fulfilled when the
end came, and the church was the life, of that which the prophets prophesied
of, which was without spot or wrinckle, and the songs of this church are
everlasting, and they who are come thither can sing a new song, for the
salvation, which they are witnesses of, Psalm. 98. 1, 2. and they can sing the
song of redemption, and the song of Moses, and of the Lamb, which no man can
learn, but they that are redeemed from the earth, and they that have the new
name, Rev. 14. 3, 4. and this song can neither thou sing, who art in the earth,
and in thy earthly nature, and ministers for the earth and to the earth, in
Balaams way, for gifts and rewards, nor them to whom thou gives David's
conditions, who are not brought to see the day of bitterness and lamentation
which the saints did witness before they came to see salvation and redemption,
for which they praised God, which salvation and testament, to the end that
generation is hid, who live in the wild, profane, and heady nature, without
the fear of God, who are in the time of wantonness and laughter, which woe is
unto, Luke 6. 25. and not brought to the time of mourning, and therefore far
from the day of salvation and the saints joy, and there your singing is carnal
and for condemnation and out of the true worship.

It has been a duty practiced not only in the times of the Priest. Arg. 3.
law but by the people of God under the Gospel, under the law we have the
songs of Moses, Deborah, and Barack, of David the sweet singer of Israel, of
Solomon, who composed to the number of 1005 songs, of Asaph, and Heman, and
Habakuk, etc. Under the Gospel we read of the songs of many, Simon, Zachary:
of Christ and his Apostles singing an Himne, after the Lords supper, Mat. 26.
30. according as was the custom among the Jews, who used to sing some of
David's Psalms the night wherein the passover was eaten, as those who are skilld
in their Customs write: we read of Paul and Silas Acts 16. singing in prison,
also of the practice of the church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 14. singing Psalms, and
in primitive, before Antichristian Appostacy, which was commonly practiced, as
Phil. Tert. Just. Martin. Chrysostom. testify: yea the very Heathens took notice
of this practice and did write of it, Pliny in his letter to Trojan the
Emperor writes of the Christian Himnes, Antelucanos, morning psalms, and songs
early in the morning, will I praise thee, etc.

Neither Moses nor Habbakuk who was servants of God, nor any of the people of
God, did ever call singing a custom Answer.
or practice, neither did they ever give a company of silly blind people other
men's conditions, in time and meeter to sing, but though Moses sang, yet he knew
the work of the Lord in his deliverance out of Egypt, for which he praised God,
but the work of the Lord is not known to thee, and thy generation, who draw
people from the Light of Christ within, and calls it natural, which does
enlighten every one that comes into the world, and this is that which brings to
witness their conditions who spoke forth Scripture; and this is it which brings
to witness John 1. 9. Acts 4. 12. 1 Cor. 2. 14. and chap. 1. ^^. Isa. 42. 6.
Ephesians. 2. 1.
salvation and redemption wherein the saints rejoice, and thou that calls this
natural, do not know the work of the Lord, nor his redemption, and there
thy singing is without understanding, and thou knows for not what thou sings,
nor they that spook the scriptures did never compel a company of poor people
who are dead in trespasses and sins to observe duties or outward observations,
as thou do, but says Christ, my kingdom comes not by observations, but my
kingdom is within, Luke 17. 21. neither did ever any of the holy men of God go
and hire with a people at such a place and took such a sum of money of them,
for preaching, neither did they go to a 1 Cor. 4. 20. Heb. 11. 36. to the end.
company of blind people, and give them David's conditions to sing in meeter as
thou and thy generation do, who say, Let us sing to the praise and glory of
God, O Lord I am not pufft in mind, I have no scornful eye, when thy are pufft
in mind and scorns them that are brought to witness David's and Habbakuks
condition, as quaking and trembling, Hab. 3. 16. Psalm. 2. 11. Jer. 5. 22. and
in scorn calls them Quakers; and they that sang after the Lords suppers, did
not call a little bread and wine the Lords supper or a Sacrament as thou do,
which thou have no scripture for, and the Lords supper thou art not come to,
who act such things, nor the bread of life did thou ever taste of, but Col. 2
14, 16, 20, 21, 22. Psalm. 119. 175.
thy singing and prayers and praises is in the death; and them thou bids sing
to the praise and glory of God, who are dead in trespasses and sins, when the
dead cannot praise God, but the living, neither can they that go down into the
pit praise him, for praises are not comely in the mouth of the wicked, and
there thou art. and Egypt is thy figure, a Land of darkness where Isa. 38. 19.
Pharaoh rules, and Moses thou art not come to, and how can thou sing Moses
song who art yet in Egypt? but death rules in thee, which has passed over all
men, from Adam until Moses: and to maintain thy singing thou brings dead men
as Pliny, and other heathens like thy self, who knows not God nor his worship,
but would rest and pervert the scriptures to maintain thee in thy Customs and
outward observations, which thou have no scripture for, and makes a custom and
trade of other men's conditions which thou have nothing to do with, as to cause
people to sing lies, as when David roared they sing, and where he trembled they
sing, and where he says, he watered his couch with tears they sing, and say
they do so, and there thou art a leader that causes people to err.

If this suffice not, know there is express scripture command Priest. Arg. 4.
as well as examples and prophesies, for this duty of singing of Psalms, and
that not only in the old, but also in the new Testament, Ephesians. 5. 18, 19.
where the Apostle alluding to the Custom that drunkards have when they are
filled with wine, they have their songs, so when Christians are filled with the
wine of the spirit they should have their Psalms Himnes and spiritual songs:
the Hebrews had 3 words whereby they divided David's Psalms, shurim, tehillim,
mismorem, to which three words here used by the Apostle, Psalms, himnes, and
spiritual songs, as we see Col. 3. 16. admonishing one another in Psalms, and
so James 5. 13. If any be afflicted, let him pray, if any be merry let him sing
Psalms; its spoken generally, if any, or whosoever is merry let him sing, not
that it is unlawful to sing at other times, for then it might be inferred its
not lawful to pray, but when one is sad, mirth is the most prayer season, in
other places we read of singing when sad, as David often, and Christ a little
before his suffering, when his heart was sorrowful, and and Silas in prison
Paul: Thus you have express command for this duty.

The Apostle, nor any of the holy men of God did ever command the world, as
thou do, to sing Psalms, neither did he Answer.
ever give the world an example to make rimes of other men's conditions, and
sing them in meeter, and though the Apostle says to the Ephesians, speaking to
your selves in Psalms and Himnes and spiritual songs, singing and making
mellody in your hearts to the Lord, and such like to the Colossians, yet this
was not to the world, but to the saints and faithful Brethren, Coll. 1. 2.
neither did the Apostle bid the saints sing other men's prayers, and cries, and
complaints, and lamentations, as thou and thy generation do, who bid people
sing to the praise and glory of God, where David said, thine arrows stick fast
in me, neither is there any rest in my bones, my wounds stink and are corrupt,
I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day long, Psalm.
38. and this you have gotten into a rhyme and meeter, and bids people sing: and
there you make a sport of David's conditions, and makes people say they are so,
in which conditions David never sang, but as he found deliverance from under
the wrath of God, and when ever did thou or any of thy generation witness these
conditions which David passed through, before the seed was brought forth: here
thou Priest Clapham have shut thy self both out of the Scriptures, and them
that spoke them forth. And whereas thou say, that the Apostle alluding to the
custom of drunkards; here again we charge thee Priest ( Clapham) to be a liar,
and a wrester of Scriptures, for the Apostle never spoke such a wo^d, as
alluding to the Custom of drunkards; here this thy Comparison is unequal, to
compare the saints singing to the Custom of Drunkards, neither did ever the
Saints cal^ singing a Custom, or make a custom of it, as thou art going about
to maintain, and whereas thou art going about to devide the Psalms, as thou
calls them, by these three Hebrew words, into Psalms, Himnes, and spiritual
songs, Here, thou art ignorant both of Psalms, Himnes, and spiritual Songs,
who art going about to divide Psalms by thy confusion oftongues, and here thou
art in Babell which God confounded into many languages, and there is thy
ministry in thy confusion and Languages, which a natural man may learn, and
there thy singing is in the Custom without the spirit. But they that knew* how
to sing with understanding, did sing with that which was before Babell was, and
before thy confusion was, and before Sternhold, and Hopkins rimes, which they
made of David, which thou practices; and they that would sing a new song, was
redeemed out of kindreds tongues and people, Rev. 5. 9. and this redemnption
thou that live in thy tongues and natural languages, art not come to; and
the new Song and Himnes thou art ignorant of; and whereas thou say that
which James spoke was generally, there thou art a liar and a wrester of
scripture, for the Scriptu^e says, is any among you affl^cted, let him pray,
is any among you merry, let him sing; but this was to the 12 Tribes, James 1.
which he calls his Brethren, and that was among them, and not among thy
generation, who live in Forms and Customs, who are strangers to the life of
God: and again, thou art going to make the Apostle James a Liar like thy self,
who say, that mirth is the most prayer season, when as that Scripture says,
is any among you merry, let him sing; is any afflicted, let him pray; which is
quite contrary to thy words. As for Paul and Silas singing in prison, their
sufferings and imprisonments thou never yet was made partaker of, nor their joy
thou never knew wherein it was, who art going about to maintain thy customs in
the world, which thou have no scripture for, but with it art disapproved, and
with the the light thou art seen, to be a stranger both to the Saints joy and
that wherein they rejoiced.

There are several rules given in the New Testament, directing Priest. Arg. 5.
how to sing aright, as 1 Cor. 14. with the spirit and with understanding, with
grace in our hearts Col. 3. which directions were needless if it were no
Gospel duty.

They that are brought to sing with the Spirit and understanding, Answer.
they witness that life which spoke forth Scripture, and need not go and get
other men's conditions made like ballades or songs, and sing them, or cause any
in a custom to sing them, as thou do in a steeple-house, and these do not
call the letter the rule, and the 4 books Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John the New
Testament, and Gospel as thou and thy generation do, for Paul said he was a
minister of the Gospel, and of the New Testament, and not of the letter, which
thou calls the Gospel and New Testament, 2 Cor. 3. 6. and there both out of
the Gospel and new Testament thou art shut, and thy Ministry is in the Letter
which kills, and thy Inventions and reasons and consequencies adds to it, and
that thou makes a trade upon, and for it thou takes peoples money, and there
with the light we read thee in the Scriptures, to be among them the true
prophets Christ and his Apostles cried woe against, such as seek for their gain
from their quarter, Isa. 56. and such as are hirelings, Micah 3. and such as
are called of men Masters, stands praying in the synagogues, having the
chiefest places in the assemblies, and the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the
greetings in Markets, which Christ cried woe against, Mat. 23. and such as go in
the way of Cain to envy, and after the error of Balaam, for gifts and rewards
which Peter and Jude cried woe against, 2 Pet. 2. Jude 11. and there thou art,
and thee, thy Ministry, and thy singing we utterly deny, who art both shut out
of the Scripture among the greedy dogs, and that life which spoke them forth,
and thou seen to be among them, the Scripture witnesses against. Priest.
Argument 6.


And whereas in thy 6th. Argument thou say, that Christians may reap much
profit or benefit by the right using of this ordinance, there is an efficacy in
it, to lift up the heart more and elevate it in Gods praises, and holy delight
it brings to the soul therein, and art telling of mutual edification and
provocation to rejoice in God, as drunkards by their songs stir up carnal
and sinful mirth, so these help spiritual joy.

They that are Christians do see thy blindness and ignorance Answer to the 6th.
and last Argument.
both of scriptures and that which spoke it forth, and Christians have not
their joy to fetch out of other men's conditions, neither do they go to without,
and yet David's prayers, praises, prophesies, cryings, tears, wastings,
afflictions; in meeter to sing, to bring delight unto their soul, as thou art
going about to maintain, there thou blind guide thou do not know what it is
that rejoices in God, nor what it is that praises him, for to thee it is hid,
who makes a trade and Custom of a dead Form, and causes the dead to sing
which cannot praise God, and there in the mutual and changeable state thou art
in thy carnal inventions with Tubal-Cain the Inventor, and outward
observations, and edification thou art not come to, who to uphold thy carnal
singing and rejoicing do bring a Comparison of the songs of drunkards, which
the saints never did, here thee, thy singing; thy Joy and thy Ministry are shut
out among the drunkards, and seed of evil doers and there is the fruits of thy
Ministry, and of that sort are they that uphold thee, and speaks well of thee,
as they did Luke 6. 26. 1 John 4, 5.
thy fathers the false prophets, and among the false prophets and deceivers
thou art with the Light seen and Judged, and the same woe which was to them is
to thee now, who art found in their stepps. Here (Priest Clapham) thy Arguments
are answered, and the rest of thy rotten stuff which is not worth mentioning,
with them comprehended, and seen with the light to be all acted, in thy filthy
reason and Inventions, which are stuffed up with so many lies and wresting
Scriptures as thou art here disproved in. So let shame cover thy face, and
deceive people no longer with thy dreams and lying divinations, and customs,
and outward observations which thou have no scripture for, which here is
plainly laid open to them who are not altogether blind, therefore make no more
Merchandise of peole through thy covetousness, nor take peoples money any more
to maintain thee in thy deceits and filthiness, but make restitution to them
whom thou have deceived, and led in blindness, and give them their money again,
which dishonestly thou have taken upon them, of whom thou have made
Merchandise: for the sword of the Lord is drawn against thee, and that
generation thou art in, and woe and misery is the end of your songs, and your
joy, and your profession of God and Christ, who are found acting those things,
he and all the holy men of God witnessed against: The day of your trouble and
torment and misery is coming upon you, Woe, woe to you pastors that destroy and
scatter the sheep of my pasture, says the Lord: woe to you hippocrites and
dissemblers who are acting in their See Isa. 56. 10, 11. Jer. 5. 31. Micah. 3.
11. Matthew. 23.
stepps, the prophets, Christ and his appostles witnessed against, and are
filling up the measure of your fathers Iniquities; ye false prophets, and
scribes, and pharisees, therefore stop your mouths in the dust, and never say
you are Ministers of Christ, and his Ambassadors, for your bottom and
foundation is seen Jude 11.
and tried, and your Customs, traditions, and practices are with the light
condemned, and humane is all your worship there, who draw near unto God with
your mouths and lips, and your hearts far from him, every ones heart after
his own Isa. 29. 13.
gain and filthy lucre, who teach for doctrines the traditions of men, and
there you keep poor people in blindness, and makes a prey upon them, and tell
them of outward ordinances, and duties, Col. 2. 14, 16, 20, 21, 22.
and customs, as this Priest Clapham, wherein he is disapproved in his
Arguments, and his folly made manifest, and so shall all yours who are of his
generation, who live in pride and covetousness, and act those things ye have no
scripture for, who 2 Timothy 3. 2^ 7, 9.
lead captive silly women laden with sins and iniquities, led away with diverse
lusts, everlearning, never able to come to the knowledge of the truth; but you
shall proceed no further, for your folly shall be made manifest to all men.

From us who are sufferers for the testimony of Jesus, whose names according to
the flesh is Christopher Atkinson. George Whitehead.

Something in answer to the High Priest's Paper, wherein he lays down 3
Principles, and several Resolves, as he calls them, wherein he goes about to
resolve people that the light of Christ in the conscience, and that which does
enlighten every one that comes into the world, which light is Christ, is
natural; and so to resolve them, that John's testimony of Christ is not true, as
it is written in John 1. 9. and does deny Christ's words to be true, who says,
he is the Light of the world, John 8. 12. John 3. 19, 20, 21. and in John 12.
46. But in the light of Christ he is seen and comprehended, yea the depth of
his subtlety, and confusion, is here unfolded, and his Paper answered from the
light of Christ, which he calls natural; but by it he is proved to be
natural, and not to discern the things of God, though he pronfesse himself to
be a Minister: but here his works are brought to the light, and he by it is
proved to be no Minister of Ghrist, but a hater of the light, as John 3. 19,
20, 21.

The Priests 1 Principle.
THere are two Adams from whom all men are, out of whose Loins all men do
come: the 1 Adam is a Fountain of all Natural good; the 2 of that which is
Spiritual; and thou brings Scripture to prove it, 1 Cor. 15. 2, 22. Ephesians. 5.
30. Genesis 2. 33. 1 Cor. 15. 45, 46.

Answer.
Art thou a teacher in England, and is this the principles of thy doctrine, to
teach people that all men come out of the Loins of the 2 Adams, without
distinction, and that the first Adam is the fountain of all natural good? here
in the presence of the Living God I declare thee and thy principle to be false,
for the first man is of the earth earthly; the second is the Lord from heaven,
from whom is the fountain of all good: out of the loins of the first thou
proceeds, but not from the second; and thy principle proceeds from thy ear^hly
wisdom, which is in the fall, and cursed; and here again thou may read thy
principle with shame and confusion of face, and repent before the Lord cut thee
off, as a deceiver, who teaches for doctrine thy one conditions.

The Priests 2 Principal.
In thy second Principal thou speaks of two seeds, and that the first Adam was
not the looser of mankind but his seed; and the 2 Adam was not the restorer of
mankind, as so, but as his seed.

Answer.
I answer, here thou art twining like the serpent, to blind the eyes of people
with thy lies, and does cross the Scripture, which thou thy self brings in the
former principle, 1 Cor. 15. 22. which says, as in Adam all die, so in Christ
shall all be made alive; and here thou denies Christ to be the restorer of
mankind, and here thou art dark and blind, and preaches and writes against the
end for which Christ came into the world; but restoration by Christ we do
witness and life from the dead, and the seed of the promise we witness,
brought out of captivity by Christ, and all who come to witness the same shall
deny thee who denies Christ to be the restorer of mankind.

The Priests 3 Principal.
In thy third Principal thou say, the grace of life none is partaker of but
the seed.

Answer.
Here thou crossest the Scriptures, which says, the grace of God which brings
salvation has appeared unto all men, and some turn his grace into wantonness,
and walk despitefully against the spirit of grace, Titus 2 12. and that is not
the seed which turns it into wantonness, and walks deceitfully against it, for
that is the seed which by grace is taught to deny all ungodliness and worldly
lusts, but it has appeared to those who abuse it, as thou do who put forth
these principles, and here thy principles is found lies, as thy Resolves are,
which follow thy Principles:

The Priests Resolves.
Now to resolve people that the light of Christ in the conscience is a natural
light, thou say, that the writing upon the heart of Gentiles is not new
Covenant written, but old; so not of grace and Life but nature.

Answer.
I answer, here thou resolves them falsely, for the works of the Law being
written in their hearts, this is not natural, which does bear witness in the
conscience, and either accuse or excuse, but is one in the covenant, spoken of
in Jer. 31. 33. Heb. 8. 2. and here thou puts in Light for darkness, and
darkness for light.

Priest.
Again thou speaks of two Images, the Image of God, and Image of Christ, and
says something of the Image of God remains after the fall, and brings Cer. 6.
9. to witness it, when as there is no such thing spoken of there, and thou
say nothing of the Image of Christ, is found before calling.

Answer.
Here thou would make God and Christ two images, and so utters forth one lie
after another, and denies the Scripture, which says he, is the express Image
of the Father, and thou say the first Image is natural, the second is
spiritual, and here let all behold thy blasphemy who would make the Image of
God natural, and the Image of Christ spiritual, and calls them two Images:
stop thy mouth, and be ashamed for ever, for being a Teacher, who seeks to
resolve people of such things as to deny God and Christ, and make them two
Images, the one natural, and the other spiritual, and says, something of the
image of God is found in man after the fall* but nothing of the Image of
Christ* O blind guide, that ever England should be deceived by such, but the
Lord is now making you manifest, and in the light thou art comprehended, and
thy subtlety is seen* and thou art now met withal, who has long blinded the
eyes of poor people with thy fained words and subtle pretenses, but here thou
art discovered to be an enemy to that which in word thou professes, and so thy
words will cover thee no longer, for the life has found thee out* and by it
thy spirit is tried to be the spirit of error, and voice to be the voice a
stranger.

Priest.
Again thou speaks of a natural light, and says, natural Light puffs up, and
quotes 1 Cor. 8. 1^2.

Answer.
Here out of thy own mouth thou art proved to be a perverter of the scriptures,
for that scripture says, knowledge puffs up: but the Scripture speaks of no
natural light.

Priest.
Again thou say, natural light discovers the blessing of the first Covenant.

Answer.
This is false, for all the blessings is to the seed which is in the Covenant,
and is the Covenant, but nature is out of the Covenant, and out of the blessing
of all thy resolves, and light is contrary to nature, for light is spiritual,
but thou art natural, who says, the light is natural.

Priest.
Again thou say, natural light may convince of evil.

Answer.
This is false, and here thou art a Blasphemer to call Christ natural, for it
is Christ that convinces the world of sin, and the light which Christ Jesus
has enlighted every one, with all which convinces them of evil, and thou
that say this is natural, did never yet own that which does convince of
sin, the Light, which will condemn thee who hates it, and calls it natural*

A Reply to the Priests Answers, to the Queries propounded to him.
The 1 Querie.
How is Christ the light of the world, and how does he enlighten every one that
comes into the world, if it be not in the Conscience? John 1. 9.

Priests Answer.
Jesus Christ enlighteneth every man, with the light he has, he is indeed the
enlightening light, and not John: but it will not prove, because Christ
quickens, that therefore with the same life, or there is no natural life for
Christ: Saints light is the light of life, sinners, not so, not their life.

Reply.
In the light of Christ thou art seen and comprehended, for thy dark words
cannot hide thy confusion, who in thy answer says, Christ does enlighten every
man that comes into the world, and then would make the light of Christ which
enlightens the sinner, not to be the same light which is in the saints, and
here all who ownes light in any measure, may see thy confusion, for the light
of Christ is but one, and it is through the obedience to the light, in which
they come to witness sanctification from sin, which now many do witness to the
praise and glory of God, who is their teacher, what have thou ( Frederick
Woodall) taught the people, all this while? who art a blind guide, for he that
knows not the light of Christ is blind, for darkness has blinded his eyes.

The 2 Querie.
How does the spirit of Christ guide unto all truth, and show things to come,
if it be not within the conscience.

Priests Answer.
This endeavors the removal of the Ancient Bonds, making common the
privileges of the Saints, and brings that Scripture, Jer. 24. 7.

Reply.
This Scripture Jer. 24. 7. shall stand to bear witness against thy self where
the Lord says, I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and
they shall be my people, and I will be their God; and the promise of Christ
wherein he has promised the spirit to guide them into all truth, and to show
them things to come, and this thou say endeavors the removing of the
Ancient bonds; I answer, It is to remove all such doctrine and such teaching as
thine, and the priests of the world under which the seed of God is kept in
bondage, and under the chains of darkness, and these thy bonds which thou
layest upon the seed is as Ancient as since the fall, and has kept people ever
learning and never brought them to the knowledge of God, and now when God has
promised to give them an heart to know him without such teachers as thou art,
and this is thy torment, but let this tormen thee for ever till thy mouth be
stopped, for it is so, we witness it.

The 3 Query.
How does the spirit of Christ reprove the world of sin, of righteousness, and
of judgment, if it be not in thy conscience.

Priests Answer.
It is not the spirit in the world that reproves the world of sin, John 14. 17.
but the spirit in the saints who are to Judge the world, 1 Corinthians. 6. 2. the
spirit in the saints by the light of truth.

Reply.
This thy answer, and these Scriptures do witness against thy self, and here
thou art made to confess the truth, out of thy own mouth thou may be judged, as
all who hate the light are, and here by the spirit of God in the saints and the
light of truth art thou judged, and here if thou will own thy own words, own
thy Judgment, for the saints do now judge the world, under which judgment
thou art.

The 4 Querie.
How are the children of God taught of God, if it be not by the light of God in
the conscience?

Priests Answer.
This is absurd, as the second, this is the strength, you shall be all taught
of God.

Reply.
It is thou that art dark, and blind, and obsurd, who would keep the people
from the teachings of God, calling that absurd, that thy own teaching might be
continued, and people be kept still in ignorance, and give thee money for such
teaching, but the free teachings of God is now appearing, and thine must be
denied which is not free.

The 5 Querie.
How can that be said to be a natural light which witnesses unto God in that
which is holy, and against the natural Inclinations of fallen man, seeing the
scripture says, the natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God,
1 Cor. 2. 14.

Priests Answer.
How can it be any other then a natural light which witnesses unto God in that
which is holly? and against the things of the spirit of God, natural things it
can discern, not spiritual, for as the man so is the light.

Reply.
Where did thou ever read of a natural light which did witness unto God in
that which is holy, and that which did witness unto God, where do thou prove
that ever the same witness which did witness God in holiness did ever witness
against the spirit of God, read thy confesion, and let thy mouth be stopped,
who speaks of a natural light, and of a natural holiness, which neither of
them is mentioned in the scripture, nor from any of the ministers of Christ,
therefore from them all art thou shut out, who art in a natural darkness.

The 6 Querie.
In this Query thou being required to prove how thou do distinguish of a
natural light, which thou so much speaks of* by their several operations.

Priests Answer.
The diversity of operations are answered above.

Reply.
Here I witness against thee, for thou have not proved in all that which is
above written that there is two lights, natural, and spiritual, for the light
is but one, in which thy confusion is seen and judged.

The 7 Querie.
How is Christ given a light to the Gentiles who had not the letter, and
whether that was not the Light of Christ which showed the Gentiles the law of
God written in their hearts, who had not the law without, and in which they did
the things contained in the law, Romans 2. 14, 15.

Priests Answer.
Thou say this proves not Christ to enlighten the Gentiles.

Reply.
Thy answer is false, for herein is proved that the obedience of the Gentiles
to that which was written in their hearts, in answering the law of God, and his
commands, was from that which is invisible, which is the light of Christ; for
that which is natural is visible, and there thou art in the visible, and in
the natural, where the things of God is not received but stumbled at.

The 8 Querie.
If it be a natural light which checks and bears rule in the Conscience, then
is not Christ alone Judge in the Conscience, but another ruler is set up before
Christ come, 1 John 5. 22. Ephesians. 2. 14.

Priests Answer.
In thy answer thou queries whether the checks was in Adam, from the light,
before Christ was revealed, and then again thou say in the next words
following, that the checks of light from Christ the old Adam had.

Reply.
Here thou ask a question, and gives the answer thy self, to thy own
confusion, and again thou say, that the old Adam had a conscience before the
new was promised, and that his seed has so: I answer, Christ which is the
light, which checks for sin in the conscience was before Adam was, or the seed
of Adam, which was Cain; of which generation thou and thy ministry is, and the
light which is from the second Adam is now appeared to make all such as thou
art manifest who are of the seed of the first Adam.

The 9 Question.
If that which excuses or accuses, and so is Judge of the Conscience, be a
natural light, then all Judgment is not given to the Son: but you set up a
Jugde in the Conscience before Christ.

Priests Answer.
This Querie is but the eighth repeated, adding to the number, not to the
weight.

Reply.
This light of Christ being to thee a stumbling block, and thou being ignorant
of its checks in the conscience, art able to give no answer to it; but such as
are serviceable to lay open thy weakness and nakedness to all, who shall read
thy Answers, or the Replies unto them.

The 10 Querie.
If that be a natural light which excuses, and so gives peace in the
conscience, then you set up a peace before Christ come, and here you deny him
to be the Prince of peace, Matthew 2* 6.

Priests Answer.
Its intolerable that Christ should be the Prince of peace.

Reply.
Here let all take notice that thou plainly denies Christ to be the Prince of
peace, but it is well that thou have uttered forth thy folly which has so long
been hid, and here thou speaks plainly thy own condition, for no peace has
ever Christ spoken unto thee, and therefore thou deniest him to be the prince
of peace, but him we do witness, to be so, and thee to be among the wicked,
whom my God faith there is no peace unto.

The 11 Querie.
If that be a natural light which shows the way toward God in the Conscience,
and reproves, the untoward ways, then is not Christ the way to the Father, but
you set up another way before him, John 14* 6.

Priests Answer.
The sense of this Querie is hidden from me.

Reply.
Here in the Light thou art comprehended, and thy wisdom shout out, and thy
senses darkened, and thou art one of them whom God has hid these things from,
and now stumbles, because thou hates the light which does discover the way unto
God, which light is Christ, who is the way, but is hid from those whose eyes
are blinded by the God of the world: if thou had confessed this in the
beginning of thy Paper, that the sense of all these things which here from the
light is spoken is bidden from thee, and so have beed silent, then thy
confusion in thy Principles, and in thy Resolves, and in thy Answers had not
been so publicly made manifest as they now are, from the light which has
comprehended thee: and hidden the sense of these things from thee.

The 12 Querie.
If that by which men shall be judged and condemned by any outward teaching
from the Letter, or by man, then by what was the Gentiles condemned who had not
the Letter, outward teaching, and yet was to perish, nor doing the things
contained in the Law, Romans 2. 13, 14.

Priests answer.
In this thy answer thou confessest the Gentiles shall be judged by the Law
written in their hearts without the written Law, and before in all which thou
have writ thon have writ that this was a natural light which Judges and
condemns the disobedient to the righteous law of God, and thou say thus
says the Lord by my heart, Scrpture may try every voice.

Reply.
Thou art the false prophet, which says, the Lord says, when as he has never
spoken this unto thy heart, but by the Spirit of the Lord in those whom he has
spoken unto, is thy voice and thy spirit tried, and as thou say would make
the Scriptures unnecessary, this is false, for they are of use and necessary to
reprove thy deceit, and them we do witness, in the life of the spirit which
gave them forth.

The 13 Querie.
If there be something in the creature naturally which is light, then how is it
that the Scripture concludes all to be children of darkness, who are in their
natural estate, and how is Christ said to be light to them that sit in
darkness?

Priests Answer.
Light and darkness, natural light, full of the wisdom of this world, but
spiritual darkness.

Reply.
How dare thou profess thy self to be a Minister of Christ, and calls the
light of Christ natural, and darkness spiritual, and here let all read thee,
to be he which puts darkness for Light, and Light for darkness*

The 14 Querie.
Whether there be any other thing that convinces of unbelief, but that which
convinces of sin in the conscience* seeing Christ says, he shall convince the
world of sin, because they believe not in him? John 16. 8, 9. Ephesians. 5. 13, 14.

Priests Answer.
The 14th. is the same with the 13th. answered there.

Reply.
Here let all see whether these 2 Queries be one, and let them read thy answer
to them both, which is saying that the light in the conscience is natural and
darkness spiritual.

The 15 Querie.
Whether do you find any Scripture that speaks of any Light that convinces the
conscience, but the light of Christ with the Law of God written in the heart.

Priests Answer.
I say, all are not convinced, nor will not, till Christ come, Jud* 15.

Reply.
Here thou art the Antichrist which denies Christ come in the flesh, and would
make people believe that Enocks Prophecy is not yet fulfilled, which Jude did
witness to be fulfilled, as Jude 15. and did witness Christ Jesus to be come,
who fulfilled the Law and the Prophets; and John did witness that Christ was
come to convince the world of sin, of righteousness, and judgment, and John in
his Epistle did write, that he which did not confess Jesus Christ come in the
flesh was an Antichrist, and we do witness the same, and there thou may read
thy self, 1 John 4. 3.

The 16 Querie.
Whether it be not the Light of Christ which bears witness in thy conscience
against all evil, and if it be not the Light of Christ, then man is not wholly
fallen, but there is something in man Good before Christ come.

Priests Answer.
I say double there was something good in man remaining after the fall.

Reply.
If so, that something good in man after the fall; whether is that good
natural, or spiritual, and whether is not that estate of man which is in the
fall natural, and so prove this from the Scripture, what it is that was not
lost in man's fall which need no Christ to save: for Christ came to seek and to
save that which was lost. And now to thee Frederick Woodall; Here thy confused
Paper is answered in plainness, and art not flattered, for I love not to give
flattering Titles to any, neither can I have any man's person in admiration for
advantage.

From a servant of the Lord, though counted a Deceiver by the generation of
Priests, yet true; whose Name according to the shesh, is RICHARD HUBBERTHORNE,
Prisoner of the Lord in Norwich Castle:
The 20 day of the 12 Month.
THE END.

