Fides Apostolica OR A Discourse asserting the received Authors and Authority
of the APOSTLES CREED. TOGETHER WITH The Grounds and Ends of the Composing
thereof by the APOSTLES, the sufficiency thereof for the Rule of Faith, the
Reasons of the name (...) in the Original Greek, and the Division or Parts of
it. Hereunto is added a double Appendix, the First touching the ATHANASIAN, the
Second touching the NICENE Creed.

By GEO. ASHWELL B. D.

(...). Jud. v. 3. Christianus, mihi nomen est; Catholicus vero Cognomen.
Pacian. Ep. ad Symp.

I shall believe that the Apostles Creed was made by them (such Reverence I
bear to the Churches Tradition) until other Authors be certainly found out.
K. Chapter 5 Paper to M. Henderson.

OXFORD, Printed by LEON. LICHFIELD Printer to the University, for Jo. Godwin,
and Ric. Davis. 1653.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, and my much Honored Lord, Thomas LORD Wenman, Baron
of Kilmaynham, and Viscount Tuam.
MY LORD,
THE Age wherein we live, as it is unhappy in too many Particulars, so in
nothing more, then that it has almost lost the ancient Faith amongst so many
Factions which pretend to it, and exclude others from it. Some we have who have
maimed it, by cutting off certain Articles; and others, made a Monster of it,
by heterogeneous Additions. Some have destroyed it, by corrupting the substance
thereof; and others discolored it, by counterfeiting its appearance. Some have
poisoned the Body thereof, by the venime of Heresies; and others plucked it in
pieces, by the violence of Schisms. But, what Remedy to cure these
Corruptions, and Disorders? Sure we can use no better means, than what the
Prophet advises us unto; To ask for the old Paths, and walk therein, and so
find rest unto our Souls. Ier. 6. 16. Or to take that course which our Blessed
Savior made use of in deciding the question of Divorces, namely, to reduce the
matters in Controversies unto the Primitive Institution. Mat. 19. 8. By which
means we shall find (if we make a sober and impartial search) what was the
Faith which the ancient Church received from Christ and his Apostles, that
which she universally professed in the Primitive Times, and delivered unto her
Children in its native Purity, and Perfection.

Now, I shall think my pains most happily bestowed, if I may be thought to
have contributed in the least, unto so good a Work, by this ensuing Discourse;
the first Rudiments whereof (that I may give your Lordship an account of its
Composure) I drew some years ago in pursuance of a Collegiate Office, which
then required me to pitch on some Fundamental part of Divinity, which might
best fit the condition and capacity of the Youth who were then my proper
Auditors; and serve as a Groundwork to settle them in the Principles of
Religion.

In order to this, I thought that I could not make a better choice, then by
fixing on the Creed, which all ages of the Church have entitled to the
Apostles, and looked on as an exact summary of Christian Religion, as to matter
of Doctrine.

But before I pitched on the Body of the Creed it self, I judged it very
expedient, if not absolutely necessary, to prefixe somewhat, by way of Preface,
touching the Authors and Authority thereof, which to me seem to stand and
fall together; for if the Creed were not composed by the Apostles, but
afterward gathered out of their writings, by some obscure Hand, not infallibly
guided (as theirs) but obnoxious unto Error; I cannot as yet see, how it can
well make good its Title of Apostolic, or justly challenge that sacred
esteem, which it has universally obtained from all Sorts and Sects of
Christians, even from the most pestilent of Heretics*

And this I was the rather induced to do, by reason of a certain short
Treatise of a Learned Countryman of ours, wherein he has been pleased to lay
down several Arguments in disprovall of the received Authors; the first, I
suppose, who ever proceeded so far, and thought fit to employ his wit and
pains on so unhappy a Subject. And these Arguments of his (as Novelties
usually spread farther, and take much at their first appearance in the world)
we have found since, not only entertained, but improved also, and augmented in
number, by a more Learned Forreiner. I could heartily wish, that they had
bestowed their pains upon some other Subject, whereby they might have gained a
more safe repute unto themselves, and a more solid advantage to the Public;
both which are purchased, not by battering, and beating down what is already
well built and settled, but by repairing the Decays and Breaches of the
Christian Church, or by building on the old Foundations: whereas we may too
justly say of such endeavors as these in matters of Faith, what the Apostle,
by an elegant antithesis, speaks in a matter of fact, viz. The eating of Things
offered to Idols, wherein the Trespasser most dangerously Scandalized his
Brother; that by this ill-managed knowledge of his, he did aedificare fratrem
in ruinam, Edify his weaker Brother, but in a most perverse sense, not to fear
God, but to fall quite away from him.

As to my own particular; the objections of these two Learned men served
opportunely to awaken me unto a more serious and exact Review of those ancient
Records, which the Primitive Church has left us; wherein finding just Ground,
as I conceived, for asserting the received Authors and Authority of the Creed,
by many concordant Testimonies of those first and best Ages; and those seconded
by the suffrages of the most eminent Divines of these latter Times, although
divided into Parties, and differing in many other Points; I undertook to
examine the force of the Arguments alleged to the contrary, in which though I
found at the first sight some fair Probabilities, sufficient to startle an
unwary Reader; yet upon a deliberate comparing them with the Consent, the
Cleerenesse, and the Authenticalnesse of the contrary proofs, I could by no
means see such a Proportion of weight and force in them, as to overthrow the
combined strength of such an Army of witnesses.

But whether or no, my answers to these objections will appear satisfactory
unto others, I must leave unto those others to judge, who see not with my eyes,
as I do not with theirs. Yet I hope that these my endeavors will meet with
Pardon at least (though they come far short of that perfection, which they
may chance to look for, and I could wish for) when they please to consider, the
ancient and acknowledged Right of the Cause I plead for; the number and
Authority of my witnesses; by whom I am supported; together with the newness
of the contrary Arguments, which as no Age before ever saw, so no Man (to my
knowledge) ever went about to solve. The first attempts in any kind are usually
rude and imperfect; much more, when they proceed from an unskilful, and
unpractised Hand, such as mine, which never before ventured on ought which it
durst expose unto the Public view. Yet to excuse my self in part from
Temerity and Presumption in this particular, I ventured not on it before I had
the approbation of some Learned Friends, who were pleased not only to peruse
the Work, but solicited me also to the Publication, which if it shall awaken
some more able Pen to perfect what I have thus rudely drawn, I shall not a
little applaud my self as the Instrument of presenting so fortunate an
Occasion.

But I have almost seemed to have forgot your Lordship, whilst I have been thus
particular in relating to you, the Occasion, the Beginning, the Progress, and
the end of these imperfect labors of mine, which I am now bold to offer unto
your Patronage, that so they may have the same Protection with the Author that
presents them. For as the many Favors and Civilities which I have received
from your Lordships hands, oblige me to a Public acknowledgment, so your
approbation of the Work (which has had the Honor of your Perusal also in
good part) has encouraged me to present that acknowledgement in this kind.
Besides, not only Gratitude, but strict Justice, seems to require this oblation
at my Hands, the firstborn of my Pen; and entitleth your Lordship more
peculiarly unto it; for though it were begotten elsewhere, it was borne under
your Roof, and so belongs unto you, as to the Lord of the House, and the
Father of the Family.

There remains naught else, but that as I now present this Treatise to your
Patronage, so to present my Prayers to God for your Person, for that of your
Noble Lady, together with all the Branches of your ancient Family; that they
may constantly Live, and comfortably Dye, in the true Christian, Apostolic
Faith, which was once delivered unto the Saints. This as it still has, so
shall continue to be a constant part of the daily Orisons of

MY LORD, Your Lordships Most Faithful, and Affectionate Servant to Command
GEO: ASHWELL.

The Contents of the CHAPTERS.
CAP. I. THE Dogmaticall part of Theology, most necessary to be established;
and in that, most especially the Creed, as the Foundation of the rest, and this
for three Reasons. A double abuse of the Creed, which occasioned this Treatise.
together with the abuse of Catechismes; The five Heads of the ensuing
Treatise; The Creed conteines all, and only Fundamentalls. The Trinity, and
Incarnation of the Son of God, cleared out of it. CAP. II. The History of the
Apostles Composing the Creed out of Ruffinus Five Reasons, why the Apostles
delivered it to the Church, not in Writing, but by an Orall Tradition. An
Objection, against the preserving of it by Tradition, Answered. CAP. III.
Testimonies of Scripture touching the Composure of the Apostles Creed;
especially, out of S. Paul's Epistles; as the places are accordingly interpreted
by Divines of good note, both Ancient, and Modern. Some Doubts against these
Testimonies solved. CAP. IV. Testimonies concerning the Creed, and the
Composure thereof by the Apost. taken out of the Greek Fathers, who bear
witness for the Eastern Churches; some Objections against these Authorities
partly Answered, partly Prevented. CAP. V. Testimonies of the Creed, and the
Composure thereof by the Apostles, taken out of the Latin Fathers, who bear
witness for the Western Churches. Some Objections to the contrary Answered.
CAP. VI. Testimonies of the Authors, and Authority of the Creed taken out of
the Protestant Divines, who have unanimously received and acknowledged this
Creed of the Apostles, together with the Nicene Creed and that of Athanasius.
CAP. VII. Six Reasons evincing the Apostles to have been the Composers of the
Creed which commonly bears their Name. Some Objections against these Reasons
Answered. The place where the Creed was Made. Of Fundamentalls and Traditions.
CAP. VIII. Several Objections which some have alleged against the
fore-assigned Authors of the Creed Answered at large. Certain Creeds compared
together, whereby their Conformity appears to one another, and to that of the
Apostles. CAP. IX. The second Head of this Discourse, namely the Grounds on
which, and the ends for which the Apostles framed the Creed. The Sufficiency
also of the Creed for the Rule of Faith, is proved by the Testimonies of
Divines as well Modern as Ancient, and those both Romish and Reformed. CAP. X.
The third Head of this Discourse; namely the several reasons, or
significations of the name (...), which the Creed bears in the Original
Greek. CAP. XI. The fourth Head of this Discourse; namely, the Division or
Parts of the Creed. CAP XII. The fifth Head of this Discourse, touched in
General viz. the supplementall or exegetticall Creeds, framed in succeeding
Ages. The Grounds whereon they were Framed and their use. Some Copies of Creeds
set down as well of the Heretics, as Orthodox, both consonant to this of the
Apostles.
Appendix the first, of the Athan. Creed.
CAP. I. Two Reasons why this Creed has been more oppugned than the rest. Its
Authority, and Author are vindicated in general, more especially, touching the
severity of the Preface. CAP. II. Several Testimonies, concerning the Author
and Authority of the Athan. Creed. CAP. III. The Time, and Place, wherein
Athanasius wrote his Creed, together with the Person to whom. The Cause
wherefore he wrote it, and the Language wherein. CAP IV. Some Objections
against what has been laid down, Answered. Especially Nazianzens Testimony
concerning the Athanasian Creed, is farther cleared and vindicated.
Appendix the second of the Nicene and Constantinopolitan Creed.
CAP. I. The Reason of the double name of this Creed. The Composure thereof*
The Additionall, or Exegeticall Particles, inserted into it. When, and by Whom
it was conveied to other Churches, and brought into Divine Service. CAP. II.
When, and by whom the Particle [Filioque] was added to the Nicene Creed, is
historically delivered, and at large. Several other causes, of the breach
between the Churches of Greece, and Rome.
To the Christian, and Catholic Reader.
OUR Blessed Savior, speaking of his second Coming, makes this question or
complaint, when the Son of man comes, shall he find faith on the Earth.
Luke 18. 8. Now he puts this question, to put it out of question, for this
seeming doubt is a strong Affirmation, and amounts to a vehement Complaint,
that when he shall come to Judgment, he shall find little or no faith amongst
men. No faith, in matter of Practice; each man will be false to his Brother:
Homo homini Vulpes, as well as lupus; the wisdom of the world, so generally
counted and esteemed, being naught else but overreaching, the ancient Christian
simplicity will be quite lost; and the Serpent expel the Dove: nothing but
insinuating Complements, and fair speeches, (like those of the Serpent, to our
Grandmother Eve) will every where practice to deceive, under pretense of
friendship. Nor, on the other side, will there be faith found in matter of
Doctrine; Religion shall be lamentably torn and mangled by intestine Combats
of the Tongue and Pen; New opinions shall be in Credit, as new fashions; till
faith, of one by Division become none; as a great entire stream loses it
self, and is quite dried up, when parted into several small Channels.

Now, that this day is near approaching, these sad Prognostics tell us;
especially the latter, wherewith the present Age so greivously labors; all
which mischeife both heretofore arose amongst us, and now tyrannizeth over us,
for want of a sure Rule or Ground of faith, rightly understood and applied. The
holy Scripture indeed is an abundantly sufficient Ground of our Belief, and
Rule of manners; but being exposed, as now adays it is, to every man's private
Fancy, the Gloss too too often wyer-drawes and corrupts the Text; so that we
look upon Gods word, through a false-coloured Glass; Pretenses of a private
Spirit, and enthusiasticall Revelations, with the Anabaptist; of right Reason,
with the Sosinian (which is as diverse in men, as their fancies or faces) make
what they please of Scripture, and force it to speak their mind; thus by
perverting it to their own sense, they are not judged by, but judge the Law;
and become (as S. James in a like Case says) James: 4. 11. Not Doers [or
Beleevers] of the Law, but Judges.

The Apostles, those renowned Patriarchs of the Christian faith, foreseing this
evil left us a double Remedy, both by Tradition preserved in the Church, to be
delivered down unto all Ages, from hand to hand, viz. a Rule or Ground of
faith; and the exposition; or right applying of this Rule. The Ground or Rule,
in the Creed, composed by themselves as a Summary of the points of Faith, which
lie dispersedly here and there in the large volume of the Scriptures. The
undoubted Exposition, and right applying of this Rule, they have left us in the
writings of the Fathers, who were their Successors, to whose care and custody,
they not only committed the Oracles of God in writing, and the Creed by word of
mouth; but the interpretation also of both, as they heard them expounded from
their own mouths, whilst they lived and preached amongst them; for in vain
had the Apostles given them the words, if they had not given them the sense
withal, whereby to stop the mouths of Heretics, who arose even at the first
preaching of the Gospel, as we may see in S. Paul's Epistles. This orthodoxe
sense is that, which is so frequently mentioned in the writings of the Ancient
Fathers, under the name of Depositum, Catholica seu Apostolica Traditio, fides
Ecclesiae, and the like expressions; and which Tertullian makes use of to
confound the whole Hydra of Heresies, in his Book De Praeser: adu: Haeret.
bidding the Heretics go to those mother-Churches, which the Apostles founded,
and personally resided in, and to which they committed the true genuine Faith;
where says he, ye shall hear no news of your upstart heterodoxe Doctrines,
invented by yourselves; wherewith this proud factious Generation infested the
Church, and led away after them many seduced Proselytes. Of this Tradition S.
Paul speaks to his Disciple Timothy, whom he had left behind him as his Deputy
at Ephesus, The things that thou have heard of me among many witnesses, the
same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. 2 Timothy: 2. 2. And to the Church of Thessalonica, Brethren stand fast, and hold the
Traditions which ye have bin taught, whether by word or our Epistle. 2 These:
2. 15. comp: v. 5. 6.

Observe here the cunning of Satan, whereby in all Times, but especially in
these last and worst, he makes way, by these his forerunners, for the coming
of that great Antichrist. He has set men on work under pretense of honoring
Scripture, as the sole All-sufficient Rule of Faith; and of withdrawing
themselves from all dangerous Dependence on men's erroneous judgments (seeing
every man is a liar) wholly referring and submitting themselves to the Holy
Ghost, to be enlightened, guided, and directed by him; some to render
suspected: others by degrees to enervate, and secretly subvert: a third sort,
openly to decry the judgment and Decisions of the Church, in the Councils and
Fathers; when in the interim, they are grossly and willingly ignorant, that
what they deny to Her, they ascribe to themselves, strongly and confidently
asserting that to be the sole meaning of the Holy Ghost, which agrees with
their opinions, confirms their fore-received Tenants, and favors their Side
and Faction.

Now let all the world judge, if it will be but an indifferent Arbiter, whether
it be not more equal to be judged, in point of Religion, by reverend
Antiquity, then by upstart giddy Novelty: By the Consent of so many Ancient
Worthies, who living long before our Times, are uninteressed and disengaged in
our Quarrels; then by the partial Determinations of men educated in; and
addicted to a Faction: By the joint consent of many, then the singular opinion
of some one: By men eminent for Learning, who therefore well could not; and for
Piety, who therefore would not deceive us, then by the conceited Ignorance, and
factious spirit of some proud Novellist, start up in this declining, wicked,
Atheistical Age: By those who lived nearest the Apostles Times, when the
Church was one (undevided into Greek and Latin, Romish and Reformed, Lutheran
and Calvinian) when Tradition was fresh, and uncorrupted, like a stream
running pure near the Fountaine-head, which afterward gathered Dreggs by
running farther into the more remote and succeeding Ages; then by the
Schismatical Directions of latter, degenerate corrupt Times: Lastly (which is
far the most effectual Argument) by those who as they had newly received, so
constantly, unanimously, and uncorruptly held the Doctrinall Traditions of the
Apostles, the genuine sense of Scripture, which they themselves left behind
them, who left the Scripture it self; then to pin our Religion upon the
sleeves of some Idolized Innovatour, who though he pretend the Authority of
Gods Word, an unerring spirit, or the clear inducements of Reason, yet in
truth has nothing but Impudence, and his Ipse dixit, to maintain his
Assertions. This Tradition it is, which made the Ancient Bishops and Doctors
of the Primitive Church, so unanimous among themselves, in what Part of the
World soever they lived, as having the same Deliverers of it who planted all
those Churches, wherein they succeeded; and so taught in all, as who received
it from the same spirit, who received it from the same Christ, who received it
from the same God the Father, as Tertullian deduceth its Pedigree out of St
John's Gospel. Chapter 16. 13. 14 and Chapter 8. 28. Else, if they had followed their
own private judgments, they must needs have often varied in their
Determinations. Hence it is, that they make a great Distinction between what
they received and published to the world, as Depositaries, Witnesses,
Historians, and what Expositions or Conclusions they drew from their own
Brains, as being their private Opinions; in the latter they leave every man to
his own Censure and Judgment, to receive or reject them as they find them
Consonant to Scripture, Antiquity, and right Reason, but in the former, they
require an absolute Assent, and condemn them all, for Heretics, who go not
along with them in the same Path, in that they showed there modesty, in this
their Piety.

The Fathers being thus cashired, and appealed from as unmeet, illegal Judges,
because obnoxious to error, which has been labored to be made good by
publishing some few paradoxicall Tenants, found in the writings of some one, or
few of them, which they conceive to be Errors, though many of them perhaps
will not appear such upon due examination; and after all their undutifull,
malicious, Search, whereby, like Cham, they have laid open their Fathers
nakedness, they cannot find one palpable Error, which they can justly lay to
the charge of all, or a major part of them, thus at last (missing their aim)
they proceed farther to call the Creed in question, that undoubted Rule and
Foundation of the Christian Faith, which the Apostles with so much care
Composed, and left unto the Church, as a most precious Depositum, the lydius,
lapis or Touchstone of the Catholic Belief, and (...) of the Orthodoxe
Professors. They have called both the Authors, and Authority in question;
first, by doubting of, and raising scruples against it; then absolutely
denying, and laying down Arguments to disprove those Authors to whom it has
been constantly entitled: for they both fall together, take away the Authors,
and the Authority will soon vanish; for if the Creed were not framed by the
Apostles, but collected out of Scripture by some uncertain, and obscure
Composer, or Composers, whose names are buried in forgetfulness, seeing it
contains some Articles which are not set down totidem verbis in any
determinate Place of Holy Writ, 'twere possible that some Points might be
mistaken, not rightly gathered or deducted, (as by a fallible Hand) and so, the
whole Frame of it of no more Authority, then some piece of a Father, or the
Canon of a Council, if so much. For though it be granted that all the Articles
of the Creed be either express words of Scripture, or by an undoubted
consequence deducible from it, yet the drawing of these Articles forth of
Scripture, requires an unerring, and Divinely-guided Hand; First, because none
else can know which is an Article of Faith, that is, a Fundamental, or Point
necessary to Salvation, who is not divinely informed of Gods will and pleasure
in this matter. Secondly, because the Judge of the consequence must be
infallible, for otherwise it often falls out, that what in one man's judgment is a
necessary Deduction, is not so in another, but probable only, or perhaps
false; else we should have had less about the Trinity and Incarnation, two
maine points of our Faith, to name no lesser ones. Having removed these two
Forts out of their way, and demolished these Propugnacula fidei, the^ after
they may safely build what new Fabrics they please, upon the abused Groundwork
of Scripture; or rather having dug up the Groundwork of the Creed, lay
Reason for a new Foundation, on which to build Castles in the Air; imaginary
structures: much like the enchanted Fortresses dreamed of in the Monkish
Romances; then they may entertain, whatsoever strange fancies they please,
Fancies which unconstantly hover up and down in the Brain, like so many
Clouds in the middle Region, carried hither and thither by the wind, and
presenting now this, now that monstrous shape: having removed these two Bounds
of Faith, they may wander in the large field of Scripture at random, scatter
here and there what pernicious seeds they please, root up what was already
sown, confound the furrows, mix adulterate grains with the pure seed of the
word, thus making havoc of all, and turning the field into a Wilderness.

And though they seem to honor Scripture, and appeal to it, as the sole
adequate Rule of Theological Truth, yet in truth they use it but as a color,
to set off their newfangled Inventions, the opinions bred within themselves;
and so wrest it to serve their own Turns; for where ever it seems to oppose
them, they strait accuse the Copy of Bastardy, that such or such a Passage
has crept out of the Margin, or Gloss into the Text; or the place has been
interlaced by some of the adverse Party, some opposite Father; they alter at
pleasure points, letters, words, yea dash out whole verses, and after all,
torture the poor Remainder, till they have forced it to bear witness on
their side, and speak what they would have it; take but for instance the
beginning of S. John's Gospel, as it is expounded by Volkelius. If they should
openly, (...), reject Scripture, they would be exploded, and expelled out of
Christian Commonwealths, and so hindered from doing mischief; but now the
Devils craft makes use of those to undermine and subvert holy Scripture, who
seem most to stand for it; and to persuade the doctrines of men, who seem most
to decry them.

In a word the body of Socinianisme (to which we may now add some other new
Sects) is compounded (like some Hydra, or Chymera, or what other horrid
Poetical monster) of the must pestilent and poisonous Heresies, which the
Church has ever labored under, or condemned in all Ages; And whereas this Age
has bin much given to Systems and Compendium's, least we should want one in
any kind, these men have furnished us with an Epitome of Heresies, a Breviary of
Epiphanius (...): yea, which is worse yet, they have opened a large Gap for
more, by making weak, depraved Reason (without any other light or guide;
however the Scripture be pretended) the sole Judge of Truth; by abolishing
faith, that Reason may be exalted in her Place; that Reason, which is never the
same, or constant to it self, either in diverse men, or the same man at diverse
times; and yet, though they so much cry up liberty of Opinion, they themselves
are unwittingly, though willingly Slaves to Socinus; else why do they all
follow him so close? was he the only unerring Guide? the monopolizer of Reason?
The Socinians indeed outwardly receive the Canon of Scripture, and much extol
it, to keep up their credit with the Christian world; but expounding it (as
they do) in their own Sense, contrary to the received Interpretation of the
Ancients, from and by whose hands they received the Canon it self, they do as
good as not receive it, for the Scripture consists in the sense, not in the
words. And whosoever shall take a full survey of their opinions, will find that
they embrace no mystery therein revealed, but only what is demo^strable by, or
(at least) falls within the Sphere of bare Reason, and the light of nature; All
the rest, which appear, either opposite unto Reason, or placed above it, as
the mysteries of the Trinity, the Hypostaticall union, Christ's satisfaction for
the sin of mankind, the Resurrection, of the same numericall Body, the
everlasting punishment of the damned for temporal faults, etc. they cannot
away with, because they can see no reason for them; diverting in the mean time
all those Testimonies of Scripture, which are produced to confirm these
Principles, by altering (as I said) of words, letters. points, wresting of
phrases, and affixing to the words new contrary Glosses; and by perverting
other places to serve their own turn, by false, unheard of Expositions; so that
this right Reason proves a crooked Rule; and instead of imforming us of the
Truth, deformes the Original, the Touchstone of its Trial. The Church of
England in her 21 Article says indeed, that General Councils may err, and
have erred, But she says not, that they have erred in matters of Faith, only
she infers from hence, wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to
Salvation, have neither strength nor authority, unless it may be declared,
that they be taken out of Holy Scripture. And good reason; because the
Scripture contains all things necessary to salvation. But by whom are these
things to be so declared? Sure by the Fathers assembled in a General Council:
So she makes these Fathers, Declarers, or Collectours of those necessary Points
out of Scripture, and for ought I can see, judges of that necessity; A very
great Privilege, and as much as was ever challenged by them. But she more
expressly ties her Clergy to submit unto the judgment of the Fathers (whether
in, or out of a Council) in weighty Points of Religion; Synod. Land. An. 1571.
Tit. 19. De Concionatoribus. Imprimis videbunt [Cincionatores] ne quid unquam
doceant pro Concione, quod a Populo religiose teneri and credi velint, nisi
quod consentaneum sit doctrinae veteris aut N^vi Testamenti; quodque ex illa
ipsa doctrina Catholici Patres and veteres Episcopi collegerint. Where she
makes the Orthodoxe Fathers, the sole Interpreters of Scripture, who are to be
followed by Preachers, in matters of Consequence; and ranks their Collections
out of Holy Scripture with the letter it self; which if it employ not
infallibility in expounding Scripture, I am sure, it comes very near it.

Reason then, is not the Judge of all Truth, (to which our Church may seem to
refer us, by making Councils fallible) that is, bare natural Reason; but
Reason enlightened: neither were the Fathers guided by it in the maine
Principles of Religion, but by Faith relying on Authority divine, or universal
Tradition. She may indeed, yea ought to search into, and examine Tradition,
whether it be genuine or spurious, as the Beraeans, Acts 17. 11. examined S.
Paul's Citations of the Old Testament, touching the Prophecies of the Messiah.
But when the Tradition is found to be good and clear, old and Catholic, then
Reason must submit to it, although it may seem to thwart, or exceed her.

Neither does S. Peter bid us to give a reason of our faith, but to be ready to
give an answer to every one that asks us a reason of the hope that is in us.
1 Peter 3. 15. that is, upon what Grounds we expect eternal Happiness, by the
Profession and Practice of the Christian Religion; and this answer, or reason
to be given, not rashly or conceitedly, but with meekness and fear. Indeed,
who the most Learned, much less every ordinary Christian (who has the charg
there given him) can give a Reason or Demonstration of all Mysteries in
Religion? some of which (as the Trinity, and Incarnation) we cannot so much as
conceive, or comprehend, fully and distinctly. Besides the word ((...)) there
may be as fitly rendered, a Reckoning or Account; for the word is, thus
elsewhere taken; (...), Give an Account of thy Stewardship, Luk: 16. 2. and,
(...), they shall give an Account thereof, viz. of every idle word. Mat. 12.
36. but never as far as I remember, is the word used for a medium, or
Demonstrative Argument a Priori.

Is it not then the ready way to the Introduction of all Sects, of
Libertinisme, yea (at last) of Atheism it self, to bring all Points of
Religion to the Censure, and Tribubunall of this conceitedly-blind Judge, which
according to the mad wish of that Roman Tyrant, cuts off the very neck of
Religion at one blow? For all Religions, which hitherto have dared to show
their face to the world, have grounded themselves on Authority either true or
false; on Real, or Pretended Revelations; The Grecians had their Oracles, Numa
his Egeria, and Mahomet his pretended Gabriel; as well as the Jews had their
Moses; and Christians, their Jesus. Humane Reason, left to its own light, and
guidance, never presumed in any Nation, to be the Mother of a new Religion: or
a sufficient Directresse in it, yea, the light of Nature is acknowledged by the
most acute Philosopher, to be dim, and dark in relation to Divine Objects;
compared therefore by him to the eye of an Owl at midday: it is not able
therefore of it self, to show us the way to Heaven, who converse here in a
spiritual Egypt, a land of darkness, which is our natural state; no getting
into Canaan, but by a pillar of fire, supernaturally raised, and divinely moved.

Now as Anabaptisme is more suitable to the dreggs of the People, and works
on the grosser humors of the Body Politic, to whom Community of goods, and
freedom from the power of Magistrates are pleasing Tenants: so this, as a
poison far more deadly, seazeth on the subtler wits, as on the finer
animal-spirits, therefore the more dangerous, because abler Instruments of
mischeife, Reason at the best is fallacious enough, but when thus cried up as
the sole, supreme Judge of all, from whom lies no Appeal, no marvel if she
extremely please he self in novell Inventions, and become much enamoured of
them, as her own genuine Birthes. She is therefore a most dangerous Guide,
being thus left to her self, in matters of Religion, which (as Vincentius Lir.
tells us) is not Res inventa, sed tradita, not found out by our selves, but
received from our Ancestors. Sure then, Eternal Salvation is a business of
more weight, then to be entrusted to her Dictates and Directions; whence it is,
that holy Scripture every where cries down the wisdom of the world, the
judgment of the natural man, the vain deceits of the Heathen Philosophers
(who were the great Masters and Admirers of Reason) and the darkness of our
understanding in things Divine, in the Mystery of Godliness. And methinks when
Reason decives us so often in smaller matters, in objects far lower, such as
lie within its own Sphere; it should a loud proclaim this Caveat to an
indifferent and experienced man, that we are not to trust it, in things of the
greatest moment, which lie so far above its reach; that we are not to follow
a false, wandering Meteour, an Ignis fat^us here below, when we have the bright
Morning Star to guide us, in this vale of darkness, until the Sun of
Righteousness arise with healing in his wings.

But, to return to the Argument, which I have in hand. As I dare not be so
rash as to tax all those of Socinianisme, who deny or doubt of the received
Authors of the Creed; so this I may safely say, that unawares they may make
way for it, as they do also, who decry or debilitate the Authority of the
Church, and Fathers.

I have endeavored therefore in this following Treatise to vindicate as well
the Authors, as the Authority of the Apostles Creed, as being the maine Basis
of the Christian Religion, to which all succeeding Creeds are in the nature of
Paraphrases, or Superstructures; a work, I conceive, too suitable unto the
Disease of this Age, and so most unhappily requisite; an Age wherein the very
Principles of Christianity are called in Question, and Faith derided as the
Portion of deluded Fools, and Idiots: An Age, wherein some have taken upon
them to Correct the Old Creed; and others, to frame new Ones: An Age, wherein
some accuse our Mother the Church of England for Believing too much, as the
Socinian, with some other Sectaries; and others, for Believing too little, as
the Roman Catholic: whose Church has added to the Creed, several other
Articles, to be believed by all Christians, as of necessity to Salvation; a
Catalogue whereof we may find in the Bull of PIUS 4th, among the Acts of their
late Tridentine Council; as also in the Roman Catechism. Wherefore I shall
endeavor withal, to clear my much honored Mother from this double
crosse-imputation, by asserting as well the sufficiency, as the necessity of
the Creed for Salvation. This is the sum and end of my Thoughts; which I
never intended to make public, when I first composed these notes some years
ago, for my Collegiate, Catechisticall Lectures. But when I since daily found
many, little or nothing to regard the Authority of the Creed, and some (of no
mean note) to write against both the Authority, and the Authors; I reviewed,
and enlarged them by farther Testimonies of Divines, both Ancient and Modern;
amongst whom finding an unexpected Harmony and Consent in this matter; I
undertook to examine the Reasons produced to the contrary, which (as I hope)
upon due trial, will not be found so weighty and convincing, as to overthrow
so Old, so General, so Received a Tradition. Now having proceeded thus far,
and taken no small pains in the Search, I presumed to expose them to a more
public view, not knowing any who has hitherto handled this Argument
Polemically, and in a set Discourse; wherein if I have any way failed, the
Truth (I hope) will not suffer by my weak Defense, but meet hereafter with an
abler Patron. But if I have so handled it, that I can revoke any erroneous
Christian, fix the wavering, or confirm him that stands, I shall have great
Cause, and good opportunity to rejoice, in contributing the least Mite to the
profit of the Christian Church, or the praise of Christ our common Savior, who
is styled by the Apostle, The Author and finisher of our Faith, Heb. 12. 2. To
whose blessed Guidance, and Protection I commit both thee and my self, in
these dark, dangerous, and unsettled Times.

(...).
(...).

(...).
(...).

Symbolum D. Athanasii.
QVicunque vult salvus esse, ante omnia opus est ut teneat Catholicam fidem,
quam nisi quisque integram inviolatamque servaverit, absque dubio in aeternum
peribit. Fides autem Catholica haec est; ut unum Deum in Trinitate, and
Trinitatem in unitate veneremur, neque confundentes Personas, neque substantiam
separantes; Alia est enim Persona Patris, alia Filii, alia Spiritus Sancti; sed
Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, una est Divinitas, aequalis Gloria,
coaeterna majestas. Qualis Pater, talis Filius, talis Spiritus Sanctus:
Increatus Pater, increatus Filius, increatus Spiritus Sanctus: Immensus Pater,
immensus Filius, immensus Spiritus Sanctus: Aeternus Pater, aeternus Filius,
aeternus Spiritus Sanctus: Et tamen non tres Aeterni, sed unus Aeternus; sicut
non tres Increati, nec tres Immensi, sed unus Increatus, and unus Immensus.
Similiter, Omnipotens Pater, omnipotens Filius, omnipotens Spiritus Sanctus;
and tamen non tres Omnipotentes, sed unus Omnipotens. Ita, Deus Pater, Deus
Filius, Deus Spiritus Sanctus; and tamen, non tres Dii, sed unus est Deus. Ita,
Dominus Pater, Dominus Filius, Dominus Spiritus Sanctus; and tamen, non tres
Domini, sed unus est Dominus. Quia sunt sigillatim, unamquamque Personam Deum,
and Dominum confiteri, Christiana veritate compellimur; Ita, tres Deos aut
Dominos dicere, Catholica Religione prohibemur. Pater a nullo est factus, nec
creatus, nec genitus est, Filius a Patre solo est, non factus, nec creatus, sed
genitus. Spiritus Sanctus, a Patre [Filioque] non factus, nec creatus, nec
genitus est, sed procedens. Unus ergo Pater, non tres Patres: unus Filius, non
tres Filii: unus Spiritus Sanctus, non tres Spiritus Sancti. Et in hac
Trinitate, nihil prius, aut posterius; nihil majus, aut minus; sed totae tres
Personae coaeternae sibi sunt, and coaequales; ita ut per omnia, sicut jam
dictum est, and unitas, in Trinitate, and Trinitas in unitate veneranda sit.
Qui vult ergo salvus esse, ita De Trinitate sentiat. Sed necessarium est ad
aeternam Salutem, ut Incarnationem quoque Domini nostri Jesu Christi fideliter
credat. Est ergo fides recta, ut credamus and confiteamur, quia Dominus noster,
Jesus Christus, Dei filius, Deus and Homo est; Deus est ex substantia Patris,
ante Secula genitus; and Homo est ex substantia matris, in Seculo natus:
Perfectus Deus, Perfectus Homo; ex anima Rationali, and humana Carne
subsistens; aequalis Patri secundum Divinitatem, minor Patre secundum
Humanitatem: qui licet Deus sit, and Homo; non duo, tamen sed unus est
Christus: unus autem, non conversione Divinitatis in Carnem, sed assumptione
Humanitatis in Deum; unus omnino, non confusione substantiae, sed unitate
Personae; nam, sicut anima Rationalis and Caro, unus est Homo; ita, Deus and
Homo, unus est Christus. Qui passus est pro Salute nostra, descendit ad
Inferos, tertia die resurrexit a mortuis, ascendit in Coelos, sedet ad dextram
Dei Patris Omnipotentis; Inde venturus est judicare vivos and mortuos: ad cujus
adventum omnes Homines resurgent cum corporibus, and reddituri sunt de factis
propriis rationem; and qui bona egerunt, ibunt in vitam aeternam; qui vero
mala, in ignem aeternum. Haec est fides Catholica, quam nisi quisque fideliter,
firmiterque crediderit, salvus esse non poterit.

(...).
(...).

Of the Authors, and Authority of the APOSTLES CREED.
CAP. I.
The Dogmaticall part of Theology, most necessary to be established; and in
that, most especially the Creed, as the Foundation of the rest; and this for
three Reasons. A double abuse of the Creed, which occasioned this Treatise;
together with the abuse of Catechismes. The five Heads of the ensuing Treatise.
The Creed contains all, and only Fundamentals. The Trinity, and Incarnation,
of the Son of God, cleared out of it,

AMongst the several parts of Divinity, which brancheth it self forth so
largly, and variously, the Positive or Dogmaticall is Best, and most necessary.
As for Controversies, it had been happy for the Church, if she had never been
exercised with any; they arose as accidentally, as unfortunately; for
Ignorance, or Malice has been the Mother of them All: Ignorance when men could
not; Malice, when they would not see and acknowledge the Truth. Truth it self
is still but one, which requires establishing, rather then questioning, for
whilst we call all things into Dispute, even the maine Grounds of our Religion,
some begin to doubt, others deny.

Now, amongst the Dogmaticks in Divinity, which are reducible to these four
Heads, the Principles of the Christian Catechism, viz. The Creed, the
Commandments, the Lords Prayer, and the Sacraments, I have thought good to
pitch upon the first named, the Creed, as the most necessary and Fundamental
Part of Christianity, and so most requisite, to be premised unto the other
three; for without a right Faith, whereof the Creed is the Rule and Ground, we
can neither Pray, nor Obey, nor use the the Sacraments as we ought; this it is,
which directs our Prayers, which quickens our Practice, and disposes us aright
for all Sacred Mysteries.

But this necessity is more pressing in these distracted Times, and that for
these following Reasons.

1. Some we have, and those who would be thought the most Orthodoxe Reformers,
who dare cavil at the Authority of the Creed, and question the letter of it;
yea not only question, but dash out, and abolish the Article of Christ's
Descent into Hell, either in words, or in the ancient and received Sense,
though generally attested by the Verdict of Antiquity, and guarded by the third
Article of our Church, on purpose inserted, as we may in all likelihood
suppose, for settling the minds of her Children in this particular; because it
began to be controverted, or at least perverted in the exposition thereof, by
some Divines in those Days.

2. Others we have of a far higher strain, who overthrow the very
Foundations of Religion, especially in the Articles of the Sacred Trinity, and
the Incarnation of our Blessed Savior (the eternal Son, or word of God made
flesh, by which he became (...)) both which are asserted in the Creed, as will
appear by the following Discourse. And that they might the more boldly vent
their desperate Tenants, have slighted the authority of the Creed, as an humane
Invention, or Compileme^t; as falsely bearing the Apostles name in the Front; so
the followers of Servetus, Valentinus Gentilis, Socinus, and others. The
Framers of which Sects were not ashamed to divulge their project to the world,
as well by the Pencill, as the Pen. They drew a Picture, wherein the Church of
Rome was described, under the form of a great Edifice; on the Roof whereof
sat Luther, and his Assistants, throwing away the Tiles: the Roof being thus
bared, Zwinglius, Calvin, and others, beat down the Walls: when this was
done, to perfect the work, come these Tritheits; Photinians, Arians, with the
rest of their Consorts, armed with Spades, and Pick-axes, to dig up the
Foundation. Here be Rooters with a witness, whose design it is not to Prune
the Tree, by cutting of some superflous Branches, but utterly extirpate it,
that they may plant a new Gospel of their own; such who instead of repairing
fall to ruining; and instead of of restoring the Decays of Gods Church, by a
deliberate and well-ordered Reformation; endeavor to erect a new Building, in
the Desolations of the old.

3. The Age miserably labors with as many Religions, almost as men, every one
strongly and confidently pretending to the True, and Excommunicating as
Reprobates all those, who are either contrarily, or but diversely minded; in a
word, who agree not with them in every Point, though of the smallest
Concernment.

Amongst which various Sects and Divisions, it concerns us, first to search
out, and then to adhere unto, some constant Rule, whereby to regulate, and
establish our Faith. Now this Rule is at Hand; for the Creed was anciently
styled, and (I hope) is still accounted by all good Christians, Regula Fidei; A
short, plain, certain, and Complete Rule: Short, without Tediousness;
Plain, without Perplexednesse, or Obscurity; Certain, without Crookedness,
or Error; and Complete, without Defect: It comprehends the whole Body of our
Belief, and omnes Articulos, all the Joints or Members of that Body, no one
wanting.

If all Christians would but hold to this, as the Primitive Church did, then
all Heresies and Sects would soon vanish; and the several Members of the
Church, which now lie distracted, and torn asunder, like the Bones in Ezekiels
vision, the severed Parcels of a Skeleton, rather then a Body, would quickly
come together, Bone to his Bone; the sinews, flesh, and skin would soon
cover them; and then, the Breath of the Lord, the Spirit of Christ, who is the
Head of this Body would Reenter into them, and give them life.

There have been two Grand Causes (as I conceive) of these miserable Divisions;
both sprung from an abuse of the Creed, what by adding to it, what by altering
of it.

1. The Church of Rome (contrary to S. Peter's Rule, from whom she boasts to
derive her Prerogative) Lording it over Gods Heritage. 1 Pet. 5. 3. And
contrary to that of S. Paul, her Joint Founder taking upon her, to have
Dominion over our Faith, 2 Cor. 14. has added new Articles to these of the
Apostles, especially in her last Council of Trent; and these she has enjoined
to be believed under an Anathema, and made the so believing, necessary to
Salvation. Which domineering carriage of hers has bred many heart-burnings,
and stirs in the world, that otherwise would never have arisen, if she had kept
her self entirely unto the old Rule, which only was required to be professed by
the Genuine and Orthodoxe Sons of the Chuerh, in the Primitive and Best Times;
for the Nicene, Chalcedon, and other succeeding Creeds, were only expositions
of, not Additions to the Apostles Creed, as will be made appear.

2. Bold Sectaries, under the specious Title of Reformers, taking occasion and
advantage from hence (what from the Tyranny, and what from the example) have
filled the world with Institutions, and Catechismes, and (I know not what)
several Tracts of their false, heretical Tenants, arrogating the name of
Truth, and of the true Church unto themselves: Some Tenants they have urged all
to believe, which are besides, and not a few quite contrary to this Creed of
the Apostles; promised Salvation to their own Disciples; but denounced
damnation, not only against their opposers, but against all those too, who
concur not with them in every tittle, and Io^a; whether negative Errors
condemned; or positive Doctrines asserted. So that now, Ecclesiam quaerimus in
Ecclesia, we have even lost the Church among so many Conventicles; we have as
many Religions as Families; and those too, not seldom disagreeing; yet all
appropriating Salvation to themselves. Every one takes upon him to be a Pope,
the name so much in show detested; and seats himself in his usurped Chair, as
an infallible Judge, guided by the Dictates of the Spirit; so that one knows
not whom to adhere to, especially, weak and ignorant Christians are most
dangerously scandalized. And, we heard of one not long ago, in Holland, who
(whether out of Pride, or Despair, I know not,) had contracted the Church
within the small compass of his own Microcosme; and upon that Ground ( true
Baptism being annexed unto the true Church) he Baptized himself; thence called
the Se-Baptist.

Now what course might be taken to heal these numerous wounds? sure they would
all close up of themselves, if all Christians would have recourse to this
Ancient, Catholic, and undoubted Rule; believing as much, requiring no more,

And by the way, we may account it none of the least Blemishes in the face of
our Church, that so many private Catechismes, with other Tracts of the like
nature, have been suffered to fly abroad from every quarter; not a few of them
(for I should offend as much against Truth, as modesty, to censure all)
erroneous; most of them defective in the maine Points, yet stuffed with
uncertainties, and impertinencies; which instead of Fundamentals, give us
Circumstantials and Appendixes; instead of a sound Body of Credenda's, hair
and nails, if not boiles and botches:

Thus have the tender Plants in the fair Garden of this Church, been partly
infected with a poisonous joyce, partly made crooked and deformed in their
Infancy, whilst they have bent themselves toward this or that Pamphleter; like
those heretofore in the Church of Corinth; who said I am of Paul, I of
Apollo's, and I of Cephas, (and 'twere well, they had no worse Tutours) to the
great prejudice of verity, and utter bane of unity.

Now all this might have been prevented, if they had not thus from the Birth
been put forth to strange Nurses, but caused to suck the Breasts of their true
Mother, the Church of England: for S. Paul calls the first Rudiments of the
Christian Religion, Milk, a nourishment fit for Babes; a good portion of which
Milk is contained in the Creed, which therefore is styled by S. Cyril Patriarch
of Jerusalem, Parvuloru^ in Christo lactea Introductio. Catech. 4.

But before I enter upon the Body of the Creed (which I purpose to treat of
hereafter, as God shall give me life, and strength, means, and leisure) I
conceave it will be expedient, if not wholly necessary, to lay down by way of
Preface or Introduction, some Prolegomena, which I shall reduce to these five
Heads, the Bounds of my ensuing Discourse.

1. That the Apostles were the Authors, or Composers of the Creed, which
bears their Name. 2. The Grounds upon which, and the Ends for which the
Apostles framed it; where I shall speak also, of the Sufficiency of the Creed
for the Rule of the Christian Faith. 3. The several Reasons of the name (...)
which is the Title it bears in the Original Greek. 4. The Division, or Parts
of it. 5. By way of Appendix, I shall add two Diatriba's or Discourses,
concerning the Nicene Creed, and that of Athanasius, (especially the latter,
because most questioned) which the Catholic Church and particulary the Church
of England (in her eighth Article) has jointly received with that of the
Apostles; and are larger explications of it, especially in the two maine Points
of the Trinity, and Incarnation, then called in question, and perverted by
Arius, and Macedonius.
But before I proceed to the handling of these particulars, it will be
requisite to remove some Doubts which may arise against what I have already
written; thus clearing my way as I go, of al Imaginary rubs and obstacles.

Ob. 1. The denying of the Apostles to be the Authors of the Creed, does not
seem to weaken or shake any Ground, by which we may prove a Trinity; first,
because every Article of the Creed is confessed to be in Scripture: Then,
because no other Argument is pretended to be fetched from the Creed, for the
proof thereof, but this, that the Phrase [ Credo In] is attributed to the
Son, and Holy Ghost, as well as to God the Father; but not so, to the
Catholic Church, or to the Articles which follow it; whereas this seems to be
a groundless Proof; for in the Scripture, and the best Authors, Credere in
Deum, in Deo, and Deo, are promiscuously taken, as signifying the same Thing.
So we Read Exodus 14. 31. Crediderunt in Dominum, and in Mosem, They believed in
God, and in Moses; which the 70 render, '(...), thus construing it for a mere
Historical assent. So also, 1 Samuel 27. 12. Achish believed in Davidem, in
David, (according to the Heb.) that is, he believed David. And 1 John 5. 10.
(...), he believed not in the Testimony, is no more but to believe the
testimony not to be true. The Creed of Nice, (...). And in some ancient Latin
Copies of the Apostles Creed, we read, Credo in Ecclesiam Catholicam in
remissionem Peccatorum, etc. Particularly in a very old MS. (in BIBL. BODL.) we
have, Credo in Spiritu Sancto, Sancta Ecclesia, remissione Peccatorum etc.

Answ. Every Article of the Creed is confessed to be in Scripture, either in
express words, or by necessary Consequence; one of which Consequences or
Conclusions is the Doctrine of the Trinity, gathered by Apostolical hands, and
placed in their Creed; for who else could Infallibly collect it, and impose it
on the Faith of Christians?

As for the particle, Credo in, which (as Stephanus observes in his Thesaurus)
is a phrase peculiar to Christian Divines; its being applied to the three
Persons in the Sacred Trinity, and to none else in Propriety of speech, is a
sufficient Argument, for the proof of that high Mystery, and so generally
understood by the Latin Fathers. S. Aug. Sermon. 181. De Temp. upon those words
of the Creed -- Sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam -- says thus. Sciendum est, quod
Ecclesiam credere, non tamen in Ecclesiam credere debemus quia Ecclesia non
Deus, sed domus Dei est; we must know that we ought to believe the Church, not
in the Church, for the Church is not God, but the Household of God. Ruffinus,
in his Exposition of the Creed, on the same Article of the Church, -- non
dixit, in Sanctam Ecclesiam, nec in remissionem Peccatorum, nec in carnis
Resurrectionem; si enim addidisset, [In] praepositionem, una, eademque vis
fuisset cum Superioribus: nunc autem in illis quidem vocabulis, ubi de
Divinitate fides ordinatur; In Deum Patrem, dicitur, and In Jesum Christum
Filium ejus, and in Spiritum Sanctum: In caeteris vero, ubi non de Divinitate,
sed de Creaturis, ac Mysteriis sermo est, [In] praepositio non additur, ut
dicatur In Sanctam Ecclesiam, sed Sanctam Ecclesiam credendam esse non ut in
Deum, sed ut Ecclesiam Deo congregatam: and Remissionem Peccatorum credendam
esse, non in remissionem peccatorum; and resurrectionem carnis, non in
resurrectionem carnis. Hac itaque Praepositionis syllaba Creator a Creaturis
secernitur, and divina separantur ab humanis. that is, He said not, In the holy
Church, nor in the forgiveness of sins, nor in the resurrection of the Body;
for if he had added the Preposition, In, there had been the same sense with
what went before: but now in those passages of the Creed, wherein our faith
concerning God is digested, we say, In God the Father; and in Jesus Christ his
Son; and in the Holy Ghost; but in the residue, which speak of the Creatures,
and the mysteries relating to them, the Preposition, In, is not added, for we
say not, I believe in the Holy Church, but I believe the Holy Church; not as in
God, but as the Church gathered to God: likewise, we are to believe the
remission of sins, not in the remission of sins: and the resurrection of
the Body, not in the resurrection of the Body. So by this short Preposition,
the Creator is distinguished from the Creature, and God from man.

Now, Ruffinus was one very well skilled in the Greek Tongue (as who Translated
much of Origin out of that Language) as well as in the Latin; and so deserves
the more credit in judging of the Phrase, (...), or Credo in.

Paschasius also in his Book de Spiritu Saucto, written against Macedonius,
vindicates the true Writing and sense of the Creed, as touching this
particular, in these words. -- Credimus Ecclesiam quasi Regenerationis Matrem;
non in Ecclesiam credimus quasi in Salutis Authorem; nam cum hoc de Spiritu
Sancto universa confiteatur Ecclesia, numquid and in seipsam credere potest?
qui in Ecclesiam credit, in Hominem credit; non enim Homo ex Ecclesia, sed
Ecclesia esse caepit ex Homine: recede itaque, ex hac Blasphemiae persuasione
ut in aliquam humanam te aestimes debere credere Creaturam, cum omnino nec in
Angelum, nec in Archangelum sit credendum -- nonnullorum imperitia
praepositionem hanc (In) velut de proxima, vicinaque sentintia, in consequentem
traxit, ac rapuit, and ex superfluo imprudentur apposuit; in nullis autem
Canonicis, de quibus textus Symbolipendet, accepimus, quia in Ecclesiam
credere, sicut in Spiritum Sanctum, Filiumque debeamus: Et ideo, cum ab hoc
Honor Creatura omnis aliena sit, hic in quem credere praecipimur (viz.
Spiritus Sanctus) Deus est: quod verbum Divinitati specialiter vox Domini
Salvatoris assignat, ita dicens, Credit in Deum, and in me credit. Et iterum
Qui credit in me, non credit in me, sed in eum qui me misit. that is, We
believe the Church, as the Mother of our new Birth; not in the Church, as in
the Author of Salvation. For when as the whole Church professes this of the
Holy Ghost, can she believe also in her self? He who believes in the Church,
believes in man; for man sprung not from the Church, but the Church from man;
be far therefore from this Blasphemous persuasion, as to think that thou
ought to believe in any humane Creature; whereas our Faith is not to be
placed, no not in an Angel, or Archangel. The unskilfulnesse of some, has
caused them to take the Preposition, In, from the neighboring sentence which
went before, and to apply it to the subsequent, rashly, imprudently, and
superfluously: whereas, we are not warranted by any of the Canonical Books, on
which the Text of the Creed depends, to believe in the Church, as we ought to
believe in the holy Ghost, and the Son; and therefore seeing this Honor is
not communicable to any Creature; he in whom we are commanded to believe,
namely the holy Ghost, is God: hence also our Savior especially applies this
word unto the Divinity, saying thus, ye believe in God, believe also in me.
And again; He that believes in me, believes not in me, but in him that sent
me.

Thus did these Fathers read this Article of the Creed, and thus they
understood it. -- Credo in, that is, Colloco fiduciam in Deo; which the
Scripture appropriats to God alone, as to the peculiar object of our Trust and
Confidence, and wholly denies to Creatures. See Psalm. 146. 3. and 44. 7. Jer.
17. 5. 1 Timothy 6. 17.

As for that place, Exodus 14. 31. the Hebrew word there (...) used signifies
properly to believe the truth or Fidelity of one, and so may well agree to
Moses, who spoke to the People in Gods name, and had so often confirmed the
truth of his words, by the following miraculous Success, now the word is
usually joined in Construction with a Noune of the Ablative Case, having the
particle ((...)) prefixed, which is the sign of that Case; and therefore should
be rather translated, if we follow the Hebraisme close -- Crediderunt in Deo,
and in Mose. However, the sense is this; They believed Gods word spoken to them
by Moses; God as the Author; Moses as the Messenger. So, here is no opposition,
but a Subordination, and therefore no Derogation to Gods Prerogative. But
(...), in the Greek; and Credo in, in the Latin; are phrases implying more,
and answer to the Hebrew word [(...)] which signifies to depend or rely on an
Infinite Power, and goodness, which therefore both can and will deliver us
from all evil; and confer in due time, all Good upon us; now this is
peculiar to God alone, and therefore appropriated to him both in the Scripture,
and Fathers.

The Particle [(...)] in the Hebrew, is (I confess) often superfluous; Thence,
(...), and (...), in the Greek; and ( In) in the Latin, which answer to it,
sometimes redound in the Scriptures, Creeds and Fathers, in their translations
out of the Hebrew, or imitations of that sacred Tongue; yet not always. Now,
to know when these Particles redound, when not, we are to compare them with
other Parallel places of Scripture, and Copies of the Creed; and then we shall
find, that though some Greek Copies of the Creed prefixe ((...)) to the
Article of the Church, and the three subsequent ones, yet others (as those of
Marcellus, Anoyranus, and Chrysostom, hereafter to be alleged) omit it as
superfluous, but still religiously retain it in the precedent Articles of the
Son and Holy Ghost; by which it plainly appears, that they esteemed it
essential to these, but pleonasticall unto those. The like may be said of some
old Latin Copies of the Creed (which yet are very few) wherein (In) redounds
by the like Hebrew Pleonasme.

Ob. 2. The Socinians say, they do all acknowledge the Apostles Creed for the
matter, though they doubt whether it were composed in this Form by the
Apostles wherein they are not the first, nor alone. Erasmus seems to have first
made question of it; after him, Calvin, and most of his followers; wholly yet
deny not the Authority, but acknowledge the matter to be true. Nay the
Socinians complain, that whereas the Creed contains all Fundamental Truths,
yet other Articles are obtruded as necessary, such as be not contained in the
Creed; how then can the denial of the Composure of this Creed by the Apostles,
any way advantage the Socinians?

Answ. The Socinians deny some Articles of the Creed, in the Sense which the
Ancient Fathers understood them from whom they received the Creed it self for
words; and ought to have done, for meaning, and the denial of the Authors,
makes them, in all likelihood the bolder in their mis-interpretations. Then,
although they hold that the Creed contains all Fundamental Truths, yet they
hold not all the Articles thereof Fundamental. On the other side, they
unjustly complain of other Articles obtruded on their Belief, whereas the
Church has only explained some few Articles of the Creed, and vindicated them
from Heretical Glosses and Corruptions; warranting those her Expositions by
old Catholic Tradition, upon a due legal search, in an Oecumenicall Synod.
Lastly, the denial of the Composure of this Creed by the Apostles, as a
Summary of Truths ordinarily necessary to Salvation (which was the maine end
of Composing it) much advantageth the Socinians, who believe not all to be
necessary; and some not true, as they are construed in the old received Sense.

If Erasmus began first to doubt of the received Authors of the Creed, he
cannot well be excused, for questioning so ancient, and established a
Tradition, whereby no Benefit could redound to the Christian Church, but the
Faith of many might be startled, and Heresies awaked, as we have seen by the
Event; and I am sorry that the Socinians should look on him as they do (though
I hope amiss) as their first Founder, or chief Patron in this latter Age; by
reason of this, and some other extravagancies of his Pen; so that what
Posseuine, from others, says of him in relation to Luther, may be verified in
respect of Socinus, in some of his Errors, Erasmus innuit, Socinus irruit; And
this ( Nescio) of Erasmus (which others have since improved to a Nego) was
presently censured by the Parisian Divines. As for Mr Calvin, though he says
indeed that he will not contend with any one about the Authors of the Creed, as
a Thing in his judgment, not overmuch material, yet he produceeth two
Arguments in the same place, which evince the Apostles, and none others, to
have been the Composers thereof; namely, the concordant suffrages of Antiquity;
and the public receiving or use thereof, presently upon the Rise, or original
of the Christian Church. Instit. lib. 12. cap. 16. 6. 18. But of his Testimony
more fully hereafter.

Ob. 3. It seems that the Creed contains not the whole Body of the Credenda,
or Christian Belief: not all Credenda in general, for there are many thousand
more which lie scattered in the Scriptures: no, nor all Fundamental Points, or
necessary Doctrinall Truths; E. G. faith in the Trinity, the Canon of
Scripture, that we are to worship God, and go to the Father by the Son, the
doctrine of Repentance, good Works, Baptism, Imposition of hands; which are
expressly called a Foundation. Heb. 6. 1, 2. none of which are in the Creed.
Add hereunto the Deity of the Son of God, which seems not to be proved by
those words in the second Article -- His only begotten Son -- for he is
called the Son of God in Scripture in respect of his Conception, and
Resurrection, both which relate to his Humane Nature. See Luke 1. 35. Act. 13.
32, 33. Romans 1. 4.

Answ. The Creed contains all Fundamental Points, purely Doctrinall, or
Speculative; that is, necessary Credenda, as opposed to the Agenda, or
Practicalls of Christianity. The Canon of Scripture contains these
Fundamentalls dispersedly; and is delivered down to us, as the Creed is, by
Tradition; but not comprehended in the Creed for when we name Fundamentals, we
speak of Matters, or Points to be believed, not of the Books which contain
those Points. The Points cited out of Heb. 6. are all Practical: so also, is
the worship of God, and coming to the Father by the Son. Baptism is a
Sacrament, one of the Agenda's in the Church; yet referred, in the Nicene
Creed, to the 10th Article, as the outward ordinary means for remission of
Sins. The Mystery of the Trinity is included in the Creed, as has been
already showed, And so is the Divinity of our Savior, in those forecited
words. Vnigenitum [Patris] Filium, The only begotten Son of the Father. For
though he be called the Son of God in relation to his Humanity, in Luke 1.
35. because in his Conception, or Incarnation, the Holy Ghost did supplere
vicem Patris, by a miraculous overshadowing; or rather, not simply as man, but
as (...) God and man in one Person, in respect of that strange Union of the
Humane Nature in one Hypostasis with the Divine, by the supernatural operation
of the Holy Ghost: as also in relation to his Raising again, whereby he was
chiefly demonstrated to be the true Messiah, or Son of God, the first
begotten of the Dead. Act. 13. 32, 33. Romans 1. 4. Col. 1. 18. and Revel. 1. 5.
comp. Col. 1. 15. Romans 8. 29. Yet in the second Article of the Creed, he is
called the Only begotten Son of God, with relation to God the Father, and in
respect of his Divinity, which he received of the Father by an ineffable
Generation from all Eternity; for this Article is placed before his Conception
by the Holy Ghost, and his Nativity of the Virgin Mary (much more before his
Resurrection, which manifested, not made him the Son of God) and therefore
cannot relate to his Manhood, but to his Godhead; not to his Conception (or
Resurrection) in time, but to his Generation from Everlasting.

CAP. II.
The History of the Apostles Composing the Creed out of Ruffinus. Five Reasons,
why the Apostles delivered it to the Church, not in Writing, but by an Orall
Tradition. An objection, against the preserving of it by Tradition, Answered.

TOuching the Composing of the Creed by the Apostles, which is my first Head,
Ruffinus Presbiter of Aquileia, St Jeromes Contemporary, and great Emulatour,
gives us this Relation in the beginning of his Exposition on the Creed. --
Tradunt majores nostri, quod post Ascensionem Domini, cum per adventum Sancti
Spiritus, super singulos quosque Apostolos igneae linguae sedissent, ut
loquelis adversis variisque loquerentur, per quas nulla eis Gens extera, nulla
linguae barbaries inaccessa videretur, and invia; praeceptum eis a Domino datum
ob praedicandum Dei verbum, ad singulas quemque proficisci nationes. Discessuri
itaque ab invicem, normam prius futurae Praedicationis in commune constituunt,
ne forte alias ab alio abducti, diversum aliquid his qui ad fidem Christi
invitabantur, exponerent: Omnes Ergo in uno positi, and Spiritu Sancto repleti,
breve istud futurae sibi, ut diximus, Praedicationis Indicium, conferendo in
unum quod sentiebat unusquisque, componunt, atque hanc credentibus dandam esse
Regulam statuunt; etc. The sum is this. We have received from our
Ancestors, that after the Ascension of our Savior into Heaven, and the
Descent of the Holy Ghost from thence, in the shape of Fiery Tongues, on the
Day of Pentecost; the Apostles enabled with the gift of Tongues, to Preach unto
the most remote, and Barbarous Nations, prepared themselves accordingly to
fulfill their Lords Command; for the more convenient and ready Discharg of
which Duty, though authorized they were to Preach indifferently unto all, yet
they sorted themselves into several Provinces: But before they went on this
Embassy, being assembled together, and inspired from above, they Compiled the
Summary of the Christian Faith, as the Groundwork of all their Preaching, and
as a constant, uniforme Rule of Belief to all their Auditors (whom they
persuaded to embrace the Christian Belief) least otherwise they might Preach
more variously, and at random. And this they left behind them, both as a
Symbol, or Token of their Faith, munimentum fidei ex lapidibus vivis, and
margaritis Dominicis, which neither Winds nor Storms can subvert; and of their
Unanimity, as being now ready to depart each from other: not as the Sons of
Noah built the Tower of Babel, and were therefore punished with confusion of
Language, being not able to understand each others Speech; for these endued
with the knowledge of all Tongues -- Turrim fidei unanimes construebant, ut
illud Peccati, hoc Fidei probaretur Indicium. Thus far Ruffinus.

Now, the Apostles having thus Composed their Creed, they committed it not to
writing, but delivered it by word of mouth to the Bishops of the Churches,
their Successors. So witness, besides Ruffinus here, St Jerome, Cyril of
Jerusalem, and Chrysologus; yea, many years before them, Irenaeus and
Tertullian; as I shall show anon. The reasons of which manner of Delivery are
thus assigned by the same Fathers.

1. Vt certum esset, neminem haec ex lectione, quae interdum peruenire etiam ad
infideles solet, sed ex Apostolorum traditione didicisse sufficeret. So
Ruffinus, That it might not come by some unhappy chance, into the hands of
Heathens and Infidels, to whom (as Dogs) these holy Mysteries of the Christian
Faith were not to be cast, least they should misconstrue or deride, Profane or
pollute them, to their own greater Damnation, the Discouragement and Scandal
of the weak Christian, and the Dishonor of Religion. And to this well agrees
the signification of the word Symbolum, which Title the Creed of old has
borne, and most properly imports a watchword; now, a watchword (we know) is
given by word of mouth, not in paper, least the Enemy hap to come unto the
knowledge of it.

2. Observa fidem (says Cyril of Jerusalem) a sola Ecclesia tibi nunc
traditam, and ex omni Scriptura munitam, non in Charta scribendo, sed in Cord
memoriam [ejus] insculpendo, necubi Catechumenus ea qua vobis tradita sunt,
exaudiat. Catech. 5. It seems by him in this Place, that the very Catechumeni,
who were instructed in the Principles of the Christian Catechism, were not
acquainted yet with all the Mysteries of the Creed, until they came to
Baptism; some Articles were to hard meat, even for them, to digest. Our
Savior has a like speech to this purpose. Jo. 16. 12.

3. Accepturi Symbolum, says Chrysologus, Pectora parate non Chartam, quia
committi non potest caducis, and corruptibilibus Instrumentis aeternum and
coeleste Secretum, sed in ipsa area animae, in ipsa Bibliotheca interni
spiritus est locandum, ne profanus Arbiter, ne improbus, quod dilaceret,
Discussor inveniat; and fiat ad contemnentis and ignorantis ruinam, quod
confitentis and credentis donatum est ad Salutem. It suits with the Dignity of
the Creed, to be engraven in no other Table then the Heart of man; and with the
safety of Christians, that they receive it no otherwise then from the mouth of
their Pastor, with his short, but sound exposition thereof. Sermon. 58.

4. The same Father in his 61 Sermon gives this Reasan. Hoc monemus ne quis
committat literis quod est Cord mandaturus, ut credat. Apostolo sic monente
Cord creditur ad justiam, Ore autem confessio fit ad salutem. Romans 10. 10. The
Confession of our Faith which we make in the Creed, has the Heart for its
Mother; the mouth for its Midwife: the Pen has nothing to do here. So the
Groundwork of this Tradition is laid by S. Paul, if we may trust the judgment
of Chrysologus.

5. The Creed is best and most safely preserved by Tradition; especially being
so short an Epitome of the Christian faith; whereas Memory trusting to Paper is
less careful of retaining: and we daily see what doubts and disputes there
arise amongst Critics about the diversity of Copies, in the Transcription of
our Sacred Books; and what Errors of the Transcribers. Nihil securum, quod
extra animum fertur. Those two great Philosophers, Pythagoras and Socrates,
whom we may justly style the Fathers of the Rest, are observed to have wrote
nothing: neither did a far greater then They, our Blessed Savior. Lycurgu's
Laws by a bare Tradition, were kept inviolate above 500 years; when those of
Solon, diligently engraven in wood, and carefully laid up, were notwithstanding
soon forgoten, and frequently broken in the Lawgivers own lifetime. Yea, we
see by experience, both in ludicrous toys, as in Childrens sports; and in
weightier matters, as in the several Habits and Customs of Nations, that
without any Law written, they are both more easily retained, and more carefully
observed.

But because I foresee, that this last Reason will meet with opposition, I
shall endeavor to clear and confirm it both by satisfying those Doubts which
probably may arise against it. It will be objected that the Creed is not most
safely preserved by Tradition, because several Copies thereof do not a little
vary. That it seems very strange, a Thing should be safer kept by Tradition,
then by writing; seeing Tradition depends on no other help, but memory; whereas
Things committed to Paper, are conveyed to Posterity, and remain by two Helps,
Memory, and Writing. If Tradition were the safest way to preserve Things, why
were the Scriptures written? What is preserved of the doctrine of the Diuids,
of Pythagoras, Socrates etc: but what we find written?

I Answer. The Creed is best preserved by Tradition, for the sense and
substance of the Articles, because daily in public use, in the Catechumen's
mouths, and the Liturgies of the Church; yet subject to variation in point of
expression, by reason of several Tongues, and Dialects in the Christian World;
as also, because of some exegeticall Additions, interserted upom occasion of
some particular Heresies, which arose in this, or that Church. So Laws are
best preserved by continued Practice, though somewhat varying if received in
diverse Nations (as the Roman Laws are) in some specialty of expression; or
by way of application to the exigence of the Times, and Genius of the People,
in diverse Countries.

As for the dependence of Tradition, it relies not only upon Memory, but upon
continual use and Practice; a better means of Preservation, then Writing,
which is daily subject to the fraud, negligence, and ignorance of Transcribers;
many differences arising from whence, have raised no small trouble unto Learned
Critics, how to reconcile them; or (if irreconcilable) to descerne the true
Copy. The Hebrew Bible was preserved entire in the true reading thereof, (as
being constantly used in the Jewish Synagogues) without any Points, or Vowels
written, as now we have it, and that for many hundred years, according to the
most received Opinion; a Thing infinitely more difficult, then the
Preservation of the Creed. Wherefore, we may not without Reason say, that a
short Summary of the Faith, such as the Creed is, is best kept by Tradition,
especially such an one, as is in continual use and Practice; whereof the
Fathers here cited give us good reason; in sum, that Non sunt evulganda fidei
mysteria nisi Initiatis, and Magistro Duce, seu Interpret; ne sc: derisui
Profanis habeantur, aut malignantium Calumniis pa^eant; ne erroneis
Ignorantium, aut male feriantium glossematis obiiciantur.

The whole Word of God was committed to writing, because large and full of
Variety; yet occasionally, and by Degrees: The like may be said of the many,
long, various Discourses of Pythagoras, and Socrates, committed to Paper by
their Scholars.

Our Saviors Sermons, and Discourses were often very large, his Miracles, and
memorable passages of his Life, almost infinite; and so could not otherwise be
well preserved, then by Writing; yet Irenaeus tells us, that many Christian
Nations had no Scripture amongst them in his Time, who notwithstanding kept
Christianity diligently amongst them by an old Tradition. And on the other
side, the Fathers tell us, that where the Scriptures were to be had, the
Heretics often set forth unsound Books under the Apostles names, and corrupted
the true Copies of Scripture, which they got into their Hands; by this means,
seducing many, and troubling more; to neither of which inconveniences, a
known, practiced, breife Tradition is obnoxious.

As for the doctrine of the Druids, it was carefully preserved (as long as the
Religion stood) by an unwritten Tradition; now Christianity has a promise of
continuance unto the end of the world. Mat. 28. 20. and so needs no more to
fear a failing of its doctrine, then its Disciples.

If it be farther objected, that all in general are commanded to confess
Christ, and to give an account of the hope that is in them. 1 Pet. 3. 15. which
seems to make against the second Reason, assigned by Cyril of Jerusalem. That
the Creed was of old committed to writing by Irenaeus, and Tertullian; and that
when these Reasons, and exhortations were made by Ruffin, Cyril, and
Chrysologus, the Creed was committed to writing both by themselves, and others.

I answer; first that those Precepts belong properly to Christians, that is, to
Persons entered into the Church by Baptism, who had the whole Creed explained
unto them: but if they extend to the Catechumeni, the Confession and Account
must be understood more indefinitely, and at large, to wit, of those more easy
and general Principles, whereof they were informed by their Teachers.
Secondly, the Creed is therefore called a Tradition, because not committed to
writing by the Apostles, as the Gospel and Epistles were, though in after Ages
it were put in writing by the Fathers and Councills, for the more public
Conviction of Heretics. Yet, it clearly appears by the forecited Fathers,
(who cannot well be thought ignorant of the Churches custom in their own
Times) that the Creed was not delivered in writing to the Catechumeni, but
taught them by word of mouth, to learn and profess, and this teaching or
delivery, not without an explication of the Catechist, or Bishop, least
otherwise they might chance to err in the meaning: withal; it was not
delivered all together, but line after line, as they were able to receive it.

CAP. III.
Testimonies of Scripture, touching the Composure of the Apostles Creed,
especially out of S. Paul's Epistles; as the places are accordingly interpreted
by Divines of good note* both Ancient, and Modern. Some doubts against these
Testimonies, solved.

THUS much for the History of the Creeds Composure, and its manner of
Conveyance to after Ages. But that the Apostles did first Compile, and then
deliver this Creed, by an orall Tradition, to the Christian Church, will need
farther Confirmation. I shall endeavor to prove it by Scripture, Antiquity,
and Reason; all which, I hope will be found to attest this Truth, as
joynt-witnesses of what has bin already produced out of Ruffinus.

And first, by Scripture; for though the Creed be not expressly set down in any
place of the New Testament, because the Apostles, for the forementioned
reasons, thought not good to commit it unto writing; yet S. Paul in diverse
places of his Epistles, not obscurely alludes unto it, under several phrases
of speech, and apt metaphours (which we find afteward applied to the Creed by
the ancient Fathers) as they may be most probably interpreted, and are so
understood de facto by the judgment of good Authors, both of the Primitive, and
latter Times.

1. First, Romans 6. 17. The Apostle tells us of (...), That Form of Doctrine;
and expressly calls it (...), a Tradition, as the Ancients constantly style the
Creed: (...), says he, (...), Ye have obeyed from the Heart that Form of
Doctrine which was delivered you: that is, whereas before Baptism, ye were the
Servants of Sin; now now ye have professed your obedience to the Faith, by
the public rehearsal of the Creed, delivered to the Church in a set Form by
the Apostles, to be openly recited before the Congregation at the time of
Baptism; a Custom used from the Beginning, and still retained in the Church.
Thus is the place expounded by Anselme, our Learned and Renowned Archbishop of
Canterbury -- Quae doctrina est Forma, quia imaginem Dei deformatam restituit,
which Doctrine says he, is styled a Form, because it restores the defaced
Image of God, to wit, by Baptism, (which the Apostle elsewhere calls, -- The
Laver of Regeneration. Tit. 3. 5.) whence it follows in the very next verse --
Being then made free from sin, that is, says the same Anselme. Per Spiritum
Sanctum quem accepistis in Baptismo, By the Holy Ghost which ye received in
Baptism.

2. Secondly. Romans 12. 6. He charge those who have the Gift of Prophecy, to
Prophecy (...) according to the Analogy or Proportion of Faith. Now by the Gift
of Prophecy in this place, Divines usually understand the Interpretation of
Scripture: and by Faith, they understand the object of Faith, or the Principles
of Christian Religion, which are contained in the Creed; thus expounding it.
Let them so interpret Scripture, that they give no sense thereof, but what
bears Analogy, and due correspondence with the main Grounds of Religion,
comprehended in the Rule of Faith, or Articles of the Creed. Thus Beza, on the
place expressly, -- Significat Apostolus verum Canonem Prophetiae, id est,
interpretationis Scripturarum verae a falsa discernendae, nempe si ad
Christianae fidei Axiomata (...) exigantur, Symbolo comprehensa quod
Apostolicum vocant; and quod jam inde ab initio Evangelicae Praedicationis,
veluti Evangelii Epitome scriptum fuit, ideoque norma, and regula fidei merito
a Tertulliano vocatur. Where he tells us that the Creed is the Epitome of the
Gospel, the Rule of Faith, and (more particularly) the Rule of Prophecy, that
is, of discerning the true Exposition of Scripture from the false: then, that
it was framed at the first Preaching of the Gospel; therefore by the first
Preachers of it, the Apostles: Lastly, that the Articles thereof are (...) ex
se fide digna, that is, require our Assent without farther proof; therefore,
framed by Divine Inspiration. With him agrees the Learned Estius, though of a
diverse Religion. Let him Prophecy (says he) according to the proportion of
Faith, id est, sic ut sequatur rectae fidei dictamen, and diligenter caveat,
nequid vel pronunciet, quamvis sibi videatur praeditus spiritu Prophetico, vel
pro Scripturae Interpretatione adferat, quod a Regula fidei discrepet. And
before him, Anselme [secundum rationem fidei] ut nihil extra fidei regulam
loquamur, aut sapiamus. To whom we may add the Testimony of Simon Grynaeus,
Scripturarum Epitome, says he, est Symbolum Apostolorum, quod ideo
Tertullianus normam and Regulam fidei appellat; quia ea tantum vera habenda ac
proinde credenda sunt, quae revera cum illis consentiunt. that is, The Apostles
Creed is the Epitome of the Scriptures, which therefore Tertullian calls the
Rule of Faith, because those things only are to be held for true, and believed,
which agree with the Articles thereof.

3. Thirdly, 1 Cor 3. 2. He thus bespeaks his Corinthians, I have fed you with
Milk, and not with meat, for hitherto ye were not able to bear it, neither
yet now are ye able. Then v. 10. He uses another Metaphor, As a wise
Master Builder, I have laid the foundation, and another builds thereon; but
let every man take heed how he builds thereupon. Now under these Metaphors,
of Milk, and a Foundation, the Apostle seems to allude unto the Creed; calling
it Milk, because it contains the first principles of Christianity, the proper
food of newborn Babes. 1 Pet. 2. 2. Who were lately regenerated by Baptism.
Ioh. 3. 3, 5. Romans 6. 4. Whence Cyrill of Jerusalem, alluding to this place,
calls the Creed, (...), a Milkie introduction. Catech. 4. And calling it a
foundation; because it is the very Groundwork of Christiany, comprising the
fundamentalls of our Religion; whereas other Doctrines are but superstructures;
which if good and profitable, he compares here to Gold, Silver, and precious
stones: if Bad; to wood, hay, and stubble. Comp. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 7. Romans 15. 20.
Ephesians. 2. 20. Rev. 21. 14. Heb. 5. 12, 13. and 6. 1, 2. Also 1 Cor. 4. 15. 2 Cor.
10. 16.

4. Fourthly. The same Apostle, in his Epistles to the Churches of Galatia and
Philippi, reprehending those who made a mixture of two Religions, joining
Judaisme and Christianity together, endeavors, to bring them back, to the true
and undoubted Rule, whereof they had formerly made profession in their
Baptism. To the Galatians, thus. Cap. 6. v. 15, 16. In Christ Jesus, neither
circumcision avails any Thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new Creature: And as
many as walk according to this Rule [(...)] Peace be on them, and mercy. Whence
I observe three things.

1. That the Apostle opposes a new Creature, to the outward state of
Circumcision and uncircumcision now, we are regenerated, or made new Creatures
in Baptism, by Profession of our faith in Christ.

2. That he immediately inferrs upon this, the walking according to a set Rule,
such a rule as has a manifest Reference to the forementioned new Birth or
Creature; now what Rule can this be, but the Creed, which has been allwaies
professed in Baptism, and borne the same Title in all Antiquity. Irenaeus calls
it (...) in the Greek, as he is cited by Epiphanius; and Tertullian, the most
ancient of the Latins, usually calls it Regula Fidei. 3. The word [(...)] which
signifies more then (...) an ordinary walking, for it is not a walking at
random, but an orderly walking (as the same word is rendered, Act. 21. 24.) an
exact keeping of a Path, without the least Declination either to the right
hand, or to the left: which signification well sorts with the accurate
observation of the Creed without varying from it in the least Particular.

And, least I should seem to go alone in this Interpretation, please but to
consult the judgment of these Fathers whose expositions follow, and you will
find them to understand this new Creature of Regeneration in Baptism: and by
the Rule or (...) the Rule of Doctrine, of Faith then professed. Chrysostom: on the
place -- (...). The Apostle, says he, means by this new Creature; our
Christian law or discipline -- for our soul grown old in Sin, is at once, or
altogethr renewed by Baptism, receiving as it were a new Creation. Theophilact
expounds it in the same sense, and the like words. Jerome -- nos qui nunc jam
in Baptismate Christo consurreximus, in novum renati hominem, nec Circumcisioni
nec praeputio serviamus, sed quod futuri sumus, jam nunc nos esse credamus.
[Regulam] Ad normam omnia diriguntur, ut utrum prava, rectave sint, cum Regula
apposita fuerit, arguantur, ita ut doctrina Dei quaedam quasi norma sermonis
sit etc. Where he expoundes the new Creature, of Baptism, and the Rule, of
that divine Doctrine, whereby all others are to be examined, the Sum whereof
is the Creed, which was solemnly rehearsed, and professed at the time of
Baptism; as for the divine Doctrine at large, comprised in the New Testament;
much of it was not extant when this Epistle was written, and therefore cannot
be here meant, by St Jerome.

Theodoret, to the same purpose, (...). This (...), of which he speaks, the
Doctrine publicly proposed, at the time of Baptism (wherein we put off our
sins, and put on the spirit) what is it but the Creed? which was then professed?
especially since he gives it such a Character of exactness, that it has
nothing either wanting, or wast, a fit Periphrasis of the Creed. Oecumenius,
accords (...). The (...), or Poole wherein we are borne anew, is the water of
Baptism: and the Rule or Doctrine opposed to the Law, which ought to satisfy
us, as that which renders us new Creatures, is the Rule of Faith comprised in
the Creed.

Again, to the Philippians, the Apostle speaks in these words. Chap. 3. v.
15, 16. Let us as many as be perfect, be thus minded; and if in any thing ye
be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you: nevertheless
whereto we have already attained, (...), let us walk by the same Rule. Where
the Apostle uses the very same phrase. And this by the way is a good
admonition for moderation in Controversies, about points of lesser Consequence,
which grate not upon the foundation; that we do not presently Reprobate those
who are otherwise minded, but patiently expect their farther Illumination, in
still keeping our selves without wavering, close to those Grounds, whereto we
have already attained by profession of our Creed in Baptism. The Fathers so
understand this Place, together with latter Interpreters, in their Annotations
on it. Ambrose: Non extra Regulam Disciplinae sapere in conversatione Fidei,
sed hoc sapere quod Commune sit, and modestum; in Evangelii veritate; which is
most properly applicable to the Creed, for that is the Rule of the Christian
Discipline, or Faith, which is most commonly received, and most modestly urged.

S. Chrysostom. (...). The Rule (says he) receives neither Addition nor
Diminution, for then it loses the very essence of a Rule; let us walk
therefore by the same Faith, within the same Bounds. What Rule, what Faith is
this, but the Creed, which is the Boundary, or Limit of the Christian Belief?
To him assents Theophilact, in the same words. Oecumenius, (...). By the Rule,
says he, he understands the Faith, or Creed for as you spoil a Rule, by
taking away from it, or adding to it, so is it also in the Faith. Anselme
construes this Rule of Communis Fidei sensus, the Common Sense or Substance of
the Christian faith, which is comprehended in the Creed: Cajetan also, of the
Regula Fidei and morum; the Rule of faith in the Creed, of life in the
Commandments. Estius in like manner. Hortor vos omnes eadem Regula fidei and
Doctrinae, incedere, eandemque Regulam tenere -- etiam alibi, de fide loquens,
Regulam nominat, ut Galat: vlt: Quicunque hanc Regulam -- I exhort you to walk
in the same Rule of faith and Doctrine and to hold the same Rule -- The Apostle
elsewhere speaking of the Faith, calls it a Rule Gal. 6, 15, 16.

5. Fifthly; In his Epistle to the Ephesians, exhorting them to unity, he sets
down seven motives or grounds thereof, and amongst these he reckons One Faith;
where Faith is clearly taken for the Object of Faith, or Principles of Belief,
which are contained in the Creed: whence it follows in the very next words,
One Baptism: that Baptism wherein we make Profession of this Faith. Otherwise
if we look on the Habit of Faith, or the actual Celebration of Baptism, we
have as many Faiths as Believers; and as many Baptismes, as Persons Baptized.

And, to clear this Interpretation farther yet, if we compare this Text with
those words of his, Chap. 2. 20. in the same Epistle, we shall find the Framers
of this Creed. Ye are built, says he, on the Foundation of the Apostles, that
is on the Grounds of Faith laid by the Apostles, not on their Persons, for they
are dead long ago. It is added there -- (...), and on the Foundation of the
Prophets, viz: not the Prophets of the old Testament, but of the New, who were
the Apostles Copartners in laying the foundation of the Christian Church.
Comp. Ephesians: 3. 5. Act: 13. 1, 2, 3. Math: 23. 34. 1 Cor. 12. 28. and 14. 29, 32.
Rev: 18. 20, 24.

6. Sixthly; 1 Timothy: 6. 20. He thus charge Timothy, (...), O Timothy keep the
Depositum, or that which is committed to thy trust: which Depositum both our
Divines, and those of the Church of Rome, understand of the saving Doctrine of
the Gospel, which we find (for matter of Belief) summed up in the Creed. And
the following words lead us to this construction, avoiding profane and vain
bablings, and oppositions of Science falsely so called, (of which Science, the
Gnostics had their name) which some professing, have erred concerning the
Faith. Besides, the Metaphor of a Depositum well suits with the Creed; first in
the manner of Delivery, the one is committed to our Hands, the other to our
Ears; both a kind of Tradition: Then in the strictness of keeping; not the
least parcel of a Depositum is to be diminished, nor the least tittle of our
Creed to be parted with: S. Basil therefore would not forgo one Iota, when the
Arians would have had him change (...) into (...).

In this sense Expositours agree, both Ancient and Modern. So Jerome,
Commendatum a nobis servandum tibi fidei Depositum custodi. And upon those
words before, v. 12. thou have professed a good Profession before many
witnesses. In Baptismo, says he, ab renunciando Seculo, and Pompis ejus: at
which time they also constantly made a Profession of the Faith. Theophilact
likewise by his Depositum, understands the Grounds of Faith, in opposition to
humane Reasoning, which falsely usurps the name of knowledge, and make us err
from the Faith, (...), for the faith admits not, says he, of disputes. Estius
construes the words more plainly of a Doctrinall Tradition, contra-distinct to
the Scripture, delivered by Christ, and received by the Apostles, which
contains fully all the Articles of the Faith, to which nothing was added by
succeeding Councels, but the same preserved still, explained, illustrated, and
defended, against succrescent Heresies. His words are these, Non solas
Scripturas Paulus apud Timotheum deposuerat, sed doctrinam sanam viva voce ei
tradiderat -- Praeter Depositi rationem est ut ei aliquid addatur -- hinc ergo
sequitur, fidei semel a Christo traditae, and ab Apostolis acceptae, nihil
prorsus addi posse, neque id agi in Conciliis Fidei causa congregatis, ut novi
condantur Articuli Fidei, sed ut fidei Doctrina ab initio tradita conservetur,
explicetur, illustretur, and contra succrescentes haereses defendatur. Comp. 2 Timothy 2. 2. and 3. 14.

7. Seventhly, the Apostle renews the same charge to him, 2 Timothy: 1. 13. (...)
Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou have heard of me, (not which
thou hadest of me in writing; for the Creed, as I have showed, is a Tradition)
in faith, and love; that is, concerntng Christian Faith, and Charity: namely
concerning Faith, in the Creed, concerning love or charity, in the
Commandments: thus he conjoynes our Credenda, and Agenda; that is, the Rules
of our Belief, and Practice. And it follows in the next v. (...), Keep that
good Depositum, the good Thing which was committed unto thee. Upon which words
consult the following Interpreters. S. Chrysostom. T^ (...). What is this
Depositum? the Faith. S Jerome, Secundum meam formam vide and doce, quam a me
breviter accepisti, quomodo integre credere, and alterutrum deligere debeamus.
What is this breife and entire Form of Belief, but the Creed? Theophilact
likewise by this Depositum, understands the Rule of Faith, (...) the Articles
which we are commanded to believe; But how says he will thou keep these
Rules? not by humane strength, but by the holy Ghost. (...), which dwells in
us through Baptism, take care therefore to keep that Spirit, and that Spirit
will keep this Depositum. Cajetan Habeto in usu formam Sermonum quos a me non
per Scripturas didicisti, sed audisti. Ipsa forma sanorum verborum, quae
audierat a Paulo, appelatur Bonum Depositum. Now this set form of words,
delivered by word of mouth: to what agrees it but to the Creed? Estius. in like
manner. Depositum id est, Doctrina ab Apostolis continuata serie tradita, in
sola Ecclesia Catholica asservatur, Scriptura enim ei cum Haereticis communis
est. Now this Doctrine delivered down from the Apostles to us, in an
uninterrupted Succession, which is here contradistinguish'd to the Scriptures,
and said to be kept in the Catholic Church, what is it else but the Creed?

8. Eighthly. The Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews (whom I little, or not
at all, doubt to have been the same Apostle) tells the Jews, That they had
need to be taught again, (...), which be the first principles of the Oracles of
God and that they were (...), Babes having need of milk. Now these Principles
are contained in the Creed: and Cyril of Jerusalem in his Catech. 4. wherein he
Paraphraseth on the Heads of the Creed (alluding plainly to this Place, as to
the other two Parallel ones, 1 Cor. 3. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 2.) calls it (...), as I
observed before. To this sense accord the following Fxpositions. Beda, Quod in
lactis commemoratione posuit and Doctrinam, ipsa est quae per Symbolum
traditur, and Orationem Dominicam. Anselmus, Elementa vocantur illae Parts, de
quibus Sermo Dei prius contexitur, sc: Incarnatio, Passio, Resurrectio, Commune
Judicium, Damnatio malorum, Corona justorum, and caetera quae primum
annunciantur eis qui convertunt tur, Exordium enim Sermonum est, Symbolum
Christianae Fidei. Aquinas, Exordia Sermonum Dei, and prima Principia, et
Elementa, sunt Articuli Fidei, et praecepta Decalogi. Cajetan, Elementa
sermonum Dei sunt ea Principia, quae docemus Catechumenos, -- Dicitur in
Symbolo, Apostolica Ecclesia, quia fundatur in Apostolis. Their words are so
plain, that they need no Logic to apply them to the Creed.

Then in the Beginning of the next Chapter, viz: Heb: 6. 1. the same Author
mentions (...), the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ: (...) the Foundation.
Amongst which Fundamental Principles he reckons up -- Faith toward God, and
the Resurrection of the dead; which two be the first, and last Articles of the
Creed, the last I say, reading the Creed, as some of the Ancients did, with
this close, The Resurrection of the dead unto life everlasting, thus coupling
two Articles in one.

Let us now see what Expositors bear witness to this sense, applying these
words to the Apostles Creed. S. Chrysostom. (...). Where he interprets the words of
the grounds of Christianity, wherein we are Catechized, and whereinto Baptized;
those fundamental Doctrines of faith, to which all the rest are in the nature
of superstructures; and what are these but the Creed?

S. Ambrose. Quis fit sermo inchoationis Christi, nisi Fidei initium? Sicut
enim cum qui in doctrinam literarum inducitur, elementa oportet primum audire,
sic and Christianus primum omnium de fide Catholica erudiri debet, quod est
fundamentum nostrae salutis -- quia enim fides fundamentum est, caetera vero
superaedificationes sunt, D. Paulus sequentibus verbis ostendit. This fidei
initium, the groundworke of Faith and Salvation; and this fides Catholica,
wherein a Christian ought first to be instructed, as being that foundation,
whereon the whole after-frame is built, what else can it be but the Creed? S.
Aug. De fide and operibus cap. 11. Epistola quae ad Hebraeos inscribitur, cum
eorum, qui baptizantur, commemorarentur Initia, posita est ibi paenitentia a
mortuis operibus -- Haec igitur omnia pertinere ad initia Neophytorum, satis
aperteque Scriptura testatur. Venerable Bede has the same words borrowing them
(as much else of his Comments) from S. Austin. Both refer them to those
Principles of Christianity, which the Novices or Catechumeni were instructed
in, and professed at Baptism, among which the principal was the Creed.
Oecumenius -- (...). Where he shows the method of the Christian Catechism;
some points whereof were explained to the Novices in Religion before Baptism,
as Repentance from dead works, Belief in God, the nature and use of Baptism,
as also of Imposition of Hands (in Confirmation after Baptism) whereby to be
made Partakes of the Spirit: and, some after Baptism, as the Mysteries of our
Saviors Passion, and High Priesthood, his taking our sins on himself, and
working our Salvation; the mysteries of our Resurrection, of the last
judgment, and everlasting Reward, or life; the most of which Principles are
comprehended in the Creed.

Theophyl. also on the same place. (...) etc. (...). Where he interprets this
repentance from dead works, of renouncing the works of the Devil in Baptism;
and referres the resurrection of the Dead, in express terms, to our
Confession of Faith, or Creed, which at the time of Baptism we publicly
attest. Anselmus, [Necrursum jacientes fundamentum] Doctrinae (inquit) quae in
exordio tradita est vobis per Symbolum, and orationem Dominicam, ut hac iterum
incipiatis imbui. Estius. [fidei in Deum] Respicit ad professionem Symboli quam
faciebant Baptizandi. Calvinus. Erant certa capita, de quibus Pastor
Catechumenum interrogabat, quemadmodum ex variis Patrum Testimoniis constat,
praesertim de Symbolo quod Apostolicum vocant, examen habehatur, Ille primus
quasi ingressus erat in Ecclesiam iis, qui jam adulti, Christo nomen dabant,
cum prius alieni fuissent ab ejus fide. Paraeus. Fidem pro Symbolo fidei
intelligere possumus, ubi haud dubie quaerebatur, credisne in Deum Patrem?
Credisne in Jesum Christum filium ejus unigenitum? Credisne in Spiritum
Sanctum? In his quaestionibus Jeronimi temporibus Catechumeni baptizandi
quadraginta diebus erudiebantur, ut ipse scribit ad Pammachium. These four
Testimonies so clearly understand this place of the Creed, and so plainly
speak of the profession thereof at the time of Baptism, that it were lost
labor to insist farther on them.

9. Ninthly, and lastly S. Jude in his general Epistle, ver. 3. exhorts all
good Christians, That they would earnestly contend for the Faith, which was
once delivered to the Saints. Where by Faith is plainly meant the object of
Faith, or the Principles of Belief, which are contained, as we know, in the
Creed; for he renders this as the reason of his exhortation, in the words
immediately following, That certain men (viz. Heretics) had crept in unawares,
who denied the only Lord God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, which be the two
first Articles of the Creed. This Faith says the Apostle, was delivered,
(...). So it is a Tradition, And but once delivered, to show the perfection and
stability of it: the Perfection; for nothing must be added to it, since it was
once delivered entire; and the stability of it; for nothing must be taken from
it, it must for ever remain firm and untoucht: in both, like a Depositum; no
second Delivery thereof, either to increase or correct it. To conclude; This
Faith the Apostle would have contended for; and that, not slightly, but
earnestly, because it concerns the maine Grounds, or foundation of
Christianity, not some By-poynts, or slight superstructures.

Thus at length, have I proved the Antiquity and Orinall Authors of the Creed
from several Texs of Scripture accordingly expounded by Divines of the best
note, both in the Primitive Times, and this latter Age. But before I proceed to
any farther proofs, it will be requisite to remove such objections, as may be
raised against what I have here produced.

Ob. 1. How can it be proved out of Scripture, that the Apostles made the
Creed, that is, this form of faith (...), in the same words, wherein we now
have it? Seeing it is no where in Scripture, and as for those Metaphors, (...),
etc. They agree to every Epistle or Sermon of the Apostles, as well as to the
Creed; and therefore it will no more follow they speak of the Creed under
those forms, then that I speak of Homo, therefore I mean Socrates. And
indeed, most of the Fathers cited on those places, seem to relate to the
Doctrine of faith in general, not to any Epitome of it, such as the Creed.
Besides, Anselme, and Cajetan extend the Rule as well to the Agenda, as the
Credenda, whereas the Creed comprehends no Agenda at all.

Answ. Every Epistle or Sermon of the Apostles cannot properly be styled a
form of Doctrine, a Rule, a Depositum, etc. First, not every Epistle; for the
Apostles mention this form, whatsoever it were, in diverse of their Epistles,
as somewhat several from them, and contradistinct unto them: nor secondly,
every Sermon; for the Apostles Sermons, which we find recorded in the Acts were
commonly made unto the Jews, circumcised Proselites, or to the (...), that is,
the Gentile-worshippers of the true God, and observers of the seven Laws of
the sons of Noah; now, such as these needed nothing to be proved to them, but
that Jesus was the Messiah; that is, to have the foregoing Promises and
predictions of the Old Testament, applied to a particular person, namely, to
Jesus the son of Mary: as for the rest, the most of the Creed, they believed
it before, and therefore had no need to have it preached unto them. Yea, in
that Sermon of S. Paul at Athens, Acts 17. to the Heathen Philosophers, who
were pure idolatrous Gentiles, we find naught preached unto them, but the
knowledge and worship of one true God, Christ's Resurrection, and coming to
judgment, so, not the whole Canon or form of Doctrine; which if it were not
explained to the Chatechumeni, before they came to Baptism, (as we have
already learned from Cyril of Jerusalem, when he was Catechist) much less was
it propounded in gross to the raw Pagan who in likelihood, at first sight,
might either deride the faith, or stumble at the threshold, upon the hearing of
so many strange mysteries.

Besides, many of the places alleged out of S. Paul's Epistles, not obscurely
allude unto Baptism, wherein the Catechumene made his confession of Faith, by
a public rehearsal of the Creed, (as will more fully appear hereafter) but
had not that Creed Preached unto him, at his first invitation to Christianity:
only in the precedent days of Lent, the Creed was explained to him by the
Catechist, and on Palme-sunday, by the Bishop.

The Rule involves the Agenda, or practical grounds of Christianity, as
Anselme and Cajetan rightly tell us; but it includes the Credenda too, that is,
our Articles of Belief, and primarily points at them; which is sufficient for
our purpose, for we make not the Creed the whole, but the Principal part of
the Christian Catechism, S. Paul therefore Heb. 6. 1, 2. and Cyril of
Jerusalem in his Catechises, join them both together, as necessary for the
Catechumeni, who were to be taught what to do, and observe, as well as what to
believe. As for the Fathers, in their Expositio^s on the forecited places of
Scripture; some of the^ expressly mention the Creed, others refer what they
say to Bapt., when the custom was to make open profession of the Creed; these
therefore may well speak for the rest, and explain their meaning touching the
doctrine of Faith, that though expressed it be in more general Terms, yet is to
be understood in the same sense, for the Breviary of this Doctrine, couched in
the Creed, and confessed at the time of Initiation into the Church by Baptism.

Ob. 2. Suppose it be granted, that the forecited places of Scripture import,
there was some Form of Doctrine delivered before the new Testament was
written, or after; and, that it contained the chief heads of Christian
Religion: yet, that this Form or Rule was the same with that which we call the
Apostles Creed, is not necessarily inferred, nor do most of the Expositours
alleged, affirm any such Thing. Nay, those Principles, Heb. 6. 1, 2. are
such, as some of them are not mentioned in the Creed, as Baptism, Imposition
of Hands, Repentance from dead works. It is not enough to prove, there were
Summaries of Faith, containing the same in substance with the Creed, for so all
Creeds, and Confessions of Faith, if true, might be called the Apostles Creed;
nay, the Scripture of the New Testament contains nothing else in Substance: the
Apostles Creed is that only which is delivered in this Form, and in these
words, which distinguish it from all other Creeds. If any now among us, who
receive it as framed by the Apostles, should even for explication, or under any
other pretense, offer to alter the least word or tittle, we should count it,
and that justly, high Presumption and Sacrilege; and should not esteem it, so
altered (though containing nothing but Truth) to be the Apostles Creed.

Answ. The forecited places of Scripture evince thus much, that, a Form
containing the Heads of Religion was delivered not after, but before the New
Testament was written, for else the New Testament could not have born witness
of it: Now the Church says, the Apostles Creed is that Form, for she has
delivered us none other, nor entitled any other to the Apostles name in any age
past; therefore let the Objectours either produce another, or subscribe to the
Churches Testimony. The like Argument may be urged touching any Book of
Scripture. As for Instance; Antiquity tells us, that S. Paul wrote an Epistle to
the Romans; the Church tells us, that the Epistle we now have so entitleed, is
that Epistle, and none other: therefore if any man will doubt of, or deny it,
let him either show another Epistle which S. Paul wrote to the Romans, or accept
this upon the Church's word. As for what the Expositours say on the
fore-alleaged Places of Scripture, has been already shown. Those Principles
mentioned Heb. 6. 1, 2. are some of them Practical Heads of Christianity,
which were taught the Catechumeni, together with the Creed; and because
Practical Points, not included in it; the Creed being composed for a Summary
of pure Doctrinals: yet they all refer to the Tenth Article of the Creed,
namely to Remission of sins: Repentance, as the Antecedent or preparative;
Baptism, as the outward means, and Imposition of Hands, in Confirmation, as
the Complement or Perfection thereof.

As for other Summaries of Faith, they cannot be either so truly, or so
properly called the Apostles Creed, because they want the Attestation of the
Church, which never acknowledged them for such; though otherwise perhaps in
substance they agree with it, as Paraphrases, or parts thereof.

The New Testament contains many things, besides the fundamental Articles of
Belief; as smaller Doctrinall Points, Evangelicall Rules of Practice, matters
of History, Disputes, Prophecies etc. All extra Fidem besides the Creed, the
Form and words whereof were delivered by the Apostles, as well as the Heads
and Substance of the Faith, though some now doubt which they were (...), in
express words.

As for explicating, or altering the Creed; we may safely paraphrase, or
comment on it now, though not alter the Text thereof in words or sense;
because it has been delivered to us totidem verbis by a confessed evident
Tradition of above 1200 years, as the Oppugners of its Authors are forced to
yield. Before it was thus settled, there was more liberty of expression, because
diverse Churches somewhat varied the Form, by reason of succresent Heresis;
but now it has triumphed over all, and is long ago settled in full possession
of the Christian Faith. Besides in all those former variations, though the
Form was changed in some few Particulars, yet the heads or Articles of
Belief, continued the same; It was not therefore sufficient for any confession
of Faith to gain the Title of the Apostles Creed, in that it contained nothing
but Truth.

CAP. IV.
Testimonies concerning the Creed, and the composure thereof by the Apostles,
taken out of the Greek Fathers, who bear witness for the Eastern Churches.
Some objections, against these Authorities, partly answered, partly prevented.

YOU have seen what light the Holy Scripture gives us, concerning this Creed
of the Apostles; but this Truth will be farther cleared and confirmed, by the
concordant Testimonies of the Fathers; and most of those the most ancient for
Time, as living nearest the age of the Apostles; and the most venerable for
Authority; who therefore may best be credited in this matter, and well speak
for the rest.

Now in reciting their Testimonies, when I produce some of them, who in their
writings set down the Creed or Rule of Faith, not agreeing totidem verbis
expressly in every word and tittle, with that, which the Church now receives
for the Apostles; I shall desire my Reader to take notice of these three things.

1. First, that diverse of the Fathers, writing against the Heretics of their
Times, mentiond only, or chiefly, those Articles, which were then called in
question by those against whom they wrote; whence it is, that they do not
always set the Creed down whole and entire: which by the way, may well be one
Reason, why the Article of Christ's descent into Hell was omitted in many latter
Creeds; because never questioned by any of the Heretics of those days. The
same reason induced the Nicene Fathers, to proceed no farther in their Creed
than this Article -- and in Spiritum Sanctum, And I believe in the Holy Ghost;
although the old Creed was larger (as will appear more fully in what I shall
produce hereafter;) namely, because the Arian controversy required no more.

2. Secondly, That the Fathers maine care in setting down this Rule of faith,
was, to keep themselves to the same Heads or Articles of the Creed, giving
themselves sometimes liberty to vary words and phrases; whence it is, that
though they always, set down the Creed, wheresoever they mention it, as the
only, necessary, unchangeable Rule of faith, the immovable Basis of
Christianity, the distinctive (...), or assured mark of a true, orthodoxe
Christian, contradistinguishing him, to Pagans, Jews, and Heretics; yet
sometimes, as learned Discoursers, they enlarge the parts of the Creed by way of
Paraphrase: otherwhiles, as short Comprisers thereof, they contract the sum of
it into fewer words, according as they saw cause, or had occasion offered. So
Tertullian, though he lay down this for a ground, that -- Regula fidei una
omnino est, sola immobilis and irreformabilis, The Rule of faith is only one,
soley immovable, and umchangeable. De Virg. vel chap. 1. Yet whereas he thrice
rehearses it in three several Tracts, he never uses the same words exactly,
but varyeth his expression; now extending, now contracting it at pleasure.

Besides, there is an other reason why some of the Creeds end with the Article
of the Holy Ghost viz: because the four following Articles are virtually
included in it, which appears by S. Chrysostomes first Homily on the Creed, as
shall be shown by and by.

As for us of this Age we are not unjustly abridged the like liberty, in
varying of words or phrases.

First, because these are suspected times, wherein the very Grounds of Faith
are by many very doubtfully held, and by some called in question.

Secondly, because the Form is now on all hands confessedly ancient, fully
settled, and strictly enjoined for so many Ages; whereas the Fathers lived in a
Time, when several Churches used to vary in the expression of several
Articles; and they themselves were known Champions of the Faith, against the
Heretics which then a rose. The case is much the same in the number of
Canonical Books, which is now a like aknowledged by all and entirely settled,
(at leastwise in those of the New Testament) but not so heretofore: Or, in the
Translations of the Bible, which every one at the first, who had some skill in
the Greek Tongue took upon him to perform; as S. Aug: tells us. Doct: Christ.
lib: 2. cap: 12. Yet it is Prudence in the Church to tie her children
ordinarily, to the use of one translation now (though not debarring the
learneds recourse unto the Originals) when as there are so many Divisions,
Opinions, Suspicions, Controversies, about matter of Religion, and such a
multitud of Schisms thence arising, which might be probably continued and
increased by such a promiscuous license.

Thirdly, that the Fathers in their Catechisticall Paraphrases on the Creed,
which they made to the Catechumeni before they were admitted unto Baptism;
sometimes intermixed matter of a diverse kind, viz. Practical Heads or Points
of Christianity, equally necessary for the instruction of their Auditors; so
does Cyril of Jerusalem in his Catacheses. And in their other Tracts, wherein
they dogmatically explain it, they often add some exegeticall Particles
against the Heretics of those days, the more clearly to confute them, and
forearme their Disciples against their poisonous doctrines; so some of the
Eastern Churches in the First Article of the Creed, added these two Attributes
by way of exposition to God the Father viz. Invisible and Impassible; thus
contradistinguishing God the Father to God the Son and contradistinguishing
themselves to the Sabellians and Patri-passians, who confounded the two Persons,

Yet notwithstanding all these seeming Differences, the indifferent Reader will
easily find, that the aforesaid Symboles or Rules of Faith which they set down
in their writings do plainly relate to this Creed of the Apostles.

First, because they affirm that they received them from the Apostles whereas
no Creed ever bore their name but this one which the Church now acknowledges
under that Title.

Secondly, because they use the same method in setting down the Articles, and
commonly they make use of the same words.

This premised; I come now to set down their Authorities in order as they lie
beginning with the most ancient, and so descending to latter times. And first of
the Greek Fathers who show what Rule of Faith was received in the Churches of
the East. These witnesses are eight in number, viz. Thaddaeus cited by
Eusebius, Ignatius, Origin, Marcellus of Ancyra S. Basil the Great, Gregory
Nyssen, Cyril of Jerusalem, and S. Chrysostom.

1. Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History; lib. 1. cap. 13. speaking of the
History of our Savior, and Abagarus King of Edessa; tells us how Thaddaeus one
of our Saviors Disciples, being sent to the King after his Ascension, was
desired by him to relate the History of the Power and coming of his Master; to
which he replied, that for the present he desired to keep silence; but on the
morrow, when the King should have caused a public Assembly of his People, he
would then at large discourse upon these following Heads which are the Articles
of the Creed concerning our Savior, touching whom only the King wished him to
discourse, namely, -- (...). Where we have these Articles. 1. Christ's Birth or
Incarnation, expressed under the name of his Coming, and being Sent of the
Father answerable to the Scripture language. Act. 7. 52. Joh. 17. 3. 2. His
Sufering, Crucifying, and Death. 3. His Descent into Hell (an Article now so
much questioned) amplyfied with this circumstance, that he broke in sunder
that Hedge, mound, or Partitian-wall, which had of old separated us from the
Communion and Privilege of the People of God, Ephesians. 2. 14. 4. His rising again
from the Dead; amplyfied with the circumstance of raising other Dead with him
who had slept in their graves for many Ages; for which see. Mat. 27. 52, 53. 5.
His Ascension unto his Father; amplyfied with the circumstance of a great
multitude which ascended up with him, whereas he descended alone; which great
multitude may be understood either of those Saints whom he raised up with
himself having rescued them from the power of Death, whereof the Devil is the
Prince, see Col. 2. 15. Heb. 2. 14. Rev. 1. 18. Or rather, of the Angels, who
waited upon him in his triumphant Ascension into Heaven Psalm. 24. 7, 8. And 68.
17, 18. Heb. 1. 6, 7. And: 2. 5, 9.

As for his Descent into Hell, Christ only is mentioned in it, not any that
bore him company thither; for which, see Act. 2. 29, 31. Esa. 63. 1, 3. Whence
he thus bespeaks the Thief upon the Cross To day shall thou be with me in
Paradise; not, To day thou shall descend with me into Hell.

But if any make doubt of the truth of this story, wherein Eusebius brings in
Thaddaeus rehearsing these Articles of the Creed; I shall desire them
impartially to consider, that it was found by him in the Records of the City
Edessa where this Thaddaeus Preached; and translated by the same Eusebius out
of the Syria^k tongue (wherein it was originally written as being the language
of that City) into Greek according to what he there sets down; thus Eusebius
in that place expressly tells us. Now what better proof can we reasonably desire
of an historical Passage, than the Public Records of that place where the
Thing was done? And what better witness of those Records, then he that saw
them, and copied out the original with his own hand?

2. Ignatius that famous Martyr and Patriarch of Antioch, contemporary to the
Apostls; having occasion to confute some Heretics of those Times, who perverted
the true Faith concerning our Savior, thus lays down the Articles of the
Creed which concern him, by way of an Antidote against this poison of theirs.
In his Epistle to the Church of the Magnesians, thus -- I desire says he, that
ye may have the full knowledge of Christ -- (...).

Then in his Epistle to the Church of Tralles, he sets down the same Articles
in like words, which will not be unworthy our comparing -- Stop your ears,
says he, when any one speaks to you, excluding Jesus Christ --

(...).

Compare these to gither, and they present us with these Articles, which touch
our Savior -- 1. That he is the Son of God begotten of the Father before all
Worlds. 2. That he was borne, in time, of the Virgin Mary, without the company
of man borne truly of the Virgin, as as he was begotten of God; but not in like
manner, God and Man being of diverse natures. 3. That he suffered, was
crucified and died under Pontius Pilate. 4. That he descended into Hell and
rose again after three Days. 5. That he ascended up to his Father into
Heaven, and sits on his right Hand. 6. That he shall come at the end of the
world, to judge both the quick and the dead, and to render to every man
according to his works.

But because the doctrine of the Trinity lies more implicitly couched in the
Creed, he expresses it more at large in his Epistle to the Church of Philippi,
in these words -- (...). That is -- There are not three Fathers, nor three
Sons, nor three Comforters; but one Father and one Son, and one comforter;
wherefore, the Lord sending his Apostles to teach all Nations, commanded them to
Baptize in the name of the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost; not
into one with three names, or into three made man, but into the name of three
of the same Dignity; for one of them only was made man, not the Father, nor the
Comforter, but the Son alone; and that, not in opinion, or appearance, but in
Truth.

If any one question the truth of these Epistles (out of which I have produced
these passages) whether they were written by Ignatius or no I shall desire him
as well to disprove, as to deny, for Else nothing of Antiquity, which agrees
not with every ons fancy shall escape the note of Bastardy I am sure the
Epistle to the Church of Tralles, out of which I cited the Articles of the
Creed which concern our Savior, agreeing in substance, method, and very much
in words with the form we now have, is acknowledged for the genuine Epistle of
Ignatius, not only by Eusebius and St Jerome of old, and by Maestreus (a D. of
the Sorbon) of late, but also by Rivet and Videlius, two protestant Divines,
who have narrowly examined the Epistles which are entitled to him and purged
them of what they suspected as asciticious.

If any would know more of this Ignatius, his Antiquity, and Esteem in the
Church, which may as well establish as ennoble whatsoever he shall testify in
this or any other Particular; I shall refer him to Nicephorus, Eccles. Hist.
lib. 2. cap. 35. Where he expressly tells us that he was that very child whom we
find mentioned, Mat. 18. 3. Whom our Blesed Savior set in the midst of his
Disciples, as a Pattern of Humility he therefore styles him in the same Place,
(...), that is, One Taken by Christ, and borne in his Arms: which Relation
seems to give light unto that Title of (...), which the same Ignatius
constantly assumes to himself in the Front of his Epistles, as a peculiar
Epithete, whereby he specificates himself, and endears his Person to the
Churches, his Age well accords to the story; so does that passage of his in his
Epistle to the Church of Smyrna, (...), After the resurrection, says he, I saw
Christ in body, and believe that he remains so: for so, not only Maestreus
translats it, [ vidi] and understands the word of a corporal vision, in the
presence of our Savior; but Videlius also, in his Edition both co^sonantly to
Jeron: in Ca. Ep. in Dial. (...) and, before them, Eus. l. 3. 30. as I find
the^ cited. And therefore as I conceive, the word (...) ought not be taken in an
Active sense, Deum ferens (i) in pectore, vel mente, accoding to that of
Damascene, speaking of the Greek Fathers. (...): but in a Passive; Borne in
Christ's arms* or led by his hand: for though I deny not that the Ancient
Fathers of the Church may in a good pious sense be called by succeeding writers
(...), a Deo inflati, though inspired by God in a far lower Degree, then the
Prophets and Apostles; yet for Ignatius himself to assume the Special style
of (...), one divinly inspired, as a distinctiue Character, severing him from,
and exalting him above his fellow-Byshops might be not undeservedly censured of
Arrogance; a vice which he was least guilty of, as appears by several pasages
in his Epistles.

Origin in the Proeme of his Books (...), translated out of the Greek by
Ruffinus, thus informs us -- Cum seruetur ecclesiastica Praedicatio per
successionis ordinem ab Apostolis tradita, and usque ad praesens in Ecclesiis
permanens, illa sola credenda est veritas, quae in nullo ab Ecclesiastica
discordat Traditione. Illud tamen scire oportet, quoniam Sancti Apostoli Fide^
Christi Praedicantis, de quibusdam quidem quaecunque necessaria crediderunt,
omnibus credentibus, etiam his qui pigriores erga inquisitionem divinae
scientiae videbantur, manifestissime tradiderunt -- Species vero eorum quae per
praedicationem Apostolicam manifest traduntur, istae sunt. Primo, quod unus
est Deus, qui omnia creavit atque composuit, quique ex nullis fecit esse
universa -- and quod hic Deus in novissimis diebus, sicutper Prophetas suos
ante promiserat, misit Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum. Tum deinde, quia Jesus
Christus ipse qui venit, ante omnem creaturam natus ex patre est; qui cum in
omnium condition Patri ministrasset (per ipsum enim omnia facta sunt)
novissimis temporibus seipsum exaniniens, homo factus est, incarnatus est cum
Deus esset and Homo mansit quod Deus erat, corpus assumpsit nostro corpori
simile eo solo differens, quod natum ex virgin de Spiritu Sancto est, and quod
hic Jesus Christus natus and passus sit in veritae (and non per imaginem)
communem hanc mortem, vere mortuus est; vere enim a mortuis resurrexit: and
post resurrectionem conversatus cum Discipulis suis assumptus est. Tum deinde
Honor ac Dignitate, Patri ac filio sociatum, tradiderunt Spiritum sanctum. --
erit tempus resurrectionis mortuorum cum corpus hoc quod in corruptione
seminatur surget in incorruptione and quod seminatur in ignominia, surget in
gloria -- quod mundus iste factus sit, and a certo Tempore caeperit, and pro
ipsa sui corruptione solvendus -- esse Angelos Dei quosdam, and virtutes bonas,
quae ei ministrent ad Salutem hominum consummandam -- Then he ads as the
fundamental principle of all, ad extra -- * Quod per Spiritum sanctum
Scripturae conscriptae sint.

The sum of what he says (for he paraphrastically enlarges some points) is
this; The Doctrine of the Church being successively derived from the Apostles,
and abiding till that present in the Churchees, that only is to be credited as
a Truth, which in nothing differs from that Eclesiasticall. Tradition, withal;
that the Holy Apostles preaching the Faith of Christ, most clearly delivered to
all Believers, even to the more dull and simple, whatsoever Points they
conceived necessary for them, the Particular Heads whereof were these which
follow, being indeed the Articles of the Creed, viz, That there is but one God,
who made all things of nothing: That this God sent his Son, our Lord Jesus
Christ, begotten of the Father before every Creature, by whom all Creatures
were made: He was incarnate, and made man, assuming a Body like in all things
to us but that it was borne of the Virgin, being conceived by the Holy Ghost:
He truly Dyed (not in apearance) the common death of all men, for he truly rose
again: Having converst with his Disciples after his Resurrection, he was taken
up [into Heaven:] That the Holy Ghost is associate with the Father and Son,
in the same Honor and Dignity: -- there shall be a time for the Resurrection of
the Dead when this body which is sown in corruption, shall rise in
incorruption; and that which is sown in dishonor shall rise in glory -- This
world was made and had a certain time of beginning, and by reason of 'its
corruptability shall be at length dissolved -- That there are certain Angels of
God, and good spirits, which minister unto him in procuring the salvation of
man kind. He adds at last an other Traditionall Foundation. -- viz. That the
Scriptures were written by the Holy Ghost.

After all he concluds, oportet igitur velut elementis ac fundamentis hujusmodi
uti, That we ought to make use of these as the first Elemens, and Grounds of
Christian Religion, which he accordingly explaines at large in those four
books of his entitled therefore, (...), of the Principles of Christianity a
work fit for his office of Catachist, which he bore for many years in the
Church of Alexandria.

4. Marcellus Bishope of Ancyra in Gallatia, fellowsuferer with the great
Athanasius, being accused by the Arians of Sabellianisme (as Athanasius also
was) and by their means expeld his Bishopric flies unto Julius Bishope of Rome
for succor: and having long there in vain expected his adversaries coming,
by confronting of whom he desired to have accquitted himself, at length, weary
of longer stay, he takes his leave of Julius, and leaves behind him an Epistle,
wherein he makes this Profession of Faith, exceeding conformable to that of the
Apostles, as we read it at this Day.

(...).

That is, -- I Believe in God Almighty and in Jesus Christ, his only-begotten
Son, our Lord: conceived by the Holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary,
crucified under Pontius Pilate, and buried: the third Day he rose again from
the Dead: he ascended into the Heavens, and sits at the right hand of the
Father: whence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead: And, [I believe]
in the Holy Ghost: the Holy Church: the forgiveness of sins; the
resurrection of the Body: the Life Everlasting.

But this is not all; to show that this Creed was not of his own framing, a
little after he subjoynes these words -- (...): that is, Having received this
Faith from the holy Scriptures, and being taught it of my spiritual
Progenitors [or Divine Ancestors] I both Preach it in the Church of God, and
have now wrote it unto thee, O Julius. This Epistle with the foresaid Creed
enclosed, we find recorded by Epiphanius in his (...), Haeres. 72.

Now whom does Marcellus mean by his Progenitors or Ancestors (...), according
to, or in God? Sure he understands either his Godfathers at the Font; or the
Bishops of the Church, by whom he was instructed in the Ancient Faith; Or
lastly (which seems to me most probable) the Apostles themselves, who were the
true and proper Fathers or Founders of the Christian Church; whence that of S.
Paul (...), that is. Though you have ten thousand Instructers, or Pedagogues in
Christ, yet have ye not many Fathers: It follows there, (...), For in Jesus
Christ I have begotten you through the Gospel. 1 Cor. 4. 15.

5. S. Basil the Great, in his Tract (...), concerning the Creed, or Christian
Faith, sets down this Symbol or Confession thereof -- (...) (...), that is,
We Believe and profess one only true, and good God, the Father Almighty, of
whom are all Things, the God and Father of our Lord and God Jesus Christ, and
one only* begotten Son of his, our Lord and God Jesus Christ, the only True
one by whom all things were made both visible and invisible, and by whom all
things consist, who was in the Beginning with God, and was God; and afterward
according to the Scripture, he appeared upon Earth and conversed with men;
being in the form of God, he thought it not robbery to be equal with God, yet
he made himself of no reputation, and taking upon him the form of a Servant
by being borne of a Virgin, and being found in fashion as a man, he fulfilled
all things which concerned him, and were written of him: according to the
commandment of his Father, he became obedient to the Death, even the Death of
the Cross: and the third Day arising from the Dead, according to the
Scriptures, he appeared to his holy Disciples, and to the Rest according as it
is written: he ascended into the Heavens, and sits on the right hand of the
Father: from whence he shall come, at the end of this world, to raise up all,
and to render to every one according to his works; when the righteous shall be
taken into Life Eternal, and the Kingdom of Heaven, and the sinners shall be
condemned to everlasting punishment, where their worm dies not, and the fire
is not quenched: And, in one only Holy Ghost the Comforter, by whom we are
sealed to the day of Redemption, the Spirit of Truth.

Here we have all the Articles of the Creed, but two, viz. The Belief of the
Holy Catholic Church and the forgivenes of sins, which he sets down in the
ensuing words; wherein he largely descants on the gifts of the Holy Ghost
toward the Church -- (...) etc. By which Spirit we are sealed unto the day of
Redemption, the Spirit of Truth, the Spirit of Adoption, by whom we cry Abba,
Father; which distributeth, and effects in every one the Graces of God unto
edification, according to his pleasure, the good Spirit which leads into all
Truth and establishes all that believe in the true and exact knowledge, in the
Godly and Spiritual service and worship, and true confession of God the
Father, and his only-begotten Son etc.

Concluding thus -- (...), thus we think, and thus we baptize (...), into a
coessentiall Trinity, according to the command of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
said go and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and
of the Sone, and of the Holy Ghost.

A little after he intimates from whom he received the foresaid confession of
faith, namely, from Christ and his Apostles (...) etc. I beseech you, says he,
that leaving off superfluous questions, and unhandsome contentions about words,
(...), you would be contented with those Doctrines, which have been delivered
by word of mouth from the Holy [Apostles] and the Lord himself; (...), not
(...), Doctrines not written, but spoken, spoken by the Saints and holy Apostles
by the Direction and inspiration of the Lord; he the Author, they the
instruments; Doctrines, opposed to curious or superfluous questions, and
strifes about words; that is, Doctrines of moment, or fundamental points, such
as the Creed conteines. And this he dilivers more plainly in the closing up of
all -- (...) etc. Beware of false Prophets, and withdraw your selves from every
Brother that walks disorderly -- (...). etc. And not after the Tradition
which they received of us; let us exactly and orderly walk according to the
Rule of the Saints, as being built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ our Lord being the head-corner-stone, in [or, by] whom
the whole building fitly joined together grows into an holy Temple in the
Lord. This Tradition, this exact Rule, this Foundation of the Apostles to what
can it be applied more congruously, than unto the Creed of the Apostles, the
substance whereof he sets down before?

6. Gregory Nyssen, Brother to the Great S. Basil, explaines the Heads of the
Creed in that Oration of his which is entitled; Catachetica Oration magna.

7. Cyril, Patriarch of Jerusalem, sets down the whole Creed in distinct
Articles, and explaines it at large in several Catecheticall Orations; as
whose office it was, to instruct all his Auditors, not to oppose one Heretic,
which, as I said, caused some of the. Fathers to set down the Creed more
imperfectly, leaving out those Articles, which were not impugned. Cyrils Creed
is this which follows -- (...). That is, I believe in one God the Father
Almighty, maker of Heaven and earth and of all things visible and invisible:
and, in one Lord Jesus Christ the only begotten son of God begotten of his
Father before all worlds, incarnate and made man: crucified, and buried: he
rose again from the Dead the third Day: he ascended into the Heavens and
sits at the right hand of the Father: and shall come to judge the quick and
the dead: And [I believe] in the Holy Ghost the Comforter, who spoke by the
Prophets; one holy Catholic Church: one Baptism of Repentance for the
remission of sins: the Resurrection of the Body and the Life Everlasting.

Any one at the first sight may perceive that this is the same with that which
we now call the Apostles Creed, in the full sense and substance of it, only a
little altered in some few words, and explayned in two or three Articles, by
some Additionall Particles. This was the confession of Faith received in the
Church of Jerusalem, the mother Church of the Christian World, where this Cyril
was Catechist, and afterward Patriarch. Ruffinus calls it Symbolum Orientale,
the Creed of the Eastern Church, and compares it in his Exposition, with the
Roman, and Aquileian. But of this, more hereafter.

8. Chrysostom has wrote two Homelies upon the Creed in the former whereof he
sets the Creed down in this form, which I am to give you out of the Latin
Edition of Erasmus having not as yet met with the Greek Original, although
sought for both, in Sr H. Saviles Edition, and that of Fronto ducaeus -- Credo
in Deu^ Patrem Omnipotentem: and in unicum Filium ejus, Dominum nostrum Jesum
Christum: iste natus est de. Spiritu Sancto ex Maria Virgin: crucifixus est
sub Pontio Pilato; sepultus est, postquam mortuus: tertia die a mortuis
resurrexit: sedet ad dextram Patris: inde venturus est judicare vivos and
mortuos; credo in Spiritum sanctum: Iste spiritus perducet ad sanctam
Ecclesiam: ipsa est quae dimittit peccata, promittit carnis resurrectionem:
promittit vitam aeternam. that is -- I believe in God the Father Almighty: and
in his only Son, our Lord Jesus Christ conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of
the Virgin Mary. crucified under Pontius Pilate, dead and buried: the third Day
he rose again from the dead: he sits at the right hand of the Father: from
thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead: I believe in the holy
Ghost: He brings us to the holy Church: she it is, which forgiveth sins;
promises the resurrection of the Body: promises Life Everlasting. The
consonancy of this Creed to that of the Apostles is sufficiently manifest,
without farther Descant:

To these Testimonies, I shall crave leave to add that Confession of Faith,
which the Arch-heretick Arius (with his companion Euzoius) presented to the
Emperor Constantine in writing; who being persuaded by a certain Presbyter
(whom his Sister Constantia at her death had commended to him) sent for Arius
to Constantinople (after he had been banished from Alexandria, for not
subscribing to the Nicene council) whither being come with Euzoius, the
Emperor asked him whether or no he assented to the Nicen Creed Arius feigning
that he did, was straitwaise commanded by him to put his Belief in writing,
which he did in this Form in the name of himself and Euzoius; we find it thus
recorded, by Socrates in his Ecclesiastical History lib. 1. c. 19. -- (...).
i.e. We believe in one God the Father Almighty and in the Lord Jesus Christ his
Son begotten of him before all worlds, God the word, by whom all things were
made both which are in Heaven and which are one Earth: who came down, and was
incarnate: and Suffered: and Rose again: and ascended into the Heavens, and
shall come again to judge the Quick and Dead: And in the Holy Ghost: the
Resurrection of the Body: the life of the world to come: and the Kingdom of
Heaven: and one Catholic Church of God, spread over the whole world. -- This
Confession of Faith, as I conceive by the Form was the Ancient Creed of the
Church of Alexandria (whereof this Arius was Presbyter) deposited therein by its
first Bishop S. Mark, who received it from the mouths of the Apostles, and
more particularly from St Peter who sent him thither; for it was common with
the Heretics to shelter themselves under the general Terms of the Apostles
Creed, which admitted of diverse constructions, and so lay the more open to be
abused, and perverted by their unsound Glosses: thus did Photinus, aworse than
Arius some years after; and thus do his Disciples the Socinians at this Day.
Only Arius may be thought to have somewhat enlarged this Apostolical Creed in
the second Article, touching the Divinity of our Savior the better to
counterfeit his assent to what the Nicene Fathers had declared in that Point,
and decreed to be held.

From these Testimonies of the Greek Fathers, who can best witness the Faith
of the Eastern Churches, we may raise these observations; but more especially,
from the two Creeds of Marcellus, and Chrysostom (to which we may add that of
Arius.)

1. That the Greek Church received the Apostles Creed by Tradition, as well as
the Latin Church; therefore it was no composure of the Roman Clergy, as some
invidiously affirm.

2. That this Creed, was extant amongst them long before the year 400
(contrary to the assertion of some) for both Marcellus, and Chrysostom
flourished before that time especially Marcellus, who convinced the Arians in
the Council of Nice, as Epiphanius tells us in the fore cited place; Haer. 72.

3. That these Creeds are found upon record, after that the Nicene Creed was
framed; which shows that the Nicene as it was not the first, so it was not the
only Creed of the Greek Church: yea, it shows that the Apostles Creed was of
public use amongst them rather then the Nicene which was made but upon a
particular occasion, viz. The detection and suppression of the Arian heresy.
Afterward indeed, when a full Creed was composed in the second General
Council held at Constantinople, wherein the four last Articles of the Apostles
Creed were added to the Nicene and some of them amplified more at larg, partly
for Illustration of the Faith, partly in opposition to Heretics; then that
Creed began to be publicly used in the Greek Church, and inserted in their
liturgy; yet, not as a Creed contradistinct to that of the Apostles, but as one
including or containing it; so that we may not unfitly call it the Apostles
Creed grown Bigger: the parts or Limbs the same; the Quantity only, augmented.

4. That the Greek Particle [(...)] which S. Cyrils Creed adds to the four
last Articles, redounds by a Pleonasme (as also in that of Arius) for neither
Marcellus, nor Chrysostom prefixe it to those Articles.

CAP. V.
Testimonies of the Creed; and the composure thereof by the Apostles, taken out
of the Latin Fathers, who bear witness for the Westrne Churches. Some
objections, to the contrary, Answered.

YOU have heard what the Greek Fathers say concerning the Creed, and its
Original; its Frame and Authors: let us now come nearer home, and examine what
the Fathers of the Western Church, and other Doctors of note, famous for
learning and Antiquity, have delivered concerning the same Argument, and we
shall find I hope an unanimous Consent, a joint agreement in their Testimonies;
which will not a little confirm this Truth to the impartial Reader, when he
shall find both East and West to bring in their suffrages, in the cause. These
Witnesses: shall be fourteen, viz, Clemens Romanus, Irenaeus, Turtullian,
Ambrose, Jerome, Austin, Maximus Taurinensis, Crysologus, Leo the Great,
Cassianus, Eusebius Gallicanus, Venantius Fortunatus, Isidore of Sevil, and
Rabanus Maurus,

1. Clemens Romanus, contemporary to the Apostles and mentioned by St Paul as
his fellow-worker. Phil. 4. 3. Successor also to St Peter in the Bishopric of
Rome, in his first Epistle Ad Fratrem Domini (translated into Latin by
Ruffinus) has these words -- Apostoli collataiis scientia linguarum, adhuc in
uno positi, symbolum quod fidelis nunc tenet ecclesia, unusquisque quod sensit
dicendo condiderunt; ut discedentes ab inuicem, hanc Regulam per omnes Gentes
praedicarent: that is, the Apostles having the gift of Tongues confered upon
them, being assembled together, framed that Creed which the Christian Church
now keeps, every one of them contributing thereto; that so, departing each
from other, they might publish this Rule amongst all Nations. And alittle after
-- Hoc praedicti Sancti Apostoli interse per Spiritum Sanctum salubriter
condiderunt, This Creed the said Holy Apostles jointly and profitably composed,
through the Assistance of the Holy Ghost. But least we should doubt, whether
the Creed he here makes mention of, were the same which we now have, he thus
briefly Sumes up the Heads of it -- Summam ergo totius fidei Catholicae
recensentes, in qua and integritas credulitatis ostenditur, and unius Dei
omnipotentis, id est, Sanctae Trinitatis aequalitas declaratur: and mysterium
Incarnationis Filii Dei, qui pro Salute humani Generis a Patre de Coelo
descendens, de virgin nasci dignatus est quoque ordine, and quando mortem
pertulerit: quomodo sepultus surrexerit: and in carne ipsa Coelos ascenderit ad
dexteramque Patris consederit: and Judex venturus sit: and qualiter Remissionem
Peccatorum sacro Baptismo renatis contulerit, and Resurrectionem humani Generis
in eadem Carne, in vitam aeternam, futuram; sic docuerunt. That is,

The Apostles recounting the sum of the Catholic Faith, wherein the whole
Belief of a Christian is declared, viz. The Equality of one Almighty God the
Holy Trinity; and the mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of God, who for
the Salvation of mankind descended from the Father out of Heaven, deigned to be
borne of a Virgin; how, and when he suffered Death; how after his Burial, he
arose, and in the same Body ascended into Heaven, and sat on the right hand of
the Father: and shall come as Judge; and how he conferred remission of sins
on those who were regenerated by holy Baptism; and, that there shall be a
resurrection of mankind in the same Body unto life Everlasting; thus have they
taught us.

And alittle after Et quod in primordio ejusdem Symboli praeponitur, Credo in
Deum Patrem Omnipotentem -- praeclarum fidei Testimonium and Fundamentum in
prima front monstratur* that is, That which is set in the beginning of the
Creed I believe in God the Father Almighty, shows in the very front a renowned
Testimony and Foundation of the Faith.

I am not ignorant that not a few among the Learned doubt of this Epistle
whether it truly belong to Clemens, or be a counterfeit set forth under his
name, as many Decretal Epistles have been falsely ascribed to several of the
Ancient Bishops of Rome; and they bring this for the chief, if not only,
reason of their Doubt, that the Author of this Epistle, which is entitled unto
James the Brother of the Lord, makes mention therein of the Death of Peter,
whereas Peter* survived James; James being Martyred at Jerusalem about the
midest of Nero's Empire as both Iosepus and Eusebius witness; but Peter was
Crucified at Rome, in the latter end thereof. For the satisfaction of which
doubt, I shall desire my Reader to consider what follows.

First that the style of this Epistle relisheth of the Ancient primitive
Simplicity, and that it is entitled, To the Brother of the Lord, with this
Addition -- Episcopo Episcoporum, regenti Hebraeorum sanctam Ecclesiam
Hierosolymis, sed and omnes Ecclesias quae ubique Dei Providentia fundatae
suut. In which words the Author of this epistle gives this James two eminent
Titles, namely, Bishop of Bishops, and Universal Bishop; and both of them, I
conceive, in regard of his See Jerusalem, where he was constituted the first
Bishop that ever was in the Christian World; the Bishop of that Church, from
which all other Churches sprang, as so many Daughters from the Mother Church,
and therefore were to honor her acordingly. Isa. 2. 3. Now we know that in
after Ages the Bishop of Rome was taxed for challenging to himself the Title
of Episcopus Episcoporum (as Stephen by S. Cyprian; Conc. Carthag. apud Cyp.)
and universal Bishop (which Boniface the third assumed by the grant of the
Emperor Phocas) whereas here these Titles are not challenged by Clemens Bishop
of Rome, but voluntarily given to an other; it is therefore wholly improbable,
that this Epistle was fained by some latter writer (as many of the decretall
Epistles have been since) under the name of Clemens, to magnify the Bishop of
Romes Authority, since, nemo gratis mendax.

Secondly, Ruffinus the forenamed Presbyter of Aquileia, translated it out of
Greek into Latin, as the genuine Epistle of Clemens, it appears therefore
that it was written at first in Greek (as was also, that famous Epistle of his
to the Corinthians) so not by some latter Roman Author; and (at least) before
the time of Ruffinus who flourished toward the latter end of the fourth Century.

Thirdly, the Epistle might probably be thus inscribed, Fratri Domini, To the
Lords Brother; then some latter Sciolus, finding James peculiarly honored with
this Title by S. Paul Gal. 2, v. 9. And finding that he about that Time was
Bishop of Jerusalem, too rashly added the name, Iacobo: whenas, Clemens might
well write it Simoni Cleophae the Brother of James, and his successor in that
See: his Brother, as appears by comparing Mat. 13. 55. Mar. 15. 40. Ioh. 19,
25. And his successor in the Bishopric, as is witnessed by Eusebius, and
others.

Fourthly; But if the name [ Iacobo] must needs stand we may possibly suppose,
that Clemens so far off, might not hear of the death of James. (as the Jews
at Rome heard no evil report of S, Paul Act. 28. 21. from their countrymen in
the East though for many years they had persecuted him both with tongue, and
hand) and so write to him as alive: or, if this seem not probable, we have a
very fair testimony out of the Chronicle called Epitome Temporum, that this
James survived Nero, and consequently survived Peter (this Chronicle was set
forth by Ios. Scaliger, and reaches down from Adam to the 20th year of
Heraclius the Emperor) the words are these -- 1. Olymp: CCXII. The Emp. Galba
(Nero's Successor) and Titus Ruffinus being Consuls, (...) (...) (...), that
is. The the same year S. James the Apostle and Patriarch of Jerusalem whom S.
Peter placed in his Throne [or See] as he was going up to Rome died; and Simeon
(who is also caled Simon) assumed the dignity of the Bishopric of Jerusalem,
and became Patriarch. Which well agrees with that of Eusebius in his (...), to
wit. That Simon Cleophae succeeded James after the Destruction of Jerusalem;
his words are -- (...). The foresaid Epitome is thus praised by that Great
Critic Scaliger, Opus utilissimum quanquam Scriptoris Idiotae. Onuphrius
Panumus (whom Scaliger calls the Father of History) called it by the name of
Fasti Siculi, because it was found first in Sicily, when learning revived in
these Westrne Parts. But the Learned Vossius lib. 2. de Hist. Gr. cap. 23.
Calls it by a third name, Chronicum Alexandrinum from Matt. Raderus (who set it
out with his Translation) Eo quod in frontispicio illud commendet (...), who
was probably the 50th Patriarch of that See An Do. IICXL Opus est, says the
same Vossius, Cronologis perutile, vel ob multa ex Africano atque Eusebio
excerpta quae frustra alibi quaeras. See Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 23.

2. Irenaeus, the Apostes Scholar but once removed (as who was Scholar to
Polycarpus, the Scholar of St John) makes mention of the Apostles Creed, and
setts it down lib. 1. adu. haer. cap. 2. I shall cite his words in the
Original Greek (for in that tongue he wrote, as having bin bred in the Asian
Church, though afterward translated to the Bishopric of Lions in France)
according as Epiphanius records them. lib. 1. haer. 31. -- (...). That is,

The Church although dispersed throughout the whole world, from one end of the
Earth unto the other, has received from the Apostles and their Disciples * The
Belief in One God the Father Almighty, who made Heaven, and Earth and the
Seas, and Whatsoever is in Them: and in one Jesus Christ the Son of God, who
was made flesh for our Salvation: and in the holy Ghost who published by the
Prophets the offices and [double] coming of the Beloved Jesus Christ our Lord,
his Birth of a Virgin, his Passion, his Resurrection from the Dead, and his
bodily assumption into Heaven; and his coming from Heaven in the Glory of his
Father to recollect all things, and to raise again every body of all mankind,
to the end that every knee of Things in Heaven, and things one earth, and
things under the earth may bow to Jesus Christ, our Lord and God and Savior,
and King, and every tongue may confess unto him; and that he may do righteous
judgment unto All, by sending the wicked Spirits, the Transgressing and
Apostate Angels, with the ungodly, unjust, lawless and blasphemous men, into
everlasting Fire; and freely bestowing that life, immortality and eternal
Glory, which he had purchased, one those who are Just, and Holy, who have kept
his commandments, and abode in his love, either from the beginning, or since
their Repentance and Conversion.

The same Father, lib. 3. cap. 4. sets down the Creed more summarily and
contractedly, with this preface to the form -- Quid si neque Apostoli quidem
scripturas reliquissent nobis, nonne oportebat ordinem sequi Traditionis, quam
tradiderunt iis quibus committebant Ecclesias? Cui ordinationi assentiunt
multae gentes Barbarorum, eorum qui in Christum credunt, sine charactere vel
atramento scriptam habentes per spiritum in cordibus suis Salutem, and veterem
Traditionem diligenter custodientes -- In vnum Deum credentes, Fabricatorem
Caeli and terrae and omnium quae in eis sunt, per Jesum Christum Dei Filium,
qui propter eminentissimam erga figmentum suum Dilectionem, eam quae esset ex
Virgin Generationem sustinuit ipse per se Hominem adunans Deo; and Passus sub
Pontio Pilato, and Resurgens and in claritate receptus, in Gloria venturus
Salvator eorum qui saluantur, and Judex eorum qui judicantur, and mittens in
ignem aeternum Transfiguratores veritatis, and contemptores Patris sui, and
Adventus ejus -- what if the Apostles says he, had not left us the Scriptures,
ought we not to follow the Rule and series of Tradition, which the Apostles
delivered unto them to whom they committed the charge of the Churches? which
Rule is held, and assented to by many of those barbarous Nations who believe in
Christ, having the Doctrine of Salvation written by the Spirit in their Hearts
without inky characters and diligently keeping the old Tradition, Believing in
one God, Maker of Heaven and earth, and of all Things therein, through Jesus
Christ the Son of God, who out of his most eminent love toward his Creature,
undertook to be borne of a Virgin, thus uniting God and man in his own
Person; he suffered under Pontius Pilate, and Rising again, was gloriously
received [into Heaven] He shall come again in Glory, the Savior of those who
are to be saved, and the Judge of those who are to be condemned, casting into
everlasting fire the corrupters of the Truth, the Despisers of his Father, and
contemners of his coming.

3. Turtullian, Lib. 1. adu. haeret. cap. 13. Having en gaged himself in the
combat with the whole body of Hereti^kes produces against them the Body of
the Faith, or Apostolical Creed, under the Title of Regula Fidei, which he
sets down in these words. Regula est fidei, ut jam hinc quid credamus,
profiteamur; illa sc: qua creditur -- unum omnino Deum esse nec alium praeter
mundi conditorem, qui universa de nihilo produxerit, per verbum suum primo
omnium emissum, Id uerbum Filium ejus appellatum, in nomine Dei vary visum
patriarchis, in Prophetis semper auditum: Postremo delatum ex Spiritu Dei
Patris and virtute in Virginem Mariam, carnem factum in utero ejus and ex ea
natum Hominem, and esse Jesum Christum: exinde praedicasse novam legem, and
novam promissionem regni Coelorum, virtutes fecisse: fixum Cruci: tertia die
resurrexisse: in Coelos ereptum, sedere ad dextram Patris: misisse vicariam vim
Spiritus Sancti, qui credentes agat: venturum cum claritate ad sumendos Sanctos
in vitae aeternae and promissorum caelestium fructum, and ad prophanos
judicandos Igni perpetuo, facta utriusque Partis resuscitatione, cum carnis
resurrectione. that is -- The Rule of Faith whereby we profess what we
believe, is this, that there is one only God the same with the Creator of the
world, who made all things of nothing, by his Word which he first of al sent
forth [or which first of all came from him] This Word, called also his Son,
variously [or in diverse Formes] appeared in the name of God unto the
Patriarchs, was always heard to speak in the Prophets; at length conveyed by
the Spirit and Power of God the Father into the Virgin Mary, was incarnate in
her Womb, of her born Man and is Jesus the Christ: After this he Published a
new Law, and the new Promise of the Kingdom of Heaven, wrought miracles: was
fastened to the Cross: rose again the third Day: being taken up to Heaven,
sits on the right Hand of the Father, sent the Deputy-power of the Holy
Ghost to guide those who believe: shall come with Glory to assume the Saints
unto the enjoyment of everlasting Life, and the Heavenly promises; and to
adjudge the Profane to everlasting Fire; having raised up both Parties, by the
Resurrection of the Body. Then he concludes -- Haec Regula a Christo, ut
probabitur, instituta, nullas habet apud nos quaestiones, nisi quas Haereses
inferunt, and quae Haereticos faciunt. This Rule instituted, as will be proved,
by Christ himself, admits of no doubts amongst us, but such as Heresies
produce, and produce Heretics.

Thus, ye see, Tertullian writing in general, as he does in this Book,
against all Heretics, puts down all the Articles thereof which were opposed by
any Heretik, either before or in his Age: For.

1. Christ's descent^ into Hell, is included in the Article of the Resurrection*
or presupposed by it, as in some other Creeds; but of this more hereafter.

2. The Article of the Catholic Church is not so clearly put down as the rest,
because not oppugned till Novatus and Donatus arose; which was after
Tertullians Death.

3. Forgiveness of Sins is employed in the New Promise of the Kingdom of
Heaven, whereof this is the First, and the Foundation to the rest.

Yet, in another book of his, he makes mention of these two latter Articles,
(namely, this of the Church, and The Forgiveness of Sins) as solemnly
professed, at Baptism. Cum sub tribus and testatio fidei and sponsio salutis
pignerentur, necessario adilcitur Ecclesiae mentio quoniam, ubi Tres, id est,
Pater and Filius, and Spiritus Sanctus; ibi Ecclesia, quae trium Corpus est.
That is, When the Confession of our Faith, and the Covenant of our Salvation,
are engaged under the Authority of Three, the Church is of necessity mentioned
with them; for where those Three are, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, there
is that Church also, which is the Body of those Three. De Bapt: adu.
Quintillan. cap: 6.

And alittle after, giving the reason why Christ himfelfe did not Baptize in
Person; he shows how incongruous it had been for him, to have used the
received form of the Church -- Ne moveat quosdam, quod Ipse non tinguebat; in
quem tingueret? In paenitentiam? Quo ergo illi Praecursorem? In peccatorum
remissionem, quam verbo dabat? In semetipsum, quem humilitate celabat? In
Spiritum Sanctum, qui nondum a Patre descenderat? In Ecclesiam quam nondum
Apostoli struxerant? That is -- Let it not trouble any; that Christ himself
did not Baptize: in whose name, or to what end should he have Baptized? To
Repentance? Why then had he a forerunner? For Remission of sins, which he
gave by his Word? In his own Name which in humility he concealed? In the Holy
Ghosts, who as yet was not descended from the Father? into the Church, which
the Apostles had not as yet built? cap. 11.

A little after him, S Cyp. in his Epistle to Magnus (being the 76.) speaking of
the Novatians, who retained the old wounted form of words in the baptismall
Intertogatories, expresses one of them thus -- Credis remissionem peccatorum,
and vitam aeternam per sanctam Ecclesiam? Do thou believe the Remission of
sins, and Life Eternal, by the Holy Church? in which words it is clear that
these two Articles were part of the confession of Faith used at Baptism; that
Life Eternal was a distinct Article from that of the Resurrection; and that
the Particle, In, which Tert. prefixeth to the Articles of the Church, and
Remission of sins, is not significant, but redundant, seeing that S. Cyp.
here omitts it. compare his Epist: to Januarius etc. viz. the 70. in Pamel.
Edit.

But in two other Tracts, he sets down the Creed more briefly. First. lib. de
virg. vel cap. 1. Regula fidei una omnino est, sola immobilis, and
irreformabilis* Credendi sc. in unicum Deum Omnipotentem, mundi conditorem: and
Filium ejus Jesum Christum: natum ex Virgin Maria: crucifixum sub Pontio
Pilato: tertia die resuscitatum a mortuis: receptum in Coelis, sedentem nunc ad
dextram Patris: venturum judicare vivos and mortuos; per carnis etiam
Resurrectionem. Hac lege fidei manente, caetera jam Discipilinae and
Conversationis, admittunt novitatem correctionis, operante sc: and proficiente
usque in finem gratia Dei, That is, The Rule of Faith is one only, solely
immovable, and unchangeable, to wit -- Of Believing in one only God Almighty,
the Maker of the world; and in Jesus Christ his Son; borne of the Virgin
Mary; crucified under Pontius Pilate; the third Day raised again from the
Dead; received into the Heavens, and now sitting at the right hand of the
Father; who shall come to judge the Quick and the Dead, by the Resurrection of
the body -- This Law of Faith abiding firm, the other parts of Christian
Discipline, and Conversation, are capable of amendment and reformation, the
Grace of God still working, and proceeding onward unto the end of the world.

Secondly, In his book against Praxeus, cap. 2. He sets down the Creed in
this short Form Unicum Deum credimus, sub hac tamen Dispensatione quam (...)
dicimus, ut vnici Dei sit and Filius Sermo ipsius, qui ex ipso processerit per
quem omnia facta sunt, and sine quo factum est nihil: hunc missum a Patre in
Virginem, and ex ea natum Hominem and Deum, filium hominis and filium Dei, and
cognominatum Jesum Christum: hunc passum, hunc mortuum, and sepultum secundum
Scripturas: and resuscitatum a Patre: and in Coelos resumptum, sedere ad
dexteram Patris: venturum judicare vivos and mortuos: qui exinde miserit
secundum Promissionem suam a Patre Spiritum sanctum Paracletum, Santificatorem
fidei eorum, qui credunt in Patrem, and Filium, and Spiritum sanctum. That is,
We believe one only God; yet under this Order, or Economy, that this one God
has a Son, his Word, who came forth from him, by whom all Things were made,
and without whom nothing was made; he was sent by God the Father into the
Virgin, and borne of her, God and man, the Son of man, and the Son of God,
called Jesus Christ: he Suffered, Died, and was Buried, according to the
Scriptures: was raised up again by the Father: and being taken up again into
Heaven, sits at the right hand of the Father: he shall come to judge the
Quick and the Dead: who afterward, according to his promise, sent from the
Father the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, the Sanctifier of their Faith, who
believe in the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost.

Then, showing the Original of the Creed, he tells us Hanc Regulam ab initio
Evangelii decurrisse, etiam ante Priores quosque haereticos, nedum ante Praxean
hesternum, probabit tam ipsa Posteritas omnium haereticorum, quam ipsa
novellitas Praxeae hesterni; quo peraeque adversus vniversas haereses jam hinc
praejudicatum sit, Id esse verum, quodcunque primum; Id esse adulterum,
quodcunque posterius. (i) That this Rule has descended to us from the beginning
of the Gospel before any Heretic arose, much more before Praxeas a fellow of
yesterday, will easily appear both by the succession of all Heretics, and the
yersterday. Rise of the Novellist Praxeas; which newnes does equally convince
all Heresies and condemn them, according to this Rule or Precedent, That which
is most Ancient, is the Truth; that which Follows, is the Forgery.

4. St Ambrose, Sermon. 38. Thus affirms; Duodecim Apostolorum Symbolo Fides
sancta concepta est, qui velut periti Artifices in unum convenientes, Clavem
suo consilio conflaverunt; That is, The Holy Faith is comprehended (or,
conceived) in the Creed of the twelve Apostles, who meeting together, like so
many skillful workmen, by joint advice framed this Key of the Christian
Belief, or mysteries of Religion.

And in his 81. Epistle written by him, Bassianus, and others, to Syricius
Bishop of Rome -- Credatur Symbolo Apostolorum, quod Ecclesia Romana
intemeratum semper custodit and servat; Let the Apostles Creed be believed,
which the Church of Rome constantly keeps and preserves inviolate. So
Canisius, and Augerius, in their Catechismes read the Place: but two Editions
of Ambrose at Paris, viz. That of Erasmus, by Chevalonius, Anno Domini. 1529.
And that of Felix Card de Monte Alto, 1586. Dedicated to Greg. 13. for [
Intemerat^m] read [ Iteratum] alluding, as I conceive, to the solemn
Rehearsal of the Creed at Baptism, or in the public service of the Church
but both these Readings come in effect, to one; for there is no better way to
keep the Creed inviolate, and preserve it from corruption then the constant,
public repeating of it; so, the Intemeratum, is an effect of the Iteratum.

5. S. Jerome, in his Epistle to Pammachius, which he wrote against the errors
of John Patriarch of Jerusalem, says thus -- In Symbolo fidei and spei
nostrae, quod ab Apostolis traditum, non scribitur in Charta and Atramento, sed
in Tabulis cordis carnalibus, post confessionem Trinitatis, and unitatem
Ecclesiae, omne Christiani dogmatis Sacramentum carnis Resurrectione
concluditur; In the Creed [or Profession] of our Faith and Hope, which being
delivered by the Apostles, is not written with ink and paper, but in the
fleshy Tables of the Heart, after the confession of the Trinity, and the unity
of the Church, the whole mystery of the Christian belief is shut up with the
Resurrection of the Body. Now he ends the Creed with the Article of the
Resurrection, because (as some others of the Ancients) he reads the last
Article of the Creed, thus -- The Resurrection of the Body unto Life Eternal;
thus joining two in one.

6. S. Austin, in his 181. Sermon, de Tempore, concures with Ruffinus in the
forecited Relation of the Apostles composing the Creed thus -- Sancti Apostoli
certam Regulam Fidei tradiderunt, quam secundum numerum Apostolorum duodecim
sententiis comprehensam, Symbolum vocaverunt, per quam Credentes Catholicam
tenerent unitatem, and per quam haereticam convincerent Pravitatem, Tradunt
enim, quod post ascensionem Domini and Salvatoris nostri ad Patrem, cum per
Aduentum Spiritus Sancti Discipuli ejus infla^mati, linguis omnium loquerentur;
ad singulas quasque Nationes, ut Dei Verbum praedicarent, ituri ac discessuri
ab invicem normam prius sibi futurae Praedicationis in commune statuerunt, ne
localiter, ab invicem Discedentes, diversum vel dissonum praedicarent his, qui
ad fidem Christi invitabantur: omnes igitur in uno positi, and Spiritu sancto
repleti, Breve suae praedicationis Indicium, conserendo in unum quod sentiebat
unnsquisque computabant, atque hanc ita Credentibus dandam esse Regulam
instituerunt. That is, The holy Apostles delivered a certain Rule of Faith,
which having (according to their own number) comprehended in twelve Sentences
they called a Symbol [or collation] by means of which the Believers might
hold the Catholic unity, and convince the perverseness of Heretics. For we
have received by Tradition, that after the Ascension of our Lord and Savior to
the Father, when his Disciples being inspired with fiery tongues by the holy
Ghost coming on them, spoke all manner of languages; they being to depart each
from other, and go unto all Nations, to preach the Word of God; decreed first
by common Consent to frame a Rule, or Prescript to themselves of their
after-preaching, least departing thus a sunder they might Preach, any thing
Diverse, or differently sounding to those who were invited unto the Faith of
Christ: All of them therefore being gathered together, and filled with the holy
Ghost, Collected into one a short Summary of their Preaching, every one
contributing what he thought meet, and this they appointed to be given as a
Rule unto Believers.

The same Father, in his 115th Sermon, De Tempore, sets down distinctly all
the Articles of the Creed, and distributes them in several, according to the
number of the Twelve Apostles, to each of them, one*

Then, in his little Book De fide and Symbolo, he also sets down all the
Articles of the Apostles Creed; withal, he tells us, lib 1. Retract. cap. 17.
Concerning this small Tract, that he wrote it as an exposition of the Creed,
which he was commanded to make, before a full Council of African Bishops
Assembled at Hippo Regia, when he was yet but Presbyter. Ut tamen non fiat illa
verborum contentio, quae tenenda memoriter competentibus traditur; Yet not
tying himself to that form of words, which is delivered unto the competentes
to be got without book. Whence we may observe.

1. That there was a certain Form of Belief delivered to the Competentes, or
Petitioners of Baptism, which they were to rehearse Memoriter, when they came
to be Partakars of that Sacrament.

2. That St Austin had liberty to vary from this, when he made the said
exposition; namely, to vary from it, not in the matter, but in the manner of
expression, as other Doctors of the Church before him had done, in their more
Learned Tracts which they published to the world, as we have seen in some
former examples.

Lastly; In his Enchiridion to Laurentius, cap. 7. he has these words, -- Ecce
tibi est Symbolum, and Dominica Oration; quid brevius auditur, aut Legitur;
Behold, thou have the Creed and the Lords prayer; can thou hear or Read any
thing more breife? Where, Hearing refers to the Creed, as being an Orall
Tradition; and Reading to the Lords prayer, as being written in the Gospel. A
little after he adds, Quomodo invocabunt in quem non crediderunt? Propter hoc
Symbolum. How shall they call on him, on whom they have not believed? For this
cause, the Creed was Framed. Where, he makes Prayer necessarily to depend on
the Creed, according to that of the Apostle, Romans 10. 14* Therefore, according
to St Austin, the Creed was as necessary from the Beginning of Christianity, as
the Lords Prayer; and the Apostles Creed it is which he there explaines.

7. Maximus Bishop of Turin; in his Homily entitled, De Traditione Symboli;
having spoken before of the word Shiboleth, where by the Ephraimites were
discovered at the Fourds of Jordan, he thus applies it to the Creed. Quod Beati
Apostoli, ut ego reor, exemplum sequentes, Ecclesiae Dei quam adversus malitiam
Diabolici furoris armabant, mysterium Symboli tradiderunt; ut quia sub uno
Christi nomine, Credentium erat futura Diversitas, signaculum Symboli inter
fideles, Persidosque secerneret, and alienus a Fide atque hostis apareret
Ecclesiae, aut tanquam Baptizatus nescisset, aut tanquam Haereticus
corrupisset. That is -- Which Pattern, says he, as I suppose, the Blessed
Apostles setting before their Eyes, delivered unto the Church of God the
mystery of the Creed, thereby arming it against the malice of the Devils fury;
that because under the same name of Christ, there would be (as they foresaw) no
small diversity of Professors, the Creed, as a Mark or Seal, should
distinguish between the true Believers; and mis-beleevers; and he might appear
an Alien from the Faith, and an enemy to the Church, who pretending to be
Baptized was found ignorant thereof, or by his Heresy had corrupted it.

8. Petrus, surnamed Crysologus, Bishop of Ravenna, has left behind him six
Homilies, one the Apostles Creed, viz. From his 56th Sermon to the 63.

9. Leo the Great, Bishop of Rome, in his eleventh Sermon, of the Passion, has
these words -- Hac Fidei Regula, quam in ipso exordio Symboli per Authoritatem
Apostolicae Institutionis accepimus, Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum, quem
Filium Dei patris* Omnipotentis unicum dicimus, eundem quoque de Spiritu Sancto
natum ex Maria Virgin confitemur, That is, By this Rule of Faith, which in the
Beginning of the Creed we have received by the Authority of an Apostolik
Institution, we confess the same Jesus Christ our Lord, whom we call the only
Son of God the Father Almighty, to be also borne of the Virgin Mary, by the
Power of the holy Ghost.

The same Leo, in his thirteenth Epistle, written to the Emperesse Pulchcria,
speaks more fully and distinctly of the Creed -- Ipsius Catholici Symboli
brevis, and perfecta confessio, duodecim Apostolorum totidem est signata
Sententiis; That is, That brief and perfect confession of Faith in the
Catholic Creed, is distinctly marked forth with twelve Sentences, equal to
the number of the Apostles.

10. Cassianus S. Chrysostomes Deacon, and afterward Presbyter of Marceilles
in France, at the command of Leo the great, wrote seven Books De Incarnatione
Domini, against Nestorius as he himself tells us in his Preface; in the sixth
whereof he has these words touching the composure of the Creed. Quod Graece
(...) dicitur, Latin Collatio nominatur: Collatio autem ideo, quia in unum ab
Apostolis Domini totius Catholicae legis fide, quiquid per universum Divinorum
voluminu^ Corpus immensa funditur copia, totum in Symboli colligitur Brevitate
perfecta -Hoc est breviatum verbum quod fecit Dominus, Fidem sc. duplicis
Testamenti sui in pauca colligens,* sed sensum omnium Scripturarum in breuia
concludens, sua de suis condens, and vim totius legis compendiocissima
brevitate perficiens; consulens sc. in hoc, ut piissimus Pater, vel
negligentiae quorundam filiorum suorum, vel imperitiae, ut non laboraret utique
quamvis simplex and imperita men's capere, quod possit facile etiam memoria
contineri vides ergo in Symbolo authoritate^ Dei esse (verbum enim breviatum
faciet Dominus super terram) sed Hominum fortasse quaeris; ne id quidem deest;
per Hominem enim id Deus fecit: sicut enim immensam illam Scripturarum sacrarum
Copiam qer Patriarchas and Prophetas maxim suos condidit; ita Symbolum per
Apostolos suos, Sacerdotesque constituit -- Nihil ergo in Symbolo deest, quod
ex scriptis Dei per Apostolos Dei conditum, totum in se, quantum ad
authoritatem pertinet, habet, quicquid vel hominum est, vel Dei: quamvis etiam
quod per homines factum est, Dei existimandum sit, quia non tam illorum per
quos factum est, quam illius credendum esse qui fecit. (i) That which in Greek
is called (...), the Latins call a Collation, a Collation, I say, because the
Apostles of the Lord gathered into one, in the perfect Breviary of the Creed
(wherein they faithfully summed up all the Points of the Catholic Belief)
whatsoever is largely diffused through the whole Body of the Scriptures -- This
is that short word which the Lord utterd, collecting the Faith of both
Testaments, and concluding the sense of the whole Scripture, in a few brief
Sentences, framing this Model out of his own materials, and comprising the
virtue of the whole Divine Law in a most compendious Summary; in this manner
consulting, as a most indulgent Father, to apply a Remedy unto the negligence
and Ignorance of some of his Children, that so the most simple and unskilful
Novice should not be troubled to comprehend it, which might also be easily
contained in memory: thou see therefore in the Creed the Authority of God
himself (for a short work [or word] will the Lord make upon the Earth, Romans
10. 28.) But perhaps thou requirest the Authority of Men? neither is that
wanting; for God made the Creed by the Ministry of men; for as he composd the
great Bulk of holy writ chiefly by his Patriarchs and Prophets, so he framed
the Creed by his Apostles and Prejsts -- There is nothing therefore defective
in the Creed, which being compiled by the Apostles of God out of the Scriptures
of God, has perfectly in it self, for matter of Authority, whatsoever either
God or men can contribute; although indeed, that which was thus framed by men,
is to be esteemed the Work of God, it not being so much to be ascribed unto
those by whom it was made, as to him who made it; nor to be thought the work
of the Instruments, but of the Author.

Afterward, he thus sets down the Text of the Creed -- Credo in unum and Solum
veru^ Deum, Patrem Omnipotentem, Creatorem omnium visibilium and invisibilium
Creaturarum: and in Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum, Filium ejus unigenitum, and
primogenitum totius Creaturae, ex eo natum ante omnia Secula, and non factu^,
Deum verum ex Deo vero, homoousion Patri, per quem and secula compaginata sunt,
and omnia facta: qui propter nos venit, and natus est ex Maria Virgin: and
Crucifixus sub Pontio Pilato, and sepultus: and tertia Die resurrexit, secundum
Scripturas: and in Coelos ascendit: and iterum veniet judicare vivos and
mortuos; and reliqua in Symbolo, quod Ecclesiarum omnium Fidem loquitur, etc.

I believe in one only true God, the Father Almighty, maker of all Creatures
both visible and invisible: and in Jesus Christ our Lord, his only begotten
Son, the first Borne of every creature, begotten of him before all worlds,
and not made, very God of very God, of one substance with the Father, by whom
the worlds were Framed [or Ages set in order] and all things made: who for our
sakes came and was borne of the Virgin Mary: Crucified under Pontius Pilate,
and buried: the third Day he Rose again according to the Scriptures: and
ascended into the Heavens: and shall come again to judge the Quick and the
Dead; And the rest that Follows in the Creed which speaks the Belief of all
the Churches.

By this Creed he confutes Nestorius through his whole First Book, as by that
Faith which was received throughout the whole world; concluding in these words.
Licet omnium ecclesiarum sit, quia una omnium fides, peculiariter tamen
Antiochenae urbis atque Ecclesiae est, illius sc. in qua tu editus, in qua
institutus, in qua renatuses, That is, Although this be the Faith of all the
Churches (which believe al alike) yet it is more peculiarly the Faith of the
City and Church of Antioch, to wit of that Church wherein thou (O Nestorius)
were Borne, Bred, and Baptized.

11. Eusebius Emesenus [or rather, Gallicanus] has three Homilies extant on
the Apostles Creed, wherein he sets down the Creed verbatim, and after
explaines it, Gaigneus Chancellor of Paris set forth these Homilies under the
name of Eus. Emesenus, grounding his opinion on two places of the Decret.
wherein these Homilies, are cited under his name, others have ascribed them to
Caesarius Bishop of Arles; a third sort, to Eucherius Bishop of Lions; a
fourth, unto Faustus Bishop of Regium, because the Author of these Homilies
says, that he was made Bishop ex Abbate lirinensi, as Faustus was; so
Bellarmine. But the Learned Andreas Schottus more probably entitles them to
Eusebius (not Bishop of Emesa in Syria) a Bishop of Gaul, (sprung perhaps from
that, or some other Emesa; and thence denominated) the Latin style being too
elegant for a Translation, and savouring of the French Dialect: and to confirm
this, he cites an ancient verse made by a Scholar of Rabanus Maurus, wherein
such an one is set down by name, though his Diocese be not mentioned. But
whoever were the Author of them, his Testimony is of good credit, each one of
the Five mentioned having been Ancient and famous Bishops.

12. Venantius fortunatus Bishop of Poictiers, has written an explication of
the Apostles Creed; in the Preface whereof he has these words -- Collata
Apostolis scientia linguarum, adhuc in uno positi, hoc est, inter se, Symbolum,
unusquisque quod sensit dicendo, condidere: That is, The Apostles having
conferd on them the gift of Tongues, before their dispersion, framed the Creed
by mutual consent among themselves, every one contributing what he thought
meet. And, a little after -- Symbolum Collatio dicitur Graece, quia hoc ipsi
interse per spiritum Sanctum salubriter condiderunt. That is, The word Symbol
in Greek, signifies a Collation, because the Apostles jointly framed it for the
common benefit, through the assistance of the holy Ghost.

13. Isidore, Bishop of Sevil; lib. de off. Eccles. cap. 22. speaks thus of
the Creed -- Symbolum competentes accipiunt -- in quo pauca (...) verba, sed
omnia continentur Sacramenta; de totis enim Scripturis haec breviatim collecta
sunt ab Apostolis, ut quia plures Credentium literas nesciunt; vel qui sciunt;
prae occupationibus Seculi Scripturas legere non possunt, haec cord
retinentes, habeant sibi sufficientem scientiam salutarem: That is, The
Competentes receive the Creed -- wherein there are but few words, but all
mysteries are therein contained, which were briefly gathered out of the whole
Scriptures by the Apostles; because that many of the Believers being unable to
read, and they who can, being hindered by their worldly businesses, reteining
these few sentences in memory, might have at hand a sufficient knowledge of
Salvation To these words he subjoynes the history of the Creeds composure, out
of Ruffinus, which we have had already.

14. Rabanus Maurus, that Ancient Archbishop of Mentz, and the most Learned Man
of his Age, may well be added unto the former, who lib. 1. De Instit. Cleric.
c. 26. thus informs us. Catechumenus dicitur, qui doctrinam Fidei audit,
necdum tamen Baptismu^ recepit. Competentes sunt, qui jam post doctrinam Fidei,
post continentiam vitae, ad Gratiam Chrsti percipiendam festinant, ideoque
appellantur competentes, id est, gratiam Christi petentes; nam Catechumeni
tantum audiunt, necdum petunt; competentes autem jam petunt, etc. Istis
traditur salutare Symbolum, quasi commonitorium Fidei, and sanctae Confessionis
Indicium, quo instructi agnoscant, quales jam ad Gratiam Christi exhibere se
debeant. That is, He is called a Catechumene, who hears the Doctrine of the
Christian Faith, but has not as yet received Baptism. Competentes are they,
who after the D^^^^ine of Faith, and Strictness of life, hasten to be made
Partakers of the Grace of Christ; and therefore are called Competentes, That
is, Petitioners for the Grace of Christ; for the Catechumeni are only
Auditors, not Askers, but the Competentes are Petitioners etc. To these
Co^petentes the saving Creed is delivered, as a Remembrancer of the Faith, and
a breviat of that holy confession, wherein being instructed, they may take
notice, what manner of persons they ought to show themselves, in reference to
the Grace of Christ. Where, by the Grace of Christ, he understands the
Priviliges of Baptism, at the Participation whereof they constantly made a
Public profession of their Faith by the Rehearsal of the Creed, therefore the
Creed could not come much short of the Institution of that Sacrament, and
consequently from no other Composers, but the Apostles.

Now, for a conclusion to these Testimonies of the forenamed Ancient Fathers,
both Greek, and Latin, I shall sum up what they say, and prove in this
Argument, in three short observations.

1. They affirm, that the Apostles by joint consent, and the special
Concurrence or Inspiration of the holy Ghost, framed a certain set Rule of
Faith, or Form of Belief; and that those Confessions or Rules of Faith which
they rehearse in their writings were received from the Apostles; and this they
build upon the constant tradition of their Ancestors; the same evidence which
we have, for the number, Authors, and Authority of the Canonical Books of
Scripture. This is affirmed by Origin, and Marcellus of Ancyra, for the Esterne
Church; By Irenaeus, and Tertullian, for the Western; all four very Ancient,
to name no latter ones.

2. That, in setting down these Rules or Confessions of Faith they keep
themselves often to the same words, ordinarily to the same method, but
constantly to the same heads or Articles of Faith; that is, no Head, or Article
of Belief set down in the Creed of one Church or Father, is different in
sense from the same proportionably set down in another; much less opposite to
any diverse Article either precedent or subsequent; and for the Difference of
expression, it is not considerable, as being caused by the diversity of
Tongues, and opposition of Heretics, the Church in those Times both
practicing, and allowing it. As for the Imperfection of the Forms; though they
omit (some of them) to express some of the Articles of the Creed in those full
and exact Terms wherein we now have them, because either not pertaining to the
subject they were handling, or not questiond by the Heretics against whom they
wrote, or as employed and enclosed in the Body of those Articles which they set
down, by a necessary Dependence (so S. Chrysostom. in his forecited Homily
involves the four last Articles in that of the holy Ghost; as appears by his
explication) yet some of them set down all the Articles, as Marcellus, Cyrill
Jeros, Augustine; Chrysologus, Eusebius Gallicanus; Irenaeus also and Tertullian
scarce want any one; especially Tertullian; And for those Fathers whose Forms
are more defective, they cannot be said to differ in substance from the other
who deliver the Creed more fully; especially seeing they had several Grounds
and occasions for what they so did; this is a Diversity only quoad majus and
minus; in quantity, not in substance; some Articles made for* one Fathers
purpose, some for another; more for this, fewer for that: And they who cite the
Creed defectively, say that the Forms set down by them, came from the
Apostles, as well as they who set it down more fully, their meaning is, that
those imperfect Forms came from the Apostles, though not so imperfectly, for
they affirm not, that the Apostles delivered no more Articles than what they
there set down, but that what they so set down came from no other than the
Apostles. St Austin, and Leo the Great sufficiently inform us, that the
Apostles jointly delivered all the twelve Articles, according as we now have
them, for they distinctly mention and reckon up so many with reference to the
same number of the Apostles who composed the Creed; but the Fathers in their
writings set them not always down entirely, but those only which were
opposite unto those Heresies that they were in hand with to confute; for urging
the Creed (as they did) by way of Argument, and Convictions they might well
omit those Articles which made not for their purpose. Now, as some of the
Fathers have thus contracted the Creed, so others have enlarged part of the
Articles by way of Paraphrase, that so they might both distinguish themselves,
and defend the Church, from the Heretics of those Days, who seemingly
received the Apostles Creed, and subscribed to the words, but perverted it to a
wrong sense, by their false, erroneous Glosses. Withal in their prefaces to
this subject, they have showed the several Reasons or ends for which the
Apostles framed it, the Delivery thereof by an orall Tradition, and the Ancient
Custom of rehearsing it in Public, at the time of Baptism.

3. That some of these fore-alleadged Fathers lived before, others since the
Nicene Council, wherein that Creed was framed which bears the name of the
Council, the first which was ever publicly authorized by the Church assembled
in a Synod: yet they who lived before the Council, make mention of a former
Creed, as Ireneus, Tertullian, Origin; and Marcellus of Ancyra; and they who
lived afterward, set not down, or explain the Nicene Creed, but one far
more ancient, received, as they themselves say, from the first Founders of the
Christian Church; as St Basil, Cyril, Chrysostom, among the Greeks; St Austin,
Maximus, Chrysologus, Eusebius Gallicanus, among the Latins: which General
Tradition so fully witnessed by the Fathers of so distant Churches (who had no
intercourse with each other) and in the most ancient, incorrupt Times, aloud
Proclaims the Authors, and Antiquity of the Apostles Creed.

CAP. VI.
Testimonies of the Authors, and Authority of the Creed taken out of the
Protestant Divines, who have unanimously received and acknowledged this Creed
of the Apostles, together with the Nicene Creed, and that of Athanasius.

ALthough the Testimonies of the Fathers, might well suffice in this Business,
the Ancient Doctors of the Church being the most apt, and able Witnesses of so
ancient a Tradition; yet, because the Church at this day (especially this
Western Part of it) is so unhappily broken into several divisions, whereto
diverse too pertinaciously addicting themselves, think nothing right or true,
but what their own side allows, and their heads maintain, thus measuring
all Religion by the private judgment of some late masters of the Reformation
(whom, though choice Instruments in that work, we ought not sure, to look on
as infallible dictatours, least in a cross, ridiculous vanity, we be found to
imitate, what we so much blame in our Adversaries, by giving that unto them
which we have taken from the Pope, and so setting up many for one) I thought it
not amiss, by declaring their Judgment also in this Point, to comply a little
with these prejudices, and so give satisfaction even to the most partial, who
look upon the Fame of the Author, rather than the Force of the argument, and
value the proof according to the esteem they have of the Person; as if the
Truth were commended by the Teacher, not the Teacher by the Truth; contrary to
that short, and sharp expostulation of Tertullian, number ex Personis aestimamus
Fidem, an ex Fide Personas? In compliance I say, with these I have thought good
to subjoyne unto the consent of Antiquity, the suffrages of our latter
Protestant Divines (many of them the prime Instruments of the Reformation) who
fully agree with the Fathers in this Point, whereby also I shall show the
convincing evidence of this Truth, which has obtained a free confession from
the Mouths and Pens of those who have rejected so many other doctrines
received in the Church of Rome, Especially, matters of Tradition, such as the
Creed is; which has been so universally received by them, who have repudiated
or Reformed all that they could find any fault with after a most severe
examination; and who in other Points not a few, have showed themselves not only
of a contrary judgment unto the Church of Rome, but even of a Different among
themselves.

These Testimonies then, may justly much prevail with those who profess
themselves of the Reformed Churches; not only, because of the Dignity of their
Name, and the uncorruptnesse of their writings (as being composed of late, and
not at all suspected of coruption by any Romish fraud) but also, that when they
speak of the Apostles Creed, they questionless mean that (...), the same in
express Terms which is now extant; and so, are not liable to that Exception,
which some (though without just Ground) have made against those Creeds set
down in the writings of the Fathers, that they vary from the Form we now
have, at least in some words and in the manner of expression.

Hereby also, two sorts of men may likewise see their error. First, the
Romane-Catholik, who with alike loudnes and lying proclaims to the world, that
the Protestant or Reformed Churches have brought in a new Religion, whereas
their endeavor has been to restore the old unto its Primitive Simplicity, by
paring off from it, as well eroneous superstructures in matter of Doctrine, as
Superstitious or Burdenous Appendixes in matter of Ceremonies, Discipline,
Government, and Manners. Secondly, the Novellist, who though he seems
outwardly much to honor the Prime Reformers, yet adheres not to their
Principles, but runs wildly after his own Inventions, foolishly measuring the
Truth of Religion by its opposition to the Church of Rome, as if she had wholly
apostatized from the Faith. Now between these two extremes, the old Catholic
Truth keeps a mean, though for this cause much suffering on both sides. Mat.
11. 19. But Wisdom is justified of her Children.

Among these Protestant Divines, I have already produced the Testimonies of
Calvin, Beza, Grynaeus, and Paraeus, in their Comments on the fore-alleaged
Places of Scripture, viz. Beza, and Grynaeus, on Romans 12. 6. Calvin, and
Paraeus, on Heb. 1. 6. To these I shall now add the Testinnies of others; and
withal, cite Calvin and Grinaeus in their other writings.

1. Martin Luther, in his Tract of the three Creeds, which we find extant in
the seventh Tome of his works, has these words -- Because some, after
Confession of my Faith, Questioned my Religion, I have thought good to Publish
these three Symboles (as they are called) or confessions of the Christian Faith,
packt up as it were in one bundle; which Creeds the universal Church hitherto
has with general Approbation taught, read, and sung, [quas quidem hactenus
universa ecclesia magno consensu docuit, legit, and cantavit] Quare iterum
testatum volo, sentire me unice cum vera Christiana ecclesia, quae ista Symbola
magno consensu hactenus tum docuit, tum retinuit: and e contra, toto Pectore
abhorrere ac dissentire a falsa illa and hypocritica ecclesta quae est
saevissimus hostis verae ecclesiae Christi, quaeque neglectis and obscuratis
istis pulcherrimis Symbolis, multiplicem interea Idololatriam in ecclesiam
invexit.

Whereby, says he, I again desire to testify, that I wholly conform my
judgment to that true Christian Church, which has hitherto concordantly
retained, and delivered those Creeds, and on the contrary, do cordially
dissent from, and abhor that false and hypocritical Church, which is the
most cruel enemy of the true Church of Christ; which neglecting and debasing
those most excellent Creeds, has in the mean time introduced manifest
Idolatry into the Church. Thus he, in his preface to the Reader.

He proceeds thus; Est autem primum illud Apostolorum Symbolum, ex reliquis
pulcherrimum, maximeque concinnum, utpote quod brevissime, and quodam ceu
compendio, omnes fidei christianae Articulos complectitur, quo nomine and
facilius a Pueris and Simplicioribus percipi ac disci potest. Alterum,
Athanasii sc. Symbolum, est paulo prolixius, -- estque hoc velut propugnaculum
primi illius Apostolici Symboli, ab eo contra Arianos haereticos conditum est.

That is, The first of these is the Apostles Creed, the most excellent and best
composed of the rest, as which most briefly and compendiously comprehends all
the Articles of the Cristian Belief; in which regard it may be more easily
learned and understood of Children, and the more simple sort. The Second, is
the Creed of Athanasius, which is somewhat larger, and is in the nature of a
Bulwark to that first Creed of the Apostles: -- It was framed by him against
the Arrians. The Third, which he there sets down, is Te Deum, being as well a
Creed, as an Hymn.

Then after -- In Symbolo Apostolorum jactum est fundamentum Christianae Fidei.
-- Subjiciemus sub finem ad tria ista Symbola and Nicenum Symbolu^, quod
itidem, ut and Athanasii, contra Arium conditum est, quod singulis Dominicis
diebus in missa canitur.

That is, In the Apostles Creed was laid, the Foundation of the Christian
Faith, -- We will add, at latter end, to these three Creeds, the Nicene Creed
also; which, as that of Athanasius, was framed against Arius; and which, upon
every Lords Day, is sung at Mass, that is, The second or communion service,
for there of old it has been placed.

The same Luther in his Colloquies gathered and set forth by Peter Rebenstocke.
Anno Dommini. 1571. Tome. 2. page 106. Ad suos frequenter aiebat; Symboli verba
ab Apostolis constituta esse credo, qui in congregatione sua hoc Symbolum
verbis tam brevissimis and consolatoriis confecerunt. est opus spiritus
sanctirem tanta brevitate, tam efficacissimis and emphaticis verbis describere:
extra Spiritum sanctum and Apostolos non potuisset ita componi etiamsi millia
secula illud componere conarentur.

That is, Luther was wont to say often unto those about him, I Believe that the
words of the Creed were agreed on by the Apostles, who meeting together framed
this Creed in so curt but comfortable expressions. It is the work of the holy
Ghost to describe a thing with such a brevity, and yet most efficatiously, and
emphatically; it could not have been so composed unless by the holy Ghost and
the Apostles, allthough a thousand Ages had endeavored it. These full and
clear Testimonies of his I find cited by Fevardentius in his annotations on
Irenaeus, lib: 1: cap: 2. A fiery Adversary of his, and so not likely to ly for
Luthers credit and Advantage,

2. Calvin, Instit lib: 2. cap. 16:: 18: says thus of the Creed -- Apostolis
certe magno veterum consensu ascribitur -- neque vero mihi dubium est, quin a
prima statim Ecclesiae origin, adeoque ab ipso Apostolorum seculo instar
publicae and omnium calculis receptae confessionis obtinuerit, undecunque
tandem initio fuerit profectum: Nec ab uno aliquo privatim fuisse conscriptum
verisimile est, cum ab ultima usque memoria sacro sanctae inter Pios omnes
authoritatis fuisse constet. Concerning the fulness of it thus: Dum paucis
verbis Capita Redemptionis perstringit, vice tabulae nobis esse potest, in qua
distinct ac sigillatim perspicimus quae in Christo attentione digna sunt.
Then; Id extra Controversiam positum habemus, totam in eo Fidei nostrae
historia^ succincte, distincteque recenseri, nihil autem contineri quod solidis
Scripturae testimoniis non sit consignatum -- quo intellecto, de authore, vel
anxie laborare, velcum aliquo digladiari, nihil attinet; nisi cui forte non
sufficiat certam habere Spiritus sancti veritatem, ut non simul intelligat, aut
cujus ore enunciata, aut cujus manu descripta fuerit.

In which words, (though according to his Judgment, an anxious Dispute about
the Author of the Creed be needles) he affirms enough whereon to ground what
I have said, concerning the composure of it by the Apostles, and none other;
viz. 1. That the Ancients generally ascribe it to the Apostles. 2. That it was
universally received as a public Confession of the Faith, presently upon the
first Rise of the Christian Church, and from the Age of the Apostles. 3. That
it is not probable to have been written, by any Private Man, seeing it is most
certain to have been, time out of mind, of a most Sacred Authority amongst all
Pious Christians. 4. That it is an assured Truth, or Dictate of the Holy Ghost;
withal telling us, that some such Divine Truths are written, others only
delivered to us by an Orall Tradition, such as the Creed is.

Now I would feign know, to whom so Ancient, so universally received a Creed,
one of so Sacred an Authority, and so Divine an Author as the Holy Ghost, can
be justly attributed, except to the Apostles, who only, were the First, the
General, the Holy, the Divinelyinspired, and authorized founders of the
Christian Church, and Preachers of the common Faith.

3. Beza subscribes in like manner to the Authority of the Creed, in his
annotations on the forecited place. Romans 12. 6. where he not only tells us,
that the Creed was extant, when the Gospel began first to be Preached, and
therefore (as we have reason to conceive) framed by the first Preachers of the
Gospel, the Apostles, but also that the Articles therein contained are
Axiomata (...), such as require our Belief without any farther Proof, that
is, without proof from Scripture, whereon our Belief is grounded; therefore,
in the Judgment of Beza, they must needs come from the divinely-inspired
Apostles, namely, the same Authors from whose Mouths or Pens the Scriptures of
the New Testament were derived to us; for none else, under the Gospel, have
delivered Axiomata (...), Principles of Religion which require no farther
Evidence; whence it is that Saint Luke tells us in his Preface, that he had his
Gospel from the mouths of the Apostles; and St Mark, as Church History has
constantly informed us, had his particularly from St Peter.

4. Joannes Pappus Comment. in Confess. August. fol. 2. has these words;
Semper in ecclesia scriptorum quorundam publicorum usus fuit, quibus doctrinae
divinitus revelatae de certis Capitibus Summa comprehenderetur, and contra
Haereticos, aliosque adversarios defenderetur. Talia scripta, licet perbrevia,
sunt Symbola illa totius ecclesiae* consensu recepta, Apostolicum, Nicenum,
Athanasianum.

Where he tells us, that there have been certain Creeds in the Church of
Public use, wherein the sum of Christian Doctrine was contained, and thereby
defended, against Heretics; namely, the Apostles Creed; the Nicene and that of
Athanasius, all received by the consent of the whole Church: Now, we know that
the two latter were composed since the third Century, and therefore the
Particle [ Alwayes] must especially, and absolutely relate only to the Apostles
Creed; which if, as Pappus here affirms, it has been of Public and
Perpetual use in the Christian Church, challenges the Apostles for its
Composers, by those two Badges of Antiquity and Universality, besides the
acknowledgment of its Title.

5. Peter Martyr, loc, Comm* de missa* cap. 12. says thus, in Symbolis summa
fidei comprehenditur; quae sane comprehensio vel summa, siquis veteres attente
legate, Ecclesiae Traditio vocata est; quae cum ex divinis libris desumpta est,
tum ad salutem creditu est necessaria; and nonnunquam a Tertulliano contra
haereticos, qui sacros libros negabant, producitur. Symbolum plenum and
absolutum Nicena Synodus edidit, non tamen primum, quandoquidem prius aliqua
extabant, ut vel ex Tertulliano possumus cognoscere. Where he affirms.

1. That the Creed is a summary of the Faith, necessary to Salvation, and
called by the Ancients, the Tradition of the Church.

2. That this Creed is produced by Tertullian, against those Heretics who
denied the Scriptures.

3. That the Nicene Creed, although a full and complete Form, yet was not the
first which the Christian Church had; for which he refers us to Tertullian;
Now, that Creed which was older than the Council of Nice, can be no other than
the Apostles Creed seeing no other Creed was ever mentioned before the time of
that Council nor other Authors assigned: And for Tertullians Testimony, to
whom we are referd, he clearly assigns the Apostles for the Authors.

6. Bullinger in the Beginning of his Decads, whereto he prefixeth the Ancient
Creeds, has these words -- Sufficiebat hactenus Symbolum Apostolorum and
sufficisset Ecclesiae Christi, etiam Constantini Seculo; confitentur enim
omnes, omnes Ecclesias non alio Symbolo quam Apostolico usas, eodemque fuisse
per totam terrarum orbem contentas: quoniam vero Constantini magni aetate
emerfit impius and blasphemus Arius, qui Christianae fidei puritatem corrupit,
and simplicitatem doctrinae Apostolicae pervertit, coacti sunt ipsa necessitate
Ecclesiarum ministri sese impostori opponere, ac Symbolo editio, verum, id est,
veterem fidei confessionem (damnata Arii novitate) declarando ex Scripturis
canonicis illustrare; neque enim and in aliis mox sequentibus tribus conciliis
Generalibus editis Symbolis, quicquam mutatum est in Doctrina Apostolorum,
neque quicquam novi adiectum, quod prius ex Scriptura sancta Ecclesiae Christi
habuerunt, and crediderunt, sed corruptionibus and novitatibus Haereticorum
antiqua veritas illustrata per Symbola, prudenter, utiliter and religiose est
opposita.

That is, Hitherto the Creed of the Apostles sufficed, and had sufficed the
Church of Christ, even in the Time of Constantine; for it is confessed by all,
that all Churches used no other Creed than that of the Apostles, and were
contented therewith all the world over, but because in the Time of Constantine
the Great, there sprang up that impious, and blasphemous Arius, who corrupted
the Purity of the Christian Faith and perverted the Simplicity of the
Apostolic Doctrine, the Pastors of the Churches were compeld out of necessity
to oppose themselves unto such an Imposture; and setting forth a Creed, to
illustrate the True, that is, the Ancient Confession of Faith, by manifesting
it out of Scriptures; thereby condemning the novelty of Arius; for neither in
the three other general Councels, which followed that of Nice, was there any
thing changed (by setting forth their Creeds) in the doctrine of the Apostles,
nor any new thing added unto what the Churches of Christ formerly had, and
believed out of the Holy Scripture; but the Ancient Faith being illustrated by
the Creeds, was prudently, profitably, and piously opposed unto the
Corruptions, and Novelties of the Heretics.

7. Christopher Barbarossa, in the Preface to his Catecheticall Analysis
(wherein he has drawn into Method the Catechisticall Meditations of
seventeene Protestant Divines) set forth by the Deane and College of Divines,
in the Academy of Rostock, has these words, -- Apostoli and Synodi brevibus
Symbolis doctrinae Christianae Summam complexi sunt -- quilibet Apostolorum
suum contulit ad hoc Symbolum. Ratio quare Apostoli composuerunt hoc Symbolum,
duplex est. 1. Suiipsius causa ut certam haberent Regulam and Amussim
doctrinae, postquam exire vellent in totum Mundum. 2. Propter nos ipsos, ut
haberemus Regulam and Amussim Fidei contra Haereticos. Nomen [ Articuli]
requirit integram omnium Fidei Articulorum cognitionem and confessionem, si
modo Fides perfecta and integra esse debet.

That is, The Apostles, and Synods comprehended the sum of Christian doctrine
in certain breife Creeds -- Every one of the Apostles contributed his part to
the Creed. There is a double Reason why the Apostles composed the Creed. 1. For
their own sake, that they might have a certain Rule or measure of Doctrine,
after they had resolved to go forth into the whole world. 2. For our sakes
that we might have a Square, or Rule of Faith against the Heretics. The word [
Article] requires an entire knowledge, and Confession of all the Points of
Faith, if so be it ought to be whole, and perfect.

8. Grinaeus, de Eccles: contin: -- Primitiva Ecclesia habuit Symbolum
Apostolorum, cujus plena in Scripturis explicatio; non abit ab hoc, quod in
Irenaeo extat Symbolum; lib. 1. cap. 2. That is, The Primitive Church had the
Creed of the Apostles, which is fully explained in the Scriptures; This Creed
is not diverse from that, which is extant in Irenaeus.

9. Nicol. Selneccerus, in his Paedagogia Christiana, -- Tria Symbola usitate
nominantur, Apostolicum Nicenum, and Athanasianum; Apostolicum majus, and in
quarta Apostoloru^ Synodo conscriptum fuisse arbitrantur. 1. De electione
Matthiae. 2. De Ordinatione Diaconorum. 3. De Abdicatione legalium. 4. Vt
existimatur, de conscribendis his Fidei Articulis, ut certa norma and (...)
praecipuorum Capitum doctrinae Christianae: and cum Apostolis jam esset in
totum terrarum orbem abeundum, extaret confessio, quae unanimem ipsorum
consensum exhiberet; ut autem hoc se habeat, certum tamen est, in hoc Symbolo,
quod internae nostrae Fidei Professio and concordia est, contineri omnia Capita
totius Religionis Christianae, recte, perspicue and ordine.

That is, There be three famous Creeds, the Apostles, the Nicene, and that of
Athanasius; the Apostles Creed is of the greatest account, and is supposed to
have been compiled in the fourth Synod of the Apostles; whereof, the first was
concerning the election of Mathias; the Second concerning the Ordination of
Deacons; the Third, concerning the disanulling of Ceremonies; Act. 15. the
Fourth as is conceived, concerning these Articles of Faith, which should serve
as a certain Rule or Model of the chief Heads of Christian Doctrine; and,
seeing that the Apostles were now to go forth into the whole world, there
might be extant a Confession, which should exhibit their unanimous consent
unto all. But however this business was ordered, it is certain, that in this
Creed which is the concordant profession of our inward Faith, are contained all
the Heads of the whole Christian Religion, Rightly, Clearly, and Orderly.

10. Alex. Nowell in his Catechism, gives two Reasons, why the Creed is
entitled to the Apostles; whereof the First and Chief, and to which he
principally enclines, is this, that it was ab Ore Apostolorum exceptum,
Received from the mouths of the Apostles and his following words confirm this
reason of the Name, wherein he declares, that it has been Ab initio usque
Ecclesiae receptum, received from the very beginning of the Christian Church;
and from that Time has perpetually abode in it firm, Authentic, immoved,
amongst all Pious Christians, ut certa atque constituta Christianae Fidei
Regula, as a sure and settled Rule of the Christian Belief. As for his latter
conjecture of the name Apostolic, that it might be so called, quia ex eorum
scriptis summa fide collectum, because the Creed was most faithfully gathered
out of the Apostles writings; he might well indulge to the doubtful speaking
of some Divines in his Time.

11. Confessio Saxonica Artic. 1. Affirmamus clare coram Deo, and universa
Ecclesia in Coelo and in Terra, nos vera Fide amplecti omnia scripta
Prophetarum and Apostolorum, and quidem in hac ipsa nativa sententia, quae
expressa est in Symbolis, Apostolico, Niceno, and Athanasiano. Et haec ipsa
Symbola, and eorum nativam sententiam sine corruptelis semper constanter
amplexi sumus, and (Deo Juvante) perpetuo amplectemur. Damnamus etiam
constantissime omnes furores, qui pugnant cum Symbolis, ut sunt Samosateni,
Serveti, Arii, Pneumatomachorum portentosae opiniones, and aliae condemnatae
veris Ecclesiae Judiciis. That is

We openly affirm before God, and the universal Church in Heaven, and in
Earth, that with a true faith we embrace all the writings of the Prophets, and
Apostles, in that very genuine, and primitive sense which is expressed in the
Creeds of the Apostles, Nic. and Athanatius; and that we have always
constantly embraced, and (by Gods help) will always embrace these Creeds, and
their true native meaning, without falsifying, or depravation; we also most
resolutely condemn all those mad heresies which are repugnant to the Creeds,
namely, those of Samosatenus, Servetus, Arius and the portentous opinions of
the Pneumatomachi, and what others condemned by the Just censures of the Church.

12 Bohemica Confessio -- Fides Apostolica in duodecim Articulos digesta, and
tradita in Symbolo, per Nicenam Synodum, atque adeo alias confirmata and
exposita est. That is, The Apostolic Faith being digested into twelve
Articles, and dilivered in the Creed, has been confirmed and explained by the
Nicene, and other succeeding Synods.

13. Galliae Confess. Art. 5. Tria illa Symbola, nempe Apostolicum, Nicenum, and
Athanasianum, idcirco approbamus, quod sint verbo Dei Scripto consentanea. That
is,

Those three Creeds, the Apostolic, the Nicene, and that of Athanasius, we
therefore approve of because they are agreeable to the written Word of God.

And Serrarius the Jesuit (whom we may well credit in such a matter) in his
Tract of the Athanasian Creed, informs us, that the Calvintan Divines in an
Assembly of theirs at Lausanna, professed that they agreed with the Lutherans
concerning those Ancient Creeds, and ascribed to them, together with the
Sciptare, a Judiciary Power or Authority, which all ought to obey. Whence we
may gather, that they Judged them to proceed from the same Fountain, to wit,
from Divine or Apostolic Tradition; otherwise, they would not have conjoined
them with the Scriptures, as the Authentic Judges or Rules, whereby all
Controversies are to be decided.

14. The Church of England, in her eight Art. of the three Creeds agrees with
the rest -- The three Ceeds, Nic. Creed, Athanasian Creed, and that which is
commonly called the the Apostles Creed ought thoroughly to be received and
observed, for they may be proved by most certain warrants of the holy
Scripture.

From these Four last Testimonies, taken out of the Confessions of the
Reformed Churches, I gather.

1. That they concordantly receive these three Ancient Creeds, and reject
whatsoever Heresy, or opinion is repugnant to them; from whence it will
appear, that they have introduced no new Faith or Religion, different from the
old, much less opposite unto it.

2. They not only receive the Apostles Creed, but also acknowledge it for such,
and by that name contra distinguish it to the Nicene, and Athanasian; therefore
by that Title they are as justly presumed to acknowledge the Apostles for the
composers of the one, as the Council of Nice and Athanasius for the Composers
of the other Two.

3. The Bohemick Confession tells us, that the Nicene Council, and the rest
that followed, did confirm and expound that Faith which had been delivered in
the Creed of the Apostles, and distributed (according to their number) into
twelve Articles: so then the Apostles Creed was the First, and not only the
First, but the Entire, and Complete Summary of the Christian Faith; to which
succeding Ages added nothing in their several Forms of Confession, or
Belief, but only explained them.

4. The Gallican Church, and our Mother of England say indeed that they receive
the three Creeds, because agreeable to the holy Writ, but they say not that
they receive them only for that Reason; so that this expression does not any
way cross the fore-delivered Tenent of deriving the Creed immediately from the
Mouths of the Apostles, no more than our Blessed Savior and his Apostles
confirming the Doctrine they taught by the testimonies of Moses and the
Prophets, prejudiced the truth and infallibility of the Spirit by which they
spoke. See Jo. 5. 39, 46, 47. Act. 26. 22. Chap. 28. 23. Such an Accessory
confirmation renders the Truth more clear, and Full, and serves not so much to
confirm the Doctrine it self, as the Persons to whom it is delivered.

CAP. VII.
Six Reasons, evincing the Apostles to have been the Composers of the Creed,
which commonly bears their name. Some Objections against these Reasons,
answered. The Place, where the Creed was Made. Of Fundamentalls, and Traditions.

TO the Testimony of Scripture, Consent of Antiquity and the joint concordant
Suffrages of our latter Protestant Divines, I shall subjoyne in the last Place,
the Verdict of Reason, which waits upon the forementioned Authorities, giving
strength unto some, and light unto others.

Reason. 1. The Title which it bears of the Apostles Creed, or Symbol has
been generally acknowledged throughout all ages of the Church, and never
questioned till of late; chiefly by our modern Antitrinitarians. That Arch*
heritick Photinus, their Fore-father, perverted it indeed with the comments, Vt
fideliter and simpliciter dicta ad argumentum sui dogmatis traheret, That he
might pervert the general words thereof to the countenancing of, or complying
with his corrupt Tenants, as Ruffinus informs us, but he never durst deny
either its Authority, or its Authors, Sure, this General Tradition, and
unanimous consent of the Church, is no weak Argument, to evince the true
Authors?

But to this Reason, I find three things Objected.

Ob. 1. Against the Name [ Symbolum.] From whence some draw an Argument that it
was jointly composed by the Apostles, because the Word is derived from [(...)]
Confer in unum, and so signifies a Collation of many; the Metaphor being
drawn from Caena collatitia, a Supper in common, whereto every one of the
guests brought his dish of meat; or were he laid down his shot equally with
the rest; whereas it might be called a Symbol, or Collation, not because it
was gathered a Pluribus, sed ex Pluribus, not by many men, but out of many
materials; and this Collation made out of Scripture, not by the Apostles
themselves, but by Apostolic men, and their Disciples, ab Ecclesiarum
Patribus, as Eusebius Emes. tells us, Hom. 1. in Symb. which appellation agrees
to those who lived in latter Times. So Canones Apostolorum, are called by the
Apostles Names though not compiled by them, but by Clemens, as the Title of
those Canons witneseth; Yea, both Greek and Latin Fathers have communicated
the name Apostle to others, to any Bishop; the Church of Rome keep the old
style still, The Apostolic See, The Apostolic Bulls; Our Saxon Predecessors
gave the Bishop of Rome the Title of Apostle, and Apostolical Pope. Bed. hist.
lib. 2. c. 2, 11. Austin the Monk is called Anglorum Apostolus; Philip the
Deacon* is called an Apostle by Tertullian; and, Epaphroditus, by St Paul*
Phil. 2. 25. So, many others besides the Twelve (whom St Chrysostom, by way of
Distinction, calls (...), Apostles by way of Eminency) were called Apostles,
who might give name to the Creed as well as the Twelve, therefore it is no
concluding or necessary Argument, It is called the Apostle Creeds Ergo, it was
made by the Twelve. Then for the Title [ Symbolum] that does not signify such a
Collation, or Feast in Common, but the word [ Symbola] and therefore cannot
imply, or allude to any such composing of the Creed by the joint concurrence of
the Apostles. Besides, Cajetan ad 2am 2ae qu. 1. art. 8. Tells us, that Aquinas
thinking fit to number the Articles ex part rei creditae, with relation to the
matter, not the makers of the Creed, for this cause passed by that famous
distribution of them according to the number of the Apostles, because it is
accidental to the Articles of Faith, whether they be gathered by many, or by
one, as that of Athanasius.

Answ. Good Authors indeed assign that for the reason and etymology of the
Apostolic Symbol that it was an Apostolical Collation, or Collection, of the
Fundamental Points of Belief by the twelve Apostoles, yet not as the
principal argument but by way of Appendix, and Congruity unto the
forementioned Tradition.

But this distinction, (says the objectour) or Collation of several Articles
might be made by Apostolic Men, and their Disciples, out of the holy Scripture
and from thence obtain the name of the Apostolic Symbol. But [it might be
so] and [it was so] are two things: If it might be so, it might be otherwise;
sure this private, groundles conjecture, may well give place to the constant
assertion of so many Ancient and learned Authors, who affirm the Apostles to
have been the Composers of the Creed, and give that for the reason of the name
which it bears.

As for the Testimony of Eusebius, Hom. 1. in Symb. who is there produced to
say that the Creed was written, not by the Apostles but by the Fathers of the
Churches; he has no such exclusive words, as [non ab Apostolis quidem] but
says that the Fathers of the Churches (whom a little after he calls Magistri,
the Masters of the said Churches) Composed the Creed; Now, who be these but the
Apostles, expressed by way of Periphrasis; for they, and they only may properly
be called the Fathers, or Masters, not of this or that Church in particular,
but of all the Churches in the World, their Commission Being general; Go, and
Teach all Nations; Math. 29. 19. Whereas others were limited to this or that
Church, as the Apostles pleased to dispose of them; and were the Sons, or
Disciples of the Apostles, as St Paul terms Timothy, and Titus, in his
Epistles which he wrote unto them. 1 Timothy 1. 2. Tit. 1. 4. Hence also it is,
that St Paul tells his Corinthians 1 Cor. 4. 15. Though ye have ten thousand
instructers in Christ, yet have ye not many Fathers, for in Christ Jesus I have
Begotten you through the Gospel, And St James in his Epistle to the dispersed
Jews, secretly taxing the proud-conceited Rabbis, who affected the highest
seats in the Synagogues, and the office of teaching their Brethren, My
Brethren, says he Be not many Masters Jam. 3. 1.

This conjecture therefore deserves as little faith, as it has foundation, that
is, none at all; for the Fathers constantly say it was called The Apostles
Creed, because Framed by, and derived to the Christian Church, from the
Apostles of Christ; and this may justly sway us in this Case; for the Title
prefixed does not only bear this construction; but more directly points out,
and inclines us to this meaning; Titles being therefore given, that they may
design the Authors, or Composers of that work unto which they are prefixed;
and the Fathers living in the first Ages should best know the Tradition; the
Title then of the Apostles Creed is not nakedly produced as a convincing
Argument, but as backed, and seconded with the Attestation of Antiquity.

As for the contrary Instance of the Canons of the Apostles, although they
bear the name of Clemens in the Inscription, who first gatherd them into one
Body, yet they may well challenge the Apostles for the Authors, who first
instituted, and put them in Practice.

Then, as to the promiscuous use of the name Apostle, and Apostolic and the
applying of them to the Ancient Bishops it will not hurt at all, or prejudice
the Title of the Creed, Because the Fathers entitle it to the Apostles so called
(...), by way of Eminency; some of them expressly naming the Twelve, as Ambrose,
Ruffine, and Augustine: others decyphering them by such circumstances, as can
agree to none other than The Apostles, who left the Srciptures to us; so
Irenaeus. Such Apostles, who received this Rule from Christ their Master, at
the very beginning of the Gospel, and before the rise of any Heresy; so
Tertullian. Such who left us the Faith per successionis Ordinem, by a continued
line of Episcopal successors; so Origin. And all the rest name the Apostles
indefinitly, not limited to a particular See, charge or place, by any
determining circomstance; now, it is a known Rule in Logic concerning
ambiguons Terms, Analogum per se positum, stat pro famosiori Analogato.

Neither, indeed, do the instances alleged show that the Name was commonly
given to every Bishop at large, but either to some Episcopal See, which the
Apostles had personally founded, as to that of Rome, founded by Peter and Paul:
or, to some special Person, who planted a New Church, or converted a whole
Nation to Christianity, (which is a work properly Apostolical) as to
Epaphroditus, of Collosse and Augustine, of our Saxon nation, and in his sense
did our Saxo^ Kings probably give the Title of Apostolic to the Bishop of
Rome, as well as for the former reason; because Gregory the Great sent over
Augustine hither with certain coadjutors, to convert our Ancestors from
Paganism.

The like may be said, in proportion of Philip the Deacon, who was sent by the
holy Ghost with a special Commission to convert the Eunuch of Queen Candace;
and, by his means, the whole Nation of Ethiopia, as Church-story tells us.

But to the critical quarrel against the word [ Symbolum,] that not it, but [
Symbola] signifies such a Collation; I shall endeavor to evidence the contrary
out of good Authors, and by the judgment of learned Critics, (...), sive
(...), collecta, caena collectitia, says Budaeus in his Lexicon. (...), so
Jul. Pollux in his Onomasticon. lib. 6. cap. 1. the accent whereof shows it is
the Genesis case plural of (...). Athenaeus has the same instance, lib. 8. circa
finem; reading the genesis case (...), from (...), not (...), from (...): so
Budaeus cites it, though Casaubon, in his Edition, read it otherwise. Latin
Authors also agree to this Reading, in whose writings we find Symbolum taken in
this sense, as well as Symbola. Ter. in Andr. Act. 1. Scen. 1. Symbolum dedit,
caenavit. ubi Symbolum quidam imperite corrigunt, says Budaeus, cum utrumque
dicatur aeque recte. Plautus in Sticho; Eo condictum Symbolum ad caenam, ac
ejus conservum Sangurinum Syrum. And, in his Curcul. (...) vocat Symbolorum
Collectores-Legimus apud Gellium, Talia Symbola; says H. Steph. in his
Thesaurus; though in his own Edition of Gellius Par^^ 1585. he read Tales
Symbolae; this being in likelihood the ground of the difference, that Symbola
is the more usual word, whereas in the old copies it was written Symbolum;
this correction therefore is corrected by Budaeus. The same Stephanus in his
Thesaurus, tells us -- Apud Plautum ac Terentium, non solum Symbolam, sed and
Symbolum legimus. And, concerning this Etymology of the Apostles, Symbol, he
is clear and plain -- ut ut sit, says he, (...) Apostolicum potius ab hac
(...) significatione, quam ab altera (ad quam id nonnullos refer dixi) viz.
Tessera militaris, appellatum fuisse, Augustini etiam testimonio confirmari
potest. Sermon. de Temp. Then, he adds; Symbolum tamen est potius quod confertur,
id est, collatum, quam collatio, haec enim est ipsa conferendi actio; Which
words apply the Title of Symbolum more closely and genuinely to the Creed,
which is nothing but Corpus Fidei e duodecim Articulis collatum, sive collectum.

Although then we might say of this word Symbolum, as of some others, that the
Holy Scriptures and Fathers take not a few Terms in another sense, then they
are commonly used in by profane Authors, as (...), Sacramentum etc. Yet in
this particular we need not make use of any such refuge, because the Fathers
who used the Title of Symbolum, were many of them skilled in the Greek tongue,
and use it in the same sense, as other heathen Authors before them did.

Lastly, to that Division of the Creed which Cajetan mentions out of Aquinas,
which relates to the matter, not to the makers of the Creed, it is scarce worth
the answering; for Cajetan there speaks of Symbolum in general, not of the
Apostles Creed precisely; he grants that the Distribution of the Articles,
according to the number of the Composers, was one very known, and famous; he
brings such a reason of the word Symbolum, as contradicts not the other, but
rather alludeth to it; and lastly, apologizeth for Aquinas, because he passed
by the usual distinction.

Ob. 2. Against the Title [Apostolick] It might be so called, not that it was
composed by the Apostles, but because it is a Compendium of the Apostles
Doctrine, and, of all other Creeds, comes nearest the very words of the
Apostles, and Evangelists. So, the Symbol of the Church at Jerusalem is styled
by Cyril, (...), The Tradition of the Holy and Apostolic Faith. Or, it might
be called the Apostles Creed, because it was received from the Apostolic See,
that is, the Roman, founded by Peter and Paul, two famous Apostles; and thence
usually honored with that Title.

Answ. Here Is another [ might be] a private conjecture without any ground, or
Proof; whereas he that will deny an Ancient and publicly received Tradition,
ought to bring more then his bare conjecture, if he would be believed against
the joint Testimonies of so many Authors both Ancient, and Modern. It is a
maxim indeed in Controversies, that Affirmantis est Probare, that it behooves
the Affirmer of a Tenent to show, not only that it may, but that it must be
thus; to evince the opinion he maintains, by some convincing Argument; but
this is to be exacted, when he broacheth some new opinion of his own, or
maintains one lately held, and taken up by some few; not so, when the Affirmer
relies upon a Tradition of so many years standing, and this Tradition confessed
by the Adversary, as this of the Creed is; for such a Tradition as this, is a
sufficient [ must be] unless the falsity or mistake thereof can be
demonstrated.

Besides, the reason of the name delivered in the objection, does notat all
oppose, but agree with the Tradition; for the Apostles might well deliver in
the Creed, the summary of what they were to Preach more at large; and, that the
Apostles Creed comes nearest of any other to the words of the Apostles in their
writings, argues them, rather than any other, for the Composers of it.

As for the testimony of Cyril, he calls not the Jerosolymitan Creed in the
place here cited, (...), the Tradition or Declaration of the Holy Apostolic
Faith, as the objector alleges; but he tells his Auditors, that in the
precedent Days of Lent, he had discoursed unto them, as far as his
Catecheses would permit, of the Holy, and Apostolic Faith delivered unto them,
(...), that is, to make open Profession thereof at their Baptism; which Holy
and Apostolic Faith, was delivered in that Creed of his, which he there sets
down, and explaines; and is so called by him, in opposition to heretical
senses and Interpretations: but that Creed, which he there Comments on, being
the Jerosolymitan, differs not from that of the Apostles, as we shall show more
clearly anon.

Lastly, for the Denomination of the Apostles Creed from the Apostolic See of
Rome, we shall examine it, when we come to answer the Objections.

Ob. 3. Against the Traditio Majorum, the received Tradition and Consent of the
Primitive Fathers, who were best like to know the Authors, as being nearest the
Apostles Times; it is objected; That Ruffinus counts it not for a certain
story, as appears by those general and indefinite words -- Qui Symbolum
tradiderunt, Those who delivered the Creed to us, as if he knew not who they
were: as also, that no Author seems to have wrote so before the year 400; nor
after this, except he lived in the western Church. And the Ethiopick Creed
differs from ours, and agrees more with the Nicene. Besides St Aug. Testimony
Sermon. 115. seems to be supposititious.

Answ. The weakness of these Arguments which are brought to overthrow so old,
and Catholic a Tradition, does not a little confirm me in my Belief, that the
Apostles were the Authors of the Creed.

First; Ruffinus in that place shows no doubt at all of the Authors, as
appears by the forecited Relation; but having before recited the Tradition of
his Ancestors and himself accordingly affirmed the Apostles to have been the
Authors in these words -- Symbolum fecerunt Apostoli in his Sermonibus, in unum
conferendo quod unusquisque sensit -- Decessuri ad predicandum, istud
unanimitatis and fidei suae Indicium Apostoli posuere. Sure those following
words, qui Symbolum tradiderunt must needs relate to the Apostles, as the
antecedent.

Secondly; that several Authors have mentioned this Tradition before the year
400, as well as after, and those, not only of the Western, but of the Eastern
Church* I appeal to the forecited Testimonies of the Fathers; among whom,
Origin, Marcellus of Ancyra, and Cyril of Jerusalem, were of the Greek Church,
and before the year 400; whereof the two latter set the Creed down, and
Origin tells us, that the Apostles delivered it: Tertullian and Ambrose were of
the Lattine, or Western Church, whereof the former sets it down, and entitles
it to the Apostles; and the latter names the Twelve Apostles for the Authors,
citing for proof both of the Creed and its Composers, a perpetual, inviolate
Tradition of the Church of Rome; now St Amb. flourished before the end of the
fourth Century, Tertullian long before.

As for the silencing of the Apostles Creed, since the Nicene Council, in the
Eastern Church; it is clear, that it was extant amongst them since the
Council, for Marcellus sets it down, and Chrysostom explaines it; but when
the Constantinopolitan Creed was framed, it was by degrees, it seems, disused,
because therein included. Then, as to the Ethiopian Creed; it is the very same
with the Nicene or Constantinopolitan, and communicated from the Greek Church,
by the neighboring Patriarch of Alexandria (as in all likelihood we may
suppose) to that more Southern People.

Lastly, To the Testimony cited out of the 115. Sermon. de Temp. The objector
confesses; that the Creed was first rehearsed entire, and then explained;
only, he questions the assignation of the several Articles to distinct
Apostles as a spurious piece inserted (out of the Margin) into the Body of the
Sermon; the rest he acknowledges for genuine: but this passage I stand not
much upon, whether it were so, or otherwise; for notwithstanding this
supposall, the Creed may well be styled a Symbol, or Collation, because agreed
on in common by the Apostles, they reducing the Number of the Articles to
Twelve, because themselves were Twelve, the Founders, or Foundation of the
Christian Faith, as St Paul calls them. Ephesians. 2. 20. and St Jo. Re. 21. 14.

Reason 2d. In the Primitive Church the Catechumeni were men instructed in the
first Rudiments of Christianity; chiefly, in the time of Lent: Then, on
Palmesunday, they were called Competentes, that is, joint Petitioners of
Baptism, and had the whole perfection of the Faith, that is, the whole Body of
the Creed expounded unto them, because Easter, the assigned Time of their
Baptism, then approached. This is testified by S. Ambrose Epist. 35. lih. 5.
Sequenti die, erat autem, Dominica, post lectiones atque Tractatum, dimissis
Catechumenis, Symbolum aliquibus competentibus in Baptisteriis tradebam
Basilicae. That is, The next day, being the Lords day, after the Reading of the
Scriptures, and the Sermon, having dismissed the Catechumeni, I delivered the
Creed to certain Competentes, in that part of the Church which is assigned for
Baptism. And, by Isidore of Sevil lib. 1. De Eccles. Offic* cap. 27. De Domin.
Palm. Hac autem die Symbolum Competentibus traditur propter confinem Dominicae
Paschae solemnitatem, ut quia jam ad Dei gratiam percipiendam festinant, fidem,
quam confiteantur, agnoscant. That is, On this day [ on Palmesunday] the Creed
is delivered to the Competentes, by reason of the approaching solemnity of
Easter, that so they may more fully understand and embrace, that Faith which
they profess, their Baptism now hastening on. And we have already in part
demonstrated the same, out of the forecited Fathers; particularly, out of their
Homilies on the Creed, which they commonly made on Palmesunday to the
Competentes, who were now ready to be baptized. But now, when Easter came, the
solemn time of Baptism (as Pentecost also was) before they were admitted to
it, they made an open confession of their Faith, as our Infants now do in the
Person of their Godfathers.

I ask then what confession of Faith was this, which they thus publicly
pronounced at Baptism? No man is so absurd to think, that every one was left
to his own discretion, to frame it as he pleased, but that the Church had a
certain prescribed form of words, or Rule of Belief, which the Competentes
did openly rehearse; the same form no doubt, which had been explained unto
them on the foregoing Palmesunday; now, this was no other then the Apostles
Creed, as appears both by those Homilies of the Fathers upon it, which were
usually made to the Competentes on Palmesunday, as preparatives to their
Baptism; as also, because we find no other Confession of Faith publicly
received in the Church, for above 300 years after the Birth of our Savior,
besides this of the Apostles.

To this agree the words of Saint Jerome, cont. Lucifer. Solenne est in
lavacro, post Trinitatis confessionem, interrogare; Credis in sanctam
Ecclesiam? credis remissionem peccatorum? That is, It is the custom at
Baptism, after confession of the Trinity, to ask; Believe thou the Holy
Church? believe thou the Remission of sins?

And long before him, S. Cyprian. Epist. 70. ad Janu* ar. etc. Ipsa
interrogatio quae fit in baptismo, testis est veritatis; nam, cum dicimus,
credis in vitam aeternam, and remissionem peccatorum per sanctam Ecclesiam?
Intelligimus, remissionem peccatorum, non nisi in Ecclesia dari; That is, The
very questioning in Baptism witnesses the Truth; for when we say, believe
thou the life everlasting, and remission of sins, by the holy Church? We
conceive, that remission of sins is not given but in the Church.

If any one desire to have this Custom of rehearsing the Creed at Baptism,
brought higher yet, up to the Age of the Apostles, that so we may know
positively when this form of Profession began; and the rather, because when
the Apostles baptized 3000 in one day, and presently after S. Peter's Sermon,
either no form was then used, or it was a very short one, and quickly learned.

I Answer, That the custom of making Homilies on the Creed by the Catechists,
and Bishops of old, for the better instruction of those who were to be
Baptized, shows that this confession was very anciently practiced; and Russinus
(who himself was ancient) tells us of many Illustres Tractatores, many famous
expounders of the Creed in this kind, before his Time; why then may not we
justly refer that custom to the Age of the Apostles, whereof we can find no
beginning in the Church?

But to give you a more Positive and Express proof, that place in the First
Epistle to Timothy cap. 6. v. 12. where he is said, to have made a good
Profession before many witnesses, is understood of the Profession of the Creed
at his Baptism, by S. Jerome, and Occumenius. And that other passage, in Heb.
6. 1, 2. of Faith toward God, and the doctrine of Baptismes, which are there
joined together; is understood in the same sense, by Chrysostom, Augustine,
Oecumenius, Theophylact; and, of latter times, by Calvin and Panaeus, as has
been showed before.

Then, for the instance of S. Peter's 3000 co^verts, it is not said that they
were Baptized all in one day (which can hardly be judged probable at that time,
for want of hands enough to the work, want of water about Jerusalem, and the
danger of making so public a Baptism) but added to the Church, that is,
dederunt nomina Christo, they put themselves in the list of Disciples, or
Catechumeni, and so became Candidates of Baptism; a custom anciently used in
the Church, as appears by Tertullian De Baptismo. But if by Adding, we must
needs understand Initiating into the Church by Baptism; we must interpret [
The same day] thus; About the same time; Day being put for Time, by an usual
Hebraisme; for which see Deuteronomy, 27. 2. compared with Ios. 8. 30. etc. and Luke
19. 42.

As for their Confession of Faith, whether the same Day or afterward; I
readily grant, that it could not be then framed in the words of the Apostles
Creed, which was not so early composed, but instead of that they publicly
attested to the Truth of Saint Peter's Sermon, which contained the fundamentalls
of Christianity, that were after succinctly gathered into one Body in the
Summary of the Creed; which was thence forward the sole form of Confession, or
Belief used at the time of Baptism, for none other we find then used.

Besides, some of the first conversions were miraculous, and so not to be drawn
into example, as ordinary, set Patterns of the Churches succeeding Practice;
the Apostles had the gift of discerning faith in the heart, and so needed not
always expect an open Profession; whereas others, in following Times, who had
not the same Gift, were tied to the ordinary Rule and method of proceeding:
thus the same Apostle caused Cornelius and his friends to be Baptized (without
any formal Profession of their Faith that we read of) because he perceived
that the Holy Ghost was powered on them. Act. 10. 47, 48.

Reason 3d. The Creeds or Confessions of Faith, which were framed by the
Counsels of Nice, Constantinople, Chalcedon, and the rest that followed, or,
which we find in the writings of the Fathers, as in Athanasius, Jerome, and
others, are no new Creeds, but comments on the old, explanations of some
points, not so fully and clearly expressed, which were then called in question,
and misinterpreted by some Heretics of those times: Now, this may serve for a
third Argument to prove that these Counsels and Fathers had still a very
careful Eye on some former Creed, derived from the Apostles unto their Times,
as a Rule or pattern to square their Symboles by. To instance in the two most
famous, the Nicene, and Athanasian.

The Nicene Creed enlarges it self chiefly, in the Point of our Saviors
Divinity, and that of the holy Ghost, withal adding here and there some small
Particles by way of Explication.

1. To the first Article it adds [ and of all things visible, and invisible]
thus more distinctly setting down the parts, ornaments, and inhabitants of
Heaven and Earth; and, withal condemning the opinion of some ancient
Heretics, who made the Angels the Creatours of the world and so exempted these
invisible Spirits from the rank of Creatures.

2. To the third Article, it adds [ who for us men, and our Salvation came
down from Heaven and was incarnate etc.] thus setting down the end of our
Saviors Incarnation.

3. To the fifth Article, it adds [ according to the Scriptures] thus showing
how our Saviors Resurrection answered to the foregoing Prophecies of the Old
Testament.

4. To the seventh Article, it adds [ whose Kingdom shall have no end] thus
setting down the necessary consequent of the general Judgment, namely, the
eternity of his heavenly Reign, Christ having then fully vanquished, and
trodden all enemies under his feet.

5. To the eight Article, it adds these two Epithets which are applied unto
the Church by way of explication, viz. [one, and Apostolick] the first included
in the word [ Church] which is of the singular number the second, in the word [
Catholick] for as the Apostles Commission was universal, so also was their
doctrine, on which the Church was Founded.

6. To the tenth Article, it adds [ I acknowledge one Baptism for etc.] thus
showing the means or Ordinance of Gods appointing, whereby he forgives, and
cleanses us from sin.

Then, for the Creed of Athanasius; If we cut of the Preface, and conclusion,
which (to speak properly) are no parts but Adjuncts of it, as wherein he shows
the necessity of the Catholic Faith to Salvation; that is, the evident danger
of denying, opposing, or corrupting any Article of the Faith, as the Arians,
and other Heretics of those days did.

1. He explaines at large the mystery of the Trinity, which lies infolded in
the First, Second, and Eight Articles of the Apostles Creed, wherein we
profess to believe in God the Father, in his Son Jesus Christ, and in the
holy Ghost: for this believing, or putting our whole trust, and confidence in
the Son, and holy Ghost, as well as in God the Father, shows their
coequality of power, Goodness, Wisdom, and All sufficiency with him; and
consequently, their Identity of nature; whence; the holy Scripture every where
forbids us to place our Faith in, or rely upon any Creature but to trust in God
alone; and when the Creed comes to the Article of the Church (which is but an
assembly of men, though of the best and highest rank) it changes the style,
saying, not as before, I believe in the Holy Catholic Church, but, I believe
the Holy Catholic Church.

2. He distinctly unfolds, and illustrates at large the mystery of our Saviors
Incarnation, especially, by the similitude of the Soul and Body. Now, this is
naught but a Paraphrase on the third Article of the Apostles Creed.

3. To the tenth Article, namely, that of the Resurrection, he adds these words
[ all men shall give an account for their workes] which show the end of the
Resurrection, and are besides involved in the precedent Article of Christ's
coming to judgment, for there can be no Judging of men's Actions without a
previous examination, and giving an Account.

4. To the last Article, namely, that of Life eternal for the good, he adds [
and they that have done evil shall go into everlasting Fire] which
necessarily follows by way of opposition, besides, that it is involved also in
the Article of the General Judgment, as the Account of our works was.

If it be objected here* that the Creeds, or confessions of Faith which we find
in the Councels, and Fathers, cannot be justly called Expositions of the
Apostles Creed, seeing that those Forms extant in Irenaeus, and Tertullian,
want many Articles which the Creed now has, much less, have they all which
the Creeds of Nice, Calcedon, and that of Athanasius have.

I answer, that the Creed, as it is set down in Irenaeus and Tertullian, is (I
confess) somewhat defective, for which I have before given some Reasons; if we
will find it full and entire, we must have recourse to some famous ancient
Church, where it was deposited by the Apostles, as that of Jerusalem or Rome:
now, to the Creeds of these Churches, the Nicene, Chalcedon, and that of
Athanasius, have added nothing in substance (as appears by what has been said)
but only in explication.

As for Tertullians Creed, though it be more imperfectly set down in his Book
De virg. Vel. and that against the heretic Praxeas; yet in his Book De
Praescrip. adv. haer. Wherein he oppugneth all Heretics which had infested the
Church until his time, (some of which scarce left any one Article of the Creed
inviolate) he sets it down more fully; only, he expreseth not distinctly, and
at large, the Article of the Catholic Church, and that of Remission of Sins,
for the former had not been yet oppugned by Novatus, or Donatus; nor the
latter, by Pelagius, who were not then risen; notwithstanding, we may find even
some hints of these, wherein the substance of them lies implicitly hid.

1. Those words of his [ qui credentes agat] and those other [ ad sumendos
sanctos] wherein he expresses, how the Holy Ghost does guide [all Believers]
and work in them; and that our Savior will come at the last to take [the
Saints] unto himself; will serve to make up the ninth Article of the Church,
and Communion of Saints: for the Title of Believers is the usual style of
Christians, and of the Christian Church, under the New Testament; and, one
Belief, or Holy Faith, is that which makes the Church a Communion of Saints,
that is, of Persons severed and discriminated from those of other Religions,
but united among themselves. Add hereunto that which the same Tertullian has
in his Book against Praxeas viz. That the holy Ghost is the Sanctifier of the
faith of those who believe in the Father, and in the Son, and in the holy
Ghost; that is, Of the Catholic Church, which is a Communion of Saints, or
Believers.

2. Those words applied to our Savior -- That he Preached the new Law, and the
New promise of the Kingdom of Heaven, imply the tenth Article viz. [I believe
one Baptism for the Remission of sinnes] as it is more amply set down in the
Nicene Creed: for by Baptism we are initiated into this new Law of
Christianity, and engage our selves to perform it as the condition of the
Gospell-Covenant, required on our Part as necessary to Salvation; whence, by a
Metonomie, it is taken sometimes as including the Law or doctrine Preached by the
Party Baptizing; as in that question of our Savior to the Pharaisees, The
Baptism of John, whence was it? From Heaven, or of men? Mat. 21. v. 25. Where
our Saviors maine end was to convince them, that he was the true Messiah, from
the Word or Testimony of John the Baptist, whereby he gave witness to him, at
that time especially when the Pharasees were sent unto John in a solemn
Embassy, to enquire whether He were the Christ, or no? Io. 1. v. 19, 20, 24,
26, 27. And, as by Baptism we are initiated into this new Law, and thereby
entitled unto the Kingdom of Heaven, and made Inheritours of it; so is
Remission of sins the new Promise, the first and newest of the whole Gospel;
which, reconciling us unto God makes us capable of his other Favors; to
introduce which and prepare us for it, Repentance was first Preached by John
the Baptist, our Savior, and his Apostles, Repent for the Kingdom of Heaven
is at hand; and, from which our Savior took his Name, thereby signifying the
chief end of his coming -- Thou shall call his Name Jesus (says the Angel
to Joseph) For he shall save his People from their Sins. Mat. 1. 21.

3. As for the last Article viz that of Everlasting Life; it is partly employed
in the Article of the Resurrection, which as it looks backward unto Death, so
it looks forward on Life Everlasting; Death the last enemy, being by it
subdued: partly expressed in the Article of our Saviors Coming to Judgment, the
chief end whereof is setdowne in these words ad sumendos sanctos in [Vitae
Aeternae] fructum, to assume his Saints unto the enjoyment of [Life
Everlasting.]

Now this Creed of Tertullian, which so nearely symbolizeth with that of the
Apostles, deserves no mean regard; First, because, he is a very ancient Doctor
of the Church, as who flourished about the end of the second Century. Secondly,
because his works are confessedly genuine. Thirdly, and Chiefly, because this
Creed of his setting down was not Framed by him, (but as he expressly tells
us) derived from Christ, by the mouths of his Apostles before ever any
Heretic appeared in the Church; so it was not made because of heresies now
risen (whereof many arose even in the Apostles Times) but before any of them
arose; not for Remedy, but prevention, and therefore must needs be very ancient.

But in the two other places, he sets down this Creed or Rule of Faith more
imperfectly, omitting what made not for his present purpose: yet those
imperfect Creeds he calls Regulas immobiles and irreformabiles; inviolable and
unchangeable Rules, that is, in regard of those Heads of Belief which he had
occasion the to set down.

So that all the Creeds which we meet with in the Fathers or Counsels, are to
be compared with that which the Church for so many Ages has acknowledged for
the Apostles, as so many Copies with the Pattern, or Structures with the
model: not so well with one another; for so they may differ in point of
quantity and proportion; like so many Pictures or Statues made to represent the
same body, whereof the original is entire and exactly proportioned, but the
copies diversely shaped, and drawn; some too Giant. like; others too
defectively, to the middle only, or the shoulders.

If it be farther objected, that the Romanists affirm all their new Articles
to be only Explications of the old, and confess that Articles cannot increase
quoad numerum credibilium, sed quoad explicationem; yet, that we condemn them
justly for obtruding those explications, as necessary to salvation.

I answer; that the Romanists are justly blamed for obtruding their
explications on other Churches, as necessary to Salvation, because themselves
make but a particular Church and yet presume upon a false privilege of
universal primacy, and Apostolic Infallibility. But as to the Exegericall
succeeding Creeds which the whole Church has for many Ages embraced, they were
Framed in general Councels or confirmed by General Practice. Now, the
Catholic Church, which received the Creed from the Apostles, and preserved ^t
as an inviolable Depositum, may justly be presumed best to know the meaning of
it; the Common Mother of Christians can best inform us which is the true sense
of the Common Faith, and has sufficien^ authority to impose it upon Her
Children.

Reas. 4. Those Fathers who wrote since the Nicene Council set down, and
explain that Creed which bears the Apostles name, not that which was framed
in the Council of Nice as appears by the forecited Testimonies; Now, this
they would not, nor could have done if the Nicene Creed had been the first. The
first Father, whom we find to meddle with, or handle the Nicene Creed, is St
Cyril Patriarch of Alexandria, who flourished an whole Century after the making
of it. Does not this plainly show, that the Church had still the prime, if not
the sole respect to that Symbol or Rule of Faith which the Apostles left her,
as the maine Basis on which the Faith of her Children was built; the Root,
whereout other Creeds, as so many Branches, sprung? the Fathers, who since the
celebration of that Council, have explained and commented on the Apostles
Creed, I have already mentioned, viz. Chrysostom, Augustine, Chrysologus,
Venantius, Eusebius, etc.

Reason 5th. It is a received Rule, which S. Augustine lays down, lib. 4. De
Baptismo, cont. Donat. cap. 24. Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec Conciliis
institutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi authoritate Apostolica traditum,
rectissime creditur. That is, That which the universal Church holds, and
has always retained, not being ordained by a Council, is most justly
believed to have been derived unto us by the Authority of the Apostles.

And, this rule is grounded upon good Reason, besides the Authority of the
deliverer: for a general effect must have as general a cause; they must be
both of the same latitude, and extent: now, there is no General cause
imagineable of a publicly received Doctrine, Government, Ceremony, or
Discipline in the Catholic Church (such especially, as is derived to it from
hand to hand, time out of mind) but the Authority of a General Council, which
is the Church Representative; or the concordant preaching of the Apostles, who
first planted Christianity in the Churches of the whole world. So then, to
apply this Rule unto our present purpose. That the whole Church holds the
Apostles Creed, experience demonstrates: that it has been always retained in
the Church, the Testimonies of the fore-aleadged Fathers show, and that it was
not Framed in any Genenerall Council, sufficienty appears both by the copies
of those Creeds which were framed in them, found varying from that of the
Apostles; as also, by the writing of those Fathers who lived before, the first
General Council held at Nice, wherein they make mention of a Rule of Faith,
derived down to them from the Apostles which some of them also set down, as
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin.

Reason. 6th.

Before the Nicene Creed was framed, both the Eastern, and Western Churches
had an Ancient Symbol or Creed. Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 6. Which could be no
other than that of the Apostles, since no other is assigned, or mentioned by
any good Author.

First; That the Western or Roman Church had such an Ancient Symble appears.

1. By the words of Vigilius Bishop of Rome, lib. 4. De Eutiche -- Roma, and
antequam Nicena Synodus conveniret a temporibus Apostolorum usque all nunc --
ita fidelibus Symbolum tradidit viz. and in Jesum Christum, Filium ejus,
Dominum; nostrum; leaving out the Particle Vnicum That is.

The Church of Rome even before the Nicene Council; from the very Apostles
times till this present, in these terms delivered the Creed unto Believers --
And in Jesus Christ his Son our Lord, leaving out the Particle [Only].

2. By Ruffinus, in his Tract on the Creed, who compares the Aquilean Creed
with the Roman, and withal tells us, that the Creed was believed so ancient
in his time, that it was then held for an Apostolical Tradition. Now this
Ruffinus was a man of note in the Church, nine years before the first Council
of Constantinople, viz. in the year 372. when he went with Melama from Rome to
Alexandria; about which time also S. Jerome wrote letters to him, namely his
Epist. 5. and 41.

Secondly, that the Eastern Churches had an ancient Creed too, before the
Nicene Council, appears by the same Ruffinus, who compares the Aquilean Creed
with that of the East, as well as with the Roman. The same appears by Cyril of
Jerusalem, who explaines it at large in his Catecheses; and this Creed of his
explaining, we shall find much consonant to that, which we now call the
Apostolical; only cutting off some few exegeticall Particles, which were added
to forearme his Auditors, and other orthodox Christians, against succrescent
Heresies: to which Creed of his he adjoynes also some practical Grounds, for
the more complete instruction and Preparation of them, against the time of
Baptism.

This Cyril was first Catechist, then Patriarch of Jerusalem, and sat
afterward in the first Council held at Constantinople, where the Eastern
Bishops were only present, and composed a Creed almost in the same terms with
this of Cyril: He composed these Catecheses in his youth, about the year 350;
and died in the year 386, five years after the celebration of that Council;
as the learned Vossius demonstrates out of Leo and S. Jerome, compared with a
passage in his sixth Catechesis. Now, as the Fathers of the first Council at
Constantinople, labored not to frame a new Creed, but were contented to
enlarge the Article concerning the Holy Ghost, against Macedonius who perverted
it: so, we may justly suppose, that the Nicene Fathers retained the words of
that Creed, which had been of old received in the East (least they might,
otherwise, seem to have framed a new Faith) amplifying only the Article
concerning the Divinity of our Savior, which was then called in question by
Arius; that so it might appear to the World, quaedam tantummodo explicatius
dici, as the same Vossius rightly conceives. Cut off therefore from the Nicene,
or Constantinopolitan Creed (or, from that of Cyril, which much symbolizeth
with it) the Additionals unto those two Articles, and you have the whole Creed
of the Apostles: for [ the Communion of Saints] is not a distinct Article, but
a part, or Paraphrase of what goes before; Saints, being employed in in [ Holy]
and Communion, in [ Church] or Congregation, Ecclesia, which is an Assembly of
selected People: and Christ's descent into Hell, is presupposed to the Article
of his Resurrection.

Therefore, to think that Cyril in his old Age, or John the Patriarch his
Successor, added all that to the Jerosolymitan Creed, which follows the
Articles of the Holy Ghost, is nothing probable, because Cyril does not barely
set down the Articles, but Catechetically explain them also, together with
the rest which precede; and there has been no reason, ever yet assigned, to
make us doubt of the composing of these Catecheses by the same man, and at the
same Time when he was Catechist, which was in his youthful Age, seeing they
all alike relish of the same juvenile, extemporary style; the consideration
whereof has made some to doubt, whether any of them were Cyril's, or no;
because they seemed not elaborate enough for so grave a Patriarch; though they
seem indeed to have been set forth by his Successor John, and thence became
entitled unto him by some latter, unwary Transcriber; which may serve to
satisfy that objection taken out of Simlerus, who in his Index of those Books
which the City of Auspurgh bought of Antony Eparch of Coreyra, reckons,
Joannis Jerosol: Catech. Illuminat. du^deviginti, and Mystagogicus quinque.

If any yet desire, to have this more fully, and clearly demonstrated, viz.
That the Eastern Churches had an Ancient Form of Belief derived to them from
the Apostles, and whereto they professed to add nothing in their following
confessions (because as it is more obscure, so it is more oppugned) they may
please to consult these following Testimonies.

1. Epiphanius, in his Book called Anchoratus, having set down the Nicene
Creed as we now have it at large adjoynes these words, (...). This Faith,
(says he) was delivered by the holy Apostles, and (in the Church, the Holy
City) by all the holy Bishops together, above 310 in number. The same Creed,
then was delivered by both; by the Apostles, as the Primitive Authors; by the
Nicene Fathers, as the Expositors. The Nicene Creed thus at full set down by
Epiphanius, was written seven years before the first Council of
Constantinople, which first added, all after the Article of the Holy Ghost,
unto that form which the Nicene Fathers had delivered (although they were not
the first framers of those additionall Articles) and having thus completed the
Creed by borrowing the remaining Articles from that of the Apostles, confirmed
the entire form by their Synodicall Authority, and so commended, yea
prescribed the whole to the Catholic Church.

2. The succeeding Counsels in the Eastern Church, expressly tell us, that
they and their Predecessors, were neither Authors of any new Faith, nor Adders
to it, but only Establishers and Exposirors of the old. The first Council of
Constantinople (which was the second General) calls the Nicene Creed (...),
most ancient, although that Synod was celebrated but 56 years before; the
reason therefore of this Title is, that they looked upon that Creed, not as
first composed by the Bishops of the Nicene Synod, but as derived and declared
out of a Creed ab ultima antiquitate in Ecclesia recepto, received in the
Church from all Antiquity, as the Reverend and Learned Primate of Armagh has
rightly expressed it. They also decreed to retain it, (...), as most agreeable
to the Sacrament of Baptism. Theod. lib. 5. hist. cap. 9.

The Bishops Assembled at Tire, Anno 518. profess to embrace the Nicene Creed
(...), expounded, (not made) by that Synod, Act. Council. 5. Constant. sub
Menna. And again, (...) (...). That is, That holy Creed, whereinto we were all
Baptized, the Nicene Synod with the assistance of the Holy Ghost has publicly
declared, that of Constantinople has ratified, that of Ephesus has confirmed,
and (in like manner) the Great holy Synod of Chalcedon has sealed.

The Council of Chalcedon, (which was the fourth General) styles the Creed
(...), a Doctrine unshaken or unmoved, from the first Preaching of the Gospel;
and withal tells us, that the Counsels of Nice and Constantinople, expounded
the Faith, (...), not adding ought, as if the faith of their Predecessors had
been deficient, but declaring their sense by Scripture Testimonies. Evagr. lib.
2. cap. 4. To this agrees also that of the Emperor Justinian, writing to
Epiphanius Patriarch of Constantinople; we keep, says he, that decree of
faith ((...)) or Symbol, which was explained by the 118 Fathers [ in the
Council of Nice;] which also the 150 Fathers [in the first Council of
Constantinople] farther declared, (...), not as though the ancient faith were
defective, but because the enemies of the Truth partly rejected the Divinity of
the Holy Ghost, partly denied the Incarnation of God the Word, therefore the
said Fathers by Testimonies out of Scripture explained this Doctrine more at
large. Thus he, 7. leg. Cord. De Summa Trinitate, and Fide Catholica.

3. To give you the Testimony of the Western Church, for confirmation of the
same Truth, The Liturgy called Ordo Romanus, a Book of known Authority and
Antiquity, in the Preface to the Nicene Creed, has these words, directed to
the Persons who were to pronounce it before their Baptism; Audite suscipientes
Evangelici Symboli Sacramentum, a Domino inspiratum, ab Apostolis institutum,
cujus pauca quidem verba sunt, sed magna mysteria. In which words, the Nicene
Creed is called, The Evangelicall Symbol, inspired by Christ, and ordained by
his Apostles. And another old Latin Liturgy, in use about the year 700, has
these words of the same Creed, Finito Symbolo Apostolorum, dicat Sacerdos,
Dominus vobiscum; Where it is also expressly called, The Creed of the
Apostles, that is, the same explained and enlarged. For these Testimonies I am
indebted to the said R. and Learned Bishop.

Now for a close to these Authorities and Arguments, I shall subjoyne the
testimony of Franc. Quaresimus, of the Order of Minors, a Person of good note
in the Romish Church, as who was made by the Pope, his President, and
Apostolic Commissary in the Holy Land; during which office of his, he took
incredible pains in searching out the Antiquities of Palestine; now, this
Author, in his Book called, Elucidatio Terrae Sanctae. Tom. 2. lib. 4. Perear.
9. cap. 1. Brings two opinions concerning the Place, wherein the Apostles
composed the Creed.

The first, that of Adrichomius, who thinks it probable that the place was
Caenaculum Sion, a Place famous for many other sacred Actions, as wherein our
Blessed Savior celebrated his last Supper, and instituted the most holy
Eucharist; wherein, the Holy Ghost descended on the Apostles at Pentecost; and
wherein, they held that famous Council about the abrogating of the Ceremonial
Law. Act. 15. consonantly to which Tradition, he brings that saying of the
Evangelicall Prophet, Out of Syon shall go forth the Law, and the word of the
Lord from Jerusalem. Isa. 2. 3.

The second, that of Friar Anselme, and others; that the place, where the
Apostles framed the Creed, was on Mount Olivet, three Bow-shootes from the
place where Christ is said to have wept over Jerusalem; for which he gives this
reason. Quia est communis in partibus istis Traditio, perpetuis monumentis a
fidelibus confirmata, qui ibi antiquitus pulchram eo intuitu aedificarunt
Ecclesiam, sub titulo S. Marci Evangelistae, ut in vetusto MS. libello de locis
sanctis exaratum inveni, and meminit Fr. Anselmus; and non modica illius
fundamenta, and ruinae adhuc cernuntur. Subtus est pulchra oblonga cisterna in
r^pe montis excisa, duodecim habens in eadem rupe excisas naviculas sive arcas,
in memoriam duodecim Apostolorum, qui una ibi collegerunt caelestis doctrinae
aquas salutares, quibus totus mundus imbibendus erat; Ad eam descenditur per
angustum ostium, quod Civitatem respicit.

Thus both opinions agree in the maine, that there was a certain place wherein
the Apostles assembled to compose the Creed, although they somewhat differ
about the assignation thereof; which circumstance is not much material,
especially seeing Adrichomius delivers his opinion but as a probable
conjecture; which may therefore well give place unto the latter, as being
fortified with the more convincing circumstances, of an ancient, well-grounded
Tradition preserved by the Neighboring Inhabitants, and of a Church built in
the memorial thereof, with a large Cisterne underneath, hewn out of the maine
Rock, having twelve cavities in it according to the number of the Apostles.

And thus, at length, have I run through my Proofs, drawn from Scripture,
Antiquity, and Reason; which, I hope, may prevail with any indifferent
judgment, to acknowledge this Creed for the Composure of the Apostles, rather
than upon some few weak conjecturall Grounds, to deny those Composers, which
the Title points us to; and then ascribe it to I know not what Namelesse, and
uncertain Authors, at an indefinite, and uncerteine Time, that is, to they know
not whom, nor when; contrary to so old, and general a Tradition.

This destructive Divinity, which has been so frequently broached in this
All-reforming Age, will not be found altogether so good in the Issue; it is not
safe tempering with the maine Grounds of our Religion; If we deny, or doubt of
the Infallible Authority of the Creed, (as we do, if we deny that it had
infallible Authors) what will become of Christianity? If the Foundations be
destroyed, what can the Righteous do? Ps. 11. 3. The profession of our Belief
is that which makes us Believers, and ranks us in the number of the Faithful.
The Creed is the maine ground work of our Religion, take which a way (with the
succeeding Creeds that have explained it in some points, by assigning the true
sense thereof, in opposition to Heretical Glosses) and the whole frame of
Christianity falls instantly to the Ground.

Leave men once to the bare letter of Scripture, (which being large, and made
up of several pieces, whereof all were not generally received till the end of
the fourth Century, and since that by reason of its dark, and ambiguous
expressions, and not a few seeming contradictions, has been found unhapily
abnoxious to the weakness and malice of erroneus interpreters) by taking a way
the Creeds, which as they are more short so they are more clear and plain
Summaries of the Christian Faith; together with the consentient judgment of
Antiquity; which has acknowledged and established them, and delivered them
over to us: And then with out the spirit of prophecy, we may soon foretell
what will become of Religion: Then what with Marcionis Machaera, and Valentini
Stilus (to use the words of Tertullian), What with chopping off whole Books at
a blow, yea an whole Testament, With the Anabaptist; what with razing out whole
chapters, and verses, scraping out words and letters, altering of points and
comma's; What with wresting and torturing the poor remainder, until it
speaks the tormenters mind (which has been the desperate Project, and
Practice of Heretics in all Ages) a very small portion of our Religion will be
left entire, yea, no means will be at all left to convince many errors, or to
satisfy Pilats so necessary question What is Truth? Jo* 18. 38. Now Pilate mist
of an answer, because he would not stay to hear it; but we may stay long
enough without one, even till our Savior (who was asked the question) come
again, and discover the hidden things of Darkness.

This made Tertullian bold to say, Non provocandum est ad Scripturas, nec in
his constituendum certamen, in quibus aut nulla, aut incerta victoria est, aut
parum certa. De praesc. adv. haer. cap. 19. that is, There Is no appealing to
the Scriptures, nor can we determine the controversies out of them from which
we may expect but an uncerteine victory or none at all. Scripturas obtendunt
(says the same Tertullian of the Heretics) and hac sua audacia statim quosdam
movent; in ipso vero congressu firmos quidem fatigant, infirmos capiunt, medios
cum scrupulo dimittunt cap. 15. that is, They pretend Scripture, and with this
boldness of theirs they presently move some; but when they come to dispute, they
weary the strong, catch the weak, and send away the indifferent, or midling
sort, with scruples in their breasts. St Paul therefore charge Titus, (whom he
had left as his Deputy in Crete, to oversee the Churches which he had there
planted) not to dispute with Heretics (as being men condemned of themselves)
but (...), to reject, or excommunicate them, after the first, or second (...),
that is Public Admoniton; or Reprehension, for they who are so in love with
their new opinions, as not to yield unto the Authority of the Church, will les
yield unto the force of Arguments; which are easily illuded, or evaded by the
subtilty of Heretics, who will fly to any shifts, rather then acknowledge a
victory; and look upon their superiors as their equals, when they see them
thus descend into the rank of Disputants, whom they can Combat with upon even
Ground.

Now, that which has caused some latter Protestant Divines to call in
question, or deny the assigned Authors of the Creed, is this, as far as I can
conjecture; that the Creed comes to us under the name of a Tradition, and they
are loath to acknowledge any such for Divine or Apostolical, least Popery
should break in at this Gap; and therefore they think it safest to adhere only
to the word written.

But why should this so much fright us? For the question between the Church of
Rome, and the Reformed, is not (as I conceive) whether there be any certain
Tradition, and consequently to be received? But what traditions are certain
and allowable? For have we not received the Scripture it self by Tradition,
viz. The number, Authors, and authority of the Canonical Books? Whence have we
the Baptism of Infants but by Tradition? (For though we have a fair plea for
it upon Scripture-Grounds, yet we have neither clear precept, nor precedent
for it, that has hithertoo been shown) or, the setting a part of the Lords
Day and other Festivals for Gods public Service? For we have no express
command for the observation of these in holy writ, nor for many other Church
ordinances that might be named.

Our Church, indeed, justly blames the Romish, for obtruding upon us, and other
Churches her own Rituall Traditions, as of necessity to Salvation; some of
which are uncertain; others frivolus, burthenous, superstitious, and even
contrary to Gods word: so did St Augustine, long ago, sharply tax Vrbicus a
Roman Presbyter for pressing the Weekly Fast one Saturday, as necessary to be
observed by all Christian Churches, whereas the usual Fasting-dayes at that
time in all Churches, were Wensday, and Friday; the Saturday fast being a
peculiar custom of the Church of Rome. But our Church abolisheth not all
Traditions, as appears by this of the Creed, which she (with other Reformed
Churches) retains; as also, by her 34th Article which was on purpose framed
touching this subject, wherein she entreats only of Rituall (not Doctrinall)
Traditions telling us, that they need not to be always, and every where alike,
but may be diversified according to Times, Countries, and men's Manners, so that
nothing be ordained against Gods Word; that what soever Private Person purposey
and openly breaks such, ought to be openly rebuked; and, that every
particular or national Church has Authority to ordain, change, and abolish
Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, ordained only by man's authority so that all
Things be done to Edifying.

CAP. VIII.
Several Objections, which some have alleged against the fore-assigned
Authors of the Creed, answered at large. Certain Creeds compared together,
whereby their conformity appears, to one another, and to that of the Apostles.

HAving thus confirmed the first of the Five Points, which I proposed to my
self in the beginning, namely, that the Apostles were the Framers or Composers
of the Creed which commonly bears their name; I should now proceed in order to
the Rest, but that I conceive it necessary to clear my passage as I go on; by
the removal of such Doubts and Objections, which like so many rubbs or
stumblingblocks, hinder my farther proceeding, and obstruct the way. The Truth,
though sufficiently clear in it self, yet will shine forth unto others more
gloriously, when these mists are scattered; though firmly established, yet her
strength will appear more formidable, in the overthrow of her Adversaries. For
there be some (and those of no vulgar rank) who have taken great Pains, and
still delight themselves, in overthrowing those ancient fabrics which our
forefathers left us, building in their room some slight, painted Toy, without
either strength or use; to please the fancy of the contriver, not satisfy the
judgment, or conduce to the profit, of the sober Christian. A course, if
prosecuted, which will ere long, bring the Doom of the Jewish Temple upon the
Christian Church, that she will not have one stone left upon another, that
shall not be thrown down. Math. 24. 2.

As for this present Argument; though the Reasons which some have brought
against it, seem to the objectors more then probable, yet, I suppose, that
upon due trial, they will appear less then necessary, so that they will
prove unsufficient to overthrow the constant Tradition of so many Ages, and to
sway against the stream of so maine a current, the joint Authority and
Testimony of so many Doctors of the Church, as well Modern as Ancient. I shall
therefore set down their Reasons fully and faithfully, yea somewhat more
distinctly than they have done; and then, subjoyne their Answers in several.

Object. 1. Were the Creed compiled by the Apostles, it is not likely that S.
Luke, writing the history of their Acts, would have omitted so principal a
matter: Sundry other things of far less consequence he has carefully
recorded (as the Apostles Decree concerning Ceremonies, and things indifferent)
but of this so important and weighty a business (the Decree concerning the
Rule of Faith) he makes not so much as one word mention, which certainly he
would never have failed to do, had they made any such? At least, if S. Luke
had omitted it in the Acts, yet it cannot be conceived, how S. Paul and the
rest of the Apostles, should not speak a word of it in their Epistles.

I answer; First, that this is but a negative argument, and concludes not; S.
Luke makes no mention thereof in the Acts, therefore it was never done. To give
a like instance, or two. S. Matthew undertakes to write the History of our
Saviors Life and Death, with the Precedents of the one, and the Consequents of
the others; and yet there be many weighty Passages omitted by him, which we
find afterward related by S. Luke, and S. John. S. John especially, composed
his Gospel of those particular Actions and Speeches of our Savior, which were
left unmentioned by the three former Evangelists: yet, he himself tells us in
the conclusion of his Book, that There were many other things which Jesus did,
the which if they should be written every one, he supposed, that even the World
it self could not contain the Books that should be written. Ioh. 21. 25.

But to come closer yet to the Argument; S. Luke in that Book of his, which is
entitled The Acts of the Apostles, mentions very few Acts of the Apostles in
general, yet has large Digressions concerning S. Stephen, and S. Philip, who
were no Apostles, but Deacons; Then, he prosecutes the story of S. Peter, and
S. Barnabas; but, more at large, that of S. Paul, whose companion he was in his
Apostolical Peregrinations: and yet, how many material Passages, even
touching S. Paul, does he omit, some of which we find afterward occasionally
recorded by himself in his Epistles, especially, in those of his to the
Churches of Galatia and Corinth? As for example, his Travailes into Arabia
after his conversion, his Coming to Jerusalem three years after, and
communicating his Gospel with Peter, James, and John; his withstanding Peter
at Antioch, his rapture into Paradise, and unto the third Heaven; together with
many other particulars: things, sure, of greater consequence than his making of
Tents at Corinth, or the sign of the Ship wherein he sailed to Italy; and yet
these are expressed the other excluded.

If it be replied; that this Argument is produced only as probable, and yet
will hold good unless some probable cause of the omission can be assigned, why
a point of so great importance, and so necessary is not mentioned, when others
of less weight are, and that the Evangelists omit indeed diverse Things which
Christ said, and did, yet set down all Things necessary to Salvation, which
was their main end.

I rejoyne; That whosoever goes about to overthrow so old, and received a
Tradition, may justly be required to bring more than probabilities and
conjectures, if he expect to be believed; that this Probability grounded on S.
Lukes omission is sufficiently overthrown by the positive Testimonies of the
Ancients which I have produced to the Contrary; that the Composure of the Creed
by the Apostles, was a business confessedly of great importance, but the
mentioning of it by S. Luke in the Acts was not altogether so necessary, it
being enough that it was otherwise testified; that, lastly S. Luke probably
omitted it, because it was a thing so vulgarly known in the Christian Church,
the Apostles delivering it to be kept, and used, wheresoever they Preached.

Secondly, though S. Luke make no express mention of this Creed of the
Apostles, yet S. Paul in diverse of his Epistles not obscurely alludes unto it,
under several Forms, and Phrases of Speech as has bin shown at large
before, so also does S. Jude. v. 3.

Thirdly; S. Luke sets down the Apostles Decree concerning the ceremonial
Law, because it was the Result of a General Council, and that Council
occasiond by a great Dissension in the Church of Antioch* which sent to the
Apostles about the Resolution of this question. Now, matters of dissension are
the chief Theme of Histories; and that Council, with the Proceedings and
Forms thereof; is set down on purpose, as a pattern to all succeeding Ages.
As for the Creed, or Canon of Faith, there was no such occasion for the
mentioning of it, seeing no Cavil then arose about it, nor any general
Council concurred to the Composure of it, but only a private meeting of the
Apostles.

Ob. 2d. Not one of the Ancient Fathers who lived within the three first
Centuries, spoke of any such thing in any of their writings; and yet they
should best know it, whose Times were nearest unto the Apostles. Then, of so
many Church-historians, who studiously gathered together the confessions of
Synods and Anti-Synods, not one makes mention of this, though a matter of the
greatest consequence, as being the Rule of Faith, and mother of all following
Confessions.

I Answer. First, That the Ancient Fathers who lived within the three first
Centuries, make mention of the Creed and the Composure thereof by the Apostles;
I appeal to the former Testimonies cited out of Irenaeus, Tertutullian, and
Origin, who all lived within two hundred years after our Saviors Assension.

Secondly; Though we have not any Comments extant on the Creed, written by the
Fathers of the three first Centuries (Origin, excepted, who largely expounds it
in his Books (...)) yet it is more than probable, that more of them expounded
it paraphrastically.

First, because Ruffinus (who lived in the next Age) in the Preface to his
Exposition of the Creed, tells us of those before him, comperi (says he)
nonnullos illustrium Tractatorum, aliqua de his pie, and breviter edidisse,
That some famous Authors had wrote piously and briefly on this Subject. And, a
little after; Tentabimus, quae omissa videntur a prioribus, ad implere, That he
would endeavor to supply, what had been omitted by former Writers.

Secondly, because it was the custom of the Ancient Bishops, to expound the
Creed unto Catechumeni, when they came to Baptism, at those two solemn times
of the year Easter, and Pentecost, as appears by those Homilies or
Catecheticall Sermons now extant, of Cyril, Chrysostom, Austin, Chrysollogus
and others. many more (doubtless) there were framed by former Bishops, which
either were never committed to paper, or, being then written are now lost. 3ly
As to the silence of Ecclesiastical Historians touching this subject, a little
observation will inform us, that novel, strange, singular, Passages are the
usual Arguments of their Pens, not things Public, known, and received, such
as the Creed is and was common then in every Novices mouth. So the Roman
Historians set not down their laws, customs, court-proceedings, as things
vulgarly known, and of daily practice amongst them; the omission whereof
rendering their Histories obscure to strangers, they are set down distinctly by
Dionysius Halycarnasseus.

It Is sufficient, that several Fathers in most Ages occasionally make mention
of it, when they had to deal with Heretics, who denied or perverted it. But,
that Ancient Church-Historians mention the several Confessions of Faith, which
were framed in several Synods and Anti-Synods (as Socrates, and others, in the
business of the Arian faction) has this double Reason, That they were New,
and contrary to each other; whereas, the Apostles Creed was an Old, known
Tradition, and received verbo-tenus by the Arians as well as the Catholics:
whence it was, that to unmaske their false Glosses, the Catholics were feign
to add, by way of explication, unto the second Article of the Creed, the word
[(...)] so, to clear the true meaning thereof, and distinguish themselves from
the corrupters of the Faith.

Ob. 3d The very Language of the Creed convinces it to be younger than the Age
of the Apostles, for the word [ Catholick] was not known in their Time, as
witnesses Pacianus in his Epistle to Sympronianus. It is likly it was added in
after Ages, to distinguish the Universal Church spread through out the whole
world, from the Canventicles of Heretics and Schismatics, suth as the
Novatians, and Donastists; for if it be said, this word was added, to
distinguish the Christian Church from the Jewish Synogogues, circumscribed
within the limits of the land of Canaan; it is an improbable Reason, because in
the Apostles Age, there were as many if not more Jews out Palastine, than in
it; as apeares by the History of the Acts.

I Answer; 1. Some one word might possibly be added in succeeding Times, by way
of explication, to distinguish the True Church from the Conventicles of
Heretics and yet not prejudice the Antiquity of the whole; So, St Austin
seems to include it in the Epethete [ Holy] for when he comes to this Article,
he adds by way of explication to -- Sanctam Ecclesiam -- Vtique Catholicam.
In case of reply; that if one word be added, why not many? and if the Church
might do so in one Age, why not at other times? I rejoyne That one word might
be added then, but by way of explication only, not to supply a mutilous member
or defective Article; but the Form being now settled for so many hundred years
such liberty is taken away together with the cause of it, the full, and genuine
sense of the Creed having been abundanty delivered to the Church in succeeding
Exegeticall Creeds, and expositions of the Fathers, so that there is now no
need of coining new words or Phrases by way of explication.

But, Secondly, We have no need to make use of this supposall; for the word [
Catholick] might very well be placed in the Creed from the Original composure
of it. notwithstanding whatsoever is produced to the contrary from the
testimony of Pacianus. for this Pacianus (Bishop of Barcelona, and contemporary
to S. Jerome) in his first Epistle to Sympronianus the Novatian, which is
entitled, De Catholico Nomine; after he had dealt with him very gently in the
beginning (superscribing his Epistle thus, Pacianus Symproniano Fratri) to win
him over the more effectually to the Communion of the Church; in the Body of
his Epistle he uses these words, Sub Apostolis, inquies, nemo Catholicus
vocabatur* Esto; sic fuerit; vel illud indulge; cum post Apostolos haereses
extitissent diversisque nominibus columbam Dei atque Reginam lacerare per
parts and scindere niterentur, nonne cognomen suum Plebs Apostolica
postulabat, quo incorrupti Populi distingueret unitatem, ne intemeratam Dei
Virginem Error aliquorum per membra laceraret? Where we may observe.

First, That he mentions not at all the applying of the word [ Catholick] to
the Church, or whole Company of Believers as it is placed in the Creed* (for
this was not called in question by Sympronianus) but the aplying of it to
particular persons which in the Apostles times were called Disciples, or
Christians, not Catholics; as Sympronianus objected.

Secondly, That Pacianus absolutely grants not, that the word [ Catholick]
was not so used in the Apostles Times, but only, indulgeth so much unto his
adversary; because, notwithstanding this supposall, he was otherwise able to
convince him upon his own concessions; which kind of supposall or indulgence,
is most usual amongst Polemick writers, there by to win over, and work upon
the Adversary.

Thirdly, That the Reason of the name, brought by Pacianus, and urged upon
Sympronian, namely, the distinguishing of the true Church, from the several
Sects led by, and denominated from, their several factions, and Heretical
heads, is very agreeable to the Apostles days and so required the like
distinctive Epethete; for S. Paul blames the Church of Corinth for Schisms and
addicting themselves factiously to several Idolized Teachers which they had
chosen to themselves; for though he names only Peter, Apollos, and himself,
yet his Discourse chiefly aims at some other Popular Preachers, and false
Apostles, as appears by comparing 1 Cor. 4. 6. 2 Cor. 11. 13, 20. And, S. John
expressly names the Nicolaitans (denominated from one Nicolas) in his Revel. chapter
2. v. 15.

As for S. Austins involving the word [ Catholick] in the Epithet Holy; it
proves not that it was not then in the Text of the Creed; for it was usual with
the Fathers in their Paraphrasticall explications, to omit the expression of
several Particles, sometimes one sometimes another, which yet were co^fessedly
in the Creed, and are expressly mentioned by them in their other Homilies, or
Tractates, as we may see in Chrysollegus, Eusebius Gallicanus, and others.

Thirdly; Heretics arose, not only after, but even in the very Apostles Times;
the Tares were scattered presently upon the sowing of the Wheat, in the
lateplowed field of the Church. S. Luke mentions Simon Magus, that Firstborn
of the Devil, and Father of Heretics, as the Ancients Style him. Act. 8. 9.
-- 24. S. Paul tells us of Hymenaeus, and Phyletus. 2 Timothy 2. 17. And, of
Alexander, Phygellus, and Hermogenes. 1 Timothy 1. 20. 2 Timothy 1. 15. Yea, S. John
informs us in more general Terms, That there were many Antichrists in the
world, even whilst he lived, who denied the Father and the Son; 1 Io. 2. 18.
22. These Antichrists then were Heretics, who taught contrary to the Faith of
Christ wherefore, it is most probable, that the word [ Catholick] was placed in
the Creed, even by the Apostles themselves, for the reason before assigned.

Fourthly; The Christian Church might justly be styled Catholic, or
universal, to distinguish it from the Church of the Jews, which was a
particular Church, confined (if not within the Bounds of one Country) yet unto
one Nation; whereas the Christian Church comprehended all Nations, and had no
other Bounds than those of the world; although not actually at the time of
making the Creed, yet in virtue, and power; according to that general
Commission of our Savior to his Apostles, Go, and teach all Nations Mat. 28.
29. And gain, Ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and all Judea,
and in Samaria, and to the uttermost part of the Earth, Act. 1. 8. The Jews
were so envious and proud, as not to receive the Gentiles into their communion,
or acknowledge them partakers in the promises of the Messiah; they would have
had them all circumcised and submit to the Ceremonial Law; but God broke down
this Partition* wall, Ephesians. 2. 14. As he made appear by the Vision of the Sheet
which he sent to S. Peter Act 10. 11. 15. And by the Decree of the Council at
Jerusalem; Act. 15. And so gathered all into one Body or Church Catholic so
called in respect of Time, Place, Persons, Faith; which is therefore called the
Common Faith. Tit. 1. 4. For this Reason at least the Apostles might justly
frame the Article at the very first Composure, in these words I believe the
holy Catholic Church.

Ob. 4th. The different relation of the Story bewrayes the uncerteinty of it;
for they give not all the same Article to the same Apostle: and some marshall
them one way, some another.

Answ. First; Diversity of opinions in Circumstances not material cannot
justly call the maine Point in doubt. So, all Christians believe the Gospel of
St Matthew, and the Epistle to the Hebrwes, to be the Word of God, though
Divines differ about the language in which, and the time when they were written:
and they all agree there is an Hell, though they do not, about the place
where. Therefore, notwithstanding some slight, groundless differences (some of
them, of latter inconsiderable Authors) we have no just reason to disbelieve
the Apostles Composing of the Creed.

Secondly; As to the various marshalling and order of the Articles; it cannot
justly argue the uncerteinty of the Tradition; because the Books of the holy
Scripture are also placed in a various method, according unto several Editions
and Translations; some following the order of the Hebrew Text, as the
Protestant Churches; others that of the Septuagint, and the old Latin
Translation, as the Churches of Greece, and Rome.

Thirdly; Neither can the diverse ascribing of them to several Apostles, raise
any just doubt of the Composers of the whole; for we find not a few
Controversies agitated amongst Divines, concerning the Authors of several
Books of Scipture: in the Old Testament, of the Books of the Judges, Kings,
and Chronicles, and of the Book of Job: in the New Testament, of the Second,
and Third Epistle of St John, and of the Revelation; whether John the Elder
were the Author of these Epistles; and, John the Divine of the Revelation; as
distinct Persons from John the Evangelist? Or, whether John the Ap. were the
Author of all three, under 3 several Titles? But more especially the Author of
the Epistle to the Hebrwes is questioned; whether it were Paul, or Barnabas,
Luke, or Clemens. And yet, not withstanding all these Controversies, the
Christian Church now doubts not of the Authority of these Books; why should we
more doubt of the Authority of the Creed, although we know not how certainly to
assign the Distinct Articles to their several Apostles; whenas in truth, the
more probable opinion is, that they jointly concurd to the framing of them all.

Ob. 5. If the Creed for matter, and form were from the Apostles, and they
delivered it precisely in those words wherein we now have it, why is it not
placed in the Canon of Scripture, for if you say, it pertaines to unwritten
Traditions (as S. Jerome, and others tell us) we must know that those (...)
concern only the Government, and Rites of the Church; whereas the Creed is a
Rule of Faith, or Doctrine, required to be professed by Christians at their
Baptism.

Answ. First; To retort a like question: why is not the number of the
Canonical Books put into the Canon, that so we might the more certainly know,
what Books are of Divine Authority, and what are Supposititious? This sure is
a Doctrinall Point, the maine Fundamental one; and highly concerns our Faith
if any thing do; and yet it is derived unto us by Tradition; why may not the
Creed in like manner.

Secondly; the Creed is taken out of the Canon of Scripture either in express
words, or by evident, and necessary Consequence (whereof the Apostles were
unerring Judges) reduced only to a Method and set Form.

Thirdly; The Apostles thought not fit to commit it unto writing, but delivered
it by word of mouth to the Pastors or Bishops of the Churches, whom they left
to succeed them; and who, in a continued Succession down from the Apostles,
delivered the Creed unto us.

Fourthly; That unwritten Traditions comprehend not only matters of Practice
(such as are the Rites, and Regiment of the Church) but also matter of
Doctrine; I appeal not only to the former instance of the Canon of Scripture,
and to this of the Creed constantly witnessed by St Jerome with many other
Fathers, (whose testimony deserves much credit) but to a Third also, the
perpetual Virginity of the Mother of God; of which Mr Perkins (no friend of
Romish Traditions) says thus; That the Virgin Mary lived, and died Virgin, is
received for Truth, but yet not recorded in Scripture: and, in Ecclesiastical
Writers, many worthy sayings of the Apostles and other holy Men are Recorded,
and received of us for Truth, which nevertheless are not set down in the
Books of the Old or New Testament; and, many things we hold for Truth, not
written in the Word, if they be not against the Word. Thus he in his Reform.
Cath. of Tradit. Concl. 2.

Ob. 6th. The Creed has not been preserved so safe from Addition, Detraction,
Mutation, as the rest of the Scriptures always have been; therefore, not
likely to have come from the Apostles.

Answ. I could wish that the holy Scriptures had been kept so safe, as the
Objectour bears us in hand; the Church then would have been more pure, and
more peaceble. But,

First; For Additions; Does not our Church cut off those Apocryphal pieces
which were long a go an* next to Daniel, and Hester? And do we not find the
151 Psalm added unto the rest a Copy whereof we have in Sixti Sen.
Bibliotheca? And in the New Testament, for some Ages, the Book called Hermae
Pastor, was joined to the Books we now have, and esteemed by many for
Canonical.

Secondly, For Detraction; Have not whole books been taken a way by diverse
Heretics, who would acknowledge no scripture that made against them? For
Instance; Marcion acknowledged none of the four Gospels, but only that of St
Luke; neither his, entirely; as Tertullian witnesses. Examples of other
Heretics are almost infinite. Yea which is more; some Canonical Books for a
while were denied, or (at least) doubted of, and so left out in diverse Copyes,
by some Orthodox Doctors of the Church, till the Truth became afterward better
cleared, as the Epistles of James, and Jude, the Second Epistle of Peter, the
Second, and Third Epistles of St John, the Epistle to the Hebrews, and the
Revelation of St John. For this we may consult the Syriack Translation of the
New Testament.

Thirdly; For Mutation; The Heretics of old time, who were bold to cut off
whole Books, did much more boldly adventure on changing of verses, words,
letters, and points. The fraud of the Arians both old and new, is notorious in
this kind.

Nevertheless for all these subtle, and various Devices of Satan to overthrow
Religion, and pervert the Word of Truth by these his mischievous Instruments,
yet some ancient copies both of the Scripture and Creed, by Gods especial
Providence have been kept entire, whereby the rest might be examined and
amended.

Ob. 7th. Although the Creed has ever been much esteemed in the Church, yet
was it never accounted Cano^icall: The Ancient Doctors were so far from
equalling it with Scripture, that they appealed from it thereunto as to an
higher Authority; so did Cyr. Catech. 4. And Paschasius, in his Book against
Macedonius Bib. Pat. Tom. 9. Which without question they never would have done
had they thought, it had bin from the Apostles, in such Form, and as now we
have it.

Answ. First; Whether the Creed were accounted for Authority, Canonical, that
is Divine, and unquestionable; and, for Frame, Apostolical; I appeal to all
those Ancient Fathers, which I have already produced; amongst whom Tertullian
(one very Ancient expressly tells us, that the Creed was ordained by Christ viz.
by the Ministry of his Apostles, who were Authorized by him, and assisted by
his Spirit to compose it; according to that saying of his He that hears you
hears me. Luke 10. 16. Whence he sends the Heretics to the Churches founded
by the Apostles, to find this Doctrine or Rule of Faith, there left by them. De
praesc. adv. haer. cap. 21. Withal, he calls it The Canon or Rule of Faith as
Irenaeus had done before him; and tells us, that no part thereof may be called in
question.

Seconly; It Is not unlikly that some of the Fathers may cite places of
Scripture in confirmation of the Creed, as the Apostles themselves in their
writings bring forth places out of the old Teastament to back and vindicate the
truth of what they said; yea, our Blessed Savior himself often cites Moses, and
the Prophets and authorizeth his doctrine by their Testimony, bidding his
Auditors to Search the Scriptures (of the old Testament) for they are they
(says he) which Testify of me Io. 5. 39. See also, Act. 26. 22. 2 Pet. 1. 19.
Iam. 2, 14, 23. And it is the usual practice of our preachers at this day to
bring proofs for their textuall observations (though often express words of
Scripture) out of other parallel Places. But, as well those citations of the
Fathers, as these of our Blessed Savior, and his Apostles, are brought, not so
much to confirm the truth of what they said, as to satisfy the minds of their
Auditors, which were more fully confirmed when they they saw the joint
correspondence of the Creed with the Scripture, and the Gospel with the Law.
And, we find at this day, though divine Authority do abundantly suffice to
confirm us in the Grounds of our Religion; yet it does more fully content the
judgment of the Learned when they see the probates of Reason to conspire with
the dictates of Faith; for Instance, in the Unity of the Godhead, and the
immortality of the Soul.

Thirdly; As for the two Fathers, whom the objectour cites, I shall return a
more particular Answer.

First; Cyril, indeed, in that place tells us that the mysteries of the Faith
ought not to be delivered unto the Catechumeni simply and nakedly, but as
clothed with scripture; and, that they should not simply believe him, unless
he brought proofs from thence for what he delivered; because the safety of our
Faith (says he) depends not on the pleasingnes of Rhetoric, but on the
demonstration of Gods Word written: The reason whereof he assigns in the
beginning of the same Homily, (...) etc. The Disciples of the Heretics by their
elegancy of speech and fair, soothing tongues, under the name of Christians,
deceive the hearts of the simple; they hide the poysoo^usdartes of their
ungodly Doctrines with sugared expressions, of all whom jointly our Lord says,
beware least any man deceive you, then he goes on, (...); for this cause the
doctrine of Faith is delivered with expositions thereon. So that he would not
have the Creed or himself believed without Scripture; not that the Creed, but
the Times, required such proof: for the Heretics of those Days, partly
framed new Creeds of their own; partly, added to, altered, and perverted the
old, withal, endeavoring to make their doctrine good by seeming
probabillities of Reason, and flourishes of Rhetoric. It was necessary
therefore, in this case, to discover these false Creeds, and Interpretations,
by bringing all unto the Text of Scripture.

Secondly; The other Father Paschasius, in the beginning of his Book De Spiritu
Sancto, written against Macedonius, taxes a false reading of the Creed, crept
into it through the ignorance of some Transcribers, who wrote I believe in the
holy Church for I believe the holy Church: and, by this error enervated an
Argument usually alleged by the Fathers for the Deity of the holy Ghost,
against Macedonius and his Followers: Paschasius therefore proves by certain
Places of Scripture that they are commanded to believe in God alone, but never
in man; wherefore seeing the Church consists of a company of men, that reading
of the Creed must consequently be false, which enjoynes us to believe in the
Church. But what of all this? He appealed not, in this, from the Creed unto
Scripture, but by Scripture corrects a false reading of the Creed; as the
Fathers, in their polemicall writings against Heretics, frequently correct
their corrupt quotations of some places of Scripture by other undoubted places.

Ob. 8th. The Reason assigned, why the Apostles composed this Creed discovers
the vanity of the Tradition; what was that? That it might be (forsooth) to the
Apostles a Canon or Rule, according to which they should square, and conform
their Preaching; what, to the Apostles, to whom Christ promised his Blessed
Spirit that should lead them into all Truth? Certainly, they, needed it not for
their own sakes, amongst whom there was no ground of difference, nor doubt of
the Principles of Christianity. And, whereas others more probably say it was
framed for the Churches sake, that she might have a short, plain, yet full
confession of Faith, as a Formula of Belief, to be publicly recited at the
Time of Baptism; neither will this hold; for in the Apostles Age, the
Confession of Faith was plain and simple when they came to be Baptized,
namely, in Jesus Christ; or, in the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; as appears by
the History of the Acts; so that the Church had then no need of such a Formula.
It began not to be required, till diverse Heresies brake into the Church.

Answ. First; It is readily confessed, that the Apostles needed no Rule of Faith
whereby to square their Preaching, as if otherwise they should have erred; yet
they might well agree one a Canon, or Rule of Fundamentals, wherewith they
thought fit to acquaint all Christians, as with Points necessary to Salvation;
whereas otherwise, they might have Preached more at large, and intermixed
matters of lesser Consequence.

As for the Authors who bring the Reason alleged in the objection, they lay it
down, not in these Terms, least the Apostles being separated each from other,
ipsi inter se in varias scinderentur parts: much less, thus, ne subinde alii
abaliis in doctrina abirent, as is odiously alleged. but Ruffinus renders the
reason thus Ne diversum aliquid his, qui ad fidem Christi invitabantur,
exponerent, S. Austin in like words, Ne diversum vel dissonum praedicarent his
qui ad fide^ Christi invitabantur. Now diversum and abversum, dissonum and
absonum are two things. there was no fear that the Apostles by being severed
each from other, should Preach ought contrary to the Truth, or to one Another,
if they had not before agreed upon a Form: yet, they might have Preached
somewhat diverse from the Fundamentalls of Christianity, namely, other Points
of inferior concernment; or at least, the same in other words, if they had
not agreed on this Rule at their setting forth; whence their Auditors might
have taken occasion to suspect and argue them of falsehood (not believing they
were all guided by the same Spirit) or to part themselves into factions, as it
fell out in the Church of Corinth about Paul, and Apollos, although they taught
the same Gospel. And, what stirs arose in the Church about a Ceremony viz.
the time of observing Easter, derived from a different tradition of S. John to
the Churches of Asia, from the rest of the Christian world, (though they all
agreed in the main, the keeping of the Feast) Eusebius, and others will
sufficienly inform us.

But, to come closer to our Subject. A notable instance in the very same kind,
namely, in matter of of Doctrine (such as the Creed is) we find in the Greek and
Latin Church about the middle of the fourth Century, touching the Grand
mystery of the Trinity; which yet upon due examination, proved only a
difference of the tongue and language. The Controversy is thus set down by
Greg. Naz Orat. 21. written in praise of the Great Athanasius Number. 46. 47. The
Orientals, says he held one (...), or Essence, and three Hypostases, or or
subsistences. The Latins by Reason of the barrenness of their Tongue, and the
narrowness of expression, could not distinguish Hypostasis from (...),
Subsistence from Essence; and therefore instead of Hypostasis brought in the
new-coind word Persona [Gr. (...)] to signify the (...), the proper distinctive
Relations of the Three, as (...) signified the (...), or Nature; what was the
effect of this says he? (...). The effect deserved laughter, or rather
Lamentation; this small difference of words, seemed a diversity of Belief,
for the Orientals suspected the Westrne Church of Sabilianisme because they
would not acknowledge three Hypostases, but caled them by the name of three
Persons. And, the Western Church suspected the Orientals of Arianisme, for
holding three Hypostases. contentions daily growing hotter between them, had
like to have separated the East and West about a syllabicall difference; But
Athanasius, says he, with much patience and prudence, calling unto him, and
hearing both Parties, having examined their meaning, and the sense of the
words, when he found them agreeing in the thing signified and at no difference
about the doctrine it self, (...), granting them the diversity of their
Terms, he unites them together in the same Truth.

Secondly; Though we hold it most certain, that the Apostles, considered
single and apart, delivered nothing to the Church, either by word or writing,
but what they were specially assisted in by the holy Ghost; and therefore most
undoubtedly true; yet, for ought I know, as the holy Ghost revealed not all
truths to the Apostles at once (no not when he descended on them at the Feast
of Pentecost) but delayed the manifesting of some till afterward, as for
example the Conversion of the Gentiles to Peter in the vision of the sheet Act.
10. So he might not reveal some truths unto them, when they were single and
apart, but only, when they met and consulted together; For though every one of
them by himself was infallible in all necessary Points, that is, so as to
deliver nothing contrary to the Faith or Truth of Christian Religion; yet
without any Derogation to his privilege, they might need the more especial
assistance of the holy Ghost upon their Assembly, to instruct them which Points
of Faith were necessary to Salvation, which not.

We have a famous Instance of this recorded, Act. 15. For, when there arose a
great question in the Church of Antioch, whether the Gentiles newly converted
in Syria and Cilicia, should be circumcised, and obey the Law of Moses? That
Paul and Barnabas were sent unto Jerusalem about it. v. 2. that the Apostles,
and Elders came together to consider of this matter v. 6. What needed this
considering in a solemn meeting, if they had been ascertained what to resolve
before they met? It follows v. 7. That there was much disputing, or debate in
the Council. Why not, even among the Apostles themselves, who were the chief
members thereof? At least this disputing might have been spared, or cut short
by the Apostles, as a thing unnecessary, if it had not been thought a good,
and needful Preamble unto a final Decision. If the Church had conceived S.
Peter, or any other of the Apostles, an infallible Judge in this Point, with
out due examination thereof, and the special assistance of the holy Ghost in a
Synod, they might have spared both their meeting, and dispute. But when there
had been much disputing and not before, they jointly determined what Laws to
free them from, and what to impose upon them, as things necessary to be
observed, v. 28. Namly the abstaining from Blood, and (consequently) things
strangled. v. 29. According to that primitive law, given to the Sons of Noah.
Ge. 9. 4. (a Law still observed by the Greek Church, by the Moscontieth, and
their neighbor churches of Pola^d which have admitted the Reformation; and
long observed generally by the whole Western Church, even til the Times of
Ludovicus Pius as appears by his, and his Father Charles capitular) together
with the abstaining from Fornication, and things offered to Idols which the
Apostle makes a species of Idolatry 1 Cor. 10. 19, 20, 21. And are more clearly
against the Moral Law, though not so esteemed by the generality of the
Gentiles. Then, and not before, they use that style, It seemed good to the Holy
Ghost, and to us; that is, To us, in the Plural, to us, assembled together.

Consonantly to this, S. Paul tells us more plainly, Gal. 2. 2. that long after
his conversion, and calling unto his Apostleship, he went up to Jerusalem by
Revelation, and communicated the Gospel which he Preached among the Gentiles,
unto the Apostles who there resided, namely, to James, Cephas, and John; giving
this for a Reason, least (says he) by any means I should run, or had run in
vain, Gal. 2. 2. Now, the composing of the Creed, wherein were to be comprised
the maine Grounds of Christian Religion, was a matter of the highest
consequence; and so, might very well require the joint and serious deliberation
of the Twelve, together with the special assistance of Gods spirit.

Thirdly; To the Reply against the second Reason; I Answer, That it is a
groundless supposall, to think that the Persons to be Baptized in the Apostles
times, were required to believe only in Jesus Christ, or in the Trinity alone:
for,

First, we find other Principles of Christian Doctrine distinctly set down, in
Heb. 6. 1, 2. And Preached by the Apostles, before they Baptized their
Auditors: for instance; the Article of Remission of Sins, by Peter. Act. 10.
43. And by Paul Act. 13. 38, 39. The Article of the Creation of the World, by
the same Paul Act. 17. 24.

Secondly, As for belief in Jesus Christ, the Apostles indeed required it as
the maine point, as we read in the History of the Eunuch, Act. 18. 37. and, of
the Jailer. Act. 16. 31. Yet not as the sole point; for belief in the holy
Ghost was also required as appears by the history of the Disciples at Ephesus
Act. 19. 2, 3, 6. It Is mentioned therefore as the principal, and that which
virtually includes all the rest; for to believe in Jesus Christ as we ought,
is to believe the Doctrine which he taught and revealed unto the world from the
Father, as the guide or light to true Blessedness; now, what was this, but the
Gospel of Salvation, whereof the Creed for matter of Doctrinalls, is the
Epitome, consult to this purpose Io. 17. 3. And chap. 3. 13. 36.

Thirdly, As for belief in the most Holy Trinity it gives us more scope, as
that which comprehends all the Articles of our Faith: for, as to believe in
Jesus Christ, implicitly conteines all the mysteries of our Redemption, viz.
His Godhead, Incarnation, and Birth, Passion, Burial, Descent into Hell,
Resurrection, Assension, Sitting on the right hand of the Father, and second
coming to Judgment, so, to believe in God the Father conteines his works of
Creation and Providence, which are the Visible effects of his eternal Power
and Godhead To. 1. 20. And to believe in the holy Ghost involves the whole
work of Sanctification, the applying of Christ's Benefits to his Church, and
completing the Salvation of mankind, which are distinctly set down in the
four last Articles. And, this S. Chrysostom teaches us in his first homily
on the Creed already cited; where his Text ends thus I believe in the holy
Ghost: but in his explication, he thus unravels the Article, and lays it open
to view in its full extent -- who brings us to the holy Church, she remiteth
our sins, promises the Resurrection of the Body, and life everlasting.

This belief therefore in Christ or in the Trinity is not to be nakedly and
simply understood, as if no other Particulars were required, but with relation
to those other Articles of the Creed, which in them lie hid, and imbosomed; for
the History of the Acts does not express Passages at large (especially such as
were ordinarily known and practiced, as the profession of the Creed at
Baptism) but briefly touches the heads of things. the Evangilists do the
like in relation of speeches and miracles of our Savior; so that we are feign
to compare the^ together, to find out the several circumstances, and make up
the Relation entire. To prosecute this point a little farther, and illustrate
it by the like Instance. As the Apostles are said to require Faith in Christ
(and naught else mentioned) of the Persons who came to be Baptized; so are they
said, (and that oftener) to Baptize in the name of Christ, without naming any
other Person of the Trinity Act. 2. 38, 41. And 10. 48. And 19. 5. And, yet we
cannot imagine, that they omitted the mention of the other two Persons. First,
because it was Christ's express command, that they should Baptize all Nations
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; Mat. 28.
19. Secondly; because the Christian Church has always held, that as water is
the Essential matter, so this composure of words is the essential Form of
Baptism; and so at no hand to be omitted. Wherefore, when the business of
rebaptization was agitated in the Nicene Council it was determined thus; That
the Persons Baptized with the formentioned Catholic from, should not be
rebaptized, as being rightly initiated into the Church, though by an heretical
hand; but as for the Pauliani, the Disciples of Paulus Samosatenus, who denied
the Trinity, and therefore Baptized in a wrong Form; their Baptism was
pronounced null and invalid; and those who were so illegally initiated, were
received by a new Baptism into te Catholic Church. Let us say then with that
most ancient Father Irenaeus, In Christi nomine subauditur, qui unxit, and ipse
qui unctus est, and ipsa unctio qua unctus est: and unxit quidem Pater, unctus
est vero Filius, in spiritu qui est unctio. that is In the name of Christ is to
be understood, the Anointer the Anointed, and the unction wherewith he was
Anointed: now, he who Anointed is the Father, the Person Anointed is the Son
with the Spirit who is the unction.

Lastly, That the Church had need of such a Formula of Belief, will appear,
both by the Reason mentioned in the objection, for Heresies infested the Church
from the beginning, to discover which, such a Shibboleth was necessary: and if
those Heresies had not sprung up so early, yet such a Symbol was as necessary
at first for prevention, as afterward for Trial. But of this, more in the
next chapter.

Ob. 9h S. Aug. says Verba Symboli per Scripturas sparsa sunt, and inde
collecta, and ad unum reducta. That the words of the Creed lie dispersed in the
Scriptures, from whence they are gathered, and reduced into a Form. De Symb.
Catech. lib. 1. cap. 1. So likewise Paschasius. If so, how can the Apostles be
the Authors thereof? For out of the Old Testament they could not gather, that
Christ was borne of the Virgin Mary; or That he suffered under Pontius Pilate.
And as for the new; many of the Apostles were dead before all was written; and
James, before any was written.

Answ. First; The Old Testament may well be said to contain the whole Creed,
if not expressly, and in the history; yet typically and in the Prophecy. To
instance in those two Articles mentiond in the objection, to wit, our Saviors
Birth, and Passion. Does not the Prophet Esaias say, A Virgin shall conceive and
bare a Son? chap. 7. 14. Yea, in the present; Unto us a Child is borne? chap.
9. 6. And* touching his Passion, does not the same Prophet tell us, He was
wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruised for our Iniquities, he is
brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, he was cut off the land of the living?
chap. 53. 5, 7, 8. And King David, in his person, They pierced my hands, and my
feet Psalm. 22. 16. comp. Zach. 12. 10. As for the names of the Virgin, and the
Judge, they are no such considerable Additions, as to make a new, or another
Article; so much may well be borrowed from the history of the Gospel, and yet
the Article not improperly said to be extant in the Prophecy.

Secondly; The Death of James, mentioned Act. 12. 1, 2. Is placed by
Chronologers in the year 44. After our Saviors Birth. But the writing of S.
Mathewes Gospel (a Book sufficient to supply all those Articles, which are
not expressly contained in the Old Testament) as placed by them in the year 41.
And so, two or three years before the death of James. In the same year 44.
Baronius, and Lorinus place the Dispersion of the Apostles into their several
provinces, and the framing of the Creed, by joint Consent as a necessary
Preparative thereunto; the dispersion, caused by the persecution of Herod; and
the door of Faith being now opened to the Gentiles as God himself had
informed them by the Vision showed to Peter, before he converted Cornelius.
Act. 10. 11. and 15. 7. But, this is agreed on all Hands, that whether this
dispersion were sooner (as Corn. a lap. places it. Anno Domini 37.) or latter,
(as Appollonius cited by Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 17.) that S. Matthew wrote his
Gospel before it, (and that in the Hebrew Tongue, the language of the Jews
amongst whom, and for whose use he wrote it, as Irenaeus, Origin, and others
witness, though it were soon after translated into Greek by James the Lords
Brother, and Bishop of Jerusalem) for an Hebrew Transcript thereof was carried
by S. Bartholomew into the Indies, and found there by Pantaenus of Alexandria,
Origens Master; as witness Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 9. and Ier. de Scriptor:
Eccles. cap. 36. in Pantaeno. And, another Transcript thereof, was carried by
Barnabas S. Paul's fellow-Apostle, unto the Gentiles whither he was sent, which
he used always to carry about with him; and which was after found buried with
him in Cyprus, (in the time of Zeno the Emperor) lying upon his Breast, The
same Authors also agree, that the Creed was framed by the Apostles, a little
before this general Dispersion. Therefore, when we are told, that the Ancients
place the composing of the Creed in the next year after our Saviors
Ascension, and consequently before the writing of S. Mathewes Gospel, the
matter is much mistaken. Ruffinus, and S. Augustine say indeed, that the
Apostles composed the Creed after our Saviors Ascension, and after the Descent
of the Holy Ghost at Pentecost, but how long after, they determine not. They
agree it was composed before their general Dispersion into the several
quarters of the World; which happened not in S. Stephens Persecution, for then
they abode all at Jerusalem, Acts 8. 1. nor, before the conversion of Cornelius
by S. Peter. Act. 10. For the set time of Preaching the Gospel to the
Gentiles, and incorporating them into the Church, was not before revealed, as
appears by the Series of the story; now, this conversion of Cornelius is placed
by Baronius. Ao 41. the very same year, wherein S. Mathews Gospel, according
to him, was written. It is most probable therefore, that this Dispersion of the
Apostles happened in that Persecution of Herod, mentioned Act. 12. for
presently after this, we find Paul and Barnabas, solemnly consecrated, and
sent away from Antioch, by the holy Ghosts command, for the performance of this
great work, the conversion of the Gentiles Ast. 13. 2, 3, 4. Whereas before,
the Gospel was Preached unto the Jews only, or (at the most) unto the
Hellenists, who were Jews by Nation, or Religion (that is, Jewish Proselites)
at least, though they speak the language of the Grecians, amongst whom they
lived. This appears Act. 11. 19, 20. And to this accord the words of S.
Chrysostom; Apostoli praedicaverunt Iudaeis, longoque temporis spatio caesi
and slagellati, in Iudaea manentes, ac demum ab ipsis propulsi, in Gentes
profecti sunt. That is, The Apostles Preached unto the Jews, and having been a
long time scourged and beaten, yet abode in Iewry, till at length being driven
out by them, they went forth unto the Gentiles. Hom. 70. in. Mat. cap. 22.
Compare herewith Act. 1. 8. and chap. 13. 46, 47.

Thirdly; S. Austins meaning in those words, may well be thus construed. The
Articles of the Creed lie dispersed in the Scriptures of both Testaments (which,
in his Time, were fully and completely extant) and were collected from thence;
That is, partly, from the Old Testament then written: partly, from the History
of the New, which the Apostles were eye and eare-witnesses of, and shortly
after committed to writing. Otherwise, we must make him palpably to contradict
himself; for elsewhere, he more then once affirms, that the Twelve Apostles
composed the Creed which now bears their name, and which he there explaines.

Object. 10th. If the Creed were composed by the Apostles, latter Ages, out of
respect unto them, would not have added ought unto it, as we see they did in
the Creeds of Nice, Chalcedon, and that of Athanasius; for the Church of Rome
was very slow to add one particle unto the Constantinopolitan Creed (viz.
Filioque) thereby to signify the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, as
well as the Father, though fully persuaded of the Truth thereof; so greatly did
they respect those 150 Bishops who composed it, although they had made some
Canons in prejudice of the former Dignity not only of the Alexandrian but of
the Roman See. Sure succeeding Ages owed far more reverence to the Apostles.

Answ. Succeeding Ages added nothing to the Apostles Creed but only explained
some Articles, which by reason of their briefnesse, or obscurity, had been
perverted by heretical Glosses. Now, this was no disrespect, but in honor of
the Apostles, thus to vindicate their Creed from false Interpretations, and so
restore it to its primitive Luster, and Integrity.

Secondly; The Constantinopolitan Creed, Framed by those 150 Fathers of the
Eastern Church, had been confirmed by the Church of Rome, in the Synod under
Damasus; no marvel then, if they were not over forward to add the Particle [
Filioque] without their consents who were the prime Framers of that Creed,
least by so doing, they should seem to vary as well from themselves, as the
Fathers of that Council.

Howsoever then that Council might exalt the Dignity of the Constantinopolitan
Patriarch (now seated in the Head City of the Empire) to the seeming prejudice
of the Bishop of Rome; yet in matter of Faith (such as the Creed) there was no
disagreement at all, and so no ground of Alteration.

If it be replied; That to charge the Creed (written for the capacity of the
meanest) with obscurity, is something hard; that, to insert ought or add to
it, though, by way of explication, would be thought great presumption; that, to
think they would add any thing to it, who would not endure that of [ filioque]
to be put into a Creed of humane Composure, and when they agreed in the matter,
is hardly credible. Besides that succeeding Ages have added to the Creed in
some Particulars, is apparent in the Nicene; and, if those additions be only
explications, yet to join them with the other Articles, and to urge them as
necessary, accounting all those Heretics who receive them not, is all one as
to make new Articles, or fundamental Truths; and withal, it secretly taxes
the Apostles Creed of insufficiency, and obscurity without those Additions.

I rejoyne, First, That the Creed in it self is plain for the capacity of the
meanest, yet the briefnes, generally, and indefinitenes of some Articles, has
laid it open to variety of Glosses, and those often Heretical; which has forced
the Church to deliver the true meaning thereof by exegeticall Additions.

Seconly; As for these explicatory Particles, the Fathers fecht them, not from
their own Brains but from Apostolical Tradition, Conserved in the Church
from hand to hand, and attested by the writings of precedent Bishops, to whom
the Apostles both delivered the words of the Creed and the true sense of each
Article: and hence it is that they urged, and imposed their explications on the
Church, as necessary to be believed. Neither*

Thirdly, Is the Apostles Creed hereby argued of Insufficiency, or obscurity;
seeing nothing is added to it, as if it were Defective in it self; or explaind
as if it were of it self obscure. It Is only vindicated, by this means from
corrupt Glosses, and restored to its primitive sense, and meaning; so the
Scripture in like manner, though clear in all necessary Points, and more
copious by far than the Creed yet has been abused in all Ages by curious, and
Daring Heads; whence, so many large comments on it, for remedy to this
mischief; and we see daily, that laws though as clearly framed as may be, yet
stand in need of Glosses, and Additionall Interpretations, when abused by
reason of their Generality.

Lastly, As to the addition of the Particle [ Filioque] it is not of the same
Nature; because it was annexed to the Creed contrary to the Decree of the third
General Council, contrary to the mind and open protestation of the Greek
Church, which had framed that Creed at Constantinople; and, by on part of the
Church only, viz. The Sea of Rome, and her adherents in the west.

Ob. 11h. If after Ages were forced, by new succrescent Heresies, to add
something unto the Apostles Creed; yet sure if they had thought it to be
theirs, they would never have taken ought from it, for this had been a ready
course to make way for new Heresies; whereas we find several Articles of the
Creed omitted by them in their new-framed Symboles.

Answ. The Councels, and Fathers, which have delivered unto us new Symboles, or
Confessions of Faith, occasioned by emergent Heresies; or rather explications
of the old Creed in some particulars, which were questioned, or denied by the
Heretics of those times* have taken nothing from the Apostles Creed, as in it
self superfluous; but have, in a larger Declaration, insisted on some Articles
which were controverted by the said Heretics; omitting others, about which
there was no doubt or question raised, and therefore not necessary, in that
case, to be repeated.

The truth of this will more clearly appear by the Paraphrases of some
Fathers on the Apostles Creed, who frequently omit some Articles, or parcells
of Articles, in their explications, even in that Age, when it is confessed on all
Hands, that the Creed, which is now called the Apostles, was fully and
completely extant. And, if they omitted some considerable Parts of the Creed,
when they undertook professedly to explain it (because, either so plain, that
they needed no explication; or, because handled before in some other Homily or
Paraphrase) we may suppose, with greater Reason, that the Councels and Fathers
omitted some one, or few Articles, in the composing of their new Symboles
(which were framed upon some especial occasion, and directed against a
particular Heresy) though the Apostles Creed were then fully extant.

For proof of this, consult the following Fathers.

1. S. Chrysostom, who flourisht about the year 400. in his first Hom. on the
Creed, omits these particles [ maker of Heaven, and Earth -- suffered, died,
descended into Hell -- ascended into Heaven] and ends the Text of his Creed,
thus, I believe in the Holy Ghost.

2. Petrus surnamed Chrysologus, who flourisht about the year 440. in his 57
Hom. on the Creed, omits [ Almighty maker of Heaven, and Earth -- suffered
under Pontius Pilate, died, descended into Hell.] In his 58 Hom. he omits [
suffered, and died -- rose [from the dead] descended into hell -- Catholick]
which Epithete is also omitted in the other following Homilies, though expressed
in the 57. After siting at the right hand of the Father -- he leaves out [
Almighty] as also in the 57 Homily.

In Hom. 59. he omits [ maker of Heaven and Earth.] In Hom. 61. he leaves out
the last Article [ life everlasting] as included in the precedent, of the
Resurrection; for Death being conquered by our Rising again, it must needs be
a Resurrection unto a life immortal.

3. Eusebius Gallicanus (usually called Emesenus) a Father of uncertain Age,
but placed by Bellarmine in the year 430. in his first Homily on the Creed,
omits [ maker of Heaven and Earth] as implied in [ Omnipotent.] all the
Articles between Christ's Birth and Ascension; although he mention them in his
explication: He omits also the Article of the Holy Ghost -- The remission of
sins by Baptism; as enclosed in the belief of the Holy Catholic Church: and
the two last Articles, viz. of the Resurrection, and life Everlasting. In his
second Homily, he omits [ Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth -- [only] Son, in
the second Article -- Suffered under Pontius Pilate, died --.

4. Venantius Fortunatus, who flourished about the year 570. in his Exposition
of the Apostles Creed, omits Maker of Heaven and Earth -- our Lord, in the
second Article -- rose again [from the Dead] -- sits on the right hand of
the Father; though it be in the explication. -- I believe the Holy Catholic
Church, the Communion of Saints -- and, Life everlasting -- which is included
(as by Chrysologus) in the Article of the Resurrection.

Object. 12. If the Creed were framed by the Apostles, and by them delivered to
all Churches of the World; it could never have come into the Fathers minds, to
have composed so many Symboles and Confessions, which for Perfection, must
needs give place to that of the Apostles; no such therefore was then extant;
which he must needs grant who knows, that this simple formula was required of
those that came to Baptism, whether they believed in God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost? Math. 28. 19.

Answ. The Fathers made no new Creeds, or Confessions of Faith, (as has been
already shown) but only explained the old: the occasion of which explicatory
Creeds, is well rendered by the Learned Vossius, Non licuit per haereticos in ea
simplicitate permanere. Haeresibus igitur obortis, quarum Architecti, vel
Patroni sese pro Christianis venditarent, ac misere seducerent imperitos,
coacti sunt addere alia, quibus Ecclesiae Doctrina ab Haeretica, item Ecclesiae
filii ab haereticis, and eorum Sectatoribus secernerentur. That is, The
Heretics would not suffer the Church to continue in the Primitive simplicity
of the Faith; for Heresies arising, whose Authors and abettors carried
themselves for Christians, and under that name miserably seduced the ignorant,
the Fathers were compelled to add other Creeds, whereby the Doctrine of the
Church might be distinguished from Heresy, and the Children of the Church from
Heretics, and their followers. Thus he De trib. Symb. Dissert. 1. number. 29.

Sceondly; as to that Form of Belief in the Trinity, which the Apostles are
said, by direction from their Master, to have required of those who came to
Baptism, Mat. 28. 19. There is no such matter there set down; only, they are
charged there to Baptize in the Name of the Trinity, not in the name of any
strange God, or of any one Person of the sacred Trinity, but of all Three
together. Yet, I willingly grant, that faith in the Holy Trinity was required
of the Persons which came to Baptism, but not by virtue of that command, which
was given to the Baptizers, not to the Persons who came to be Baptized: but
this Faith was not the only thing required of them; for we read other points
numbered amongst the principles, or beginings of Christian Doctrine which the
Catechumeni were taught, as Repentance from dead works, resurrection of the
Dead, and Eternal Judgment. Heb. 6. 1, 2.

Ob. 13th If the Creed had been Composed by the Apostles with the same
sentences, words, and order, which we now have, and had been so delivered to
the Catholic Church; there had not been diverse Creeds about the year 400,
according to diverse Churches; diverse in the manner of expression, and diverse
in the number of sentences; which diversity will appear to him that shall
compare several Creeds together, especially the Nicene, which has not a few
sentences added, and others alterd, with which additions and alterations it was
afterward received, and used in the Eastern Churches, the Apostles Creed being
in a manner excluded.

Answ. First; The diversity of several Creeds in some few words, or in the
manner of expression, is a Circumstance not material, so the same sense be
kept inviolate, and all the Heads, or Articles of the Faith preserved entire.

Secondly; As to the number of Sentences (more in some Creeds, and fewer in
others) we have before assigned some Reasons, why one or more articles have
been omitted in some Creeds, and so the number made fewer; but, for the adding
of any new Sentences unto the Apostles Creed, I constantly deny that the
Primitive Church ever did it, but on the other side constantly disclaimed it;
her office being this, to preserve the old Faith [ which was once delivered to
the Saints] not to coin a New.

Thirdly; The Church upon occasion, has added some Explicatory Particles to
several Heads of the Creed, especially in the two first Synods of Nice, and
Constantinople; partly to vindicate the Faith from the corrupt Glosses of
Heretics; partly, the more fully to instruct her Children in the mysteries of
Christianity: But all these exegeticall Additions refer to some Article, or
Limb of this Body of Faith, like Physic or nourishiment to the part; but make
not any new Article, thereby to render the Body monstrous. The Fathers in those
two Synods, did neither on the one side, dislocate or deprave any limb of the
Creed; nor, on the other side, supplied any defective member; they only gave a
new growth or Augmentation, as Burnishing to some Articles; or restored that
natural vigor, and vital juce unto some parts, which the Heretics had
deprived them off.

The Nicene Creed, that is, the Apostles by this means become vegete and
grown, was afterward used in the Greek Church; yet not presently, either
that alone, or Principally, but only once in the year: afterward indeed, in the
time of Timotheus Patriarch of Constantinople, (which was about six-score years
after its first composure) it was ordained to be used every Sunday. But before
this, we may well presume that the Apostles Creed was used in their Litturgies,
without these explications, except it can be shown, that for four hundred
years and upward, they either used no Creed in their Church Service
ordinarily, which is most improbable; or, that they used some other Creed,
which no man yet has demonstrated

To demonstrate this more fully, and distinctly, it will not be unworthy our
labor, to compare some Creeds together, in which Collation we may contemplate,
with no small delight and satisfaction, The consent of Antiquity in matter of
Faith, the great care of the Church in preserving that Faith entire, and the
growing Perfection of our sacred Mother according as she grew in years. These
Creeds shall be Six, The Apostles Creed; The Eastern Creed, or Ierosolymitan,
set down by Cyril, and compared by Ruffinus; The Nicene; The Athanasian; The
Aquileian, set down by Ruffinus, and compared with the Eastern and Roman
Creeds; The Chalcedon Creed; And to these we will add, That of the Church of
Antioch, a good part whereof is set down by Cassianus.

Article I.
Apost. I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven, and Earth. East.
I believe in one God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth, and of all
things visible, and Invisible. Nice* has the same words. Aquil. I believe in
God the Father Almighty, Invisible, and Impassible. Athan. There is one Person
of the Father -- The Father is God -- The Father is Almighty. Antioch. I
believe in one only true God maker of all Creatures Visible, and Invisible.

Article II.
Apost. And in Jesus Christ his only [or only-begotten] Son our Lord, East. And
in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son of God, begotten of the Father
before all worlds. Nic. And in one Lord Jesus Christ the only-begotten Son of
God, begotten of the Father before all worlds, light of light, very God of very
God, begotten not made, of one Substance with the Father, by whom all Things
were made. Aquil. And in Jesus Christ his only [Unicum] Son our Lord. Athan.
The right Faith is that we believe and confess that our Lord Jesus Christ the
Son of God, is God, God of the Substance of the Father, begotten before the
worlds, perfect God, equal to the Father as touching his Godhead. Chalc. We
profess the Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, to be one and the same, and all us
with one accord pronounce him to be perfect as concerning his Godhead,
consubstantiall to the Father according to the same Godhead, begotten of his
Father before the worlds as touching his Godhead. Antioch. And, in our Lord
Jesus Christ his onlybegotten Son, the firstborn of every Creature,
begotten of him before all Worlds, and not made, very God of very God,
consubstantiall to the Father, by whom the Worlds were framed (or, Ages set in
order) and all things made.

Artic. III.
Apost. Conceived by the Holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary. East: Incarnate
and made man. Nic. Who for us men, and for our Salvation, came down from
Heaven, and was incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made
man. Aquil. Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary.
Athan. It is necessary to everlasting Salvation, to believe rightly in the
Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ; for the right Faith is, that we believe
and confess, that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is God and man --
Man of the substance of his Mother, borne in the World; perfect God, and
perfect Man, subsisting of a reasonable soul and humane flesh; inferior to the
Father, touching his Manhood; who although he be God and Man, yet he is not
two, but one Christ, one, not by conversion of the Godhead into flesh, but by
taking of the Manhood unto God; one altogether, not by confusion of substance,
but by unity of Person; For as the reasonable Soul and Flesh is one Man, so
God and man is one Christ. Chalc. We profess the same, to be perfect God when
he was made man, very God, and very Man, the same [subsisting] of a Reasonable
Soul, and Body -- of the same substance with us according to his Humanity, in
all things like unto us, without sin -- the same in these last Days, for us
and, for our Salvation, was borne according to his Manhood of the Blessed
Virgin, the Mother of God, one and the same Jesus Christ, the Son, the Lord,
the only-begotten, made known in two natures without confussion, conversion,
division, or separation thereof, (the distinction of the natures being not at
all taken away by reason of their union, but the propriety of each nature being
preserved, and both meeting in the same Person) not severed, or divided into
two Persons, but one, and the same only-begotten Son, God the Word, and Lord
Jesus Christ; according as the Prophets have from the beginning [or, from above]
instructed us concerning him; yea and Christ himself, and as the Creed of the
Fathers has deliverd unto us. Antioch. Who for our sakes came, and was borne
of the Virgin Mary.

Article IV.
Apost. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried. East.
Crucified, and Buried. Nic. He was Crucified also, for us under Pontius Pilate,
he suffered, and was buried. Aquil. Crucified under Pontius Pilate, and buried.
Athan. Who Suffered for our Salvation. Antioch. Crucified under Ponitus Pilate,
and Buried.

Article V.
Apost. He descended into Hell, the third Day he rose again from the Dead.
East. The third Day he rose again from the Dead. Nic. And, the third day he
rose again, according to the Scriptures. Aquil. The third Day he rose again
from the Dead. Athan. Descended into Hell, rose again from the Dead. Athan.
Descended into Hell, rose again the third Day from the Dead. Antioch. And, the
third Day he rose again according to the Scriptures.

Christ's descent into Hell (as we see in this Collation) is expressly set
down but in two Creeds, namely, this of the Apostles, and the Athanasian;
although the Fathers of the first Ages generally acknowledge it, and mention it
in their writings, for which we may look back on the Creeds of Thaddaeus, and
Ignatius, set down before. The reason therefore, why it is omitted in other
Creeds, I conceive to be this; That they held it involved or presupposed in the
following word -- The third Day he rose again from the Dead. For Christ may
not improperly be said to have risen the third Day, according to both Parts;
from the Grave, in his Body: from Hell [a low place, especially in comparison
of Heaven] in his Soul. So, both Parts, in this Rising met together from two
several Places, whether they had before Descended; both which places are set
down in holy Scripture as the Receptacles of the Dead, as well Good as Bad (so
it is in either a Rising from the Dead) and are jointly called by the names of
Sheol, Hades, Inferi This also S. Chrysostom, in setting down the Creed,
passes by Christ's ascension into Heaven; as being included in, or presupposed
by that which follows, His sitting at the Right Hand of the Father. See Genesis
37. 35. Job. 26. 6. Psalm. 86. 13. and 139, 8. Prove. 15. 11. Isa. 13. 9. Luke
16. 23. Rev. 1. 18. and chap. 20. 13.

Artic. VI.
Apost. He ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right Hand of God the
Father Almighty. East. And ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand
of the Father. Nic. has the same. Aquil. the same. Athan. He ascended into
Heaven, he sits on the right hand of the Father, God Almighty. Antioch. And
he ascended into Heaven.

Article VII.
Apost. From whence he shall come to judge the quick, and the dead. East. And
he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. Nic. Who shall come again with
glory to judge the quick and the dead, of whose kingdom there shall be no
end. Aquil. From thence he shall come to judge the quick, and the dead.
Athan. From whence he shall come to judge the quick and the Dead. Antioch. And
he shall come again to judge the quick, and the dead.

Article VIII.
Apost. I believe in the Holy Ghost. East. And in the Holy Ghost, the
comforter, who spoke by the Prophets. Nic. And in the Holy Ghost, the Lord, and
giver of life, who proceeds from the Father [and the Son according to the
Latines] who with the Father, and the Son together is worshipped, and
glorified, who spoke by the Prophets. Aquil. And, in the Holy Ghost. Athan:
There is another Person of the Holy Ghost -- the Holy Ghost is God -- the Holy
Ghost is of the Father [and of the Son] Neither made, nor created, nor
begotten, but proceeding.

Article IX.
Apost. I believe the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints. East.
One, holy, Catholic Church. Nic. One holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church.
Aquil. The holy Catholic Church. Where Ruffinus in his explication, interprets
[ Holy] by that which preserves the Faith, or Religion of Christ entire; and
opposes the Church to the Conventicles of several Heretics, which he calls
Concilia vanitatis; thus explaining the word Catholic, and the Communion of
Saints.

Article X.
Apost. The forgiveness of Sins. East. One Baptism of Repentance for the
Remission of Sins. Nic, I acknowledge one Baptism for the Remission of
Sins. Aquil. The Remission of Sins.

Article XI.
Apost. The Resurrection of the Body. East. And the Resurrection of the Body.
Nice. And, I look for the Resurrection of the Dead. Athan. At whose coming All
men shall rise again with their Bodies, and shall give an account for their
own Works. Aquil. The Resurrection of this Body. In the Exposition whereof
Ruffinus has these words, Et ideo satis cauta and provida adjectione Ecclesia
nostra [Aquilegiensis] docet, quae in eo quod a caeteris traditur, Carnis
Resurrectionem, uno addito pronomine, tradit, Hujus Carnis Resurrectionem;
hujus sine dubio, quam is qui profitetur, signaculo Crucis fronti imposito
contingit. That is, our Church [the Aquileian] has warily and providently
added the Pronoune [This] to the Article of the Resurrection of the Body, which
is delivered without it in other Churches; This Body, that is, which he
touches, who makes profession of the Creed, having the Sign of the Cross
made upon his Forehead, whence we may observe, not only the Antiquity of the
Cross in Baptism; but the custom also of the ancient Church, in adding some
exegeticall particles to the Creed, as a Thing publicly received and practiced
in the Christian World.

Article XII.
Apost. And, life Everlasting. East* And life Everlasting. Nic. And the life of
the World to come. Athan. And they that have done good, shall go into life
Everlasting; and they that have done Evil, into Everlasting fire. Aquil.
Incloseth it in the precedent Article of the Resurrection, in the explication
whereof, Ruffinus has these words, Dabitur and peccatoribus incorruptionis and
immortalitatis ex Resurrectione conditio; ut sicut Deus justis ministrat ad
perpetuitatem Gloriae, ista peccatoribus ad prolixitatem confusionis ministret
and paenae. That is, Sinners also shall rise to an immortal and incorruptible
estate; so that as God affourdeth the rightious everlasting Glory, he also
prepares the sinners for length of shame and sorrow.

Ob. 14th. That Creed which was neithe made by the Apostles nor by any General
Council, nor was recieved by the Greek or Eastern Churches, but in the
Church of Rome; and had been so long recited, and used in the Church, now
about the year 400, that then it was held an Apostolical Tradition; which, it
is certain, was conveyed also by the Church of Rome, to other Churches of the
West, the Eastern Churches in the mean time using other Creeds; that Creed
was composed by those who had the Government of the Roman Church: but, there
is naught of this which agrees not to the Creed, that we call the Apostles;
therefore, the Bishop and Presbyters of the Church of Rome composed it.

Answ. This is the summary Argument, used to disprove the Authors of the Creed,
and which we have already answered by Parts. For, that the Creed was composed
by the Apostles, we have proved at large, both by Authorities and Arguments.
That it was received (for the full sense and substance thereof) in the Greek
or Eastern Church,, appears both by what we have before cited out of the
Greek Fathers, especially Marcellus and Chrysostom; as also by the foresaid
Parallel of the Jerosolymitan, Nicene, Antiochian, and Athanasian Creeds, with
the Roman, and Aquileian.

That it was held an Apostolical Tradition by the Church of Rome, before the
year 400, appears by the forecited Testimonies of the Lain Fathers,
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Ambrose, and others.

That it was convaied by the Church of Rome to other Churches of the West,
which the Objector invidiously alleges, to disparage it amongst the Reformed
Churches) is more then has been proved; but if it were, it makes nothing
against its Dignity, and Authority; for such a Conveyance will argue the Church
only for the Deriver (as the Head, Mother, or Principal Church of the West)
not the Original Composer of the Creed; and, it is generally acknowledged, that
the Church of Rome, in the first Ages, was most famous for the purity of the
Orthodoxe Faith; and the incorrupt keeping of Traditions, especially
Doctrinall. Lastly, that the Eastern Churches used other Creeds, has been
also disproved, if by [others] be meant Creeds diverse in meaning, and in the
substance of the Articles: Therefore the conclusion, namely, that the Creed was
framed by the Bishop and Clergy of Rome, of its own accord falls unto the
Ground.

Thus have I endeavored, not only to bring positive Arguments for the
asserting of this Ancient Tradition, but withal to answer all those Objections
which are brought against it; a Task, far the more difficult of the two.

First, because it is an untrodden Path, wherein I had neither Help nor Guide;
no man, till these late busy Times, having ever presumed to write against the
Authority, or the Authors.

Secondly, because it is usually a far easier labor, to establish a received
Truth, then to demolish all the specious objections which are raised against
it. I shall desire to meet with the same candor in my Reader, whosoever he be
that shall compare these Arguments and Answers together, which I have used
toward the Objectors, whose Persons I have not so much as named, (as having no
quarrel to them) but only contended with their Objections: and, whatsoever my
Answers be, their Arguments I am sure, are set down at full, and to the best
advantage, least otherwise I might seem to have fought with my own shadow. Let
the indifferent Reader see, and judge.

Yet, if after all this, I be farther asked by the more curious enquirer, which
of all those Creeds or Symboles that we meet with in Antiquity, and which I
have here produced, came (...), in express words from the Apostles, neither
more, nor less, not the least particle varied?

I Answer; First, That this question, as it has much difficulty in it, so it
has little necessity; for as long as those Creeds agreed in the substance of
the Faith, it matters little or nothing, though there be some variety of
expression.

This indeed might make way for a difference in substance, if done rashly, upon
a private judgment, and a design of countenancing some new opinion: but not
so, when done by the general consent of the Church, assembled in a Synod,
which is supposed, not only to have the words of the Creed, but also the true
sense thereof kept in her, by Tradition, as an inviolable Depositum; and
withal, to be directed by the Holy Ghost, so as not to err in any necessary,
fundamental Point, such as the Articles of the Creed are. The Socinians
indeed, would have the Nicene Creed to differ in substance from that of the
Apostles, but such a censure is not to be much wondered at in them, who renew
the Heresies condemned by that Creed, and by the two Councels which composed it.

Secondly; Amongst all the forementioned Creeds, those which we may have most
probable recourse unto, as the exact Patterns, or Modells of the rest, the
Apostles genuine Births as well for words as matter, are the Creed of the
Jerosolymitan Church, explained by Cyril; and the Creed of the Roman Church,
which we of the West, now commonly call the Apostles Creed; for these two are
most complete in themselves, and most consonant to each others.

First; The Creed of the Jerosolymitan Church is likely to be the Apostles,
because that was the Ancient mother Church of the whole World, where
Christianity first began, and from thence was communicated unto all Nations;
and wherein the Apostles are said to have composed the Creed, before they went
unto the Gentilks.

Secondly; The Church of Rome also has a very fair Plea for her Antiquity and
Integrity.

First, Because that Church was founded by the two Prime Apostles, Peter and
Paul.

Secondly, Because she was in the greatest Repute, for the first Ages, as the
most incorrupt preserver of the Catholic Faith, and keeper of Apostolical
Tradition, when other Churches swerved from the Apostolic Doctrine: whence it
is, that the Fathers of those Ages frequently appeal to her, in their writings
against Heretics.

Thirdly, Because Heresies arising in other Churches, forced them to add some
explicatory Particles to the Creed, thereby to vindicate the Faith from
Imposture, and distinguish themselves from unsound Professors: but the Church
of Rome had this happiness for a long while, that no Heresy sprang up in her,
which by infecting her Children, enforced her to this necessity; for that of
the Novatians, was about Ecclesiastical Discipline, rather a Schism then a
Heresy; and Blastus, was a Quartadecuman, Erring only about the time of keeping
Easter. As for Florinus and Praxeas; the one was no Roman, but a stranger, and
soon discovered; and both, upon Discovery were banished, as it seems; for we
hear not of any great harm they did, or store of Disciples they led after
them. Now, this felicity of the Roman Church, caused them to keep their Creed
entire, according as they had received it from the Apostles, their first
renowned Founders, without any Alteration or Addition, so much as in the manner
of expression; to which purpose we may consult these three following
Testimonies.

First, S. Amb. in his forecited Epistle to Syricius Bishop of Rome, exhorts
all to believe the Apostles Creed, which the Church of Rome has always
preserved [ intemeratum] untoucht, and inviolate.

Secondly; Ruffinus in his Exposition of the Creed, upon those words, [ I
believe in the Father Almighty] gives us this Admonition; Illud non importune
commonendum puto, quod in diversis Ecclesiis aliqua in his verbis inveniuntur
adjecta, in Ecclesia tamen urbis Romae hoc non deprehenditur factum; quod ego
propterea esse arbitror, quod neque haeresis ulla illic sumsit exordium; and
mos ibi servatur antiquus, eos qui gratiam Baptismi suscepturi sunt public, id
est, fidelium populo audiente, Symbolum reddere; and utique adjectionem unius
saltem sermonis, eorum qui precesserunt in fide non admittit auditus; in
caeteris autem locis, quantum intelligi datur, propter nonnullos haereticos
addita quaedam videntur, per quae novellae doctrinae sensus ceederetur excludi.

That is, I think it not unseasonable to give notice, that in diverse Churches
somewhat is added to these words; but not so, in the Church of Rome; the reason
whereof I suppose to be this; because neither any Heresy there took its Rise,
and the ancient custom is there also kept, that the Persons who are to be
baptized, publicly rehearse the Creed in the aud^ence of the Church, which
would not endure to hear the least word added: but in other Places, according
as we are informed, some passages seem to be added by reason of certain
Heretics, on purpose to exclude the novelty of their Doctrines, by expressing
the true sense.

1. Thirdly, Vigilius Bishop of Rome, in his 4th book against Eutyches, has
these words, Vniversitas profitetur, Credere se in Deum Patrem omnipotentem;
and in Jesum Christum, filium ejus, Dominum nostrum. Huic Capitulo ob id iste
calumniatur, cur non dixit, in unum Iesum Christum Filium ejus, juxta Niceni
decretum Concilii? Sed Roma, and antequam Nicena Synodus conveniret, a
temporibus Apostolorum usque ad nunc, and sub Beatae memoriae Caelestino, cui
iste rectae fidei testimonium reddidit, ita fidelibus symbolum tradidit; nec
praejudicant verba, ubi sensus incolumis permanet. That is, The whole Church
professes, to believe in God the Father Almighty; and in Jesus Christ his Son,
our Lord* Eutyches cavils at this last Article, because it runs not thus, [ In
one Jesus Christ his Sonne] according to the Decree of the Nicene Council:
whereas the Church of Rome, before the assembling of that Council, from the
Times of the Apostles until this present, (and under Caelestinus of Blessed
memory, the rightnesse of whose faith Eutyches acknowledged) delivered* the
Creed in these Terms unto the faithful; neither be the words prejudicial,
where the sense is entire.

So then; That the Church of Rome kept the Creed inviolate, this Apostolical
Tradition faithfully, and entirely; witness here S. Ambrose, Ruffinus, and
Vigilius: And, that the Apostles distinguished it into twelve Articles,
according to their own number, witness (as has been shown before) the same S.
Ambrose, Augustine, and Leo the Great.

But, because these two Creeds, of the Ierosolymitan and Roman Churches,
differ something in the Bulk, that of Jerusalem being somewhat the larger; we
may, if we please to make them exactly agree, cut off those Additionall
Particles from the Creed of Jerusalem, which were added because of Heresies,
succrescent in those Eastern Parts.

But if we let them alone, the difference will not appear considerable;
rather, an admirable Harmony will be observed between the so distant Churches
of East and West, in matter of Faith, which otherwise, in Discipline and
Ceremonies, did not a little vary. Thus, the Churches Coat, like that of Christ
her spouse, was seamles, though wrought with diverse Colors.

CAP IX.
The Second Head of this Discourse; namely, The Gounds on which, and the ends
for which, the Apostles Framed the Creed. The Suffiiciency also of the Creed fo
the Rule of Faith, is proved by the Testimonies of Divines as well Modern as
Ancient; and those, both Romish, and Reformed.

HAving evinced, as far as in me Lies, the first, and chief Head which I
proposed to Treat off, namely, That the Apostles were the Composers of the
Creed which commony bears their Name; I come now to dispatch the other three,
in their order as they lie, the which will require but a short discussion; and
first; the Grounds, and ends of composiing it.

First; The Apostles had Ground, and warrant for composing this Breviary of
Faith, from diverse Patterns in holy Writ, of Gods own setting. King Solomon
in the old law contracts the whole Duty of Man into these two precepts, Fear
God, and keep his Commandments Eccles. 12, 13. And a wiser then he, in the
Gospel, our Blessed Savior, reduces the whole Law unto these two Heads, The
love of God, and our Neighbor Mat. 22. 37.

More particularly; God the Father, in the old Testament, concluded the whole
law of nature with all its Branches, within the compass, of ten short Precepts;
and those ten, he reduced into two Tables: Thus, we have a perfect Rule of
Love, and obedience, from his Mouth. Then, God the Son, under the New
Testament, at his Disciples request, gave us an exact Form of Prayer, whereby
to ground, exercise, and regulate our hopes and desires. There remained now in
the compiled some short complete Rule of Faith which the holy Ghost here did,
delivering this Creed unto the Church by the Mouths of the Apostles, to be for
ever kept therein as a sacred Depositum.

Thus have we three Brief, but Full Rules of those Fundamental, Christian
virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity; namly, The Creed, The Lords Paryer, and The
Ten Commandments; delivered unto us by the three Persons of the Sacred Trinity.

Secondly; The Framing of the Creed was most necessary for these two ends: tht
preservation of Faith, and Charity.

First, For the ease, and safety of Christians; especially, of the plainer,
weaker, and more Ignorant sort. Many have not the ability, or leisure to peruse
the whole Body of Scripture, and thence to collect those Points of Faith which
are necessary to Salvation; for they lie confusedly scatterd here and there,
mixed with matter of a diverse kind* yea, some Articles of the Creed are not
expressly and directly found in any determinate Place of holy writ, (as the
eight and ninth; together with the mystery of the Trinity, which is therein
contained) but depend on Consequences, and Logical deductions, which though
sufficiently clear in themselves upon a just arguing, or comparing, of Places,
yet it cannot be presumed that every one has the skill to Frame them; so that
there would be much fear of error, and danger of mistake in so weighty a
Business. Wherefore it was very expedient, or rather absolutely necessary,
that there should be gathered a summary of these points, digested into a
method, and expressed in plain terms; and that by an unquestionable and
unerring hand; that so we might know what to trust to, and have always at
hand those maine grounds of our Religion, which God requires to be believed by
us, as necessary to Salvation.

The whole Scripture is indeed a Perfect Rule of Faith, so is it also, of our
hope, and life. A perfect Rule of our Life, and manners, in its precepts and
prohibitions: of our hope in its Promises, and several Patterns of Prayer: of
our Faith, in its Dogmaticall Positions; yet as it pleased God to sum up the
first in Ten short words, as Moses calls the Commandments. Deuteronomy. 10. 4. And,
to sum up the second in seven shorter Petitions: so it was as requisite, that
upon the the same Ground, the Third should be reduced unto some few Heads, as
they are now in the twelve Articles of the Creed; which therefore we may not
improperly call, Sepes Credendorum The fence or mound of our Faith, without
which Boundary we should wander up and down in infinito Campo, in a large
field at random.

This Reason is touched by S. Austin De fide and Symb. cap. 1. Est Fides
Catholica in Symbolo nota fidelibus, memoriaeque mandata, quantum res passa est
brevitate Sermonis, ut incipientibus atque lactentibus, eis qui in Christo
renati sunt, nondum Scripturarum divinarum diligentissima and Spirituali
tractatione atque cognitione roboratis, paucis verbis credendum constitueretur
proficientibus, and ad divinam doctrinam certa humilitatis atque Charitatis
firmitate surgentibus, quod multis verbis exponendo esset perficiendum.

Secondly; For the due bounding of our Faith and Charity. There are many
lesser, circumstantiall Points in divinity which Christians may differ about,
Salva Fide and Charitate; without prejudice to either: but, others there be of
far higher Concernment, requisite to the very being of a true, and rightly
grounded Christian; these we call Fundamental Points; the Nescience of most
whereof, but the denial of any, is destructive of Salvation, whithout ensuing
repentance. Now, it was necessary, that these should be known, and severed
from the rest, that so the Church might know whom to admit to Baptism, and
acknowledge for her Children, and on the other side, Whom to reject, or cut off,
as Heretics, misbelievers. Yea besides, that every private Christian might
know by this Rule, whom to communicate with, and whom to fly from and avoid, as
Heathens and Publicans in our Saviors Language.

To demonstrate this Father, (namely that the Creed conteines all Points which
a good Christian is bound of necessity to believe) I shall produce a Reason, or
two, and thereto subjoine the testimonies of the Ancients; which, among other
Corollaries hence deducible, will serve to free the true reformed Churches from
that just imputation of Heresy, which the Church of Rome has been pleased to
lay upon Them; for all of the^ generally and unanimously embrace the Creed, as
appears by their several confessions; and therefore cannot justly be charged
with heresy in the ancient, (which is the true, and genuine) acception of the
word.

The reasons are these two which follow.

First; the End, for which the Apostles Framed the Creed, cannot be imagined to
be any other than this, viz. To give us a Breviary of the fundamental
Doctrines of Faith, Dare we say, that the Apostles came short of this their
end? It must be then either for want of Power or want of will. Now, to affirm
they could not compass it, is little better then Blasphemy and to affirm they
would not, when they might; must needs argue them of gross negligence in their
function, and uncharitablnesse to the Christian church; faults wholly
uncompatible with the Apostolic office, and Zeal.

Secondly; The name of Symbol [(...)] in the Greek and Regula Fidei, The Rule
of Faith, in the Latin, whereby the Ancients style the Creed, argue the
compleatnesse of it: for (...) signifies Nota or Indicium; the Creed being the
note of difference, between the true Children of the Church, and those who were
either unbelievers or misbelievers. And, the Rule of Faith, as Tertullian calls
it; or, The Rule of Truth, as Irenaeus, (...) That unerring Rule of Truth which
we received in Baptism; (from whom Chrysostom and Austin borrowed the term
who opposed the Creed to the Placita of Heretics; and will have them examined
ad hujus amussim, by the line or Rule of the Creed) must be adequate to the
Faith or necessary Truth, whereof it is a Rule, niether larger, nor narrower;
for else, it loses the very nature of a Rule.

To this Truth the Fathers give in their Suffrages; I shall set down the
Testimonies of some, who were the most Ancient, and the most famous in their
Times.

1. The Creed is called Breve Evangelium, the Epitome or breviary of the
Gospel (like Homers Works enclosed in a nutshell) according to the saying of
S. Bartholomew, recorded by Dionys. Arear. lib, de mist. Theo. cap. 1.

2. Clem. Romanus, in his forecited Epistle, Ad Fratrem Domini, calls the Creed
Summun totius Fidei Catholicae, the Summary of the Catholic Faith: and farther
says, that in it Integritas credulitatis ostenditur, The entire, or whole
Faith of a Christian is declared.

3. Ignatius in his Epistle to the Magnesians, after he had reckoned up those
Heads of the Creed, which touched our Savior, concludes thus (...), He, who
fully knows, and believes these things, is Blessed, that is as fare as
concerns these Articles, or this part of the Faith, which relates to our
Savior; the same holds, in proportion of the rest; otherwise, not only a
right belief (although full, and entire,) but a good life also, are requisite
to happiness.

4. Irenaeus tells us, that many barbarous Nations, who had not the Books of
Scripture among them, yet, Sine Charactere, vel atramento, Scriptam habuerunt
per Spiritum sanctum in Cordibus suis salutem, Had Salvation wrote in their
Hearts by the Finger of the holy Ghost without the help of Pen, and Ink.
Where, by [ Salvation] he understands the Tradition of the Creed; (as appears
by the following words) so called by a Metonymie, because it is a means, in
its kind, sufficient to Salvation. Thus he, lib. 3. cap. 4. The same Father
elsewhere gives this testimony of the fullness of the Creed, (...) That is,
Neither the most able Orator amongst the Pastors of the Church, can say more
than this (for no man is above his Teacher or Master) neither he who is weak
in speech, can distinguish (or, speak less than) this Tradition; for there
being one and the same Faith neither he who is able to speak much of it, has
augmented it; nor he who is able to say little, has lessened it at all.

5. Origin, in the preface of his Books (...) says that the Holy Apostles
Preaching the Faith of Christ, De quibusdam quidem etc. Concerning some Points,
most plainly delivered unto all Believers, even the most dull and slow,
whatsoever they judged necessary. where by Necessaries, he understandes the
Articles of the Creed, which he there reckons up.

6. Cyril of Jerusalem, in his fifth Catechesis, speaking of the Creed uses
these words, (...), we comprehend, says he, the whole Doctrine of Faith in a
few versicles. And afterward, comparing it unto a small grain of
mustard seed, which virtually, contains many Branches, (...), says he, (...),
so also does this Creed, in a few words, comprehend the whole doctrine of
Religion, which is delivered in the old and new Testament.

7. Eusebius Galicanus (commonly called Emesenus) in the beginning of his second
Homily on the Greed has these words Hanc nobis fidem, velut magnam lampadem,
Christus adveniens, errantibus viam monstraturus exhibuit, per quem possit Deus
ignotus requiri, quaesitus credi, creditus inveniri. This Faith or Creed says
he, like some great Lamp, Christ exhibited for his coming, thus showing the
way to those in error; By help whereof, God, who was before unknown, might be
sought, being sought might be believed on, being believed on, might be found.

The same Father, in his first Homily, derives the name Symbolum, from Caena
collatitia; and then tells us, that De utroque Testamento, totius Corporis
virtus in paucas est diffusa sententias, ut facilius animae Thesaurus, non in
Arca sed in memoria portaretur, The quintessence of the whole Body of Scripture
is extracted into a few Sentences, that so this precious Treasure of the Soul
might be the more easily borne, not in a Chest but in the Conscience.

After this, he brings two similies to the same purpose; comparing the Creed to
a picture, wherein are united all the several Graces of the choicest Beauties:
and, to a Rich Man journying, who puts all his wealth into a few Jewels, which
are easily portable.

8. S. Austin, in his 181 Sermon De Tempore, gives this Elogy of the Creed;
Symbolum breve est verbis, sed magnum est Sacramentis; quicquid enim
praefiguratum est in Scripturis, quiquid praedictum est in Prophetis vel de Deo
ingenito, vel ex Deo in Deum nato, vel de spiritu Sancto, vel de suscipiendo
omni Sacramento, vel de morte Domini, resurrectonisque ejus mysterio, totum
breviter hoc Symbolum continet. That is, The Creed is little for words, but
large in mysteries; for what soever was prefigured in the Patriarchs,
proclaimed in Scripture, foretold in the Prophets, either concerning God the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, or of undertaking the mysterious work of our
Salvation, or concerning the Death, and resurrection of the Lord, this Creed
does contain in brief.

9. Leo the Great, in his 13th Epistle, written to the Empress Pulcheria,
calls the Creed (as is fore-alleadged) The short, and Perfect Confession of the
Catholic Symbol distinctly marked forth by the twelve Apostles into so many
sentences, Tanquam instructa sit munitione Caelesti ut omnes haereticorum
opiniones solo ipsius possint gladio detruncari, cujus plenitudinem si Eutiches
etc. As completely furnished with celestial armor, so that the the Heads of
all heretical opinions may be cut off by its sword alone; the Fullness whereof
if Eutiches etc.

10. Cassianus, in his sixth Book of the Incarnation of our Lord, speaks fully
to this purpose; Quicquid per universum etc. whatsoever is largly diffused
throughout the whole Body of the Scriptures, is all summed up in the perfect
breviary of the Creed. The place we have cited more at large; chap. 5.

11. Venantius Fortunatus, in the preface to his explication of the Creed,
begins thus Fidei Catholicae totius summam recensentes, in qua integritas
Credulitatis ostenditur, and unius Dei omnipotentis, id est, Sanctae Trinitatis
aequalitas declaratur, and mysterium Incarnationis Filii Dei etc. That is,
Whilst we declare the sum of the whole Catholic Faith, wherein the entire
belief of a Christian is set forth, with the equality of one Almighty God,
that is, of the Holy Trinity, and the mystery of the incarnation of the Son
of God etc. where he uses the very words of Clemens Romans Which we forecited.
Then he concludes, Cunctis credentibus quae continentur in Symbolo, salus
animarum and vitae perpetua bonis actibus praepareiur; Let all those who
believe the Things contained in the Creed, provide, by good works, for the
salvation of their Souls, and life everlasting: that Creed being sufficient
for matter of belief, as good works are, for matter of practice.

12. I shall conclude these Testimonies of the Ancients, with these words of
Erasmus lib. de Rat. verae Theolog. -- Vtinam nostra credulitas Symbolo esset
contenta; ubi caepit esse minus Fidei inter Christianos, mox increvit
Symbolorum and modus and numerus. Would to God, says he, our Belief had been
contented with the Creed; when there began to be less Faith amongst
Christians, the Creeds straitwaies increased both in bulk, and number.

For the farther clearing of this Truth, I shall add to the Authority of the
Ancients, the Testimonies of some noted Doctors in the Roman Church, who make
the Apostles Creed the Breviary of the Faith; and the note, or sign to
distinguish the Orthodox Professors from Heretics, as well as Infidells: and
so, by a necessary consequence, free the Reformed Churches from the injurious
imputation of Heresy, seeing they all unanimously receive the Creed, in the old
Primitive sense, as it was expounded and enlarged by the four first general
Counsels.

1. Aquinas 2a. 2ae. qu. 1. Art. 9. speaking of the Apostles Creed, uses these
words; Necessarium fuit, fidei veritatem in unum colligi, ut facilius posset
omnibus proponi, ne aliquis per ignorantiam fidei a veritate deficeret; Et ab
hujusmodi sententiarum fidei collectione, nomen Symboli est acceptum. It was
necessary, says he, for the Points of the true Faith, to be drawn into one
(from which Collection of Sentences it took the name of Symbolum) that so they
might the more easily be presented to all; and for this end, least any one
should depart from it through ignorance. Whence it will follow, that all
necessary points of Faith are therein contained, for if any were wanting; there
were room left for ignorance.

2. Canisius, in his Catechism, makes this Question; Estne brevis aliqua
fidei complexio, ac summa omnium nobis credendorum? Is there any short summary
of the faith, and collection of all Points to be believed? He answers; Est
illa, quam 12 Apostoli suo Symbolo tradiderunt -- quod quidem Symbolum, velut
illustris not a est, qua Christiani ab Impiis, qui vel nullam, vel non rectam
Christi fidem profitentur, discernendi ac internoscendi sunt. There is, namely,
That which the Twelve Apostles have delivered in their Creed -- which Creed is
a famous mark or sign, whereby Christians are to be discerned from those
ungodly persons, who either profess no faith, or not the Right.

3. Augerius, in his Catechism, proposes the like question: Estne brevis
aliqua methodus fidei, quae necessario nobis tenenda est? Is there any short
method or rule of Faith, which is necessary to be held by us? He answers; Est,
and quidem ab ipsis Apostolis tradita, quae Symbolum ideo vocari solet, quod
sit quaedam Illustris notae, qua Christianos distinguimus ab iis, qui
Idololatrarum superstitionem, and haereticorum impiotatem comitantur. There is
such an one, and that delivered by the Apostles themselves, which is therefore
commonly called a Symbol, because it is a certain mark of note, whereby we
distinguish Christians from those who follow the superstition of Idolaters, and
the impiety of Heretics.

4. The Roman Catechism, set forth by the Decree of the Council of Trent,
and of Pius 5. has these words touching the Creed; Hanc fidei formulam,
Symbolum Apostoli appellarunt, quia ea veluti nota and tessera quadam
uterentur, qua desertos and subintroductos falsos fratres, qui evangelium
adulterabant, ab iis qui vere Christi militiae sacramento se obligarent, facile
possent internoscere. That is, This form of Belief the Apostles called a
Symbol, because they made use of it, as a certain Token or watch word, whereby
they might easily discern false Brethren, who had privily crept into the
Church, and corrupted the Gospel, from those who sincerely bound themselves by
Oath (in Baptism) to the service of Christ.

5. A Catechism, taken out of the Works of Costerus Pet. de Soto, and others;
set forth by the command of the Archbishop of Triers; respons. ad 2am qu.
says thus, Haeretici quosdam Articulos, vel penitus negant, vel
interpretationibus depravatis in novas, alienasque. Sententias detorquent;
neque ulla unquam, extitit haeresis, quae non hoc Symbolo damnari potuerit.
That is, The Heretics do either wholly deny some Articles of the Creed, or by
their corrupt interpretations wrest them into new, and strange senses; neither,
did there ever arise any Heresy, which might not be condemned by this Creed of
the Apostles.

Now, how the Church of Rome, which gives this Testimony of the fullness of the
Creed for the Rule of Faith, and makes it the Distinctive mark, whereby to
know her true, genuine Children, from the Bastardy of Heretics, can justly
add many other Articles to it, (as Pius 4. does, in his Bull De professione
fidei) to be believed as necessary to Salvation; and for the not receiving of
them, as undoubtedly Catholic, necessary Truths, together with the Apostolic
Articles, condemn the Reformed Churches of Heresy; I can see no shadow of
Reason; except she include these her Dictates in the body of the ninth Article,
and so enforce them upon us, by virtue of the Apostles pretended Authority,
interpreting the Article thus, I believe the Holy Catholic Church, That is, I
believe whatsoever the Church of Rome, usurping the Title of Catholic,
requires of me to be believed. But this Interpretation will be found obnoxious
to a double Error.

First, Because she beggs the maine thing in question, namely, That she is the
Catholic Church; whereas, she is but a member thereof, and that a very
diseased one.

Secondly, Because the sense of the word [ Credo] I believe, must in all reason
be taken in the same sense here, as it is in the following Articles, unto which
it is in like manner referred; viz. I believe, there is a Remission of Sins,
that there is to be a Resurrection of the Body, and Life everlasting. So here;
I believe there is an Holy Catholic Church; that is, That the Christian Church
is Holy, and Catholic or Universal: Holy, for Doctrine, and Manners; and
universal for Place, not tied to Greece, or Rome, or Geneva, but generally
diffused throughout the whole world.

To conclude this Point; I shall add some concurrent Testimonies of the
Protestant Divines, whose agreeing in this with the Church of Rome, though much
differing in others, shows the Power and cleerenesse of this Truth, which
extorts a Confession from all Mouths; and withal, may serve to stop the
violence of some zealous Reformatists, who even Reprobate all those that go
not along with them in every newbroached Doctrine, and in the Resolution of
each Theological Controversy. These Divines shall be six.

1. Luther in his larger Catechism, after he has set down the Creed, the
Commandments, and the Lords Prayer; he subjoynes, In hisce tribus partibus,
summatim ac nuditer, and (quoad ejus fieri potuit) simplicissime comprehensa
sunt omnia, quicquid passim in sacris literis long, lateque tractamus. That
is, In these Three are summarily, and plainly comprehended, whatsoever Things
are handled at large in the holy Scriptures. The Creed being the Breviary of
the whole Scripture, for matter of Faith; as the ten Commandments are, for
matter of of Practice; and, the Lords Prayer, for our Petitions. Each perfect
in its kind.

2. Selneccerus, in his Paedag. Christiana, says, Certum est in hoc Symbolo
[Apostolorum] contineri omnia Capita totius Christianae Religionis, recte,
perspicue, and ordine. That is, It is certain, that in this Creed of the
Apostles, are contained all the Heads of Christian Religion, rightly, clearly,
and methodically.

3. Joan: Gerardu^, a late Learned, and Moderate Lutherane, in the Epistle
Dedicatory to his second Tome of Common Places, speaks thus of the Creed,
Quotquot Doctrinae Christianae etc. Whatsoever Collections or Systems of
Christian Doctrine; which Saint Luke calls Catechises. Luke 1. 4. Act. 18. 25.
Saint Paul, The form of sound words. 2 Timothy 1. 13. The Epistle to the
Hebrews, The first Principles of the Oracles of God. chap. 5. 12. and, the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ. cha. 6. 1. Clemens of Alexandria, (...),
rude Draughts. Origin Principles, (...). Dionysius of Alexandria, Elements of
Divinity, (...). Eusebius, lib. 3. cap. 3. (...), A breviary of the Elements of
Religion, Nazianzen, Theology. Theophilus, and Lactantius, Institutions. The
most at this day, call them Common Places. Whatsoever Collections, I say, in
this kind, of Christian Doctrine, have been written and set forth by diverse
Authority, from the most ancient times of the Primitive Church, the first
lineaments (as it were) and chief Heads of them, are set forth in the Apostles
Creed.

This Rule of Faith set down by Irenaeus and Tertullian, and styled an
Apostolical Tradition, if any one compare with the words of the Apostles
Creed, he will easily find a great agreement between them -- sometimes, the
Apostles Creed; sometimes the Scripture, it self, is called the Rule of Faith
by the Ancients; namely, by reason of the exact harmony or concord between
both, which looks on the holy Scripture, as the fountain, and the Creed as a
stream thence derived. As in Ages past, when new Disputes ever and anon arose,
the Fathers who succeeded the Apostles, were enforced to set forth larger and
more express summaries of the Apostolic Doctrine; partly to unfold it more
fully, partly to vindicate it from corrupt Glosses: So also, in this latter Age
of ours, wherein the minds of many are very far withdrawn from the
Apostolic simplicity by the subtilty of Satan, the shortness of the Creed is
to be explained more at large out of the fullness of Scripture, and thereby
fortified against the corruptions of Heretics; that so we may faithfully
preserve in our own persons, and deliver over to Posterity, the sacred
Depositum of the Christian Faith. Thus for Jo. Gerardus.

4. Calvin. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 16.. 18. Of this we are undoubtedly assured,
says he, Totam in eo [Symbolo Apostolorum] fidei nostrae historiam, succincte,
destincteque recenseri; That the whole History, or subject of our Belief, is
contained in the Apostles Creed briefly and orderly.

5. Beza, on Romans 12. 6. the place before cited, tells us, That the Apostles
Creed was composed, at the very beginning of the Gospels Preaching, veluti.
Evangelii Epitome, as a Compendium, or short summary of the Gospel; and
therefore was deservedly called the Rule of Faith, by Tertullian.

6. Bullinger, in the Preface to his Decads, tells us, That the General
Counsels, in setting forth their Creeds, changed nothing in the Doctrine of
the Apostles, neque quicquam novi adjectum, neither added any thing thereto;
therefore they judged that Doctrine full and complete. Now, that by the
Doctrine of the Apostles, he means the Creed, appears clearly by the precedent
words.

The forecited Testimonies of Jo. Pappus, Chr. Barbarossa, and Pet. Martyr, say
as much; which, who so please, may look back upon, for farther satisfaction.

CAP X.
The Third head of this Discourse; namely, The several Reasons, or
significations of the name (...), which the Creed bears in the Original
Greek.

THE Apostles Creed is styled (...), a Symbol, for more Reasons than one, all
taken from the several Significations of the word, found even in profane
Authors.

First; (...) (as well as (...)) signifies Collecta, or Collatio, (...), a
conferendo: that is, a Feast, or Supper, whereto every one of the Guests
brought his share either in meat or money; which kind of Feast was also, by an
other usual name called (...). Now this acception of the word, well suits with
the Creed, as having reference both to the Makers and the Matter. For the
makers or Composers of the Creed were the twelve Apostles, parallel in number
to the twelve Articles whereof it consists, And, the matter of the Creed
consists of the several points of Faith, gathered out of the whole Scripture
and hear United in one methodicall (...), or Breviary.

This also well consorts with an other signification of the word, mentioned by
Pliny. Not. Hist. lib. 33. cap. 1. Both Greeks and Romans (says he) in
latter Times, called a Ring, Symbolum. Probably, from the several parcels, or
grains of Gold, melted and fashioned into one Orbic^e: which grains aptly
signify the several Parts; and, the orbicular figure, the Perfection of the
Creed.

This reason of the name, we find given by Clemens Romanus, Ruffinus, Saint
Austin, Cassianus, and Venantius Fortunatus.

Secondly; The word signifies Tessera Pacti, a Tally in Contracts; a Bond, or
Indenture, such as we make with God in our Baptism, by profession of our Faith
in the Creed, wherein the Articles of our Covenant with God (for matter of
Belief) are comprised, from which if we recede, we break our Covenant, and so
renounce our Christendom, thereby forfeiting all the privileges of our
Baptism.

This reason of the name is rendered by Chrysologus, Hom. 62. in Symb. Placitum,
vel pactum quod lucri spes venientis continet, vel futuri, Symbolum nuncupari,
contractu etiam docemur humano; quod tamen Symbolum inter duos format semper
geminata conscriptio, and in stipulatione cautum reddit humana cautela, ne cui
surrepat, ne quem decipiat perfidia contractibus semper inimica. Sed hoc inter
homines, inter quos fraus, a quo facta est, aut cui facta est, semper laedit:
inter Deum vero, and homines, Symbolum fidei sola fide firmatur; non literae,
sed spiritui creditur; and mandatur cordi, non chartae; quia divinum Creditum
humana non indiget Cautione. And alittle after; Sed dicis; qui falli non potest
quid est quod exiget Placitum? Quid Symbolum quaerit? quaerat ille propter te,
non propter se; non quia ille dubitat, sed ut tu Credas. The sum is; That in
humane Contracts there are required two Symbola or Tabellae, the Indenture and
the Counterpane, and both these in writing to prevent mistakes, and cheatings:
but one only is required in our Baptismall contract, or Covenant, to wit, our
Bond given to God, not in writing, but by way of parole, published in the face
of the Church. The reason is; because God can be neither decieved, nor decieve;
but we, unless thus bound, might through humane frailty, more easily depart
from the Faith professed, and in fringe our Articles, not to the decieving of
God, (who knows us better than our selves) but to the destroying of our Grace,
and the forfeiting of our glory.

Hitherto also belongs that of Genebrard in his Book De Trinitate. Aristoteles
pulchre dixit, elementa quae inter se qualitate una communicant, (...).
Solebant autem Graeci in pactis conventis uti quibusdam tesseris, quae loco
tabularum syngrapharumque essent, ex quibus jus diceretur, quae and vocarentur
Symbola. ergo summa fidei compendio verborum concepta ab Apostolis, sive ab
Ecclesia representativa, vere Existit Symbolum, quod ea in judicium Ecclesiae
relata declaret penes eum Religionis virtutem esse, qui ipsa in suae fidei
Probationem confert; nam certe penes illum consistit Religionis veritas, cui
been credulitate convenit cum doctrina Apostolica, cujus Symbolum est
consensionis, conventique nota certissima.

Thirdly; The word signifies, Tessera Amicitiae, or Tessera hospitalis, a
certain Token, which not only particular men gave to their Friends and Allies,
but which Cities also publikly be stowed on some welldeserving men, that so,
in their Travailes, they might (upon producing thereof) be friendly received,
and courteously entertained in the confederate Towns. So Budaeus informs us
out of Lysias the Orator. Now, this Confession of our Faith in the Creed, has
the same nature and use among all Churches wheresoever dispersed over the face
of the whole Earth; for whosoever brings this Tessera, or Token with him is to
be received as a Brother -- But if there come any unto you says St John, and
bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your House, neither bid him, God
speed. 2 Io. 10.

To this Sense alludes Leo the Great, in his Epistle or Tract against Eutyches
Fraterna vos and paterna solicitudine commonemus, ut inimicos Catholicae fidei,
hosts Ecclesiae, incarnationis dominicae negatores, and instituto a Sanctis
Apostolis Symbolo repugnantes, in nullum recipiatis consensionis affectum, we
warn you out of a fraternall, and a fatherly care, that ye receive not into
your communion the enemies of the Catholic Faith the adversaries of the
Church, the Denyers of the Lords incarnation and the oppugners of the Creed by
the holy Apostles.

Fourthly; The word signifies Insigne militare, a military Flag, Ensign, or
Banner, by which Soldiers are known to what Captain or General they belong.
So Herodian in the 4th book of his history tells us of the Emperor Antonius
Caracalla; that partly to ingratiate himself the more with the Soldiers;
partly, to harden himself in warlike exercises, (...), He sometimes bare on
his own shoulders the weightiest Ensigns of the Army. Now, this signification
also well agrees to the Creed; for by this Profession of our Faith, we show
that we belong to Christ our General, fighting under his Banner against our
three enemies, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil: His Cognizance we take on
us in our Baptism, by attesting to the Creed; either in our own Persons, if
Adulti: or, if Infants, in Personis Susceptorum.

Fifthly; The word signifies Tessera militaris, a watchword, whereby Soldiers
of the same Army, or Camp know one an other, and discern themselves from the
Enemy. Which signification, among all the Rest, seems most proper to the
Creed, because by this profession of the Faith, Christians are distinguished,
not only from Jews, Turks, and Infidels, but, more especially from Heretics,
those Renegados, and Deserters of the Christian Faith. For, as watch-wordes are
most necessary in civil wars, where the Difference is between the same
Countrymen, who use the same Language, apparel, arms, and manner of fighting;
these being the only signs and tokens, whereby they may try those whom they
suspect; and discover whether they be true friends or concealed Enemies: so
Heretics profess Christ in outward show and take his name upon them; but do
not truly Preach him, secundum Apostolicas Regulas, non integris Traditionum
lineis nunciantes (to use the words of Ruffinus) what out of Pride, Curiosity,
or discontent; what for gain, or Belly, they frame new Doctrines of their
own, some besides, some against the Foundation; which they obtrude upon the
Faith of others. Now, the watch word to discover these false Apostles, these
Deceitful workers, who transformed themselves into the Apostles of Christ 2
Cor. 11. 13. Was (anciently) the Creed. If, upon examination, they embraced
this in the old Catholic sense, they were received as Brethren: if not they
were rejected and avovded as spies, false Brethren, Corrupters of the Faith.

The Heathens also had the like Custom, to give for their wathwords, the names
of their Gods, their suposed Deityes, as (...), Minerva and the like. what
fitter watchword then for a Christian, than the profession of his Faith in the
true God, the thrise-holy Trinity, which he makes in the Creed.

And this may be therefore judged the most proper in this Place, and most
likely to be intended by the first entitlers; because the Ancient Church of
God, following his Pattern in holy Scripture, uses many other the like
military Terms, and seems to delight in the metaphor. The Church her self is
described, Terrible as an Army with Banners. Cant. 6. 4. Our Blessed Savior is
styled, (...), The chief Captain or General of our Salvation Heb. 2. 10. And
S. Paul exhorts Timothy whom he had left his Lieutenant at Ephesus to endure
hardness, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. 2 Timothy 2. 3. In opposition to
which (that I may give this note by the way) the heathen Soldiers under the
Christian Emperors got the name of Pagani; because, when they refused to
renounce their Idolatry, and so become Christians, they were dimissi in Pagos,
cashiered, and sent into the Villages, and so returned unto their country Life.
To proceed; our Christian Virtues, or graces, are styled (...), the Complete
Armor of God. Ephesians. 6. 11. 13. The particulars whereof are there described. The
grand mysteries of our Salvation have the name of Sacraments given them; now,
Sacramentum properly signifies that Oath of obedience which Soldiers took unto
their General. lastly; that part of the Church, which here on Earth, is styled
Millitant: that in Heaven, Triumphant. Suitably then, does the Creed wear the
name of Symbolum, a watchword. The Reason of the name we find given by Clemens
Romanus, Ruffinus, Maximus Taurinensis, and Isidore Bishop of Sevil.

CAP XI
The fourth Head of this Discourse; namely, The Division or Parts of the Creed.

THE Apostles Creed has a double Division, among Divines, to wit, A greater,
and a less. The one distributes into four general Parts: The other
Anatomizeth it into twelve Articles, limbs, or joints (for this is the
literal signification of the word Articulus) which make up the entire Body of
Christian Faith.

As to the first Division. The four general Parts of the Creed, have for
their Object, God and man, viz. The three Persons of the sacred Trinity, and
the Church; instructing us what we should believe of either.

1. The first part is touching God the Father; and consists but of one Article.

2. The second Part, is touching God the Son; and comprehends six Articles.

3. The third part, is touching God the holy Ghost; and consists but of one
Article, as the first did.

4. The fourth Part is concerning the Church and a threefold benefit conferd by
God upon it answerable in number to the Persons of the sacred Trinity; viz. The
Remission of sins by the Father Ephesians. 4. 32. Resurrection of the Body by the
Son Io. 6. 39. Mat. 24. 31. everlasting Life by the holy Ghost, the Spirit of
life, and Glory. Gal. 6. 8. Rev. 11. 11. Pet. 4. 14.

Then for the Second division. The Creed brancheth it self into twelve
Articles, usually referred to the twelve Apostles in several, but however
answerable to their number. The Articles we have already distinctly set down
and compared them with six other succeeding Creeds.

These twelve Articles are compared by some to the twelve Stones, which Joshua
in his passage over to Jericho, took out of the midst of Jordan to frame an
Altar within Gilgal, in memory of having gotten possesion of the promised land.
For the holy Scriptures, wherout these Articles of our Belief are taken, are
the true waters of life, a spiritual Jordan. The river it self was sanctified
by the the very Person of our Savior, when he descended into it at his
Baptism, in which solemnity all his Disciples have since made a Public
profession of their Faith by attesting to the Creed, The twelve Articles
thereof, compiled into one Body, well resemble those twelve Stones framed into
an Altar, and that Altar erected, in memory of the Promises now obtained, the
heavenly Canaan typifyed by the earthly; for the Creed conteines the great
benefits of God toward his Church, heretofore possessed in shadow, but now in
substance, by virtue of our Blessed Saviors Purchase, who was the Antitipe of
Joshua, In whom the promises of God are yea, and Amen. 2 Cor. 1. 20.

But, by others, they are more appositely compared to the twelve
foundation-stones, mentioned in Reve. 21. 14. Which are there said to support
the wall of the new Jerusalem and wherein, as it is there expressly set down,
the Names the twelve Apostles of the Lamb were written. This new Jerusalem is
Christ's Church on Earth, for it is there styled The Tabernacle of God with men.
ver. 3. The wall of this City, is the Faith or professed doctrine of the
Church, whereby it is guarded against her enemies, and separated from all other
Religions. And the twelve Stones in the foundation of this wall are the twelve
Articles of the Creed, which be the Grounds of our Faith, the Fundamentalls of
Christian Religion.

To the same sense, and purpose S. Paul compares the Church to an holy Temple
built upon the foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself
being the chief Corner Stone Ephesians. 2. 20, 21. Now, this foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, cannot be understood of their Persons (for they are dead
long ago) but of the maine Grounds of their Doctrine, which are continued, by
their successors, in the Church, unto the worlds end.

CAP XII.
The fifth Head of this Discourse, touched in General viz. the Supplementall,
or, exegeticall Creeds, framed in Succeeding Ages. The Grounds whereon they
were framed, and their use. Some Copies of Creeds set down, as well of the
Heretics as the Orthodoxe; both consonant to this of the Apostles.

THIS Creed of the Apostles was in it self, a Complete Rule of Faith,
sufficient to establish the Church in her Belief; but, in process of time,
certain Heretics arose, who perverted the anciently received Faith in the old
Catholck sense and meaning thereof yet in outward show, and Profession
subscribed to the words. Such were those Arch-hereticks Arius, Macedonius,
Nestorius, Eutyches, against whom the four first general Councels were called.

Now, to detect, and convince these close, subtle Heretics, the Church was
enforced to Frame some other Creedes or Symboles. Nihil mirum videri debet
(says S. Hilary) quod tam frequenter fides exponi caeptae sint; necessitatem
hanc nobis furor haereticus imponit; that is, It is not to be marvelled that
the Creed has been so often explained in several Forms of Confession; the
fury of heretics has forced us to it.

New Creedes then these were, not for the Sense, but only for the Frame and
Composure; they being naught else but Paraphrases or expositions of the old;
especially in those two maine Points of the Trinity, and Incarnation, which
were then (and I could wish, they were not by some now) chiefly oppugned; the
Devils malice, and man's curiosity, concurring together: the Devils malice; as
being Points of the higest concernement: and man's curiosity; as farthest
removed out of the Reach of our natural Capacity, and beyond the ken of human
Reason.

Now, that we may, and how far we may lawfully thus explain the Christian
Faith, and enlarge the Doctrinals of Christianity, let us hear Vincentius
Lirinensis, who thus expresses it with a like elegancy and Solidity. Forsitan
dicet aliquis; nullusne in ecclesia Christi profectus habebitur Religionis?
Habeatur sane, and maximus; sed ita tamen, ut vere Profectus sit ille fidei,
non permutatio. Crescat, oportet; sed in suo duntaxat genere crescat; in eodem
sc. Dogmate, eodem sensu, eademque Sententia; Imitetur Animarum Religio
rationem corporum, quae licet annorum processu numeros suos evoluant and
explicent, eadem tamen, quae crant, permanent. multum interest inter pueritiae
flore^, and senectutis maturitatem; iide^ tamen ipsi fiunt senes, qui fuerant
Adolescentes; ut quamvis unius, ejusdemque Hominis status habitusque mutetur,
una tamen nihilominus, eade^que natura; una, eade^que Persona sit. Parva
lactantium membra, magna juvenum, eadem ipsa sunt tamen. Quot parvulorum artus,
tot virorum; and siqua illa sunt quae aevi maturioris aetate pariuntur, jam in
seminis ratione proserta; ut nihil novum postea proferatur in senibus, quod non
in pueris jam antea latitaverat -- Quod sihumana species in aliquam deinceps
non sui generis vertatur effigiem, aut certe addatur quippiam membrorum numero,
vel detrahatur; necesse est, ut totum Corpus vel intercidat, vel prodigiosum
fiat, vel certe debilitetur. Ita etiam Christianae Religionis dogma sequatur
has, decet, profectuum leges, ut annis sc consolidetur, dilatetur tempore,
sublimetur aetate; incorruptum tamen, illibatumque permaneat; and universis
partium suarum mensuris, cunctisque quasi membris and sensibus propriis plenum
atque perfectum sit; quod nihil praeterea Permutationis admittat, nulla
proprietatis dispendia, nullam sustineat Definitionis varietatem.

The sum whereof is this. That there may and ought to be a proficiency in
Religion (the greater, the better) but it must be an increase, not a change.
Religion must proceed on, and grow, but in the same sense, Doctrine, and
substance; like our Bodies, which in process of Time, grow bigger, and yet
abide the same. There is much diference, between the flower of Youth and the
fading of Age, yet they are the same still. Their Bulk and stature, diverse;
but the same nature, and the same Person, as before The limbs of Children, are
little; of Men grown, large; yet, both the same: the Infant has as many
members, as the fulgrowen; neither appears there, ought new in the old, which
lay not hidden, and (as it were) enclosed in the young; so that riper Age does
but produce that to open view, which the seminall virtue concealed, and shut up
in a narrower room -- But, if in process of Time, the humane shape should be
changed into that of a diverse kind; if ought should be added to the just
number of Parts, or taken from it; the whole Body must of necessity perish,
grow prodigious, or (at least) insensibly Pine away. So, the Doctrine of
Christian Religion must observe these Rules of Growth, that in process of
years, it get strength, spread, and hieghten; yet still remain entire, and
unaltered in all its parts; nothing added, changed, or cut off. Thus he, in his
Commonitory against Heresies. Chapter. 28. and 29.

Now, amongst those Explicatory Creeds, which unfold and enlarge the Christian
Faith in the several Parts, or limbs thereof, the Nicene and Athanasian
Creeds are the two Principal, Framed both much about the same Time, generally
approved of by the Catholic Church in succeeding Ages, and jointly received
with that of the Apostles; particularly, by our Church of England.

But, before I come to treat of these two distinctly, in a double Appendix,
According to what I proposed in the beginning of my Discourse; I shall conclude
this Chapter, and, together with it, this whole Treatise Concerning the
Apostles Creed, in setting down some Ancient Forms, or Cenfessions of Faith
yet untouched, which the Reader may please to compare with it; and thereby
discern the variety of expression, but agreement in Sense, amongst other
Bishops and Churches of that Primitive Age, as yet unmentioned; which will
farther enlighten, and establish what has been already asserted. And, amongst
these, I shall Place some Confessions even of those Bishops, who favored Arius
and Macedonius, to show how near they came unto the Orthodoxe Forms, who
therein may serve to shame, and testify against the Blasphemies of some modern
sectaries.

The first of these in Dignity, as well as Time, is that of Gregorius
Thaumaturgus, afterward recited and approved of in the fifth General Council,
held at Constantinople.

The Creed, like his name, is well worthy our wonder; for, not only Nicephorus,
lib. hist. 6. cap, 17. But Gregory Nyssen also, in his Encomiastical, Oration
of Thaumaturgus, gives us this Relation of its Original, and Composure, That
the Blessed Virgin revealed it unto him; by the mouth of S. John, whereupon he
strait committed it to Paper, and left it to the Church, which has since kept,
and esteemed it as a sacred depositum, delivered her from Heaven. The occasion
of this Creed so revealed, was the Heresy of Paulus Samosatenus (taken up
afterward by Photinus) who denied the Divinity of our Savior, and
consequently overthrew the Trinity; which heresy then staggerd many in those
Eastern Parts, and was therefore condemned in a Synod at Antioch, whereof this
Paulus was Patriarch. The words thereof are these, viz. (...) (...). That is,
There is one God, the Father of the living word, of the subsisting wisdom, the
eternal Power, and Character; the perfect Father of him that is Perfect, the
Father of the only-begotten Son: There is one Lord, the only [Lord] from, or
of the only [Lord] God of God, the character and image of the [Fathers]
Divinity, the operative or effectual word, the wisdom which comprehends the
whole frame of the World, the Power which made the whole Creation; the True,
the Invisible, the Incorruptible, the Immortal, the Eternal Son, of the
True, Invisible, Incorruptible, Immortal, and Eternal Father: And, one Holy
Ghost, having his subsistence of (or, from) God, and by the Son clearly
manifested unto men, the perfect Image of the perfect Son, the quickening
life of the Living, that Holiness, which is the Author of Sanctification, by
whom God the Father is manifested, who is above all, and in all; and God the
Son, who is through all: The perfect Trinity, neither divided, nor
diversified from each other, in Glory, Eternity, or Majesty: There is not
therefore in the Trinity ought created, or subservient [to another Person] nor
ought superinduced, as not existing at first, but afterward added; so that the
Father was never without the Son, nor the Son without the Holy Ghost, but
the same Trinity [abideth] always, without the least change, or Alteration.

The Second Creed, is that Confession of Faith made by Eusebius Caesariensis
before the Fathers of the Nicene Council, and approved of by them, and, by the
Emperor Constantine it runs thus, (...), etc. We believe in one God the Father
Almighty, maker of all Things both visible and invisible: and, in one Lord
Jesus Christ, the Word of God, God of God, Light of Light, Life of Life, the
only begotten Son, the Firstborn of every Creature, begotten of the Father
before all Worlds, by whom all things were made; who was Incarnate for our
Salvation, and conversed amongst men, suffered, rose again the Third Day,
ascended unto the Father, and shall come again with Glory to judge both the
quick and the dead: We believe also in the Holy Ghost. See for this Creed. Soc.
Hist. lib. 1. cap. 5. Theod. lib. 1. cap. 12. Athan. Op. Tom. 2. Page 48. Edit.
Commelin.

The Nicene Fathers added some Passages to this Creed, for the fuller
conviction of the Arian Heresy, and thus proposed it to the Church, (...) etc.
We believe in one God the Father Almighty, maker of all Things both visible and
invisible: and, in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the onlybegotten of
his Father, begotten of the substance of his Father; God of God, Light of
Light, very God of very God, begotten not made, consubstantiall to the Father;
by whom all Things were made, both which are in Heaven, and which are in Earth;
who for us Men, and for our Salvation, came down, was Incarnate, made Man,
suffered, and rose again the third Day, he ascended into the Heavens, and shall
come to judge the quick, and the dead: And, in the Holy Ghost.

Both these Confessions, the lesser of Eusebius, and the larger of the
Council, leave off at the Article of the Holy Ghost, because the Arian
controversy, which was then in agitation, required no more; not that the
Ancient Creed brake off there: whence, the Arian Bishops, who assembled at
Antioch, Ao 341. When, they came, in the rehearsal of their Faith, to the
Article of the Holy Ghost, they added, (...), That is, If it be needful to
add so much, we believe also the Resurrection of the Dead, and the life
everlasting. See for this Soc. lib. 2. cap. 1. Athan. Tom. 7. page 687. Comm.

As for the Creed of Eusebius, which the Nicene Fathers thus enlarged, he
prefaceth it with this Elogy, which shows its Antiquity, and Authority, (...)
etc. As we have received from the Bishops our Predecessors, both in our first
Catechizing, and at our Baptism; as we have learned from the Holy Scriptures,
and as we have believed and taught, both when we were Presbyter, and when we
came to be Bishop, so also now believing, we propose this our Faith unto you.

The Third Creed, was framed in the Arian Synod at Antioch; for Eusebius Bishop
of Nicomedia, the great Patron of the Arians, being made Bishop of
Constantinople by the Emperor Constantius, calls a Council at Antioch; the
Bishops whereof, not daring openly to tax what had been decreed in the Nicene
Council, yet desiring to overthrow privily, the consubstantiality of the Son
with the Father, thus altered the form of the Nicene Creed, viz. (...), etc.
We Believe, consonantly to the Evangelicall, and Apostolical Tradition, in
one God the Father Almighty, Framer and Maker of all Things: and in one Lord
Jesus Christ, his only-begotten Son, God, by whom all things were made,
begotten of his Father before all worlds, God of God, entire of the entire,
only of the only, perfect of the perfect [God] king of the king, Lord of the
Lord; the living Word the Wisdom, the Life, the true Light, the way of Truth,
the Resurrection, the Shepherd, the Door, Immutable and unalterable, the
unchangeable Image of the Divine essence, Power, Council, and Glory of the
Father; the firstborn of every creture; who was in the beginning with the
Father, God the word (as it is said in the Gospel, and, the Word was God, by
whom all things were made, and in whom all things consist) who in these last
days came down from above, was borne of a Virgin, according to the
Scriptures, and made man; the mediator of God, and men, the Apostle of our
Faith, and Author (or Prince) of life; (as he says, I came down from Heaven,
not to do mine own will but the will of him that sent me) who suffered for
us, and arose for us the third Day, and ascended into the Heavens, and sits
at the right hand of the Father, and shall come again with glory, and Power,
for to Judge the Quick and the Dead: and, in the holy Ghost, who was given for
the Comfort, the Sanctification, and Perfecting of Believers; acording as our
Lord Jesus Christ Charged his Apostles, saying, Go, and Teach all Nations,
Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost. It is manifest, that the Father, is Truly [or, really] the Father; the
Son, truly the Son; and the Holy Ghost, truly the Holy Ghost; the names,
not being barely, or in vain imposed, but exactly signifying the proper
subsistence, order, and Dignity of each Person so named; so that they are Three
in the manner of Subsistence, but one in the Consent. Socr. Hist. lib. 2. cap.
7.

The Fourth was Framed on this occasion. Certain Bishops being sent by
Constantius to his Brother Emperor of the West, for to give an account of the
Casting out of Paulus, and Athanasius, concealed the precedent Formula of
Belief made at Antioch, and exhibited this other of their own composure viz.
(...) etc. We believe in one God the Father Almighty, Creator and maker of all
Things, of whom the whole Family in Heaven, and Earth is named: and in his
only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, begotten of the Father before all
Worlds, God of God, Light of Light, by whom all things were made, both in the
Heavens and in the Earth, whether Visible or Invisible; who is the Word, and
the Wisdom, and the Power, and the Life, and the true Light: who in these last
Days, was for our sakes made Man, and Borne of the holy Virgin: was Crucified,
Dead, and Buried; and rose again the third Day from the Dead: he ascended into
the Heavens, and sits on the right hand of the Father; and, shall come at
the end of the World to Judge the Quick and the Dead, and to render unto every
one according to his works; Whose Kingdom never ceasing, endures unto all
eternity; for he sits at the right Hand of God, not only in this world, but
also in that which is to come: We believe also in the holy Ghost, that is, in
the Comforter, whom according to his Promise, he sent to his Apostles, after
his ascent into Heaven, to teach them, and bring all things to their
remembrance; by whom also the Souls of those who syncerely believe in him are
Sanctified. But those who say the Son was made of nothing, or of any other
Substance, and was not of God; and that there was a Time, when he was not; the
Catholic Church does not acknowledge them for her own. Socr. hist. lib. 2.
cap. 14.

The Fifth Creed, is that which was rehearsed by Vrsacius and Valens, two Arian
Bishops, in the Synod of Ariminum, and had bin not long before Composed by the
Bishops of that Faction in the Synod of Sirmium. The Form is this which
follows. We believe in one only and true God, the Father Almighty, Creator and
Framer of all things: and in one only-begotten Son of God, begottten before
all Worlds, before all Beginning, before all imaginable Time, which we can
possibly conceive or comprehend, begotten of God without sense or passion; by
whom the Worlds [or Ages] were set in order, and all things were made; the only
Son of his Father, God of God like unto the Father who begat him (according to
the Scriptures) whose Generation no one knows but the Father who begat him:
This only-begotten Son of his (we know) came from Heaven, for the puttting
away of sin by the will of his Father; was borne of the Virgin Mary,
conversed with his Disciples, fulfilled every Part of his office according to
the will and Council of his Father; was crucified, suffered, and Dyed;
descended into the lower Parts of the Earth, and ordered all things there, the
Porters of Hell Trembling at his sight: he rose again the Third Day, Conversed
with his Disciples, and after forty Days was taken up into Heaven, and sits
at the right hand of the Father; and shall come at the last Day in the Glory of
his Father, to render unto every one according to his works: And, in the holy
Ghost, whom the same only-begotten Son of God, Jesus Christ, promised to send
unto mankind, the Comforter; (according as it is written; I depart unto my
Father, and I will beseech the Father, and he shall send you another Comforter,
the Spirit of truth, he shall receive of mine, and shall teach you, and bring
all things to your remembrance) As for the word [(...)] essence, because it
being set down by the Fathers without explication, and not understood by the
People, gives cause of offense, and because the Scriptures have no such word,
we have thought good to take it away and to make no mention at all hereafter of
it, when we speak of God, because the holy Scriptures mention not at all the
essence of the holy Ghost, or the Son: but we say that the Son is like unto
the Father in all Things as the holy Scriptures say and Teach. Soc. lib. 2.
cap. 29.

The sixth Confession of Faith, is that new Formula which Acacius Bishop of
Caesarea in Palestine, one of the Arian Party; proposed in the Synod of
Seleucia, by Leo a great officer in the Emperors Court. The Form was this.
(...) etc. We profess, and believe in one God the Father, Almighty, maker of
Heaven and Earth, of things Visible and Invisible: we believe also in our Lord
Jesus Christ his Son, begotten of him without Sense or Passion, before all
worlds, God the Word, the only-begotten of God, the light, the life, the Truth,
the Wisdom, by whom all Things were made, both which are in Heaven, and which
are on Earth, whether visible or invisible: we believe, that in the latter Age
of the World, he took flesh of the holy Virgin Mary, for the putting away of
sin, was made man, suffered for our sins, rose again, was taken up into
Heaven, sitteh at the right hand of the Father, and shall come again in Glory
to judge the Quick and the Dead: we believe also in the holy Ghost, whom our
Lord and Savior called the Comforter, when he promised to send him to his
Disciples after his departure, and accordingly sent him; by whom also he
sanctifyeth those in the Church who believe, and are Baptized in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Those who Preach any other
Faith than this, we Judge them aliens from the Catholic Church. See for this,
Socr. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 32.

The Seventh Confession of Faith, is that of the Macedonians, exhibited by them
to Liberius Bishop of Rome, when they fled to him, and the Emperor Valentinian
for succor, from the Persecution of his Brother Valens, and the Arian Bishop
Eudoxius. The Form was this. We believe in one God, the Father, Almighty,
maker of all things visible and invisible: and, in one only-begotten God, the
Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, begotten of the Father, that is, of the
Substance of the Father; God of God, light of light, very God of very God,
begotten, not made, consubstantiall to the Father; by whom all Things were
made, both which are in Heaven, and which are on Earth: who for us men and for
our Salvation, came down, was incarnate, and made man, suffered, and rose
again the third Day; he ascended into the Heavens; and shall come to Judge the
Quick, and the Dead: And, in the holy Ghost. But those who say, of the Son of
God, that there was a Time when he was not, a Time before he was begotten, and
that he was made of nothing, or had any other Essence or Substance than that of
his Father, or that he is obnoxious to change or Alteration; such as these the
Catholic and Apostolic Church of God does Anathematize. Socr. lib, 4. cap. 11.

THE FIRST APPENDIX Concerning the CREED of Athanasius.
CAP. I.
Two Reasons, why this Creed has been more oppugned, than the Rest. Its
Authority, and Author are vindicated, in general; more especially, touching
the severity of the Preface.

AMongst all the Creeds, this of Athanasius has met with most opposition;
First, because it has most resolutely and strictly oppugned the Ancient, and
Modern Heresies, about those great Points of the Trinity and Incarnation; for,
whereas other Creeds proceed by way of simple Confession, Narration, or
Exposition of the Faith, I Believe etc. This runs in an higher style, more
directly repugnant to the corrupters of the Christian Faith -- Whosoever will
be saved, must believe etc. Both in the Beginning, and the close, requiring an
absolute Assent upon pain of Damnation, and tacitly anathematizing all the
Adversaries of the Faith. So that, we may compare the Apostles Creed to a
Foundation; the Nicene, and other Exegeticall Creeds, that followed, unto a
Superstructure: but this of Athanasius, to a Bulwark, or Defensive work,
which guards the House, and excludes the enemy from approaching; no marvel
then, it has been so much oppugned. Secondly, because it was the work, and
composure of a Private man, whereas the other Creeds either challenge the
College of the Apostles for the Authors, or the Catholic Church assembled in
a Synod; or, at least, the Tradition of some Patriarchall, or other Ancient and
famous Church, time out of mind; whereas this of Athanasius, though relying but
upon a single Fathers Authority, yet speaks much bigger than the Rest, and
expressly requires a more exact obedience, than any of the other.

Now, this double reason has raised both it, and its Author, many Adversaries;
whereof, some have styled the Preface of it, Proud and Insolent: others, have
denied Athanasius for the Author, so to leave it destitute of a Patron, and
deprive it of the Authority of so eminent a Champion of the Christian Faith: a
Third sort have more impudently defamed both Work and Author, and styled it
Sathanasius his Creed, as one Geo* Niger, and Valentinus Gentilis, as Genebrard
tells us in his Epistle to Charles Cardinal of Lorraine, prefixed to his Book
De Trinitate. Among all which Adversaries it is observable, that none have
either denied the Author, or defamed the Creed, but such whom the Church has
noted of Heresy; and commonly, have been the Ringleaders to the Rest.

In this heat, and fury of opposition, it will concern us, calmely to examine
the Truth, whereby we shall at once vindicate the Credit, both of the Creed,
and its Composer.

First; for the Truth and Esteem of the Creed, it relies not on the Authority
of one single Father, who composed it (though never so famous in his time, and
all Ages since, among the Orthodox Professors) but on the Testimony of the
Catholic Church, which has received it, and commended it to all her Children,
as the Buckler of the true Christian Faith: neither only so, but has received
it of old into her Liturgies, and still retains it; an Honor not vouchsafed
to any other Creed of a Private man's composing* Constantinople, Rome, and the
Reformed Churches, have jointly received it, and exposed it to public use,
although they very much differ in other Points; a strong argument of its
Verity, and Authority.

Secondly, For the credit of the Author; whosoever consults Ecclesiastical
History, and Nazianzens Encomiastick Oration, must needs acknowledge his great
fame throughout the Christian World, for his Learning, Virtue, and unwearied
Constancy in maintaining the true Faith against the Arian Faction, under four
Emperors Reigns, especially under Constantius and Valens, when they swayed
all; which Undaunted constancy of his, when the other Bishops generally, either
complied with the Enemy, or kept silence for fear, deservedly purchased this
peculiar honor to his Creed, as the due reward of his unconquered Faith; and
delivered his Fame unto succeeding Ages with so loud a Trumpe, that we hear
Cosmas Laurens proclaim, Cum ex S. Athanasii Opusculis aliquid inveneris, nec
ad scribendum Chartas habueris, in vestimentis tuis scribe illud. So Sophronii
Prat. Spirit.

Thirdly; As to the supposed Pride and Insolency of the Preface, with which
Terms some have been pleased to dignify it, as being too stately for a private
Man's work, and too peremptorily excommunicating all Christians, who out of
Ignorance or mysperswasion, embrace not all the following deep misteryes
contained in it; they may please also to take notice, that the Creed which
follows, though for the composure it Have Athanasius only for the Author, yet
the Faith therein set down and explained, is the common received Faith of the
Church, derived down from the Apostles to his Times, and since commended by
our Catholic Mother to succeeding Ages, as the Groundworke of Christian
Religion most necessary to be first laid, and relied on; and therefore may well
bear such a Proeme which refers not so much to the Authority of the writer, as
to the Creed written: the composure was a private Man's, but the Creed was
Public; the Frame of one, but the Faith of All.

Then, for the strict exacting the belief of his Creed from all Christians,
they may please to observe, that it was wrote in opposition to the Arians, so
that it does not so directly exclude from Salvation the pure Ignorant, as the
stuborne Heretic; nor, so much condemn the bare nescience, as the negation of
the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints. Jud. 3. though I conceive it
to be very hard, if not utterly impossible, for any Christian to be saved, who
does not expressly believe the Substance of the Faith therein explayned,
especialy in those two Points which he so much insists upon viz. The Trinity,
and Incarnation; the Vision or Fruition of the Blessed Trinity being the last
End, or Happiness of mankind; and, the Incarnation of our Savior, with the
consequents thereof, being the means appointed by God for to compass it. So
that the great Athanasius showed not his Pride in prefixing such a Proeme, but
rather his mercy, and Paternall care toward the Church by a more express
Declaration of the necessity of the Catholic Faith, which some otherwise might
have more oscitantly hearkened to, and been less careful to entertain, if not
awakned by the Terror of this Preface.

CAP. II.
Several Testimonies, Concerning the Author, and Authority of the Athanasian
Creed.

Hving premised thus much, in way of a general Vindication, I shall now set
down some special Testimonies, concerning the Author and Authority of this
Creed, beginning with this latter Age wherein it has begun to be questioned,
and so by degrees ascending to the Time of Athanasius himself; thus, at
length, arriving at the Fountain Head, by the guidance of the Stream, or
Current.

1. Protestant Churches generally receive it under the title and name of
Athanasius, together with the Apostles Creed, and that of the Nicene Council;
for which we are to consult the forecited Testimonies of Luther, Io. Pappus,
anb Nic. Selneccerus, with the two Confessions of the Churches of Saxony, and
France, attested by the Ingenuous Confession of Serrarius the Jesuit, who tells
us in his Discourse on this Creed, that the Calvinian Divines in an Assembly at
Lausanna, agreed with the Lutherans as touching the three Creeds, ascribing
unto them, as well as to the Holy Scriptures, a Judiciary Power, or Authority,
which all ought to obey: which, sure, they would never have done, if they had
not thought, that the Creed of Athanasius, as well as the other two, had been
derived from the same fountain whence the Scriptures flowed, to wit, from the
Holy Ghost as the Author, and the Apostles as the Deliverers; which Faith so
derived, Athanasius more largely paraphrased on, especially in those two main
Points of the Trinity and Incarnation, then perverted by Heretics; by this
means, not altering, but clearing the old Apostolic Tradition.

2. Joan. Cazonovius, though a professed enemy to the contents of this Creed, yet
is forced to acknowledge, in his first Epistle unto M. Calvin, that this Creed
is received under the name of Athanasius, Non solum in Latina Ecclesia, sed
etiam Constantinopolitana, Serviana, Bulgarica, Russica, Moscovitica; Not only
in the Latin Church, but also in that of Constantinople, Servia, Bulgaria,
Russia, and Moscovia. Now this Cazonovius, as Genebrard tells us, was a Polonian
Knight, of an eminent Family, and (together with Gregorius Pauli, a Minister)
the Chief of the Trinitarians. He wrote against those two Epistles which M.
Calvin sent Ad Fratres Polonos: and, in the Colloquy between the Tritheits, and
the Orthodox Divines, held at Petricow in Poland, during the Assembly of the
Estates, Anno 1565. he was the Scribe, or Secretary on the Tritheits behalf.
When, in that Colloquy, he, and his Adherents were urged again and again, to
produce that Greek Copy of Athanasius his Creed, which they gave out, to be
different from that received in the Latin Church (for he confessed a Creed of
Athanasius received in the Greek Church, but diverse from the Latin one) they
could not do it; the truth is, the diversity is only in the particle [
Filioque] added by the Latins in the Article of the Procession; so that they
might as well have said that our Nicene Creed is diverse from theirs, whereto
it is likewise added. But of this more heareafter.

3. Gennadius Scholarius, Patriarch of Constantinople, in his Book which he
wrote in Defense of the the Florentine Council, the year after it was
Celebrated, clearly names Athanasius for the Author of this Creed. These are
his words; (...) etc. Where he styles Athanasius (...), the Confessor, from
this (...) or Confession of his Faith; and withal, sets down the Beginning of
his Creed in express Terms, as now we read it.

4. Eugenius the fourth Bishop of Rome, in his Instructions to the Armenians,
given by him unto them in the forecited Council of Florence, which was
celebrated in the year 1439, recommends unto them the Creed of Athanasius, in
these words; Compendiosam illam fidei Regulam, per Beatissimum Athanasium
editam, cujus Tenor talis est, Quicunque vult etc. That short Rule of Faith,
set forth by the most blessed Athanasius according to this Tenor, Whosoever
will be saved etc.

5. Manuel Caleca, a Grecian, but one who wrote against the Errors of his
Countrymen, presently after the Council of Lions (celebrated in the year 1274
under Gregory the Tenth) in which Council he is thought also to have been
present; in his Second book Cont. Graecos cap. 20. tells us, that Athanasius
wrote this Creed, and sent it to Julius Bishop of Rome, cum insimularetur non
rectae fidei, when he was accused of erring in the Faith: and because some of
his Countrymen dissented from him in this Point, the chief (if not only)
reason whereof was, because the Latins produced copies of it; with this
Addition [ filioque] in the Procession of the Holy Ghost; he strengthens his
Assertion by this double Reason.

First, that Gregory Nazianzen (whom he there calls the Divine, by way of
Eminency) makes mention thereof; of whose Testimony more anon.

Secondly, That it is sung every Lords Day throughout all the Churches of the
West, and the Author thereof is so famous, that even Children know him. Then he
subjoynes, Let them therefore either produce some other Creed of so Famous a
man, which the Divine ( Nazianzen) makes mention of, and to which the Tradition
of the Church bears witness; or, if they cannot, let them embrace that which
the Church now receives.

6. Jo. Beleth, a Parisian Divine, Explic. Divin. Offic. cap. 40. having told
us, that there were four Creeds allowed of by the Church; Secundum, inquit,
and quod in Prima recitatur, quicunque vult salvus esse etc. Quod ab Athanasio
Patriarcha Alexandrino contra Arianos haereticos compositum est, licet plerique
eum Anastasium fuisse falso arbitrentur. The Second of these Creeds, says he,
is that which is rehearsed in the first service, Whosoever will be Saved etc.
which was composed by Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria against the Arian
Heretics, although many falsely think that Anastasius was the Author.

7. Gul. Durantes, or Durandus (otherwise called Mimatensis) who flourished
about the year 1280, assigns this Creed to Athanasius; Rat. Divin. Off. lib.
4. cap. 25. For thus he writes, Secundum Symbolum, Quicunque vult salvus esse
etc. ab Athanasio Patriarcha in civitate Treveri Compositum; that is, according
to the Creed, Whosoever will be Saved etc. which was composed by the Patriarch
Athanasius in the City of Triers.

8. Rodolphus, and Hagmo, two Franciscan Friars, sent with Hugh and Peter, two
Dominicans, by Gregory the ninth unto Constantinople in the year 1239, to
reconcile the Greeks unto the Latins (thence called Apocrisiarii,
Church-legats, as well by the Latins, as the Greeks) have thus determined the
difference concerning the procession of the holy Ghost from the Son as well as
the Father, out of the Athanasian Creed, Propterea, quicunque non crediderit
spiritum sanctu^ a filio procedere, in via perditionis est; unde S. Athanasius,
du^ exulabat in partibus occidentalibus, in expositione fidei, quam Latinis
verbis reddidit, sic ait, Pater a nullo est factus etc. Whosoever believes not
that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Son, is in the way of Perdition;
whence, S. Athanasius, whilst he was an exile in the western Parts, in his
exposition of the Faith which he set forth in Latin, says thus, The Father
was made of none etc. See for this Tom. 3. Eccles. Annal. Abrah, Bzovii. Ao
1239.

9. Abbo, Abbot of Floriack, who lived about the latter end of the tenth
Century, has these words in his Apollogetick which he made to the Kings of
France, Hugh and Robert, Father and Son; Primitus de fide dicendum credidi,
qua^ alternantibus Choris, and in Francia, and apud Anglorum Ecclesiam, variari
audivi. Alii enim dicunt, (ut arbitror) secundum Athanasium, Spiritus Sanctus a
Patre and Filio, non factus, non Creatus, sed procedens; qui dum id quod est
[nec genitus] subtrahunt Synodicum D. Gregorii se sequi credunt, ubi ita est
scriptum; spiritus sanctus nec ingenitus est, nec genitus, sed procedens. that
is, I thought meet to speak first concerning the Faith, which I find diversely
expressed in the French, and English Churches, for some say (as I suppose)
according to Athanasius, The holy Ghost not made, nor Created, but proceeding
from the Father and the Son: who, in leaving out that particle [ nor begotten]
conceive they follow the Synodicall of S. Gregory, in which it is thus written,
The holy Ghost is neither unbegotten, nor begotten, but proceeding. To which
words Baron. in his Annals ad A. 1001, thus attests, Vides, lector, in his, ja^
ante sexcentos annos Symbolum vere ejus esse absque dubitatione creditu^ and
praedicatum; thou see here, Reader, that above six hundred years ago, the
Creed which goes under the name of Athanasius, was verily believed to be his
without the least doubt to the contrary. And well might he say so, for that
ambiguous clause [ ut arbitror, as I suppose] in this Testimony of Abbo, has
no reference to the Author, but to the words, and to the various Copies of
Athanasius his Creed, as appears by the scope and purpose of the Abbot in his
Citation.

10 That this Creed was asscribed to Athanasius, in the Time of Charles the
Bald, will appear; first; out of the second Book of Rathrannus, Monk of
Corbey, written by him against the Greeks, a Book not yet extant in Print.
Secondly; out of the first Book of Aeneas Bishop of Paris, written also
against the Greeks; c. 19. Thirdly; out of the Capitulum of Hincmarus
Archbishop of Rheims, which he gave to the Presbyters of his Diocese. Ao 852.
See the first Capit. in Apend. Tom. 3-Conc. Gall. set forth by Sirmondus. But
for all three, See Armac. de Symb.

11. The fourth Council of Toledo held in the year of our Lord 671 according
to the edition of Io. Garsia Loaisa; and in the third year of K. Sisenandus,
by threescore and two Bishops, whereof Isidore of Sevil was one; thus
professes its Faith in the words of the Athanasian Creed, only somewhat
contracting them, for thus the Fathers of the council begin, cap. 1. Secundum
divinas Scripturas, and doctrinam quam a Sanctis Patribus accepimus, Patrem,
and Filium, and Spiritum Sanctum unius Deitatis atque Substantiae confitemur,
in Personarum diversitate Trinitatem credentes, in Divinitate unitatem
praedicantes, nec Personas confundimus, nec substantiam seperamus. Patrem a
nullo factum, vel genitum dicimus -- Christus descendit ad Inferos, ut sanctos
qui ibidem tenebantur, erueret, devictoque mortis Imperio resurrexit -- mortui
resuscitandi sunt ab eo [Iesu Christo] in die novissimo -- percepturi ab ipso,
alii pro justitiae meritis vitam aeternam; alii, pro peccatis, supplicii
aeterni sententiam* Haec est ecclesiae Catholicae fides. Hanc Confessionem
conservamus atque tenemus; quam quisquis, firmissime custodierit, perpetuam
salutem habebit. that is, According to the Scriptures of God, and the Doctrine
which we have received from the holy Father, we profess the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost to have the same Godhead and Substance, believing a Trinity in a
diversity of Persons, and an Unity in the Godhead, neither confounding the
Persons, nor dividing the substance: we say that the Father was made of none,
nor begotten -- Christ descended into Hell, that he might deliver the Saints
that were there detained, and having conquered the Power of Death he rose
again -- The Dead are to be raised up by him at the last Day -- to receive
from him, some, for their righteous deeds, life eternal; others, for their
sins, the sentence of everlasting punishment. This is the Faith of the
Catholic Church. This Confession we preserve and hold; which whosoever shall
firmly keep, shall obtain everlasting Salvation.

12. In two very Ancient Latin Psalters, which are in S. Rob. Cottons Library
we find Athanasius his Creed together with that of the Apostles, containing the
same number of Heads, with that of our Days. In the former Psalter (says the
Reverend, and Learned Armachanus) which we gather to be as old as Gregory the
first ( viz. 1050 years) both by the old fashion of the Pictures, and the
largeness of the Characters, Athanasius his Creed bears the name of Fides
Catholica, as it does also in an other Psalter of S. Lewis 9th extant in King
James his Library: the other is called Symbolum Apostolorum. In the latter
Psalter, which was once K. Athelstans, That of the Apostles, has Symply the
name of Symbolum: the other is called Fides S. Athanasii Alexandrini, The Faith
of S. Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria.

13. Boethius, that great Scholar and Statesman, in the Reign of Theodorick
the Goth; in his Book De Trinitate, has these words at the Beginning, which
refer us plainly enough to the Creed of Athanasius -- -Fidei Catholicae haec
de Trinitatis unitate Sententia est, Pater, inquiunt, Deus, Filius Deus,
Spiritus sanctus Deus; igitur Pater, Filius, Spiritus Sanctus, unus Deus, non
tres Dii. That is, This is the Decree of the Catholic faith concerning the
unity of the Trinity: The Father, they say, is God, the Son God, the Holy
Ghost God, therefore the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are one God, not three
Gods. On which words Venerable B^de, our Countryman, makes this Gloss -- Haec
est fides qua credimus, quae dicitur Catholica; unde in Symbolo, Haec est fides
Catholica, quam nisi quisque crediderit etc. Haec est una apud omnes, unde
Apostolus, una fides, unum Baptisma. that is, This is the Faith, wherein we
believe, which is called Catholic, whence we say in the Creed, this is the
Catholic Faith, which Whosoever does not believe. etc. This Faith is the same
among All, whence that of the Apostle, One Faith, One Baptism.

14. S. Augustine, in several Parts of his works, takes whole sentences out of
this Creed of Athanasius; which shows that it was then extant, and used by the
Church. In his Book De Trinitate, cap. 8. He has these words, Omnipotens
Pater, Omnipotens Filius, omnipotens Spiritus sanctus, and tame^ non tres
Omnipotentes, sed unus Omnipotens. and Ibidem; Deus Pater, Deus Filius, Deus
Spiritus sanctus, and tamen non tres Dii, sed unus est Deus: that is, The
Father is Almighty, the Son Almighty, the holy Ghost Almighty, and yet there
are not three Almightyes, but one Almighty* Again; The Father is God, the
Son is God, and the holy Ghost is God, yet there be not three Gods, but one
God. Which last passage he repeats word for Word in his 174th Epistle, written
to Pascentius. So, in his Enchiridion cap. 36. Sicut anima rationalis and Caro
unus est homo, ita Deus and homo unus est Christus; As the Reasonable Soul and
the Body are one man, so God and man are one Christ. Now, these are the
Passages for which the Sectaries chiefly deny the Authenticalnesse of this
Creed. The same father shuts up his Soliloquies whih this Prayer, O tres
coaequales and coaeternae personae, Deus unus etc. O three Coequall, and
Coeternall Persons, one God etc.

Neither, can we, with any probability, say, that such (...) were casual, S.
Augustine lighting by chance on the same expressions as Athanasius had used,
writing on the same Subject; for besides the unlikelinesse of hitting upon the
same very words, in several passages, without the least variation; we may
please to take notice, that the Fathers of the first Ages were very punctual
in following the steps of their Ancestors, not only in the matter of Faith, but
in the very form of expression; not accustoming themselves to vary, or invent
new Phrases, except upon necessity, and the urgency of Heretics.

The sight of these passages, caused the great Annalist Baronius to use these
words; Aliquod Symboli Athanasiani exemplar etc. I easily persuade my self,
that a Copy of the Athanasian Creed, was convayed unto the Churches beyond Sea,
by some African Bishop, who (as it often fell out at other Times) was present at
that Roman Synod under Julius; seeing it seems to have come unto S. Austins
knowledge, whose writings appear interlaced with some Passages thereof;
especially, in his Comment on Psalm. 120. v. 6. The Sun shall not burn thee
by day, nor the Moon by night: where, according to Possevins citation,
Apparat* Sac. voce, Athanasius, (though now the reading be somewhat varied) he
uses these words, De hoc Sole etc. Concerning this Sun the holy Father
Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria thus excellently spoke, The Son of God is
from the Father alone, neither made, nor created, but begotten.

15. An old Manuscript, containing the Historical Fragments of S. Hilary,
which came forth of the Library of P. Pithaeus, and was Printed at Paris, in
the year 1598. sets down this Creed, and entitles it to Athanasius with this
Preface, Fides dicta a S. Athanasio; sive Symbolum, quod ejus nomen praefert;
The Faith pronounced by S. Athanasius, or, the Creed which bears his name.

16. But the most Ancient, and pregnant Proof of this Creed, we have from the
mouth of Gregory Nazianzen, in his 21 Oration, which he wrote in the praise of
Athanasius; number. 44, 45. the words are these. (...). That is. Athanasius
presented the Emperor with a Gift truly Royal and magnificent, a Pious
writing against an unwritten Innovation; that so one Emperor, Speech, and
writing, might overcome the other. This Confession of his is received with much
veneration, both by the Western Christians, and those of the East (as many as
have the life of Faith in them) of whom some believe it in their heart, if you
will believe what they say, but, they bring it not forth to light, so that it
lies like a dead Embryo in the Mothers Womb: others, somewhat blow, and kindle
this spark of Faith, so far as to accord with the Time, and to give
satisfaction to the more Godly and zealous of the Orthodox Laity: but others
there be, who boldly profess the Truth; of which party I desire to be.

To this agrees the Author of that Greek Book, of the Procession of the Holy
Ghost, which was given to Lazarus Bayffius K. Francis 1. Ambassador at Venice,
in the year 1533. Who not only Entitles this Creed, (...), The Confession of
S. Athanasius; but farther confirms its Authority, by this Testimony of
Nazianzen, (...) (...), etc. Gregory the Divine (says he) makes mention also
of this Confession in his Encomiastick Oration of Athanasius, in which he
says, He first of all, and alone -- This Confession of his, is received with
much veneration etc. Where he cites the Oration, and sets down the words. The
Author of this Book, who ever he were, lived in the time, when the Controversy
of the Procession was hotly agitated between the Greeks and Latins, which was
about the ninth and tenth Centuries.

But for the more clear understanding of these words, we must take notice of a
threefold Creed, or Confession of Faith written by Athanasius.

1. A Synodicall Epistle written to the Emperor Jovianus, by Athanasius and
the other Bishops of his Patriarchate, assembled at Alexandria, in the name of
Egypt, Thebais, and Lybia; wherein they confirm, and set down the Nicene
Creed, with a premised explication of the word (...). See for this Theod. lib.
4* cap. 3. and Niceph. lib. 10. cap. 42. About the same time, a Synod of
Bishops assembled at Antioch, under Meletius the Patriarch of that See, send
the like Epistle unto the Emperor, prefixing also the Explication of the word,
(...), and subjoyning the Nicene Creed. For which see Soc. lib. 3. cap. 21. and
Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 4.

2. His (...), or Exposition of the Faith which we find in his Works, distinct
both from the Nicene, and his own Creed. It seems a larger Paraphrase, or
Explication of the Nicene Creed, or of his own.

3. His (...), Confession, Creed, or Symbol, which now commonly goes under his
name, and is usually Printed with his other Works. This is that which I
conceive to be understood in Greg. Nazianzens Oration; and that, for these
Reasons.

First, because it appears by Nazianzen, that it was distinct from the Nicene
Creed, whereof Osius, not Athanasius, was the Composer, as will appear by the
next Appendix. And Athanasius his own works show, that it was diverse from his
(...), which is but a Paraphrase on the Nicene, and not sent to any Emperor,
or received by the Western Church, as this is witnessed to be. Nor, can any
man show a Third Creed, or Confession of Faith, ascribed to Athanasius, besides
that which now bears his name; It is That therefore, and none other.

Secondly; Nazianzen here tells us, that both the East and West honored this
Creed: for which no better reason can be assigned, then that which agrees to
this Creed of Athanasius; which was twice written, first in the West, for the
satisfaction of Julius Bishop of Rome; after that, in the East, for the
Emperor Jovianus his satisfaction: which can be affirmed of no other Creed but
this.

Thirdly; This Creed commended so much by Nazianzen, is styled (...), a
Confession of Faith, to which word, or title Gennadius alluding, in his
rehearsal of the Athanasian Creed, calls him (...), a Confessor, as we have
already showed.

Lastly, Nicetas Metropolitan of Heraclea, in his notes on this Oration,
understands it of this Creed.

CAP. III.
The Time, and Place, wherein Athanasius wrote his Creed, together with the
Person, to whom. The Cause wherefore he wrote it, and the Language wherein.

HAving produced these Testimonies, in vindication of the Author, and Authority
of this Creed; I shall in the next place, for the farther Illustration of this
Argument, examine in brief these three Particulars.

First; When, Where, and to whom, this Creed was written? To whom? viz. To P.
Julius, Liberius, or the Emperor Iovianus? Where? At Rome, Triers, or
Alexandria? When? In the year 340, before, or after?

Secondly; The Ground, or Cause, whereupon it was written?

Thirdly; The Language, wherein it was Written?

First; As to the Time, Place, and Person to whom, Pelargus will have it wrote
in a Synod at Alexandria, and sent to the Emperor of the East. And others say
it was wrote in a Well at Triers, as the Inscription of that Well testifyes, so
Possevine in his Apparatus. Genebrard also tells us, that in an Ancient
Manuscript, in the Library of the German Monks at Paris, he found an imperfect
Copy of the Synods, taken forth by a namelesse Author, which testified the same
in these words, Fertur Athanasius Patriarcha Symbolum praedictum edidisse apud
Treverim, in quoda^ puteo latitans, propter gravissimam persecutionem
Arianorum, and praecipue Constantii Imperatoris Ariani, qui eum ubique perquiri
faciebat ad mortem, quia nolebat haeresi Arianae consentire. Nauclerus reports
the same in his Chronology, Seculo 12mo.

But the more rceeived opinion is, that Athanasius gave in this his Creed in
writing unto Julius BP of Rome, in in a Synod of 50 Western Bishops, there
Assembled in his Cause. So Baronius, ad An. 340. Athanasius Romam citatus
quantumlibet ipsius Fides Catholica omnibus innotuisset, ut nulla penitus
potuerit suboriri suspicio, tamen Romanae Sedis communicationem haud habere
licuisset, and alioru^ Episcoporu^, qui ad Synodum convenissent; nec plane,
audiendus esset qui reu^ advenerat, nesi edita Public Catholicae fidei
Professione, eademque ex more latino sermon, coram Pontifice, and ei
assidentibus recitata. Athanasius, says he, being cited to Rome, although the
Catholicknesse of his Faith were well known to all so that there was no
suspicion at all to the contrary, yet he would not have obtained Communion with
the Sea of Rome nor the other Bishops, who came unto the Synod; neither indeed,
was he to be heard, being a person accused, before he had made a Public
profession of the Catholic Faith, and that according to custom, in the Latin
Tongue, before the Bishop of Rome and his Assessours.

Of the same opinion is Binius, who in the first Tome of the Councels, sets
down for one the second Roman Council, held by Julius, and above 50 Bishops
when Athanasius had now expected the coming of the Eusebians to Rome, above
eighteen months. At the same time, says he, Publicam Catholicae Fidei
professionem, quae Symbolum Athanasii appellatur, latino sermon coram
Pontifice, eique assidentibus recitavit. Hanc Pontifex ab ipso cognitam atque
susceptam, una cum actis Synodi in amplissimo Romanae Ecclesiae Archivo,
collocari mandavit* that is, Athanasius then made a Public Profession of the
Catholic Faith, which is called his Creed, rehearsing it in the Latin Tongue,
before the Bishop of Rome and his Assessours. This Creed so acknowledged and
received, the Bishop of Rome commanded to be put in the Archives of the Roman
Church, together with the Acts of the Synod.

Manuell Caleca, in his forecited Book against the Greeks, agrees in Substance
with B^nius, and Baronius, though he seem to place the writing of this Creed a
year sooner; and says, that it was sent to P. Julius, not delivered him in
presence. These are his words; Gregorius Theologus in Athanasii laudibus,
ipsius meminit dicens, Solus ille, vel cum paucis admodum, ausus est veritatem
in Scriptis confiteri etc. quam tunc temporis conscriptam, ad Iulium Romanum
Pontificem misit, cum insimulare^ur non rectae esse fidei.

Now all these opinions may well agree, according to Possevins Conjecture, who
(in his Apparatus, verbo, Athanasius) thinks it probable ut sanct. Trinitatis
acerrimus propugnator, hymnum illum (he means his Creed, because sung
hymne-wsie in the Church Service) locis quibus potuit omnibus, scripser it,
cantaverit, disseminaverit. So that he might write it, at several times in all
the forementioned Places.

First; At Triers. (as the Inscription of the Well there is said to witness)
when he was first banished, about the year, 336.

Secondly, He might send it in writing to Julius Bishop of Rome, when the
Eusebian faction sent Legates unto him with letters, to accuse Athanasius Anno
Domini 339.

Thirdly, He might give it in writing to the Synod at Rome, of which Julius was
president, to satisfy them all concerning his belief. A. D. 340.

Lastly; He might send it from a Synod at Alexandria, to the Emperor of the
East; either to Constantius in his Synod held, A. D. 339. Or rather, to
Iovianus, in his last Synod, held about the year 364, together with the
Synodicall Epistle before mentioned; which Nazianzen seems to imply in the
forecited Oration, where he opposes Emperor, to Emperor, as well as Doctrine
to Doctrine; that is, the Catholic Jovians to Constantius the Arian, as well
as the Orthodoxe Creed, to the Heretical Confessions. Except we will say, that
this Creed was exhibited in the Council of Sardica (a famous City in
Illyricum) held in the year 347, and called by Constans the Emperor of the
West, (who favored Athanasius) and by Constantius jointly: or, to Valentinian
the successor of Iovianus; in whose time Athanasius lived seven or eight
years; but for this we have no Authors Testimony. The same Creed was probably
sent also to Liberius Bishop of Rome, as we shall show anon.

Secondly; As to the Ground or Cause whererupon Athanasius Framed his Creed; I
answer, that he wrote it to give an account of his Faith, and to vindicate
himself from the recrimination of his Adversaries; who accused him of
Sabellianisme, as he did them of Ariniasme. Indeed, who can with any likelihood
suppose, but that Athanasius in his so many years persecution by the Arians,
set forth some where the Confession of his Faith, to clear himself, and that
the Orthodoxe might see, for what cause they so pertinaciously vexed him? Now,
that this Creed is that Confession will appear, (besides what has been
already alleged) by the Agreement thereof both in words and sense, with those
more full and large Treatises of his against the Arians, whereof this seems a
Compendium; and, by the Constant Tradition of the Church, which has received
this, and none other, as the Confession or Creed of Athanasius; whose judgment
ought to prevail with us above the the rashness of some Novellists, who have
questioned both the Authority and the Author.

But because this Recrimination of Sabellianisme is but obscurely set down in
the writers of that Age, and utterly denied by some of ours, I shall endeavor
in a few worrdes to clear it.

First; It was the custom of that Age, that when any was advanced to a
Bishopric, but more espepecially, to a Patriarchall See, such as Alxandria
was, whereof Athanasius was Bishop he sent about his Literae Formatae, or
Encyclicae, wherein he testified his Faith unto the Christian world, and his
communion with the Catholic Bishops; and this was in use, whether the new
Bishop were suspected of heresy, or not. Now, there was far greater Cause for
this in the case of Athanasius, when he appealed to Julius Bishop of Rome, as
the most Eminent Patriarch of the Church, and one not engaged in the quarrel
between him, and the Eusebians. For it had little stood with the gravity, and
impartial uprightness of such a Judge, to have presently, with an overforward
affection, received a man into his Communion, laden with so many, and so heavy
Accusations, before he had given an Account of his Belief: which, that it was
the custom then observed, and particularly in the case of Athanasius, and his
fellows, is plainly set down by Sozomen lib. 3. cap. 7. where, having
premised that Athanasius and three other Bishops, being thrust out by the Arian
faction, fled unto Julius for succor, he subjoynes -- (...). That is, The
Bishop of Rome having learned the crimes objected against each of them, after
that he found them all agreeing in the Doctrine of the Nicene Council, he
received them into his Communion, as persons of the same judgment with
himself.

Secondly; Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra, who was the chief of those three
Bishops, that were thrust out by the Arian faction, and fled to Rome with
Athanasius, having formerly accused the Eusebians of the Arian Heresy, and
convicted them in the Nicene Council, was himself also scandalized with the
cross imputation of Sabellianisme, whereupon he freely made an Orthodox
Confession of his Faith at Rome, such as the Synod lately held at Sardica had
embraced. Now, that Athanasius who was principally hated by the Eusebians, had
the charge of Heresy recriminated also upon him, appears by a passage of the
same Julius in his Letter to the Eastern Bishops then Assembled at Antioch,
(...), Now as concerning Marcellus, says he, seeing ye have wrote touching him
also, as of one who thinks impiously of, or against Christ -- where, the
particle [ Also] necessarily implies, that the Oriental Bishops, had accused
the rest of the same crime, and who but Athanasius as the principal of the
Accused. See the place in Athan. Apolog. 2. page 548. Edit. Comm. And, his
Epistle ad Solitarios, two leaves from the beginning. Epiphanius also in his
(...) Her. 72. tells us, that this Marcellus, being accused by the Arians of
Sabellianisme, to Julius Bishop of Rome, voluntarily came to Rome, and having
long, but in vain, there expected the appearance of his Adversaries, upon his
departure left an Epistle with Julius, wherein he sets down a Confession of
his Faith. His case is just parallel to that of Athanasius, who was accused of
the same Heresy, as Epiphanius there witnesses, and in like manner cleared
himself.

Thirdly; this imputation of Sabellianisme was so pertinaciously urged upon
Athanasius by his Arian persecutors, that Liberius successor to Julius in the
Roman See, was constrained to send a short Epistle to him, for farther
satisfaction; wherein, having set down his own Faith concerning the Trinity,
he adds by way of Antithesis -- (...), wherefore I condemn the opinions of
Sabellius and Arius, and all the forementioned Heresies, to everlasting
punishment, according to the voice of our Savior, Then he concludes, (...): If
thou then agreest with me, Brother Athanasius, in this Confession (which is
the only true Faith, received in the holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church) as
in the presence of God, and his Christ; write unto me thy consent, and
agreement therein with me, that so I may be ascertained thereof, and without
scruple perform thy commands. This Epistle of Liberius with the rescript of
Athanasius, we find extant in the first Tome of Athanasius his works.

The same Athanasius in his forecited (...), or exposition of the Faith
vindicates himself from Sabellianisme in these words -- (...). That is, We
neither make the Father and the Son the same Person as the Sabellians do, in
this destroying the relation of the Son; neither do we attribute to the
Father that passible Body, which the Son took on him, for the Salvation of
the whole world.

Fourthly; Sulpitius Severus lib. 20 hist. Tells us, that Athanasius was
condemned of Sabellianisme in a certain Council, by the Arians. Add hereunto
that Arius himself in his Disputation before Probus the Judge, taxes
Athanasius in these words; sometimes, says he, he makes three appear One,
saying, But these three are one God: then, I know not by what strange mixtion,
he makes them Triforms, triple; saying, And this one God is the Trinity. So
Geneb. To prevent such mistakes and cavils, Athanasius has a chapter, in his
Works entitled, Quod non tres Dii, that there are not three Gods.

Thirdly; As to my last Query; in what Language this Creed of Athanasius was
originally written? I Answer, it is most probable that Athanasius first wrote
it in Latin, as being a Language which he well understood, (although some have
been pleased to deny it) and the Creed being exhibited unto Julius Bishop of
Rome in a Synod of Latin Bishops. My reasons are these.

First; The Latin edition of this Creed is the same in all Copies, whereas the
Greek Copies vary, as Translations use to do. Genebrard, in his third book De
Trinitate, has set down three several versions there of, out of the Latin
into the Greek; namely, Vulgatam, Dionysianam, and Constantinopolitanam. The
first is that which is commonly Printed. The last is that which the Church of
Constantin^ple uses. The middlemost is so called from Dionysius a Grecian
Bishop, entitled Zienensis and Firmiensis, who gave the foreeited Manuscript of
the Procession to Lazarus Bayffius; the Book was fairly written by the Learned
Nic. Sophianus. And to these three, which are set down and compared by
Genebrard, we may add a fourth, found in an Horologium of Greek hymns,
composed by Thechara a Monk of Constantinople, and is set down by the R.
Armach in his Tract de Symb. which besides that it has much inserted here and
there by the Greek Translator, very much differs in the residue from all the
three former, as they also do from each other.

Secondly; As the Bishop of Rome wrote in Latin to the Bishops of the East, so
those Bishops wrote their Formulae Fidei, and Paenitentiae libelli to him in
Latin; as Serrarius informs us in his Discourse on this Creed. Much more
reason had Athanasius to write this his Creed in Latin, it being exhibited at
Rome in a Synod of Latin Bishops, on purpose to satisfy them concerning his
Belief; most of whom, in all likelihood, understood not the Greek Tongue.

Thirdly; The foresaid reason is fortified by this other, that Athanasius
himself well understood the Latin Tongue, and therefore needed not to
communicate with them by an interpreter* Which skill of Athanasius is not only
made probable, from the example of other Greek Bishops, as Eusebius
Caesariensis, Photinus, and others of this latter Age also, who joined the
study of both Tongues together; and, from his long abode in the Western Parts
at several times, as at Triers, above two years, at Millain, and Aquileia; and
at Rome above 18 months: but clearly proved from that forecited passage of
Nazianzene, Orat. 21. Number. 46, 47. Which I brought by way of Answer to the
eight Objection, against the Apostles Creed; where he tells us, how Athanasius
composed the difference between the Greek and Latin Churches, about the words
Hypostasis, and Essentia, verborum sententia diligenter and accurate perpensa,
having diligently and accurately weighed the meaning of the words; at length
peswading both Parties that it was but a Logomachia, a contention about Terms,
since both meant the same Thing. Now such a Controversy as this could never have
been stated, with so full a satisfaction to both Parties, unless he had been
furnished with more than ordinary skill, as well in the Latin, as the Greek.

CAP IIII.
Some objsctions, against what has been laid down, answered. Especially,
Nazianzens Testimony concerning the Athanasian Creed, is farther cleared and
vindicated.

THus far have I proceeded By way of (...), in a positive and demonstrative
way, to assert the Author and Authority of the Athanasian Creed; and by the
way, have enervated most of those Arguments, which I have found brought against
either. But least I should seem to leave the Tract unperfect, by passing by
any considerable objection which has to my knowledge, been alleged against
it, I shall set down the objections distinctly, and subjoyne some light
Strictures, by way of Answer.

Object. 1. They who ascribe this Creed to Athanasius, agree not either about
the Time, or place Durandus, says it was written in his first Banishment at
Triers, where he lay hid in a Well, to avoid the treacheries of the Arians.
Manuell Caleca, and Baronius say, it was wrote to P. Julius, either from his
Diocese at Alexandria; or given in writing to him, and the Roman Synod when he
pleaded his Cause before them, that so he might be received into the Communion
of the Church of Rome, wherein Baronius, is deceived more ways than one.
first, because not only here, but in the the whole work of his Annals, he
labors to prove, that in all Ages the Bishop of Rome had full Power to cite,
absolve, or condemn the Bishops of the East, and of the whole World. Secondly,
because Athanasius was not accused for matter of Doctrine by the Arians, but
for matter of fact; and his restitution to his Bishopric opposed by them, for
Political inconveniences; as that his return had once already caused
seditions and Slaughters in Alexandria: and that he had been restored to his
See contrary to the Canons, as one condemned by the Synod of Tire, and not yet
absolved, Thirdly, because if he had needed to render an account of his Faith
to Maximus Bishop of Triers, or Julius of Rome, He would have used none other
than the Necene Creed; it being not opportune to have used any other at that
Time, for fear he migt have been thought to imitate the Arians, and
Semi-Arians, who ever and anon framed new Confessions in their Synods and
ante-Synods, on purpose to depreciate the Nicene Creed, as false, imperfect, or
obscure; and for this very reason, were chiefly hated by the Catholics.

Answer. 1. The several opinions about the Time and Place, where and when
Athanasius Published his Creed, are but circumstantiall differences, and
therefore not destructive of the main business; except we will therefore deny an
Hell, because Divines differ about the Place where it is seated, and the Time
when it was prepared. Besides, all these differences are easy enough to be
reconciled, as I have showed already, taking my rise from Possevins judgment.

As for the Well at Triers, what ever Baronius may judge of it, yet if it bear
that Inscription which Possevine witnesses, it may probably enough have been
the Place where Athanasius at first composed this Creed of his; either lying in
it there for shelter at his first coming to Triers, till he had made his
innocence known to Constantine the younger, and to Maximus the Bishop of the
place: or, inscribing that Title on it, in imitation of the Apostles Creed,
which was framed in a like place, as we find it recorded by Fr. Quaresmius an
Eyewitness, in his forecited Testimony.

2. What though Baronius ascribe more authority to the Bishop of Rome, than in
truth is due to him, or than Julius challenged in that Age? What, if Athanasius
acknowledged him not for universal Bishop? Nevertheless, he might prudently
appeal to him as the chief Patriarch of the Christian Church, sitting in the
head City of the Empire; and as to a Person disengaged in his quarrel, and so
not to be justly excepted against by his adversaries. The appeal, was not out
of duty, but discretion.

3. That Athanasius was accused for matter of Doctrine, I have already proved;
and therefore he had good reason to make confession of his faith.

4. The Arians, and Semi-Arians were hated by the Catholics, for not assenting
to the Nicene Council, and for rejecting the word (...), or Consubstantiall,
in explaining the Divinity of the Son of God; whereupon, they framed new
Forms, or Confessions of their own, contrary to the Decrees of that Council.
Yet, for all this, Athanasius the great Patron of the Nicene Faith, might very
well compose a larger explanation of those two material and mysterious Points
of the Trinity and Incarnation, then questioned; an explanation, not contrary
(as the Arians Confessions) but concordant to the Nicene Creed; and this he
might do without any more derogation thereto, than came afterward from
Jerome, Leo, and other succeeding Fathers, who made Confessions of their Faith,
or Creeds of their own private co^posure, at this day extant in their works;
Creeds, not to be imposed on all Churches, but to manifest their own Belief,
or for the use of some particular Diocese. The Authorities produced to the
contrary, speak against the fraudulent, destructive Symboles of heretical
Synods.

Ob. 2. This creed is usually left out of the Manuscripts of Athanasius his
works, or, at least has not his name prefixed.

Answ. This is not a sufficient Argument to disprove the Author, because the
other works of Athanasius being originally wrote in Greek, and communicated
to us from the Eastern Church, it is no marvel if this Creed is omitted,
which was at First written in Latin; especially, when the Latins produced it
with the addition of [ filioque] in the procession of the holy Ghost; which the
Greeks so much abhorred as an adulterate Insertion, and repudiated the whole
Creed, some of them, for that very Reason. Pet. Felcmannus testifies, that he
met with a manuscript of the Palatine Lybrary, wherein it was entitled to
Athanasius. The Reverend Armachanus also tells us, it is found in a very old
book of Hymns, written part in Latin, and part in Irish, the Book said to
be composed in the Nicene Synod by three Bishops, Eusebius, Dionisius, and a
third unnamed. We have already produced many Authorities to the same purpose,
all which the Tradition of the Church confirms, which no man can prove ever to
have thought otherwise. Genebrard withal informs us, Quod in vetustiissimis
Romanae Ecclesiae (...), sub Athanasii nomine ejus ad primam recitatio usu
recepta est; That in the most ancient Horologies or liturgies of the Roman
Church, this Creed has been usually rehearsed under his name, at the first
Service.

Ob. 3. If this were Athanasius his Creed he would have mentioned it some where
in his Historical Tracts, Epistles, or Apologies; or, some writer of the same,
or the next Age. Or, at leastwise some writer of his life.

Answ. We have produced Testimonies to this purpose, out of Nazianzene, Hylary,
Augustine, and Boethius who all lived near his Time.

Ob. 4. They who ascribe this Creed to Athanasius, say it lay a long while in
the Roman Archives unknown to the Church. So Baronius and Possevine, which is
improbably affirmed of this writing; if it had been framed by so famous
admired a Champion of the Faith as Athanasius was; especially, seeing so many
succrescent Heresies might have been refuted by it.

Answ. Those Authors affirm indeed, that the Original written by Athanasius
his own hand, lay long in the Roman Archives, together with the Acts of the
Synod, wherein he delivered it: but they deny not, that Copies there of might
have been taken, and divulged; yea, Possevine affirms there were such taken,
and Baronius thinks it very probable: and those parcells of it, which we find
in S. Augustine, and Boethius, confirm the same. As for the refuting of
heresies by it, we find it alleged by S. Aug. to that purpose; and it is likly
that many others did the like, whose works are not come to our hands, or not
so diligently perused by the objector, as touching this particular. The Works
of Athanasius, as of other ancient Fathers, were alleged by after Ages against
succrescent Heresies, as we may see by Nazianzen.

Object. 5. If this Creed had been certainly believed of Athanasius his making,
the Latins had made use of it against the Greeks, in the controversy of the
Procession, as being a Father of so great Authority amongst them; whereas the
first whom we read of to have made use of this Argument, were the Apocrisiarii,
or Legates of Gregory the 9th. When the Controversy had now continued almost 500
years, and been discussed in many Synods, and Polemicall writings.

Answ. Although we now read in the Athanasian Creed, That the Holy Ghost
proceeded from the Father and the Son; yet in all likelihood, it was not so
put down in the (...), or original written by Athanasius; nor by any other,
for a good while after; and therefore, no marvel, if the Latins made not use
of this Creed against the Greeks, as a testimony on their side, when there was
no such testimony to be found. My reasons are these.

1. The Greek Edition of Athanasius his Creed, as we have it Printed by
Commelinus, in the year, 1600. has no such words as [(...)] although the
Latin read it, [ Filioque] that the Holy Ghost proceeded from the Son also.
The same we may say of the Parisian, and other Printed Editions, which have not
it in the Greek.

2. Athanasius, in his other Works, acknowledges no such Procession of the
Holy Ghost from the Son, though having oft-times occasion to speak thereof,
in his Tracts of the Trinity; yea, he seems rather to say the contrary, in
more Places than one.

3. They who took upon them to add the same clause [ Filioque] to the Nicene
Creed, framed in a Synod of Eastern Bishops, without asking the consent of the
Church which framed it, yea contrary to the Decree of the third General
Council; might well be more bold in adding to the Creed of Athanasius, which
was the Composure of one single Father, made at Rome, in the Latin tongue, and
kept in their own Archives. Now, the Church of Rome did the one; why not the
other too, which might be done with less noise, and notice.

4. This Additionall particle [ Filioque] was not added to the Nicene Creed,
until the ninth Century at the farthest; For Leo the third, Bishop of Rome,
who flourished in the beginning of that Century, not only denied to insert this
Particle into that Creed; and persuaded the French Bishops, that they should
not add it; but withal caused the Creed to be engraven in a Silver Table,
(and that Table publicly placed in S. Paul's Church at Rome) without the
Particle [ Filioque] so witnesses Pet. Lombard. Sent. lib. 1. Did. 11. It is
likely that the same was added to the Athanasian Creed about the same time, as
it was to the Nicene, and so afterward made use of by those Apocrisiarii.

Object. 6. Jo. Belethus, who slourished above Three Hundred years since, tells
us of some, who thought it to be the Creed of Anastasius: now, this Anastasius,
surnamed Sinaita, was Patriarcb of Antioch, and lived in the reign of the
Emperor Justinian, and of Iustine the younger; and was some two Ages juniour
to Athanasius.

Answ. The conjecture of those, whosoever they were, seems so groundless,
that Belethus who mentions it, not so much as names the Authors, as being men
of small or no credit; much less produces any reason, to justify their
conjecture: yea, he professedly condemns this their opinion of falsehood. The
mistake probably was this, because this Anastasius wrote a Book (...),
Concerning the Faith, now extant in the French Kings Library at Paris.

Ob. 7. Meletius Patriarch of Alexandria, in his letter which he wrote to Io.
Douza, Ao 1597. acknowledges not this Creed as the writing of Athanasius --
Athanasio, inquit, falso ascriptum Symbolum, cum Appendice illa Romanorum
Pontificum adulteratum, luce lucidius contestamur; We openly protest against
that Creed, says he, falsely entitled to Athanasius, being corruptly set forth
with that Appendix of the Roman Bishops. where by the Appendix he means the
particle [ Filioque] in the Article of the holy Ghost.

Answ. If Meletius his meaning extend to the whole Creed of Athanasius, his
Authority, as a single and a late Author cannot in reason challenge a belief
contrary to the verdict of so many grave Authors so much Ancienter than he;
especially, in a matter of fact; such as this is. But I suppose, Meletius in
those words absolutely denies not, that Athanasius was the Author of the Creed
now entitled to him; but that it is not to be fathered on him, as it is now read
in the* Western Church, with the Appendix, [ filioque] added thereto by the
Bishops of Rome; but not Originally inserted, as he conceives, by Athanasius of
which I have already spoken.

Ob. 8. Nazianzens Testimony concerning Athanasius his Creed, or Confession of
Faith, is to be understood of the latter end of that Synodicall Epistle, which
he sent to the Emperor Jovianus; wherein, after he had set down the Nicene
Creed, he adds these words; Nonnulli hanc Fidem a Patribus in Concilio Niceno
confirmatam antiquare non sunt veriti; alii vero simulant assentiri illi,
reipsa autem pernegant, dum hanc vocem [(...)] perverse interpretantur;
iisdemque in Spiritum Sanctum loquuntur blaspheme, asserendo eum creatum esse,
and factum per filium; That is, Some have not been afraid to abrogate this
Faith Established in the Nicene Council; others there be, who feign to
receive it, but in truth reject it, whilst they interpret the word Hom^ousion,
in a perverse sense; the same men speak also blaspheamously against the Holy
Ghost, affirming that he was created, and made by the Son. Then, in the
close, they say; Quinetiam, neque Spiritum Sanctum a Patre and Filio
separarunt, sed ei una cum Patre and Filio, in una sanctae Trinitatis fide,
propterea quod una est in sancta Trinitate Divinitas, gloriam tribuerunt, That
is, Neither did they separate the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son, but
ascribed glory to him, together with the Father and the Son, in the same
faith of the holy Trinity, because there is but one Divinity in the holy
Trinity. Theod. hist lib. 4. cap. 3.

Answ. Whether, or no, this fragment, this foot, this Appendix of an Epistle,
deserve the Title of a Confession of Faith, so venerably esteemed by the
Churches of East and West; of Libellus, a Declaration; of a Gift truly Royal
and Magnificent; with which Titles Nazianzen in that place honors Athanasius
his Creed, let the impartial Reader judge.

Besides, we may observe for our fuller satisfaction in this particular.

1. That these words, which the Objector calls Athanasius his Creed, refer
not to him, and to the Bishops of his Patriarchate, who wrote the said Epistle,
but to the Fathers of the Nicene Council; for they run in the third Person --
neque separarunt -- gloriam tribuerunt. not in the first -- neque separavimus
-- gloriam tribuimus. Therefore, they relate to those Fathers who made the
Nicene Creed, which is immediately prefixed; not to the Bishops who sent this
Synodicall Epistle.

2. That this Synodicall Epistle was sent in the name of all the Bishops of
Egypt, Thebais, and Lybia; whereas the Confession of Faith written by
Athanasius, was attested by him only, or by very few besides. So witnesses
Nazianzen in his forecited Oration; Primus ille, and solus, aut cum admodum
paucis, veritatem palam, apertisque verbis promulgare non dubitavit, unam trium
personarum Divinitatem and essentiam scripto confessus; and quod multis illis
Patribus circa Filium prius concessum fuerat, idem ipse postea in asserenda
Spiritus Sancti Divinitate superno afflatu consecutus. Atque Imperatori donum
vere Regium, and magnificum offert etc. That is, He first of all, and alone, or
accompanied with very few, doubted not to publish the Truth openly, and in
express Terms, professing in writing one Deity and Essence of three Persons;
and that which God had formerly granted to many Fathers ( viz. the Nicene)
concerning the Son, Athanasius obtained the same afterward, by an
inspiration from above, to assert the Divinity of the Holy Ghost. And he
presents the Emperor with a Gift truly Royal and Magnificent etc. Of what
Creed, or Confession of Faith can these Words be understood, but of that which
now bears the name of Athanasius, wherein he so clearly, and at large, asserts
the great mystery of the Trinity in Unity; and, in particular, the Divinity of
the Holy Ghost, in these words -- The Holy Ghost also is God -- such as the
Father is, such is the Holy Ghost -- The Holy Ghost is of the Father [and the
Sonne] neither made, nor created, nor begotten, but Proceeding. Whereas the
Nicene Fathers, had only vindicated the Divinity of the Son, then called in
question by Arius and his Adherents, as Nazianzen here tells us.

3. Nazianzen informs us here of the Time when Athanasius wrote his Creed,
when very, very few, (...), durst openly profess the true faith; which must
needs be meant of the Times immediately succeeding the Death of Constantine the
Great; or when he was first deposed by the Synod of Tire, and banished to
Triers, by the importune calumnies, and violence of the Arian Party, in the
latter end of his Reign; for then there appeared but three Bishops in the
cause with him, who were in like manner feign to fly into the West, as Sozomen
witnesses. lib. 3. cap. 7. Whereas, after this, in the year 347. there was a
Synod of Orthodox Bishops called together at Sardica, a City of Illyricum, who
professed the Nicene Faith; and when Athanasius sent the forenamed Epistle to
the Emperor Jovianus, his whole Patriarchate subscribed, together with him, to
the Nicene Creed therein enclosed, the Emperor being then a Catholic.
Wherefore, it is most probable that Athanasius first wrote his Creed at Triers;
or when he fled to Julius Bishop of Rome, for succor; which Creed he
afterward sent also, with that Synodicall Epistle to the Emperor Iovianus, by
whom he was restored to his See, thereby to confute his Adversaries, who would
have had the World believe, that he was justly condemned, as erroneous in the
Faith. The Epistle, he sent in the name of the whole Synod: The Creed, in his
own.

THE SECOND APPENDIX OF THE Nicene or Constantinopolitan CREED.
CAP. I.
The Reason of the double name of this Creed. The Composure thereof. The
Additionall, or Exegeticall Particles, inserted into it. When, and by Whom it
was conveied to other Churches, and brought into Divine Service.

THIS Creed has a double name, from a double Council whereof the one began,
and the other finished it. It was begun in the First general Council, held at
Nice in Bithynia, in the year 325, thence called the Nicene Creed, But it was
recited, approved, and enlarged, as now we have it; by the second general
Council held at Constantinople, in the year 381, thence called, the
Constantinopolitan Creed, by many latter writers.

The Nicene Fathers, being 318 in number, all subscribed to it, except five who
adhered to Arius, and would not acknowledge the Son to be of the same Essence
or Substance with the Father, by admitting of the word (...). The
Constantinopolitan Fathers, were 150 in number, who all assented to this Creed;
And, Damasus Bishop of Rome, confirmed it for the westrne Church, with the
suffrages of his fellow Bishops; although not present at Canstantinople, either
in his Person, or by Proctor.

The Nicene Council was called against Arius, who denied the Son to be
Coessentiall and Coeternall with the Father; Those Fathers therefore enlarged
the second Article of the Creed, touching the eternal Divinity of the Son of
God. The Council of Constantinople was called against Macedonius, who denied
the Divinity of the holy Ghost; whence, those Fathers enlarged the eight
Article of the Creed, which concerns the Third Person of the Trinity.

As for the Form of words, or Frame of this Creed; it had, in the first Place,
Hosius Bishop of Corduba for the Composer, who sat in the Council of Nice as
President or Moderator, by the appointment of the Emperor Constantine the
Great; and therefore subscribed in the first Place, before Vitus, and
Vincentius, who were the Bishop of Romes Legates; as we may see in Binius, Conc.
Tom. 1. The Composing of this Creed by Hosius we have witnessed by Baronius A.
325, who took it out of the Epist. of Athan. ad Solitarios, who was present at
the Council* the words of Baron are these; Consentientibus Catholicis Episc.
and Arianis pariter assentientibus, concepta est Catholicae Fidei formula, qua
omnia Arianae haeresis capita truncarentur; fuit autem ejus formandae Osius
imprimis Architectus sapientissimus; de quo haec S. Athanasius cum scribit in
Arianos, ex verbis eorum in eundem Osium apud Constantium conclamantium; Hic
princeps est Synodorum; and siquid scribit, ubique auditur; hic formulam Fidei
in Nicena Synodo concepit, and Arianos ubique pro haereticis traduxit, that is,
By the joint consent of the Catholic Bishops, the Arians also agreeing to it,
there was Composed a Form of Catholic Belief: He that Composed it was Osius,
that most wise Master Builder; concerning whom S. Athanasius, in his works
against the Arians, thus writes, rehearsing their very words wherein they
cried out upon him before the Emperor Constantius, This is the chief
President of Synods; who, if he write ought, is hearkened to every where; he
composed the Form of Belief in the Nicene Synod, and has traduced the Arians
every where for Heretics.

But the Additionall Particles, or supplement of this Creed, was made by
Gregory Nyssen, an eminent Father in the first Constantinopolitan Council, who
perfected and completed the Form, as we now have it. So Nicephorus informs
us. Eccles. Hist. lib. 12. cap. 13. From that time forward, it was held for one
entire Creed, and promiscuously called by succeeding Ages; sometimes the
Nicene, sometimes the Constantinopolitan Creed: It was caled lthe Nicene for
the honor of that Council, which was the first Oecumenicall, and the
Foundation of all the Rest that followed; as also, because it was contained
virtually and implicitly in the shorter Creed of that Council. So Marcus
Bishop of Ephesus, in the Synod of Ferrara Sess. 5. Conc. Tom. 4. And it was
called the Constantinopolitan Creed, because finished in that Council, and
brought to that perfection wherein we now see it.

This Creed, according as it was framed in the Nicene Synod, far shorter than
now we have it, we may see in these following Authors; viz. Athan. Epist. ad
Iovianum. Conc. Tom. 1. page 399. Cod. Can. Eccl. Afric. p. 19. Ruff. Eccl.
Hist. lib. 1. cap. 6. Theod. lib. 1. Hist. cap. 12. Socr. lib. 1. c. 5. Cass.
trip. hist. lib. 1. cap. 17* Niceph. lib. 1. cap. 12. We have already Englished
it, in the Twelfth Chapter of the precedent Discourse on the Apostles Creed.
Now, I shall set down the Original Greek, which runns thus;

(...).

After this, the Fathers of the Constantinopolitan Council enlarged this
Form, partly by adding some explicatory particles; and partly by resuming out
of the Apostles Creed those Articles, wherein it was defective. The Explicatory
particles were chiefly touching the Holy Ghost. The Articles taken out of the
Apostles Creed, were those which follow the Article of the Holy Ghost.
Notwithstanding, they omitted three passages thereof, which were virtually
enclosed in the rest, that preceded or followed, viz. 1. [(...), God of God]
because it follows, [ very God of very God.] 2. [(...), both which are in
Heaven, and which are in earth] because there went before, [ by whom all things
were made.] 3. [(...), That is, Of the substance of the Father] because they
thought it sufficiently comprehended in the word (...), which signifies more
than (...) as Epiphanius tells us in his Anchoratus, viz. A person of one and
the same individual substance with the Father; whence the Orthodoxe Christians
were differenced from the Arians, by the Title of, (...), vel (...), That is,
of Homoousians, or of those who worshipped the Son of God under this Title, by
professing him of the same substance with the Father. So then, the entire form
thereof, as the Western Churches now read it, by resuming that passage [ God
of God] out of the first Nicene form; and adding the word [ Filioque] that is,
[ and from the Son,] in the Procession of the Holy Ghost; runs thus, the
additionall particles being distinguished from the rest by this mark [ ] which
encloseth them;

I Believe in one God the Father Almighty, maker [of Heaven and Earth] and of
all things visible and invisible: and, in one Lord Jesus Christ, the
only-begotten Son of God, begotten of his Father [before all Worlds] [God of
God] light of light, very God of very God; begotten, not made, being of one
substance with the Father; by whom all Things were made: who for us men, and
for our Salvation, came down [from Heaven] and was incarnate [by the Holy
Ghost of the Virgin Mary] and was made man; [and was crucified also for us
under Pontius Pilate;] he suffered [and was buried] and the third day he rose
again [according to the Scriptures] and ascended into Heaven, [and sits on
the right hand of the Father] and he shall come [againe with Glory] to judge
both the quick and the dead; whose Kingdom shall have none end. And, I believe
in the Holy Ghost, [the Lord and Giver of life, who proceeds from the Father
and the Son, who together with the Father and the Son is worshipped and
glorified, who spoke by the Prophets. And, I believe one Catholic and
Apostolic Church; I acknowledge one Baptism for the remission of sins; and,
I look for the Resurrection of the Dead, and the life of the World to come.]

That Gregory Nyssen, by order of the Second general Council held at
Constantinople, added the particles here inserted, is witnessed, as I said, by
Nicephorus Callistus, in hist. Eccles. lib. 12. cap. 13. his words are these,
(...). That is, They (the Fathers of that Synod) added to that Divine
Confession of Faith made at Nice, The Glory of the most Holy Spirit, as a
Person of equal Honor and Glory with the Father and the Son; Gregory of
Nyssa supplying what was defective in that Sacred Creed, Not that they were the
first framers of those additionall particles, for we find them extant, before
the celebration of this Council, in Epiphanius his Anchoratus, and (for the
most part) in Cyrils Catecheses; but the first, who by their Synodicall
Authority, confirmed the entire Form; having left out something of the Nicene
Creed, ( viz. those three fore mentioned Passages) but added more; and so
commended, yea prescribed the whole unto the Christian Church.

This Creed so enlarged, was presently received into the Public service of the
Church; for Platina in the life of Damasus tells us; Mandavit ut in principio
celebrationis, quam missam vocant, Confessio diceretur, ut hodie fit; that is,
Damasus (who lived at the time of the Constantinopolitan Creed) commanded, that
in the Beginning of Common-service, this Creed, or Confession should be
rehearsed, as now we use it. And Walafridus Strabo, de Reb. Eccles. cap. 22.
informs us, that this was done in imitation of the Greek Church; Illud
Symbolum * quod nos ad imitationem Graecorum, intra missas adsumimus. Et mox.
Ab ipsis ergo ad Romanos ille usus creditur pervenisse.

Yet, for some years, though it were received into the Greek Liturgy, it was
not Constantly used, till the Time of Timotheus Patriarch of Constantinople,
who came to that See, in the year 511. So Theodorus Lector in the Second Book
of his Eclogae, or Collectanea, (...) etc. that is Timotheus, at the desire of
his Friends, took order that the Creed of the 318 Fathers should be rehearsed
at every Communion; and this, in reproof of Macedonius, who had not received
it; whereas before it was rehearsed only once in the year, to wit, on the Eve
of the Passion, at the Time when the Bishop Catechized. By this it appears
that it was used Publicly in the Eastern Church, though but once in the
year, whereas this Timotheus caused it to be constantly rehearsed at every
Communion. Not long after this, we find it commanded to be used in the third
Council of Toledo, a National Council of 78 Bishops, assembled under K.
Recaredus, whereof Leander Bishop of Sevil was one. This Council was
celebrated in the year 590, the second canon whereof runs thus. Pro reverentia
sanctissimae Fidei, petitione Recaredi Regis, constituit Synodus, ut per omnes
Ecclesias Hispaniae and Galliciae, secundum formam Orientalium Ecclesiarum,
Concillii Constantinopolitani, hoc est 150 Episcoporum, Symbolum fidei
recitetur, and prius quam Dominica dicatur oration, voce clar^ praedicetur, quo
fides vera sit manifesta, and testimonium habeat, and ad Christi corpus and
sanguinem praelibandum pectora populorum fide purifica^a accedant. that is, Out
of a venerable regard of the most holy Faith, and upon the motion of K.
Recaredus, the Synod has ordained, that the Creed of the Constantinopolitan
Council, that is, of the 150 Bishops, should be rehearsed after the use of the
Eastern Churches, throughout all the Churches of Spain and Gallicia; and that
it be openly published before the saying of the Lords Prayer; that so the true
Faith may be manifested, and witnessed, and that the Hearts of the People,
being purifyed by Faith, may come to the participation of Christ's Body and
Blood.

From Spain, in likelihood, it came over the Pyrenees into France; part
whereof, namely Languedoc, and the Country adjacent, was then under the
Dominion of the Gothish Kings of Spain. And as it was commanded, to be
rehearsed in the Spanish Churches, on purpose to profligate the Arian heresy,
wherewith all their Princes had bin infected until K. Recaredus, so was it more
generally received in the Churches of France, in the latter end of the 8
Century, when Elipandus Archbishop of Toledo, and Felix Bishop of Urgell, had
been condemned of Nestorianisme in two Synods; namely, at Ratisbone, in the
year 792. And at Frankfort, where Charles the great was present in the year
794. So Walafridus Strabo de Rebus Eccles. c. 22. Apud Gallos and Germanos,
post dejectionem Felicis haeretici, sub gloriosissimo Carolo Francorum Rege,
idem Symbolum latius crebrius in Missarum caepit officiis iterari; that is, The
same Creed (viz. the Nicene) began to be used amongst the Galls, and Germans,
after the deposition of the heretic Felix (under Charles the most glorious
King of the French) more often, and throughout more Churches, in the
Communion-service. And the Synod of Frankfort, to prevent the spreading of this
Heresy, took order, that together with the Apostles Creed, the Nicene also
should be diligently delivered for the public use of the Churches; the thirty
third Canon, of which Synod, set forth by Sermondus, runs thus, Vt fides
Catholica sanctae Trinitatis (id est, Symbolum Constantinopolitanum) and oration
Dominica, atque Symbolum fidei [Apostolorum] omnibus praedicetur ac tradatur.
That the Catholic Faith of the holy Trinity (that is the Nicene or
Constantinopolitan Creed) and the Lords Prayer, and the Apostles Creed, be
Preached, and Delivered unto All.

As for our Church of England, it was probably brought hither by Augustine, and
his fellow Preachers, who were sent to convert the Nation, by Gregory the
Great, then Bishop of Rome.

CAP. II.
When, and by whom the Particle [Filioque] was added to the Nicene Creed, is
historically delivered, and at large. Several other causes, of the breach
between the Churches of Greece, and Rome.

IT will not be amiss for a close unto the Discourse on this Creed, to show
(as far as good Authors give us light) the Time when, and the Person by whom,
the Particle [ Filioque and from the Sonne] was added to this Creed; which
declares the holy Ghost to Proceed from the Son, as well as from the Father.
And this I thought fit to add; partly, for that the matter is obscure, and not
generally known; partly, for the completing of my discourse on this Creed;
and, partly also, for to show the Original and progress of so chief a cause
of Difference between the Churches of East; and West, which has now lasted
for some hundreds of years to which I shall add some other causes of the
Breach, and so give a conclusion of the whole Treatise. My collections on this
Argument I have cheifely from the Learned Vossius, who with his wonted industry
and fidelity has acquainted us with what he found recorded concerning it, out
of the best witnesses of Antiquity, viz. Dissert. 3a. De 3bus. Symb.

The Churches of Spain where the first who added this Particle to the Creed,
in a Synod held in Gallicia, in the year 447 as it is cited by the Rnd
Armachanus.

The French Churches, following their example* are said next to have added it;
and, after them, the Roman. As for our Church of England, venerable Bede tells
us hist. eccl. lib. 4. cap. 17. That Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury though a
Grecian, in a Synod which he with his fellow-bishops held at Hatfeild, in the
year 680. Spiritum sanctum ex Patre and Filio, inenarrabilitur procedentem
praedica verunt, that is, declared the ineffable procession of the holy Ghost
from the Father and the Son. Yet, in the Canons, entitled Cresconiana, the
Article touching the holy Ghost runs in the ancient Form, Et in Spiritum
sanctum, Dominum and viv^ficatorem ex Patre procedentem, cum Patre and Filio
adorandum and conglorificandum, qui locutus est per sanctos Prophetas; that is,
And I believe in the holy Ghost, the Lord, and giver of life, who proceeds
from the Father, who with the Father and the Son together is worshipped, and
glorified, who spoke by the holy Prophets. This Collection of Canons is extant
in the Public Library at Oxford.

Then, for the French Churches, Aeneas Bishop of Paris in a Book of his (not
extant in Print) which he wrote against the errors of the Greeks, witnesses
for his Time, In fide Catholica, quam die Dominica decantat ad missam
universalis Galliarum Ecclesia, sic canitur inter caetera Credo and in Spiritum
sanctum, Dominum and vivificantem, qui ex Patre Filioque procedit, qui cum
Patre and Filio simul adoratur and conglorificatur, qui locatus est per
Prophetas* that is, In the Catholic Faith or Creed, which the whole Church of
France sings at the Communion-Service, they sing this among the rest; And I
believe in the holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life, who proceeds from the
Father and the Son etc.

But to examine this controversy more particularly, and in order. In the year
767, there was a Synod held at Gentilliacum in France, under Pipin Father to
Charlemagne, in which the Greeks and Latins disputed concerning the Procession
of the holy Ghost. So Ado viennensis; Facta est tunc temporis Synodus, anno
Incarnationis Domini 767, and quaestio ventilata inter Graecos and Romanos, de
Trinitate; and utrum Spiritus, sicut procedit a Patre, ita procedat a Filio.
that is, There was a Synod called in the year of our Lord 767, wherein, the
question concerning the Trinity was agitated between the Greeks and Romans; as
also, whether the holy Ghost proceeds from the Son, as he does from the Father.
Then in a Synod at Aquisgrane, the question was renewed, and decided, (as it
seems, upon this occasion; because the Particle [ Filioque] was usually added,
in the singing of this Creed, throughout the Gallicane Churches; he who moved
the question was one John, a Monk of Jerusalem, The words of Ado in his
Chronicle, concerning this Synod, are these -- Syuodus magna Grani Aquis
c^ngregatur Anno Incarnationis Dom. 809, in qua Synodo de Processione Spiritus
sancti quaestio agitatur, utrum si^^^ procedit a Patre, ita procedat a Filio.
Hanc quaestionem Joannes, Monacus Hierosolymitanus moverat; cum Regula and
Fides Ecclesiastica firmet Spiritum sanctum a Patre and Filio procedere, non
Creatum, non Genitum, sed Patri and Filio coaeternum, and Consubstantialem. To
give a final determination unto this question, Bernarius Bishop of Amiens, and
Jesse or Asius Bishop of Worms, were sent by the Synod, together with
Adelhardus Abbot of Corbey, unto Leo 3 Bishop of Rome; who confirms the decree
of the Synod, concerning the Procession, as agreeing with his Opinion; yet
speaks very honorably of the Constantinopolitan Fathers (who added not the
particle [ Filioque]) unto whom he would not presume to equal himself: but
withal he expressly charge them to raze it out of the Creed. The sending of
these three by the Synod, is mentioned by a Monk of S. Eparch, in the life of
Charlemaigne. the Answer of Leo, is set down in the Acts of the Synod
collected by Smaragdus, and out of him by Baronius in the year 809, wherein
after much discourse, the said Legates of the Synod thus ask the Pope; Ergo,
ut videmus, illud a vestra Paternitate decernitur, ut primo illud de quo
quaestio agitur, desaepe fato Symbolo tollatur, and tunc demum a quolibet
licite ac libere, sive cantando, sive tradendo, discatur and doceatur. P. Leo
answers; Ita procul dubio a nostra part decernitur; ita quoque, ut a vestra
assentitur a nobis omnimode suadetur. After this, as I said before, he took
order that this Creed should be engraven in a silver Table, or Scutcheon,
without that Addition (which he well foresaw would prove the Aple of contention
between the Churches of East and West) and so to be publikly hanged up, and
exposed to the view of all, that so the whole world might see the Roman Church
had added nothing to the Creed. So Pet. L^mb. witnesses, lib. 1. Sent. Did.
11. Anastas. in the life of Leo 3. Euthymius Zygabenus in Panoplia Dogmat. Tit.
12. Photius in Epist. ad Aquil. Episc. apud Baronium. A. 883.. 9. and Nicetus
Choniates in Orthod. fid. Thesauro, Tom. 21.

Thus Leo 3d left the Nicene Creed, as he found it, without the insertion of
this Particle. Then: for Nicholas 1. and his Successor Adrian, who deceased in
the year 872. They seem not to have added it; for Andrew Bishop of Colosse,
who pleaded in this cause against the Greeks in the Council of Florence,
having diligently revised all that belonged thereto, denies that Photius,
although their bitter enemy for their opinion of the Procession, ever objected
to them their corrupting of the Creed: These are his words; Photius, Romanae
Ecclesiae inimicus acerrimus, nullam de Synodi additione faciens mentionem, in
Nicholaum ac Adrianum summos Pontifices, literis invectus est Plurimum.

Much less did John the 8. the successor of Adrian, make this Addition, who
sat in the Roman See, till the year 882. For this Pope allowed the
Restitution of Photius to his See, and sent his Legates to the Synod held at
Constantinople in the year 879. of which Synod Photius was President, and
wherein, with the assistance of the Popes Legates, whatsoever had been
determined against Photius in the times of P. Nicolas, and Adrian, was
abrogated: amongst which, chiefly that Synod was condemned, which had been
held in the year 869. against Photius, by Ignatius then Patriarch of
Constantinople, and is now counted by the Church of Rome for the 8.
Oecumenicall; whereas the Church of Greece gives that Title to this, wherein
Photius Presided; in which, among other Things there transacted, the Nicene
Creed was also read without the Addition of [ Filioque] and so subscribed to;
yea, that Addition was interdicted; and all this done, Consentientibus Ioannis
Papae Legatis, by the consent of the said Legates of John 8.

The Greeks lay the blame of this Addition on Pope Christopher, who thrust Leo
the Fifth out of his Chair, in the year 908. and after seven Months was in
like manner dejected by Sergius. But Baronius gives a reason to the contrary,
Anno 888. Nullo pacto possunt tribui ista Christophoro, qui invasor Apostolicae
Sedis, mox sede pulsus, perbrevi tempore eam tenuit tumultuose. That is; This
Addition cannot be ascribed to Pope Christopher, who having invaded the
Apostolic See, was quickly thrust out again, having held it but a very little
while, and that in great troubles.

Wherefore, with more probability, we may attribute this Addition to Pope
Sergius, his Successor, who made this business of the Procession his first
and chief work; and sent unto the French Bishops, to gather the most solid
Arguments they could find, against the Error of the Greeks; upon the Receipt
of which letters, a Synod was called at Soissons. 6 Call. Jul. Ao 909. Wherein
Herivaeus Archbishop of Rheimes, earnestly exhorts the Clergy to prosecute the
question against the Photian Errors and Blasphemies, Hortamur vestram
Fraternitatem, says he, ut una me cum, secundum admonitionem Domini Romanae
sedis presidis, singuli nostrum perspectis Patrum, Catholicorum sententiis, de
divinae Scripturae pharetris acutas proferamus sagittas, ad conficiendam
belluam monstri renascentis, and ad terebrandum Caput nequissimi Serpentis.

And, this may be the reason, why the ancient Roman writers, never delivered
to posterity the name of that Pope, who contrary to the Precept and Practice of
his Predecessor Leo 3. undertook to add this Particle to the Creed; namely,
because they were ashamed of such an Author as Sergius, an usurper of the Sea,
and one of a most infamous life; whom if they had alleged, they had laid both
themselves, and their cause, open to the scoffs and railings of the Greeks,
who would greedily have laid hold on such an advantage. Otherwise, it were a
Thing extremely improbable, that the Clergy and Notaries of the Roman Church
should be so grossly negligent, as not to insert a matter of this consequence
into their public Registers; and that all the Ecclesiastical Writers of that
and the next Age, should quite pass over it in silence; Especially, it being
done in a great Synod of Western Bishops, as the forenamed Bishop of Colosse
witnessed in the Council of Florence, when he there disputed in this cause on
behalf of the Roman Church. His words are these; Cyrillus literis mandavit,
Sanctum spiritum esse per Filium, ac Filii esse, and ab ipso profluere; quam
profecto sententiam non dixisset, nisi coactus fuisset haereticorum ipsorum
opinionem evertere; quemadmodum etiam Romanae Ecclesiae contigit: nam maximo in
Gallia, and in Hispaniis, Schismate imminente, cum jam [ex filioque] passim
celebraretur, Romano Pontifici fuit necesse, in multorum Occidentalium amplae
Dignitatis, magnique Consilii Patrum Conventu, addito [ex Filioque] Symbolum
magis illustrare. That is, Cyril has wrote, that the Holy Ghost is by the
Son, and of the Son, and that he proceeds from him; which he had not
declared, unless he had been compelled, thereby to overthrow the opinion of
the Heretics; as it fell out also in the Roman Church; for a great Schism
being now ready to break forth in the Churches of France and Spain, when as
the particle [ Filioque] was commonly used, it was necessary for the Bishop of
Rome, to illustrate the Creed by the Addition of that particle, which he did in
an Assembly of many Western Bishops, and those of the greatest Dignity, and
judgment, Sess. 7a.

About 165 years after the ejection of the Patriarch Photius, Michael
Cerularius vehemently set himself against the Latins; accusing them, not only
concerning the Procession of the Holy Ghost, but also concerning Traditions and
Ceremonies; as for Communicating in unleavened bread, fasting on Saturday etc.
Leo Achridenus, Metropolitan of Bulgaria, seconded him. Michael Psellus, Tutor
to Michael Ducas the Emperor, surnamed Paropinaceus, pursued the quarrel; and
so did Theophylact, who flourished about the year 1070.

Thus began, and thus continued, the deplorable Schism between the Churches of
East and West; the causes whereof were these that follow.

1. The Addition of this particle [ Filioque] to the Nicene, or
Constantinopolitan Creed; not only without, but against the Consent of the
Eastern Churches, who had composed that Creed; but were never called to that
Synod, wherein this Alteration was made; yea, still protested against it. But,
which was more; this Addition was made in contempt of the third general
Council held at Ephesus, which expressly forbad it, and denounced an Anathema
against him, whosoever should dare to alter this Creed, by Addition or
Diminution. cap. 7. For though an Oecumenicall Synod cannot absolutely
prescribe to another Oecumenicall (whence, the first Council of Constantinople
added much, by way of explication, to the Nicene Creed) yet it may prescribe
Laws to Inferior Synods, whether Provincial, or National; so that, nothing
ought to be done in the common cause of the Faith, but by the common Judgment,
and determination of the Catholic Church.

Thus did the Greeks complain. And, when the Latins afterward urged (the
Authority of the Roman See, now growing daily greater) that the Bishop of Rome
by a peculiar privilege, derived from St Peter the Prince of the Apostles, was
to take care that the Church received no Damage; that he had an infallible
Judgment, by the special, Gift of the holy Ghost, in all controversies of
Faith, and authority to decide them, so that there was no necessity he should
expect the judgment of the Eastern Churches; and, that this was the Privilege
of the first See, which had received the Primacy from S. Peter, Christ's vicar
on Earth.

The Greeks replied. First; that S. Peter never challenged that privilege to
himself, to judge alone and to be judged of none; for, being called in
question, that he had conversed with the Gentiles, he was feign to make an
Apology for himself in the public audience of the Church. Act. 11. And when
the Controversy arose, whether the Gentiles should be circumcised, and observe
the Ceremonial Law; no Appeal was made to S. Peter, but a Synod was called,
wherein, though he spoke first yet James, as Bishop of Jerusalem, the place
where the Synod was called, decided the question, and seems to have sat
therein as President. Besides, S. Paul resisted him to his face at Antioch, and
publicly rebuked him for causing others to Judaize by his example; as we Read,
Galatians, 2. 14. Which he would not have presumed to do, if he had conceived
him endued with such a supereminent privilege.

So then, there appears naught in Peter above the rest of the Apostles but a
Primacy of order, or of Dignity, at the most; such as is acknowledged to be fit
in the Church of God; and this Primacy conferred on him, either for that he was
first called, or for his Age, or Zeal, or that he was commonly the first
Speaker, and so rather the Mouth than the Head of the Apostles: but there
appears no Primacy of order or Jurisdiction over his fellow-Apostles. But
suppose we should grant, said they, that Peter had such an unerring, paramount
privilege; yet this might well be personal, and annexed to his Apostleship, not
derivable to any Episcopal successor: and, if derivable; why should the
Bishop of Rome rather arrogate it to himself, than the Bishop of Antioch, in
which City S. Peter first sat? Or, the Bishop of Alexandria, a See instituted
by the same Apostle, under S. Mark, before he ever appointed any Bishop at
Rome? As for the Grounding of this privilege on S. Peter's martyrdom at Rome;
where appears any such Dependence, or legacy bequeathed by S. Peter, that his
Infallibility and Supremacy should be annexed to that Chair alone, as to the
place of his Death and Burial.

It Is true, they confessed, that the Bishop of Rome was of old accounted, Primae
Sedis Episcopus, The Bishop of the Principal See: but withal, they said, that
there was a vast difference between Primacy, and Power; for, if by this
pretense, he should challenge any Authority, or Jurisdiction over the Bishop of
Constantinople, the Second See; Why should not he of Constantinople likewise,
claim the same Power over the Bishop of Alexandria, which is the third? And
so, in like manner, Alexandria over Antioch? Antioch over Jerusalem? An opinion
never heard of, or entertained in the Church of God.

The Bishop of Rome therefore had this primacy, not by divine right, but by
humane, or Ecclesiastical: that is, not from any Apostolical Privilege
derived from S. Peter, but by the grant of Emperors, and Decrees of
Counsels. It was fit, that one Bishop should be chief for order sake; and
this Honor was given to the Bishop of Rome for the Dignity of his Seat, Rome
being the Head of the Roman Empire. For which cause, Alexandria had of old the
Second place, as being Praefectura Augustalis, the Peculiar of the Roman
Emperor, so ennobled by Augustus Caesar: Antioch, the third, as the Metropolis
of Syria, and the Eastern Countries adjoining: whereas, if the preeminency of
Sees had been derived from S. Peter; the City of Antioch, where he sat seven
years in person should have been preferred before Alexandria, whether he only
sent an other, viz, S. Mark, and appointed him for the first Bishop.

And for this cause Caesarea too was made the Metropoliticall See of Palestine,
because it was the seat of the Roman Governor; until the Fathers of the Nicene
Council in honor of Jerusalem, where S. James was made the first Bishop of the
Christian world, and whence the Gospel spread into the whole earth, gave the
Bishop thereof a Patriarchall title, and that, rather of dignity, the^
Authority; for thus runs the seventh Canon of that Council, Quoniam mos
antiquus obtinuit, and vetusta Traditio, ut Aeliae, id est, Hierosolimorum
Episcopo honor Deferatur, habeat consequenter honorem, manente tamen
Metropolitanae Civitatis (Caesareae) propria Dignitate. that is, Because, from
an old Custom and Tradition, honuor has been given to the Bishop of Aelia,
that is, of Jerusalem, let him have Honor accordingly, provided that the
Dignity of the metropolitan City ( Cesarea) remain entire.

For the same cause also, when Constantinople was reedifyed, made the seat of
the Empire, and called new Rome, by Constantine the Great, it was thought fit
by the Emperors and succeeding Counsels, that the Bishop of Alexandria should
no longer have the Second, but the third Place, Constantinople now succeeding
in that honor; for thus runs the fifth Canon of the first Council of
Constantinople, Constantinopolitanae Civitatis Episcopum habere oportet
Primatus honorem post Romanum Episcopum, propter quod sit nova Roma. that is,
The Bishop of Constantinople ought to have the next place of honor after the
Bishop of Rome, because his City is new Rome. And because there could not be
two Seeds primae, two first or chief Sees; the same Council ordained that the
Bishop of Constantinople should be styled, the second Patriarch, but in all
other things, should be of equal Dignity and Authority with the Bishop of Rome.

So, in all the rest; whosoever will please to compare the Prelates Sees with
the Notitia Imperii, shall find that the Church still accommodated her
Hierarchy of Mertropolita^s, Archbishops, and Bishops, unto the state of the
Empire, the distinction of Provinces, and the Dignity of the Cities, according
to that ancient Rule, Ecclesia est in Republica, non Respublica in Ecclesia,
The Church is in the Commonwealth, not the Commonwealth in the Church.

2. The second cause of the Schism, was the Deposition and Excomunication of
the Patriarch Photius, and of the other Prelates, and Abbots his adherents, in a
great Synod at Constantinople, held under the Emperor Basiliu^, and the
Patriarch Ignatius, in the year 869, which business was mainly urged, and
furthered by two Bishops of Rome successively, viz. Nicolas the first, and
Adrian the second.

3. The third cause, was the Rash and Inconsiderate Zeal of the said Patriarch
Photius, who first dared to accuse the Roman Church of Heresy, because it held
that the holy Ghost proceeded from the Son, as well as from the Father;
whereas in all former disputes between the Greeks and the Latins, whether by
word or writing, neither party accused his Adversary of Heresy, for holding
either opinion: Yea, the Latins Demo^strated, that some of the Greek Fathers
spoke as they did; neither, could the Greeks deny it. And since this
precipitate Censure of Photius, not a few of the Roman Divines have, in
requital, accused the Greek Church of the same Crime, for holding the
Contrary.

4. The fourth cause, was the contention about the Primacy between the Bishops
of Rome and Constantinople. For John surnamed Iejunator, and Cyriacus his
successor Patriarchs of Constantinople, were very earnest with the emperor
Mauritius to obtain the Title and Authority of Oecumenicall Patriarchs,
thereby challenging a Superiority over the Bishops of the whole Christian
World, from the Dignity of their City, which was then the Head of the Roman
Empire, that of the West being utterly broken, and Rome the Ancient Seat
thereof, for that Cause loosing its former Dignity. Now, against these their
endeavors Gregory the great then Bishop of Rome, publicly opposed himself
and taxed them in express Terms, of Antichristian ambition; saying withal,
that, Dato uni Episcopi universalis Titulo, reliquos Sacerdotes honor debito
privari, The giving of the Title of Universal Bishop unto one, does deprive
the other Bishops of their due Honor. Yet, with in less than two years after
his Death, Boniface the Third, his Successor abtained the same Title of the
Emperor Phocas, which Gregory had so much Decried. But the Greek Prelates
would never yield to it.

5. The fifth cause, was the business of Images, which brake out after this
contention about the Primacy. For the Emperor Leo Isaurus, and his son
Constantinus Copronymus, interdicted the worship thereof, and commanded them to
be broken; Both of them, for this Cause, being very hateful to the Church of
Rome.

6. A sixth cause, was the Pride, Pomp, and Covetous Exactions of the Popes
Legates who were yearly sent from Rome, to carry the Chrisme unto
Constantinople.

7. The seventh, and last cause, was the Division of East, and West Empire,
caused by Leo 3. Bishop of Rome; who seeing Italy, and more especially his own
Church and City, daily vexed, and in danger of imminent Ruin, by the
incursions of the Saracen^ on the East, and the oppression of the Lombardes
from the West; and seeing that the Greek Emperor, at his earnest
solicitation, either would not, or could not protect him: In fine, he persuaded
the Senate, and people of Rome, to elect Charlemaigne* Emperor of the West,
which they did; and he accordingly crowned him at Rome, in St Peter's Church,
upon Christmas Day Ao Dni 800.

Thus, this great Breach had its original both from Prince, and Prelate. The
Emperors became odions to the Popes, for the business of Images; and the
Popes to the Greek Emperors, for the Division of the Empire. Then, for the
Clergy; The contention about the Primacy made way for the Schism. The Pride,
Pomp, and Avarice of the Roman Legates, fomented it. Then, the Doctrine of the
Procession, acco^pained with the Deposition of Photius, and the adding of the
particle [ Filioque] to the Nicene Creed, on the one side; with the retortion
of Heresy, wherewith Photius charged the Latin Church, on the other; brought
it to the Height. And when the Differences were thus high, then every petty
diversity in matter of Ceremony, or opinion, was a sufficient occasion of
Cavil, and served to make the Breach wider.

For, to insist a little upon this last. The Greeks celebrate the Eucharist in
both kinds, and give it to Infants, presently upon their Baptism; but the
Romanists do neither. They give it also in leavened bread, and condemn the
contrary use; whereas the Church of Rome usually delivers it in light
Wafer-cakes. They admit of Priests marriages, that is, the use of those wives
whom they married before ordination; which the Romanists do not. They prohibit
the fourth marriage in any Christian as a thing intolerable. They solemnize
Saturday festivally, in memory of the Creation, and eat flesh therein;
forbidding as unlawful, to fast any Saturday in the year, except Easter Eve,
in memory of our Saviors then lying in the Grave. They Eat no blood, nor any
thing strangled, in observation of that Decree of the Apostles. Act. 15 28, 29.
They observe four Lents in the year. They reject the religious use of massy
Images, or statues in their Churches; though they admit of Pictures or plain
Images. They disallow private Masses, and the sale of Indulgences, and Pardons;
with the Adoration of the elevated Host: lastly, they have their service in a
known Tongue. In these, and some other small particulars, they differ in
practice from the Roman Church* And, as in matter of practice so in opinion
too; as about Transubstantiation, Purgatory, the State of Souls departed etc.

But, too much of the causes, and the sad effects that followed. The great head
of his Church, unite all his members, to himself, and each other, in Verity,
and Unity, in the same Faith and the same Love. He who is the Wisdom of his
Father, supply his Church with that VVisdome from above, which is first pure,
then peaceable; that so, it may seek, and seeking obtain those two
inestimable Blessings, Truth, and Peace. The Great Physician of Souls, in his
due time, apply an effectual Salve to heal up these Wounds of his torn,
mangled Spouse. The Great Shepherd of his Church, who came to bind up that
which was broken, to seek that which was lost, to recollect the dispersed
ones; and who once brake down the partition wall between Jew and Gentile,
bring his Scatterd Sheep into one Fold here, and hereafter set them at his
right Hand in his Heavenly Kingdom.

FINIS.
ERRATA
PAge 3. lin. 24. for sunt read sicut. p. 9. l. 24. r. 2 Cor. 1. 24. p. 17. l.
21. r. Marcellus Ancyranus. p. 88. l. 16. r. Contextio. p. 102. l. 32. r. Heb.
6. 1. p. 105. l. 20, 21. r. this -- testimony. p. 117. l. 19. r. his comments.
p. 118. l. 14. r. where. p. 122. l. 12. r. this. p. 116. l. 25. r. discessuri.
p. 128. l. 19. r. confinem. p. 141. l. 17. r. Melania. p. 145. l. 31. r. God:
p. 157. l. 6. r. form. p. 159. l. 23. r. out of. p. 161. l. 31. r. Test. p.
173. l. 29. r. this. p. 174. l. 27. r. Moscovitish. p. 175. l: 34. r. Act. 8.
37. p. 179. l: 21. r: is. p. 181. l. 12. r. spoke. p. 183. l. 22. r.
generality. p. 189. l. 16. r. or. p. 193. l. 15. r. words. and l. 25. thus. p.
196. l. 20. r. ita. p. 204. l. 12. r. commonly. p. 205. l. 12. f. in the. r. to
be. p. 207. l. 34. r. unjust. p. 209. l. 11. r. Areop. p. 210. l: 9. r. (...).
p. 214. l. 31. r: or. p. 223. l: 18. Creed made by. p. 245. l: 34. r. Lauraeus.
p. 252. l: 9. r: Haymo.


