A Remonstrance, AGAINST PRESBITERY.

Exhibited by diverse of the NOBILITY, GENTRY, MINISTERS and INHABITANTS of
the County PALATINE. OF CHESTER with the Motives of that REMONSTRANCE.

TOGETHER WITH A SHORT SURvey of the Presbyterian Discipline.

Showing the inconveniences of it; and the inconsistency thereof with the
constitution of this State, being in its Principles destructive to the Laws and
Liberties of the People.

With a brief Review of the Institution, Succession, Jurisdiction of the
ancient and venerable Order of Bishops.

Found to be instituted by the Apostles, continued ever since, grounded on the
Laws of God, and most agreeable to the Law of the Land.

By Sir THOMAS ASTON Baronet.

Horace, lib. 1. Epist. 2. Vt iugulent homines, surgunt de nocte latrones,

Vt teipsum serves non expergisceris?

Because my people has forgotten me, they have burnt incens to vanity, and
they have caused them to stumble in their ways, from the ancient paths, to walk
in paths in a way not cast up.

Jeremiah, 18.15. Printed for John Aston. 1641.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
Most dread Sovereign,
Far be it from my ambition, to presume your sacred Majesty should mispend
your more precious minutes upon the perusal of this weak essay of my loyal
affections to my Parents; My King, the Father of his people, Bonus Rex nihi. a
bono patre diffet^ and patria dicitur a patre, quia haber communem patrem, qui
est pater patriae.
to whom by the Law of nature I owe Faith and Allegiance: Ligeance or faith of
the subjects is due to the King by the law of Nature. Cokes Post not.
My Mother the Church, in whose bosom I have been fostered with the pure food
of life, the Word of Truth.

Yet Sir, since your Majesty was pleased so graciously to approve of the mere
Text or Abstrast of this Treatise (The Remonstrance of many of your humble
loyal Subjects of that your devoted County of Chester) it is a duty in me
humbly to beg your Majesty's leave, that it may under your Princely patronage
walk abroad with this Comment, it having by misprision or malice, been
pursued with some unjust clamours, And the pure intents of the subscribers have
been expoz'd to a sinister interpretation who I am certain had no other end
but to express their loyal desires to prevent a growing danger.

I confess my own insufficiency to perform so great a task, I foresee the
calumny that inevitably attends every good intention, since Traducers bark at
those Elephants, whose strength of learning might support a Church, against all
the batteries of wit or reason: How must I look to have these Bats flutter
about me, who in namelesse pamphlets, fill the air, and the ears of every one
with nothing, but shrikes and outcrie, against all Government, Invectives
against all Governors of the Church.

But I have read of one borne dumb, who seeing his Father in danger, affection
supplied the defects both of art and nature, and in an i^stant lent him organs
and language to forewarne his Fathers peril. This excites me to proceed; since
God has given me sense to speak plain English; and (I thank him) spirit to
speak truth: it were an argument of affectation to my self, if out of
distrust of my own abilities to write Placentia, (to win popular applause) I
should silence my apprehension of the danger imminent over King and Church,
which more leisure, or perhaps more curiosity, has given me that occasion to
look into, (may be) many better able have omitted.

Visible it is to every eye, what assaults are made by such inveighours against
the long established Government of the Church, under that reverend Order of
Bishops, but it is not so easily discernable how much this may concern your
Majesty. yet Experience will tell us if we look abroad, that all those
Monarchies have Suffered an EClipse where the rights of the Churh have been
deserted: And no marvel, if it be well looked into, Crowns carry a charm with
them at the consecrtion of Kings

Exellently learned and satisfactory I must confess are the Treatises of many
great Divines in defense of this Order, But Ars non habet inimicum praeter
ignorantem, and some of these have erred in writing above the capacity of their
opposers. Artists judge best of a Diamond without a foil, know it by it is own
Rays: but the inexpert only by comparison with other stones. I have placed
Episcopac^ and Presbytery in parallel; such as my self doubtl^sse will better
distinguish them in plain prospect, than in mere speculation. The Bishops are
suspect as parties, all that is writ by them as partial; To all but the
preiudicate, sure I stand unsuspest, being as free borne, as independent as any
man, I have no interest, but the love of truth and liberty; save that of
loyalty; which when I consider to how gracious a Prince I owe that duty I
confess it appears a great tie: he that shall read those public
prosessions of grace to both your houses (and it is pity but they should be read
and registered in the hearts of all your people) I shall willingly concur with
you to reform all Innovations in Church and Commonwealth, The Kings speech to
both Houses. 23. Ianuar. 1640.
to regulate all Courts of Justice according to Law, (and that) what ever part
of my revenue shall be found illegal, or grievous to the public, I will
willingly lay down, relying entirely upon the affections of my people. And
shall be privy to that pledge of free grace given under your Majesty's hand
and seal to that your County upon the humble representation of their loyal
affections to the peace of Church and State, in those words (which I assure my
self we shall ever keep as royal Records) We being desirous with the advice
and assistance of Parliament to redress all just grievances, The Kings letter
to the Lords and Gentry of the County Palatine of Chester.
and resolved by Gods grace, to preserve the purity of Religion, and govern
according to Law. He I say, that shall but read these, sure needs no oath of
Allegiance, but will bend all his endeavors to support all his prayers to
perpetuate that Crown to all posterity, under whose Royal shade, we have
such happy assurances to receive justice, to enjoy our Religion, Liberty, and
Laws.

These Considerations have encouraged me to represent the Government of a
Presbitery (as it yet appears) by their own Writers, Incompatible with your
Majesty's Soveraigntie, destructive to your peoples liberties, wherein your
Majesty pardoning the presumption, and casting a favorable eye upon the good
intention: such as malign truth, or your Majesty's prosperity can vent their
venom against no man, less values it, then

Your Majesty's most loyal Subject, and humble Servant, THO. ASTON

To the Reader.
Reader,
I Did never expect to salute thee from the Press, yet I am now forced to it,
finding my name upon every Stationers stall, first assumed without my privity,
to countenance (an imperfect truth, which yet I must avow ( The Cheshire
Remonstrance, improperly called, A Petition.) Secondly, abused by an absolute
untruth, the spurious issue of some brainsick Anabaptist, injuriously fathered
upon that County, and styled The answer to that Petition, therein disavowing
me; yet I must give him more thanks that printed the latter then the first:
That exposed me to censure, This invites me to justify my self, to vindicate
my Country: The first, starting out naked without the papers to which it
relates, appears like a shadow without a substance, or a Comment without a
Text, yields every man discourse, few men satisfaction. To explain this Riddle,
I have inserted that Petition, those posititions which were annexed, and were
the occasion of our Remonstrance. Thou that art doubtful or have censured Ex
part, take in evidence, the whole truth, then give thy verdict.

The latter has nothing in it worth my answer, nor thy note, but that it is
merely fictitious, false In toto, and in qualibet part.

Never any such Petition seen in Cheshire, never presented to the house, noe
such persons ever signed it.

For thy better satisfaction, know we have but five Noblemen in Cheshire, four
of which, signed the first Petition; of Knights Baronets, Knights, and
Esquires, I know not above two in the whole County, that do desire the
abolition of the Episcopal order, we have not in all so many Divines, as are
said to have underwrit, and fourscore and ten of those have signed the
Remonstrance, most of the rest were never asked. And for the Gentry and
inhabitants, I do confidently believe not one of either, but will protest
against that Libell, not one of a hundred, but (that question being singlely
stated, whether they desire the continuance of Bishops, or to submit to a
Presbytery) will with their hands witness their hearts affections to the
preservation of that order, established by our Laws, the observation of which
Laws, must preserve the continuation of our liberties.

But thou will less admire his boldness to traduce a Country, when thou
shall find him so impudent as to belie the Gospel.

To delude the (ignorant or negligent) Reader, he stuffs his Margin full of
Texts, of which thou shall not find one for his purpose: He takes upon him to
prove, that the Apostles always ordained sundry Bishops in every particular
Congregation, and those of equal power and authority: for proof whereof, he
quotes Act 11.30. Acts 11. verse 27, 28, 29, 30. C. a lapide, Acts 11.31.
but take the precedent verses with it, and see what thou can conclude thence
(a.) And in those days came Prophets from Jerusalem to Antioch, and there
stood up one of them named Agabus, and signified by the Spirit that there
should be great dearth, thorowout all the world, which came to pass in the
days of Claudius Caesar. Then the Disciples every man aecording to his ability
determined to send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in Judea, which also
they did, and sent it to the Elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.

By which it is very probable, as is the opinion of C. a Lapide, and others,
was chiefly meant the Deacons, Nec alia tunc fuit Diaconorum ratio, quam sub
Apostolis oblationes enim fidelium quotidianas et anuos Ecclesiae proventus
recipiebant ut conferent in veros, usus, id est partim Ministris, partim
pauperibus, alendis distribuerent. Episcopi tamen arbitrio cui and oeconomiae
suae rations quotidianas reddebant. Calvin Institut. lib 4. cap. 4. sect. 5.
whose office was to collect and treasure up the benevolences for the relief
of the Presbyters, and of the poor, as is agreed by all Writers.

Now he would apply the word Elders which is in the Latin Presbyteri only to
the Bishops: whereas that word did usually imply all the Ministers of the
Church. As it is explained by that vast learned Lyra, and the harmony of all
the Fathers upon that place of Acts 14. Lyra cap. 14. Acts Tom. 6. fol. 1144.
Et cum instituissent illis per singulas Ecclesias Presbyteros etc. dicit nomine
presbyterorum, intelliguntur etiam alii Ecclesiae Ministri ut Episcopi,
Diaconi, and huiusmodi* Vid. Chrysostom upon the Epist. to Titus fol. 1700.
And when they had ordained them Elders in every Church, etc. (He says) by the
name of Elders is also to be understood all other Ministers of the Church, as
Bishops, and Deacons, and such like.

All the rest of his quotations are but mere citing of Texts out of a
Concordance where ever he finds the word Elder, quoting it for a Bishop, never
observing whether it be for him, or against him; As to prove them of equal
authority, he cites, 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well be counted
worthy of double honor, it is a strange conclusion, ergo, equal in authority.
Chrysostom. 1. cap. ad Titum, Paulus Tito multorum Episcopor iudicium commisit.


Likewise to prove that one Bishop is not set over many Churches, he quotes
Titus, who as it appears by the subscription of that Epistle, was ordained the
first Bishop of the Cretians; Saint Chrysostom upon that Chapter, says, Paul
committed to Titus the judgment of many Bishops. And Lyra Lyra paulus
instituit Titum Archi Episcopum Cretensium.
upon the same Chapter, that Paul instituted Titus Archbishop of the Cretians,
with whom agree our late Writers, amongst which Erasmus more fully in his
Argument on the Epistle to Titus observes, Erasmus tom. 6. fol. 354. Titum
discipulum suum ob eximias dotes Insulae nobilissimoe Cretae, praefecerat
Apostolus, and illic abiens Archiepiscopum consecrarat, monet autem quod ipse,
apud Cretenses per singulas civitates episcopos instituat, quos and presbyteros
vocat idoneum episcopi formam praescribens, etc.
that Paul set Titus his Disciple, for his excellent gifts, over the Cretians,
and departing thence, consecrated him Archbishop, admonishing him to institute
Bishops (which he also calls Presbyters) in every City, prescribing him the
fit endowments of a Bishop.

With like liberty does he abuse History, unworthily assuming the name of that
reverend Patriot, Archbishop Usher Usher de britannie^ ecclesiae primord.
to patronize his fictions, who only historically recites the several
opinions of Authors concerning the first induceing of the Christian faith into
England, whether by James the son of Zebedec, Simon Zelotes, Simon Peter, or
Joseph of Arimathea, ann. 63. after Christ, Usher ibid. fol 7. si quidem
Metaphrastae credimus, apud quem legimus petrum in britann longo tempore fuisse
moratum, etc. ecclesias constituisset episcopos, presbyteros, and diaconos
ordinasset. 12. Caesaris Neronis rursus Romam reversum esse.
or others; which if all admitted for truths conclude nothing to the governing
of the land withou Bishops (for some hundred years from the first plantation of
the Gospel) but rather the clear contrary, I shall give thee Reader, that
Fathers own words, (whereby) judge what truth is to be expected from sueh
juggler^, First he cites Metaphrastes, in whom (says he) we read that Peter
was a long time in Brittannie, and drew many Countries to the Christian faith,
but at last when he had illuminated many with the light of the word, and had
constituted Churches, he ordained Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons returning to
Rome the 12. y^er of Nero Caesar: here were the several degrees of dignities.
Again he recites Aristobulus, Aristobulum quoque cuius ipse in epistola ad
Romanos meminit, britannorum episcopum a paulo ordinatum in Menaeis Graecorum.
Usher fol. 9.
whom Paul mentions in his Epistle to the Romans, and was one of his seventy
Disciples, him Paul ordained Bbishop of the Britains. (This was a large
Parish) Next he relates many diversities of opinions concerning Joseph of
Arimathea his being in England, Usher fol. 24. licet hoc fuisse verum (quod
tamen non fuit) non sequitur ergo quod totum solium illud suscepit fidem.
and concludes, that although it were true (which it was not) yet it follows
not that therefore all the land had received the faith; for it might be
dispersed amongst private persons, but was never received by the whole kingdom,
nor came they to have Christian Churches till Lucius time, as is confessed by
that reverend Bishop, Public vero primum sub Lucio and Elutherio receptum hic
fuisse Evangelium consentiens nostrorum historicorum est sententia Usher ibid.
fol. 52.
That the Gospel was first publicly received here under Lucius and
Elutherius, with which accords Master Fox in his Martyrs; That from Peter, Anno
65. after Christ, Elutherius was the twelf^h successive Bishop of Rome, Acts
and Monuments fol. 34. Hieron. lib. de viris illustr. Iraeneus lib. 3. cap. 3.
Acts and Monumets fol. 107. Usher Brit. eccles. primord. fol. 54. and 59.
who about Anno 161. sent Fugacius or Fuganus, and Dimianus or Damianus which
converted first the King and people of Britain, and baptized them with the
Baptism and Sacrament of Christ's faith. The Temples of Idolatry and all other
Monuments of Gentility they subverted, converting the people from their diverse
and many Gods to serve one living God: There were in Britain 28. head Priests,
which they called Flamines, and three Archpriests which they called
Archflamines, having the oversight of manners, and as Judges. Those 28.
Flamines they turned to 28. Bishops, and the three Archflamynes to three
Archbishops, having their seats in three principal Cities: which being Master
Fox his own words according with the Bishop, Usher ibid. ^o. 59.
you may observe how a liar confounds himself; for he first says, The Church of
England was governed some hundred years without Bishops from the first
plantation: and in the next line he disproves himself, That in the instant of
the conversion of the Church, and supplantation of idolatry were planted
Bishops, from whence he concludes an excellent Argument: Because they were
instituted by Elutherius the twelfth successive Bishop of Rome from the Apostle
Peter (Non interrupta serie) Converted the people to the true God, subverted
idolatry, and supplanted the heathen Priests; Ergo, They are of Ethnicall or
Diabolical, not Apostolical institution.

Truly (Reader) I have spent too much time on him, but it is to admonish the
vulgar with the Apostle Paul, to stop their ears against such Libellers, and 1 Timothy verse. 45.6.
Not to give heed to fables: The end of the Commandment is Charity out of a
pure heart, and of a good Conscience, and of faith unfeigned, from which some
have swerved unto vain jangling, desiring to be teaehers of the Law,
understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirmed. I do it to
persuade some able Divine (not to mispend time to answer the matter of their
Pamphlets, but) that it will be time well spent to discover the falsehood of
such saucie-untaught-teachers, as here the Apostle speaks of; to display their
misquotations, and distortions of Scripture.

It is the best and quickest plea to take away the testimony of a false
witness, to prove him formerly perjured. And in this point, the works of such
persons thoroughly traced, they will best be rendered despicable to the world.

For though the Prophecy of Saint Paul, 2 m. 4. 3
That the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine, but after
their own lusts shall they heap up to themselves teachers, having itching
ears, and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned
unto falbes is in these days most evidently manifested of many. yet charity
forbids us to censure all to seek untruth for; its own sake, many no doubt are
deluded with that species of truth, which (the pretended though abused
quotations of Scripture) they stuff their books withal carries with it, which
I dare promise any man that will take pains to examine will scarce find
patience to read any more of them.

Reader, I have wandered too long from thee, but now return not to beg thy
approbation, (I Court no man's) but to advise thee for thine own sake: That
being falsehood is so bold to offer to outface truth in pirnt to let all
whispered detractions (from which no Good, work is free) be rejected by thee,
and receive and weigh these following truths of the manner of procuring the
subscriptions, and the reasons of presenting that Remonstrance, the carriage
whereof is testified the contents avowed by thy friend if thou art either a
freeman or a Protestant.

THO. ASTON

THE REMONSTRANCE REPRESENTED TO THE HOUSE OF Peers, by Sir THOMAS ASTON
Baronet from diverse Noblemen, and Gentlemen, of the County-Palatine of CHESTER,
against PRESBYTERIAN Government.
To the High and Honorable Court of Parliament, The Nobility, Knights Gentry
Ministers, Freehoulders, and Inhabitants of the Countie-Palatine of Chester
whose names are subscribed in the several Schedules hereunto annexed
Humbly Show
THat whereas diverse Petitions have lately been carried about this Country,
against the present form of Church Government (and the hands of many persons of
ordinary quality solicited to the same, with pretense to be presented to this
honorable Assembly) which we conceiving not so much to aim at reformation, as
absolute Innovation of Government, and such as must give a great advantage to
the adversaries of our Religion, we held it our duty to disavow them all: And
humbly pray, that we incur no miscensure, if any such clamours have without
our privitie) assumed the name of the County.

We as others, are sensible of the Common grievances of the Kingdom, and have
just cause to rejoice at and acknowledge with thankfulness the pious care
which is already taken for the suppressing of the growth of Popery, the better
supply of able Ministers, and the removing of all Innovation, and we doubt not
but in your great wisdoms, We conceived it not proper for us by way of prayer
to intermeddle, but by way of submission to leave these to the Judgment of the
Parliament.
you will regulate the rigor of Ecclesiastical Courts to suit with the temper
of our Laws, and the nature of freemen.

Yet when we consider that Bishops were instituted in the time of the Apostles
philip. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3.1.
. That they were the great Lights of the Church in all the first general
Counsels, Anno. Bishops. 330. at Nice. 318 380. at Constant. 150 430. at
Ephesus. 200 451. at Chalcedon. 430 553. at Constant. 165 681. at Constant. 289
781. at Nice. 350 870. at Constant. 383
; That so many of them sowed the seeds of Religion in their bloods, and rescued
Christianity from utter extirpation in the Primitive heathen persecutions, Vid.
Eusebius Fox his Martyrs.
; That to them we owe the redemption of the purity of the Gospel we now
profess from Romish corruption, Vid. book of Martyrs. Cranmer Tutor to Ed. 6.
. That many of them for the propagation of that truth, became such glorious
Martyrs; A Cranmer, B. Latimer, ^. Ridley B. Hooper, B. Park. A Parker, A.B
Gri. B. Whitegift, etc. vid. book of martyrs.
. That diverse of them (lately and) yet living with us, have been so great
assertors of our Religion against its common enemy of Rome; Bishop Jewel,
Bishop Andrews, bishop White, Archbishop Usher, Bishop Moreton, Bishop
Davenant, and our English Seneca, Bishop Hall.
. And that their government has been so long approved, so often established by
the Common and Statut Laws of this Kingdom, Bracton lib. 3. fol. 106. Flet. a
lib. 7.24. Coo. Little. fol. 97. 134. stat. 14. E. 3. 25. E. 3. 16. R. 2. H.
8.20.1.8.9. Eli.
. And as yet nothing in their doctrine (generally taught) dissonant from the
word of God, or the Articles established by Law: Partiucular men; (errors
cannot be aken for the Tenets of the Church.
In this case to call their Government; a perpetual vassalage, an intolerable
bondage, And (prima facie, and inaudita altera part) to pray the present
removal of them; or (as in some of their petitions) to seek the utter
dissolution, an^ ruin of their offices (as Antichristian) The petition
annexed, note 6.
we cannot conceive to relish of Justice or Charity, nor can we join with them.

But on the contrary, when we consider the tenor of such writings, as in the
name of petitions are spread amongst the common people, the tenants preached
publicly in Pulpits, The positions annexed,
and the contents of many printed Pamphlets swarming amongst us; all of them
dangerously exciting a disobedience to the established form of government, and
their several intimatious of the desire of the power of the keys, Petition
anexed, note 4.
And that their congregations may execute Ecclesiastical Censures within
themselves; Petition annexed note 19.
We cannot but express our just fears, that their desire is to introduce an
absolute Innovation of Presbyteriall Government, whereby we who are now
governed by the Canon and Civil Laws, dispensed by twenty fix Ordinaries
(easily responsall to Parliaments for any deviation from the rule of Law)
conceive we should become exposed to the mere Arbitrary Government of a numerous
Presbytery, who together with their ruling Elders, will arise to near forty
thousand Church Governors, and with their adherents, must needs bear so great
a sway in the Commonwealth that if future inconvenience shall be found in that
government, we humbly offer to consideration, h w these shall be reducible by
Parliaments, how consistent with a Monarchy, and how dangerously conducible to
an Anarchie, which we have just cause to pray against, as fearing the
consequences would prove the utter loss of Learning and Laws, which must
necessarily produce an extermination of Nobility, Gentry, and Order, if not of
Religion.

With what vehemency of spirit, these things are prosecuted, and how plausibly
such popular infusions spread as incline to a parity, we held it our duty to
represent to this honorable Assem^ly; And humbly pray that some such present
course be taken, as in your wisdoms shall be thought fit, to suppress the
future dispersing of such dangerous discontents amongst the common people; we
having great cause to fear, that of all the distempers that at present threaten
the welfare of this state, there is none more worthy the mature and grave
consideration of this honorable Assembly, then to stop the torrent of such
spirits, before they swell beyond, the bounds of Government, Then we doubt not
but his Majesty persevering in his gracious inclination to hear the
complaints and, relieve the grievances of his Subjects in frequent Parliaments,
it will so unite the head and the body, so indissolubly cement the affections
of his people to our Royal Sovereign, that without any other change of
Government, he can never want Revenue, nor we Justice.

We have presumed to annex a Copy of a Petition (or Libell) dispersed, and
certain positions preached in this County, which we conceive imply matter of
dangerous consequence to the peace both of Church and State: All which we
humbly submit to your great Judgments, praying they may be read, And shall
ever pray, etc Directed to the house of Peers, And subscribed by the
Lieutenant of the County. Three other Noblemen. Knights Baronets, Knights, and
Esquires, fourscore and odd. Divines fourscore and ten. Gentlemen, two
hundred threescore and odd. Freeholders and other inhabitants, above six
thousand: None of them Popish Recusants, And all of the same County.


The Petition which was spread abroad in the Country amongst the Common
people, by some private Persons to procure hands, but was concealed from the
Gentry: A Copy wher^of was annexed to the Remonstrance, and was complained of,
having injuriously assumed the Name of the Humble Petition of the Freeholders,
and the rest of the Inhabitants within the County of Chester (which might
seem to involve the whole County,)
Shows,
THat whereas the manifold unsupportable burdens wherewithal our Consciences
and estates have been long oppressed, with a continual increase thereof, have
at last so tired and infeebled our strength, that we find our selves unable to
subsist any longer under the weight thereof: we dare not now neglect to take
the present opportunity of serving the Lords providence in the use of this
means, which we hope is of his own appoynting for our relief: But as we have
in some measure implored God, who is the blessed Author; so we thought our
selves bound humbly to Petition this honorable and renowned Assembly (convened
in Parliament) for redress of our miseries, being the likelyest instrument, so
far as we apprehend (not limiting the Holy one of Israel) for that end and
purpose, which we humbly pray may be duly considered, as we make bold to tender
them in these few Lines following.

Our miseries are such as are either Ecclesiastical or Civil; first
Ecclesiastical, and that in regard of the usurping Prelates, their lawless
dependent officers, and their irregular manner of worshipping God prescribed
unto, and cruelly imposed upon us by them: for as touching the Prelates
themselves, we conceive them to be the Popes Substitutes (per accidens) at the
least, if not by solemn covenanted allegiance, as it may appear by their
Lording it over Gods heritage, both Pastors and People, and assuming the power
of the Keys only to themselves, contrary to Gods sacred word.

Therefore we humbly Petition you this honorable Assembly, as you tender the
glory of God, the Kings Prerogative, the Subjects liberty, the purity of Gods
sacred Ordinances, and the welfare of Posterity, or wish the downfall of
Antichrist and his adherents, to stir up the zeal and strength wherewith the
Lord has endued you, and courag^ously proceed (unto your immortal praise)
against these his mighty enemies, and secret underm^n^rs of the good estate of
our Church and Commonwealth, and utterly dissolve their Offices, which give
l^fe to the most superstitious practices in or about the worship of God: And so
together with the ruin of their Antichristian Offi^es and Government, we also
humbly pray may fall to the ground their impious Courts, with all their
dependant Officers, (even from the Chancellors to the Parators) their corrupt
Canons, book of Articles, the English refined Masse-booke of Common Prayer,
with all their popish significant Ceremonies therein contained; the strict
imposing whereof, has driven out of this our English Nation many of our most
godly and able Ministers, and other his Majesty's loyal Subjects, able both
for person and estate to have done good service to God, our King and Country.

Secondly our Civil miseries are chiefly these.

First, That the tenths of all our goods should be taken from us, by Parsons,
Impropriators, and in some places by Recusants, under a pretense of maintaining
the Ministry; and yet notwithstanding we forced in diverse places to
maintain a Ministry out of the rest of our estates, if we will have any, and
to repair our Churches, which have been of late very excessive and
superstitious.

Secondly, That Suits in Law are so long unnecessarily detained in Civil Courts
before judgment be had, whereby diverse persons have their estates utterly
ruined, and others much decayed.

Thirdly, That the Oath in Courts Leet and Baron is usually administered without
limitation, and before the charge be given, so that the Jurors cannot swear in
judgment as the Lord requires they should.

Fourthly, That the County Court is kept upon the Monday, and thereby we are
put unto excessive charges in traveling thereto, unless we should labor
upon the Lords day next before.

Fifthly, that our Country is very destitute of sufficient Schoolemasters for
the educating of our Children, and fitting them for the service of God, our
King, and Commonweal.

Sixthly, that there are such excessive fines by some Gentlemen imposed upon
their Tenants, as that thereby they are both disabled to maintain their
families, (whence arises so many poor people) and to do his Majesty
service, and pay him lawful tribute.

Therefore that these our grievances both Ecclesiastical and Civil may be
redressed, and that the contrary privileges which Christ has purchased and
commanded us to stand unto, may be obtained and established; We most humbly
beg that the revealed will of God contained in the Books of the Old and New
Testaments, and recorded for our practice in the days of the gospel, may be
that Rule which your Honors would be pleased to follow. O what glory would it
be unto our God, our King and Nation, what beauty unto our Church, what honor
unto this Noble Parliament, and what confusion to the enemies of his Majesty
and loyal Subjects: if we might see the moral Doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles made old Englands Canons; then might our Ministers have liberty to
preach Gods world, and administer the Sacraments according to the mind of
Christ, and our Congregation power to execute Ecclesiastical Censures within
themselves: Then might his Majesty's Subjects meet together, and pray for the
King and Queen and their Posterity, without punishment and false Calumniation.
O this would make our peace with God, and good men; this would gain our
friends, and scatter our enemies: This would make our Land impregnable, and our
Soldiers courageable; This would unite our Kingdom in peace, and cause us and
our little ones to sleep in safety; This would call back the banished, and
release the Lords imprisoned: this would advance our Mord^cais, and hang our
wicked Hamans: This would replant our conscionable Ministers, and supplant our
Lordly Pr^lacy: This would take away illegal exactions, and bring our people
to due subjection: this would take away extorted Herriots, excessive Fines, and
unlimited Boones, for it would learn Landlords more compassion, and Tenants
due submission; yea, this would make a sweet Harmony betwixt Rule and
Obedience in all Relations.

Which that it may now happily be effected, we earnestly implore the Lord of
Heaven to bend your noble spirits to this great work of God, which so sweetly
ushereth al other comforts.

And so we shall ever pray, etc.

The Positions annexed also to the Remonstrance.
Certain Positions preached at St. John's Church in Chester by Mr. Samuel Eaton
a Minister lately returned from new England upon Sunday being the third day of
January 1640. in the afternoon.

FIrst, That the names of Parsons and Vicars are Antichristian.

2. The Pastors and Teachers of particular Congregations, must be chosen by the
people, or else their entrance is not lawful.

3. That all things which are of Humane invention in the worship of God (under
which he seemed chiefly to comprehend the book of Common prayer, and the rites
and Ceremonies therein prescribed) are unsavory and loathsome unto God.

4. That Ecclesiastical censures of admonition and Excommunication, ought to
be exercised by particular congregations within themselves.

5. That the people should not suffer this power to be wrested out of their
hands, and usurped by the Bishops.

6. That the supreme power in Church matters, next under Christ, is in the
Church, meaning (as he clearly explained himself) particular Congregations;
for he denied all National, Provincial, and Diocesan Churches, as well as
Bishops, and so expounded that text, Math. 18. Go tell the Church, etc of
particular Congregations, or as we call them parochial Churches.

7. That all good people should pray earnestly unto God, and not cease to
petition the Parliament for the razing of the old foundation (meaning as he
plainly discovered himself) the abolishing of Episcopal Government, and the
establishing of their new Presbyterian Discipline; as also for the purging all
filth and Ceremonies out of the house of God.

8. That they that put not to their hand to help forward this work, may
justly fear that curse pronounced against Meroz. Judges 5. Curse you Meroz,
because they come not to help the Lord against his mighty enemies; and there
he expressly called the Bishops the mighty enemies of God and his Church.

Certain other Positions preached by the same man at Knuttesford a great market
Town in the same County.
9 THat every particular Congregation is an absolute Church, and is to have all
ordinances and officers within it self; the members of it must be only
Saints; these must enter Covenant amongst themselves, and without such a
Covenant no Church.

10. That the power of the Keys is committed neither to the Pastors nor
Governors, but to the whole Congregation, and to every particular member of
the same; and Christ having committed them to every one, would of every one
demand an account of them, and therefore charged the people, as they would
answer it at the dreadful day of judgment, to keep the keys amongst
themselves, and not to suffer any authority to wrest them out of their hands.

11. That it is an heinous sin to be present when prayers are read out of a
Book, either by the Minister or any other.

By which, and other such Doctrines, many of the common people are brought into
that odium of the Book of common prayer, that diverse of them will not come into
the Church, during the time of Divine Service.

THe spreading of the foresaid Petition, and the public and frequent
preaching of these and such like seditious Doctrines, having stird up a
general discontent in many common people, diverse of the Gentry without any
sinister respect whatsoever, but only out of a care of the public peace,
(being thereunto induced by the presidents of London and Essex, into which the
Lords had formerly directed orders for suppression of such disorders) did
humbly desire the Earl of Darby, Lord Lieutenant of the County to join in a
Remonstrance of the distempers likely to ensue, and to represent the same to
the house of Peerese Praying their care for prevention thereof.

THe Remonstrance being resolved of, upon a conference of many of the
Gentlemen of the Country, some Divines were sent unto, to know if they would
join in subscription with the Gentry and for the clear carriage and quick
dispatch, several Letters were sent into the several hundreds, directed to
some of the princ^pal Justices there with copies of all enclosed, to procure
the subscriptions of their neighbor-hood, all of the same contents, and
subscribed by those few who underwrit this following, being fourteen persons
of quality.
Gentlemen.
Upon consideration of the copy of a Petition enclosed, from the Freeholders of
this County which has been spread abroad and signed by many hands, we
conceive it would much reflect upon the Country to let it pass in the names
of the County without any protestation against it, being not only clamorous
against the government of Church and State, but against our Country in
particular: And being the shortness of time would not permit a general
meeting; yet such as we have consulted both with Divines and others are
pleased to approve of the copy enclosed: Therefore for the speedy dispatch of
it, we have thought fit to send several Coppies into the several hundreds,
entreating that you will be pleased to assemble or send unto all the Gentry of
your hundred, and such Divines as you conceive will join in it, and some of
the chief Freeholders before wedn^sday next, and sign the Paper annexed to
the Petition with as many hands of quality as you can get, and return them to
Cholmley, where we shall some of us meet and annex them all to the original
it self which we have signed; and will so send it up to be preferred: the
dispatch is the life of the business. We hope no man will be slack in that so
much concerns the Country. So we rest your very loving friends.

We desire that you would be pleased not to let any Coppies be taken, and
return it on Thursday next at farthest, and let no Papist subscribe
whatsoever. January 30. 1640 The Direction or Superscription: To the Right
Honorable the L. Brereton, Mr. Doctor Dod, and Henry Mainwayring Esquire, or
one of them; and to others the Gentlemen of the Hundred of Northwich.

This public carriage, I hope, will satisfy all ingenious men how injurious
such clamours have been, as pretended undue practices to procure
Subscriptions. And if some few timorous people by pretense of trouble have
been frighted to retract their former Subscriptions, J presume no judicious
man will conceive it either to reflect on the Gentry, or dis-value the
substance of the Remonstrance.

To the Honorable the Lord Bishops.
Reverend Fathers,
IN the first part of this Discourse, I have had a particular Interest, used
the liberty of my own expressions out of the sense and foresight of my own
endangered Liberty; which I apprehend absolutely to depend upon the
preservation of your regulated order and Legal Government; to be inevitably,
if not irrecoverably, lost by the admission of an irregular, Arbitrary
Presbytery. I deny not but the wisdom of this Age may find out a new way,
neither pattern'd by the Apostles, nor practiced in any Age or State; and when
it is established by Law, I know my part, obedience: But till then, Law being
on my side, God forbid I should not as freely speak in defense of fundamental
Laws, of Divine institutions, as others do to the subversion of both.

Such has been the unhappiness of my Privacie, I am scarce known to, hardly
know any of, your persons: yet with that Reverence do I look upon your Sacred
order as an Apostolical, therefore not questionable institution. I consider
your Predecessors as the Ballast which have poyz'd the Barks of Monarchy, to
sail safely in the Sea of Vulgar, whose piety and wisdom first prescribed
the Medium twixt Tyranny and Anarchy. Till Bishops helped to reduce the
unbounded wills of Princes to the limits of Laws, Kings were Tyrants: And
where ever they are not, there ever follows a popular (which is a worse
Tyranny.) Obedience to Kings, Conformity to Laws, is a Duty both to God and
nature, but subjection to the absolute and unlimited wills of men is unnatural
to those that were borne under the protection of Laws.

Long has this Nation flourished in the equal dispensation of Laws, by
Divines, Civilians, and Common Lawyers; Glorious and fortunate have been the
Proficients in all of them; They much deceive themselves that think the one
shall rise by the fall of the other two.

If two or three mixed Arbitrary Courts, sitting only in Term time, shall be
thought so prejudicial to the Common Law, what must a Quotidian-Chancery prove
in every Parish? Sure he that should but seriously consider the condition of
the Advocates in the Low Countries, Geneva, and in all places where the
Presbytery has got footing, would burn his Bar Gown, and begin a new
profession, at the apprehension of such a change. No doubt Rebus sic stantibus,
At this instant, there are many able men ready to supply your voyded seats,
and an instant extinguishment of all the lights of the Church cannot be feared.
But if all preferment for humane learning shall be thus taken away, in the next
Age we are liker to degenerate to the Barbarism of the Greeks then arive at
their perfection. The sword has for a short space kept some States a float,
but I must boldly say, it is the Reverence of Religion, the advancement of
learning, that has made them stable and happy. These Considerations are
properly within the capacity of a Gentleman; But in the latter part I must ask
your pardon, That I have walked beyond my Verge; Taken as well a Divine as a
politic Survey of your order. I know it is an Injury to plead a good cause
ill, yet I hope you will find my Modesty such, that in this I presume so
little of my self, that I have only allowed words to knit together the
opinions of such Authorities as till now have been Authentic. It Is a time
when selfe-interest swayes much, and (for ought I know) every man that reads
this, may be equally concerned as my self; whereby, this must be conceived
less partial from me, then from any of your Coat. And at least they will
infer hence, that much more might be said, since I have said so much. I must
confess enough has been delivered in a little by that Reverend Primate
Usher; It Is Apostolical. Which admitted, the Conclusion silences all
argumentation.

Contra negantes principia non disputandum, Does well in Schools; but when
noise and novelty only prevail, I wish you had been all more free in defense
of your Calling. It Is truth, that Downam, Bilson, Suckliffe, and many others,
have said so much, as there can scarce be any thing added, but they must have
new Titles, or else they will not be looked on, the Fathers themselves are
absolete and deserted Authority. We are all grown so wise in this knowing
Age, that every man must have his proofs levelled to his own natural reason:
unless they be invectives; those tickle the itching ears of the time, and are
presently taken upon trust, without examination. I was not framed to court that
strain; nor do I expect to please your oppugners; all my ambition is to
satisfy some Gentlemen free as my self; my Desire is not to offend you, by
the ill manage of so good a Cause.

Though I know none by any of you, yet should I not seek to qualify the ill of
any of your persons. But must profess I affectionately pray, for the
Conservation of that order which is so apt an Emblem of the Divine ordinance
of that great Creator; who as he ordained, the Sun to exceed the Moon, The
Moon the Stars, and every Star excelling another in glory, Doubtless
intended as divine a Method in disposing the lights of our immortal souls, as
those Luminaries of our corruptible bodies. He I hope will preserve this
Church, while that Sun and Moon endure. Which is the prayer of

The well-wisher of Sion, T. A.

Since the several attempts to blemish this Remonstrance by dispersing that
Libell, and by seeking to draw some ignorant people to disavow their own
subscriptions, it pleased diverse Gentlemen of quality to testify both their
dislike of such practices, and the continuance of their zeal to a vow their
Remonstrance, By this Certificate. To our very loving friend and Kinsman Sir
THOMAS ASTON Baronet.
SIR,
We have lately received a Printed Copy, of a most seditious, feigned, and
dangerously factious Petition, which is spread in the County, purporting to be
preferred to the High and Honorable Court of Parliament, by the Nobles,
Knights, Gentry, Ministers, etc. of this County; (pretended) in answer of a
Petition, subscribed by us and many thousands more, and by our request
preferred by you for the good and honor of this County; which vile and
Machivilian Petition, we perceive was never preferred to neither House, but
dispersed maliciously and seditiously to stir up discord and tumult. And we
have also seen the Coppie of your Petition preferred on the behalf, and for
the service of this County for whom you are trusted in this, Which we all so
well approve of, as we doubt not, but that as well those many thousands who
subscribed our Remonstrance preferred by you (which found so gracious
acceptance both with his Sacred Majesty, and the Lords to whom it was
preferred) as also many thousands more of this County, whose hands could not by
reason of shortness of time be gotten to that, will upon just opportunity
acknowledge your good service herein for your Country, and your merit from the
Inhabitants thereof who stand well affected, either to his Majesty, or the
good or peaceable Government of this Kingdom. And therefore we have not only
thought fit with these few subscribers (whom the shortness of this dispatch
could divulge your merits unto) to testify your great Care and Diligence for
your Country, and our approbation thereof, but to pray you, not to be
discouraged herein; But still to press, as there shall be opportunity, an
effectual order and answer to our Remonstrance, and some course, as the great
wisdom of the Lords assembled shall think meet, to check the further growth
of these Seditious Insolences, and attempts to cast aspersions upon our Loyal
intentions, and disturb the peace of our Church and state Government: wherein
we have also addressed our thankfulness and Humble desires to the most
Honorable Earl of Bath, which we shall beseech you the rather more speedily to
deliver, because here are daily more Innovations by the importunity of the
Authors of these Schisms, and factions, so that much ill is to be feared, if a
timely prevention be not given to the growth thereof. So beseeching God direct
the hearts of that most Honorable Assembly, we take our leave of you, and rest
as your faithfulness and care of your Country may challenge,

Your assured loving Friends, Robert Lord Viscount Kilmorey. Robert Lord
Viscount Cholmondeley. Sir Edward Fitton Baronet. Sir Tho. Brereton Knight.
Hugh Cholmondeley Esquires. John Mynshull Esquires. Tho. Cholmondeley
Esquires. John Davenport. Esquires.
Thomas Bromley Esquires. Rand. Rode Esquires. William Manwaring Esquires.
Arthur Starkey. Esquires.
Tho. Maisterson Esquires. Tho. Manwaring Esquires. Edw. Tannat Esquires. John
Werden Esquires.
Edward Morgell Gentlemen. Tho. Berrington Gentlemen. Richard Allen Gentlemen.
Tho. Wilkinson Gentlemen. John Dodde Gentlemen. Tho. Stockton Gentlemen. Tho.
Massy Gentlemen.
George Cotton Esquires. Hugh Calveley Esquires. C. Manwaring Esquires. Tho.
Cotton Esquires.
William Moreton Esquires. John Leghe Esquires. George Leycester Esquires.
Jonathan Wodenoth Esquires.
Tho. Cotton Esquires. Edw. Dod Esquires. Edw. Wright Esquires. Geor. Bostock
Esquires.
Ralph Morgell Esquires. John Stockton Esquires. Rich. Tannat Esquires. John
Massy Esquires.
Divines.
Doctor Bisphant. John Conney. Rich. Wilson.


The Table Of the several Sections in the survey of Presbytery.
Sectio prima. The design of the Presbyterians. 2 The method of their
proceeding. 3 Their censure of the Clergy in Queen Elizabeth's days. 4 The
opinions of the Reformed Churches of her time. 5 A discussion whether they
seek to pull down or advance the Clergy. 6 The Ecclesiastical Laws
agreeable to Gods Word. 7 The Presbyterians must not be prescribed in doctrine.
8 They must be freed from civil miseries. 9 Episcopacie most agreeable with
Monarchy. 10 Presbytery inconsistent with Monarchy. 11 Presbytery
inconsistent with Civil Magistracy. 12 Presbytery inconsistent with laws. 13
The inordinate violence of the Presbytery. 14 That this Discipline brings not
liberty to the vulgar, but introduces a mere Arbitrary Government. 15 That the
Presbyterian discipline is confessed a yoke. 16 The vain excuse (that
Lay Elders shall moderate) refuted. 17 No Reformed Church gives any president
parallel with us. 18 Conclusion. That to introduce a new form is dangerous.
The Table, to the Review of Episcopacie.
Sectio prima, That there were Bishops in the Apostles times. 2 That the seven
Angels of the seven Churches were Bishops. 3 That there has bin a continued
succession of Bishops. 4 That they were Diocesan Bishops. 5 That the Clergy
ought to be superior to one another. 6 That they assume no power or
jurisdiction their predecessors had not. 7 That Bishops had the same power of
Ordination in former times. 8 Ecclesiastical censures anciently in Bishops. 9
Titles of Honor anciently given to Bishops. 10 That there were Archbishops in
the primitive times. 11 That late great Writers approved Bishops. 12 That
Bishops were approved in the Reformed Churches. 13 Episcopacie approved by the
ancient customary laws. 14 That abolition of Episcopacie will occasion great
distraction in the Common Laws. 15 That it will destroy great part of the
Statute Laws. 16 Whether it may be done by the Kings Legal Prerogative. 17 The
Conclusion.
REader, the Authors absence has occasioned many omissions, having not
opportunity to peruse the Press, especially in the quotations. The best help
is thy friendly patience, to pass by the literal faults, amend these few
following, and bear with the rest. Some of them vary the fence, therefore it
is desired thou will amend them ere thou read.

Errata.
IN the Survey of Presbytery, Praef. B 2, p. 2. line. 7 all men, line 11. for
instructed r, entrusted, Sect. 2. l. 19. for them, r. their Sect. 2, page 2.
marg. l. 41, read Prelate Church. Sect. 3, not 1, marg. r. pertulisti, ibidem
for eddisti, r, eddidisti, not (k) for ne nec. C 2, p, 2. ma^g. not o for 40.
r, 21, Sect 7, l, 12, blot out they say, Sect, 7, D 8, l, 17, add (as Calvin
calls them) fanatici homines, etc. El, 9 for Deo r, duo, marg. for Tomes, r Tom.
7, E 2, p, 2. l, 17, r, Censurers, E 3, p, 2, l, 29, add such unlimited, Sect.
9, l, 9, for every r, Envy, cla^our, F fol. l, 13, a full point at possession,
fol, F, 2, p, 2 l, 4, put out (it) F 3, l, 23, for and r, etc. ibid, marg. l,
11, r, frenabit, fol, G 2, p, 2, l, 25, r, observable G 3, p, 2, marg, l, 2, r,
Dominio G 4, marg. l, 2, r, 59, H 3, p, 2, l, 19, add man not to rest, fol. I
l, 17, r. Presbytery, fol, l 2, l, 1^, after repent: add The Praesbyterians
affirm, l 3 p, 2, l. 6, r, these new Standerbearers, K 8, l, 2, blot out that,
L 2, p, 1, l, 7, for those r, these, L 3, l, 7, r, Classical.

In the Review of Episcopacie.
Fol, 9, marg, l, 11, r, Heraclam and, fol, 10, marg, l, 25, r, Episcopatum.
fol, 11 marg, l, 12, for ad id, r, adversus, fol, 13, l, 2, r, Fencelesse, fol,
24, l, 8, r, other fol, 26, marg, l, 25, r, hoc fol, 27, l, 12, for many r,
may, fol, 38, l, 5, for cause, r, course: fol. 39, l, 4, for received r.
retained fol, 43, l, 2, for absolute r, obsolete, fol, 57, l, 20, for which his
r, with his, fol, 65, l, 3, for if r, that the Prelates, l, 28. put out cure,
fol 77, l, 19, for both r, but.

The Preface.
IT IS a time of Censures; nor actions nor persons escape (if perhaps) the power,
(yet not) the tongues of men; certainly the Goose-Quill did never more
licentiously, less civilly bedabble both times and persons.

No action (of so pure intention) has been more bespattered than the
deliverie of this Remonstrance: No man with more confidence, less cause, has
been more mistaken, misse-censured than my self. Yet some I presume that have
now seen those Motives, which before they did not, are satisfied; there was
just cause for us to complain, none for them to judge.

We alas are none of those that live in Goshen, Exodus: 8.22.
severed from the sorrows of our brethren; we have had our The common
Grievances.
swarm of flies to destroy our fruits: we have felt the storm of a
distempered state, as well as they; Exodus 9 26.
But we had rather with prayer and patience wait and hope for the reunion of
our distracted peace, than rend the breaches wider, by pulling on our heads a
greater plague than we have yet felt, or then the Egyptians suffered, till
their Exodus 14.25. And the Lord troubled the Egyptians, and took off their
Chariot wheels, that they drove heavily. 28 And the waters returned and covered
the Chariots, and the horsemen, and all the Host of Pharaoh.
Chariots were taken off their wheels, or then we hope we can till our Laws
the Hinges of the State be dis-joynted, the reins of Government let loose:
Then alas, how soon (with them) should we be overwhelmed with disorder and
confusion? how easily become a prey to the first invader?

Yet I fear we undergo more censure, who pray the preservation, than those
that seek the abolition of those Laws that give us Life and safety, by
preserving Order, which is the Soul of Government. Ordo est anima Legis


We meet with several sorts of Censurers some seem to rob the Gentry of
the right of their own free thoughts, as if they were but properties to serve
the ends of others, act the designs of the Bishop and his Clergy, who I do
absolutely affirm, never knew of it till it was done: yet I do confidently
assume, if he required, it might have as many free testimonies (of quality) of
his moderation, as any man of that reverend Order.

Others of the same stamp seek to impeach the credit of the Subscribers, as
if a great part were papists: All may see our instructions were not to admit
such: I resolutely affirm, no one Gentleman of quality there is such, and I
confidently believe, not one at all of the whole number.

Some (that certainly never saw it) Censure for company, that we only swim
against the stream, and contrary to the Torrent of other Countries, have put
in a justification of a plea for Bishops: such I said before sure never saw it:
when they do, they will find, that we have the same sense of disorder in
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction as others have: That to us The Remonstrance.
the suppressing of Popery, the increase of able Pastors, the removing of
Innovations, will be equally acceptable as to other Subjects: only we
conceived our modest submission to the judgment of that great Counsel,
Remonstrance.
to regulate the rigor of Ecclesiastical Courts to suit with the temper of
our Laws, and the nature of Freemen, would to so grave a Senate administer as
much matter of serious consideration, implie as much need of Reformation, as a
large invective full of bitter reviling, which might more convince us of want
of Charity, than the Bishops of Moderation: being virulence of Spirit never
argued either Civility, or Christianity, never tended to piety or unity, nor
advanced either Religion, or good Order.

Hoc reperiemus, nimiam mor ofitatem ex superbia magis and fastu, falsa que
sanctitatis opinione, quam ex vera sanctitate, veroqueejus studio nasci. Itaque
qui ad faciendum ab Ecclesia defectiones, sunt aliis audaciores and quasi
Antesignani, ij ut plurimum nihil aliud causae habent, nisi ut omnium contemptu
ostentent se aliis esse meliores. Calvin. Institut. lib. 4. Cap. 1. sect. 13.
Calvin observes, that too much bitterness or obstinacy springs rather from
pride and disdain, and a false opinion of holiness, then from true sanctity;
or the desire thereof. And that such as are forwards, and the leaders of others
in their defection from the Church, have for the most part no other cause, but
their own self conceit, thinking themselves better than all men else.

But if either process of time, or discontinuance of Parliaments have admitted
any superstructures of exorbitant power, doubtless the wisdom of the House,
(instructed with the steerage of the State) would reduce such without our
clamours.

For such complaints as are against the temporal power of the Bishops, we
know of no such thing inherent to the Order. Si quam habent Episcopi potestatem
gladii, hanc non habent, ut Episcopi ex mandato Evangelit; sed jure humano do
natam a Regibus and Imperatoribus ad administrationem civilem suorum honorum.
Haec interim alia functio est, quam ministerium Evangelii Melancthon Articul.
fidei. 37. In his speech the 23. of January.
Melancthon tells us, if they have any power of the sword, it is of humane
institution given them by Kings and Emperors: if so, certainly ejus est
revocare, cujus est dare. And where a gracious Prince, ( ex mero motu, and I
may say, ex puro amore) out of a tender affection to the peace, and welfare of
his people, has freely offered a retraction of such temporal authority, If
upon serious debate you shall show, that Bishops have some temporal authority,
not so necessary for the government of the Church, and upholding of Episcopal
jurisdiction, I shall not be unwilling to desire them to lay it down.
as is not necessary for the government of the Church; it is more proper for
the debate of his great Council to decide the point; than befitting the
importunity of us, his (much satisfied) subjects, especially with such
violence, as relishes rather a sentence than a supplication: Quia non consensum
quaerit, sed dissidium auget, qui quod fact is praestatur, verbis exigit.

But for the Office and Order it self, it is confessed, we were so far from
joining with them, either in their prayer of abolition, or the ^n^ecency of
their Language, that 'twas thought, it became us to vindicate the Country,
(consisting of Civil Gentry) from the imputation of such incivilitie, as that
petition, if it had past as the Act of our County might perhaps fix upon us:
And more then in our own excuse of not joining with them, we presumed not to
move any thing for, or against the Bishops: but being we intimated our fear
that these practices and tenets tended to introduce a Presbytery, 'twas
necessary to show we had no hand in that Petition, which would have no
Bishops, lest we might seem to desire neither.

These prejudices of opinion thus removed, I hope men will with more clear
eyes see the Integrity of our intentions, and will with us in time take heed
of Wolves, especially when they appear in sheeps clothing.

As we are a Gentry, who for Antiquity shall subscribe to none; so I hope
shall we ever testify our zeal as great, our resolutions as firm to preserve
our ancient liberties, as any Country whatsoever: And I believe if any had our
provocation, they would have made our complaint.

A Survey of Presbytery.
SECT. 1. The Design of some Presbyterians.
IT IS an ill presage of worse events, to begin with the subversion of Gods
house, the Church: It is not Reformation, but total Innovation many men look
for.

'Twas a sign of no good intent, when such a petition must be smothered up
from the knowledge and Counsels of the Gentry: And though it were suppressed
after it had been spread abroad, as (perhaps) finding the times not ripe for a
full discovery of their occult designs: yet (to those that will see) it gives
light enough, that under pretext of Reforming the Church, the true aim of such
spirits is to shake off the yoke of all obedience, either to Ecclesiastical,
Civil, Common, Statute, or the Customarie Laws of the Kingdom, and to
introduce a mere Arbitrary Government.

But it may perhaps be said, this is but the fancy of some distempered Zelots
in that part only: and that I do but raise a shadow and fight with it: let
such compare well the harmony of other licentious raylers (whose pamphlets
garnish every stall) and the concurrence of those of the same strain in the
times of Queen Elizabeth and King James, with the present positions and
petition complained of; and I dare promise they shall find them all of a
piece, all champions for the Presbytery, which they then called, The great
cause, the Holy cause, which (as they then declared) Rogers his Preface to the
Articles.
they will never leave suing for, though there should be a thousand
Parliaments, until either they obtain it, And lately preached by Eaton in
Chester in the pulpit to the like effect.
or bring the Lord in vengeance and blood upon the State, and the whole land
for repelling the same.

With what Method, Justice, and Moderation they go about it, is worth the
observation.

SECT. 2. The Method of their proceedings.
IN this Chart of their petition, we may find our selves placed among the
Antipodes to all order, rather than in a State governed by Laws. It has been
the Method of former times, that the Parliament, the Primates, the Nobiles,
with the minores Nobiles, the Gentry, consult and dispense the rules of
government, the Plebeians submit to and obey them. But in their Petition ordine
converso, petitioners Plebeians assume to give judgment, the Parliament must
execute, the Nobility and Gentry suffer by it.

They make not any one proof or complaint against any one Bishop, or their
order; yet clearly sentence them all, Their Petition. note. 2. Martin
Marprelate. f. 11. 12. Engl. Compl. to Jesus Christ. That the Hierarchy is
that beast to which the Dragon gave his power. fol. 11. All Prelaticall
government is papal. ib. The Bishops the limbs of the great beast, of no other
spirit than Atheistical. Prelacy is misery fol. 4. Scare budges set up by the
Devil. The horned beasts of the Popedom. A Bishop or no Bishop. fol. 1.
for the Popes substitutes per accidens at least, if not by solemn covenanted
allegiance: They condemn them Their Petition. note. 4. They are cruel Harpies
against Religion. Protest. 27. Febr. 1639. f. 6. They are the makebates, the
Achans of Israel. L. Bishops no Bish. fo. 71. Prelacy is an open rebellion
against Christ and his Kingdom fo 13. They steal Gods word from the people.
fo. 20.
for the mighty enemies, and secret underminers of the Church and
Commonwealth: They judge them offices and Their petition. note 6. An Enemy to
salvation and Antichristian. We vow to forsake the Bishops in Baptism, because
we vow to forsake the devil and all his works. Engl. Compl. to Christ. fol.
11. They are the seed of Antichrist. Bishops no Bishops. fol. 1. Bistwicks good
Angel. What is spoke of Antichrist is spoke of all Prelates. Bishop no Bishop
fol. 53. In worshipping the Name Jesus, they are notorious Antichrists. ib. fol.
64. Sions plea fo. 11.281.
government Antichristian, leaving the Parliament only to execute their doom
upon them: no more, (nor no more ado) but Their petition. note 5. To protest
against the Hierarchy as Antichristian. Good Counsel for the Church. fol. 86.
Prelacie to be wholly taken away. Ans. to Land. petition. 33. To be removed
View of the prelaticall Church. 38.
utterly to dissolve their Offices, and together with ruin of their
Antichristian offices and government, their impious Courts, Their petition.
note 7. From their corrupt Courts. Walkers Letany. The Bishops impious
government, Chreda Angliae, fol. 3.
their dependent Officers, even from the Chancellor to the Paritor, Some of the
Articles agr^e not with Scripture. Englands Compl. fol. 21. They except against
the 20. Article. Against Ordination of Bishops. fol. 49. Against the third
Article. Christ on his Throne. fol. 49.
The book of Articles, Their petition note 7. Liturgy framed out of the
Breviarie Portuys, and Massebooke prelate: Church. fol. 27. A Mass of Errors,
Superstition, and Idolatry. Remonst. 27. Febr. 1639. fol. 15. Syons plea. 29.
The Service Book raked out of 3. Romish Channells.
The English refined Massebooke of Common Prayer, with all the Popish
significant Ceremonies therein contained.

Here is neither men nor discipline spared, Lord Bishops no Bishops. Fol. 28. A
treatise that the Church is Antichristian. Church Ministe^y and worship in
England all Antichristian. 8 Propositions in print.
others tell us Prelates, Discipline, and Church of England are all concluded
Antichristian; therefore good Christians should separate themselves from such a
Church. And is this the language of our Country, of our times only? If so,
'twere some argument to convince our present Prelates, to have stained the
honor of their Coats, as degenerate from their pious predecessors. But O
Tempora! O mores! is no new exclamation, all ages, all people condemn the
present, and still applaud the times past. With what reverence do we call to
mind those precious days we yet style the purity of Q. Elizabeth's reign? as if
then the Church were all innocence, had no spot in her infant whitenes: but if
we shall as well look back, and consider the spirit of the fathers of these
Disciples in those days, we shall then find, it is not the Churches purity, it is
not the Pastors piety, can stop the foul mouths of such traducers; it is envy
and ambition barks thus in emulation of their Order, not in zeal against their
Doctrine or Discipline.

SECT. 3. The Presbyterians censure of the Clergy in Queen Elizabeth's time.
WEre the Clergy then more meek and humble? will you believe the Brethren of
that time, speaking of the Clergy in General? They are wolves, Brethrent
Supply. p. 4 ^.
Intolerable oppugners of Gods glory Ibidem page 53.
, A crew of monstrous and ungodly wretches, Martins Epistle.
an Antichristian Swinish Rabble.

Were the Bishops then of purer lives, or Doctrine? The charitable Brethren
styled them The most pestilent enemies of our State Hay any. p. 13. 14.
Supplicat. fol. 53. Vdals Dialogue.
, The Ordinances of the Devil, Ibidem page 21.
petty Popes, petty Antichrists, Jncarnate Devils, cogging, cozening Knaves.

Were they less rigid in their Censures? They tell you, Hay any. page 28.
Martins protestat. 27. page 12. 21. Arch bishop Grindall b^nisht in Qu. Maric^
time.
They are Butchers and Horse-leeches; these Dragons tyranny, and blood-thirsty
proceedings are inexcusable.

Is it only our present Archbishop has opened the gap of Calumny? They say,
Their, then Archbishop of Canterbury was more ambitious then Wolsey, Dialogue
from Throgmorton. D 3. ibid G. 4.
prouder then Stephen Gardner, more bloody then Bonner: Beelzebub of Canterbury,
Martin sen. C 4.
a monstrous Antichristian Pope, Epistle out of Scotland.
a most vile and cursed Tyrant.

Was the State more favorable to them? they complain No enemy. A. 3.
The Magistracy and Ministry have walked hand in hand in the contempt of true
Religion, and unto both the word of the Lord is made a reproach.

Did the Parliament yet please them better? Admonition to the Parliament. p. 3.
All good consciences (say they) shall condemn that Court: It shall be easier
for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, then for such a Court: There
shall not be a man of their Seed that shall prosper, be a Parliament man, or
bear rule in England any more.

Nay, the Queen her self scapes not their censure, Hay any. pa. 5.
Supplication to the Parliament. p. 43.
Do you think our Church government to be good and lawful, because her
Majesty and the State allow the same? why Ibidem p. 13. 15 23.
the Lord does not allow and approove of it: her Majesty and the State do
maime and deforme the body of Christ, Motion out of Scotland to the Lords. p.
41.
and so do bid God to battle, and either her Majesty knows not what they
desire, or else she is negligent of her Duty, and unthankefull to God.

Who that reads these would envy our Ancestors, or pray for the restoring of
their days again? Had those times or persons no better testimony given of
them, certainly a stranger that should have come amongst these to seek a
Religion, would enquire as the Moore did of the Spaniard, what Religion they
were of; not out of desire to learn that, but that he might choose the
contrary, as concluding the opposite to so extreme bad, must needs be good: for
doubtless no man would lay the foundation of his Faith, where he neither finds
in practice the principles of Christian Charity, nor natural Civility.

But let us examine better witnesses of those times, whether were more guilty,
the accused, or the accusers.

Beza (a strict Reformer) in his Epistle to some English Brethren writes thus:

Bez. Epist. 12. f. 220. Jmmo optima omnia nobis de eo regno pollicemur, in quo
tam multorum etiam excellentissimoru^ martyrum Sanguine obsignata est
Christianae religionis instauratio.
I promise to my self even the best things of that Kingdom, wherein the
restoration of Christian Religion has been sealed with the Blood of so many
excellent Martyrs: Hortamur ut omni animorum acerbatione de posita, alii alios
patienter ferant, Fegiae Majestati clementissimae, and omnibus praesulibus suis
ex aenimo obsequantur.
And exhorts them, that leaving all bitterness, they would bear one another
with patience, and obey the Queens Majesty, and all their Prelates with a
free heart. And writing to Bishop Grindall Beza Epist. 23. ad Grindall

Quod tu igitur quorundam (...) perpetulisti, everendissime vir, in eo sane in
sign patientiae and lenitatis Chr^stianae specimen eddisti, quo majore post
hac paena digni erunt, qui porro aut horitatem tuam aspernabuntur.


he commends his Christian lenity and patience, for bearing with the
selfe-conceited pride of some, and says they shall deserve a greater
punishment that will reject again his authority.

But Beza is but a single witness, take another then, though later in time,
yet no less eminent in worth: Peter Du Moulin (both superintendents of the
Reformed Churches:) In England, says he, Moulins Buckler of Faith fol. 347.

Petr. Molinaeus Thesibus. de notis Ecclesiae par 2. Th^s. 33. Episcopos
Angliae post conversionem ad fidem and ejuratum papismum asserimus fuisse
fideles D^i servo., ne debuisse deseraere munus vel titulum Episcopi.


where God has used Bishops to strive against, and to resist Papistry, And
where God has given them Sovereign Princes, which maintained and upheld them
by their power: Episcopal order continues and flourishes at this day, And
God has here raised up, and still does, excellent Bishops, both for learning
and piety, which courageously maintain Gods cause both by word of mouth, and
writing and some of them also have received the Crown of Martyrdom for the
Confession of the Gospel.

If the men were without exception, was their Discipline the cause of quarrel?
Ask them, they will tell you yea.

They say First Admonition to the Parliament. p. 17. 24. 26. Syon^ Plea. 29.
The Communion Book is culled and picked out of that Popish Dunghill, the
Portuise, and Mass book. Second admonition page 42.
The Sacraments are wickedly mangled and profaned. Gilby page 2.
They eat not the Lords Supper, but play a Pageant of their own. The public
Baptism First Admonition. page 40.
is full of Childish and superstitious toys, the Ceremonies Gilby. page 40.
are popish fooleries, Romish Relics, and rags of Antichrist.

If all were thus far amiss, what hope was there yet of Reformation? They
tell us Pen^es Epistle before the motion.
England with an impudent forehead has said, I will not come near the Holy one;
and Gilby. page 77.
hates them to this day that faithfully do their office. What miserable
condition shall any charitable Christian consider this distressed Nation to be
in? that views it either in such colors, those Fathers, or these our Brethren
have set us forth in? What must be the comfortable Contemplation of that great
day of which Job 19.25.
Job says, I know that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall stand at the
latter day upon the earth, and in my flesh I shall see God, whom I shall see
for myself, and my eyes shall behold. And as St. Paul says, 1 Corinthians. 13.12.
see face to face, and know even as also we are known. When we call to mind
our prim^geni^ors were Heathens denying God: our predecessors Apostates fallen
from the true God to Romish Idolatry and superstition: our Fathers and our
selves such Schismatiques from whom all good Christians must separate
themselves.

Miserable indeed were the condition of this forlorn state, if other Reformed
Churches spoke not better of us, than we of one another.

SECT. 4. The opinions of the Reformed Churches.
Hear Calvin's opinion in his Epistle to the Lord Protector of England Calvin
in his Epistle to the L. Protector.

Quod ad formam precum and Rituum Ecclesiarum, valde probo, ut certa illa extet
a qua pastoribus in sua sunctione disiedere non liceat.


The form of prayer, and the Ceremonies of the Church I do exceedingly
approve of, as that from which the Ministers ought not to depart.

Martin Bucer, Scripta Anglican. page 456. Egi gratias Deo qui dedisset vos bas
ceremonias co puritatis reformare, nec enim quicquam in illis deprehend^ quod
non sit ex verbo Dei desumptu^, aut saltem ei non adversetur commode acceptum.
Martin Bueer a learned Reformer being requested by the Archbishop Cranmer to
give his censure of the English Liturgy, says, I praise God that gave you
light to reduce these Ceremonies to such purity; for I find nothing in them,
which is not taken out of the Word of God, or at least wise, (if clearly
interpreted) not repugnant to it.

Beza superintendens Genevae. Doctrine puritat viget in Anglia, pure and
sincere. Rogers Preface.
Beza writes from Geneva, That in England true Doctrine flourishes purely and
sincerely.

The German Zanchie, Zanchius de Strasborough. per hanc Reginam factam, etc.
That by this Queens coming to the Crown, God has again restored his
Doctrine, and true worship.

And Danaeus Danaeus a Frenchman at Geneva. Rogers in his Preface to the 39.
Articles.
gives this large testimony, That the whole compass of the world has never
seen any thing more blessed, nor more to be wished for, than is her Government.

If then we find, that neither Queen, Parliament, State, Clergy, Doctrine,
Ceremonies, nor the Church it self can please such Separatists, but they
revile all, whom all the world else admires, approves: 1 Corinthians. 13.1.
Though they speak with the tongues of men and Angels, and have so little
Charity, let us value them, but as sounding Brass, and tinckling Cymballs; Let
us weigh their noise no more; let it be said to them as Jehu to Jo^am, 2 King.
9.22.
What have thou to do with peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother
Jezabel, and her witch-crafts are so many? what do these men with religion in
their mouths, when they have no Christianity in their hearts? 2 Timothy 3 3, 4,
5.
Being without natural affections, truce breakers, false-accusers, fierce,
despisers of those that are good, heady, high minded, having a form of
godliness, but denying the power thereof, from such turn away. And from the
delusions of such, God turn the hearts of all loyal Subjects.

It Is the nature of Mankind, that being deceived by the species of an
imaginary good, they many times covet their own ruin. These sugared baits of
parity and liberty infused into vulgar apprehensions under the pretext of
piety, and reformation, are such popular poisons as will soon over spread the
body of the Commonwealth, and corrupt or dissolve the Nerves and Ligaments of
Government (conformity to Laws) if not early prevented by those precious
Antidotes against Confusion, Loyalty, and Constancy.

SECT. 5. A Discussion whether they seek to pull down, or advance the Clergy.
LEt us then ere we embrace the thoughts of such a total subversion of the
Fabric of a Church and State, examine whether such Reformers aim at our
liberty, or their own advancement, whether such bitterness of Spirit proceed
from zeal to truth, or emulation of the order. What a Monopoly is this, to
take away the title wherein the office of all true Pastors is comprehended, and
to transfer it to one alone among many? Christ's Throne fol 43.


Is it to clip the wings of the Clergy that they soar not too high, that
these men cry out against Episcopal jurisdiction? or rather is it not to Imp
out their broken Feathers, that they may mount above the reach of all Laws? Is
it to regulate any exorbitant power in them? or rather is it not to make their
power as indefinite, This Monopoly is a mystery of mischiefs, view Prelat.
Church. fol. 3.
as their numbers are infinite? Is it not really to pull down 26. Bishops, and
set up 9324. potentiall Popes? when in effect the Pastor of every parish Church
must be such.

The consequences these men promise to themselves in their petition (seconded
by the writing of their fellow-laborers) promise no less, which are,

First, to quit themselves from the circumscription of any Ecclesiastical
Authority, either in discipline or doctrine, Their petition, note 16. View of
the Prelaticall Church, fol. 16.
They pray that the revealed will of God, contained in the books of the old and
new Testament may be the rule that we should follow; As if certainly this
whole State and Church had all this while followed a wrong Guide. Their
petition, note 17.
(d) That the moral doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles may be old Englands
Canons, (of which themselves must be Expositors) as if all Canonical obedience
were a mere intrusion upon Gods word, and had no foundation in Scripture.

Do we not know, that Timothy and Titus were by Saint Paul set over the
Churches of Ephesus and Crete, and in the style of both the Epistles, by the
interpretation of the Fathers, appear to have been Bishops, and to have
Canonical power committed to them? 1 Timoth. 1.3.
To suppress false doctrines, 2 Chap. 1.8.
To direct time and place for prayer and supplications, 9.
To prescribe forms of apparel, 11.
To impose silence upon women, 1 Timoth. 3.2, 12.
To institute Bishops and Deacons, 1 Timoth. 5.19.
To receive accusations, and to punish Elders, Ibid. 22.
To ordain Ministers, Titus 3.10.
To admonish and reject obstinate Heretics, 1 Timoth. 1.20.
To excommunicate such as blaspheme. And these things not transmitted to them
as doctrines, but as part of their jurisdiction.

1 Timoth. 4 11.
These things command and teach, and rebuke with all authority. Titus 2.15.
And let no man despise thee.

So that here we may see a foundation of Ecclesiastical Government laid even
by the Apostles themselves, and to us enjoined obedience.

And though in the infancy of the Gospel, when Matthew. 8.20. Luke 9.58.
The Son of man had not where to lay his head: when his Disciples all past
through the fire of Martyrdom, and no free State, scarce any whole Village had
received the Gospel, even Rome it self was for many ages after, the seat of
the Heathen Emperors, Fox his Martyrs, fol. 39.
under whose terrible persecutions the Church was scattered into corners and
deserts, where they could best hide themselves: It could not then (I say) be
expected, that so exact a platform of Discipline should be laid down to
govern handfuls, as was after necessary to be extended to sway the converted
Christian world.

Yet then did Paul see the necessity both of instituting rules of government,
and putting the execution into the hands of some supreme power: To which
purpose, as Erasmus observes, Eras. tom. 6. fol. 343. Timotheum, Paulus in
ministerium adoptarat, probae indolis juvenem and sacris literis eruditum,
Quoniam autem huic Ecclesiarum curam delegarat, sicut and Tito, instituit eum
in sunctione Episcopali.
He elected Timothy, a hopeful young man, and learned in holy writ, into the
ministry; and that he might commit to him the care of the Churches,
instituted him (as also Titus) in the office of a Bishop. And Saint Hierome
Hieronymus Dialogo adversus Luciferianos. Ecclesiae satus in summi Sacerd^ti^
dignitate pendet, cuis^^on exors quaedam and ob omnibus e^^inens detur potest
as, tot in Ecclesiis efficientur Schismata quot Sacerdotes.
gives the reason of the necessity of such superintendencie in the Church, for
says he, The safety of the Church depends upon the dignity of the chief
Priest, to whom if some extraordinary power above the rest be not given,
there would be as many schisms in the Church, as there are Pastors.

If then the Institution of Ecclesiastical Government were Apostolical, the
administration committed by Saint Paul himself to prime Presbyters, or as all
ancient Fathers agree, to Bishops; Let us next see, whether such
Ecclesiastical Laws have been deduced down to our forefathers in a
continued current, from (the fountain head) the Apostles; or are but as these
charitable men style them, The Relics of Romish Tyranny.

SECT. 6. The Ecclesiastical Laws agreeable to Gods word.
I Have in the Epistle formerly set forth the first plantation of the Gospel
in England, in the time of Lucius, Fox his Martyrs, fol. 34.

Archbishop Usher, De primord: Eccles: fol. 54, 59.


about the year 169. when as Elutherius (then Bishop of Rome) shows from what
principles we derive our Ecclesiastical Laws: In his lettet to Lucius King
of Britain he writes thus:

Fox Martyrs, fol. 108. Usher. De Britannicarum Ecclesiarum Primordiis, fol:
102.
Ye require the Roman Laws, and the Emperors to be sent over to you: The
Roman Laws and Emperors we may ever reprove, but the Law of God we may not.
Esutherii rescriptum ad Lucium Britanniae Regem. Petistis a nobis Leges Romanas
and Caesaris vobis transmitti, quibus in Regno Britanniae uti voluistis, etc.
Habetis penes vos in regno utramque paginam, ex illis Dei gratia per Consilium
regni vestri sum legem and per illam Dei patientia vestrum rege Britanniae
regnum.
Ye have received of late, through Gods mercy in the Realm of Britain, the
Law and faith of Christ, ye have within your Realm both the parts of the
Scriptures: out of them by Gods grace, with the Counsel of your Realm, take
you a Law, and by that Law rule your Kingdom of Britain; for you be Gods
Vicar in your Kingdom. A King has his name of ruling, and not of having a
Realm; you shall be a King while you rule well, but if you do otherwise, the
name of a King shall not remain with you, and you shall lose it, which God
forbid.

Sure none will so much honor Popery, to say these were Popish infusions, they
will not grant them a plea for such antiquity, which is more than by some
hundreds of years they can justly lay claim to. Calvin does some right to the
antiquity of these Laws, in his Treatise concerning the state of the ancient
Church and the manner of government thereof before the Papacy, Calvin's
Institut. lib. 4. cap. 4. sect. 1.
Which (says he) will represent unto our eyes a certain image of the divine
Institution; for although the Bishops of those times made many Canons, whereby
they might seem to express more than was expressed in the holy Scriptures,
yet with so good caution they framed their whole administration according to
that only rule of Gods word, Vt facile videas nihil fere hac part habuisse a
verbo Dei alienum.
that you may easily perceive that they had almost nothing in this behalf,
dissonant from the word of God.

Nay further (says he) If we look into the form of government it self,
Sect. 4. Sirem intuemur, reperiemus veteres Episcopos non aliam regendae
Ecclesiae formam voluisse fingere, ab ea quam Deus verbo suo praescripsit.
we shall find that the ancient Bishops would not devise another form of
Church regiment differing from that which God has prescribed in his Word.

And there is none I am sure can say this was Kingly flattery; Happy were it,
that every King laid this counsel to heart, had it engraven in characters of
gold for his Memento vivere. It is so consonant too, that it is incorporated
with our Common Law. Bract. lib. 3. fol. 107. Nil aliud potest Rex in terris,
cum sit Dei Minister and Vicarius quam quod de sure potest. Dicitur enim Rex a
been regendo, and non a regnando, quia Rex est dum been regit, Tyrannus dum
populum sibi creditum violenta opprimae dominatione.


If then this Ecclesiastique Discipline were deduced from the Apostles, built
upon the Basis of the Old and New Testament, continued ever since, and is now
so confined within the limits of of our Laws: Stat. 25. H. 8. c 19.
That the Clergy can enact no Canons or Constitutions without the Kings Royal
assent, and that none formerly made shall be in force, but such as by
Commissioners of both Houses shall be adjudged worthy to be kept. And that it
is provided, that no Canons, Constitutions, or Ordinances shall be made, or put
in execution within the Realm, which shall be contrariant or repugnant to the
Kings Prerogative Royal, or the Customs, Laws, or Statutes of the Realm.
Then this Ecclesiastical Law becomes a mere regulated Law by the judgment
and consent of the Civil State: If so; That the continuation of this
Discipline, in the dispensation of such Ministers, whose deviations are
punishable as misdemeanors, should be inconsistent with the government of
this State, I confess I understand not.

SECT. 7. They must not be prescribed in Doctrine.
BUT is this all? No: They must be free in Doctrine as well as Discipline,
prescribed by no Ecclesiastical Authority. Their Petition, Note 18.
They must preach the word of God, and administer the Sacraments according to
the mind of Christ, (And God forbid they should not) but we must believe them
more familiar with Christ's mind, than all the Fathers of the Primitive times,
or the Church ever since, or admit them an infallibility of spirit, as that
they are unerring.

Why so? belike (they say) they are: Some of them tell us, their Sions Plea.
Presbyterian Discipline is the Scepter of Christ, swaying his own house
according to his hearts desire. And another of them, And the Epistle before the
Supplicat. Anno 2. El.

This Discipline is the Scepter alone, whereby alone Christ Jesus rules among
men.

T. C. lib. 1. page 220. Suckliffe 16 3.


They that reject this Discipline, refuse to have Christ reign over them, and
deny him in effect: That it is the eternal counsel of God.

They are as well privy to his doctrine as his will. If you ask them Saint
Paul's question, Romans 10.16.
How shall they hear without a preacher? and how shall they preach except they
be sent? They will tell you, H. N. Euangel. c. 13. sect. 6.
The Word is not taught by the Sermons of Ministers, but by the Revelation of
the Spirit. And though the Prophet makes a great complaint, Hosea 4.6.
My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge; because thou have rejected
knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shall be no Priest to me.

And as the Apostle says, Christ on his throne. 67. The prime and proper
conferring this Order, is by Christ inwardly, gifting a man for the work.
Some things are hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned, and
unstable wrest (as they do also the other Scriptures unto their own
destruction. Yet these men will tell you learning is not necessary; when the
Spirit inclines them to the work of the Ministry, they must not doubt of
gifts. For says Cartwright, T. C. lib. 1. page 180.
When men are called to a public calling, God does pour his gifts on that
person, which is called so plentifully; that he is as it were suddenly made a
new man, which presumption they derive high.

God (say they) rebuked Moses, for excusing himself to be a man of imperfect
lips. And though the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 2.7.
I am ordained a Preacher, which implies the necessity of a lawful Calling,
whereupon is grounded an Article of our Religion, 23 Article.
That no man ought to Preach or minister the Sacraments, before he be lawfully
called or sent: (with which accord the Confessions of all the Reformed
Churches) Helvet: Con: 2: Ca: 18. Moulin Frem Con. art. 31. Bohem an Cap: 6.
Belgique art. 14. Wittemberg. art. 20. Suevian: art. 13.
And St. Paul seems to rebuke all intruders into the Ministry, asking, Are
all Teachers? 1 Cor. 12.28.
Yet they contrary to the example of the Apostle, in absolute opposition to the
Article of our Religion, will answer St. Paul in the Affirmative, yes. R. A.
Conf. of Brow. p. 113.
Lay men may teach to get Faith Corda Angliae. prop. 16.
may preach to Congregations to exercise their abilities. Nay, Barow: Disc: p.
36.
that every member of the Church has power to examine the manner of
administering the Sacraments. To restrain this liberty with them is the Yoke
of ^ondage. Christ's Throne.
As also to enjoyne a decent form of outward reverence, to accompany the
inward devotion of the heart; in humbling the body as well as the soul at the
reception of the pledge of our salvation; in standing up in the profession of
our Faith in the Creed, or in celebrating the obsequies of such as dye in the
Lord, Revel. 14.15.
with thanks for their deliverance, and with prayers for the surviving
faithful, with the like, (though the Maxim be unanswerable, Non servatur
unitas in credendo, nisi eadem adsit in colendo.

And though again it be unquestioned by all Ancient, uncontroverted by most of
the late Writers, and concluded in one of our Articles, Article 20.
That the Church has power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, with which agree
all the Reformed Churches, Rog. book of Art. 100.
Ne una Contradicente: And that great light of Germany, (Melancthon) holds them
inseparable from the Church, judging it a wicked thing, Melanct. par. 2. fol.
22. Jmpium quoque est sentire omnes Ceremonias institut as esse ab impijs
pontificibus, fuerunt nonnulli prudentes and sancti viri qui senserunt vulgi
ita supinos and demissos animos, ut nunquam sint dignitatem and amplitudinem
religionis animadversuri, nisi aliqua externa and oculis exposita specie
remorati and detenti, etc.

Habes autem praeclarum locum de Ceremoniarum usu. Josuae 22. Ne vestri pueri,
etc.

Pro pueris and infirmis istiusmodi sunt instituti ritus, Ibidem.


to think that all Ceremonies were instituted by bad Bishops, recommending to
us an excellent place of the use of Ceremonies in Joshua: That it may be a
witness between us and you, and our Generations after us; That your Children
may not say to our Children in time to come, ye have no part in the Lord: For
children and the weak were such Ceremonies instituted. And although we are
required by the Holy Ghost, To submit to every Ordinance for the Lords sake, 1
Peter 2.13.
whether it be to the King as supreme, or to Governors. Yet, these men teach
us new Doctrine; that such Ordinances as these, (though becoming Christian
humility and piety, derived from Antiquity, imposed by Authority, and obedience
commanded by Holy precept, are an Christ on his Throne fol. 24. fol. 25.27.
Syons Plea. fol. 91.
evacuation of Christ's death, and so an Apostasy from Christ, and suit not with
the liberty of the Gospel, wherewith Christ has made them free. Christ's
Throne. fo. 25.


In which extravagancies, such men run into all the desperate Schisms that
formerly rent the Church: In their contempt of our Service, Rites, and
Ceremonies, being Brownists, Brownists write, to have a Lyturgie, or form of
prayer, is to have another Gospel, Barrow refut. page 244.
In their false pretended liberty, Familists, The Familists say, they are a
free people, in Bondage to no creature. H. N. Sperland. c. 3. Sec. 6. C. 40.
Sec. 7.
In their neglect of due calling, and disdain of learning, Anabaptists.
(fanatici homines) Olim fanatici homines ut sibi applauderent in sua inscitia
iactabant Davidis exemplo spernendas esse omnes Literas. Sicut hodie
Anabaptistae non alio praetextu se pro spiritualibus venditant nisi quod omnis
Scientiae sunt expertes. Calvin. Comment on the Psalm. f. 330. Ps. 71.14.
Brainsick men in times past would take example from David; to despise all
learning, as now our Anabaptists, who only hold themselves inspired with
gifts, because they are ignorant of all Literature. These obey none of their
pretended Patrons. Beza says, Consequitur eum abuti Christianae libertatis
beneficio, qui vel suis Magistratibus, vel praepositis suis sponte non paret in
Domino. Beza Epist ad peregrinarum Ecclesiarum fratres in Anglia.
he abuses Christian Liberty, who submits not freely to the Magistrate. And
Melancthon holds, Melanct. in 13. Romans
It Is a mortal sin to violate the Edicts of the Magistrate. Quod neque
contra fidem, neque bonos mores injungitur, indifferenter esse habendum, and
pro eorum inter quos vivitur Societate servandum est. Augustine. Epist. 118. ad
Ianuarium. Cap. 2.
St. Austin gives these men good Counsel, (x) That which is neither against
Faith, nor good Manners, is to be held indifferent, and observed for their
society with whom you live.

Zanchie is a little sharper with them, Damnandi sunt Anabaptistae and alii qui
a veris Christi Ecclesiis se subdueunt. Zanchy. Tomes. fo. 692.
These Anabaptists (says he) and others that withdraw themselves from the
Communion of the Church either for the pretended vices of the Minister, or
other excuses are to be cut off from the Church: But if none of these incline
them to the peace of the Church,

Their pretended great Master Calvin, Calvin. Epistola Dom. Protector. Epistol.
fol. 88.
has a sharper Rod for such State-troublers: Amplissime Domine, audio esse Deo
seditionum genera, quae adversus regem ac regni statum caput extulerunt; Alii
enim Cerebrosi quidem, videlicet, sub Evangelii Nomine, passim invectam
vellent, Alii vero in superstitionibus Antichristi ita obduruerunt, ut earum
revulsionem far non possint; Ac merentur quidem tum hi, tum illi gladio
ultore coerceri, quem tibi tradidit Dominus, Cum non in regem tantum insurgunt,
sed in Deum ipsum, qui and Regem in Regiasede constituit, and te protectorem
instituit tum personae, tum etiam Regiae Majestatis.

SECT. 8. They must be free from Civil Miseries.
BUt all this tends yet but to free their Consciences, over which (say they) No
man Christ on his throne. fol. 60.
on earth has power in matters of Religion: If so, 'twere more tolerable.

But this large Conscience will have the body as free as the mind: They must
hold their Conventicles, intimated by that their meeting, Petition, Note 20.
View of Prelaticall Church, and diverse others.
together to pray for the King and Queen without punishment, or false
Calumniation.

This is a gap to let out Law, and take in liberty; Thus may they infuse what
Doctrine, contrive what stratagems, accumulate what multitudes they please, not
only without punishment, but without inquiry of the Laws. Nor is this all.

Freedom of their Consciences and persons is not enough, but they must have
their purses and estates as free too. They tell us they have Civil miseries,
as well as Ecclesiastical: such as Their Petition, note 11.
The payment of Tithes, to Parsons or Impropriators, which whether due Jure
Divino I dispute not, but by Civil, Common, and Statute Law, we know they are.

The prescription is somewhat ancient, for it is said, Melchizedeck Genes.
14.20. Heb. 7.2.
blessed Abraham, and he gave him tithes of all things. And under the Law it
is ordered, That Nehem. 10.37.
the Levits might have the tithes in all their Cities of our tillage. This we
find not discontinued under the Gospel, Heb. 7.5.
They which are children of Levi, which receive the office of the Priesthood,
have a commandment to take according to the Law, tithes of the people. And
Saint Paul holds it good equity, 1 Corinthians. 9.13.
That as they which wait at the Altar, are partakers of the Altar; even so has
the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel. Our Statute Laws have established and incorporated them into our
estates; for, Stat 27.31.32.37. H. 8.
Tithes in the hands of Laymen become temporal inheritances, and shall be
accounted Assets: And Lay men proprietaries of tithes, Cooks Littleton, fol.
159.
have election either to sue for the treble value by the Common Law, or for the
double in Ecclesiastical Courts.

The ancient jurisdiction of Court Leets, and Court Barons, Petition. note 12,
13. Sions plea, fol. 47.
they would subtly undermine by quarrelling at the oath, whereby the Court
must fall, Ex consequenti, Cooks Littleton, fol. 58. Britton, 274.

Bract. de Actionibus, fol. 105. Civiles actiones terminari debent in Curia
Baronum, de quibus ipse petens clamaverit tenere.


taking away the use of Juries, or the testimonies of witnesses. Though we find
them held in the time of Edward the Confessor, and so called, Barons vero qui
suam habent curiam de suis hominibus: and continued ever since. And indeed they
would have no Courts at all to have jurisdiction over them, as appears by many
of their writings, as that they would have Courts to proceed only against sins
by the word of God, Chord. Angl prop. 8.10. Sions plea, fol. 48.

If it be no sin, there is no ground of an oath. View Prelaticall Church, 41.


of which the Presbytery would be Judges, and (as they say) it would free us
from weekly Courts.

The would withdraw the customarie right of Their petition, note 21. Bract.
lib. 2. fol. 60. Cooks Littleton, fo. 185. Lambert, fol. 119. 58.
Herriots taken in the Saxons times, in which language it is called Heregeat,
or the Lords best; for Here is Lord, and Geat is best. And in the Laws before
the Conquest it is said, Sive quis incuria, sive morte repentina, fuerit
intestat mortuus, Dominus tamen nullam rerum suarum praeter eam quae jure
debetur Herrioti nomine sibi assumito.
Whether by a judicial sentence, or by sudden death, any man dies intestate,
yet the Lord shall take none of his goods, but that which is due by Law in the
name of a Herriot.

Nay, they yet go higher, even to the denial of the right of propriety in
our estates. They would pay no Fines, Their petition, Note 22.
do no Boons nor Duties to their Landlords, or at best bring them within the
Arbitrarie Jurisdiction of the Presbyter, who must be Chancellor betwixt Lord
and Tenant.

And these things are not represented by way of complaint, or submitted to the
consideration and determination of the Parliament, but seem to be enforced by
intimation of a strong, occult, employed Covenant; in that they say, Their
petition, Note 15. Christ on his Throne, fol. 77. So woe may recover that
Christian liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and for which his blood
was powered forth. Sions plea, fol. 333. Romans 14.1, 2. 2 Pet. 13.14. Goodman,
page 30.
The contrary privileges Christ has purchased, and commanded them to stand
unto. If this be not to subvert Laws, I know not what is? It is not only a
defiance to Civil Government, but a Band against it.

Nor Law nor Gospel escape such censures: If Saint Paul teach us not to resist
authority, but rather to submit to punishment: Some tell us, This is a
dangerous doctrine, taught by some, by the permission of God for our sins.
Certainly these are dangerous doctrines indeed, and God open our eyes in time
to foresee and prevent the consequences: So much are people infatuated with
these false glosses of pretended liberty, that they are easily seduced to
swallow such gilded pills, with open arms to embrace, with eager hands to pull
upon their own heads their own ruin. For alas, what is it else, but to
enthrall our selves under an irrecoverable servitude, whence can be no
redemption? Is it not to make that choice the Israelites refused, Whether is
better for you, Judges 9.2.
either that all the sons of Ierubbaal (which are threescore and ten persons)
reign over you, or that one reign over you? Whether shall we content our
selves with the dispensation of Laws our selves assent to, can at any time
expand, or contract, as we shall find them too narrow, or too large for the
circle of our Isle, trust the administration of these in the hands of six and
twenty Bishops, whose Delegate power is limited by our Statute Laws, whose
persons are easily responsall for any extent of that power, beyond those bounds
the Parliament allots them? Or submit our selves to the mere Arbitrarie
Government of thrice twenty six thousand Presbyters and Elders, for more than
so many will that Hierarchy amount to, under which they would now draw us, by
the platform of their new pretended discipline.

In which, if there were any more but the Species of liberty, that we should
thus be quit from all Ecclesiastique subjection; (though it is a principle too
often proved true, Moulins Confession, 408. Tyranny is more tolerable than such
a freedom, which under the title of liberty introduces licentiousness, and
this licentiousnes brings in extreme servitude.
that Overmuch desire of liberty is the original of Tyranny, every one by
being too free, becoming a slave: The Vulgar being well resembled to birds
long caged and kept tame, which breaking loose starve for want of food, or
become a prey to the first destroyer. Yet this might be a popular motive to
entice many into this new Coy.

If it did conduce to a real freedom, I wish all men should know, I hold my
self as freeborn as any man, and as much disdain the thought of servile
fetters of Romish Tyranny, or an insultant Prelacie, as any he that lives. But
I ever held, that Nunquam libertas gratior extat quam sub Rege pio. That it is
Law, which is to a free State (not a Band, but) a Guard against oppression;
That it is Magistracy which levels the scale of justice betwixt power and
poverty, that preserves degrees, distinction, order, All Societies,
Oeconomick, Civil, and Ecclesiastical, do consist by the submission of
inferiors to superiors, which being removed, confusion necessarily follows.
without which no Church, no State, no family can stand.

And when I see in these men, no shadow of true liberty, by pretending legal
government; nor yet the false gloss of liberty, by extinguishing all power,
but that it is evident by desiring to share the power of the keys, Paraeus
Catechetica 5. praecepti.
and to execute Ecclesiastical censures in their congregations within
themselves. Petition annexed, note 3
They have no thought of the peoples liberty, but to assume into their own
hands the same power they cry down in the Bishops, not to qualify, but to
exalt it above all moderation.

The use thereof being fully explaned by Expositors of their own strain, to
import no less, than to trample under feet the sacred Crowns of Kings, the
power of Parliaments, the seats of Justice, the use of Magistrates, the
efficacy of Laws, and make themselves Chancellours over our lives and
conversations, our wives, our children, our servants, our private families, and
our estates: That any hands should help to hoyse up unlimited, unbounded
Tyranny, I have nothing left me but acclamation, O fortunati nimium bona si sua
norint, and shall conclude with that saying, Quos Jupiter vult perdere, hos
prius dementat.

Yet shall I freely display some of those positions, which diverse that pretend
reformation less blush to publish, than I to recite, as part of their new
Christian doctrine; which how consistent with the Monarchique Government of
this State, how far inclinable to an Anarchy, and whether subversive of the
Laws, or destructive to the Subjects liberty, I shall not take upon me to
determine; but perhaps the consideration may please some others, though I
profess I only write to please my self, Liberare animam. Yet I hope no man
will be so far displeased with me, as to apply what I collect from some, as
meant by all that pretend a Presbyteriall Government. I have charity to think
many men that way inclined, have good intentions, and desire reformation out of
a pure heart: But I am confident, the more they acquaint themselves with such
positions as these, the less they will like the discipline.

SECT. 9. Episcopacie most agreeable with a Monarchy.
HEre, as in all distracted States, may well be applied the poets exclamation;
Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum? Not that Religion it self (which is the
band of peace) is cause of evils, but that it is made the usual cloak of all
seditious disturbances either in Church or State.

All the shafts of malice, every clamor, obloquy, shot at the order, doctrine,
and persons of the Bishops, how ever feathered wirh the pretext of piety, yet
still light all in one center, and may appear to be levelled all at one mark.

The power of the keys is the burden of all their songs, Sions plea, fol. 82.
All the fearful evils of sin and judgment from withholding the keys of
Christ's Kingdom.
in which consisting the Ecclesiasti que Discipline, not Doctrine of the
Church, it becomes rather a question in Policy than in Divinity, whether it
should rest in the hands of a few entrusted by the Church, or to be transmitted
to the hands of a multitude, or (as our Preacher would have it) Politions
annexed to the petition, 10
to every particular member of the Church.

And where it is clear in point of Divinity, where the Scripture has not
expressly set the rule, as in this particular it is left doubtful, such
Separatists interpreting that place of Matthew, Matthew. 18.17. Sions plea, 285.
Titus 2.15. 3.10. In his rebus de quibus nihil certi statuit divina Scriptura,
mos populi Dei, and instituta majoru^ pro lege tenenda sunt, and sicut
praevaricatores divinarum legum, ita contemptores Ecclesiasticaru^
consuetudinu^ coercendi sunt. August. ad Casulanum.
Go tell the Church, to be the whole Congregation; whereas others conceive it
clearly restrained to such as are set in authority by the Church, out of that
of Titus, who being entrusted by Saint Paul in the Churches of Crete; he
directs him to rebuke with all authority: And more particularly, A man that is
an heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject. In this case, we
must examine the ancient, continued practice and opinions of former times and
Writers: And such contemners of the customs of the Church (says Saint Austin)
are to be compelled.

But truly this was so little questioned in antiquity, that it seems it was
never doubted by Calvin himself, says he, Calvin. Epistol. ad Gasperum
Lizetum. Nun quam utile putavi jus excommunicundi permitti singulis pastoribus.
Nam and res odiosa est, nec exemplum probabile, and facilis in Tyrannidem
lapsus, and alium usum Apostoli tradiderunt.
I never thought it useful, to commit the power of excommunication to every
Pastor, for it is an odious thing, and not to be approved, but would soon
slip into tyranny, and the Apostles left another custom.

And indeed, what tyranny were not to be looked for from such aspirers, if they
were once invested in power? who cannot smother their ambition till they get
into possession what is the pride of the Prelates? (who admit the King the
supreme head of the Church under Christ, receive their designation from him,
hold the inferior has not power over the superior) compared with these
spirits? who tell us, That Princes T. C. Reply, p. 144. Rogers Preface. Huic
disciplinae omnes orbis Principes and Monarchas falce suas submittere and
pare^e necesse est. Travers. de Disciplina Ecclesiae, fol 142. Baron. Annals,
1076.
must be subject unto the Church, and submit their Stepters, and throw down
their Crowns before the Church, and lick up the dust of the feet of the
Church; all which is applied to their Presbytery, ascribing to every Presbyter
what the Pope only assumes to himself; That all Kings ought to kiss his feet.

How this superintendencie is derived from Scripture, how consonant to
Antiquity, or consistent with the glory of a King, is considerible.

I conceived God himself had an high hand in the institution of Kings and
Princes, when he leaves this principle in the Mosaic Law:

Deuteron. 17.15.
Thou shall set him King over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose. And in
that he says, 1 Samuel 15.11.
I have set up Saul to be King. And of David, he says, 1 Samuel 16.1.
I have provided me a King. And of Solomon says the prophet, Nehemiah 13.26.
God made him King over all Israel.

Nor does he dispose Crowns at the direction, or by the advice of others,
Daniel 4.31.
for the most high rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever
he will. But it should appear he challenges to himself the sole propriety of
this King-making Jurisdiction, in that he rebukes the Israelites, saying; They
have set up a King, but not by me, Hosea 8.4.
They have made them Princes, and I knew it not.

And as in institution, so in succession will he be the sole disposer of
Monarchies; 1 Chronicles. 17.11.
I will raise up thy seed after thee, and establish his Kingdom. Nor were his
intentions sure to let this be a titular shadow only without power, when we
are told, Proverbs 16.14.
The wrath of a King is as messengers of death. And we are commanded to 24.21.
fear the Lord and the King. Daniel 2.37.
Thou, O King, (says the prophet Daniel) art a King of Kings: for the God of
heaven has given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory.

And as the donation of this power is solely his, so will he have the
revocation too. To Saul says the prophet, 1 Samuel 28.17.
The Lord has rent thy kingdom from thine hand, and given it to thy servant
David. And to Solomon, 1 Kings 11.11.
I will surely rend the kingdom from thee, and will give it to thy servant.
Daniel 2.21.
He removes Kings, and sets up Kings, says Daniel.

Nor does he seem to subject them to the question of inferiors, says
Solomon, Ecclesiastes 8.4.
Where the word of a King is, there is power, and who may say unto him, What
do thou? Job 34.18.
Is it fit to say to a King (says Job) thou art wicked, much less to expose
them to violence: But his precept, 1 Chronicles. 16.22.
Touch not mine anointed, puts a guard upon their sacred persons, which to
violate, though in our own defense, is a breach of his command.

Though Saul persecuted David for his destruction, yet says he to Abishai, 1
Samuel 26.9.
Destroy him not, for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords
anointed, and be guiltless?

And lest these precepts might seem discontinued with the Law, they are
renewed in the Gospel: 1 Peter 2.13.
Submit your selves to the King, as supreme. And as if bare obedience were not
enough without due reverence, we are again commanded 1 Peter 2.17.
to fear God, and honor the King.

But was this honor due to them only from the Laity? Aaron the high priest
called Moses the chief prince, Lord; Exodus 32.22.
And Aaron said, Let not the anger of my Lord wax hot.

Or was the power of Kings subordinate or superior to the Church? We read that
Jehosaphat King of Judah appointed Judges, Levites, and Priests. 2 Chronicles.
19.5.8.


And was this power continued in the Royal Race of Kings, since the coming of
Christ? or extinguished by the greater light of his presence? We find Christ
himself rendering Tribute to Caesar, Give unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's. Matthew 22.19.


Or is it that Regal right, fixed only to the Scepters of Christian Kings and
Princes? We find the ancient Fathers gave to the Thrones of Princes, (though
Heathens) the prerogative God left them; Tertullian tells us, We give that
Reverence to the Emperor, as belongs both to us and him, as a man second to
God, and only less than God, for so he is greater than all others being
only less than God. Tertullian. ad Scapulam. cap. 2.

Colimus Jmperatorem sic quomodo and nobis licet, and ipsi expedit ut Hominem a
Deo secundum, and solo Deo minorem; Hoc and ipse volet, sic enim omnibus major
est, dum solo vero Deo minor est.




Or is this right solely annexed to the Imperial Throne? He again tells us in
the general, Kings are only in the power of God, from whom they are second,
after whom first, before and above all others. Tertullian, ad Scap.


Are we only to be subject while they rule over us after our own desires; and
quit from our Allegiance under persecution? St. Ambrose receiving Imperial
command to deliver up the Churches, says, Jf I be compelled, I may not
oppose: I may grieve, I may weep, I may sigh: Against Arms, Soldiers, the
Goths also, my Tears are my weapons, such are the guards of a Priest, I
neither can, nor ought to make other defense. Quid ergo turbamini? volens
nunquam vos deseram, coactus repugnare non novi, dolere potero, potero flere,
potero gemere: adversus arma, milites, Gothos quoque, Lachrymae meae arma sunt.
Talia enim Ambrosius Concione 1. contra Auxentium.


But perhaps such passive piety was more requisite in those days, when Gods
design was to convert the world by suffering, nor by subduing; when the seeds
of Religion must be watered with the blood of Martyrs, Sanguis martyrum semen
Ecclesiae.
than now in these purer times of Reformation. Yet we see Calvin advises us not
to fight for righteousness, but to suffer for righteousness: Calvin.
Institut. l. 4. c. 20. Art. 29.

Si ab imp^o and sacrilego principe vexamur ob pietatem, subeat primum
delictorum nostrorum recordatio, quae talibus haud dubie Domini flagellis
castigantur. Jnde humilitas impatientiam nostram fraenavit; succurrat deinde
haec cogitatio, non nostrum esse hujusmodi malis mederi, hoc tantum esse
reliquum, ut Domini opem imploremus, cujus in manu sunt regum corda and
regnorum Inclinationes.


If we be persecuted for godliness, by an impious and sacrilegious Prince, let
us first of all remember our sins, which no doubt are corrected by God with
scourges; this will bridle our impatience with humility: Then let us entertain
this thought, that it is not our part to heal such distempers* that this is our
only remedy, to appeal to Gods assistance, in whose hand are the hearts of
Kings, and the inclinations of Kingdoms. And in another place he tells us,
Calvin. Institut. l. 4. Insignis est and memorabilis apud Jeremiam locus, quem
tamet si prolixiorem, ideo non pigebit refer, quia totam hanc quaestionem
clarissime definit.
the Prophet Jeremiah clearly resolves this question, Jeremiah 27.6. 8. 9. 12.
I have given all these lands into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar the King of
Babylon. And it shall come to pass that the Nation and Kingdom which will not
serve the same Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon, and that will not put their
neck under the yoke of the K. of Babylon, that Nation will I punish says the
Lord, with the sword, and with the famine, and with the pestilence, until I
have consumed the land. Therefore hearken not ye unto your Prophets, nor to
your Diviners, and which speak unto you saying, ye shall not serve the King of
Babylon. I spoke also to Zedechiah King of Judah, according to all these words
saying, bring your necks under the yoke of the K. of Babylon serve him and his
people and live. Why will you dye thou and thy people by the sword, pestilence
and famine, as the Lord has spoken against the Nation that will not serve the
King of Babylon: Upon which place says Calvin Videmus quanta obedientia
Dom^nus tetrum illum ferocemque Tyrannum coli voluerit, non alia ratione nisi
quia regnum obtinebat. Calvin Institut. l. 4. cap. 20. Art. 27.
, we see what obedience the Lord will have given to this wicked and fierce
Tyrant, for no other reason but because he was a King. With whose counsel his
successor Beza Beza Epist. 24. 2d peregri. Eccl. in Anglia fratres.
well agrees. Illud solis precibus and patientia sanari potest. The Triacle
against this venom is Prayer, not Vengeance. We must be subject for Conscience
sake. Romans 13.5.
Hence it is deduced and incorporated into an Article of our Religion, Article
37.
That the Kings Majesty has the chief Government of all estates
Ecclesiastical and Civil, in all causes within his Dominions. Which is not
the sole position of our Church: But with this agree all the Reformed Churches:
Helverian Art. 16. Bazil. Art. 7. Bohem. Art. 16. Belg. Art. 36. August. Art.
16. Saxon. Art. 23.
And more particularly the French Church, whose Article of Religion is, Moulins
Buckler of Faith. Art. 40. fo. 535.
We must not only endure and suffer Superiors to Govern, but also we must
honor and obey them with all reverence, holding them for Gods Lieutenants and
Officers, whom he has appointed to exercise a Lawful and an Holy charge: we
must obey their Laws and Statutes, pay all Tributes and Imposts, bear the yoke
of Subjection with a good and free will, although they be Infidels. Therefore
we detest those that would reject Superiority, and establish community of
goods: and overthrow all course of Justice.

But yet perhaps the policy of States have found this Supreme power
prejudicial to the good of Commonwealths; and the Laws of God must give way
to the Laws of Nations, since Salus populi Suprema Lex: Gregor. Tholosan.
Syntag. jurum. l. 47. ca. 17. N. 1.
But experience tells us, the Romans were quickly weary of their change of
Government from a King to a Senate, and in nine years reduced it to a
Dictator, finding by experience, that commands depending upon diverse votes,
beget distraction and Ruin.

And History informs us, that the Spartan State, wherein, The King, the
Nobility, and the people had their just proportions of power, administration
of Justice, and obedience, subsisted above eight hundred years in a happy and
flourishing Condition; whereas Athens being a popular State, scarce stood out
an age. The nearest degree of government to a Monarchy, being ever longest
lived, and most glorious, most safe for the people, as was seen in Rome; when
the Commons to suppress the power of the Nobility in the Consulls, created
the Tribunes of the people; who sharing in government, would share in honors,
and fortunes too, which occasioned the Agrarian Law: Titus Livius.
That no Citizen should have above five hundred Acres of Land: and that the
people should share equally in all Conquests: This bred the quarrel of Sylla
and Marius, continued in Caesar and Pompey, and ended in the ruin of Rome.

From these observations, Tacitus draws this conclusion, Vnius Imperii corpus,
Tacitus Annalls. 1.
unius animo regendum videtur. It is necessary the body of one Empire should
be governed by one head, which must not be barely a Titular head, a shadow of
power without the weight of it: for Laws well made avail little, unless they
be entrusted to a hand that has power to exact execution of them.

Nor do I observe that these principles of Divinity or Policy do essentially
differ, but rather seem to be ^he same with the fundamentalls of the Laws of
this Kingdom. For says Bracton the learned Historian in the Genealogy of our
Laws. Bracton. fol. 107.
Rex ad hoc creatus est and electus, ut justitiam faciat universis, quia si non
esset qui justitiam faceret pax de facili possit exterminari, and supervacuum
esset leges condere and justitiam, nisi esset qui leges tueretur. Potentia vero
omnes sibi subditos debet praecellere, parem autem habere non debet, nec multo
fortius superiorem, maxim in justitia exhibenda, ut dicatur vere de eo, magnus
Dominus noster and magna virtus ejus.
To this end was a King created and chosen, that he might do Justice to all
men, because if there were not one to administer Justice, peace would soon be
rooted out, and it were vain to enact Laws, or talk of Justice, if there
were not one to defend the Laws.

Who must be one not subordinate to inferior powers, but says he; He ought
to excel all his subjects in power: And he must have no equal, much less a
superior, chiefly in administering Justice: That it may truly be said of
him, Great is our Lord (our King) great is his virtue.

And hence is it, that such Princely jurisdiction, superiorities, and authority
over Ecclesiastical Causes and persons, is annexed to the Imperial Crown for
ever by our Statute Laws; 1 Eliz. 1.
And that in the oath of Supremacy Oath of Supremacy. 1 Eliz. 1.
we not only acknowledge the King to be the supreme Governor in all
Ecclesiastical things or Causes, but are sworn, That to our power we shall
assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences, and
Authorities united and annexed to the Imperial Crown.

In this Scala Regia, this Gradation of Royal Monarchy, we can find nothing
incongruous to the faith or liberty of a true Protestant. But we see our
selves bound by Oath to acknowledge and support that Regal Government our
Statutes have established, our Laws approved: History represents most happy,
policy recommends as safest, to which all protestant Churches confess due
allegiance: All Primitive times yielded full obedience, To whose Throne Christ
himself yields Tribute, To whose power he commands submission and reverence;
To whose jurisdiction is committed the designation of Bishops and Judges, whose
persons God will have sacred, whose Actions unquestionable, whose succession he
himself determines, whose Kingdoms he disposes, and whose Election is the
All-Makers sole prerogative.

Now whether these Crowns and Scepters shall be held Jure Divino or not, I
take not on me to determine: but I may be bold to deliver Du-Moulins own
words, Moulins Buckler of Faith. fol. 560.
Whosoever builds the authority of Kings upon men's institutions, and not upon
the Ordinance of God, cutteth off three parts of their authority, and
bereaveth them of that which assures their Lives and their Crowns more than
the guards of their bodies, or puissant army, which put terror into subjects
hearts, instead of framing them to obedience: Then the fidelity of subjects
will be firm and sure, when it shall be incorporated into piety, and esteemed
to be a part of Religion, and of the service which men owe to God.

SECT. 10. Presbytery inconsistent with Monarchy.
IN the government of the State as now it stands, there being then so much
Harmony, (though it may sometimes be out of Tune) Let us examine this new
found Discipline, how consistent with a Protestant Monarchy, least by admitting
it ex improviso, we may shoulder Regem ex solio, and Religionem ex solo, A King
out of his Throne, and Religion out of the Land.

It Is a fair species of piety, to cry out for Reformation, and too many (I
fear) for this shadow are ready to let go the substance: Never was Gods
Church so pure, but she had her spots; it will be perfect charity to wipe
them out, but it argues none to make them greater: In stead of Reforming, some
so deface, deforme her, that one would scarce think there were Christians in
it; when for the most part the greatest slanderer proves the greatest Hypocrite.

If the Intention were unity; the way to preserve it, 1 Epphes. 4.
is by meekness of spirit in the band of peace: but those that expect any from
some of these Disciplinarians delude themselves; If we may believe their own
writings (however we may hope Reformation might qualify them) we shall find
they have no such design.

Some tell us plainly the Episcopal Government must not be moderated, nor
reserved, Answ. to Land. petition. fol. 33.

If the Hierarchy be not removed, our desolations are like to be the
astonishment of all Nat^^ns.

Syons plea. fol 5. 160. Christ on his Throne. fol 47. Jer. 4.11.12. Syons
plea. 196. Syons plea. 185.


but presently and wholly taken away. The Bishops must be utterly extirpated,
no less than the Romans rooted out the very name of Tarquins, for the tyranny
they had exercised. A wind to fan or cleanse will not serve the turn, but it
must be a full mighty wind, to root up, and carry away the very foundation of
their being. It is not lopping, nor pruning, nor shaving, nor paring the nails
of this evil that will serve turn, unless ye pluck up these stumps of Dagon
by the very roots, their nails will grow ranker than ever they did. Except
this strange fire be removed, the Lord must make the consuming fire of his
wrath break out upon us. If it live, ^ 187.
the Commonwealth must dye. Nay, some of them go so far, as to profess,
The Church-Ministerie and worship in England, are all Antichristian, 8.
Propositions printed by an unknown Author.

Protest. against the Hierarchy, as an Antichristian Tyranny.

Lord Bishops no Bishops. 86.


from which all Gods people are in duty and conscience bound to separate
themselves; by these obloquies, seeking (as they confess) to stir up a holy
hatred of the Prelates, Syons plea. 196. and Epistle to the Reader.
even to dash their Brains against the stones. By such clamours cherishing in
the vulgar a discontented Humor (which is the common source of Schism and
Heresy) thereby the better to broach their new invented Discipline, built upon
no other Basis, but the peoples dislike of Popery: as If the only rule to
draw out the line of our Religion by, were to take the direct opposite in all
things to that of the Church of Rome, That Religion most pure which has least
conformity with Rome. Christ on his throne. 23.
when we know that such as travel absolutely East and West from one another,
if they live to it, shall meet in the same line they parted, whereas parallells
continued to any extent do never interfare.

The first quarrels of the greatest breaches in the Church have for the most
part bin in points of discipline: And for all the noise, some of these men make
of dissension and enmity in rites and ceremonies, which are but shadows; we
shall find that in the most essential parts of Discipline, which concern the
sway of Church and State, the subjection of Prince and people to the tyranny of
their Discipline, they do not only shake hands again with Popery, but with
the strictest of them, (the Jesuits) clearly sever themselves from the Tenets
of the Protestant Church; Jesuits Declarat. motuum. cap. 20. Quodlibets. p. 142.
both sides laying this for a fundamental, both agree for the utter abrogation
of all Episcopal jurisdiction: Contrary to the 36. Article of our Religion.

The Church so subdued, see how they sway the Civil State, wherein it will be
observed whether the Lukewarm Protestant (as they call us) or such zealous
separatists be likest to give fire to that Popish powder, which would blow up
in fumum all Kingly Supremacy, or Magisteriall Superiority over the
Independent Hierarchy.

God says, Thou shall make him King whom I shall choose, and this rule we admit
for Law. Some that pretend to be presbyterians, tell us, Gilby, lib. de
Obedientia, page 25. and 105. Populo jus est ut imperium cui velit deferat.

Buchan. de jure Regni, page 61.

In regnis hominum potestas regis est a populo, quia populus facit Regem.
Bellarm. de Council. l^b. 2. cap. 19.


Kings, Princes, and Governors have their authority of the people, and upon
occasion they may take it away again, as men may revoke their Proxies and
Letters of Attorney. The Jesuits come not much short of this, for say they, In
the kingdom of men the power of the King is from the people, because the
people makes the King. To a bad prince God has said, I will rend the kingdom
from thee, and every true protestant expects the performance, not taking the
staff out of Gods hands, who says, Deuteron. 32.35. Romans 12.19.
To me belongs vengeance, and I will repay.

One of these says, Goodman, page 144, 145.
Evil Princes ought to be deposed, and inferior Magistrates ought chiefly to
do it. With this Bellarmine agrees, Bellarmin. lib. 3. de Pont. cap. 7. Talis
consensu omnium potest, imo debet privari suo dominio.
Such by the consent of all may, nay ought to be deprived, and if this was not
done in old time, it was for want of strength to do it.

Solomon says, Who shall say unto a King, What do thou? Goodman tells us,
Obedience, page 111. Bancroft, 36.
Judges ought to summon Princes before them for their crimes, and to proceed
against them as all other offenders. Here I find they have outgone the Jesuit;
David thought no man could stretch forth his hand against the Lords anointed
and be guiltless. Yet this Disciplinarian says, Goodman, page 185.
When Magistrates cease to do their duties, God gives the sword into the
peoples hands. Nay, Obedience, page 110.
a private man having some special inward motion may kill a Tyrant. In this
the Jesuit is too slow paced too, he thinks fit to give him a public trial
first; Tyrannice gubernans, just acquisito Domino non potest spoliari sine
publico judicio. Emanuel Sa.
Marry sentence given, then any man may be the executioner.

Suarez is more moderate, Si Papa Regem deponit, ab illis tantum poterit
expelli, vel interfici, quibus ipse id commiserit. Suarez lib 6. cont. Jacob.
Regem, cap. 4.
If, says he, the Pope deposes a King, he may not be driven away, nor
killed, but by those to whom the Pope shall give order to do it.

The Apostle bids us, 1 Peter 2.13.
Submit to the King as supreme, and to this the protestant swears allegiance.

They say, T. C. lib. 1 page 3.
The establishing of the Presbytery is the full placing of Christ in his
kingdom; that Kings and Princes must be subject to some parochial Presbyter:
with whom concurs Bellarmine, Chr^stus Ecclesiam regendam Petro and Episcopis,
commisit non Tiberio and ejus Praefectis. Bellar. de Laicis, cap. 7. Annot. on
1 Pet. 2.13.
Christ (says he) committed his Church to be governed by Peter and his
Bishops, not by Tiberius and his Officers. And in the Annotations on the
Rhemish Testament, Kings and Princes must be subject unto some Bishop.

Christ commands us obedience, to pay tribute to Caesar: The ancient Fathers
direct us to bear with prayer and patience the persecutions of bad Princes:
Nay, the very Heathens found humanity (where Divinity was wanting) to
qualify this Barbarism: Tacitus Tacitus Annals, 12.
advises, To bear with the riots and covetousness of Kings, as with
barrenness and other infirmities of nature; for whiles there are men there
will be vices, but they cannot continue long, and will be recompensed when
better come. And he leaves us this his golden sentence, Men are to reverence
things past, and submit to what is present, and should wish for good princes;
but whatsoever they are, endure them.

But some of these pious Presbyterians will neither be guided by precept nor
president, They hold it not enough for subjects not to obey, but they must
withstand wicked Princes, Goodman, page 43, 57, 72.
They must take up arms against them, Englands complaint against the Canons.
They may kill them as monsters and cruel beasts Goodman, 99. Buchanan, de
jure Regni.
: And if neither the Magistrates nor the people do their office, in deposing
or killing of them, then the Minister must excommunicate such a King, Knox
Histor fol 78. Obedience, fol. 116. Goodman, 199. T. C. Part. 2. Reply 65.
and any Minister may do it against the greatest prince.

Nay, if he be a just and gracious Prince toward his people, yet he must
learn obedience to the presbyters, otherwise says Barrow, Barrowes Discourse,
page 116.
A Prince contemning the censures of the Church, is to be disfranchized out of
the Church, and delivered unto Satan.

Here the universal Shepherd welcomes his brethren to the Romish fold, whose
principle it is, Bellarmin. in Barkl. cap. 21. Moulins Buckler, fo. 547.
That being Pastor he may shut up and destroy furious Rams, that is, Kings
which are not obedient to him. And the Jesuit tells us, that Tollet lib. 1. de
Institutione Sacerdotali, c. 13.
An excommunicate person can exercise no act of jurisdiction. And then says
Tollet, Tollet. lib. 4. de Instruct. Sacerdotali, c. 58. Vrbanus secundus.
We do not hold them for homicides, who being transported with zeal of the
holy Church against the excommunicate, shall chance to kill one of them.

Here let the loyal hearted Protestant stand at gaze a while, and consider
what effects the power of the keys being thus distributed, may produce, when
his King, his Sovereign, to whom he owes religious duty, legal obedience,
and to whom he is (perhaps) bound by oath, shall by the breath of every
Schismatike pastor of a parish be blown into hell, and he must then abandon
all relief or communication with him, to whom he is bound by allegiance.

To the poison of such devilish doctrins, let the ears of all good Christians
be deaf; from the infection God turn their hearts, and with the Psalmist let
al true protestants pray to the King of Kings, Psalm 61.6. Psalm 21.7.
That he will prolong the Kings life and his years as many generations. For
the King trusts in the Lord, and that through the mercy of the Most High he
may not be moved. Verse 8.
But that his hand may find out all his enemies, and his right hand those that
hate him.

SECT. 11. Presbytery inconsistent with Civil Magistracy.
BUT may be these King-Curbers will be themselves conformable to the Civil
Magistrate, and to keep the power of Kings within a tether is no hurt. Though
the light of Nature incline all creatures, the experience of all Nations
instruct all people to seek a head to that body, in which they contract
themselves by conferring power to that head, to conserve those rules of
government or order they prescribe for their more security, as well as Laws
to regulate the exorbitancies of unbounded Nature, which semper nititur in
vitium: Yet all power that grows too great, grows suspect and dangerous. And
this perhaps may be doubted easily to degenerate from security into Tyranny:
And therefore one prescribes us a remedy, and tells us, Knox, Hi^
That God has appointed the Nobility to bridle the inordinate appetites of
princes, and in so doing they cannot be accused as resisters of authority. And
some of them tell these great officers, Goodman, page 34.
whence this superintendent power is derived to them: Whereof (says one of
them) came this division of personages, Lib. de obedient. p. 114.
seeing all men came of one man and one woman? was it for their lusty hawking,
hunting, dicing, carding, dancing, swearing, fleering, flattering, for their
cruel polling and pilling? No, Lib. de obedient. p. 107:
there was no such thing, they have their honor of the people, to revenge the
injuries of their Governors.

And though such advance this power in the Nobility, above the thrones of
princes, yet they think fit to put them in mind, they have a superior power
above them too, Knox, page 272.
by charging the Nobility upon pain of excommunication to join with them;
where they see cause to resist their prince.

But these degrees of government in Kings or Nobles, are held perchance but the
ill effects of too much power, encroachments upon the liberties of freeborn
men; therefore they who have this power of the keys Jure divino, ought not to
be subordinate to any power that is of human institution.

Yet knowing that God who is the God of order, and not of confusion, has ever
appointed Magistrates to rule the people, showing the inconvenience of want of
government in the men of Laish, 1^7.
who (says the Prophet) dwelt careless after the manner of the Zidonians,
where there was no Magistrate in the land that might put them to shame in any
thing: who became a prey to the Tribe of Dan. And the Apostles precept being
peremptory, Titus 3.1.
To obey Magistrates: They will perhaps give due obedience to the Civil
Magistrate. Melancthon tells us, Peccatum est mortale violare edicta
magistratus. Melancth. in 13. ad Romanos.
It is a mortal sin to violate the edicts of the Magistrate.

But some of these Disciplinarians positions are, that (o) Subjects do promise
obedience, that the Magistrate might help them, Goodman, page 190.
which if he do not, they are discharged of obedience: Barrow, Refut page 169.
And that without the Prince, the people may reform, and must not tarry for
the Magistrate. But where their own spirits guide them; they may become Judges
and Executioners themselves, laying it for a principle, (p) That if the
Magistrates shall refuse to put Massemongers to death, Goodman, p. 77, 196.
the people (in seeing it performed) do show that zeal of God which was
commended in Phinees, destroying the adulterers, and in the Israelites against
the Benjamites.

But in this they have the excuse of zeal in offense and indignation at sins
against God, and negligence in Magistrates. In which case, some hold, that Knox
Appeal. fol. 30. Goodman. page 185.
not Kings and Magistrates only ought to punish crimes against God, but the
whole body of the people, and every member of the same to his ability must
revenge the injury done to God.

The French Reformed Church Moulins Buckler of Faith. f. 535. 39. Art.
knew none of this Doctrine, who in the thirty ninth Article of their Faith,
declare plainly, That they believe that God will have the world governed by
Laws and Policies, that there may be some restraint of the disordered desires
of the world: And as be has established Kingdoms and Commonwealths, whether
hereditary or otherwise, and all that belongs to the State of Justice, and
will be known to be Author thereof, so has he put the sword into the
Magistrates hands, to repress sins committed not only against the second
Table of the Commandments of God, but also against the first. Though Isay,
their zeal in revenging injuries done to the Majesty of God transport them to
share in the execution of Justice; Yet may be they will submit to the Civil
Magistrate in the government of the Church, and ordination of Rites and
Ceremonies, in which by the twentieth, and thirty seventh Articles of our
Religion, Rogers Articles. f, 213. Helvetian. Bazill. Bohemian. Belgique.
Augustan, Saxon. Suevian. Confessions.
the power is committed to those, to whom God has given the superiority, to
which Doctrine all protestant Churches subscribe as Apostolical, and
Orthodoxall. Rogers Articles. f, 213. Helvetian. Bazill. Bohemian. Belgique.
Augustan, Saxon. Suevian. Confessions.


But when we examine how they conform, we shall find that in direct
opposition to us and other Reformed Churches: Some of them say, that Civil
Magistrates have no power to ordain Ceremonies pertaining to the Church, 1
Tho. Cartwright. 1. Reply. p. 153.

2 Reply. 2. part. p. 4.


as being no Church Officers at all.

Viretus Dialogue of white Devils.
One of them holds, That if any Magistrates under the Title of authority and
power that God has given them, will make the Ministers of the Church subject
to them; they do verily set up a new Pope, changing only his Coat and Masque.
Indeed they will not allow the Magistrate to be pope, but such will be popes
themselves, and allow him no more power than the pope did. Says Cartwright,
T.C. 2. 2. 157. 161.
The Prince may call a Council of the Ministry, and appoint time and place.
The very same says Saunders Saunders. lib. 2. c. 3.
the papist, might the Emperors do of old. Cartwr. 2. 2. p. 156. Harding p.
317. 312. The Counsels were not called Imperatoria, but Episcopalia.
The Decrees made there may not be said to be done by the Princes Authority;
therefore the Canons of the Counsels were called the Bishops, not the
Emperors. The same says Harding, the Emperors did not under-write
definientes subscripsimus, as the Bishops did, but Consentientes. T. C. 2. R.
p. 161. Saund. de Monarch. l. 2. c. 3.
Cartwright allows Princes to be present in Counsels to suppress tumults. The
same does Harding allow them ad pacem and concordiam retinendam, ut nullum
fieri tumultum permittant. Nay, the Magistrate is beholding to Mr. Cartwright,
T. C. 2. 2. p. 164. 167. Harding. page 217. 314:
to allow that he may be an Assistant, and have his voice in their meetings,
and gives this reason for it, That oftentimes a simple man, and (as the proverb
says) the Gardner has spoken to good p^rpose. Mr. Harding yet allows more to
the popish Magistrates: He says Ambassadors of States have honorable seats in
all Counsels, may sit as assistants, may give their advices, may exhort the
Bishops, and subscribe with them. But Cartwright will allow them no power there
neither to be Moderator, Determiner, nor Judge.

Nay, they not only have no power, but they must be subordinate to their
Presbyters; Magistrates Ecclesiastical Discipline. p. 185. Lear. Discipl. page
89.
as well as other men must submit themselves and be obedient to the just and
lawful Authority of the Church, that is, the Presbytery: And Travers Travers.
page 142.
speaking of the power of the Lay Elders says, It is just that Kings and
Magistrates must obey them.

Neither is this Government changeable by the will or power of the Magistrate,
but it is held, that of necessity Martin junior. Thesis. 22.
all Christian Magistrates are bound for to receive this government: Which
says Snecanus: If any Magistrate hinder, let him be freely admonished of his
duty; If he do not then submit, let him be more exactly instructed that he
may serve God in fear. Bancroft. fol. 134.
Marry if this way there happen no good success, then let the Ministers of the
Church execute their office, without lingering and staying so long for a
Parliament.

Which compulsive power in the Church holds me thinks some analogy with that of
the Jesuits Odoard. West. in Sarct. juris. Sect. 6. Ecclesia non solum
praec^pit, dirigit, sed coe^cet, disponit virtute potestatis gubernativae.
whose opinion is, The Church not only prescribes and directs, but restraines
and dispones by virtue of her Gubernative power. Which positions are a language
unknown amongst Protestants.

Melancthon tells us, Potest as Ecclesiae suum m^ndacum babet, (...) Non
iri^mpa^ in ali^nu^ officiem, non transferat regna mundi, Non abroger leges
Magistratuum, non tollat legitimam obedientiam, non impediat Iudicia de ullis
civ libus ordinationibus aut contractibus, non praescribat leges magist atibus
de forma Reipublicae, etc. Augustan. Confession. Articulis fidei fol. 46.
The Church has her own Rules, and intrudes not into another office,
disposes no Crowns, abrogates not the Laws of Magistrates, extinguishes not
lawful obedience, stops not judgment in Civil causes; nor prescribes Laws
to Magistrates.

But these will derive us another authority above the Magistrate. They tell us
Counterp. p. 12.
Christ has translated the Jews Sanedrim into his Church. That there is no
reason but the same Authority the Synagoge had under the Law, should continue
in the Church under the Gospel. Beza praefat. ad libr. de excom. verius fuit
Synagogae sub lege, etc.
That under the Law judgments between blood and blood, between plea and plea
T. C. l. 2. p. ^7. Beza de excom. 104.
did belong to the Priests, and that it was death for any man to rest in his
determination. To deduce this judicial power to themselves, they tell us,
Christ as a King (not as a Priest or Prophet) prescribed the form of
Ecclesiastical government. Cartwr. l. 2 p: 240.
And that every Eldership is the Tribunal seat of God. Bez. de Presbyt. 124.
That every well-ordered parish having a perfect Eldership is of equal
authority. Cartwr. l. 2. p. 419.


So here we see every parochial Presbytery invested in Christ's Throne,
claiming judicial power immediately from Christ, whereby as is set forth in
the Geneva These 83. Civiles quoque lites antequam Christiani essent Magistratus
ex Apostolica Doctrina componebantur.
Discipline, Civil contentions were compounded by the Elderships before there
were any Christian Magistrates. But how have they now lost that judicial
power? No, says Cartwright, Cartwright. l. 1. p. 175.
the same Authority which the Church had before there was a Christian
Magistrate, does still continue.

And another would be glad to learn how this authority was translated from the
Church unto the Civil Magistrate Discourse of Discipl. p. 118. 119.
For says Travers, Heathen Princes being become Christians, do receive no
further increase of their authority than they had when they were Pagans. If so,
certainly in their esteem all Civil Magistracy is but a mere usurpation
upon the Tribunal of Christ the Eldership.

SECT. 12. Presbytery against Laws.
BUt Kings, Nobles, Magistrates, are all men subject to sins and infirmities,
and no reason the blind should lead them who have the light of truth, Christ on
his Throne fol. 67.
being inwardly called and gifted (as they say) for the work of the Ministry;
yet surely the Law is a perfect guide; to which all men must give absolute
obedience, which is enjoined by St. Paul: Submit yourselves to every Ordinance
of man, 1 Pet. 2.13^.
for the Lords sake. This precept was so prevalent with the ancient Fathers,
that they conformed to the customs and rules of every Church where they came.
St. Ambrose says, Ambrosius in Epist. 118. August. ad Januarium.

Cum Romam venio jejuno Sabbato, cum sum Mediolano non jejuno, sic etiam tu ad
quam forte Ecclesiam veneris eius morem serva, si cuiquam non vis esse
scandalo, nec quenquam tibi.


When I come to Rome I fast the Sabbath, at Millaine I fast not: so also do
thou in what Church soever thou come, observe their Customs, if thou will
neither give scandal to others, nor have others give offense to thee. And St.
Austin seems much to be troubled at the refractorinesse of such spirits as are
not conformable to the government of the places they live in. Sensienim saepe
dolens and gemens multas infirmorum perturbationes fieri per quorundam fratium
contentiosam obstinationem, and superstitiosam timiditatem, qui in rebus
hujusmodi, quae neque Scripturae authoritate, neque universalis Eccclesiae
Traditione, neque vitae corrigendae utilitate, ad certum possunt terminum
pervenire, tantum quia suhest qualiscunque ratiocinatio cogitantis, aut quia in
sua patria sic consuevit, aut quia thy vivit, ubi peregrinationem suam, quo
remotiorem a suis, eo doctiorem factum putat, tam litigiosas excitant
quaestiones, ut nisi quo^ ipsi faciunt nihil rectum existiment. St. August. in
Epist. 118. ad Januar^^m.
Often (says he) do I think with sorrow and groans what vain perturbations
arise from some weak brethren by their contentious obstinacy, and
superstitious fears in such things, which neither by authority of Scripture,
nor universal tradition of the Church; nor necessary conformity of manners,
can be reduced to any certain term, only because they find various matter
of Argument, or because it was so in such a Country, or because they are so
far out of conceit with their own, that they hold those things most
authentic, which differ most from their present practisee. Hereupon raising so
many litigious questions, that they esteem nothing right but their own
fancies.

To such obstinate Opinionators Master Calvin (whose Discipline they would
seem to imitate, though I fear they will scarce follow his Doctrine) leaves
this principle: I desire such may be admonished, first not to wed themselves
to their own folly. Secondly, that in such frowardness they hinder not the
building of the Church. Thirdly, that foolish emulation transport them not: for
what cause have such of brawling, but shame to yield to their betters. Calvin.
Epistola ad Anglos agentes Franckford^ae.

Illos monitos, esse cupio ne sibi in sua inscitia nimis placeant, dei de ne
sua pervicatia sancti Aedificu cursam retardent, Tertio ne stulta eos aemulatio
abripiat. Nam quae illis rixandi caus^, nisi quia pudet mel^oribus cedere.




Now how far the Apostles precept, the Fathers president, or the advice of
Mr. Calvin prevails upon some of these, to submit to men or Laws, or with
what moderation they proceed to establish their own new Discipline is
observeable.

Posito uno absurdo sequuntur mill, is a Rule in Schools: and now can they
be conformable, subordinate to Law or Government, who lay their Principles
above all Laws. They tell us, Practice of Prelates. D. 2.
the Presbyter is the only band of peace. That T. Cart. lib. 1. Epist.
the want of Eldership is the cause of all evils. That this Discipline Idem.
l. 1. p. 6. and 48.
is no small part of the Gospel, it is of the substance of it. Knox
Exhortation. page 35. 43.
That it is the Gospel of the Kingdone of God. Register. page 68.
That without this Discipline, there can be no true Religion. T. Cart. lib.
page 220. Idem Preface to the Demonstrat.
That they that reject this Discipiine; refuse to have Christ reign over them,
and deny him in effect to be their King, or their Lord. And thence conclude,
that if any refuse to have the Lord Jesus set up as Lord, let him be Christ on
his throne. fol. 76.
Anathema Maranatha.

Upon these pillars advancing the Church above the reach of all humane power,
telling us, that every visible Church In the 8. unanswerable propositions
printed 1641.

Eatons Positions. not. 9.


(which they say is every parish) is an independent body of it self, and has
power from Christ her head, who has left perfect Laws for the government
thereof, which are unalterable and unchangeable, in all times, ages, and places
by any the sons of men.

Which positions stand point blanck against the Articles of our Religion,
against the power of our Laws. By the twentieth Article we profess
positively, Rogers fol 98.
That the Church has power to decree Rites or Ceremonies.

fol. 211.
By the 37. Article we declare, That the Kings Majesty has chief power in his
Dominions, and that it is a prerogative given to all godly princes in holy
Scriptures by God himself, that is; that they should rule all Estates and
Degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or
Temporal, and restrain with the Civil sword the stubborn and evil doers.
Hereupon we lay the foundation of that Oath of supremacy ratified by our Laws.
And such superiority Statute Anno 1: Eliz. cap. 1.
in the visitation of the Ecclesiastical state, reformation, order, and
correction of the same; and of all manner of errors, heresies, Schisms,
abuses, offenses, contempts, and enormities whatsoever, is by the authority of
Parliament, united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of the Realm.

25 Id. 8.
And our Laws restrain the Clergy from making any Constitutions, or Laws
without the Kings consent: in opposition whereof says one of them, Admonition
to the Parliament. 2.
No civil Magistrate has such authority as that with out his consent it
should not be lawful for Ecclesiastical persons, to make any Church order or
Ceremony.

Which Rules if we shall make the touchstone of such new Doctrines, we shall
find them upon nearer terms of reconciliation with the papist than the
protestant.

The papist says, Answ. to the execut. of Justice. d. 3. p. 56.
The Emperor of the whole world, if he take upon him to prescribe Laws of
Religion to the Bishops and Priests, he shall be damned assuredly except he
repent. The making of Ecclesiastical Constitutions and Ceremonies belongs
unto the Ministers of the Church, T. C. Reply 1. p. 153. Admonition to the
Parliament.
and Ecclesiastical Governors, unto the Elders who are to consult, admonish,
correct, and order all things pertaining to the Congregation. Nor want they
some false glosses of Scripture to varnish over this pretended Jurisdiction
above Laws: but they plead obedience to the commands of disobedience, which
they infer from that of St. Paul to the Galatians, Galatians 5.1.
Standfast in the liberty wherewith Christ has set you free. Which though it
be plainly evident in the Text it self that by this freedom, the Apostle
intended freedom from the Law of Circumcision, in the next verse saying, (I
Paul say unto you, Galatians. 5.2.3, 4, 5.
that if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing, for every man
that is circumcised is a debtor to the whole Law; and that Christ is become of
no effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye are fallen
from Grace. For we through the spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by
faith.)

Yet hence do they ground their strong plea, for exemption from all Authority,
as if it were an evidence of their faith to shake off the yoke of all Law.

From such another place in the Revelations, by leaving out part of the verse;
To you I say, as many as have not this Doctrine, Revel. 2.24.
and which have not known the depths of Satan) and taking only the latter
part: Verse 25.
I will put upon you none other burden, but that which you have already, hold
fast till I come. They do extort a construction fit to be delivered in no
other words, but their own, who say this is, Sions plo, 283.
A most pregnant place against subjecting of our selves to any power or
religious practice, how specious and spangled (with depth of devilish
learning) soever it be.

Having thus pleaded privilege over, some cry out mainly against Law and
authority, says one of them, Impiety is suffered to bear sway against the
Majesty of God, Supplication, p. 59. Ibid. page 24.
and that by Law and Authority: And that such Laws are retained in force, as
justle and overthrow the Royal prerogative of the Son of God.

But perhaps this exclamation is only against such Laws as support the
prelates, the enemies of presbytery.

No, they must have no Laws to limit them, Epistle before the Demonstration,
B. 4. Bancroft, fol. 55.
As great indignity is offered unto Jesus Christ (says one) in committing his
Church to the government of the Common Law, as can be by mean hirelings unto a
King, in committing his beloved Spouse unto the direction of the Mistress of
the Stews, and enforcing her to live after the laws of a Brothell-house.

SECT. 13. The inordinate violence of the Presbyterians.
FRom these principles do such lawless Disciplinarians prosecute their
design with such spirit, that nor King, Nobles, Magistrates, Laws, nor any
thing must stand in their way, Sions plea, fol. 340.
Aut hoc, aut nihil, is their Ensign. They who hinder discipline (say they)
bring the State at length to an extremely desperate point: Fol. 244.
None but enemies to Christ, are enemies to this government.

And as against enemies they proceed indeed, Sions plea, fol. 240.
Strike neither at great nor small, but at these troublers of Israel, smite
that Hazael in the fifth rib, yea, if father or mother stand in the way, away
with them, down with the colors of the Dragon: Fol. 200.
advance the standard of Christ.

Not the white flag of truce, but the red flag of destruction, whose emblem
was never by any Father (till now) writ in such bloody characters. The title
page to Sions plea And Christ on his Throne.
Those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring
hither and slay them before me.

This, till advanced by the new Standard-bea-bearer, was never writ in the
banner of that Lamb of peace; these were none of those trophies I read of in
the glorious throne in the Revelation. When Revel. 5.6.
in the midst of the throne, and of the four Beasts, and in the midst of
the Elders stood a Lamb as it had been slain (not like a destroyer) To whom
the four Beasts, Verse 8.
and four and twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb: Verse 9.
And sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open
the seals thereof, for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy
blood. It was to this Sacrifice, Verse 11.
not Sacrificer; That the many Angels about the Throne, and the Beasts and the
Elders, to the number of ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of
thousands cried with a loud voice, Verse 12.
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain.

Nor were any of that scarlet liverie in his retinue, Revel. 7.9.
For lo a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and
kinreds, and people, and tongues stood before the Throne, and before the Lamb
clothed with white robes and palms in their hands, which came out of great
tribulation, and had washed their robes, Verse 14.
and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.

But such as these think their dye is not deep enough, they must yet strike
the Basilike vein, Sions plea, 262. Gibson threatened King James, that as
Jeroboam he should be rooted out, and conclude his race, if he maintained
Bishops, Bancroft, fol. 28.
Nothing but this (say they) will cure the pleurisy of our State. By which,
what fountain of blood they mean, is fitter for the exposition of a Jesuit,
Carolus Scriban. Erratum valde fuisse in festo Barthol. quod secta non fuerit
vena basilica: id est, quod percitum fuit regi Navarrae and principi condensi.
than the enquiry of a Protestant. Only the torrent of such spirits is
observable (if not formidable) who check at no power.

Well may the all-reaching arm of a Parliament assist, but (they hold) it
cannot stay their course. Sions plea, 155.
If the Hierarchy be not removed, and the Scepter of Christ's kingdom, namely
his own discipline be advanced, there can be no healing of the sore. The
Parliament may remove all state grievances, in repairing wrongs, censuring
misdemeanors, etc. All which are to be done, Sions plea, 156.
but the former is not to be left undone. As God has not blessed any
Parliamentary endeavors, because (as we take it say they) they went not this
way to work, so it is likely he will not be with you now, if you go not this
way to work.

Some were a little freer languag'd against the Parliament, Supplicat. page 25.
Bancroft, fol. 50.
29. Eliz. That if they did not abrogate the government of Bishops, they should
betray God, the truth, and betray the whole kingdom.

But this is but gentle admonition; if fair words will prevail, it is well;
if not, they will do it perforce. Unlawfulness of unlimited Prelacie, fol. 12.
Though the Parliament be for Bishops (says one of them) yet all the godly and
religious will be against them. And it is now become the language of the
pulpit, that if the Parliament will not releeve them, Eaton in his Sermon at
Chester.
yet they shall stick fast together, to maintain their cause, which is Christ's
cause. Herein following the counsel of their Predecess^urs, Bancroft, fol. 169.
That if the brethren cannot obtain their wills by suit, nor dispute, the
multitude and people must work the feat. Thus built upon the authority of one
of their ancient Ringleaders, who tells them, Knox to the Communaltie, fol. 49,
50.
Reformation of Religion belongs to the Communaltie. (The which carrying some
Species of liberty in it) they seek to confirm that popular ambition, by
cherishing in them an opinion of a right in the power of the keys, as
belonging Eatons positions annexed, 9.
neither to the Pastor, nor Governors, but to the whole Congregation, and to
every particular member thereof, and Christ having committed them to every
one, would of every one demand an account.

A dangerous doctrine, if once grounded in vulgar apprehensions. These possessed
with an opinion of an equal interest in the power of the keys of the Church
(which they know how to manage) will much more plausibly embrace the
suggestions of a paritie in the sway of the State, as better suting with their
capacities: It will be somewhat difficult to possess the common people, A
Priest stirred up rebellion in King Richard the seconds rhyme, with this
argument.
that we are all sprung from the Tribe of Levi: But the old seditious argument
will be obvious to them, That we are all the sons of Adam, borne free, some of
them say, the Gospel has made them free. And Law once subverted, it will
appear good equity to such Chancellours, to share the earth equally. They
will plead Scripture for it, that we should all Genesis 3.19.
live by the sweat of our brows. They will tell us that in Egypt we were all
fellow Brick-makers: And it is no noveltie in the stories of this State, That
such Artificers have levelled the palaces of Nobles, and squared out the
dimensions of the Gentry and Lawgivers, according to the rule of their reason.

The empty name of liberty, blown into vulgar ears, has over-turned many
States: how much more prevalent and dangerous must it be, when enforced as a
religious duty to disobey authority.

We know Saint Paul's precept is, Romans 13 1, 2.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, they that resist receive
damnation. And certainly since his time, never any age till now brought forth
such desperate Anti-Apostles (as I may not improperly call them) in absolute
opposition to the rule of the Apostle, Eatons Position. 9.
To conjure men in their pulpits, as they will answer it at the dreadful day
of judgment, not to submit to any authority whatsoever. And in defiance and
contempt of our Laws (still in force) which exact the deprivation of every
Ecclesiastique, Stat. 1 Eliz. cap. 2.
the confiscation of the goods and chattels, and imprisonment, during life of
every Laick, that shall wilfully deprave the Liturgy established by Law; in
their petition to style it, Freholders Petition. Note 8.
The English refined Masse-booke of Common Prayer. In their pulpits to preach
it Eatons Position. Note 10.
sin, to be present at reading of a prayer out of a book by Minister or any
other. In print to publish, that it is absolutely 8 Propositions in print p. 1.
sinful and unlawful to hear any Minister preach in the Church of England and
the Assemblies thereof.

And seeing these are seconded by the frequent and public venring of
scandalous, invective, and libellous pamphlets, full of seditious doctrines,
implying an absolute abnegation of the Kings supremacy, Volumes of Paraphlets.
That the Church is independent and must have all her officers and Laws within
her self, which is to deny the Ecclesiastical Law, which Sir Ed. Cook says,
whosoever shall enie, he denies that the King has full power to deliver
Justice in all causes to all his subjects.
and withdrawing the people from their due allegiance, exciting them to
disobedience. To me such bold violation and uncontrolled contempt of Laws
(sitting the Lawmakers) appears formidable: Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse
bonum.

I consider the Nobility and Gentry of this Isle (this nurserie of honor)
situate as the Low Countries in a flat, under the banks and bounds of the
Laws, secured from the inundations of that Ocean, the Vulgar, which by the
breach of those bounds would quickly overwhelme us, and deface all distinctions
of degrees or persons: and cannot but with admiration observe, that Sampson
like in their full strength (but as blind with inconsiderate zeal, as he by
treachery) any such should lay hold on those pillars of our State, that prop
up the regulated Fabric of this glorious Monarchy; and by cracking them,
wilfully bury themselves and us in the rubbish of that Chaos, which they so pull
upon their own heads, seeking to turn our freedom into fetters, by
cancelling our ancient Laws (the Charters of true liberty) and exposing us
eternal Apprentices to the Arbitrarie Jurisdiction of a new Corporation of
Apron Elders, Mechanic Artizans; as if they had forgot the old Rule, Haec
natura multitudinis est; aut humiliter servit, aut superbe dominatur.

When we know the principle of the Religion of some of these is, That every man
should be equal for calling, and that there should be no difference of
Persons amongst Christians. Sleidan. Com. l. 5.
And the Maxim of policy is, that to erect a paritie, where there are many
Gentry, they must first dispatch them out of the way. Machiavell.


SECT. 14. Presbyteriall Discipline brings not liberty to the vulgar: but
introduces a mere Arbitrarie Government.
BUt perhaps to all this the common people lend a ready ear: This still tends
to the enlarging of their loved liberty: It Is true indeed, here is a large
design of liberty: The Presbyters must, as I have showed, have power over
Princes, Nobles, Magistrates, be subordinate to no Laws, concluded by no
Parliament, but be an independent body of themselves; and the common people
must be their factors for this freedom.

And when they have done all, what share shall these deluded people have of
this dream of liberty? Is it any other than such as a poor prisoner for debt
finds when he is released from the bonds of the Law by a Turkish pirate, he
tugs hard at an Oar to waft his Rescuers from the reach of his just Creditors;
but when he has brought them to their wished haven, he there sees himself
seven fold more slave than he was in prison; chained to his Gally without hopes
of Redemption, rest, or possibility of avoiding stripes, though all his life
besides be but one continued drudgerie.

It Is plain indeed, we shall set the Presbytery free from the government of
men, or reach of Laws, but let us examine if the whole constitution of their
Discipline be not to us a bondage.

Their first Maxim is to place themselves above the reach of man: what they
deny as a Treasonable challenge in the Bishops against the prerogative of
Princes, they boldly assume to themselves (to the little Bishop, absolute Pope
of every parish) that their office is jure Divino.

8. Propositions printed 1641.

Eatons Positions. 6. and 9.


Every visible Church being an independent body of it self, having power from
Christ her head to bind and loose, to receive in, and cast out by the Keys of
the Kingdom, whereby neither to their office nor authority does either King
or potentate, man or Law, contribute any thing, not so much as in ordination of
particular Ministers; for they tell us, Christ on his throne. fol. 67.
Some Protestants are of opinion, that Ordination cannot be performed but by a
Prelate, or at least by Ministers only, without whose imposition of hands it
were no Ordination, as is if it did confer such an order. Whereas, say they,
the prime and proper conferring of this Order is by Christ himself, inwardly
calling, and gifting a man for the work of the Ministry.

And though the Evangelist says in the eighth to the Acts, Acts 8.18.
That through laying on of the Apostles hands the Holy Ghost was given. And St.
Paul explaines it fully to be interpreted of Election into the Ministry,
charging Timothy 1 Timothy 4.14.
Not to neglect the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy;
with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, which they confess was
frequent in the Apostles times. Christ on his throne. 68.


Yet afterward (say they) in successive ages, there was no such gift annexed
to the laying on of hands, Christ on his throne. Prelacy misery. fol. 7. Eatons
Positions. 2.
but that the election of Ministers was by every Congregation respectively.
With this false pretense of power, (That to the people belonged the laying on
of their hands as a token of their approbation and confirmation of him that is
chosen) working upon the vulgar, who are ready to snatch at every shadow of
liberty, to advance their Hierarchy.

Though they must know as soon as they have done, that they have raised a
spirit they have not power to lay again: for then they tell them, (the work of
their own hands) These new created Chorda Angliae fol. 8. Proposition the 9.

If any be so hardy as but to speak evil of any Minister, or mis-name them, he
is to be imprisoned. Laws of Geneva. fol. 71.


Pastors must be reverently respected, and that the people be not suffered in
any wise to scandalize them, nor have power to depose them, or put them out
whom before they have made choice of.

But their position is, A man once made a Minister is not to be kept back from
preaching, by the Inhibition of any creature. Martin Junior. Thesis. 106.
No sooner advanced, but straight the Scene is changed, they write up actum
est, it is finished, their work is done: and then the people (that have all
this while been taught to value themselves) Buchani de jure regni. fol 73.

Populum a quo reges nostri habent, quicquid juris sibi vendicant, regibus esse
potentiorem, jusque idem in eos habere multitudinem, quod illi in singulose
multitudine habent.


above the power of Kings, who challenge all their right from them, and that
the multitude has the same power over Kings, that Kings have over every one of
the multitude; that it was their Office to pull down Prelates, and reform
Religion, Knox to the Communalty. fol. 49.
must now learn another lesson, and know their distance, That Oves non possunt
judicare Pastores.

The Presbyter is no sooner in his chair, but he is presently a Judge: And if
any heresy, profaneness, or Idolatry creep into the Church, he may root it
out. Prelacy is misery fol. 7.
And not only judge of Schisms or Heresies in points of Doctrine or faith,
but he with his Elders become absolute Chancellors over our Lives, Families,
and Estates.

If we examine the latitude of their Commission, we shall find it extend to
no less: one tells us, the Minister and Elders are weekly to meet for
censuring delinquents in swearing, cursing, profanation of the Lords Day,
drinking, Fornication, adultery, and for debating of Heresies and
superstitions, etc. A report of the form of Church government, by a Presbytery.
And if any be suspected, or if there be any scandal in the bounds, proceeding
with the censures of the Kirk against them, that all transgressors may be
brought to repentance, or separated from the people of God.

Some of them must The Northamptonshire Classis. Bancroft. fol. 79.

The Elders, etc once a month to look to all within the parish concerning
their honest behavior, and peaceable demeanor. View of the Prelaticall
Church. fol. 41.


determine matters of Contracts and Marriages. Nay, they must have a special
Quaere into the peaceable demeanor of the Inhabitants, within the precincts of
their several Presbyteries, upon that place of S. Paul, 1 Corinthians. 6.1.
(Do any of you having a matter against another, go to Law before the unjust,
and not before the Saints?) grounding a decree in their Classis, that if any
member of the Presbytery be at variance with his brother, he shall be
suspended till he bring the matter before them. Now let us well weigh what man
lives so upright in all his ways, that is not, or may not be a Delinquent at
the mercy of these dreadful Judges, whose least chastisement is banishment,
(suspension from the food of Life, the blessed Word and Sacraments) whose
easiest prison is Hell, and whose punishment (Tradatur Satanae) eternal
destruction?

Where is then the promised liberty of this so much desired change? when from
the legal penalties of positive, and regulated Laws which awe our persons,
and might (perhaps) pinch our purses, whereof we know how to avoid the breach,
or satisfy the penalty, we shall become mere Tenants at will of our souls.

That the infirmities of man's nature, considered, Romans 7.14.
That we are carnal and sold under sin and that the best of Gods Saints
fall into daily errors: yea, and as it is said, Faelix qui minimis urgetur,
who can plead privilege or exemption from these rigid censures. The best
Charter here is but durante been placito; None dum been se gesserit: Since
innocence is no Supercedeas: for suspicion or scandal, misprision or malice
may make a delinquent, injuriously to be suspected or traduced, and actually
to be guilty are of equal punishment, Public Confession or Excommunication.
Nay it is so far from freedom, that it brings upon us a twofold bondage.

Both Law and Nature abhor double punishment for one offense. Yet say they,
View of the Prelaticall Church. fol. 37.
Malefactors that have once satisfied the Law, if they procure pardons must be
suspended from the Sacrament, till they again satisfy the Congregation. And
Master Knox tells us, Mr. Knox: The order of Excommunication in Scotland. Ae. 2.
All Crimes that by the Law of God deserve death, deserve also excommunication,
as Murderers, Adulterers, Sorcerers, Witches, Conjurers, Charmers, givers of
drink to destroy children, Blasphemers, denyers of the truth, railers against
the Sacraments, and all that have lived with any offense to the Congregation,
though they have suffered the punishment of the Law: against all which he would
proceed by way of Excommunication.

And we know that most of these Crimes they would fetch within their
jurisdiction, have their several penalties provided by the Statute Laws of
this Kingdom, whence necessarily follows, that either the temporal
jurisdiction (all Law) must be extinct; or in stead of freedom we must submit
to double punishment.

But say they, They only proceed against sins, Chorda Angliae. propos. 8.10.
Courts to proceed only against sins by the Word of God. Sions plea. Bilson.
fol. 316.
and it is their office to bring sinners to Repentance. And there are diverse
other petty Crimes, which fall not (as they say) under the Civil sword: as
chiding, fighting, brawling, contempt of the order of the Church,
Sabboth-breaking, wanton and vain words, negligence in hearing the preacher,
neglect of receiving the Sacraments, suspicion of Avarice, or of pride,
superfluity or riotousnesse in cheer or raiment. They must have a rod for the
women too, in correcting their lascivious, dissolute, or too sumptuous attire,
private or public dancing, May-games, visiting stageplayes, Tavernes, or
Tipling-houses, and all inordinate livers, which must be brought to their
Tribunal.

Now let any man branch out those forenamed particular heads of the Table of
their Discipline; and he shall find that neither our words, opinions, nor
actions, as of private men, but they subject us under their jurisdiction.
Consider us with relation to others, and see how many accidents are emergent
upon Contracts, marriages, fornication, Adultery, to which take in the
general heads of suspicion and scandal, and then see how far this
insinuates into our private families, who can be secure of the honor or
repuration of wife or daughters, longer than he is sure he has no maligner:
for I find no branch at all amongst them for the punishment of the slanderer,
nor no reparation for the injured innocent.

Marry the guilty may be quit, as was the position of Mr. Snape of Northampton
shire, Bancrofts Treatise of the disciplinarians of Northampton shire. fol. 82.
who having wrought upon a mean servant, that had got his Masters Daughter
with child, to make public Confession to the Congregation. That done, Snape
absolved him, then justified him clear from that sin committed, even as
though he had been newly borne. If this be the way to recover infant
innnocence, who would not soil himself a little to be so cleansed?

Next view that general Quaere into men's peaceable demeanors, View of
Prelaticall Church. fol. 41. Admonition 2. page 75. The Church is to censure
such a party as is troublesome and contentious.
together with their rule of Abdication of Lawsuits, and see if this bring not
to their Chancerie all actions real and personal. And lastly consider their
universal head of Bilson fol. 316. Our Presbyteries proceed against vice. T.
Cart. l. 2. p. 68. Snecanus de Discipl. Eccles. p. 460.
proceeding against sins. Which Mr. Cartwright pretty well explaines, Every
fault that tends either to the hurt of a man's neighbor, or to the hindrance
of the glory of God is to be examined and dealt in by the orders of the Church.
Snecanus enlarges him a little further, Quodvis peccatum, (says he) every
sin against God or neighbor, by word or deed, purposely or ignorantly,
manifestly or secretly. If so, let us then consider, if this be not a general
prohibition to all Courts of Judicature, a mere annihilation of all Laws.

For St. Peter's precept is, to 1 Peter 2.13.
submit to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake. And Laws being the
Ordinance of man, the breach of every Law is sin. Nor can there be any suit
or controversy betwixt men, but the one side is the wrong-doer; for we know
that All unrighteousness is sin, 1 John. 5.17.
And the Disciplinarians including the punishment of all sin against God, or
our neighbor, within their jurisdiction, we have no more use of Laws, but are
all brought under a mere arbitrarie Government. And then ablata Lege we know
what follows, fiat Certamen.

But Law had no mercy, and perhaps these holy men will be tenderhearted,
easie-handed in laying on the scourge of chastisement.

Let us see how they deal with one of their own, one Bluet, being
excommunicated, writes to the Brethren, that he might be restored to the
Church, from which he had been long kept out. Bishop Bancroft. fol. 117.
Woe is me, says he, that J am cast out of your presence this day. And if
this woe and shame did but touch the body, it were tolerable; for then at the
day of death I should end my misery, and no more hear the words of reproach:
But woe is me, that there is a partition wall between heaven and my Conscience:
If my offense may not be passed by without further confession, even before God
and his Church in London, will I lie down and lick the dust at your feet.

See here you eager advocates for the advancing of this holy Discipline the
precious fruits you are like to reap by it. Such as these will teach you
perfect humility: They have learnt of Rehoboams Counselors, 2 Chronicles. 10.10.
To make their little finger thicker than the Bishops loins. Their punishments
(perhaps) wrung the purse, but those will grate the soul.

And if we should well examine upon what easy occasions this fearful
sentence flies out, we should much more fear it. Suckliffe 132.
At Geneva two Ministers were deposed and banished, for speaking against
usurie: John Morelli for saying the words, Tell the Church were not alone
appropriate to the Consistory, and is frequently used upon every private
Grudge. Whereas no man ought to be excommunicate, but where the Law says, he
should be condemned. If Law be King, and will a Tyrant, sure all that will
preserve Law, and will love liberty, unwillingly submit their necks to the
Tyrannical yoke of such Discipline.

SECT. 15. The form of Discipline they prescribe is confessed to be a yoke.
YEt oh say many, here is so excellent a form of Government, the Parochial
Presbyter can run into no extravagance, but he is accomptable to the
Presbytery or Classitall meeting, which consists of particular Kirks in such a
Circuit. Report of Church Government.


And what is the business there? Not to suppress, but to exercise the power of
Jurisdiction, By the Ordinances of Geneva, they first imprison, after banish
him that will not stand to the Ordinances of the Consistories Order. Art. 91.
Ordination, suspension, Deprivation, but principally all persons of whatsoever
quality, disobedient to their Ministers and Elders, are with great Authority
censured: So here we must learn obedience to the wills of men not of Laws:
Yet these Classes again are responsall to the Provincial Synods: And they
perhaps may regulate the rigor of the Presbyters.

But do not the Pastors of New England tell us, A modest Advertisement of
Church Government. fol. 10.
That no Pastors by Gods word have authority over others, for that every
Minister has his power both of Order and Jurisdiction immediately from Christ
Jesus, and therefore to him only is responsible for the Doctrine he teaches,
the Discipline he exercises, and the Censures that he inflicts. Therefore (say
they) for any number of Ministers in a Synod, to take to themselves Authority
over others who are equal in Dignity, is to set up a Humane Authority that
Christ never instituted, and to exercise a Tyranny, and Popery of the
Presbytery, as bad, nay worse than Bishops.

Yet there is a higher appeal to the National Assembly, and there the Records
of Synods are perused, Acts and Constitutions for all Kirkes are agreed upon
with common consent. And will they obey these Constitutions?

Some confess, that in the Assembly of the Apostles, certain observances were
imposed on the Churches. Acts 15.28.
But this Act of the Apostles, say they, is no president or pattern for
succeeding ages, for the Apostles were inspired with the Holy Ghost; and when
any Assembly can infallibly assure them they are inspired with the Holy Ghost,
then they will obey. Christ on his throne. fol. 57.


But though they will admit no Law or Superior over themselves, yet here
perhaps the Laity may receive relief against the rigor of their Censures: for
one tells us, Report of the Government of the Church by a Presbytery.
All Appellations, Petitions, Grievances, and Complaints are examined and
determined by this supreme and highest Kirk Iudicatorie: what redress we may
expect hence we are informed immediately before, they are responsible only to
Jesus Christ.

And the same reporter plainly tells us, The perpetual Kirks are not governed
by the intrinsecall power of any one or many set over them, as in the
Monarchical Government of Prelates, but they are ruled and judged by
themselves.

If so, we had need have a strong faith in their Integrities, for if we admit
a possibility of doing wrong in them, we leave very little probability of
receiving right: for first they are accomptable only to Christ. Next they are
both judges and parties. Those that give false judgment in the Classes, are
judges in the Synods in the National assemblies: and from them is no appeal
to any Prince in the world, (for they sit in Christ's Throne:) And this is
utterly destructive to the peoples liberty.

Now in this whole Gradation of Church government by Presbyteries, Classes,
Synods, and National Assemblies: What Is become of our old superintendent power
of Parliaments? we have all this while been persuaded, That Episcopacy is
inconsistent with this State, as exercising some power not warranted by our
Laws, we are strongly excited by some Disciplinarians, to root them out for
attempting to put in execution some Constitutions not ratified by Parliament.

Yet now we must learn, That the Parliament cannot hinder (these
Disciplinarians) to make Laws Ecclesiastical, seeing Ecclesiastical
Government is independent. That general Assemblies may recall Acts ratified in
Parliament, which being annulled, In their Synods they disannull all Laws,
they conceive repugnant to their Discipline. Suckliffe. fol. 131.
the Civil ratification falls ex Consequenti. And though our Laws make void
all Canons or Constitutions repugnant to the Kings prerogative, or the Laws
and Customs of the Kingdom, (which preserve our liberties) yet we must now
know, that no power nor liberty ought to be permitted to any State, Degree, or
Authority, (whatsoever they be) to live without the yoke of Discipline. Knox
his exhortation. page 91. 92.


Et tali jugo libertatem induimus? And is all our long labored liberty become
a yoke? A yoke unavoydable, a yoke unsupportable. Truly if this be so, we may
truly write, Sic vos non vobis sertis Aratra Boves.

We have spun a fair thread, That Kings the nursing Fathers, and Queens the
nursing Mothers of Syon, Isaiah. 49.23.
(the supreme Governors of the Church) Princes the heads of their Fathers
houses, Numb. 7.2.
Princes of the Tribes, (whose office is to rule in judgment) Nobles that
confer blessing upon that land where their sons inherit the Crown,
Isaiah. 32.1.
Gentry the flowers of this garden of Europe, fenced by the protection of the
Laws as with a partition Wall against the spoil of vermin vulgar, the Boares
of the Forest that would root up our plants, wed and pruned from inbred Weed
and Canker by the skillful hand of Parlaments, should now be all cast into the
lump, laid common: All become yoke-fellowes, bear the bonds of such boundless
Disciplinarians, which hold themselves subordinate neither to Emperors, Kings,
Princes, Magistrates, Laws, Parliaments, Presbyteries, Synods, Assemblies, nor
any thing they ever mean to reckon with in this world; but only to Jesus
Christ their Head.

Such as these rather appear to be of the followers of Jehu the son of
Nimshi, for they drive furiously, 2 Kings 9.20.
who walked in the ways of Jeroboam: Then of those undefiled Virgins, that
follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. Revelation. 14 4.
We know that the meek he will guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach
his way. Psalm. 25.9.
But such as have bitter envying and strife in their hearts, This wisdom
descends not from above, bus is earthly, sensual, devilish. James 3.17.


SECT. 16. The vain excuse that Lay Elders shall moderate them refuted.
YEt some have a fine veil to blind the eyes of the willing (and certainly
none see less than the wilfully blind) that this is a mixed government, we
shall have Lay Elders amongst them to moderate the extravagancies of the
pastors, and we need not fear but they will look to them.

Alas how vain a shadow is this, when we look upon it but with the light of
reason? Are we not taught, these Elders must be chosen by the voice of the
people: and are not these people taught by the pastors subordinate to them, the
Elders being but temporary, for half a year or a y^are, is it probable they
shall have that dependence upon one another? they shall have that interest in
the parish, as he that is perpetuus Dictator, Chancellor, Arbiter for life in
his petty popedom.

Some men talk of dumb Dogs, and certainly he will be held such, that cannot
so bestir himself in his parish, as to have all their votes follow his, who
has such absolute power over every man's person, family, and estate. Hunting of
the Fox, etc, Ec. 2. a S. Snecanus de Discipl^na Ecclesiae page 456.
If then by this rule, every little parish Church should have seven such Elders
at the least, and every great Church thirteen, and these people at the
devotions, of their pastor, of their Chancellor, we have then instantly no
less than a hundred thousand Church Governors, besides their adherents; which
admitted, we are sure in danger never to recover a free Parliament again: and
in stead of 26. Bishops, whose deputation is from, whose dependence is upon the
King as supreme, whose temporal power is wholly derived from, limited by the
Laws; whose persons are easily responsible to Parliaments, for any deviation
from the rules of Law, we should thus expose our selves to an irrecoverable
subjection to a multitude, whose Election is prescribed to (Iure Divino)
immediately from Christ Jesus, who are the carvers of their own Government.
View of the Prelaticall Church fol. 41.
Their National Assembly to be gathered once in three years, to make Canons,
and to establish Ecclesiastical Government: This independent of Parliaments,
accomptable to none but Christ Jesus either for Doctrine or Discipline; and if
in time found to be extravagant from, or destructive to all Laws and
Government, yet the Parliament shall then have an Host to encounter, and not a
few Delinquents to punish.

May not their own words be more properly inverted upon such, than on the
Bishops. Englands complaint to Jesus Christ against the Ca^ons.
Such (Presbyteriall) Government and Jurisdiction it is merely papal, though
not in the first degree (the Pope usurping an universal power over all the
Churches in the world) yet in a second: Every pastor in his Diocese (his
parish) exercising a papal power, and so does cunningly undermine the Royal
Office, and overthrow Gods sacred Ordinance, who has given a power and charge
to Kings to suppress all such Ecclesiastical Tyranny over the souls of his
people.

Yet perhaps it may be said, though their government be thus wholly severed
from the Parliaments, and stands a part by it self, our Lay Elders shall have
vote among them in all their Synods, and Assemblies, who may have a care to
balance the scale 'twixt Church and State. But are we not told; Some one
Elder of each Parish appointed by the particular Kirk, Sessions, and the whole
Ministry of those Churches meet, etc. Whereto, if their Doctors and Teachers
be admitted, they are double in number to the Laymen; if equal, one Lay
Elder inclining to their party turns the scale; if not, yet how incapable in
respect of abilities, how inactive in respect of Spirit, these annual
temporary Officers must needs be, in comparison of this powerful preaching
ministry, which has such absolute authority over the souls of their
parishioners, every man may foresee with half an eye.

SECT. 17. No reformed Church gives any president parallel with ours.
BUT many of us will not trust or trouble our own judgment to rifle into the
consequences of things; but we cry out, how do other Reformed Churches? Gens
humana novitatis avida; and no Nation more unfortunately, more improvidently
prone to follow fashions than we.

And alas, whence can we fetch a pattern, that (the freedom of our State
considered) would not render us miserable?

Can the French be any president to us, who live under a Monarch of another
Religion, who will allow them no Sea, no Diocese, no means for a Bishop:
whose Bishops will admit no sub-Bishops of another faith under their
jurisdiction: Therefore what necessity makes to them Law, must we make our
choice? Is it the position of their Church to exclude them?

Shall we believe Moulin himself? he says, Moulins Buckler of the faith* the
30. Article. fol. 3. 45.
Our adversaries unjustly accuse us to be enemies of the Episcopal Order: for
we must be altogether ignorant of Histories, if we do not know that all
antiquity speaks honorably of that degree.

The Geneva Discipline many dote upon, not knowing what it is, nor how
consistent with our State. That which makes our common people so greedily
embrace this desired change, is the frequent preaching, and possessing them of
an interest in the power of the Keys; if they follow that president, they will
find themselves deceived.

Beza tells us, De gradibus Ministerii cap. 11.
In Geneva the Elders are chosen yearly, not of the baser sort of people, but
of the order of 25. 60. or 200. men, which be the Counsels of that State. Nor
was that government of choice, as fittest, but of necessity. Their Bishop was
also their Prince, Franciscus Bonivardus says 1124. The Bishop fained of
Emperor Frederick, ut ille solus Genevae principatum obtineret Regali jure.
who had such power as the Duke of Venice. And having treated with the Duke of
Savoy, their enemy, was forced to fly; during whose life they could not make a
new Bishop, but submitted to a new form of Government under Master Calvin, who
only wanted the Title, but was of much greater power than a Bishop: nor was at
that enmity with the Order as our Novelists are, who profess it sin to hear
(them or for their sakes) any Ministers 8 Propositions in Print.
preach in the Church of England. For he says, We confess that Bishops or
Pastors must be reverently heard, as far as they teach the word of God
according to their function. Calvin. opusculum in Confess. Eccles. Gallic.
Fatemur ergo Episcopos five pastores reverenter audiendos, quatenus pro suae
functionis ratione verbum Dei docent.


But admit they being a private State, a Cottage in respect of a Kingdom,
submit themselves to the Oeconomick Government of a Family, (theirs is no more
in comparison to this glorious Monarchy) shall we relinquish our Laws, can we
reduce this populous Nation (that peoples so many foreign Isles) into the same
mould that modells a handful.

Some have already entertained so degenerate thoughts, that they can mention
Switzerland, a fair pattern; and so do I with horror and indignation.

Others the Low Country Discipline pleases well; a fit object for such; they
must indeed look downwards still that are so pleased, and not upwards, to the
God of Order, 1 Corinthians. 14.
and not of Confusion: who sees the distracted Sects and Schisms that abound
in that State, and does not pity, so near, so loved neighbors, were not
partakers of that blessing (we call misery, and out of love to Noveltie are
grown weary of) uniformitie of Discipline.

Truth is, we are taken with the shadow of that which essentially is not
there, The Scepter of Discipline; If we must change, I would be glad we might
take president from their Metropolis Amsterdam: where it is true, they were
busy to advance this Throne of Christ, to put this yoke upon the neck of that
State, but their troublesome and ambitious spirits once discovered, they
quickly nipt these soaring Birds in the shell, reduced the Pastors to the number
of thirteen, of those keeping for the most part three vacant, which City,
being compared with this of London, both for populousness and capacity, it
will easily appear those ten, who must supply the accidents of Festivalls,
Marriages, and Funerals, do not trouble their heads with many State affairs.
Yet to make them sure, they allow them their Classical meetings, but provided
one of the Magistrates of the City be present: And if he say no, all they
consult stands for nothing.

This proposition made and assented to by all these zealous petitioners against
this usurpation, this Monopoly of the power of the Keys in the hands of the
Bishops: That the prime Gentleman in every parish shall be perpetual Elder and
have a negative voice, I confess in point of private policy I am convinced: I
may perhaps be in time an Elder, and doubt not but the Gentry will thus make a
shift to keep the Clergy humble, the vulgar low enough.

But if we must look for new elections every year, what must this produce but
a little Civil war in every parish?

We have yet a nearer president, and before we know what it is, long for the
Scottish Discipline. I could be glad we had so much patience to let them be
our probationers therein for one seven years. But we shall be told, sic fuit
ab antiquo, it was so of old with them. Now what effects both to King and
Commonwealth the positions of some Disciplinarians of that Nation have in
former times produced, it is better to be forgot than looked into: All I shall
say is, That certainly our freer people have not such dependence upon, are not
indeed in such vassallage to the Nobility, the Gentry, as the Common people of
Scotland are in to their Lords: their Nobility and Gentry (having absolute
power over theit Tenants) shall ever bear sway in the Church. But it will not
be so with us, the inferior sort of people once finding their power in popular
election of Elders, will rather exclude both Nobility and Gentry, and then no
doubt the Church will be well governed: our Communalty depend upon Laws, not
Lords: It Is Law which has made us a free people.

That we know by a certain Law, that our wives, our Children, our Servants,
our goods are our own, that we build, we plough, we sow, we reap for our
selves, this is true liberty. How little of this they enjoy from whom we
would take a pattern, who are but Tenants at will to their Lords, they that
will sedato animo compare the Constitution of that State with this, would with
me again cry.

Oh fortunati nimium bona si sua norint Angligenae! SECT. 18. Conclusion, to
review Episcopacie.
IF then there be no president that exactly parallels ours, without great
alteration; we must certainly introduce aliquid de novo; set up some new form
by our selves. And what inconveniences that may bring to a settled State, was
well expressed by St. Austin, Ipsa mutatio Consuetudinis, etiam quae adjuvat
utilitate, novitate perturbat, Austin. ad Ianuar. Ep 118. cap. 5.
which is ingeniously expressed by that learned Verulam. Verulams Considerations
concerning pacification of the Church. fol. 9.
Way given to mutation, though in taking away abuses, yet it may so acquaint
men with sweetness of change as it will undermine the stabilitie even of that
which is sound and good: holding it against all good policy to innovate any
thing in Church matters: and whether warrantable in Divinity or no, to abolish
so ancient a Constitution is questionable.

'Twas (me thinks) a Maxim of some weighr, Qui mala introducit, voluntatem Dei
oppugnat revelatam in verbo: Qui nova introducit voluntatem Dei oppugnat
revelatam in rebus. He that brings into the Church any bad custom opposes the
will of God revealed by his word: who introduces any new customs opposes Gods
will revealed by fact.

If then in the whole series of this new Predicament of Discipline (we should
put our selves into) we find the design of such is to draw their necks out
of the yoaks of all Ecclesiastical and Civil Government, neither to be
prescribed in Doctrine nor Discipline, their persons restrained by no Law,
their Government inconsistent with Monarchy, Magistracy, Laws, destructive to
Gentry. Their calling independent either on King or people: Their power above
Princes, Potentates, Nobles, People, Laws, Parliaments; their errors
accomptible to none but Christ alone; no foreign State, or Reformed Church
giving any exact president absolutely parallel with ours, and no so great
mutation, being without hazard to the State, and (perhaps) not warranted by
Gods Word. In the name of God let us look ere we take this desperate leap;
from the inconveniences whereof can be no recovery, (if they once get the
upper hand) but by a new Conquest. Far be it from me to presume to
prescribe a remedy, it is the easier way to give cautions, to descry
inconveniences, to discover Rocks, than to assume to steer the ship of State
in a safe course; to give Counsel, other than what is warranted by good
authority.

In such distractions, when we find the time now fully come, 2 Timothy 4.3.4.
That men will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts heap up to
themselves teachers, having itching ears, turning from the truth unto Fables.
And as St. Peter says, Peter 3.16.
Being unlearned, and unstable, wresting the Scriptures to their own
destruction: Then is the Prophets Counsel seasonable, State super vias
Antiquas, Jeremiah. 6.16.
Stand ye in the ways, and see and ask for the old paths where is the good
way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls.

Let us look back into Antiquity, and see before we part with this reverend
old order of Episcopacy for this new fangled Discipline, whether it will be
made good to be deduced from Christ himself to his Apostles, to the Angels of
the Churches, to the Fathers of the Primitive times, continued in the same
jurisdiction and superiority over other degrees of the Clergy, distributed
into Diocesses, honored with Titles and Attributes, endued with power,
approved in other Reformed Churches, and no way opposite to, but consistent
with our Laws; and then though there be many errors crept into the execution,
which prove not to be in the Constitution; I hope we shall have it reduced to
its ancient purity; and not cast away our Gold for a little rust.

In the disquisition whereof I would not have any man look for any thing from
me de novo, or, think I assume to add any strength to their cause; I do but
bind together a posie of the flowers of others planting; only having taken
some pains to please and satisfy my self, I shall be glad if any man else
can reap any content out of my labors. Et tu confirmatus, confirma fratres,
was Christian Counsel, and I confess had I power to do it, I would draw all
the world to my opinion; that is to reverence their Calling, preserve their
Order, yet with as free a resolution, and as respectlesse of their persons,
submit to the exemplar punishment of such as stain the honor of their Coat,
entrench upon our Liberties, negligently starve their flock, covetously
engrosse the means of faithful Laborers, or with their Novelties distract
the Church, as any man that lives.

FINIS.
Imprimatur.

Tho. Wykes.
May 28. 1641.

