PROSPEROVS PROCEEDINGS IN IRELAND: Being a Remonstrance, or exact Relation of
the most distressed estate of the Inhabitants of Galloway, Arrowmoore, and
Baltimoore, when that worthy Captain Captain THOMAS ASHLEY, Captain of the
Employment of London first arrived there; showing the most inhumane, unparaleld
cruelty of the Rebels to the Protestants, murdering them in the open
Streets. As also, showing the happy success God has given him, in defeating
the Rebels, by taking of Castles from them, with many hundred head of Cattle,
for the relief of the poor distressed PROTESTANTS. As was certified to the
Honorable Houses of Parliament (the 15. of October 1642.) by three
Certificates, under the hands of diverse of the Gentry and Clergy, inhabiting
within the said places (whose names are within mentioned) Presented as a means
of his continuance for the further defense of the aforesaid places, with all
his successful proceedings since his first arrival to this present.

All which good Services were thankfully accepted of both Houses of Parliament,
and desired to be Printed.



LONDON: Printed for John Hancocke, in Burchen-lane at the sign of the Bible.
October 19. 1642.

PROSPEROVS PROCEEDINGS IN IRELAND.
WHereas since the 22. of October 1641. (at which time brake forth in Ireland
that fearful fire of a general Rebellion, long blown by the Priests, Friars
and Jesuits, these great Incendiaries of Christendom) there has been diverse
barbarous and inhumane cruelties, by robbing, burning, pillaging, stripping,
torturing, wounding, and massacring, exercised upon the poor English, and
distressed Protestants of the greatest part of this Kingdom, and in none more,
then in the Counties of Mayo and Galloway (within the Province of Connaught)
amongst many witnesses that one at Shrowle (which unmatchable Massacre was
committed Feb. 13. 1641.) wherein without respect of days (it being upon the
Lords day, which might have put them in mind of better things) the bloody
executioners having undertaken the safe conduct of a great number of poor
distressed English to Galloway, contrary to the rights both of hospitality and
honesty, fell upon them, no age, no sex, no profession finding the least
favor with them, but promiscuously they slaughtered, or dangerously wounded,
most of the men and women, old and young, Churchmen, and Laymen, and that in
such a barbarous manner, that the Sicilian Evensong, and the Parisian Massacre
(though formerly much spoken of) will be silenced, when this shall come in
place; this though coming short of them, in the number of those that suffered,
yet far exceeding them in the cruel manner of their sufferings; from which
Massacre, as also from diverse other parts of those Counties, many with their
wives and children (who had formerly been able in a plentiful manner to
entertain others) like Sheep escaped out of the jaws of the Wolf, came
starved, stripped, and naked for succor to the Town of Galloway, where such as
were able to serve his Majesty, were entertained by Captain Anthony Willoughby
the Governor of the Fort, and by him ever since accordingly in a good manner
maintained, the remainder repairing to the Town of Galloway, where for the
time they received a fair outside of courtesy, in a devilish policy to draw
them to assign to a Declaration of their humane and courteous entertainment
amongst them, whereby the State might divert from these parts the supplies of
men and munition intended for their relief; which was no sooner assigned (but
as Masters of what they desired) they presently changed their countenances unto
them, they denied them the benefit of their Markets, they inhibited them (by an
Instrument in writing affixed upon their Church door) going into the Church
upon pain of life and death they durst not appear abroad to buy necessaries,
they were enforced for their safety to keep their houses, not daring to be
seen abroad; the usual salutations they had, were English-Dogges, and
English-Rogues; they were kept in those perpetual fears, that when they went
to bed overnight, they knew not where to find their heads in the morning;
they were disarmed of those poor weapons they had for their defense, in the
assimulation of the proceeding of the State (as the Major himself avouched
under his own hand) against the Irish in Dublin, Cork, and Yough Hall, where
the English Protestants had for safety disarmed the Recusant Irish: therefore
the Recusant Irish for the same reason would disarme the English Protestants,
and (to make full expressions of their bloody purposes to the English Nation
and Religion) they did entertain into the Town, and out of the ruder parts of
the Country of Erconnaught, great number of the sons of Beliall, barbarous
inhumane Kernes men who were never acquainted with civilitie or humanity, who
were borne to do slaughter and execution) only to rob, pillage, and spoil,
strip, and murder the poor English Protestants, which they did under the
Town walls, and in the open streets in the day time, and in the sight and
presence of the best of the Townsmen, who oftentimes did not only animate them
thereunto, but accompanied them in the doing thereof; All which they did, and
much more, and that in such a bloody and inhumane manner, that no History,
ancient or modern, can exceed; few equal the same for cruelty. And to add
further unto it, because Hamans implacable rage against the Nation of the Jews,
could receive no satisfaction so long as poor Mordecai sat at the Kings gate,
so long as his Majesty's Fort stood as an offense to their eyes, therefore
finding their wicked plots for the surprisall thereof to fail them, they shut
up the Town gates leading to the Fort, they took away the benefit of commerce
with them, they made stay of what provision we in the Fort had in the Town,
they kept within the walls diverse of the Fort Soldiers employed thither for
necessaries; they denied us Wine for the Communion at Easter, though earnestly
desired, they treacherously possessed themselves of a fall ship of London,
lying then in the Harbor (whereof Robert Clark was Master) for no other reason
but because it was a defense to the Fort, they cruelly murdered his men, they
carried his Ordinance into the Town to batter the Fort, they raised Mounts in
the Town to annoy the Fort, they shot many shot at the Kings Pinace then being
in the River, because assistant to the Fort, their whole resolution was to
surprise us or to famish us; and knowing our scarsitie both of victuals and
Ammunition, to drive us to the greater straights, as they blocked us up in the
Harbor, whereby we might not be relieved by water, so upon their own charges
they drew several Companies out of the Country to besiege us by Land, which
they did for diverse weeks, they advancing the King of Spaines Colors, in their
Camps, as the Town did a Flag of defiance upon their Gates; Into which
straights having drawn us of the Fort, they were so confident of us, as if we
had been already in their net, it being their daily glory and report, that the
Fort was at their pleasures, and they could have it when they pleased. And the
truth is, if our gracious God had not put extraordinary wisdom and strength
into our provident Captain for the defense thereof, it could not in
probability have held out so long.

But it pleased God in his good time (when humane means began to fail us) to
speak much comfort to our distressed souls, by sending Captain Tho. Ashley
with one of his Majesty's ships (called the Employment) into this Harbor, with
a good proportion of victual and Ammunition, whereby on a sudden the stream
turned: The Fort was relieved, the Rebels were daunted, the poor English were
revived, the Town made means for pacification; the Camp was dissoleed, their
hopes were frustrated, the Sea became ours, we were Masters of the Harbor, and
we will ever with thankfulness to God remember the happy deliverie which upon
a May morning we received by him, whose first coming to us was so auspitious,
and whose stay with us has been so prevalent to the heartning of the Subject,
and terror of the Rebels, that our humble request is he (of whom we have had
such plentiful experience, who has brought such comfort to us, such fear to
the Rebels, who understands the Nation, and knows the Rocks and Creeks of
the Harbor (which to a stranger may be dangerous) who has already since his
coming possessed himself of two of their ships (which brought great Ordnance,
Corn, and Ammunition to the Town from foreign parts) that he may be continued
amongst us as a second to the Fort for the preservation of us from those
miseries which this ill affected people (notwithstanding their pretended
Pacification) upon the first advantage offered them (except seasonably
prevented) are likely to bring upon us. Which our humble request, with this our
knowledge and true remonstrance we do in all humility present under our hands.

Richard Tuam. Thomas Reyton, Dean of Tuam. Michael Smith Archbishop of
Clorfert. Tho Gilbert Archdeac. of Tuam. John Springham Collegii Regis
Vicarius. William Harrioud. David Roberts. Tho. Bishop. Godfrey Daniel. Hugh
Dunstervill. Anthony Willoughby. Richard Hall. Tho. Martin Lieuten. William
Roose. Dutten Banbury. John Knowles. Alexander Moore. John Fisher.


A Certificate from Baltimoore, 10. Sept. 1642.
We whose names are here under written, in acknowledgement of our
thankfulness, do hereby certify, That Captain Tho. Ashley has twice come in
unto this Port of Baltimoore, with his ship, and several ways relieved us,
and in particular has formerly helped us with two small Gunnes and powder, and
drove away the enemy from us; and now furnished our poor with bread, and very
nobly sent his Company on Land, and put the Rebels to the rout which was in
Garrison within Musket shot of us; and diverse times with the assistance of
Captain Willoughby (of his Majesty's Fort of Gallaway) has taken from the
Rebels sometimes 200. sometimes 300. and sometimes 500. head of cattle, for
the relief of the poor Protestants in and about the Fort aforesaid; having
burnt seven or eight hundred houses of the Rebels, to the value of six thousand
pound per annum, and never left shooting at the Town, till they hung out the
white Flag for parley; and took five hundred Tun of Wheat from them, and gave
it to the poor Protestants, and left six Pieces of Ordnance in the Fort for
their protection, and burnt, and sunk, and spoiled nine sail of ships of the
Rebels part that came from foreign parts in the time of his being here; where
people could have no water without prejudice of life, being none near the
Town. Then five Springs came out of a Rock where never was known any before. He
took one ship from the Town wall:

All which we certify for truth, as witness our hands, 10. Sept. 1642. Tho.
Newman. John Blythman. Charles White.


The 29. July 1642. Captain Tho. Ashley Captain of the Employment, now employed
for his Majesty's service, in and about the Fort of the Town of Gallaway, the
day and year aforesaid, the Castle of Arrowmoore near Gallaway being then
besieged by my Lord Cleremoris, and Captain Redmond Burse, and diverse other
great men: And their Soldiers being three Companies with their three several
Colors, The said Captain sent his Skiffe and long Boat, with a great piece,
and very well manned with Musketeers, which drove away the Rebels, and
relieved the said Castle, wherein were upwards of thirty English souls, which
were all in great distress.

Witness some of our hands that dwelt in the said Castle. 4. Sept. 1642.
William King. Humphrey King. John Hatley. William Tolly Tho Hawkesworth.


FINIS.

