THEATRVM CHEMICVM BRITANNICUM.

CONTAINING Several Poetical Pieces of our Famous English Philosophers, who
have written the Hermetique Mysteries in their own Ancient Language.

Faithfully Collected into one Volume, with Annotations thereon, By ELIAS
ASHMOLE, Esquire. Qui est Mercuriophilus Anglicus.

THE FIRST PART.

Serpens et Bufo gradiens super terra^ Aquila volans, est nostru^ Magistoriu^.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by J. Grismond for NATH: BROOK, at the Angel in Cornhill.
MDCLII.

TO All Ingeniously Elaborate Students, In the most Divine Mysteries of
Hermetique Learning.
THe Subject of this ensuing Work, is a Philosophical account of that Eminent
Secret treasured up in the bosom of Nature; which has been sought for of
Many, but found by a Few, notwithstanding Experienced Antiquity has afforded
faithful (though not frequent) Discoveries thereof. Past Ages have like Rivers
conveied down to us, (upon the floate,) the more light, and Sophistical
pieces of Learning; but what were Profound and Misterious, the weight and
solidity thereof, sunk to the Bottom; Whence every one who attempts to dive^
cannot easily fetch them up: So, that what our Savior said to his Disciples,
may (I hope without offense) be spoken to the Elected Sons of Art; Unto you it
is given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God; but to others in
Parables, that seeing they might not see, and hearing they might not understand.

Our English Philosophers Generally, (like Prophets) have received little
honor (unless what has been privately paid them) in their own Country;
nor have they done any mighty Works amongst us, except in covertly
administering their Medicine to a few Sick, and healing them. (For greater
Experiments then what it performs in Physic, they never publicly made show
of.) Thus did I* O. (one of the first four Fellows of the Fratres R. C.) in
curing the young Earl of Norfolk, of the Leprosy; and Doctor B. in carrying
off the virulency of the Smallpox, twice, from Queen Elizabeth; insomuch that
they never appeared. But in Parts abroad they have found more noble Reception,
and the world greedy of obteyning their Works; nay, (rather then want the
sight thereof) contented to view them through a Translation, though never so
imperfect. Witness what Maierus, Hermannus, Combachius, Faber, and many others
have done; the first of which came out of Germany, to live in England;
purposely that he might so understand our English Tongue, as to Translate
Norton's Ordinall into Latin verse, which most judiciously and learnedly he
did: Yet (to our shame be it spoken) his Entertainment was too too course for
so deserving a Scholar.

How great a blemish is it then to us, that refuse to read so Famous Authors
in our Natural Language, whilst Strangers are necessitated, to Read them in
Ours, to understand them in their Own, Yet think the dignity of the Subject,
much more deserving, then their Pains.

If this we do but ingeniously Consider, we shall judge it more of Reason that
we look back upon, then neglect such pieces of Learning as are Natives of our
own Country, and by this Inquisition, find no Nation has written more, or
better, although at present (as well through our own Supinenesse, as the
Decrees of Fate,) few of their Works can be found. John Leland took very much
pains, even at the yiedling up of the Ghost, of our English Learning, to
preserve its latest (but weakest, 'cause almost spent) Breath; and from him
John Bale, with John Pitts (who indeed is but Bale's Plagiary) has left us a
Catalogue of the Writers of this Nation, and that is near all. Yet Posterity
for this is deeply obliged. What punishment then did their pestilent Malice
deserve, who robbed us of their whole Works?

A Juditious Author speaking of the Dissolution of our Monasteries, says thus:
Many Manuscripts, guilty of no other superstition then Red letters in the
Front, were condemned to the Fire; and here a principal Key of Antiquity was
lost to the great prejudice of Posterity. Indeed (such was Learnings
misfortune, at that great Devastation of our English Libraries, that) where a
Red letter or a Mathematical Diagram appeared, they were sufficient to entitle
the Book to be Popish or Diabolical.

Our English Nation has ever been happy for Learning and Learned men, and to
illustrate this, I hope it will not prove distasteful.

As first, the Druydae (the famous and mysterious Druydae) that were Priests,
D^viners, and Wise men: and took their Original and Name from Druys Sarronyus
the fourth King of the Celts, (styled Sapientum and Augurum Doctor,) who dyed
Anno Mundi. 2069.

Next the Bardi, who celebrated the Illustrious Deeds of Famous Men, which they
ingenio^sly disposed in Heroique Verse, and sung them to the sweet Melody of
the Harp: Amongst other Testimonies hereof receive Chaucer's;

The old gentle Brittons in her days
Of diverse aventures maden Lays,
Rymed first in her Mother Tongue,
Which Lays, with her Instruments they song.
These Philosophers had their Name from Bardus Druydus (the 5 King of the
Celts,) who was the first Inventor of Verses, as Berosius tells us; and dyed
An. Mundi 2138. Neither of these Sects of Philosophers used any writing (indeed
it was not lawful; for,) such was the Policy and Curiosity of Elder Ages (to
defend their Learning and Mysteries from the Injury of Ignorant
Interpretations) that they delivered them to Posterity, by Tradition only.

Caesar testifies, (and it is a noble Testimony) That the Learning of the Druydi,
was first invented in Britain, and thence transf^rr'd into France; and that,
in all his time, those of France came over hither to be Instructed. Agricola
(in Tacitus) preferrs the Britains before the Students of France
(notwithstanding that they were of a docible Wit, and apt to Learn) in that
they were curious in attaining the Eloquence of the Latin Tongue.

As for Magic, Pliny tells us, It flourished in Britain, and that the People
there were so devoted to it (yea, with all Complements of Ceremony) a man would
think that even the Persian learned his Magic thence.

A Germane Poet, says, that when the World was troubled with Pannonick
Invasions, England flourished in the knowledge of all good Arts; and was able
to send of her Learned Men into other Countries, to propogate Learning; and
instances Winifrid (alias Boniface the Devonshire Man) and Willebroad (the
Northern Man) that were sent into Germany.

Nay more, England was twice Schoole-Mistris to France (for so says Peter
Ramus) viz. First by the Druydae (who taught them their Discipline) and
afterward by Alcunius, in Charles the Great's time, through whose persuasions
the Emperor founded the University of Paris.

For the Saxons, it is not to be denied but that many of them, after their
conversion to Christianity, were exceedingly Learned, and before that, much
addicted to Southsaying, Augury, Divination by the Neighing of Horses, etc. And
it is worth the Enquiry (there being more in it then we ordinarily apprehend) why
they in General worshipped Herthas [i. e. Dame Earth] for a Goddess, and
honored Mercury above all the Gods of the Germans, whom they called Wooden,
(hence Wodensday now our Wednesday?) For, they believed that this Dame Herthus
Intermediated in Humane Affairs and Relieved the Poor; whose Image was made
Armed, standing among Flowers, having in its right hand a Staff, and in it a
Banner, wherein was painted a Rose; In the other Hand a Balance, and upon the
Head thereof a Cock; on the Breast a carved Bear, and before the Middle, a fixed
Scutchion; in Chief whereof was also a Balance; in Face, a Lion; and in
Point, a Rose. And for their God Wooden they esteemed him as their God of
Battle, representing him by an Armed Man. Insomuch that we to this very day
retain the Word Wood among us, to Signify Fierce, Furious, Raging, [as when
one is in a great Rage, we usually say he is Wood:] So the Mercury of the
Philosophers is shaddowed under the fierce and terrible Names of Lion, Dragon,
Poison, etc. But this is not All, although it be Something.

And now to come yet nearer to our Selves; we must needs say that of Later
Times (since the Conquest) our Nation has produced such Famous and eminently
learned Men, as have equaled (if not surpast) the greatest Scholars of other
Nations, and happy were we if now we could but partake of those Legacies they
left, and which Envy and Ignorance has defrauded us of: (Howsoever the small
remainder which is left, we have good reason to prize,

For out of old Fields as Men says,
Comes all this new Corn fro year to year;
And out of old Books in good faith
Comes all this Science, that Meuleare.)
That England has been successively enriched with such Men, our Country men
John Leland (and I never heard he was Partial) abundantly Testifies: who
avers, That Generally we have had a great number of excellent Wits and
Writers, learned with the best as Times served, who besides their knowledge in
the four Tongues, in which part of them excelled, there was no Liberal
Science or any Feate concerning Learning, in which they have not showed
certainte Arguments of great Felicity and Wit. And thus much for the Generality
of Learning.

Now for a Particular account of the Hermetique Science, vouchsafe (Ingenious
Reader) to accept the ensuing Collections, yet not so, as if therein were
contained all the Works of our English Hermetique Philosophers, (for more are
designed in a Second Part to follow and complete this a full Theatrum; the
which GOD allowing me further Time and Tranquillity to run through it, as I have
already this, I intend shortly to make ready for the Press.) Whereby yet more
to manifest what Men we have had, no less famous for this kind of Philosophy,
then for all other Commendable Arts and Sciences.

To add any thing to the praise thereof, were but to hold a Candle before the
Sun; or should I here deliver a full Account of the Mavelous Operations and
Effects thereof, it would be as far beyond the limits of a Preface, as remote
from the Belief of the generality of the World. Nor do I expect that all my
Readers should come with an Engagement, to believe what I here write, or that
there was ever any such thing in rerum natura as what we call A Philosophers
Stone, nor will I persuade them to it, (though I must tell them I have not the
vanity to publish these Sacred and Serious Mysteries and Arcana, as Romances)
it is enough that I know Incredulity is given to the world as a punishment. Yet
I Will tell them what one of our Ancient Poetical Philosophers says,

If you will lysten to my Lay,
Something thereby you may find,
That may content your mind:
I will not swear to make you give credence,
For a Philosopher will find, here in Evidence
Of the Truth; and to Men that be Lay,
I skill not greatly what they say.
I must profess I know enough to hold my Tongue, but not enough to Speak; and
the no less Real then Miraculous Fruits I have found in my diligent enquiry
into these Arcana, lead me on to such degrees of Admiration, they command
Silence, and force me to lose my Tongue. Yet, as one greatly affecting my
Native Country, and the satisfaction of all Ingenious Artists, I have
published (for their use) these ensuing Collected Antiquities; and shall here
say something more then they speak of.

He who shall have the happiness to meet with S. Dunstans Work^ De Occulta
Philosophia, (a Book which E. G. A. I. made much use of, and which shall
chiefly back what here I am about to say) may therein read such Stories as
will make him amazed to think what stupendous and Immense things are to be
performed by virtue of the Philosophers Mercury, of which a Taste only and no
more.

And first, of the Mineral Stone, the which is wrought up to the degree only
that has the power of Transmuting any Imperfect Earthy Matter into its utmost
degree of Perfection; that is, to convert the basest of Metalls into perfect
Gold and Silver; Flints into all manner of Precious Stones; [as Rubies,
Saphirs, Emeralds, and Diamonds, etc.] and many more Experiments of the like
nature. But as this is but a part, so it is the least share of that Blessing
which may be acquired by the Philosophers Materi^ if the full virtue thereof
were known. Gold I confess is a delicious Object, a goodly Light, which we
admire and gaze upon ut Pueri in Junonis avem; but, us to make Gold (says an
incomparable Author) is the chiefest intent of the Alchimists, so was it
scarce any intent of the ancient Philosophers, and the lowest use the Adepti
made of this Materia.

For they being lovers of Wisdom more then Worldly Wealth, drove at higher and
more Excellent Operations: And certainly He to whom the whole Course of Nature
lies open, rejoices not so much that he can make Gold and Silver, or the
Divell^ to become Subject to him, as that he sees the Heavens open, the Angels
of God Ascending and Descending, and that his own Name is fairly written in
the Book of life.

Next, to come to the Vegitable, Magical, and Ang^licall Stones; the which
have in them no part of the Mineral Stone (Quatenus a Stone, Fermented with
Metalline and Earthy Nature) for they are marvelously Subtle, and each of them
difforing in Operation and Nature, because Fitted and Formented so several
(...) and Purposes. Doubtless Adam (with the Fathers before the blood, and
since) Abraham, Moses, and Solomon, wrought many Wonders by them, yet the
utmost of their Virtues they never fully understood; nor indeed any but GOD the
Maker of All things in Heaven and Earth, blessed for evermore.

For, by the Vegitable may be perfectly known the Nature of Man, Beasts,
Fowls, Fishes, together with all kinds of Trees, Plants, Flowers, etc. and how
to produce and make them Grow, Flourish and bear Fruit; how to increase them
in Color and Smell, and when and where we please, and all this not only at an
instant, Experimenti gratia, but Daily, Monthly, Yearly, at any Time, at any
Season; yea, in the depth of Winter. And therefore not unlike, but the
Wallnut-Tree which anciently grew in Glastenbury Churchyard, and never put
forth Leaves before S. Barnabies Day, yet then was fully loaded with them, as
also the Hawthorne there, so greatly famed for shooting forth Leaves and
Flowers at Christmas, together with the Oak in New-Forrest in Hampshire that
bore green Leaves at the same Season; may be some Experiments made of the
Vegitable Stone.

Besides the Masculine part of it which is wrought up to a Solar Quality, and
through its exceeding Heat will burn up and destroy any Creature, Plant, etc.
That which is Lunar and Feminine (if immediately applied) will mitigate it with
its extreme Cold: and in like manner the Lunar Quality benums and congeals any
Animal, etc. unless it be presently helped and resolved by that of the Sun;
For though they both are made out of one Natural Substance; yet in working they
have contrary Qualities: nevertheless there is such a natural Assistance
between them, that what the one cannot do, the other both can, and will
perform.

Nor are their inward Virtues more then their outward Beauties; for the Solar
part is of so resplendent, transparent Luster, that the Eye of Man is scarce
able to endure it; and if the Lunar part be exposed abroad in a dark Night,
Birds will repair to (and circulate about) it, as a Fly round a Candle, and
submit themselves to the Captivity of the Hand: And this invites me to
believe, that the Stone which the ancient Hermet (being then 140 Years old)
took out of the Wall in his Cell, and showed Cornelius Gallus, Ann. 1602. was
of the Nature of this Vegitable Stone: For, (upon the opening his Golden Box
wherein it was enclosed) it dilated its Beams all over the Room, and that
with so great Splendour, that it overcame the Light that was kindled therein;
Besides the Hermet refused to project it upon Metal (as being unworthy of it)
but made his Experiment upon Veronica and Rue.

By the Magical or Prospective Stone it is possible to discover any Person in
what part of the World soever, although never so secretly concealed or hid; in
Chambers, Closets, or Cavernes of the Earth: For there it makes a strict
Inquisition. In a Word, it fairly presents to your view even the whole World,
wherein to behold, hear, or see your Desire. Nay more, It enables Man to
understand the Language of the Creatures, as the Chirping of Birds, Lowing of
Beasts, etc. To Convey a Spirit into an Image, which by observing the Influence
of Heavenly Bodies, shall become a true Oracle; And yet this as E. A. assures
you, is not any ways Necromanticall, or Devilish; but easy, wondrous easy,
Natural and Honest.

Lastly, as touching the Angelical Stone, it is so subtle, says the
aforesaid Author, that it can neither be seen, felt, or weighed; but Tasted
only. The voice of Man (which bears some proportion to these subtle
properties,) comes short in comparison; Nay the Air it self is not so
penetrable, and yet (Oh mysterious wonder!) A Stone, that will lodge in the
Fire to Eternity without being prejudiced. It has a Divine Power, Celestial,
and Invisible, above the rest; and endowes the possessor with Divine Gifts. It
affords the Apparition of Angels, and gives a power of conversing with them,
by Dreams and Revelations: nor dare any Evil Spirit approach the Place where
it lodges. Because it is a Quintessence wherein there is no corruptible Thing:
and where the Elements are not corrupt, no Devil can stay or abide.

S. Dunston calls it the Food of Angels, and by others it is termed The
Heavenly Viaticum; The Tree of Life; and is undoubtedly (next under GOD) the
true Alchochodon, or Giver of Years; for by it Man's Body is preserved from
Corruption, being thereby enabled to live a long time without Food: nay it is
made a question whether any Man can Dye that uses it. Which I dot not so much
admire, as to think why the Possessors of it should desire to live, that have
those Manifestations of Glory and Eternity, presented unto their Fleshly Eyes;
but rather desire to be Dissolved, and to enjoy the full Fruition, then live
where they must be contem with the bar ^ Speculation.

After Hermes had once obtained the Knowledge of this Stone, he gave ever the
use of all other Stones, and therein only delighted: Moses, and Solomon,
(together with Hermes were the only three, that) excelled in the Knowledge
thereof, and who therewith wrought Wonders.

That there is a Gift of Prophecy hid in the Red-stone, Racis will tell you;
for thereby (says he) Philosophers have foretold things to come: And Petrus
Bonus avers, that they did Prophecy, not only Generally but Specially; having
a Foreknowledge of the Resurrection, Incarnation of Christ, day of Judgment,
and that the World should be consumed with Fire: and this not otherwise, then
from the Insight of their Operations.

In Brief, by the true and various use of the Philosophers Prima materia (for
there are diversities of Gifts, but the same spirit) the perfection of Liberal
Sciences are made known, the whole Wisdom of Nature may be grasped: And
(Notwithstanding what has been said, I must further add) There are yet hid
greater things then these, for we have seen but few of his Works.

Howbeit, there are but a few Stocks that are fitted to Inoculate the Grafts of
this Science on: They are Mysteries Incommunicable to any but the Adepti, and
those that have been Devoted even from their Cradles to serve and wait at
this Altar: And how rarely such have been heard of, may appear by Norton:

For few (says he) or scarcely Due
In Fifteen Kingdoms hadour Red Stone.
And they perhaps were (with S. Paul) Caught up into Paradise, and as he, heard
unspeakeable Words, so they, wrought unoperable Works; such as it is not
lawful for to utter.

Of such as these therefore will I glory, yet of my self I will not glory, but
of mine Infirmities. And truly whether such were in the Body or out of the Body
I cannot tell, GOD knows, doubtless they were not far from the Kingdom of
GOD.

But I fear I have waded too far; and therefore now to give some Particular
Account, as well touching the Publication of this Work, as also the Disposition
thereof, and the Nature of the Obselete Language wherein it is written: I shall
in the First place acquaint the Reader, that the kind Acceptance my former
Endeavors received at the Hands of Candid Artists, in publishing some
Chemicall Collections; very earnestly invited me to find out a Second Piece
wherewith to present those Grateful Persons. Whereupon I intended to rally up
some of my own Conceptions in this Science, and expose them also to the Test:
But (to this end, reviewing the Philosophers) I found that many (assuming that
Name) wrote what their Fancies, not their Hands had wrought, and further then
in Apprehension had not seen Projection; (amongst whom our Ripley was sometime
One, as appears by his Ingenious Retractation, hereafter mentioned:) and being
truly sensible of the great Injury such Works have done young Students (at the
first not able to distinguish, who have written upon their undeceveable
Experience, who not; and consequently, not which to follow, or which to avoyde)
I withdrew my Thoughts (having never as yet set my self Effectually upon the
Manual Practice.) lest I should add to the many Injuries the World has
already suffered, by delivering the bare Medley of my Dubious Apprehensions,
without the confident Attestation of Practice: and be justly esteemed as
indiscreete as those whom Ripley mentions, that prate.

Of Robin Hode and of his Bow,
Which never shot therein I trow.
Yet still casting about what to make choice of, at length (by the
encouragement of some that are Industrious after public benefit) Centred my
Thoughts, and fixed them on this design of Collecting All (or as many as I
could meet with) of our own English Hermetique Philosophers, and to make them
public.

Nor did I change this Resolution with my Clothes, notwithstanding the
Difficulties I saw, ready to encounter and obstruct the Undertaking: For,
besides the Pains and Care that was thereunto requisite, the Fear of not
meeting with, or obtaining the Original Manuscripts, or Authentic Copies of
this Nature, (which I knew to be in some Men's hands, yet wanting them my
self,) shrewdly beset, though nothing discouraged me: yet was I therewith
freely and plentifully supplied by some worthy and intimate Friends, whom I
would gladly here mention, but that I well know they delight not to see their
Names in Print. These had, My Care was next to dispose them in such a Series as
might be answerable to the Respective Times, wherein each Author Flourished;
and withal to the best Advantage of the laborious Student: the which I have
managed with so just an Adequation, as (I hope) will neither detract from the
due Honor of the One, nor yet disturb or darken the direct path of the Other.

But whilst I was doing this, I made a Question (in regard some Philosophers
had writ in Verse, others in Prose) which of these should take Precedence; and
after some Consideration adjudged it to the Poetique part: And that, not only
because its Original may probably Anticipate the time of Orpheus, (although he
be noted by Maierus, Primus Antistes, Sacerdos, Theologus, VATES, and Doctor
totius Graecorum nationis) because that Linus is said to be the most Perite of
any Lyrick Poet, and so Ancient that some suppose him Master to Orpheus, who
writ that admirable Allegory of the Golden Fleece, and was the first of all the
Grecians that brought the Chemick Learning (with other Sciences) out of Aegipt,
as the other the first that brought the Phaenician Learning to the Grecians: I
say not only for that it is the Ancientest, and Prose but of Latter use with
other Nations: but because Poetry has bin most Anciently used with us, and (as
if from a Grant of Nature) held unquestionable.

Again, the Excellent Melody thereof is so Natural and Universal, as that it
seems to be borne with all the Nations of the World, as an Hereditary
Eloquence proper to all Mankind: Nor was this all, for I considered that it
Claims a General succession, and Reception, in All Nations, all Ages, who
were never without a Homer, a Virgil, or an Ovid: No not this small Segment of
the World [England] without a Rasis Cestrensis and an Hortulanus; For the First
of these, His Liber Luminum, and his Lumen de Luminum, are the Ancientest now
extant in Latin Verse: In the latter of which, I cannot omit this Title of
his, [Responsio Rasis Cestrensis Filio suo Merlino;] whereby it appears he was
Merlin's Contemporary (at least) if not his Mister, in this Abstruse Mystery.
These Works of his are both Published by Hermannus, but very Imperfectly, as I
found by Comparing them with a Manuscript, as ancient as King John's Time. And
for the Second He was the first Christian Philosopher after Morienus, who
(traveling abroad, and returning hither in the Reign of William the
Conqueror) because he was the first that Transplanted the Chemicall Muses from
remotest Parts into his own Country; is called Garland, ab Coronam Hermeticam
and Poeticam. But, to return to our Matter.

If neither its Antiquity, nor the Natural Ratification, General Succession,
and Reception thereof, were enough to allow it the Righ^hand of Fellowship, yet
I suppose the Effects thereof, (which so affect and delight the Ear, rejoice
the Heart, satisfy the Judgment, and indulge the Hearers) justly may: In
regard Poesy has a Life, a Pulse, and such a secret Energy, as leaves in the
Mind, a far deeper Impression, then what runs in the slow and evenlesse
Numbers of Prose: whereby it won so much upon the World, That in Rude Times,
and even amongst Barbarous Nations, when other sorts of Learning stood
excluded, there was nothing more in Estimation. And for that we call Rythme;
the Custom of diverse of our Saxon and Norman Poets, shows the Opinion they
had thereof; whilst the Latin (notwithstanding its Excellency) could not
sufficiently delight their Ears, unless their Verses (in that Language,) were
formed with an Harmonicall Cadence, and brought into Rythme: Nor did the
Ancients wrap up their Chiefest Mysteries, any where else, then in the
Parobolical and Allufive part of Poetry, as the most Sacred, and Venerable in
their Esteem, and the securest from Profane and Vulgar Wits. For such was the
goodness of our Fathers, that they would not willingly hazard (much less
throw) their Childrens Bread among Dogs; And therefore their Wisdom and Policy
was, First, to find out a way to Teach, and then an Art (which was this) to
Conceal. In a word, to prefer Prose before Poetry, is no other, or better,
then to let a Rough-hewen-Clowne, take the Wall of a Rich-clad-Lady of Honor:
or to Hang a Presence Chamber with Tarpalin, instead of Tapestry.

And for these Reasons, and out of these Respects, the Poetical (as I
conceived) deserved the Precedence.

Howbeit probably some of these Pieces (now brought to public Light) had
welnigh perished in a silent Ruin; and Destruction g^t a complete Victory
over them, but that my Diligence and Laborious Inquisition rescued them from
the Jaws thereof: being almost quite shrouded in the Dust of Antiquity, and
involved in the obscurity of forgotten things, with their Leaves half
Worme-eaten. And a wonder it is, that (like the Creatures in Noah's Arc) they
were hitherto so safely preserved from that Universal Deluge, which (at the
Dissolution of Abbeys) everflowed our greatest Libraries.

And in doing thus, I presume it no Arrogance to challenge the Reputation of
performing a Work, next that of a Man's own: and something more, in that (as if
having the Elixir it self) I have made Old Age become Young and Lively, by
restoring each of the Ancient Writers, not only to the Spring of their several
Beauties, but to the Summer of their Strength and Perfection.

As for the whole Work it self, it is sheav'd up from a few gleanings in part
of our English Fields; where though I have bestowed my Industry to pick up here
and there, what I could find in my way, yet I believe there are many other
Pieces of this Nature in private Hands, which if any are pleased (out of the
same Ingenious score that I have published these,) to Communicate to me: I
shall set thereon a value suitable to the worth of their Favors, and let the
World know its Obligation to them besides.

The Style and Language thereof, may, I confess (to some) seem Irksome and
Uncouth, and so it is indeed to those that are strangers thereunto; but withal
very Significant: Old words have strong Emphasis; others may look upon them as
Rubbish or Trifles, but they are grosty Mistaken: for what some light Brains
may esteem as Foolish Toys; deeper Judgments can and will value as sound and
serious Matter.

We English have often varied our Fashions (such is the levity of our Fancies)
and therefore if you meet with Spellings different from those in use; or
uncouth Words as strangely ridiculous, as a Maunch, Hood, Cod-piece, or
Trunke-hose, know; as they were the fashionable Attyres, so these the usual
Dialects of those Times: And Posterity will pay us in our own Coin, should we
deride the behavior and dress of our Ancestors. For we must consider that
Languages which are daily used in our Discourse, are in as continual Mutation:
what Custom brings into habit, is best liked for the Present, whether it be to
revive what is lost, or introduce something new; or to piece up the present,
with the retained shreds of what preceded; But learned Tongues (which are
contained in Books) enjoy a more immutable Fate, because not subject to be
washed away with the daily tide and current of Times. They are like the fashion
and Drapery wrought on Marble Statutes, which must ^ver be retained without
alteration.

And therefore that the Truth and Worth of their Works might receive no
Diminution by my Transcription, I purposely retained the old Words and manner
of their Spelling, as I found them in the Originalls (except only some palpable
Mistakes and Blemishes of former Transcribers, which I took upon me to correct
and purge as little more then Litterall Imperfections:) yet not to leave the
Reader unsatisfied, have added a Compendious Table, for the Interpretation of
Old, unusual, and obsolete Words, and thereby smoothed (as I suppose) the
Passage for such as have not hitherto bin Conversant in these Ancient Rough
hewed Expressions.

Wherefore you that love to converse with the Dead, or consult with their
Monuments, draw near: perhaps you may find more benefit in them, then the
Living; There you may meet with the Genii of our Hermetique Philosophers,
learn the Language in which they wooed and courted Dame Nature, and enjoy them
more freely, and at Greater Command, (to satisfy your Doubts) then when they
were in the Flesh; For, they have Written more then they would Speak; and left
their Lines so Rich, as if they had dissolved Gold in their Ink, and clad
their Words with the Sovereign Moisture.

My Annotations are limited within the Bounds of what is Historical, or what
occasionally must needs entrench on the Confines of other Arts, and all Glosses
upon the Philosophical Work purposely omitted, for the same Reasons that I
chose to send forth other Men's Children into the World, rather then my own. And
what presumptuous Mistaks, or Errors, the Candid Reader shall meet with, will
(I hope) be Censured with no less Favor and Charity, then that whereby they
are wont to Judge the Faults of those they esteem their Friends and
Well-wishers.

And now to Conclude: May the GOD of NATURE be graciously pleased (out of the
Immense Treasury of his Goodness) to vouch safe all such (whose good Angels
direct them to, or have alreadly Religiously Engaged them in this Mysterious
knowledge) the Full and Entire Accomplishments of a True and Pious Philosopher,
[To wit, Learning, Humility, Judgment, Courage, Hope, Patience, Discretion,
Charity and Secrecy:] That so they may enjoy the Fruits of their Labors,
which otherwise will be but vain, and unpleasant: and causel^sly render the
Divine Science and Secret it self, Contemptible.

Farewell (Industrious Students) and let your Goodness still invite ^e to
accomplish the End I have proposed: In doing which, (I presume) you may one Day
esteem me, better deserving your Patronage; At leastwise, your charitable
Censure: which is all the Recompense Expected or Merited, by him, who is

26 Jan. 1651/2 Yours Really Devoted, E. Ashmole.

THE ORDINALL OF ALCHIMY.

Written by THOMAS NORTON OF BRISTOLL.

LIber iste Clericis monstrat scientiam,
Liber sed Laicis auget inscitiam:
Liber, honores juvans per copiam:
Et Liber pauperum fugans inopiam:
Liber fiduciae est and veritatis:
Regibus consilium, doctrina Praelatis:
Et Liber utilis viris beatis
Vivere qui cupiunt absque peccatis.
Liber secretum, Liber doni Dei,
Electis semita, vires bonae spei,
Valens constantibus firmae fidei:
Ve non credentibus verbis oris mei.
Quaerunt Alchimiam, falsi quoque recti:
Falsi sine numero, sed hi sunt rejecti,
Et cupiditatibus (heu) tot sunt infecti,
Quod inter mill millia, vix sunt tres electi,
Istam ad scientiam multi sunt vocati
Nobiles, and pauperes, inscii, literati;
Qui noelunt labores, neque tempus pati;
Ideo non perficient, quia sunt ingrati.
Liber Artis filios docet iste satis,
Quibus haec percipere deus dedit gratis,
Versiculis propheticis quatuor his credatis,
Omnia dat gratis divinae fons pietatis.
Haec nobilis scientia est tantum illis data,
Qui diligunt justitiam, mente cum beata;
Dolosis, and raptoribus sed est denegata,
Propter peccata tardantur munera grata.
Saepe Reges Angliae decorasset haec res,
Firmasi in domino fuisset eorum spes;
Ille sed qui capiet per hanc rem honores,
Antiquos mores mutabit in meliores.
Iste cumque venerit, regnum reformabit,
Virtutibus and moribus, and exemplum dabit
Sempiternum Regibus; plebs tunc jubilabit,
Et mutuo se diligens lauds Deo dabit:
O Rex, haec facturus! Deum Regem ora,
Et ejus auxilium pro re hac implora:
Tunc regi justo fulgenti mente decora
Grata supervenient qua non sperabitur hora.
THis Book the greatest Clearkes may teach,
But shorteneth the Vulgar-Reach:
A Book that gets by Wealth) Renown,
And Boggles at a thred-bare-Gowne:
A trusty-Booke of faithfull-Things;
Instructing Priests, Advising Kings:
A Book that is fitted for the sense
Of Man, who lives without offense:
A Book of secrets given by God;
To men Elect, a Beaten-Trod:
Availing such as constant be
In Faith, and Hope, and trusting Me.
Good Men and Bad, even Numberless,
(The latter, but without success)
Desire the Art: But still (Alas!)
They are so given to Avarice,
That of a Million, hardly three
Were ere Ordaind for Alchimy.
Yet many called every Hour,
Learned and Unlearned, Rich, and Poor;
Who Will neither Tend, nor take the Pains;
And therefore Trudge without the Gains.
On whom God does this Art bestow,
Her Sons may herein fully know:
By these These foure-Prophetick lines extracted from Sir John Abbot of
Bridliugtons Prophecies, Ubi de Tauro, etc.
foure-lines you may believe
Heaven does all things gratis give.
This Art in such you only find
As Justice love, with spotles-Minde:
But it is denied to guilefull Men;
For sin protracts the gifts of Heaven.
These had adorned the English-Throne,
If they had trusted God alone:
For he that hereby Honor winns,
Shall change the old for better things.
And when he comes to rule the Land,
Reform it with a virtuous hand:
Leaving examples of good deeds
To every King that him succeedes:
Then shall the People Jubilize
In mutual love; and sacrifise
Praises to God. O King that shall
These Works.! implore the God of all
For timely help, in this good thing:
So to a Just, and Glorious King,
Most goodly Graces shall descend,
When least looked for: To Crown his End.
THE PROHEME.
TO the honor of God, One in Persons three,
This Book is made, that Laymen should it
And Clerks also, after my decease,
Whereby all Laymen which puts see,
To seech by Alkimy great riches to winn them in prease,
May find good Counselor they such warke begin;
And great deceipts they may hereby eschew,
And by this doctrine know falls men from true.
Nathles Clerks great seacreats here may leare,
But all Lay men shall find here cause to fear,
And to beware of falsillusions,
Which Multiplyers work with their Conclusions:
But for that I desire not worldly fame,
But your good prayers, unknown shall be my name.
That no man should thereafter search, ne look,
But wisely Consider the flowers of this book:
Of every estate that is within Mankind
If ye make search much people ye may find,
Which to Alkimy their Courage do address
Only for appetite of Lucre and Riches.
As Popes with Cardinals of Dignity,
Archbyshopes with Byshopes of high degree;
With Abbots and Priors of Religion,
With Friars, Heremites, and Preests many one,
And Kings with Princes and Lords great of blood,
For every estate desires after good;
And Merchaunts also which dwell in the fiere
Of brenning Covetise, have thereto desire;
And Common-workemen will not be out-lafte,
For as well as Lords they love this noble Craft*
As Gouldsmithes whom we should lest repreve
For sights in their Craft meveth them to believe:
But wonder it is that Wevers deal with such warks,
Free Masons and Tanners with poor Parish Clerks;
Tailors and Glasters woll not thereof cease,
And eke sely Tinkers will put them in the prease
With great presumption; but yet some color there was,
For all such Men as give Tincture to Glass:
But many Artificers have been over-swifte
With hasty Credence to fume away their thrifte:
And albeit that losses made them to smarte,
Yet ever in hope continued their heart,
Trusting some time to speed right well,
Of many such truly I can tell,
Which in such hope continued all their life,
Whereby they were pore and made to unthrife:
It had byne good for them to have left off
In season, for naught they found but a scoff,
For trewly he that is not a great Clerk
Is nice and lewd to meddle with this warke;
Ye may trust me well it is no small inginn
To know all secreats pertaining to the Mine;
For it is most profound Philosophy,
The subtle science of holy Alkimy,
Of which Science here I intend to write,
Howbeit I may not curiously indite.
For he that should all a common people teach,
He must for them use plain and common speech;
Though that I write in plain, and hoemely wise
No good Man then should such writenge despise.
All Masters that write of this Soleme work
They made their Books to many Men full derke,
In Poyses, Parables, and in Metaphors also,
Which to Shollers causes peine and woe:
For in their practice when they would it assay,
They leese their Costs, as men see aldaye.
Hermes, Rasis, Geber, and Avicen,
Merlin, Hortolan, Democrit, and Morien,
Bacon, and Raimond, with others many more
Wrote under covert, and Aristotle also.
For what hereof they wrote with their penn,
Their Cloudy Clauses dulled many Men:
Fro Laymen, Fro Clearks, and so fro every Man
They hid this Art that no Man find it cann.
By their books do they show Reasons fair,
Whereby much people are brought into despair.
Yet Anaxagoras wrote plainest of them all
In his book of Conversions natural;
Of the old Fathers that ever I found
He most disclosed of this Science the grownde;
Whereof Aristotle had great envy,
And him rebuked unrightfully
In many places, as I can well report,
Intending that men to him should not resort:
For he was large of his cunning and love,
God have his soul in bliss with him above:
And such as sowed envious seed,
God forgive them their misdeede.
As the Mounke which a Book did write
Of a thousand receipts in malice for despite;
Which be coppied in many a place
Whereby has been made pale many a Face;
And many Gownds have byne made bare of hew,
And men made falls which before time were true.
Wherefore my Pity does me constreyne
To show the truth in few words and plain,
So that you may fro false doctrine flee,
If ye give Credence to this book and me;
Avoid your Books written of Receipts,
For all such Receipts are full of Deceipts;
Trust not such Receipts, and learn well this Clause,
Nothing is wrought but by his proper Cause:
Wherefore that Practice falls far behind
Where Knowledge of the cause is not in mind:
Therefore remember ever more wisely,
That you work nothing but you know how and why.
Also he that would in this Art proceed,
To eschew falsehood he has great need:
For truth is good which this Art must guide,
Wherefore to falsehood ye may never slide;
But steadfastly your mind must be set,
Falls Colloured Metal never to Counterfett;
As they that seek Blanchers or Citrinacions,
Which woll not abide all Examinacions,
Wherewith falls Plate they make as they cann
Or Money to beguile some good true Mann:
But God has made that of this blessed Art,
All that be falls shall have thereof noe part;
He must have Grace that would for this Art sue,
Therefore of right him needs to be true:
Also he may not be trobled in his Mind
With outward charges* which this Art would find:
And he that would have his intent,
He must have Riches sufficient.
In many ways he may not look
But only pursue the order of this Book;
Named of Alkimy the Ordinall,
The Creed mihi, the Standard perpetual:
For like as the Ordinall to Preesti sotteth out
The service of the days as they go about:
So of all the Books unordered in Alkimy
The effect is here set out Orderly:
Therefore this Book to an Alchimister wise,
Is a Book of incomparable price;
Whose truth shall never be defiled,
Though it appear in homely wise compiled:
And as I had this Art by Grace from Heaven,
I give you the same here in Chapters seven:
As largely as by my fealty I may,
By license of the dreadful Judge at domes day.
The first Chapter shall all Men teach
What manner People may this Science reach,
And why the true Science of Alkimy,
Is of old Fathers called Blessed and Holy.
In the second Chapter may be said,
The nice Joys thereof, with the great pain.
The third Chapter for the love of One,
Shall trewly disclose the Matters of our Stone;
Which the Arabies done Elixir call,
Whereof it is, there understonde you shall.
The fowerth Chapter teaches the gross Work,
A foul labor not kindly for a Clerk.
In which is found full great travail,
With many perils, and many a fail.
The fifth Chapter is of the subtle Werk,
Which God ordained only for a Clerk;
Full few Clerks can it comprehend,
Therefore to few Men is the Science send.
The sixth Chapter is of Concord and love,
Between low natures, and heavenly spheres above:
Whereof true knowledge advances greatly Clerks,
And causes furtherance in our wonderful werks.
The seventh Chapter trewly teach you shall,
The doubtful Regiments of your Fires all.
NOw Sovereign Lord God me guide and speed,
For to my Matters as now I will proceed,
Praying all men which this Book shall find,
With devoute Prayers to have my soul in mind;
And that noe Man for better ne for worse,
Change my writing for dread of Gods curse:
For where quick sentence shall seame not to be
There may wise men find selcouthe previtye;
And changing of some one syllable
May make this Book unprofitable.
Therefore trust not to one Reading or twain,
But twenty times it would be over said;
For it conteyneth full ponderous sentence,
Albeit that it fault form of Eloquence;
But the best thing that ye do shall,
Is to read many Books, and than this withal.
To: Vaughan sculp:



Nortons Ordinall.
CHAP. I.
MAIS tryefull merveylous and Archimastrye
Is the tincture of holy Alkimy:
A wonderful Science, secret Philosophy,
A singular grace and gift of the almighty:
Which never was found by labor of Mann,
But it by Teaching, or Revelacion begann.
It was never for Money sold ne bought,
By any Man which for it has sought:
But given to an able Man by grace,
Wrought with great Cost, with long layfir and space.
It helps a Man when he has need,
It voydeth vain Glory, Hope, and also dread:
It voydeth Ambitiousnesse, Extorcion, and Excess,
It fenceth Adversity that she do not oppress.
He that thereof has his full intent,
Forsakes Extremities, with Measure is content.
Some people would not have it cauled Holy,
And in this wise they do replye,
They say how Painims may this Art have,
Such as our Lord God woll never save:
For their wilful falls infidelity,
The cause of goodness, possessours cannot be.
Also it makes none other thing
But Gold or Silver, for Money, Cupp, or Ring.
Which of wise men is proved and well found
Least verteous thing that is upon the Ground.
Wherefore concluding all men of that sect,
Say, how this Science n'is holy in effect.
To this we say and wittnes as we cann
How that this Science was never tought to Man;
But he were proved perfectly with space,
Whether he were able to receyve this Grace:
For his Truth, Virtue, and for his stable Wit,
Which if he fault he shall never have it;
Also no man could yet this Science reach,
But if God send a Master him to teach:
For it is so wonderful and so selcouth,
That it must needs be tought from mouth to mouth:
Also he must (be he never so loath)
Receive it with a most sacred dreadful Oath,
That as we refuse great dignity and fame,
So he must needly refuse the same.
And also that he shall not be so wild
To teach this seacret to his own child;
For nighnes of Blood ne Consanguinity
May not accepted be to this dignity:
So blood as blood, may have hereof noe part,
But only virtue wins this holy Art:
Therefore straightly you shall search and see,
All manners and virtues with th'abilitie
Of the person which shall this Science leere,
And in likewise make him straightly swear:
So that noe man shall leave this Art behind,
But he an able and approved Man can find;
When Age shall greeve him to ride or go,
One he may teach, but then never no more:
For this Science must ever secret be,
The Cause whereof is this as ye may see;
If one evil man had hereof all his will
All Christian Pease he might hastily spill,
And with his Pride he might pull down
Rightful Kings and Princes of renown:
Wherefore the sentence of peril and jeopardy,
Upon the Teacher rests dreadfully.
So than for doubt of such pride and wreach,
He must be ware that will this Science teach:
No Man therefore may reach this great present,
But he that has virtues excellent.
So though Men ween Possessours not to aid,
To hallow this Science as before is said;
Neither seem not blessed effectually,
Yet in her Order this Science is holy.
And forasmuch as noe Man may her find
But only by grace, she is holy of her kind.
Also it is a work and Cure divine,
Foul Copper to make Gold or Silver fine:
No man may find such change by his thought,
Of diverse kinds which Gods hands have wrought.
For Gods Conjunctions Man may not undo,
But if his Grace fully consent thereto,
By help of this Science, which our Lord above
Has given to such Men as he does love;
Wherefore old Fathers conveniently
Called this Science Holy Alkimy.
Therefore noe Man should be too swifte,
To cast away our Lords blessed gift:
Consideringe how that Almighty God
From great Doctors has this Science forbod,
And granted it to few Men of his mercy,
Such as be faithful true and lowly.
And as there be but Planets seven
Among the multitude of stars in Heaven:
So among millions of millions of Mankind,
Scarslie seven men may this Science find.
Wherefore Laymen ye may lere and see
How many Doctors of great authority,
With many searchers has this Science sought,
Yet all their labors have turned into naught;
If they did cost, yet found they none avail,
For of their purpose every time they fail;
And in despair they reason and depart,
And then they said how there is noe such art;
But fained Fables they name it where they go,
A falls fond thing they say it is also:
Such Men presume too much upon their mind,
They ween their wits sufficient this Art to find.
But of their slander and words of outrage,
We take thereof trewlie little Charge:
For such be not invited to our feast,
Which weeneth themselves wise and can do least.
Albeit such Men list not longer to pursue,
Yet is this Science of Alkimy full true;
And albeit some proud Clerks say nay
Yet every wise Clerk well consider may,
How he which hereof might no truth see
May not hereof lawful wittnes be,
For it were a wondrous thing and queinte,
A man that never had sight to peinte.
How should a borne blind Man be sure
To write or make good Portrature.
To build Poules steeple might be great doubt,
For such proud Clerks to bring about;
Such might well happ to break their crown,
Ere they could wisely take it down.
Wherefore all such are full far behind,
To fetch out the secreatest point of kind;
Therefore all Men take their fortune and chance,
Remit such Clerks to their Ignorance.
NOw ye that will this Science pursue,
Learn ye to know falls Men from true.
All true searchers of this Science of Alkimy,
Mustbe full learned in their first Philosophy:
Else all their labor shall them let and greive,
As he that fetches Water in a Sive;
The true men search and seek all alone
In hope to find our delectable stone,
And for that they would that no Man should have loss,
They prove and seek all at their own Cost;
So their own Purses they will not spare,
They make their Coffers thereby full bare,
With great Patience they do proceed,
Trusting only in God to be their speed.
The false man walks from Town to Town,
For the most part in a threed-bare-Gowne;
Ever searching with diligent awaite
To winn his pray with some falls deceit
Of swearing and leasing; such will not cease,
To say how they can Silver plate increase.
And ever they rail with perjury;
Saying how they can Multiply
Gold and Silver, and in such wise
With promise they please the Covetise,
And Causes his mind to be on him set,
Then Falsehood and Covetise be well met.
But afterward within a little while
The Multiplier does him beguile
With his fair promise, and with his false oaths,
The Covetise is brought to threed-bare clothes:
But if he can hastily be well aware,
Of the Multiplier and of his Chaffare,
Of whose deceipts much I can report,
But I dare not least I give comfort
To such as be disposed to Treachery;
For so much hurt might come thereby;
Wherefore advise you and be wise,
Of them which proffer such servise.
If they had Cunning have ye no doubt,
They woll be loath to show it out:
When such men promise to Multiply,
They compass to do some Villony,
Some true man's goods to bear away;
Of such fellows what should I say?
All such false men where ever they go,
They should be punished, they be not so.
Upon Nature they falsely lie
For Mettalls do not Multiply;
Of this Sentence all men be sure,
Evermore Art must serve Nature.
Nothing multiplieth as Auctors says,
But by one of these two ways,
One by rotting, called Putrefaction,
That other as Beasts, by Propagation;
Propagation in Mettalls may not be,
But in our Stone much like thing ye may see.
Putrefaction must destroy and deface,
But it be don in its proper place.
Mettalls of kind grow low under ground,
For above earth rust in them is found;
So above earth appears corruption,
Of mettalls, and in long time destruction,
Whereof noe Cause is found in this Case,
But that above Earth they be not in their place.
Contrary places to nature causes strife,
As Fishes out of water losen their Life:
And Man, with Beasts, and Birds live in air,
But Stone and Mineralls under Earth repaier.
Physicians and Appoticaries faut appetite and will,
To seech water flowers on a dry hill:
For God has ordained of his wisdom and grace,
All things to grow in their natural place.
Against this doctrine some Men reply,
And say that Mettalls do Multiply:
For of Silver, Lead, Tinn, and al so Brass,
Some vein is more, and some is less,
Or which diversity Nature should cease,
If Mettalls did not multiply and increase;
Wherefore they say that reason shows now,
How that under Earth they multiply and grow;
Why not then above Earth in vessels close and fair,
Such as should preserve them from Fire Water and Aier?
Hereto we say this reason is but rude,
For this is noe perfect similitude;
For cause efficient of Mettalls find ye shall
Only to be the virtue Mineral,
Which in every Earth is not found,
But in certain places of eligible ground;
Into which places the Heavenly Sphere,
Sends his beams directly every year.
And as the matters there disposed be
Such Mettalls thereof formed shall you see.
Few grownds be apt to such generation:
How should then above ground be Multiplication?
Also all men perceyven that be wise,
How Water conjealed with Cold is yse;
And before time it harded was
Some lay in more places and some in less,
As water in fosses of the Carte-wheele,
Were veins small when they began to keele,
But water in ditches made veins more,
For plenty of water that was therein froare.
Hereupon to say it were noe good advice,
That therefore of yse should multiply more yse.
So though there be of Mettalls veins more and less,
It proves not that they increase more then it was,
Also ye may trust without any doubt,
If Multiplying should be brought about:
All th'engredience must draw to simplcity,
And break Composition as yearly ye may see:
For Multiplying of Herbs how Nature has provided,
That all things joined in the seed be divided:
Else stalk and leaves which vertually therein be,
May not come forth actually that eye might them see.
But Metal holds his holle Composicion,
When corrasive waters have made dissolucion:
Therefore sith yse is nerrer to simplicity,
Then is Metal, and may not increased be,
Trewly ye may trust as I said before,
How of one ounce of Silver, may Silver be noe more.
Also nothing multiplied shall ye find,
But it be of Vegetative or of Sensitive kind:
Where Mettalls be only Elamentative,
Having noe seed, nether feeling of life;
Wherefore concluding all Multipliers must cease,
For Mettalls once Mettalls shall noe more increase;
Nathlesse one Metal transmuted we find,
Unto a Metal of another kind,
For propinquity of matter that in them was,
As it is known betwixt Iron and Brass.
But to make true Silver or Gold is noe ingin,
Except only the Philosophers medicine.
Wherefore such leasings as Multipliers use,
Clerks reprove and utterly refuse;
Such art of Multiplying is to be reproved,
But holy Alkimy of right is to beloved,
Which treats of a precious Medicine,
Such as trewly makes Gold and Silver fine:
Whereof example for Testimony,
Is in a City of Catilony.
Which Raymond Lully, Knight; men suppose,
Made in seven Images the truth to disclose;
Three were good Silver, in shape like Ladies bright,
Every each of Four were Gold and did a Knight:
In borders of their Clothing Letters like appear,
Signifying in Sentence as it shows here.
1. Of old Horshoes (said one) I was ire,
Now I am good Silver as good as ye desire.
2. I was (said another) Iron fet from the Mine,
But now I am Gould pure perfect and fine.
3. Whilome was I Copper of an old red pann,
Now am I good Silver, said the third woman.
4. The fourth said, I was Copper grown in the filthy place,
Now am I perfect Gould made by Gods grace.
5. The fifth said, I was Silver perfect through fine,
Now am I perfect Goulde, excellent, better then the prime.
6. I was a Pipe of Lead well nigh two hundred year,
And now to all men good Silver I appear.
7. The seventh said, I Lead am Gould made for a Maistrie,
But trewlie my fellows are nerer thereto then I.
This Science bears her name of a King,
Called Alchimus, without leasing:
A glorious Prince of most noble mind,
His noble virtues help him this art to find;
He searched Nature, he was nobil Clerk,
He left Extorcion, than sought and found this work.
King Hermes also he did the same,
Being a Clerk of Excellent fame;
In his Quadripartite made of Astrology,
Of Physique and of this Art of Alkimy,
And also of Magique natural,
As of four Sciences in nature passing all.
And there he said that blessed is he
That knows things truly as they be.
And blessed is he that makes due proof,
For that is root of cunning and roof;
For by opinion is many a Man
Deceived, which hereof little cann.
An old Proverb, In a Bushel of weeninge,
Is not found one handful of Cunninge:
With due proof and with discreet assaye,
Wise men may leare new things every day.
By Cunninge, Men know themselves and every thing;
Man is but a Beast and worse without Cunninge:
But little favor has every Man
To Science whereof he little can;
And little Cunning makes men proud and wild,
Sufficient Cunning makes men full mild.
Nobil men now in manner have despighte
Of them that have to Cunning appetite:
But noble Kings in ancient days,
Ordained (as old Auctors says,)
That the seven Sciences to learn and can,
Should none but only a Noble man;
And at the least he should be so free,
That he might Study with liberty;
Wherefore old Sages did them call
The seven Sciences liberal:
For he that would leare them perfectly and well,
In clear liberty he must dwell.
From worldly warkes he must withdraw,
That would learn but Man's Law:
Much more the World he must forsake,
Which many Sciences would overtake.
And for that cause Men may well see,
Why Cunninge men despised be.
Yet nobil Memory shall never cease,
Of him which Cunninge does increase.
He which loves Cunning, Justice, and Grace
Is set aside in many a place;
But who to Court brings in with guile,
Profit, or present, he is the Man that while.
Wherefore this Science and many Graces more,
Be lost and be departed all ye fro.
And furthermore remember what I say,
Sin caleth fast for his ending day:
Covetise and Cunninge have discord by kind;
Who lucre coveteth this Science shall not find;
But he that loves Science for her own kind,
He may purchase both for his blessed mind.
Of this Chapter more I need not teach,
For here appears what men may it reach:
That is to remember only the true,
And he that is constant in mind to pursue,
And is not Ambitious, to borrow has no need,
And can be Patient, not hasty for to speed;
And that in God he set fully his trust,
And that in Cunning be fixed all his lust;
And with all this he lead a rightful life,
Falshoode subduinge, support no sinful strife:
Such Men be apt this Science to attain.
The Chapter following, is of Joy and pain.
CHAP. II.
NORmandy nurished a Monk of late,
Which deceived Men of every state.
But before that done he in his fantazie,
Weened he had caught this Art fully.
Such rejoicing thereof he had,
That he began to dote and to be mad.
Of whose Joys (albeit they were small)
For an ensample I write this Tale.
This Monk had walked about in France,
Raunging Apostata in his plesaunce.
And after he came into this land,
Willing Men should understonde;
How that of Alkimy he had the ground,
By a Book of Receipts which he had found.
In surety thereof he set all his mind,
Some nobil Act to leave behind;
Whereby his name should be immortal,
And his great Fame in laud perpetual.
And often he mused where to begin,
To spend the riches that he should winn.
And ever he thought lo this I cann,
Where might I find some trusty Man,
Which would accord now with my will,
And help my purpose to fulfill.
Then would I make upon the plain
Of Salisbury glorious to be saine,
Fifteen Abbeys in a little while,
One Abbie in the end of every mile.
Hereupon this Monk to me resorted,
Of trust (he said) which men of me reported,
His foresaid mind he did to me tell,
And prayed me to keep his great Council.
I said before an Image of Saint Jame,
That I would never disclose his name;
Yet I may write without all vice,
Of his desires that were so nice.
When he had discovered his great Cunning,
He said that he faughted nothing,
But a good mean for his solace,
To labor to the Kings good grace,
To get license of his estate,
And of his Lords mediate,
To purchase land for the Abbeys aforesaid,
For which all cost should be well paid;
But yet he had great doubt and fear,
How to purchase, of whom, and where.
When I had heard of this great work,
I searched (to wit) what manner of Clerk*
He was, and what he knew of School,
And therein he was but a Fool.
Yet I suffered, and held me still,
More to learn of his lewd Will.
Then said I, it were a lewd thing,
Such matter to show unto the King;
But if the proof were reasonable,
He would think it a foolish Fable.
The Monk said how that he had in fire,
A thing which should fulfill his desire,
Whereof the truth within forty days,
I should well know by true assaies.
Then I said, I would no more that tide,
But forty days I said I would abide.
When forty days were gone and past,
The Monks Craft was clean overcast.
Then all his Abbeys and all his thought,
Was turned to a thing of naught;
And as he came, he went full lewd,
Departing in a mind full shrewd:
For soon after within a little while,
Many true men he did beguile;
And afterward went into France.
Lo! this was a pitiful chance,
That fifteen Abbeys of Religion,
Should in this wise fall to confusion.
Great wonder was what thing he meant,
And why he set all his intent
Abbeys to build; then was it wonder,
Why nould he live Obedient under,
But be Apostata, and range about,
This blessed Science to find out:
But as I wrote above in this Book,
Let no Deceiver after this Science look.
AN other Ensample is good to tell,
Of one that trusted to do as well
As Raymond Lully, or Bacon the Friar,
Wherefore he named himself saunce peer;
He was Parson of a little Town,
Not far from the City of London,
Which was taken for half a Leach,
But little cunning had he to Preach;
He weened him sure this Art to find;
His Name he would have ever in mind
By means of a Bridge, imagined in dorage,
To be made over Thames for light passage:
Whereof should grow a Common ease,
All the Country thereabout to please.
Yet though he might that warke fulfill,
It might in no wise suffice his will;
Wherefore he would set up in hight,
That Bridge for a wonderful sight,
With Pinacles guilt shining as goulde,
A glorious thing for men to behold.
Then he remembered of the new,
How greater fame should him pursue,
If he might make that Bridge so bright,
That it might shine also by Night.
And so continue and not break,
Than all the Land of him would speak.
But in his mind ran many a doubt,
How he might bring that warke about;
He trowed that Lamps with lights of fire,
Should well perform his nice desire;
Wherefore Lamps for that intent,
He would ordain sufficient:
But then he fell in full great dread,
How after the time that he were dead;
That light to find Men would refuse,
And change the Rent to some other use.
Then thought he well is him that wiste,
In whom he might set all his trust;
At the last he thought to make the light,
For that Bridge to shine by night,
With Carbuncle Stones, to Make men wonder,
With duble reflection above and under:
Then new thoughts troubled his Mind,
Carbuncle Stones how he might find;
And where to find wise men and true,
Which would for his intent pursue,
In seeking all the World about,
Plenty of Carbuncles to find out;
For this he took so micle thought,
That his fatt flesh wasted nigh to naught:
And where he trusted without despair,
Of this Science to have been heir,
When the year was fully come and go,
His Craft was lost, and thrift also;
For when that he took up his Glass,
There was no matter for Gold ne Brass:
Then he was angry and well near wood,
For he had wasted away his good:
In this wise ended all his disporte,
What should I more of him report.
But that Laymen and Clerks in Schools,
May know the dotage of these two fools,
Remember this example where ye go,
For in such Minds be trewlie many more:
Theie lewdly believe every Conclusion,
Be it never so false an elusion:
If it in book written they may find,
They ween it true, they be so lewd of mind.
Such lewd and hasty confidence,
Causes poverty and lewd expense.
Of trust of this Art rises Joys nice,
For lewd hope is fools Paradise.
The true tought Children made this confession,
Lord without thee all is digression;
For as thou art of our Science begininge,
So without thee may be noe good endinge.
Confiteor, Astissime nullus ista rapit; Licet prius didicit, absque te
nilsapit: (...) tanta stat gratia te Deumsemper apud Perficere sicut capere,
nam finis es, et caput*



AS of the Joys of this Art ye have seen,
So shall ye now hear some deal of the Pain:
Albeit contrary to the appetite
Of them that has to this Science delight.
The first Pain is to remember in mind,
How many seeken, and how few do find,
And yet noe Man may this Science wynn,
But it be tought him before that he beginn;
He is well learned, and of full clear wit,
Which by teaching can surely learn it:
Of many diversities he must be sure,
Which secreats would know of working Nature:
Yet teaching may not surely avail,
But that sometime shall happ a man to fail;
As all that be now dead and gone
Failed before theie found our Stone:
One time or other, first time or last,
All Men failed till true Practice were paste;
No Man sooner fails in heat and cold,
Then does the Master which hasty is and boulde:
For noe Man sooner may our Work spill,
Then he that is presuminge his purpose to fulfill:
But he that shall trewlie do the deed
He must use providence and ever work with dread;
For of all pains the most grevious pain,
Is for one fail to beginn all again.
Every man shall great Pain have
When he shall first this Art covet and crave,
He shall often times Change his desire,
With new tidings which he shall hear;
His Council shall oftentimes him beguile,
For that season he dreadeth noe subtle wile:
And oftentimes his mind to and fro,
With new Oppinions he shall change in woe:
And so long time continue in Fantasy,
A great adventure for him to come thereby:
So of this Art be ye never so feign,
Yet he must taste of many a bitter pain.
OF Pains yet I must show more,
Against your appetite though it be full sore:
It is great Pain, as all wisemen guess,
To wit where a true Master is;
And if ye find him, it will be Pain,
Of his true love to be certain.
Forasmuch as noe Man may teach but one,
Of the making of our delicious stone;
And albeit ye find him that will ye teach,
Yet much trouble and pains may ye reach;
For if your mind be verteously set,
Then the Devil will labor you to let;
In three wises to let he woll awaite,
With Haste, with Despair, and with Deceipte:
For dread of Virtue which ye may do,
When ye should attain this grace unto.
The first peril aforesaid is of Haste,
Which causes most destruction and waste;
All Auctors writing of this Art,
Say haste is of the Devils part:
The little Book writ of the Philosophers feast,
Says, omnis festinatio ex parts diaboli est:
Wherefore that Man shall soonest speed,
Which with great Leisure wisely woll proceed;
Upon assay ye shall trewly know
That who most hastes he trewly shall be slow;
For he with haste shall bring his warke arreare,
Sometimes a Month, and sometimes a whole Year
And in this Art it shall ever be so,
That a hasty Man shall never fail of woe:
Also of haste ye may trewly be sure
That she leaves nothing clean and pure;
The Devil has none so subtle wile
As with hastiness you to beguile;
Therefore often times he will assault,
Your mind with haste to make default;
He shall find grace in Town and Land,
Which can hastines all times withstand:
I say all times, for in one point of time,
Haste may destroy all your engine;
Therefore all haste eschew and fear,
As if that she a Devil were.
My wit trewly cannot suffice,
Haste sufficiently for to despise;
Many Men have byne cast in great care,
Because they would not of haste beware:
But ever call upon to see an end,
Which is temptation of the Fend:
Noe more of haste at this present,
But blessed be ever the Patient.
WHen with Haste the Feind has noe avail,
Then with Despair your mind he will assail;
And often present this Sentence to your mind,
How many seeken, and how few may find,
Of wiser Men then ever were ye:
What surety than to you may be?
He woll move ye to doubt also
Whether your Teacher had it or not;
And also how it might so fall,
That part he tought you but not all;
Such uncertainety he woll cast out,
To set your mind with greevous doubt;
And so your Pains he woll repair
With wann hope and with much Despair;
Against this assault is no defense,
But only the virtue of Confidence:
To whom reason should you lead,
That you shall have noe cause to dread;
If you wisely call to your mind
The virtuous manners, such as you find
In your Master and your Teacher,
So shall you have noe need to fear;
If you consider all Circumstances about,
Whether he tought you for Love or for Doubt;
Or whether Motion of him began,
For it is hard to trust such a Man:
For he that profereth has more need
Of you, then you of him to speed.
This wise certainly ye may well win,
Before that you your warkes do begin;
When such certainety ye truly have,
Fro Despair ye may be sure and save.
But who can find such a Master out,
As was my Master, him needs not to doubt:
Which right nobil was and fully worthy laud,
He loved Justice, and he abhorred fraud;
He was full secret when other men were loud,
Loath to be known that hereof ought he Could;
When men disputed of Colors of the Rose,
He would not speak but keep himself full close;
To whom I labored long and many a day,
But he was solleyn to prove with straight assaye,
To search and know of my Disposition,
With manifold proofs to know my Condition:
And when he found unfeigned fidelity,
In my great hope which yet nothing did see,
At last I conquered by grace divine
His love, which did to me incline.
Wherefore he thought soon after on a tide,
That longer delays I ne should abide;
My manifold letters, my heavy heart and cheer,
Moved his Compassion, they perced him full near;
Wherefore his Penn he would noe more refrain,
But as here follows so wrote he again.
MY very trusty, my dear beloved Brother,
I must you answer, it may be none other;
The time is come you shall receive this Grace,
To your great comfort and to your solace:
Your honest desire with your great Confidence,
Your Virtue proved with your Sapience;
Your Love, your Truth, your long Perseverance,
Your steadfast Mind shall your Desire advance:
Wherefore it is need that within short space,
We speak together, and see face to face:
If I should write, I should my fealty break,
Therefore Mouth to Mouth I must needs speak;
And when you come, mine Heier unto this Art
I will you make, and fro this land depart.
Ye shall be both my Brother and mine Heier,
Of this great secret whereof Clerks despair:
Therefore thank God which gives this renown,
For it is better then to were a Crown:
Next after his Saints, our Lord does him call
Which has this Art to honor him withal:
Noe more to you at this present tide,
But hastily to see me, dispose you to ride.
THis Letter receiving, I hasted full sore,
To ride to my Master an hundred miles and more;
And there Forty days continually,
I learned all the secreats of Alkimy:
Albeit Philosophy by me was understonde,
As much as of many other in this Land;
Nethles fools which for their Science sought,
Ween that in forty days it will be wrought.
Between Forty days warke now ye may see,
And Forty days lerninge is great diversity;
Then dark doubts to me appeared pure,
There fownd I disclosed the Bonds of Nature:
The cause of Wonders were to me so fair,
And so reasonable, that I could not dispaier.
If your Master and ye resemble all about
My good Master and me, than have ye no doubt.
THe third impediment deceit we call,
Amongst other to me the worst all;
And that is of Servaunts that should awaite
Upon your warke, for some can much deceipte;
Some be negligent, some sleeping by the fire,
Some be ill-willd, such shall let your desire;
Some be foolish, and some be over bold,
Some keep no Counsel of Doctrine to them told;
Some be filthy of hands and of sleeves,
Some meddle strange Matter, that greatly greeves;
Some be drunken, and some use much to jape,
Beware of these if you will hurt escape,
The True be foolish, the Witty be false,
That one hurts me Sore, that other als:
For when I had my warke well wrought,
Such stale it away and left me naught.
Then I remembering the cost, the time, and the pain,
Which I should have to begin again,
With heavy heart farewell adieu said I,
I will noe more of Alkimy.
But how that chance befell that Season,
Few men would it believe by reason:
Yet Tenn persons be witness true all
How that mishapp did me befalle,
Which might not be only by Man,
Without the Devil as they tell can.
I made also the Elixer of life,
Which me bereft a Merchaunt's wife:
The Quintessens I made also,
With other secrets many more,
Which sinful people took me fro,
To my great pain and much more woe:
So in this work there is no more to saine,
But that every Joy is meddled with his pain.
OF Pain there is a little yet behind,
Which is convenient to be had in mind;
That fell upon a blessed Man;
Whereof the truth report I cann.
Thomas Daulton this good man height,
He served God both day and night,
Of the Red Medicine he had great Store,
I trow never English man had more.
A Squier for the body of King Ehward,
Whose name was Thomas Harbert,
Took this Daulton against his desire,
Out of an Abbie in Gloucester-shier,
And brought him in presence of the King,
Whereof Deluis had some tiding,
For Daulton was whilome Deluis's Clerk;
Deluis disclosed of Daultons work.
Deluis was Squier in confidence
With King Edward often in his presence.
Deluis reported that in a little stounde,
How Daulton had made to him a thousand pound
Of as good Goulde as the Royal was,
Within half a day and some dele less;
For which Deluis swear on a Book.
Then Daulton on Deluis cast his look,
And said to Deluis, Sir you be forswore,
Wherefore your heart has cause to be sore.
Of nothing said he, that I now have told,
Witness our Lord whom Judas sold.
But once said Deluis I swear to thee,
That thou should not be uttered by me;
Which I may break well I understand,
For the Kings weal and for all his Land.
Then said Daulton full soberlie,
This answer voydeth no perjury.
How should the King in you have Confidence,
Your untrewth confessed in his presence.
But Sir said Daulton to the Kings Grace,
I have bin troubled often in many a place
For this Medicine greviously and sore,
And now I thought it should hurt me no more:
Wherefore in the Abbie where I was take,
I cast it in a foul and Common lake
Going to the River which does ebb and flow,
There is destroyed as much riches now,
As would have served to the Holy land,
For twenty thousand men upon a band.
I kept it long for our Lords blessed sake,
To help a King which that journey would make,
Alas Daulton then said the King,
It was fowly don to spill such a thing.
He would have Daulton to make it again,
Daulton said it might not be certain:
Why (said the King) how came ye thereby?
He said by a Channon of Lichfielde trewly,
Whose works Daulton kept dilligently,
Many years till that Channon must dye.
And for his service he said in that space,
The Cannon gave him all that thereof was;
The King gave to Daulton Marks four,
With liberty to go where he would that hour.
Then was the King in his heart sore,
That he had not known Daulton before.
And ever it happneth without leasinge,
That Tyrants be full nigh to a King.
For Herberte lay for Daulton in weight,
And brought him to Stepney with deceipte.
The servaunts of Herbert the money took away
Which the King gave to Daulton that day.
And after Herbert carried Daulton far,
From thence to the Casle of Gloucester,
There was Daulton prisner full long,
Herbert to Daulton did mickle wrong:
Fro thence he had him to prison fast
To Troy, till four years were nigh past,
And after he brought him out to dye;
Daulton to death obeyed lowly,
And said Lord Jesue blessed thou be,
Me thinks I have byne too long from thee.
A Science thou gave me with full great charge,
Which I have kept without outrage.
I found noe man yet apt thereto,
To be mine Heyer when I am go:
Wherefore (sweet Lord) now I am feign
To resign this thy gift to thee again.
Then Daulton made devout prayers, and still
Withsmiling cheer he said now do your will.
When Herbert saw him so glad to dye,
Then ran water from Herberts Eye:
For Prison ne Death could him not avail
To winn this Art, his Craft did him fail.
Now let him go said Herbert than,
For he shall never hurt ne profett man.
But when Daulton from the block should rise,
He looked forth in full heavy wise,
And so departed with full heavy cheer,
It was not his will to live one year.
This was his Pain as I you tell,
By men that had no dread of Hell.
Herbert dyed soon after in his bed,
And Deluis at Teuxbury lost his head;
This wise great Pain, as you may see,
Follows this Art in every degree.
Here lost the King all his intent,
For Herbert was proud and violent,
So nobil a man to opprese with pride,
And like a Fellone him lead and guide;
Where that by goodness patience and grace,
There might have grown full great solace,
As well to the King, ye may understonde,
As for th'ease of Commons of this land;
But wonder not that grace do not fall,
For sin reygneth in this land over all.
Lo here was grace full ready at hand,
To have ceased Taxes and Tallages of this land;
Whereby much Love and Grace would have be,
Between Knighthood Priest-hoode and Comminaltie.
Here ye may see how vicious violence
May not purchase the virtue of sapience:
For vice and virtue be things contrary,
Therefore the vicious may not come thereby;
If Vicious men might learn this Science,
They would therewith do wondrous violence:
And with Ambitiousnesse grow evermore
Worse of Conditions then they were before.
Now is this Chapter of Joy and Pain gone,
The Chapter following shows Matters of our Stone.
CHAP. III.
TONsile was a labourer in the fire
Threescore years and more to win his defire:
Brian was another, with Holton in the Weste,
These were ever busy, and could practice with the best:
But yet this Science they never found,
For they knew not the Matters, ne the Ground,
But rumbled forth, and evermore they sought,
They spent their life and their goods to naught;
Much loss, much cost, much anguish they bought,
Among their Receipts which they had wrought:
Then made Tonsile to me his great complainte,
With weeping Tears he said his heart was fainte,
For he had spended all his lusty days
In falls Receipts, and in such lewd assayes;
Of Herbs, Gommes, of Roots and of Grass,
Many kinds by him assayed was,
As Crowefoote, Celondine and Mizerion,
Vervaine, Lunara, and Martagon:
In Antimony, Arsenick, Honey, Wax and Wine,
In Hair, in Eggs, in Merds, and Urine,
In Calx vive, Sandifer, and Vitriall,
In Markasits, Tutits, and every Mineral,
In Malgams, in Blanchers, and Citrinacions,
All fell to naught in his opperacions:
For he considered not how he did rage,
When to Gods proportions he laid surcharge:
After all this, he thought nothing so good,
To work upon as should be man's Blood;
Till that I said how blood would waste and fume
In mighty fire, and utterly consume.
For Christ his love then said he teach me,
Whereof the substance of our Stone should be:
Tonsile (said I) what should it you avayle
Such thing to know? your lims does you fail
For very Age, therefore cease your lay,
And love your Beads, it is high time to Pray;
For if you knew the Materials of our Stone,
Ere you could make it your days would begone.
Thereof no charge good Master said he,
It were sufficient Comfort now to me
To know the true Materials without wrong
Of that Stone which I have sought so long:
Tonsile (said I) It is noe little thing,
Whereof you would have true tydinge;
For many Auctors write of this doubt,
But none of them shows it Clearly out:
For Auctors which of this Art do write,
Besought God as witnesses Democrite,)
That he unpained would fro this World take
Their Souls whom he tought Books thereof to make;
For greatly doubted evermore all such,
That of this Science they may write too much:
Every each of them tought but one point or twain,
Whereby his fellows were made certain;
How that he was to them a Brother,
For every of them understoode each other;
Also they wrote not every man to Teach,
But to show themselves by a secret Speech:
Trust not therefore to reading of one Book,
But in many Auctors works ye may look;
Liber librum apperit says Arnold the great Clerk,
Anaxagoras said the same for his work:
Who that slothful is in many books to see,
Such one in Practice prompt shall never be;
But Tonsile for alms I will make no store
Plainly to disclose it that never was done before,
By way of answer for your recreation,
If ye cann wisely make Interrogation.
Good Master (said he) then teach me trewly,
Whether the matters be Sol or Mercury?
Or whether of Sol or Lune it may be,
Or whether I shall take them all three,
Or Sol by it self, or Mercury alone,
Or Sulpher with them, for matters of our Stone?
Or whether I shall sal Almoniack take,
Or Mineral means, our Stone thereof to make?
Here be many questions Tonsile, said I,
Wisely remembered and full craftily;
You name it not yet but only in general,
For you must take some deal of these things all;
Of these and of other you must take a part,
One time or other to minister this Art:
Many things helps to apt our Stone,
But two be Materials, yet our Stone is one;
Between which two is such diversity,
As between the Mother and the Child may be:
An other diversity between them find ye shall,
Such as is found between Male and Female:
These two kinds shall do all your service,
As for the White work (if you can be wise;)
One of these kinds a Stone ye shall find,
For it abides fire as stones do by kind:
But it is no Stone in touching ne in sight,
But a subtle Earth, brown, roddy, and not bright:
And when it is separate and brought to his appearage,
Then we name it our ground Litharge.
First it is brown, roddy, and after some deal white,
And then it is called our chosen Markasite:
One ounce thereof is better then sifty pound;
It is not to be sold in all Christian ground;
But he that would have it he shall be feign
To do it make, or take himself the pain:
But one great grace in that labor is saine,
Make it once well and never more again.
Old fathers called it thing of vile price,
For it is naught worth by way of Merchandise:
Noe man that finds it woll bear it away,
Noe more then they would an Ounce of Claye;
Men will not believe that it is of high price,
No man knows it therefore but he be wise.
Here have I disclosed a great secret wonder,
Which never was writ by them which been earth under.
A Another Stone Tonsile you must have withal,
Or else you fawte your chief M^^^riall;
Which is a Stone gloriouse faier and bright,
In handling a Stone, and a Stone in sight;
A Stone glittering with perspecuitie,
Being of wonderful D^aphanitie;
The price of an Ounce Conveniently,
Is twenty shillings or well near thereby:
Her name is Magnetia, few people her know,
She is fownde in high places as well as in low;
Plato knew her property and called her by her name,
And Chaucer reherseth how Titanos is the same,
In the Channons Yeomans Tail, saying what is thus,
But quid ignotum per magis ignotius:
That is to say, what may this be,
But unknown by more unknown named is she;
Nethles Tonsile now I will trewlie teach
What is Magnetia to say in our speech:
Magos is Greek, Mirabile in Latin it is,
Aes is Money, y^os Science, A is God ywisse.
That is to say it is such a thing,
Wherein of Money is wondrous divine Cunninge;
Now here you may know what is Magnetia,
Res aeris in qua latet scientia divinaque mira.
These two Stones Tonsile ye must take
For your materials, Elixir if ye make.
Albeit the first time materials be no more,
Yet many things helps as I said before.
This secret was never before this day
So trewly discovered, take it for your pray;
I pray God that this turn not me to Charge,
For I dread sore my penn goes too large:
For though much people perceive not this Sentence,
Yet subtle Clerks have too much Evidence;
For many Clerks be so clear of wit,
If they had this ground, they were sure of it;
Where our Lord has ordained that no man it find,
But only he that is of verteous mind:
Wherefore old Fathers Covered for great reason,
The Matters of our Stone disclosed at this season.
Other Materials ye shall none take,
But only these two our white stone to make;
Except Sal Armoniack with Sulphur of kind,
Such as out of Metals ye can find;
These two woll abide to fulfill your desire,
The remnant will void when they come to fire;
Sulpher woll brenn and change Colors fast,
But our Litharge abides first and last:
Ye may not with metals or Quicksilver beginn,
To make Elixir if you intend to winn:
Yet if you destroy the whole Composition,
Some of their Compounds will help in Conclusion;
And that is nothing Else of that one or that other,
But only Magnetia and Litharge her Brother.
To: Vaughan sculp:


CHAP. IV.
OF the gross Warke now I will not spare,
Though it be secret, largely to declare:
To teach you the truth is mine intent,
As far forth as I dare for Gods Commandment.
I will inform and guide you in the way,
In such wise as you may find your pray:
If you consider how the parts of Works,
Be out of Order set by the old Clerks.
As I said before, the Masters of this Art,
Every each of them disclosed but a part:
Wherefore though ye perceived them as ye would,
Yet ye cannot order and join them as ye should.
Arnold shows in his writing,
How our final secret is to know the thing
Whereupon our work should take her ground,
And how pure Natures and simple may be found:
In this Book beginning multipharie,
He says in our grounded Matter two kinds be;
But how to find them he kept that in store,
Ye have their Names the last Chapter before.
Freer Bacon disclosed more of that point,
When he said, Depart ye every joynte
In Elementa propinqua: take good heed thereto;
But unwise Doctors never worken so,
But headly they proceed as men well nigh madd,
To the Matters divisible more Matters they add:
So when they ween to bring forth a Flower,
They do nothing but multiply Error.
There cesed Bacon, and so do other such,
For very dread least they should show too much
Avicen in Porta wrote, if ye remember,
How ye should proceed perfection to engender.
Trewly teaching as the pure truth was,
Comedas ut bibas, et bibas ut Comedas,
Eat as it drinks, and drink as it does eat,
And in the mean season take it a perfect sweat.
Rasis set the Dietary and spoke some deal far,
Non tamen comedat res festinanter,
Let not your Matters eat over hastily,
But wisely consume their food leasurelie.
Hereof the Prophet made wondrous mention,
If ye apply it to this intention.
Visitasti terram, and inebriasti eam,
Multiplicasti locupletare eam
Terram fructiferam in salsuginem,
Et terram sine aqua in exitus aquarum.
If it I have plenty of Meat and of Drink,
Men must wake when they desire to wink:
For it is labor of watch and pains great.
Also the Food is full costly meat;
Therefore all Poor men beware said Arnold,
For this Art longs to great men of the world.
Trust to his words ye Poor men all,
For I am witness that so ye find shall.
Esto longanimis and suavis said he,
For hasty men the end shall never see.
The length of clensing of Matters infected,
Deceyveth much People, for that is unsuspected.
Wherefore Poor men put ye not in prea^e,
Such wonders to seech, but in season cease.
Excess for one half quarter of an hour,
May destroy all: therefore chief succoure
Is Primum pro quo, and vultimum pro quo non,
To know of the simperinge of our Stone.
Till it may noe more simper do not cease,
And yet long Continuance may not cause increase*
Remember that Water will buble and boil,
But Butter must simper and also Oil.
And so with long leisure it will waste,
And not with bubling made in haste:
For doubt of perrills many more then one,
And for supergression of our stone.
Amongst gross Works the fowlest of all
Is to clarify our means Mineral.
Extremities may not be well wrought,
Without many Means wisely sought.
And every Mean must be made pure,
If this work should be made sure.
For foul and clean by natural law
Has great discord, and so has ripe and raw.
Steadfast to steadfast will it self combinde,
And fleeting to fleeting will draw by kind:
And ever where as the Concordance is more,
Natures will draw that were elsewhere before;
This gross Work is foul in her kind,
And full of perrills as ye shall it find.
No man's wit can him so much avail,
But that sometime he shall make a fail.
As well as the Layman so shall the Clerk,
And all that labor the gross work:
Whereof Anaxagoras said trewlie thus,
Nemo primo front reperitur discretus.
And once I heard a wise man say,
How in Catilonia at this day,
Magnetia with Mineral means all,
Be made to sale if ye for them call,
Whereby the honds of a cleanly Clerk,
Shall not be siled about so foul a work.
And long time sooner your Work I understonde,
Should be far onward before hand.
For if you should make all things as I cann,
Ye might be weary before your work begann.
The Philosophers warke do not begin,
Till all things be pure without and within.
We that must seek Tincture most specious,
Must needely avoid all things vild and vicious.
Of manifold means each has his property,
To do his Office after his degree:
With them hid things be out fett,
Some that will help and some that would let.
Our Appoticaries to dress them can no skill,
And we to teach them have no manner of will:
Whereof the cause trewly is none other,
But that they will counterfaict to beguile their Brother,
Rather then they will take the pain
Thereto belonging, ere they should it attain:
It is there use whereof my heart is sore,
Much to desire and little to do therefore.
Who would have true warke he may no labor spare,
Neither yet his Purse, though he make it bare:
And in the Gross Warke he is furthest behind,
That daily desires the end thereof to find.
If the gross warke with all his Circumstance,
Were don in three years, it were a blessed chance:
For he that shall end it once for certain,
Shall never have need to begin again,
If he his Medicine wisely can Augment;
For that is the Mastrie of all our intent.
It needs not to name the means Mineral,
For Albert writes openly of them all.
Much I might write of nature of Mines,
Which in this Gross Warke be but engines;
For in this Warke find ye nothing shall,
But handie-crafte called Art Mechanical:
Wherein an hundredth ways and more,
Ye may committ a fault as ye therein go.
Wherefore believe what old Auctors tell,
Without Experience ye may not do well.
Consider all Circumstances, and set your delight
To keep Uniformity of all things requisite.
Use one manner of Vessel in Matter and in Shape,
Beware of Commixtion that nothing miscape.
And hundredth faults in special,
Ye may make under this warning general.
Nethles this Doctrine woll suffice,
To him that can in Practice be wise.
If your Ministers be witty and true,
Such shall not need your warkes to renew.
Therefore if ye woll avoyde all dread,
In the Gross Warke do by my read:
Take never thereto no Houshold-man,
They be soon weary as I tell cann;
Therefore take noe man thereto,
But he be Waged, however you do;
Not by the Month, as nigh as ye may,
Ne by the Week, but by the Day:
And that your Wages be to their mind,
Better then they elsewhere can find;
And that they need not for Wages sue,
But that their Payment be quick and true;
For that shall cause them to love and dread,
And to their Warks to take good heed,
For doubt least they be put away,
For Negligence of them in one day:
Houshold-men woll not do so,
From this Warke therefore let them go.
If I had known this, and had done so,
I had avoided mickle woe.
Also in this Warke must be Liberty,
Without impediment, in every degree,
With diverse Comforts peynes to release
Of labors continual which may not Cease;
Else anguish of Labor and Melancholy,
Might be Cause your Warkes to destroy.
Of the gross Warke it needs to show noe more,
For old men have tought the remnant before;
And what is necessary that they laft out,
This Book shows it without doubt.
Wherefore this little Book the Ordinall,
Is in Alkimy the Complement of all;
The Chapter following convenient for a Clerk,
Shows the Counsels of the subtle Work.
To. Vaughan sculp.


CHAP. V.
BRISE by Surname when the change of Coin was had,
Made some Men sorry, and some Men glad:
And as to much people that change,
Seemed a new thing and a strange;
So that season befell a wondrous thing,
Tuching this Science without leasinge.
That three Masters of this Science all
Lay in one Bed nigh to Leaden Hall,
Which had Elixirs parfite White and Red,
A wonder such Three to rest in one Bed,
And that within the space of days Tenn,
While hard it is to find One in Millions of Men.
Of the Dukedom of Loraine one I understand
Was borne, that other nigh the Middle of England;
Under a Cross, in the end of Shires three,
The third was borne; the youngest of them is he.
Which by his Nativity is by Clerks found,
That he should honor all English ground;
A Man might walk all the World about,
And fail such Three Masters to find out;
Twain be fleeting, the Youngest shall abide,
And do much good in this Land at a Tide.
But sin of Princes shall let or delay
The Grace that he should do on a day.
The eldest Master chaunted of him a Song,
And said that he should suffer much wrong.
Of them which were to him greatly behold,
And many things more this Master told,
Which since that time has trewly befall,
And some of them hereafter shall,
Whereof one is trewlie (said he)
After Troubles great Joy shall be
In every quarter of this Land,
Which all good Men shall understonde:
The Younger asked when that should be,
The old Man said when Men shall see
The holy Cross honored both day and night,
In the Land of God in the Land of Light;
Which may be done in right good season,
But long delayed it is without reason:
When that begins note well this thing,
This Science shall draw toward the King;
And many more Graces ye may be boulde,
More then of us shall now be told;
Grace on that King shall descend,
When he old Manners shall amend:
He shall make full secreate search,
For this Science with doulced speech;
And among the Solitary,
He shall have tidings certainly.
So sought King Kalid of many Men,
Till he met with Morien,
Which helped Kalid at his need,
His Virtues caused him to speed.
Now of such Matters let us cease,
And of the suttill Warke rehearse;
Great need has he to be a Clerk,
That would perceive this suttill Work.
He must know his first Philosophy,
If he trust to come by Alkimye:
And first ye shall well understonde,
All that take this Work in hand;
When your materials by preparation,
Be made well apt for Generation,
Then they must be departed a twinn,
Into four Elements if ye would to winn:
Which thing to do if ye ne can,
Go and learn it of Hortolan.
Which made his Book of that Doctrine,
How ye should part the Elements of Wine.
Moreover ye must for your succor,
Know the effects of the quallities four;
Called Heat, Cold, Moisture, and Drines,
Of which four all things Compounded is;
And since in this Art your chief desire
Is to have Color which should abide fire,
Ye must know before you can that see,
How every Color engendered shall be,
For every Color which may be thought,
Shall here appear before that White be wrought.
Yet more ye would have to this sum,
Swiftly to melt as Wex or Gum:
Else might it not enter and perce
The Center of Mettalls as Auctors rehearse;
So ye would have it both fix and flow,
With Color plenty if ye wist how;
Such three Contraries jointly to meet
In one accord is a great Secret.
Nethles he that is clear of Mind,
In this Chapter may it well find;
And first to give you a short Doctrine,
Of the aforesaid qualities prime:
Heat, and Cold, be qualities Active
Moisture, and Drines, be qualityes Passive;
For they suffren the Actives evermore,
As Stones to be Lyme, and Water to be Froare.
Hereupon to Judge, ye may be bold,
Nothing is full wrought but by Heat and Cold;
Nethles the Passives have some Activity,
As in Handicrafts men ye may daily see;
In Bakinge, and Brewinge, and other Crafts all,
Moisture is opperative and so Drines be shall.
Aristotle in his Phisicks and other many more,
Said ab actionibus procedit speculatio;
They said that Practice is root and beginning,
Of Speculation and of all Cunning:
For the properties of every thing,
Be perceaved by their working;
As by Colors of Urins we may be bold
To give sentence of Heat and Cold;
By these aforesaid four qualities prime,
We seeche Colors with length of time;
Of White Color we be not full sure,
To seeche it but in a substance pure:
Great Doctrine thereof learn now ye may,
When ye know how Colors grow all day.
Color is the utmost thing of a Body clear,
Clear fubstance well termined is his matter here;
If Heat has maistery in matter that is dry,
White Color is ever thereof certainly;
As it appears in sight of brent Bones,
And in making of all Lyme Stones.
Where Cold works in matter moist and clear,
Yet of such working Whitnes woll appear:
As it shows in Ice and Frosts hoar;
The cause is set out in Philosophy before:
I write not here of common Philosophy,
But by example to teach Alkimy;
That one may be perceived by that other,
As is the Child perceived by the Mother.
If Heat in moist matter and gross withal,
Warke, thereof Black Color engender shall;
Example hereof if ye of me desire,
Behold when you see green Wood set on a fire;
When Cold works in matter thick and dry,
Black Color shall be, this is the cause why;
Such matter is compacted and more thick,
With Cold constreyning, enemy to all quick,
Thicknes made Darkness with privation of Light,
So Color is private, then Black it is to Sight,
Therefore evermore remember this,
How clear matter is matter of Whitenes;
The cause efficient may be manyfold,
For somewhile it is Heat, and sometime Cold:
But Whire and Black, as all men may see,
Be Colors contrary in most extremity:
Wherefore your warke with Black must beginn,
If the end should be with Whitenes to winn.
The middle Color as Philosophers write,
Is Red Color between Black and White:
Nethlesse trust me certainly,
Red is last in work of Alkimy.
Also they say in their Doctrine,
How these two Colors Rufe and Citrine,
Be mean Colors between White and Red,
And how that Green, and Color wan as Lead,
Between Red and Black be Colors mean,
And freshest Color is of matter most Clean.
Physicians in Urines have Colors Nynteene,
Between White and Black as they ween;
Whereof Color underwhite Subalbidus is one,
Like in Color to Onychyne stone:
Of such like Color Magnetia found is,
But Magnetia glittereth with Cleerenes:
In our suttill warke of Alkimy
Shall be all Colors that has been seen with Eye:
An hundredth Colors more in corteyne,
Then ever has been seen in Urine.
Where in so many Colors might not be,
But if our Stone contained every degree,
Of all Compositions found in warke of kind,
And of all Compositions imaginable by mind.
Of as many Colors as shall therein be saine,
So many graduations your wisdom must attain:
And if you know not such graduations all,
Learn them of Raymond in his Atre General.
Gilbert Kymer wrote after his devise,
Of 17. Proportions, but they may not suffice
In this Science, which he could never find;
And yet in Physic he had a nobil mind.
Where the royalty of the nature of Man,
Advaunceth often Medicines of the Physician:
And so honoreth often times his Craft,
When that the Medicines peradventure might be lafte;
But it is not so in Physic of Mines,
For that Art exceeds all other engines:
And rests only in the wisdom of Man,
As by experience wise men witness can.
ANd so of Alkimy the true foundation,
Is in Composition by wise graduation
Of Heat and Cold, of Moist and of Dry,
Knowing other Qualities ingendered thereby;
As hard and soft, heavy and light,
Rough and smoothe, by ponders right,
With Number and Measure wisely sought,
In which three rests all that God wrought:
For God made all things, and set it sure,
In Number Ponder and in Measure,
Which numbers if you do change and break,
Upon Nature you must do wreake.
Wherefore Anaxagoras said Take good heed,
That to Conjunction ye not proceed,
Till ye know the Ponders full complete
Of all Components which should therein meet;
Bacon said that old Men did nothing hide,
But only Proportion wherein was noe guide:
For none old Auctor, King, Prince, ne Lord,
Writing of this Science with others did accord
In the Proportions; which if ye would reach,
Raymond, with Bacon, and Albert, done it teach,
With old Anaxagoras, of them four ye shall
Have perfect knowledge, but not of one have all:
And if you would join four Qualities to intent,
Then must ye Conjoyne every Element:
As Water and Earth after your desire,
Well compounded with Air, and Fire:
Knowing the worthiest in his activitie,
The second, the third, every-each in his degree;
The fourth, and the vilest may not be refused,
For it is profitable and best to be used;
And best may extend his Multiplication,
In whom is the virtue of our Generation;
And that is the Erthly Lytharge of our Stone,
Without him Generation shall be none;
Neither of our Tincture fixation,
For nothing is fixed but Earth alone;
All other Elements moveable be,
Fire, Air, and Water, as ye daily see:
But Fire is cause of extendibility,
And causes matters permiscible to be,
And clear brightness in Colors fair
Is caused of kind evermore of Air,
And Air also with his Coaction,
Makes things to be of light liquefaction:
As Wax is and Butter, and Gummes all,
A little heat makes them to melt and fall:
Water cleanses with ablution blive,
And things mortifyed causes to revive.
Of multiplying of Fire is no greater wonder,
Than is of multiplying of Earth set under:
For Earth bears Herbs daily new and new,
Without number, therefore it is true
That Earth is wonderful as well as Fire,
Though one spark may soon fill a Sheere:
If all a Sheere were filled with Flax,
One spark than would wonderfully wax:
Fire and Earth be multipliers alone,
And they be causers of multiplying our Stone.
Of this Earth shows Albert our great Brother,
In his Mineralls, which Lytharge is better than other.
For the white Elixir he does it there rehearse,
And the book of Meeter shows it in a verse.
NOw to Conjunction let us resort,
And some wise Council thereof report:
Conjoyne your Elements Grammatically,
With all their Concords conveniently:
Which Concords to healpe a Clerk,
Be chief Instruments of all this work:
For nothing may be more contrary now,
Than to be fixed and unperfectly flow:
All the Grammarians of England and of France,
Cannot teach you this Concordance:
This Ordinall tells where ye may it see,
In Physic in the Book de Arbore.
Join them also in Rhetorical guise,
With Natures Ornate in purified wise.
Since our Tincture must be most pure and fair,
Be sure of pure Earth, Water, Fire and Air.
In Logical wise be it early or late,
Join true kinds not sophisticate;
Ignorance hereof has made many Clerks,
Lewdly to leese their labor and their works.
Join them together also Arithmetically,
By suttill Numbers proportionally.
Whereof a little mention made there was,
When Boethius said tu numeris elementa ligas.
Join your Elements Musically,
For two causes, one is for Melody:
Which there accords will make to your mind,
The true effect when that ye shall find.
And also for like as Diapason,
With Diapente and with Diatesseran,
With ypate ypaton, and Lecanos muse,
With other accords which in Music be,
With their proporcions causen Harmony,
Much like proportions be in Alkimy,
As for the great Numbers Actual:
But for the secreate Numbers Intellectual;
Ye must seeche them as I said before,
Out of Raymond and out of Bacons lore.
Bacon shows it darkly in his three letters all,
And Raymonde better in his Art General.
Many men ween which does them read,
That theie do understonde them when theie do not indeed.
With Astrology join Elements also,
To fortune their Workings as theie go:
Such simple kinds unformed and unwrought,
Must craftily be guided till the end be sought,
All which season theie have more obedience,
Above formed Natures to Sterrs influence.
And Science Perspective gives great evidence,
To all the Ministers of this Science.
And so done other Sciences many more
And specially the Science de Pleno and Vacuo,
But the chief Mistress among Sciences all,
For help of this Art, is Magic Natural.
WHen the four Elements wisely joined be,
And every-each of them set in his degree,
Then of diverse degrees and of diverse digestion,
Colors will arise toward perfection.
For then works inward heat natural,
Which in our substance is but Intellectual:
To sight unknown, hand may it not feel,
His working is known to few Men and seild;
And when this heat natural moved be shall
By our outward heat artificial,
Then Nature excited to labor will not cease
Many diversities of degrees to increase.
Which is one cause by reason you ma^e see,
Why in our warke so many Colors be:
Therefore it causes in this Art great doubt,
Ignorance of heat within and without,
To know how these two heates should accord,
And which of them in working should be Lord.
DIgestion in this warke has great likeness
To digestion in things of Quicknes:
And before other (as I witness can)
It is most like to digestion of Man.
Therefore said Morien, our Stone in generation
Is most like thing to Man's Creation,
In whom says Raymond the four degrees all
Of the four Complexions together find ye shall,
And that actually, which ye cannot find
Amongst Creatures in none other kind.
Wherefore among Creatures these two alone
Be called Microcosmus, Man and our Stone.
Now of Digestion the aliment and food
Perfectly to know is needful and full good.
It is humor sollid constant with siccitie,
Mightily meddled after some degree,
In opposite passives mixed duly,
Ingendered by inward and outward heat trewly.
So nothing else is our Digestion,
But of humor substantial a create perfection.
I pray ye Laymen have me excused,
Though such Terms with you be not used,
I must use them, for all Auctors affirms,
How every Science has his proper Terms.
Digestion sometimes advanced may be
By outward cold, as yearly ye may see
How in Winter men eaten more meat
Than in Summer, when expansed is their heat;
For cold makes heat inward then to fly,
And ligge nigh together, then stronger is he;
Which by his strength his power is more
To make Digestion than he might before.
But our chief Digesture for our intent,
Is virtuall heat of the matter digerent;
Nethles heat of the digestible thing,
Helps digestion and her working:
Feaverly heat makes no digestion,
Baines may help and cause also destruction.
Wine digested has more heat natural,
Than has new Must, whose heat is accidental:
Coagulation is noe form substantial,
But only passion of things material.
MOre ye must know, when Colors appear,
Who is principal Agent in that matter Clear.
For sometimes it is Heat, and sometimes Cold it is,
And sometime Moisture, and somewhile Drines.
The principal Agent to know at every season,
Requires great search made by suttill reason:
Which is not perceived but of Masters few,
For they mark not how Colors arise by rewe:
The principal Agent of the qualities four,
Has power royal as Lord of most honor
The remnant of qualities to Converte to his kind,
Of which conversion Anaxagoras makes mind
In his Book of Conversions Natural,
Whereof Raymond shows causes special:
It is no Jape neither light to learn
Your principal Agent all seasons to discern:
Which I teach you to known by signs four,
By Color, Odor, Sapor and Liquore.
ANd first by Color to serve your intent,
To know thereby your principal Agent.
Look in your Vessel which Color shows most,
He that causes him is principal of the host
As for that season, whose pride ye may swage,
By this our Doctrine, if ye see him rage:
Which ye may do when ye well understonde,
The cause of all Colors which ye have in hand.
Which I woll teach you now shortly withal,
Because here and there seek them ye ne shall:
Whitnes is caused of many matters clear,
In another thing termined, and so it is here;
Blacknes is when parts of a body dark,
With thicknes oppresses the cleernes of the Warke;
Or else it is of a Combust terrestrietie;
But of such Combustion great hardness shall be;
And by Commixion of Dark Clear and Clean,
Shall be ingendered all the Colors mean:
Every clear thing perspicuate and fair,
Stands by the matters of Water and Air,
Whom a pure Earth does apprehend,
Such as shall not their cleerenes offend;
And if in such cleerenes and perspicuitie,
Ye can noe special Color see,
Thereupon to Judge you may be bold,
The cause of such things was exceeding Cold:
As Crystal, Berill, and other things more,
Diversity between them learn ere ye go;
Crystal hat Water declyning toward Air,
Wherefore it is clear, perspicuous and fair;
But where it declineth toward Water more,
It is dark as Berill or Ice hard frore;
But when matters draws toward siccitie,
Darkness with hardness engendered shall be;
As it appears in the Adamant Stone,
And in other things many one.
Twinkling and glittering as in Magnetia is,
Light is cause thereof within matter of Cleerenes;
Which is superduced upon waterly vapor,
Beforetyme incenced with Heat be ye sure;
Now after cleerenes and Colors in extremity,
Of mean Colors a little show will I.
Ruby color is of a thinn fume succended
In a clear Body, which also is amended
When in that Body reyneth plenty of light,
For more or les thereof makes more or les bright:
As the Amatist follows the Ruby in dignity,
In less Cleerenes and more Obscurity:
And a Calcedonie in Slymy substance,
Follows the Berill in degrees of variance.
Green as a Smaragde is of Water clear,
With Erthy substance Combust mixed full near:
And the cleerer substance that the Earth be,
The cleerer greeness thereof ye shall see.
Tawney is of Cleerenes terminate,
Infused with thick Fumosity congregate
Of Water, and also of Earth succended,
Whereby the cleerenes of Aier is suspended.
Wann or leady Color engendered is
Of Waterie and Erthy parts without amiss;
And where such parts be cold and thick,
Ever Wann Color thereon shall stick;
As it appears in old layen Lead,
And in Men that be wellneere dead:
This Wann Color called Lividitie,
In Envious Men uses much to be;
Natural heat and blood done resort,
To the Heart, them to comfort,
And leaves Cold and Dry the Face,
For heat and blood is parted fro that place.
Likewise when Fevers be in extremity,
The Nails of Hands of this Color will be.
The Sapphire Color, that Orient Blewe,
Like in Color to the heavenly hue,
Is much fairer than Wann Color to sight,
For therein is more of Aier Water and Light
Than is in Wann Color, and that by manifold,
Wherefore such Color is more deerer sold;
All other Blewes the sadder that they be,
They have less of Aier and more of Terrestriety.
Silver to Azure soon brought will be;
The cause thereof is perspicuitie,
Which is in Silver caused of Air,
Wherefore it turns to hevenly Color fair;
And Quicksilver plenty within him is,
Causes in Silver all this brightness:
Subtiler Earth, pure Water, with cleerenes of Air,
Causes such brightness to Quicksilver to repair.
Citrine Color Yellowe as ye see in Gould,
Is Color most liking for some men to behold:
Caused of mighty and strong digestion,
For humor in him have strong decoction;
Such Color with Heat engendered be shall,
As it in Honey, Urine, Lie, and Gall:
The shining of Gould is caused as I tell,
Of pure and subtle Water termined full well,
Perspicuously condensed; for Water pure and fine,
The more it is Condensed, the better it woll shine;
For of a Mirror the cause none other is,
But moisture termined, as all Clerks guess,
So that it be polible withal;
For Aier Figures receive never shall;
For Aier may not be terminate in his kind;
So cause of shining in Water ye shall find.
With White and Red well meddled pure and fine
Woll be engendered fair Color Citrine.
So diverse Comixtions of Elements,
Makes diverse Colors, for diverse intents:
With diverse Digestions, and diverse degrees,
All Colors be made which your Eyes sees.
Of Elements ye must the proper Color learn,
Whereby of Colors ye may better discern;
Physicians say of good Herbs and soote,
Some be cold outward and hot within the root;
Example hereof if ye list to get,
Behold the working of the gentle Violet:
Common Philosophy the cause does disclose,
Why cold is within and red without the Rose:
Anaxagoras said in his Coversions natural,
Inward and Outward be contrary in things all,
Which is true except such things as be
Of little composition, and nigh simplicity;
As is Scammonye, and Laurel the Laxative,
Which be not nourishing to vegetative.
Remember how in every mixed thing,
Evermore one Element defireth to be King:
Which proud appetite of Elements and vicious,
Moves men to be Ambitious:
Wherefore our Lord that best dispose cann,
Has made Ordeynance for sinful Man,
All proud appetites to equality to bring;
When Requiem aeternam the Church shall singe,
Than shall every ambitious thought,
Plainly appear how that it was naught:
Lords, and Beggars, and all shall be
In the Charnell brought to equality.
Your Principal Agent so rebate shall ye,
When he usurpeth above equality;
Therefore Aristotle said Compound ye our Stone
Equal, that in him repugnance be none;
Neither division as ye proceed;
Take heed thereto, for it is great need;
And when it falls that ye shall see
All Colors at once that named may be;
Than suffer Nature with her operation,
At her own leisure to make Generation:
So that among so many Colors all,
Nature may show one principal:
Such as shall draw toward your intent,
According to your desired Element.
This wise by Colors ye may provide
How in your works ye shall ye guide.
Many more things of Colors I may write,
But this is sufficient my promise to acquit,
As far forth as Colors may serve your intent,
By them to know your principal agent.
But many Clerks wonder why you may see
So many Colors as in our Stone woll be,
Before that perfect White and Clear,
And unchaungeable woll appear,
Considering the fewnes of the ingredients;
I woll that answer to please their intents,
And teach them the truth of that great doubt.
By kind of Magnesia such Colors pass out,
Whose nature is of such Convertibilitie,
To every proportion, and to every degree,
As Crystal to his Subject is found;
For of every thing that is upon the ground,
Which that ye woll Crystal set under,
Such Color has Crystal, therefore cease to wonder:
Wherefore Hermes said not untruly ne Envious,
Ad perpetranda miracula rei unius:
God has so ordained says Hermes the King,
To fulfill the miracles of one thing:
Common Philosophers thereof cannot find
The virtues of our Stone exceeding far their mind.
SMelling may help forth your intent,
To know your reigning Elemente;
And be with Color a Testimony,
To know your principal Agent thereby;
And ye which would by smelling learn
Of your principal Agent trewly to discern.
As White, and Black, be Colors in extremity,
So of Odors, soote and stinking be:
But like as Fishes know not by sight
Noe mean Colors, because their Eyne bright
Have none Eyelidds for their sight closinge,
So mean Odors shall not by smellinge
Be known of you, this is the cause why,
For Nostrills be open as the fishes Eye:
Therefore mean Odors be not in certain
Smelled by the Nose, as mean Colors be seen.
Heavy Smell is not as Clerks think
The middle Odor, but only the less Stink.
Old Fathers wrote by their Doctrine,
Of their Experience which is maturine,
That if ye meddle sweet Savor and redolente
Equally with stinking to prove your intent;
The soote shall be smelled, the stinking not so,
The cause ye may learn now ere ye go;
All sweet smelling things have more purity,
And are more spiritual than stinking may be:
Wherefore it is in Aier more penetrative,
And is more extendible, and is also to life
More acceptable, as friend to Nature,
And therefore rather received be ye sure.
ODor is a smokish vapor resolved with heat,
Out of substance, by an invisible sweat;
Which in the Aier has free entringe,
And changes the Aier and your Smellinge;
As Sapor of Meats changes your Tastinge,
And as Sounds changes your Hearing,
And as Color changes your Sight,
So Odor changes Smelling by might.
The cause of Odours to know if you delight,
Four things thereto be requisite;
First that suttill matter be Obedient
To the working of Heat, for to present
By a fume the liknes of the same thing,
From whom that fume had his beginning;
Also to bear forth that pure fume and fair,
There is required a clear thinn Aier:
For thick Aier woll not bear it far,
But it woll reteyne it much faster;
And so thick matter Obedience has none,
To the working of Heat, as it shows in Stone:
Heat makes Odours, Cold shrinketh, by reason
Dunghills in Summer stink more than in Winter season;
Pleasant Odours ingendered be shall
Of clean and Pure substance and fumigale,
As it appears in Amber, Narde, and Mirrhe,
Good for a Woman, such things pleases her;
But of Pure substance with a Mean heat,
Be temperate Odours, as in the Violet;
Of a Mean heat with substance Impure,
Is Odours misliking, as Aloes and Sulphur:
But when Natural heat begins to spill,
Then thereof arises heavy smell;
As Fish smells that is kept too long,
Natural heat rotteth, so the smell is strong;
STinch is a Vapor, a resolved fumositie
Of things which of Evil Complexions be.
And when Humor only is in Corruption,
So that the Substance be not in Destruction,
Thereof shall only heavy smell arise,
But not very Stinch come in that wise.
Of every Stinch the cause of that Chance
Is only corruption of the self substance;
And when Evil substance shall putrify,
Horrible Odor is gendred thereby:
As of Dragons and Men that long dead be,
Their stench may cause great Mortality.
It is not wholesome to smell to some Cole,
For quenching of some Snuff a Mare woll cast her Foale.
When the Qualities of a thing according is
To your Nature, good Odor will not miss:
But when the substance is contrary to your kind,
The Odours thereof odious you shall find.
Fishes love Soote smell, also it is true,
They love not old Kydles as they do the new.
All things that are of good Odor,
Have natural Heat for their succor;
Though Camphire, Roses, and things cold,
Have soote Odours, yet Auctors told,
How Heat virtually enclosed is the skell,
With Pureness of substance, why they so smell:
This old opinion you may teach your Brother,
How noe good Odor is contrary to another;
But it is not so of stinking smells,
For stinch of Garlic voydeth stinch of Dunghills.
Of Odours this Doctrine is sufficient,
As in Alkimy to serve your intent,
Your Warks to understonde thereby,
When things begin to purrifie;
Also by Odours this you may learn,
Suttilnes and grosnes of Matters to discern:
Also of Mean substance knowledge ye may get,
With knowledge of Corruption of Natural heat;
And knowledge of Diversity by good attendance,
When Humor corrupts and when the Substance.
But our Substance was made so pure and clean,
And is conserved by virtue of the mean,
That ye no stink thereof shall find,
Albeit that it putrify fro his own kind.
THe third sign and the third Testimony
To understand your principal Agent by,
Is Sapor called, of Mouth the Taste,
Which evermore is cause of waste
Of the substance of the same thing
Whereof ye make proof by Tastinge
Sapor should be much better Judge
Then Color or Odor, and more refuge,
Were not Taste a perilous thing,
While our Stone is in workinge;
For it is hurting to health and life,
It is so greatly penetrative;
Above all subtle things it has Victory,
And peirceth solid things hastily,
Wherefore it is peril and not good,
Much or often to Taste of that food:
It Comfort Mettalls as we well find,
But it is Perilous for all Mankind,
Till perfect Red thereof be made,
Such as in Fire woll never fade.
A lewd Man late that served this Art,
Tasted of our white Stone a part,
Trusting thereby to find relief
Of all sickness and of all grief,
Whereby the Wretch was suddenly,
Smitt with a strong Paralisie;
Whom my Master with great Engine,
Cured with Bezoars of the Mine.
Therefore though Taste by Common reason,
Should be best judge at every season,
Yet for that Taste is abominable
Sapor is here not profitable.
Yet of some parts seperable,
A Taste may well be Convenable
Before Conjunctions to make assay,
Whether they be well wrought or nay;
Howbeit a Wiseman has help sufficient,
By Color and Odor to have his intent:
For many Men can choose good Wine,
By Color and Odor when it is fine;
But for new Wine not fined in general,
The true Taste is most suertie of all;
For Smelling has Organalls but one,
Nothing discerning but fumous things alone;
But Taste has six Organalls without doubt,
To feel quality of things within and without,
Which Nature ordained against peril and strife,
For more suertie of things having life:
An Ape chooses her Meat by Smelling,
Men and Popinjayes trusten to Tasting:
For many things be of good Smell,
Which to Taste be found full ill:
For they may be abominable sower,
Over-sharpe, too bitter, or of great horror,
Or Venamous, stinking, or over-stronge,
The Taste is judge and voideth such wrong.
Old men wrote in ancient time,
How that of Sapors there be fully Nine;
Which ye may learn in half an hour,
As Sharp taste, Unctuous, and Sower,
Which three do suttill matter signify;
And other three do mean matter testify,
As Bitinge taste, Saltish and Weerish also,
Other three come thick substances fro,
As Bitter taste, under Sower, and Douce;
These Nine be found in many a Noble House;
Five of these Nine be engendered by Heat,
Unctuons, Sharp, Salt, Bitter, and Doulcet;
But of the Nine the remnant all four,
Be made with cold, as is the Sapor Sower,
And so is Sowerish taste called Sapor Pontick,
And less Sower also called Sapor Stiptick,
Also is Weerish taste called Unsavory,
With Cold ingendered effectually.
Sapor of two things has his Conception,
Of diverse Substance and of diverse Complexion.
OF Hot and Moist in the Second degree,
With a Thick substance, Doulcet Taste will be;
The same degrees of the same Complexion,
To a Mean substance knit by connection,
Unctuous Sapor engender ever shall;
But where it is Hott and Dry withal,
With a Mean substance in the Second degree,
The Taste thereof must needs Saltish be;
When a thing in the Third degree Hot and Dry is,
With a substance Thick, there is Bitterness;
But in the Fowerth degree matter Hot and Dry,
With a Suttill substance, Sharp Taste is thereby;
So five Tastes, as I said before,
Be ingendered with Heat, and not one more.
Of Cold and Dry in the Second degree by kind,
With a Suttill substance, full Sower ye shall it find;
As by Faces of People ye may Deem,
When they taste Crabs while they be green:
The same Complexion in the same degree,
In a thing which of Mean substance shall be,
Of that is engendered ye may well suppose,
A Bitinge Taste as is of the Roase,
But Sower, and Sowrish, and least Sower, all three
Be of Cold and Dry in High and Low degree:
And Cold and Moist in the First degree of all,
A Weerish Taste engender ever shall,
As of an Egg it shows in the glaere,
And in pale Women over White and Fayer:
For such be Cold, and of Humiditye
They have trewly great superfluity,
Therefore to Men they have less delight;
Cold rebateth luxurious appetite.
Isaac said there be but Tastes seven,
For Sower and less Sower was one but uneven,
But in Complexion they were of one foundation,
For Unsavory was but of Taste privation;
Compound Tastes be found also,
As Doulce Eger and others many mo;
So by Taste men may Craftily know
Diverse complexions and degrees high and low;
And when ye doubt by Taste to make report,
Than to your other testimonies resort.
As in Physic trust not to Urine
Only, but also take witness and Doctrine
Of your Pulses, and wisely considering
Six things not natural the Body concerning,
Having respect also therewithal,
Unto these Seven things natural;
And take heed if ye woll be fure,
Of Three things contrary to nature:
Complete these Sixteen wisely to your ground,
A lewd Physician least that ye be found:
For so of (had I wist) ye may beware,
And help the Sick man from his care:
So fo this Science if ye woll advaunce,
Your works, take heed of every Circumstance,
Wisely Considering your testimonies four,
Three be now passed, the fowerth is Liquor.
LIquor is the Comfort of this Work;
Liquor gives evidence to a Clerk
Thereby to fasten his Elements,
And also to loose them for some intents;
Liquor conjoyneth Male with Female Wife,
And causes dead things to resort to Life;
Liquors cleanses with their ablution,
Liquors to our Stone be Chief nutrition;
Without Liquor no Meat is good;
Liquors conveieth all Aliment and Food
To every part of Man's Body,
And so they do with us in Alkimy.
Ye must consider the purity
Of all your Liquors and quantity;
And how thick they be or thinn,
Or else thereof shall ye little winn;
But not as Physicians makes mention,
For Elixir is a thing of a second intention;
Wherefore ye shall more Wondrous natures find
In his working, than in all other kind;
Physicians say the thicker Urine be,
The more it signifies Humidity,
Where thick Liquor with us has siccity,
And suttill Liquor betokneth Humidity:
Many Liquors be requisite
To our Stone for his appetite.
In the Book of Turba Aristeus deposed,
How Air in Water was secreatly enclosed,
Which bare up Earth with his Aierly might.
Pithagoras said that was spoke with right.
Aristotle Craftilye his words set he,
Saying, cum habueris aquam ab Aere.
Plato wrote full sapiently,
And named it stilla roris madidi:
Which was kindly spoken for Alkimy.
But common Students in first Philosophy,
Say Air condensed is turned into Rain,
And Water rarefied becomes Air again.
Some said how May was first season and fair
To take such Water as is made of Air.
Some said such Waters come heaven fro,
When the Sunn enters into Scorpio.
Some said all Liquors should be refused;
Which Frost infected should not be used:
The cause why as tells Autors old,
Is that their accuity is duld with cold.
Some Philosophers said that ye should take
Milk for the Liquor Elixir to make:
And other sort said after their intent,
No Liquor so good for the Complement,
As Water of Litharge which would not miss,
With Water of Azot to make lac virginis:
But Democrit said best Liquor to present
Elixir withal was Water permanent:
Whose natural virtue and property,
Was fire to abide and never to fly:
Rupiscissa said that chief Liquor
Was Aqua-vitae Elixir to succor;
For she was spiritual, and would revive
Dead things fro death to live,
She was Quintessence, the fifth thing,
Whereof Aristotle by his writing
In his Book of Secrets says so,
How that all perfection was in quinario.
Rupiscissa called it best Liquor of all,
For it makes gross matter spiritual:
But of Pithagoras ye may find,
Our Aqua-vitae of another kind;
He says it was Vivificans in his sentence,
Fac fugiens fixum and fixum fugiens,
For in such wise with strong Coaction,
Fixed matters were made of light liquefaction.
Another sort said no Liquor was above
The Liquor which Congers most desire and love:
Therefore such Liquors are best found,
Nigh to Islands, and to such ground
Which the Ocean Sea has compassed about,
For there such Liquors be soonest fet out.
Of another Liquor wise men tell,
Which is fresher than Water of the Well;
Fresher Liquor there is none in taste,
Yet it woll never consume ne waste;
Though it be occupied evermore,
It will never be less in store;
Which Democrit named for his intent,
Lux umbra carens, Water most Orient;
Hermes said no Liquor so necessary,
As was Water of crude Mercury:
For he shall stand said that Noble Clerk,
For the Water within our work.
Now learn ye which for this Science have sought,
By all these Liquors our Stone must be wrought.
LIquor is a thing moveable,
Of fleeting substance and unstable.
All such things follow the Moon,
More then standing kinds done;
And that appears to a Clerk,
In working of the white Work;
Liquors washen and maken clean
Both Extremities and the Mean;
God made Liquors for Man's use,
To cleanse foul things in every house;
Liquor brings without doubt,
Hidden things in Bodies out,
As Landres witness evidently,
When of Ashes they make their Lie;
Liquor comfort the roots of Grass,
And of Trees such as dry was;
For Liquors of Nature woll restore
Humors that were lost before.
Liquors departs Qualities asunder,
Substance resolving in Attomes with wonder;
Liquors also brings into one
Many things to be one Stone.
Liquors helps to flux and to flow
Many things, and learn ye may now
How Liquor is in many manners found
Out of things that be on the ground,
Some by cutting, as Turpentine;
Some with Pressing, as Sider and Wine;
Some with grinding, as Oil is had;
Some with stilling, as Waters be made;
Some with Brenning, as Colophonie;
And some with Water, as Women make Lie;
Some be otherwise brought about,
And by natural working fet out,
As Urin, Sweat, Milk, and also Blood,
And Renniet which for Cheese is good:
By as many manners and more by one,
We seek Liquors for our Stone.
Every of the forenamed woll cleave
To that they touch, and some deal leave:
But Quicksilver albeit it is fleeting,
Yet he woll never cleave to any thing,
But to a Metal of one kind or other,
For there he finds Sister or Brother.
Meddling with suttill Earth does him let,
To cleave to things such as he meet:
All the said Liquors which rehearsed be,
Conteyne four Elements as well as he;
As Milk conteyneth Whey, Butter, and Cheese,
So done trewly every-each of all these:
Which four may be departed a twinn,
And after conjoynd to make ye winn.
But much more craftily they be here sought,
Then Cheese, and Butter, and Whey be wrought;
And draw nearer to simplicity,
Then Cheese, Butter, or Whey may be.
Of all Liquors which be in our Stone,
None is called simple but Water alone.
Of every Liquor which to our Stone shall go,
Ye must know complexion and degree also,
And than with Liquor ye may abate
The principal Agent from his Estate,
If he permanent and abiding be,
In any point of superfluitye:
As if the reigning quality be Dryness,
Ye may amend it with humor of Moistnes.
Now more, now less, as ye see need,
And so in all qualities proceed:
And in such wise order at your will,
The principal Agent, your purpose to fulfill:
With knowledge of diversity, contrariety, and accord,
Ye may choose which quality shall be Lord.
Your Liquors be ordained to add and subtray,
To make equality by wisdom of assay;
But trust not that any thing may be
Hot and Moist both in one Degree:
For all that trust two qualities to be so,
Shall be deceived where ever they go.
Common Schools (so teaching) be not true,
Leave that Opinion, and learn this of new
All Old men in that were oversecne,
To set in one degree any qualities twain:
Else they said so that Scholars should not find
The secret mixtures of Elementall kind.
Therefore who cannot his graduations,
May not be perfect in our operations:
For in true Number God made every thing;
Without true Number no Man truly may sing;
Who fails of his Number fails of his Song,
Who fails with us must do Nature wrong.
COnsider also the nature of the mean,
When it is in the Third degree made clean;
The purer that your means be,
The more perfection thereof ye shall see.
The means reteyne a great part
Of the virtues of this Art:
For the Principle may not give influence
To the Final end, neither the refluence
Unto his Principal without succor and aid
Of means containing the extremities aforesaid:
For like as by means of a treble Spirit,
The Soul of Man is to his Body knit,
Of which three Spirits one is called Vital,
The second is called the Spirit Natural.
The third Spirit is Spirit Animal,
And where they dwell now learn ye shall:
The Spirit Vital in the Heart does dwell,
The Spirit Natural as old Auctors tell
To dwell in the Liver is thereof feign,
But Spirit Animal dwells in the Brain:
And as long as these Spirits three
Continue in Man in there prosperity:
So long the Soul without all strife
Woll dwell with the Body in prosperous life,
But when these Spirits in Man may not abide,
The Soul forthwith departs at that tide:
For the suttill Soul pure and immortal,
With the gross Body may never dwell withal,
He is so heavy, and She so light and clean,
Were not the suttilnesse of this Spirit mean.
Therefore in our work as Auctors teach us,
There must be Corpus Anima and Spiritus:
Also in our work ye shall so find,
That our means must accord in every kind
Of both extremities with wisdom sought,
Else all our work shall turn clear to naught:
For prudent Nature may not by workinge,
Make Complement of appetite of a thing,
And so pass between extremities,
But if she first pass by all degrees
Of every mean, this is truth unfeigned,
Wherefore Nature many means ordained.
NOw after all this to learn ye had need,
Of seven Circulations of Elements for your speed,
According to number of the Planets seven;
Which no man knows but he have grace from heaven.
Old Philosophers, men of great engine,
Said how of Circulations there should be Nine;
It is the ^urer to do by their advice,
Nethles Seven may your work suffice,
By inventions late found of new,
Of later Philosophers whose works be true.
But for Circulations of Elements,
Some Clerks ween to have their intents.
When they fro Fire ordain to descend,
To Air (they ween not to offend)
If they to Water do then proceed,
And thens to Earth when they see need,
And in such wise by order fall,
From the highest to the lowest of all:
Upon these words they took their ground,
That Aer est cibus ignis found.
But trust me that such Circulation,
Is but only a rectification,
Better serving for separation,
And for correction than for transmutation
But the truth is that appetite of the Fire,
Has to work in Earth his chief desire,
As upon his chief food material,
For Fire with Earth has most concord of all;
Because that siccitie is the lyme of heat,
But Air of her kind is most wet;
Yet Fire without Air works not,
For Faces of Elements be knit with a knot
Of Gods hand that they may not depart,
By noe engine ne craft of Man's art;
As in Plomps ye have example fair,
Where heavy Water arises after Air;
Whereof noe cause reasonable ye shall find,
But Connection of faces of Elementall kind.
But our Circulation is from Fire on high,
Which ends with Water his most contrary.
Another Circulation begins with Air,
Ending with his Contrary clean Earth and faier.
Fro Fire to Earth, fro thence to Water clean,
Fro thence to Air, then fro thence by a mean,
Passing to Earth, then eftsoons to Fire,
To such Circulations the Red work has desire.
Other Circulations be better for the White,
That be rehearsed for her appetite.
Every Circulation has her proper season,
As her lightness accords with reason.
For as one Planet is more ponderous
Then is another and slower, in his course:
So some Circulations which Clerks seeks,
Must for her time have full thirty Weeks;
Other Circulations shall often time have less,
As one Planet is lighter then another was:
But the time of one with another will amount
To twenty six Weeks proved by account.
After all gross works made before hand,
And after all Circumstances had I understande;
Ignorance hereof deceives many a Man,
Causing them to cease where Wisemen began.
Common People which for this Science have sought,
Ween how in forty days it might be wrought.
They know not how Nature and things of Art,
Have a proper time assigned for their part,
As it appears by this Similitude,
The Elephant for that she is great and rude,
Goes with Foale years full twain,
And fifty years ere that Foale gender again.
Anaxagoras said in his Consideration,
That Metals had for their generation
A thousand Years, wherefore him list to say,
In respect thereof our Work is but one Day.
Also ye must work by good advice,
When ye see Earth above Water rise;
For as Water bears Earth which we go on,
So woll it do in working of our Stone:
Wherefore Well-springs with strokes soft,
Soberly make ye must in times often;
Whereby Water may soberly flow,
For violent Fluxes be perilous as now.
MOreover it healpeth in Alkimy
To know seven Waters effectually:
Which be Coppied with many a Man,
While they be common seek them as ye can,
Desire not this Book to show things all,
For this Book is but an Ordinall.
By those Waters men Ween in mind
All faults to amend of Metaline kind;
Also they ween of the Elements four,
The effects to ween by their succor:
For they suppose with confidence unfeined,
That all Virtues requifit in them be contained;
Some to molifie Mettalls hard wroght,
And some to harden Mettalls that be soft,
Some to purify, some to make malleable;
Every each according that he was able,
Such Liquors to know it is profitt and good,
Howbeit they may not to our Stone be food:
Noble Auctors men of glorious fame,
Called our Stone Microcosmus by name:
For his composition is withouten doubt,
Like to this World in which we walk about:
Of Heat, of Cold, of Moist and of Dry,
Of Hard, of Soft, of Light and of Heavy,
Of Rough, of Smooth, and of things Stable,
Meddled with things fleetinge and moveable;
Of all kinds Contrary brought to one accord,
Knit by the doctrine of God our blessed Lord:
Whereby of Mettalls is made transmutation,
Not only in Color, but transubstantiation,
In which ye have need to know this thing,
How all the virtues of the Elements transmuting,
Upon the transmuted must have full domination,
Before that the substance be in transmutation;
And all parts transmuted must figured be
In the Elements transmuting impressed by degree.
So that the third thing elemented of them all,
Of such condition evermore be shall.
That it trewly have it may be none other,
But her Substance of that one, and her Virtue of that other.
A Child at his Nativitie can eat his meat and cry,
Our Stone at his Nativity woll Color largly.
In three years after a Child can speak and go,
Then is our Stone more Coloring also.
One upon a Thousand his tincture trewly is,
Of clean washen Metal I am true witness,
Fastiely (believe it) and fully in your thought,
It makes good Silver as of the Mine is wrought;
And also our Stone woll augment and increase,
In quantity, and quality, and thereof never cease;
And therefore his growing and augmentation,
Is likned to Man in waxing and creation.
Nathles one point of truth I woll report,
Which to some Men may be discomforte;
At the first making of our Stone,
That time for winninge look for none;
If ye then cease, I understande
Ye shall depart with loosinge hand^,
The Costs be so great before,
Expended and set upon the score;
But at the first augment of all
Which time our Stone depart ye shall
In parts twain full equally,
With subtle balance and not with Eye:
One for the Red, that other for the White,
To mainteyne both for your delight;
Then winning first begins to arise:
But afterward if ye be wise,
At every augment continually,
Profit shall grow comodiously;
In this our White Warke alone,
As well as in the Ruby Stone;
Whereof said Maraa Sister of Aron,
Life is short, and Science is full long.
Nathles it greatly retardeth Age,
When it is ended by strong Courage;
But some that have byne tought trewlie,
Have forsook their work lewdly;
When their great labor have byne paste,
For they know not how at the last
Grows the profit and the winninge,
Which they would have at the beginning,
Therefore I find that it is need,
The truth to tell when ye should speed,
For when I am past and out of mind,
This my Witness shall rest behind,
For which cause I do not spare,
Of this Art the truth to declare;
As much as I dare, that I be not shent
For breaking of Gods Commandment.
This wise ends all our White Work
Showed sufficiently for an able Clerk.
AFter all this upon a day
I heard my noble Master say,
How that many men patient and wise,
Found our White Stone with Exercise;
After that they were trewlie tought,
With great labor that Stone they Caught;
But few (said he) or scarcely one,
In fifteen Kingdoms had our Red Stone:
And with that word he cast his Eye,
Looking on me full steadilye,
Of his words he saw me woe,
I said alas what shall I do?
For above all Erthly thing,
I most desire and love Cunninge.
And for the Red Stone is preservative,
Most precious thing to length my Life;
The Red Stone said I is lever to me,
Then all were Gould that I would so to be.
He said I was to young of Age,
Of Body lusty and likely to outrage,
Scantly of the age of twenty eight years,
He said Philosophers had noe such Compeers;
This woeful answer then he made to me,
Till ye be elder he said it may not be.
Alas good Master remember said I,
Howbeit my Body be light and lusty,
Prove and assay and you shall find
Age sufficient within my Mind,
He held his words full still that tide,
And so long time he did abide;
After this sudainely in wondrous wise,
He tempted me after the Philosophers guise.
Which to rehearse it were too long,
And to show how I should do wrong;
For that must be kept secreate,
For them which shall with this Science meet;
Yet at the last with leisure and with space
I wan his love, by help of Gods Grace;
So that I had with Grace the true doctrine
Of Confection of the Red medicine;
Whom to seek it avails right naught,
Till the White medicine be fully wrought.
Also both Medicines in their beginning
Have one manner of Vessel and Workinge,
As well for the White as also for the Red,
Till all quick things be made dead;
Then Vessels and form of operation
Shall change, in Matter, Figure, and Graduation.
But my heart quaketh, my hand is tremblinge,
When I write of this most selcouth thing.
Hermes brought forth a true sentence and blounte,
When he said Ignis and AZot tibi sufficient.
The Expositor of Hermes and Aristotle joynte,
In that joynte work showed a strange point,
He said Albertus Magnus the Black Freere,
Nether Freer Bacon his compeere,
Had not of our Red stone consideration,
Him to increase in multiplication.
The Expositor knew it sufficiently,
And my Master tought me trewly,
Albeit that I never made assaye
Of the Red work before this Day:
The cause appears in this Book before,
When I was robbed then I would no more.
Nethlesse I have put me so far in preass,
That secreate Truth to show I cannot cease;
Rehersing such as were greatly too bold,
So great secreats to show as they told:
They said that within the Center of incompleate White
Was hid our Red Stone of most delight:
Which may with strength and kind of Fire,
Be made to appear right as we desire.
Pandulphus in Turba said, mente secura,
Et ejus umbra in vera tinctura.
Maria confirmed it in fide oculata,
Quod in ipsa albedine est rubedo occultata.
The Book Laudabile Sanctum made by Hermes,
Of the Red Work speaks in this wise:
Candida tunc rubeo jacet uxor nupta marito,
That is to say, if ye take heed thereto,
Then is the fair White Woman
Married to the Ruddy Man.
Understandinge thereof if ye would get,
When our White Stone shall suffer heat,
And rest in Fire as red as Blood,
Then is the Marriage perfect and good;
And ye may trewly know that time,
How the seminall seed Masculine
Has wrought and won the Victory
Upon the menstrualls worthily,
And well converted them to his kind,
As by experience ye shall find,
Passing the Substance of Embrion,
For then complete is made our Stone;
Whom wise Men said that ye should feed
With his own Venom when it is need.
Then ride or go where ye delight,
For all your Costs he woll you quite.
Thus ends the subtle Warke with all her store,
I need not, I may not, I woll show no more.
Vaughan sculp:s


CHAP. VI.
Toward the Matters of Concordance,
Consider there be no variance
Between such things as should accord;
For of variance may grow discord,
Whereby your VVarkes may be lost,
With all your labor and all your cost:
He that wol take our VVarke in hand,
Five Concords he must understande.
The first Concord is need to mark
Whether his Mind accord with the Warke,
Which shall be Lord to pay for all,
Else all your labor destroy ye shall.
The second Concord is needful to kenn,
Between this Craft and her Workmen.
The Third shall serve well your intents,
When Warke accords with Instruments.
The fourth Concord must welbe sought,
With the Place where it shall be wrought:
For trewlie it is no little grace
To find a perfect working Place.
The Fifth is of Concord and of Love,
Between your VVarkes and the Sphere above.
Of these five Concords rehearse we shall,
Beginning with the first of all.
FOr the first ye shall well find
That full few Lords be stable of Mind;
They be hasty, the VVarke is long,
They would have you do Nature wrong.
Some now be onward as hasty as fire,
Half a year after have noe desire;
And some in a Week, it is noe Nay,
Woll change their minds, and some in a day,
And for one Month have full belief,
And the next Month they woll the Art repreeve.
It were much better for such to cease,
Than for this Art to put them in preasse;
Let such like Butterflies wander and pass,
And learn this lesson both more and less,
Following the Sentence of this holy letter,
Attingens a fine usque ad finem fortiter,
Disponens omnia suaviter:
That is, proceed mightily to the End
From the Beginning, maugre the feinde,
All things disposing in the mean space,
With great suavity that comes of grace.
All short-witted Men and mutable,
Such must needs be variable;
And some do every Man believe,
Such credence does their Cofers greive;
To every new Tale to them told,
They give Credence and leave the old.
But some Lords be stable of wit,
Such be apt to finish it.
Every such Lord or Master of this Work,
Be he Layman or be he Clerk,
Be he rich man, Knight, Abbot or Lord,
He has with this Art great Concord.
THe second Concord with this Art is,
When ye can find apt Ministers.
Noe Minister is apt to this intent,
But he be sober, wise, and diligent;
True, and watchful, and also timorous,
Close of Tongue, of Body not vicious,
Clenly of hands, in Tuching curious,
Not disobedient, neither presumptuous;
Such Servants may your works of Charge
Minister, and save from all outrage;
But trust not that two such Servants or three,
May sufficient for your work be;
If your Matter be of quantity reasonable,
Then Eight such Servants be convenable;
But upon little quantity, find ye shall
Four men able to perform all;
That one half of them must work
While the other Sleeps or goes to Kerke;
For of this Art ye shall not have your pray,
But it be ministered as well by Night as Day
Continually, except the holy Sunday alone,
From Evensong begin till Evensong be done.
And while they work they must needs eschew
All Ribaudry, else they shall find this true,
That such mishap shall them befall,
They shall destroy part of their Works or all;
Therefore all the Ministers must be Men,
Or else they must be all Weomen;
Set them not occupied one with another,
Though some to you be Sister or Brother:
Yet they must have some good disporte
Their great labors to recomforte:
Then nothing shall better avaunce
Your work than shall this Concordance.
THe Third Concord is to many full derke,
To ordeyne Instruments according to the Work:
As every Chapter has diverse intents,
So has it diverse Instruments,
Both in Matter and also in Shape,
In Concord that nothing may mis-happ:
As works of D^vision and Separation
Have small Vessels for their Operation;
But Vessels broad for Humectation,
And some deal broad for Circulation;
But long Vessels for Precipitation;
Both short and long serve Sublimation:
Narrow Vessels and four inches high
Serve Correction most properly.
Of Vessels, some be made of Lead,
And some of Clay both quick and dead;
Dead Clay is called such a thing
As has suffered great roastinge;
Such meddled in powder with good raw Claye,
Will Fire abide and not go away;
But many Claies woll leap in Fire,
Such for Vessels do not desire.
Other Vessels be made of Stone,
For Fire sufficient but few or none
Among Workmen as yet is found
In any Country of English ground,
Which of Water nothing drink shall,
And yet abide dry Fire withal,
Such Stones large for our intent,
Were a precious Instrument;
All other Vessels be made of Glass,
That spiritual matters should not out-passe;
Of Ashes of Fern in this Land everi-each one
Be made, but els-where be of Stone.
Of our Glasses the better kind.
The morning stuff ye shall it find,
Which was Ashes the night before,
Standing in Heat all night and more;
The harder stuff is called Freton,
Of clipping of other Glasses it come:
Tincture with anealing of Glasiers
Will not perse him as they rehearse.
By this Doctrine choose or refuse,
Take which you woll unto your use,
But for figures of Vessels kind,
Every Man follows his own mind,
The best fashion is ye may be sure,
She that best concordeth with Vessel of Nature;
And figure that best Concordeth with quantity,
And with all Circumstances, to matter best is she,
And this shows well Albertus Magnus,
In his Book De Mineralibus.
Hereof a Secreate disclosed was,
By my good Master; to more and less,
Saying, Si Deus non dedisset nobis vas
Nihil dedisset, and that is Glass.
Instruments needful there be more,
As be Furnaces ordained therefore.
Old Men imagined for this Art
A special Furnace for every part,
Everie-each divising after his own thought;
But many Furnaces of them be naught;
Some were too broad and some too long,
Many of them did Nature wrong:
Therefore some Furnaces may be well used,
But many of them must be refused,
For theie were made but by advice
Of them which seemed, and were not wise:
The most Commendable Fashion of them all,
In this Book portraied find ye shall.
One Furnace by me is found of new,
Such as Old Men never knew,
Whose secreate Power with study sought,
And with great Cost was dearly bought;
In him will be at one time wrought,
Threescore Warkes, and cost right naught,
More than it should for one Warke or twain,
Therefore profitable it is certain;
Threescore degrees diverse ye may get,
For threescore warkes, and everie-ech of diverse Heat,
Within that Furnace, to serve your desire,
And all they served with one little Fire,
Which of a Foot square only shall be,
Yet everie-ech of the threescore as great space as he:
Many purposes ye may thereby fulfill,
For here you shall have Heat after your will.
Of this Instrument all Men may not be sure,
Therefore it is not formed in Picture.
Another Furnace woll serve threescore
Glasses trewly, and yet far more,
Everie-ech of them standing in like Heat,
As by the Picture, Doctrine ye may get:
Another Furnace for this operation,
By me was found by Imagination,
Notably serving for Separation
Of dividents, and for Altification,
And for Dis-junction called Division,
And for Correction called Ablution,
Yt woll for some things serve Desiccation,
Yt serves full well for Preparation;
So for six things it serves well,
And yet for all at once as I can tell:
This is a new thing which shall not be
Set out in Picture for all men to see;
Another Furnace in Picture be shall,
More full of perils than other Furnaces all,
Made for Magnetia, whereof bold Men had doubt,
To tuch with hands a poor lynine Cloute,
Which in the middle thereof unbrenned stood,
For fear of flames brenning fierce and wood;
Which suttill Furnace I devised also,
In which I found many wonders more
Than is convenient at this season to tell,
Whose graduation is doubtful and casuell:
Wherein Magnetia, matter of great cost,
Must quickly be served or suddenly be lost:
Of whose graduation if you woll not miss
Consider your Stoples, and learn well this,
The more is the Stople the less is the Heat,
By manifould Stoples Degrees ye may get;
Who knows the power, the working and kind,
Of every Furnace, he may well truth find,
And he which thereof dwells in Ignorance,
All his Warke faleth upon Chance:
Noe man is sure to have his intent,
Without full concord of Art with Instrument.
Many more Instruments occupied ye shall se,
Than in this Chapter now rehearsed be,
Which ye must ordeyne by good or sad advice
And prove them before hand often if ye be wise.
THe fourth Concord is full notable
Between this Art and Places Convenable.
Some Places must needs be evermore dry,
Close from Aier, no ways Windy;
Some must be dark and dim of sight,
In which Sunbeams none may light;
But for some Places the truth so is,
They cannot have too much brightness:
Some Places must needs be Moist and Cold
For some works as Auctors toulde;
But in our Warkes in every place,
Wind will hurt in every Case:
Therefore for every Warke in season,
Ye must ordain Places by reason.
Philosophers said by their engine,
How it should be wrought within locks Nine:
Astrologers said it was a grace,
To find a Chosen Working Place;
For many things woll wondrous do
In some Places and elsewhere not so,
But contrary wonders be of one thing
In contrary Countries wrought without leasing;
Whereof none other cause may appear,
But only contrary places of the Sphere:
Whereto Places contrary of the ground,
To them Concordaunt and Obedient be found;
Hereof great Evidence and wittnes full clear,
In the Magnets Stone openly does appear,
Whose North point draws toward his Country,
Which under the Southe starr drives Needles away;
Wherefore wise Men which for this Art sought,
Found some Places concordant, some Places naught;
Trewly such Places where Lechery is used
Must for this Art be utterly refused.
THe fifth Concord is known well of Clerks,
Between the Sphere of Heaven and our Suttill Werks.
Nothing in Earth has more Simplicity,
Than the elements of our Stone woll be,
Wherefore they being in warke of Generation,
Have most Obedience to Constellation:
Whereof Concord most kindly and convenient
Is a direct and fiery Ascendent,
Being sign common for this Operation,
For the multitude of their Iteration:
Fortune your Ascendent with his Lord also,
Keeping the aspect of Shrewes them fro;
And if they must let, or needely infect,
Cause them to look with a Trine aspect.
For the White warke make fortunate the Moon,
For the Lord of the Fourth house likewise be it done;
For that is Thesaurum absconditum of old Cle^ks;
So of the Sixth house for Servants of the Werks;
Save all them well from great impediments,
As it is in Picture, or like the same intents.
Unless then your Nativity pretend infection,
In contrariety to this Election,
The virtue of the Mover of the Orb is formal,
The virtue of the Eight Sphere is here Isntrumental,
With her Signs and Figures and parts aspectuall,
The Planets virtue is proper and special,
The virtue of the Elements is here material,
The virtue infused resulteth of them all:
The first is like to a workmans Mind,
The second like his Hand ye shall find.
The third is like a good Instrument,
The remnant like a Thing wrought to your intent.
Make all the Premises with other well accord,
Then shall your merrits make you a great Lord.
In this wise the Elixir of whom ye make mention,
Is ingendered, a thing of a second intention.
Trust not in Geomantie that superstitious Art,
For God made Reason which there is set aparte.
Trust not to all Astrologers, I say why,
For that Art is as secreat as Alkimy.
That other is disproved and plainly forbod,
By holy Saints of the Church of God.
Trust not, ne love not Negromancy,
For it is a property of the Devil to lie.
Trust to this Doctrine, set herein your desires,
And now learn the Regiment of your Fires.

CHAP. VII.
Aparfet Master ye may him call trow,
Which knows his Heates high and low.
Nothing may let more your desires,
Than ignorance of Heates of your Fires.
Of many Auctors written ye may see,
Totum consistit in ignis regimine:
Wherefore in all Chapters you must so proceed,
That Heat work not more ne less than it need;
Wherein many of Gebars Cooks
Deceived were, though they be wise in Books.
Such Heat wherewith Pigg or Goose is Scalded,
In this Art Decoction it is called;
For Mineral means serves such heat,
And to make our Letharge to give sweat.
Such Heat as dries lawne Karcheefes fair,
In thirty operations serves for our Air;
But for Divisions you must use such heat,
As Cooks make when they roast gross Meat;
The same Heat with a circular Fire,
For Separation of Dividents we desire;
But for Circulation of Elements,
Ignis candens observes our intents;
Which Fire must ever be Coequall
In every minute, and yet perpetual:
For it may never abate ne increase,
And yet the Fire may never cease.
Study wisely, and look about
Such a Fire trewlie to find out.
And in that Fire no moisture may be,
Which Hand may feel or Eye may see.
Ignis humidus an other Fire also
Is, and yet it seems oppositum in adjecto:
Such Heat dissevereth at certain tides
Matters cleving to Vessels sides.
Many more things that Heat may wynn,
It makes often thick Matters to be thynn.
A Philosopher mistely spoke of this Heat,
And said, the highest degree thereof to get
Shall cause and gender such Siccitie,
As of dry heat shall be in the First degree.
Another Fire is Fire of Disiccation,
For matters which be imbibed with Humectation.
An other Fire is Fire of Conservation,
For all dry things of his operation:
For Magnetia is Fire of effusion,
Full of perils and full of illusion,
Not only peril which to the Warke may fall,
But such also which the Master hurt shall;
Against which once received is noe boot,
Ordain therefore to fetch breath from your foot;
Provide for Mouth, Eyes, Ears, and Nose,
For it is worse than ten times the Pose.
Men hereby has sound pains sore,
Because they had not this warning before.
Ignis corrodens serves in this Art,
Elementa propinqua wisely to depart.
By one point of excess all your Warke is shent,
And one point too little is insufficient;
Who can be sure to find his true degree,
Magister magnus in igne shall he be.
It is the harder to know trewly his might,
There is no trial for it but our Eye sight:
Therefore all men fail in his presence,
Where Heat is learned with cost of Experience.
Of this Heat in special Anaxagoras said thus,
Nemo primo front reperitur discretus.
Another is Heat of mighty Coaction,
For Mineralls that be of hard Liquefaction:
This Heat cannot be too strong,
Be he continued never so long.
Another is Heat of Calcination
For foul Mettalls for their Preparation;
Which may not brenn, ne do them melte,
For so all they may soon be spilte.
The twelfte is Heat for to Sublime
All the Spirits of the Mine.
The last Heat of these goes for all,
When to Projection our Stone shall fall.
Use makes Masterie, there is noe more to sayn^,
But he that fails must needs begin again.
Now have I tought you every thing by name,
As Men teach other the way to Walsingham,
Of every Village, Water, Bridge, and Hill,
Whereby wise Men their Journey may fulfill:
So may a Clerk by this Doctrine find
This Science well if he be clear of mind;
All other may find himself hereby a fool
To deal therewith, which little can of School;
For this is the end of all worldly Cunninge,
Where to attain can neither Pope ne King
By their Honors, ne by their great Council,
But only by Virtue and Grace as Auctors tell.
This precious Stone will not be found ne wrought
But he be right devotely sought.
The Auctors forenamed with this Book of mine,
Shows of Alkimy all the Doctrine,
If ye complete their Sentences all,
Not by Opinion, but after this Ordinall;
For in this Ordinall I fet you from all doubt,
Is nothing set wrong, nor one point left out.
The days were when that this Doctrine and ground
Had pleased me more than a Thousand pound;
Three Hundred pounds was not for my desire,
As would have byne this Chapter of the Fire.
And mervaile not Lords, ne ye friends all,
Why so noble a Science, as all Men this Art call,
Is here set out in English blunt and rude,
For this is so made to teach a Multitude
Of rude people which delen with this Works,
Ten Thousand Laymen against ten able Clerks:
Whereby yearly great Riches in this Land
Is lewdly lost, as Wisemen understonde;
And many men of Every degree
Yearly be brought to great Povertee.
Cease Laymen, cease, be not in folly ever;
Lewdnes to leave is better late than never.
All that has pleasure in this Book to read,
Pray for my Soul, and for all both Quick and dead.
In this year of Christ One thousand four Hundred seaventy and seven,
This Warke was begun, Honor to God in Heaven.
THE COMPOVND OF ALCHYMIE.

A most excellent, learned, and worthy work, written by Sir George Ripley,
Chanon of Bridlington in Yorkshire, Containing twelve Gates.

Titulus Operis.
HEre begins The Compound of Alchymie,
Made by a Chanon of Bridlington,
After his learning in Italy
At Yxning for time he there did won:
In which be declared openly
The secrets both of Sun and Moon,
How they their kind to multiplye,
In one body togeder must won.
Which Chanon Sir George Ripley hight,
Exempt from Claustrall observance,
For whom pray ye both day and night,
Since he did labor you to advance.
He turned darkness into light,
Intending to help you to happy chance,
Gyving Counsel that ye live right,
Doing to God no displeasaunce.
GEORGE RIPLEY UNTO King EDWARD the fourth.
O Honorable Lord, and most victoryous Knight,
With Grace and Fortune abundantly endewed,
The savegard of England, and maynteyner of right;
That God you loves indeed he has well showed:
Wherefore I trust this Land shall be renewed
With Joy and Riches, with Charyty and Peace,
So that old ranckors understrewed,
Tempestuous troubles and wretchedness shall cease.
And now sith I see by tokens right evident,
That God you guydeth, and that ye be virtuous,
Hating sin, and such as be insolent,
How that also Manslaughter to you is odious,
Upon the Indygent also that ye be piteous,
Great ruth it were if ye should not lyve long:
For of your great fortune ye be not presumptuous,
Nor vengeable of mind to wreke every wrong.
These considered, with others, in your most noble Estate,
Like as God knows, and people do witness bear,
So entyrely me meveth, that I must algate
Record the same, and therein be no flatterer:
And that not only, but also to write here,
And to your Highness humbly for to present
Great Secretts which I in far Countries did lert,
And which by grace to me most unworthy are lent.
Once to your Lordship such things I did promise,
What time ye did command to send unto me;
And since that I wrote in full secret wise,
Unto your Grace from the Universitie
Of Lovayne, when God fortuned me by Grace to see
Greater secretts and much more profit,
Which only to you I will disclosed to be:
That is to say the great Elixirs both Red and White.
For like it you to trust that trewlie I have found
The perfect way of most secret Alchimy,
Which I will never tr^wly for M^rke ne for Pound
Make common but to you, and that conditionally
That to your self ye shall keep it full secretly,
And only it use as may be to Gods pleasure,
Else in time coming, of God I should abye
For my discovering of his secret treasure.
Therefore advise you well with good delyberation,
For of this Secret shall know none other Creature
But only you, as I make faithful Protestation,
For all the time that I here in life endure:
Whereto I will your Lordship me to ensure,
To my desire in this by oath to agree,
Least I should to me the wrath of God procure;
For my revealing his great gift and previtie.
And yet moreover I will your Hyghnes to pardon me,
For openly with pen I will it never write,
But when that ye list by practice ye shall se^;
By Mouth also this pr^tious secret most of delyght,
How may be made Elixirs Red and White,
Plain unto your Hyghnes it shall declared be,
And if it please you with easy expense and respyte
To help, I will them make by help of the Trinity.
But notwythstanding for peril that might befall,
Though I dare not here plainly the knot unbinde,
Yet in my writeing I will not be so Mystical,
But that ye may by study the knowleige find:
How that each thing multiplicable is in his kind,
And that likeness of bodies Metalline be transmutable
I will deelare, that if ye feel me in your mind
Ye shall prove my writing true and noe feigned fable.
And if God grant you by me to win this treasure,
Serve him devoutly with more Laud and thanking,
Praying his Godhead in life ye may so endure,
His gifts of grace and fortune to use to his pleasing,
Most specially intending over all thing,
To your power and connyng his precepts ten
So to keep, that into no danger your self ye bring;
But that ye may in glory see him hereafter, Amen.
As the Philosopher in the book of Meteors does write,
That the likeness of bodies Metalline be not transmutable,
But after he added these words of more delight,
Without they be reduced to their beginning materiable.
Wherefore such bodies which in nature be liquable,
Mineral and Mettaline may be Mercurizate,
Conceave ye may that this Science is not opinable,
But very true by Raymond and others determynate.
In the said Book the Philosopher speaks also,
Therein if it please your Highness for to read,
Of diverse Sulphurs, but especially of two;
And of two Mercuryes Joined to them indede:
Whereby he does true understanders lead
To the knowledge of the principles which be true;
Both Red most pure, and White, as have I speed,
Which be nevertheless founden but of right few.
And these two things be best he adds anon
For them that works the Alchimy to take,
Our Gold and our Silver therewith to make alone;
Wherefore I say, who will our Pearl and Ruby make,
The said principles look that he not forsake:
For at the beginning if his principles be true,
And that he can by craft them so bake;
Trewly at the end his Work shall him not rewe.
But one great secret right needful it is to know,
That though the Philosophers speak plurally,
All is but one Thing, ye may me trow,
In kind, which is our Base principally,
Whereof does spring both White and Red naturally;
And yet the White must come first of the Red:
Which thing is not wrought manually,
But naturally, Craft helping out of our Lead.
For all the parts of our most precious Stone,
As I can preve, be Coessentiall and concrete;
Moreover there is no true principle but one;
Full long it was er I therewith could mete:
Who can reduce it, and knows his Heat,
And only kind with kind can redress,
Till filth original be cleansed from his Seat,
Likely he is to find our secrets both more and less,
Only therefore work Kind, with his own Kind,
And all your Elements Join that they not strive,
This point also for any thing bear in mind;
That passive natures ye turn into active,
Of Water, Fire, and Wind, of Earth make blive;
And of the Quadrangle make ye a Figure round,
Then have ye honey of our been hive;
One ounce well worth a thousand pound.
The principal secret of secrets all
Is true Proportion which may not be behind,
Wherein I council you be not superficial,
The true conclusion if ever ye think to find,
Turn Earth to Water, and Water into Wind,
Thereof make Fire, and beware of the Floode
Of Noe, wherein many one be blind;
That by this Science they get but little good.
I council you to eat and drink temperatly,
And be well ware that Iposarcha come not in place;
Nesh not your Womb by drinking ymmoderatly,
Lest ye quench your natural Heat in little space;
The color will tell appearing in your Face:
Drink no more therefore, then ye may eat;
Walk up and down after an easy pace,
Chafe not your Body too sore for to sweat.
With easy Fire after meving when ye sweat,
Warm your Body and make it dry again;
By Rivers and Fountains walk after meat:
At morrow tymely visit the high Mountain,
That Physic so byddeth I read certain:
So high the Mountain nevertheles ye not ascend,
But that ye may downward the way have plain,
And with your Mantell from cold ye you defend.
Such labor is wholesome, your sweat if ye will dry
With a napkin, and after it take no cold,
For gross humors be purged by Sweat kindly;
Use Diacameron, then confect with perfect Gold
Hermodactilus for watrie humors good I hold,
Use Hipericon Perforate with milk of Tithimall;
And Sperma Cete ana with redd Wine when ye wax old,
And Gotes Milk sodde^ with Gold nourishes moisture radical.
But a good Phisytian who so intends to be,
Our lower Astronomy him needs well to know
And after that to learn, well, Urine in a glass to see,
And if it need to be chafed, the Fire to blow,
Then wyttily, it, by diverse ways to throw,
And after the cause to make a Medicine blive,
Truly telling the ynfirmities all on a row:
Who thus can do by his Physic is like to thrive.
We have an Heaven yncorruptible of the Quintessence,
Ornate with Elements, Signs, Planetts, and Stars bright,
Which moisteth our Earth by Suttile influence:
And out thereof a Secret Sulphur hid from sight,
It fetteth by virtue of his attractive might;
Like as the Be fetches Honey out of the Flower
Which thing can do none other Erthly wight;
Therefore to God only be glory and honor.
And like as Yse to Water does relente,
Whereof congealed it was by violence of great Cold,
Whence Phoebus it smites with his Heat influent:
Right so to Water mynerall, reduced is our Gold,
(As writes plainly Albert, Raymond, and Arnold)
With heat and moisture by craft occasionate,
With congelation of the Spyrite, Lo! now have I told
How our materials together must be proportionate.
At the Dyers craft ye may learn this Science,
Beholding with Water how they decoctions make
Upon their Woad and Maddre easyly and with patience,
Till the Tinctures appear which the Cloth does take
Therein so fixed that they will never forsake
The Cloth for washing after they joined be;
Right so our Tinctures with Water of our Lake
We draw by boiling with Ashes of Hermes tree.
Which Tinctures when they by craft are made parfite,
So dies Mettalls with Colors evermore permanent,
After the quality of the Medycine Red or White;
That never away by any Fire, will be burnt:
To this Example, if you take good tent
Unto your purpose the rather shall ye win,
And see your Fire be easy and not fervent;
Where Nature did leave off, what time look ye begynn.
First Calcine, and after that Putrefye,
Dyssolve, Dystill, Sublyme, Descend, and Fyxe,
With Aquavite often times, both wash and dry,
And make a marriage the Body and Spirit betwixt;
Which thus together naturally if ye can myxe,
In losinge the Body the Water shall congealed be,
Then shall the Body die utterly of the Flixe,
Bleeding and changing Colors as ye shall see.
The third day again to Life he shall uprise,
And devour Byrds, and Beasts of the Wilderness,
Crows, Popingayes, Pyes, Pekocks, and Mavies;
The Phoenix, the Egle white, the Griffon of fearfulnes,
The Green Lion and the Red Dragon he shall destres;
The white Dragon also, the Antlope, Unicorne Panther,
With other Byrds, and Beasts both more and less;
The Basiliske also which almost each one does fear.
In Bus and Nubi he shall arise and ascend
Up to the Moon, and since up to the Son,
Through the Ocean Sea, which round is without end:
Only Shypped within a little glasen Tonne,
When he comes thither, then is the Maistrie Won:
About which Journey great good shall ye not spend,
And yet ye shall be glad that ever it was begone;
Patiently if ye list to your work attend.
For then both Body and Spirit also both Oil and Water,
Soul and Tincture one thing both White and Red,
After Colors variable it conteyneth what so men clatter;
Which also called is when he has once been Dedd:
And is revived our Marchasite, our Magnete, and our Lead,
Our Sulphur, our Arsenicke, and our true Calcevive:
Our Son, our Moon, our Ferment of our Bread:
Our Toade, our Basiliske, our unknown Body, our Man, our Wife.
Our Body thus naturally by craft when it is renovate
Of the first order is Medicine called in our Philosophy,
Which oftentimes must again be Spiritualizate:
The round Whele turning of our foresaid Astronomy:
And so to the Elixir of Spirits must ye come, for why
Till the same of the fixed by the same of the flier be overgone
Elixir of Bodies named it is only;
And this secret point truly deceaveth many one.
This natural process by help of craft thus consummate
Dissolveth the Elixir spiritual in our unctuous Humiditie;
Then in Balneo of Mary together let them be Circulat,
Like new Honey or Oil till they perfectly thicked be,
Then will that Medicine heal all manner Infirmity,
And turn all Mettalls to Son and Moon most perfectly:
Thus shall ye have both great Elixir, and Aurum Potabile,
By the grace and will of God, to whom be lawd eternally.
Here follows the Figure containing all the secrets of the Treatise both
great and small
John Goddard sculpsit

summary of information in treatise

Incipit Prologus.
Child of this Dyssyplyne incline to me thine Ere,
And harkyn to my doctrine with all thy dylygence;
These words of wisdom in mind do thou bare,
Which of old Fathers be true in sentence;
Live clean in soul, to God do none offense:
Exalt thee not but rather keep thee Low,
Else will thy God in thee no Wisdom sow.
Fro feigned Doctrine and wicked thought,
The holy spryt does him wythdraw;
Nylling to dwell where Syn is wrought,
Dred God therefore and obey his Law,
A ryghteous Man forsook I never saw:
Nether his seed beg bread for need,
In holy Scripture thus do I read.
Make Wisdom therefore thy Sister to be,
And call on Prudence to be thy Frynd,
By paths of truth they will gyde thee,
With love and honesty where so thou wend:
Both vertuose to be, courteous and hend:
Pray God therefore that thou may find
Wisdom and Prudence with mouth and mind.
All manner good cum with them shall,
And honesty by there hands innumerable,
Then into combraunce shall thou not fall;
So be they in riches Incomparable:
To worship and profyt they will thee able,
To conyng and to all manner of grace,
Both here and after thy lyvys space.
For these benefyts which they don bring,
In part ynnumeryd by sapyence,
To them I can compare no thing;
No rychys, no spyces of redolence:
Above all tresure such is there exellence,
That whatsoever erthly that precious is,
To them comparyd is but as cley ywys.
Infynyte treasure to Man they be,
Who usyth them shall fryndshyp have
With God in Heven, and there him se,
After them vyvelyche therefore thou crave,
For Body and Soul both will they save;
And herein Goods does multiplye,
And before Princes they dygnyfy.
Think how Adam lost his wisdom,
Sampson his might that was so strong,
King Saul also lost his Kingdom;
And Davyd was punnyshed soar for his wrong:
In the Oak by the here fair Absolon hong,
King Ezeky by sycknesse had punishment,
And many one more for sin was shent.
But see how other that livyd well,
And to their God did none offense,
Such chastysment did never feel,
But God showed ever to them benevolence;
Enok and Ely were carried hence,
To Paradyse, and other good livers were
Of God rewarded in dyvers manner.
Sum had great Fortune, sum great Cunning,
Sum had great Peace, sum great Riches,
Sum conquered Londs to there wonyng;
Sum were exalted for there great mekenes,
Sum other were saved fro the cruelnes
Of Tyrants, Lions, and hot Fornacys,
As Danyell and other in many places.
Thus to good Livers God send great grace,
And unto Sinners sore ponishment;
Sum to amend in this life had space,
Sum suddenly with fire fro Heavyn were brent,
Sinful Sodomyts for ever were shent;
With Dathan and Abyron and other more,
Which sank for Syn to endless woe.
Thus ever sith the World was wrought,
God has rewardyd both evyll and good;
Thus if it may rest in thy thought,
Fro sinful livyng will chaung thy mood.
If sinful people this understood,
They ought to be aferd God to offend,
And soon there sinful lyfes to amend.
Therefore with God look thou begyne,
That he by grace may dwell with thee,
So shall thou best to Wysdom wyn,
And knowledge of our great prevyte;
Norysh Virtues, and Vices look thou flee,
And trustyng thou wylt thee well dispose,
Our secrets to thee I will dysclose.
Keep thou them secret and for me pray,
Look that you use them to Gods pleasure;
Do good with them what ever thou may,
For time thou shall this life endure,
That after thy endyng thou may be sure
In Hevyn for to rewardyd be,
Which God grant both to thee and me.
The Preface.
O High Yncomprehensyble and glorious Mageste,
Whose Luminos Bemes obtundyth our speculation;
One-hode in Substance, O Tryne hode in Deite,
Of Hierarchycall Jubylestes the gratulant gloryfycation;
O pytewouse puryfyer of Souls and puer perpetuation;
O deviaunt fro danger, O drawer most deboner;
Fro this envyos valey of vanyte, O our Exalter.
O Power, O Wysdom, O Goodness inexplycable;
Support me, Tech me, and be my Governor,
That never my lyvyng be to thee dysplycable,
But that I aquyte me to thee as a true professor:
At this beginning good Lord here my prayer;
Be nygh with Grace for to enforce my will,
Grant well that I may my intent fulfill.
Most curyose Coffer and copyose of all tresure
Thou art, fro whom all goodness does dessend,
(To Man) and also to every-ech Creature;
Thine Handy-warke therefore vouchsafe to defend,
That we no time in lyvying here myspend,
With truth thou grant us our lyvelode to win
That in no danger of Synfulnes we run.
And for so much as we have for thy sake
Renowncyd the World, our Wylls, and the Fleshys Lust,
As thine own wylfull professyors us take;
Sith in thee only dependyth all our trust,
We can no ferther, to thee enclyne we must:
Thy secret Tresorars, vouchsafe to make us,
Show us thy Secrets, and to us be bounteous.
Among other which be professyd to thee
I me present, as one with humble Submyssyon,
Thy Servant besechyng that I may be,
And true in levyng acording to my professyon:
In order Chanon reguler of Brydlyngton;
Besechyng the Lord that thou wylt me spare,
To thy true Servaunts thy secretts to declare.
In the beginning when thou madyst all of naught,
A globose Matter and dark under confusyon,
By thee Begynner mervelously was wrought,
Conteynyng naturally all things without dyvysyon,
Of which thou madyst in six Days dear dystynction;
As Genesys apertly does record
Then Heavyn and Earth perfeytyd were with thy word.
So through thy Will and Power owte of one Mase
Confused was made all things that being is;
But in thy glory before as maker thou was,
Now is and shall be without end I wys:
And puryfyed Sowls upp to thy blys
Shall come a pryncyple, this may be one,
For the declaryng of our Stone.
For as of one Mase was made all thing,
Right so must hit in our practyse be,
All our secrets of one Image must spryng:
In Philosophers Books therefore who lust to se,
Our Stone is called the less World one and three,
Magnesia also of Sulphur and Mercury,
Propotionat by Nature most perfytly.
But many one mervelyth which mervel may,
And muse on such a mervelous thing,
What is our Stone sith Philosophers does say,
To such as ever be hit sechyng:
Yet Fowls and Fyshys to us does yt bring,
Every-ech Man yt has, and is in every place,
In thee, in me, in every time and space.
To this I answer, that Mercury it is I wys
But not the common called Quicksylver by name,
But Mercury without which nothing being is;
All true Philosophers record and say the same:
But simple serchers puttyth them in blame,
Saying they hyd hit, but they beblame worthy,
Which be no Clerks, and medlyth with Philosophy.
But though hit Mercury be yett wisely understond,
Wherein it is, where thou shall it seech,
Else I thee Council take not this warke in hond,
For Philosophers flattryth Foolys with fair Speech:
But list to me, for trewly I will thee teache,
Which is thy Mercury most profyttable,
Being to thee nothing dysseveable.
It is more nythe in sum things than in sum,
Therefore take tent what I unto the wryt,
For if thou never to the knowledge cum,
Thereof yet shall thou me not twytt:
For I will trewly now thee excite,
To understand well Mercurys three,
The keys which of our Scyens be.
Raymond his Menstrues does them call,
Without which trewly no truth is done,
But two of them are Superfycyall:
The third essentyall of Soon and Moon;
Their propertyes I will declare right soon,
And Mercury of other Mettalls essencyall,
Is the pryncipall of our Stone materyall.
In Soon and Moon our Menstrue is not seen
Hit not appears but by effect to sight,
That is the Stone of which we mean;
Who so our writing concevyth aryght,
Hit is a Soul, a substance bright:
Of Soon and Moon, a subtle influence,
By which the Earth receyveth resplendence.
For what is Gold and Sylver says Avycen,
But Earth which is pure White and Red,
Take fro that the said clernes, and then
That Earth will stond but lyttyll instead;
The hole compound is called our Led,
The qualyte of clernes fro Soon and Moon does com
These be our Menstrues both all and sum.
Bodies with the first we Calcene naturally
Perfyt, but none which be unclene,
Except one which usually
Named by Philosophers the Lion Green,
He is the mean the Soon and Moon between:
Of joynyng Tynctures with perfytnes,
As Geber thereto beryth wytnes.
With the Second which is an Humydyte
Vegetable revyvyng that erst was deed,
Both pryncyples materyalls must loosed be;
And formalls, else standyth they little in stead:
The Menstrues therefore know I the read:
Without which neither true Calcynatyon,
Don may be, nether yet natural Dyssolutyon.
With the third humydyty most permanent
Incombustyble and unctuous in his nature,
Hermes Tree to ashes must be brent:
Hit is our Natural Fire most sure,
Our Mercury, or Sulphur, or Tyncture pure:
Our Soul, our Stone, borne up with wynd
In the E^the ingendered, bear this in thy mind.
This Stone also tell thee I dare,
Is the vapor of Mettalls potentyall,
How thou shall get hit thou must beware:
For invysible is truly this Menstruall:
Howbehytt with the second Water phylosophycall,
By seperatyon of Elements yt may appear,
To sight in form of Water clear.
Of our Menstrue by labor exuberate
And with hit may be made Sulphur of nature
If itt be well and kyndly acuate;
And cyrculate into a Spryt pure:
Then to dyssolve thou must be sure
Thy Base with hit in dyvers wise,
As thou shall know by thy practyse.
That point therefore in his dew place
I will declare with other mo,
If God will grant me space and grace:
And me preserve in life from woe;
As I thee teache look thou do so,
And for thy first ground pryncypall
Understond thy Water menstruall.
And when thou have made true Calcination,
Encresyng and not Wastyng moisture radycall,
Till thy Base by ofter subtylyatyon
Will lightly flow as Wex upon Metal;
Then lowse hit with thy vegetable Menstruall,
Till thou have Oil thereof in Color bright,
Then is your Menstrue visible to sight.
And Oil is drawn owte in color of Gold,
Or like thereto out of our fine Red Lead,
Which Raymond said when he was old,
Much more then Gold would stond him instead,
For when he was for age nygh deed,
He made thereof Aurum Potabile,
Which him revyvyd as Men might see.
For so together may they be Cyrculate,
That is to say, Oil and the vegetable Menstruall,
Either so by labor exuberate,
And made by Craft a Stone Celestyall:
Of Nature so fyrye that we yt call
Our Baselysk, otherwise our Cokatryse,
Our great Elixir most of pryse.
Which as the sight of a Basylysk his object
Kylyth, so sleyth it crude Mercury,
When thereon itt is project,
In twynke of an Eye most suddenly,
That Mercury teynyth permanently;
All bodies to Son and Moon perfyt,
Thus gyde thy base both Red and White.
Aurum potabile thus is made,
Of Gold, not common calcynat;
But of our Tyncture which will not vade,
Out of our Base drawn with the Menstrue circulate,
But natural Calcynatyon must Algate
Be made, ere thy Gold dyssolved be,
That Pryncypall first I will tell thee.
But into Chapters this Treatis I shall devyde,
In number Twelve with dew Recapytulatyon;
Superfluous rehearsalls I ley aside,
Intendyng only to geve true Informatyon,
Both of the Theoryke and Practycall operatyon:
That by my writing who so will guyded be,
Of his intent perfytly speed shall he.
The First Chapter shall be of natural Calcination;
The Second of Dyssolution secret and Phylosophycall;
The Third of our Elementall Separation;
The Fourth of Conjunction matrymonyall;
The Fyfthe of Putrefaction then follow shall;
Of Congelatyon, albyfycative shall be the Syxt,
Then of Cybatyon the Seventh shall follow next.
The secret of our Sublymation the eight shall show;
The nynth shall be of Fermentation,
The Tenth of our Exaltation I trow;
The Eleventh of our mervelose Multyplycatyon;
The Twelfth of Projectyon; then Recapytulatyon;
And so this Treatise shall take an end,
By the help of God as I entend.
OF CALCINATION. The first Gate.
CAlcinacion is the purgacyon of our Stone,
Restauryng also of his natural heat;
Of radycall moisture it lesyth none;
Inducyng Solucion into our Stone most mete,
After Philosophy I you behyte,
Do not after the common gyse,
With Sulphur and Salts preparat in dyvers wise.
Nether with Corrosyves nor with Fire alone,
Nor with Vyneger nor Water ardent,
Nether with the vapor of Led our Stone
Is Calcyned to our intent:
All they to Calcyne which so be bent
Fro this hard Science withdraw their hond,
Till they our Calcyning better understonde.
For by such Calcynyng their bodies be shent,
Which mynysheth the moisture of our Stone;
Therefore when bodies to powder be brent,
Dry as askys of Tree or Bone,
Of such Calx then will we none,
For moisture we multiply radycall,
In Calcynyng, mynyshyng none at all.
And for a sure ground of our true Calcynacyon,
Woorch wyttyly kind only with kind;
For kind to kind has appetyble inclynacyon;
Who knows not this in knowledge is but blind:
He may forth wander as Mist does with the Wynd;
Woting never with perfytnes whereto light,
Because he cannot conseve our words aryght.
Join kind to kind therefore as reason is,
For every Burgeon answers to his own Seed;
Man begets Man, a Beast a Beast likewise;
Ferther of this to trete it is no need,
But understond this point if thou wylt speed;
Every thing is first Calcyned in his own kind,
This well consevyng, fruit thereyn shall thou find.
And we make Calxes unctious both White and Red,
Of three degrees or our Base be perfyt;
Fluxyble as Wex, else stond they little in sted;
By right long process as Philosophers write,
A year we take or more for our respyte:
For in less space our Calxe will not be made,
Able to tayne with color which will not vade.
As for the Proporcyon thou must beware,
For therein many one is beguylyd,
Therefore thy warke that thou not mar;
Lat the Body be sotelly fylyd
With Mercury, as much then so subtylyd:
One of the Son, two of the Moon,
Till altogether like pap be done.
Then make the Mercury four to the Son,
Two to the Moon as hit should be,
And thus thy work must be begone,
In figure of the Trynyte;
Three of the Body and of the Spryt three:
And for the unytye of the substance spiritual,
One more than of the substance corporal.
By Raymonds Reportory this is true,
Proporcyon there who list to look,
The same my Doctor to me did show;
But three of the Spryt Bacon took,
To one of the Body for this I wooke:
Many a night or I hit wist,
And both be true take which you list.
If the Water be equal in Proporcyon
To the Earth which hete in dew mesure,
Of him shall spryng a new burgyon;
Both White and Red in pure tyncture,
Which in the Fire shall ever endure:
Kill than the quyck, the ded revyve,
Make Trynyte Unyte without any stryve.
This is the best and the surest Proporcyon,
For here is lest of the part spyrytuall,
The better therefore shall be Solucyon;
Then if thou did it with Water small,
Thine Earth over glutyn which losyth all:
Take heed therefore to potters loome,
And make you never to nesh thy women.
That loome behold how yt tempered is,
The mean also how thou hit Calcenate;
And ever in mind look thou bare this,
That never thine Earth with Water be suffocate,
Dry up thy moisture with heat most temperate:
Help Dyssolucyon with moisture of the Moon,
And Congellacyou with the Son, then have thou done.
Four Natures shall into the fyfth so turn,
Which is a Nature most perfect and temperate;
But hard hit is with thy bare foot to spurn,
Against a brodyke of Iyron or Stele new acuate:
So many one does which been infatuate,
When they such high things don take in hond,
Which they in noe wise understonde.
In Eggs, in Vitryoll, or in Blod,
What riches wene they there to find;
If they Philosophy understode,
They would not in worchyng be so blind,
Gold to seek or Sylver out of kind:
For like as Fire of brennyng the pryncyple is,
So is the pryncyple of gildyng, Gold I wys.
If thou intend therefore to make
Gold and Sylver by craft of our Philosophy;
Thereto another Eggs nor Blood thou take,
But Gold and Sylver which naturally,
Calcyned wisely, and not manually,
And new generacyon will forth bring,
Incresyng their kind as does each thing.
And if yt true were that perfyt might be,
In things which be not mettallyne:
In which be Colors plesaunt to see,
As in Blood, Eggs, Here, Uryn, and Wine,
Or in mean Mettalls dyggyd out of the Mine:
Yet must their Elements be putrefyed and separate,
And with Elements of perfyt Bodies be dysponsate.
But first of these Elements make thou Rotacyon,
And into Water thy Earth turn first of all;
Then of thy Water make Air by Levygacyon;
And Air make Fire; then MASTER I will thee call
Of all our secretts great and small:
The Wheel of Elements thou can turn about,
Trewly consevyng our Wrytyngs wythowt dowte.
This done, go backward, turnyng thy Wheel again,
And into thy Water then turn thy Fire anon;
And Air into Earth, else laboryst thou but in vain:
For so to temperment is brought our Stone,
And Natures contraryose, four be made one,
After they have three times ben Cyrculat,
And also thy Bace perfytly consummate.
Thus under the moisture of the Moon,
And under the temperate hete of the Son,
Thy Elements shall be incynerate sone,
And then thou have the Maistery wone;
Thank God thy work was then begone:
For there thou have one token true,
Which first in blacknes to thee will show.
The head of the Crow that tokyn call we,
And sum men call hit the Crows byll;
Sum call hit the Ashes of Hermes Tree,
And thus they name hit after theyer will,
Our Tode of the Earth which etyth his fill:
Sum name hit by which it is mortyfycat
The spyryt of the Earth with venom intoxycate.
But hit has Names I say to the infynyte,
For after each thing that Black is to sight;
Named hit is till the time that hit wex White,
For after blackness when yt wexeth bright,
Then has hit names of more delyght:
After White things, the Red after the same,
Rule of Red things, does take his name.
At the first Gate, now art thou in,
Of the Philosophers Castle where they dwell;
Proceed wisely that thou may wine
In at mo Gates of that Castle,
Which Castle is round as any Bell:
And Gates has Eleven yet mo,
One is conquered, now to the Second go.
The end of the first Gate.
OF SOLUTION. The second Gate.
OF Solucion now will I speak a word or two,
Which shows out that err was hyd from sight,
And makyth intenuate things that were thyk also;
By the virtue of our first Menstrue clear and bright,
In which our Bodies eclypsyd ben to sight:
And of there hard and dry Compactyon subtylyat
Into there own first nature kyndly retrogradate.
One in Gender they be and in Number not so,
Whose Father the Son, the Moon truly is Mother,
The mean is Mercury, these two and no mo
Be our Magnesia, our Adrop, and none other;
Things there be, but only Sister and Brother:
That is to wene Agent and Pacyent,
Sulphur and Mercury coessentyall to our intent.
Betwyxt these two in qualyte cotraryose,
Engendered is a Mean most mervyllosely
Which is our Mercury and Menstrue unctuose;
Our secrett Sulphur worchyng invysybly,
More fersely than Fire brennyng the body,
Into Water dyssolvyng the Body mynerall,
Which Night fro darkness in the North part we call.
But yet I trow thou understandyst not utterly
The very secrett of Phylosopers Dyssolucion;
Therefore conceve me I council thee wyttyly:
For I will tell thee trewly without delusyon;
Our Solucyon is cause of our Congelacyon;
For the Dyssolucyon on the one side corporal
Causyth Congelacyon on the other side Spyrytuall.
And we Dyssolve into Water which weytyth no hond,
For when the Earth is integrally yncynerat;
Then is the Water congelyd, this understond;
For the Elements be so concatenat,
That when the body fro his first form is alterate:
A new form is inducyd immediately,
For nothing being without all form is utterly.
And here a secret to thee I will dysclose,
Which is the ground of our secrets all;
And if thou hit not know thou shall but lose
Thy labor and costs both great and small,
Take heed therefore in Error that thou not fall:
The more thine Earth and the less thy Water be,
The rather and better Solucyon shall thou see.
Behold how Yse to Water does relent,
And so hit must, for Water hit was before;
Right so again to Water our Earth is bent,
And Water thereby congelyd for evermore,
For after all Philosophers which ever was bore:
Every Metal was ons Water mynerall,
Therefore with Water they turn to Water all.
In which Water of kind occasyonate
Of qualytes been repugnaunce and dyversyte,
Things into things must therefore be rotate,
Untyll dyversyte be brought to parfyt unyte,
For Scripture recordyth when the Earth shall be
Trowbelyd, and into the deep Sea shall be cast
Mountains, our Bodies likewise at the last.
Our Bodies be lekenyd convenyently
To Mountains which after high Planets we name;
Into the depenes therefore of Mercury.
Turn them and keep the out of blame,
Then shall ye se a Nobyll game;
How all shall become powder soft as sylke,
So does our Runnett by kind curd our Milk.
Then has our Bodies there first form lost,
And other be enducyd ymedyately;
Then have thou well beset thy cost,
Whereas some other uncunning must go by,
Not knowing the secretts of our Philosophy:
Yet one point I more must tell thee,
Every Body how hit has dymencyons three.
Altytude, Latytude, and Profundyte,
By which algates turn we must our Whele;
Knowing thy entrance in the West shall be;
Thy passage forth into the North if thou do well,
And there thy Lyghts lose their Light eche-dele:
For there thou must abide by Ninety Night
In darkness of Purgatory wythowten Light.
Then take thy course up to the Este anon
By Colors passing varyable in manyfold wise,
And then be Winter and Vere nygh over-gon
To the Est, therefore thine assendyng devyse,
For there the Son with Day-lyght does upryse
In Somer, and there dysporte the with delyght,
For there thy Warke shall become parfyt White.
Forth fro the Est ynto the South assend,
And set thou up therein thy Chair of Fire,
For there is Harvest, that is to say an end
Of all this Warke after thine own desire:
There shynyth the Son up in his own sphyre,
And after the Eclyps is in rednes with glory
As King to rain upon all Mettalls and Mercury.
And in one Glass must be done all this thing,
Like to an Egg in shape, and closyd well,
Then must you know the mesure of fyryng;
The which unknowen thy Warke is lost each dele,
Let never thy Glass be hotter then thou may feel:
And suffer still in thy bare hand to hold
For dread of losyng as Philosophers have the told.
Yett to my Doctrine furthermore intend,
Beware thy Glass thou never opyn ne meve
Fro thy beginning, till thou have made an end;
If thou do contrary thy Warke may never cheve:
Thus in this Chapter which is so breve,
I have the taught thy true Solucion;
Now to the Third Gate go, for this is won.
OF SEPARATION. The third Gate.
SEparacyon, does each part from other devyde,
The subtle fro the groce, fro the thyck the thyn;
But Separacyon manual look thou put aside:
For that pertaynyth to folys which lyttyll good don wyn,
But in our Separacyon nature does not blyn:
Making dyvysyon of qualytes Elementall
Into the fyfth degree till they be turned all.
Earth is turnyd into Water black and bloe,
And Water after into Air under very white:
Air is turned into Fire, Elements there be no mo;
Of this is made by craft our Stone of great delight,
But of this Separacyon much more must we write;
And Separacyon is called by Philosophers dyffynycyon
Of the said Elements tetraptatyve dyspersyon.
And of this Separacyon I find a like figure
Thus spoken by the Prophet in the Psalmody,
God brought out of a Stone a flud of Water pure,
And out of the hardyst Stone Oil abundantly:
Right so of our precyose Stone if thou be wytty,
Oil incombusteble and Water thou shall draw,
And thereabout thou nedyst not at the Coals to blow.
Do this with hete esy and mesuryng
First with moist Fire, and after with the dry;
The flewme by Pacyence out drawyng;
And after that thy other natures wyttyly,
Dry up thine Earth till hit be thrysty:
By Calcenyng else thou laboryst all in vain,
And then make hit drink up his moisture again.
Separacyon thus must thou often times make,
Thy Matter dyvydyng into parts two;
So that the Simple fro the groce thou take
Till Earth remain benethe in color bloe,
That Earth is fyx for to abide all woe:
The other part is Spyrytuall and fleyng,
But thou must turn hem all into one thing.
Than Oil and Water with Water shall dystyll
And through her help receve menyng:
Keep well this two that thou not spyll,
Thy Wark for lack of dew closyng,
Make thy Stopell of glass meltyng
The top of thy Vessle together with yt,
Than Phylosopher-lyke usyd is hit.
The Water wherwyth thou must renew thy Stone
Look thou dystyll before thou warke with hit
Oftentimes by it self alone:
And by thy sight thou shall well wit,
Fro feculent feces when hit is quytt:
For sum men can with Saturn it multeply,
And other Substance which we defye.
Dystyll hit therefore till hit be clean,
And thyn like Water as hit should be,
As Hevyn in Color bright and shine,
Keeping both figure and ponderosyte,
Therewith did Hermes moisture his Tree:
Wythyn his Glass he made to grow upryght,
With Flowers dyscoloryd bewtyosely to sight.
This Water is like to the venomous Tire,
Wherewyth the mighty Tryacle is wrought;
For yt is Poison most strong of ire;
A stronger Poison can none be thought:
At the Potecarys therefore oftyn yt is bought:
But no man shall be by hit intoxycate,
After the time yt is into Medycyne Elevate.
For then as is the Tryacall true,
Hit is of poisons most expulsyfe;
And in his working does mervells show,
Preservyng many from death to life,
Look thou meng yt with no corrosyve:
But chese hit pure and quick rennyng,
If thou thereby wylt have wynnyng.
It is a mervelose thing in kind,
And Without hit may naught be done;
Therefore Hermes calls hit his Wind,
For it is up flying fro Son and Moan,
And makyth our Stone fly with hit Sone:
Revyvyng the ded and gevyng life
To Son and Moan, Husband and Wife.
Which if they were not by craft made quick,
And there fatnes with Water drawn out;
And so the thyn dyssevered from the thyke,
Thou should never bring this work about:
If thou wylt speed therefore without doubt,
Reyse up thy Byrds out of their nest,
And after again bring them down to rest.
Water with Water accord will and assend,
And Spryt with Spryt, for they be of kind;
Which after they be exalted make to dyssend,
And so thou shall devyde that nature before did bind,
Mercury essencyall turnyng into wind:
Without which natural and subtle Seperacyon,
May never be complete profitable Generacyon.
Now to help thee in at this Gate,
The last Secret I will tell to thee;
Thy Water must be seven times Sublymate,
Else shall no kyndly Dyssolucyon be,
Nor Putryfyyng shall thou none see,
Like lyquyd pytch nor colors apperyng,
For lack of fire within thy Glass workyng.
Four Fyers there be which you must understond,
Natural, Innaturall, against Nature, also
Elementall which does bren the brond;
These four Fyres use we and no mo:
Fire against Nature must do thy bodies woe;
That is our Dragon as I thee tell,
Fersely brennyng as Fire of Hell.
Fire of Nature is the third Menstruall,
That fire is naturally in every thing;
But fire occasionat we call Innaturall,
And hete of Askys and balnys for putrefying:
Without these fyres thou may not bring
To Putrefaccyon for to be seperat,
Thy matters together proportyonat.
Therefore make fire thy Glass within,
Which brennyth the Bodies more then fire
Elementall; if thou wylt wyn
Our Secret according to thy desire,
Then shall thy seeds both root and spyre,
By help of fire Occasionate,
That kyndly after they may be seperat.
Of Seperacyon the Gate must thus be wone,
That furthermore yet thou may proceed,
Toward the Gate of secret Conjunccion,
Into the Castle which will the Inner lead,
Do after my Council therefore if thou wylt speed;
With two strong locks this Gate is shyt,
As consequently now thou shall wit.
The end of the third Gate.
OF CONJUNCTION. The fourth Gate.
AFter the Chapter of natural Separacion
By which the Elements of our Stone dysseveryd be
The Chapter here followyth of secret Conjunccion;
Which natures repugnant joyneth to perfyt Unyte,
And so them knyttyth that none from other may fle;
When they by Fire shall be examynate,
So be they together surely conjugate.
And therefore Philosophers geveth this deffynycyon,
Seeing thus Conjunccion is naught else
But of dysseveryd qualytes a Copulacyon;
Or of Pryncypylls a coequacyon as other tells,
But some with Mercury which the Potecarys sells,
Medleth Bodies which cannot dyvyde
There matter, and therefore they step aside.
For unto time the Soul be Separate
And clensyd from his orygynall Syn
With the Water and purely spyrytuallyzate:
Thy true Conjunccion may thou never begin,
Therefore the Soul first fro the Body twyn:
Then of the corporal part and of the spyrytuall,
The Soul Conjunccion shall cause perpetual.
Of two Conjunccions Philosophers don mentyon make,
Groce when the Body with Mercury is reincendat,
But let hit pass, and to the second tent thou take,
Which as I said is after Separacion celebrat:
In which the partys be lest which lest so collygate;
And so promotyd unto most perfyt temperance,
Then never after may be among them Repugnance.
Thus causyth Separacion true Conjunccion to be had
Of Water, Air, Earth and Fire,
But that every Element may into other be lad,
And so abide for ever to thy desire;
Do as done Laborous with Clay and Myer,
Temper them thyke, and make them not to thyn,
For so to up drying thou shall the rather wyn.
But manners there be of this Conjunccion three,
The first is called by Philosophers Dyptative,
Betwyxt the Agent and the Patyent which must be
Male and Female, Mercury and Sulphur vive;
Matter and form, thyn and thyke to thryve.
This lesson will help thee without any dowte,
Our Conjunccion trewly to bring about.
The second manner is called Tryptative,
Which is Conjunccion made of things three,
Of Body, Soul, and Spyrit till they not stryve,
Which Trynite must be brought to perfyt unyte,
For as the Soul to the Spyrit the bond must be;
Right to the Body the Soul to him must knyt,
Out of thy mind let not this lesson flyt.
The third manner and also the last of all,
Four Elements together which joynyth to abide,
Tetraptative contently Philosophers does hit call,
And specially Guydo de Montayno whose fame goyth wide;
And therefore the most laudable manner this tide,
In our Conjunccion four Elements must be aggregat,
In dew proportion first which asonder were separat.
Therefore like as the Woman has Veins fyfteene,
The Man but five to the act of her fecundyte,
Requyryth in our Conjunccion first I mean,
So must the Man our Sun have of his water three;
And (nine) his Wife, which three to him must be:
Then like which like will joy have for to dwell,
More of Conjunccion me nedyth not to tell.
This Chapter I will conclude right sone therefore,
Groce Conjunccion chargyng the to make but one,
For seldom have Strumpetts Children of them I bore,
And so thou shall never cum by our Stone,
Without you suffer the Woman to lygg alone;
That after she has conceyved of the Man,
The Matryce of her be shyt from all other than.
For such as addyth evermore crude to crude,
Openyng their vessels, and lettyng there matter kele:
The sperme concevyd they norysh not, but delude
Themselfes, and spyllyth there work every dele;
If thou therefore list for to do well,
Close up the Matryce and norysh the seed,
With heat contynuall and temperate if thou will speed.
And when thy Vessle has stond by Monyths five,
And Clouds and Clypsys be passed each one;
That light apperen increase thy hete then blyve,
Till bright and shyneing in Whytnesse be thy Stone,
Then may thou opyn thy Glass anon,
And feed thy Child which is then ybore
With milk and mete ay more and more.
For now both moist and dry be so contemperate,
That of the Water earth has recevyd impressyon;
Which never assunder after that may be separate,
And right so Water to Earth has given ingressyon,
That both together to dwell has made professyon:
And Water of Earth has purchasyd retentive,
They four be made one never more to strive.
And in two things all our intent does hing,
In dry and moist which be contraryous two;
In dry that hit the moist to fyxing bring,
In moist that hit geve lyquyfaccion the Earth unto,
That of them thus contemperate may forth go
A temperament not so thyk as the Body is,
Another so thyn as Water without mys.
Losyng and knyttyng therefore be Princypalls two
Of this hard Science, and Poles most pryncypall;
How be hit that other pryncyples be many mo,
As shyneyng fanells which show I shall:
Proceed therefore unto another wall
Of this strong Castle of our wisdom,
That Inner at the Fyft Gate thou may come.
OF PUTREFACTION. The fifth Gate.
NOw begynnyth the Chapter of Putrefaccion,
Without which Pole no sede may multyply,
Which must be done only by contynuall accyon
Of hete in the body, moist, not manually,
For Bodies else may not be alterat naturally:
Sith Christ do it wytnes, wythowt the grain of Whete
Dye in the ground, encrese may thou not get.
And in likewise without thy Matter do Putrefye,
It may in no wise trewly be alterate,
Nor thine Elements may be devyded kyndly;
Nor thy Conjunccion of them perfytly celebrat:
That thy labor therefore be not frustrate,
The prevyte of Putrefying well understond,
Or ever thou take this Warke in hond.
And Putrefaccyon may thus defyned be,
After Philosophers sayings it is of Bodies the fleyng,
And in our Compound a dyvysyon of things three,
The kyllyng Bodies into corrupcyon forth ledyng,
And after unto Regeneratyon them ablyng:
For things being in Earth wythowt dowte
Be engendryd of rotacyon of the Hevyns about.
And therefore as I have said before
Theyn Elements comyxt and wisely coequat,
Thou keep intemperat heat, eschuyng evermore,
That they by violent hete be never incynerat;
To powder dry unprofytably Rubyfycate,
But into powder black as a Crows byll
With hete of Balne, or else of our Dounghyll.
To time that Nights be past nynty,
In moist hete keep them fro any thing;
Sone after by blacknes thou shall espy
That they draw fast to putrefying,
Which thou shall after many colers bring
To perfyt Whytenes with Pacyence esyly,
And so thy sede in his nature shall multeply.
Make each on other to hawse and kiss,
And like as Children to play them up and down,
And when there sherts be fylyd with pysse,
Then lat the Woman to wash be bound,
Which oftyn for fayntnes will fall in a sound:
And dye at the last with her Children all,
And go to Purgatory to purg there fylth orygynall.
When they be there, by lyttyll and lyttyll encrese
There paynys by hete ay more and more,
The Fire from them lat never cese:
And se thy Furnace be apt therefore,
Which wise men do call Athenor:
Conservyng hete requyryd most temperately,
By which the Water does kyndly putrefy.
Of this Pryncypull spekyth Sapyent Guydo,
And seyth by rottyng dies the Compound corporal,
And then after Moryen and other mo,
Uprysyth again Regenerat, Sympill, and Spyrytuall,
And were not hete and moisture contynuall,
Sperme in the womb might have now abydyng,
And so there should thereof no fruit upspryng.
Therefore at the beginning our Stonys thou take,
And bery each on with other within there Grave;
Then equally a Marryage betwyxt them make
To ly together six wekys; then lat them have
There sede consevyd kyndly to norysh and save;
From the ground of there grave not rysyng that while,
Which secret point does many on begyle.
This time of Conceptyon with esye hete abide,
The Blacknes showing shall tell the when they dye;
For they together like lyquyd Pyche that tide,
Shall swell and burbyll, setyll, and Putrefye,
Shyning Golors therein thou shall espy:
Like to the Raynbow mervelose unto sight,
The Water then begynnyth to dry upryght.
For in moist Bodies hete noryshyng temperate,
Ingendryth Blacknes first of all which is
Of kyndly Commyxyon to the tokyn assygnate;
And of true Putrefying, remember this,
For then to alter perfytly thou may not mysse;
And thus by the Gate of Blacknes thou must cum in
To light of Paradyce in Whytenes if thou wylt wyn.
For first the Son in his uprysyng obscurate
Shall Be, and pass the Waters of Noyes flud
On Earth, which were a hundred days contynuate
And fyfty, away or all this Waters yode,
Right so our Waters as wise men understode
Shall pass, that thou with Davyd may say
Abierunt in sicco fluminae: bare this away.
Sone after that Noe plantyd his Vyneyard,
Which really floryshed and brought forth Graps anon:
After which space thou shall not be aserd;
For in likewise shall follow the floryshyng of our Stone:
And sone upon that thyrty days overgone,
Thou shall have Graps right as the Ruby red,
Which is our Adrop, our Ulyfer red and our Led.
For like as Sowles after paynys transytory
Be brought into paradyce where ever is yoyfull life;
So shall our Stone after his darkness in Purgatory
Be purged and joynyd in Elements without strife,
Rejoyse the whytenes and bewty of his wife:
And pass fro the darkness of Purgatory to light
Of paradyce, in Whytnes Elyxer of great might.
And that thou may the rather to Putrefaccyon wyn
This Exampull thou take to the for a true conclusyon,
For all the secrett of Putrefaccyon restyth therein;
The heart of Oak that has of Water contynuall infusyon
Will not sone putrefy, I tell the without delusyon:
For though yt in Water ly a hundred years and more,
Yet should thou find it sound as ever it was before.
But and thou keep hit sometime wete, and sometime dry,
As thou many se in Timber by usual experyment,
By prosses of time that Oak shall utterly Putrefy:
And so in likewise according to our intent,
Sometime our Tree must with the Son be brent:
And then with Water sone after we must hit kele,
That by this menes thou shall to rottyng bring hit well
For now in wete and now again in dry,
Now in great hot and now again in cold
To be, shall cause yt sone for to putrefy:
And so shall thou bring to rottyng thy Gold,
Entrete thy Bodies therefore as I have thee told:
And in thy Putrefying with hete be not so swyft,
Lest in the Askys thou seek after thy thryft.
Therefore thy Water out of the Earth thou draw,
And make the soul therwyth for to assend;
Then down again into the Earth hit throw,
That they often times so assend and dessend,
From vyolent hete and sudden cold defend
Thy Glass, and make thy fire so temperat,
That by the sydys thy Water be never vytryfycate.
And be thou wise in chesing of thy Water,
Medyll with no Salt, Sulphur, nor mean Mineral,
For whatsoever any Water to the do clatter;
Our Sulphur and Mercury be only in Metal,
Which Oylys and Waters some men call:
Fowlys, and Byrds with other namys many one,
Because that folys should never know our Stone.
For of this World our Stone is called the sement,
Which mevyd by craft as Nature does require;
In his encrese shall be full opulent,
And multeply his kind of thine own desire:
Therefore if God vouchsafe thee to enspyre
To know the truth, and fancies to eschew,
Like unto the shall be in riches but few.
But many be mevyd to work after there fantasy
In many subjects in which be Tynctors gay,
Both White and Red, devydyd manually
To sight, but in the Fire they fle away,
Such brekyth Potts and Glassys day by day:
Enpoysonyng themfelfs, and losyng of their syghts
With Odors and smoks and wakeyng up by nights.
Their Clothes be bawdy and woryn threde-bare,
Men may them smell for Multyplyers where they go;
To fyle their fyngers with Corrosyves they do not spare
Their Eyes be bleryd, and their Chekys both lene and bloe:
And thus for (had I wist) they suffer loss an d woe;
Such when they have lost that was in their purse,
Then do they chyd and Philosophers sore accurse.
For all the while that they have Philosophers ben,
Yet cowde they never know our Stone.
Some sought in Soote, Dung, Uryne, some in Wine:
Some in Sterr slyme, for thing yt is but one;
In Blood, Eggs; Some till their thryst was gone:
Devydyng Elements, and brekyng many a pott,
Multyplying the sherds, but yet they hit yt not.
To se their Howsys it is a noble sport,
What Fornaces, what Glassys there be of diverse shape;
What Salts, what Powders, what Oils, and waters fort,
How eloquently, de materia prima they clape,
And yet to find the truth they have no hap:
Of our Mercury they meddle and of our Sulphur vyve,
Wherein they dote, and more and more unthryve.
They take of the Red Man and his white Wife,
That is a special thing and of Elixers two,
Of the Quintessence and of the Elixers of life,
Of Honey, Celydony, and of Secundyns also,
These they devyde into Elements with other mo;
No Multeplyers but Philosophers called will they be,
Which natural Phylosophye did never read nor see.
This felyshyp knowyth our Stone right well,
They think them rycher then is the King;
They will him help, he shall not fail
France for to win, a wonders thing;
The holy Cross home will they bring:
And if the King were prisoner I take,
Anon his Ransom would they make.
A mervell yt is that Westminster Church,
To which these Philosophers do haunte;
Sith they so much riches can woorche,
As they make boste of and avaunte,
Drynkyng daily the wine a due taunte,
Is not made up perfytly at ons,
For truly hit lackyth yet many Stonys.
Folys do follow them at the tail,
Promotyd to riches wenyng to be;
But will ye here what worship and avayle,
They wyn in London that nobyll cite,
With Sylver Macys as ye may se:
Sarjaunts awayting on them every owre,
So be they men of great honor.
Sarjaunts sekyth them fro Street to Street,
Marchaunts and Goldsmyths leyeth after them watch;
That well is he that with them do mete,
For the great advantage that they do cache,
They hunt about as does a Rache:
Wenyng to win so great tresure,
That ever in riches they shall endure.
Some would cache their goods again,
And some more good would aventure;
Some for to have would be full feign,
Of Ten pound one I you ensuer:
Some which has lent without mesure
Their goods, and be with powerte bestad,
To cache a Nobyll would be full glad.
But when the Sarjaunts do them arest,
There Paukeners be stuffed with Parrys balls;
Or with Sygnetts of Saint Martynes at the lest,
But as for Money yt is pyssyd on the walls:
Then be they led as well for them befalls
To Newgate or Ludgate as I you tell,
Because they shall in safeguard dwell.
Where is my Money become seyth one,
And where is mine seyth he and he?
But will ye here how suttell they be anon,
In answeryng, that they excused may be,
Saying, Of our Elyxers robbyd we be:
Else might we have paid you all your Gold,
If yt had been more by ten fold.
And then theyer Creditors they begin to flatter,
Promysyng to work for them again;
The Elyxers two in short space after,
Dotyng the Merchaunts that they be feign
To let them go, but ever in vain:
They work so long, till at the last
They be again in Prison cast.
If any then ask them why they be not rich,
They sey they make fine Gold of Tynn;
But he they sey may surely swym in dyche,
Which is upholden by the chyn,
We have no stock, therefore may we naught wyn:
Which if we had we would some worche,
I now to fynysh up Westmynster Church.
And some of them be so Devowte,
They will not dwell out of that place;
For there they may wythowten dowte,
Do what them lift to their Solace,
The Archedeacon is so full of grace:
If that they please him with the Cross,
He forsyth lyttyll of other menys loss.
And when they there sit at the wine,
These Monkys they sey have many a pound,
Would God (seyth one) that some were mine;
Hay hoe, careaway, lat the cup go round:
Drynk on, seyth another, the mean is found:
I am a Master of that Art,
I warrant us we shall have part.
Such causyth the Monkys then evyll to don,
To wast there Wagys through their dotage;
Some brings a Mazer and some a Spone;
There Philosophers gevyth them such courage,
Behotyng them wynnyng without damage:
A pound for a penny at the lest again,
And so fair promys makyth folys feign.
A ryall Medycyne one upon twelve
They promys them thereof to have,
Which they could never for themself
Yet bring abowte, so God me save:
Beware such Philosophers, no man deprave:
Which helpyth these Monkys to riches so,
With thread bare Cowlys that they do go.
The Abbot well ought to cherysh this Company,
For they can tech his Monkys to leve in poverte,
And to go clothyd and monyed relygyously,
As did Saint Benet, eschuyng superfluyte,
Esyng them also of the ponderosyte
Of their pursys, with pounds so aggravate,
Which by Philosophy be now allevyat.
Lo who so medlyth with this rych Company,
Great bost of there wynnyng may they make,
For they shall have as much by there Philosophy,
As they of the tail of an Ape can take;
Beware therefore for Jesus sake:
And medyll with nothing of great cost,
For and thou do, yt is but lost.
These Philosophers (of which I spoke before)
Medlyth and blondryth with many a thing,
Renuyng in errors more and more,
For lac of true understandyng,
But like must like always ferth bring:
So God has ordained in every kind,
Would Jesus they would this bear in mind.
Wene they of a Nettyll to have a Rose
Or of an Elder an Apple sweet,
Alas that wise men there goods should lose:
Trustyng such Losells when they them mete,
Which seyth our Stone is trodyn under fete:
And makyth them therefore vile things for to still
Till at their howsys with stench they fill.
Some of them never lernyd a word in Scolys,
Such thynk by reason to understond Philosophy:
Be they Philosophers? nay, they be folys:
Therefore there Warkes provyth unwytty;
Medyll not with them if thou be happy:
Lest with their flatteryng they so the till
That thou agree unto there will.
Spend not thy Money away in waste,
Geve not to every speech credence;
But first examyn, grope and taste;
And as thou provyst, so put thy confydence,
And ever beware of great expense:
But if thy Philosopher lyve vertuosely,
Trust the better to his Philosophy.
Prove him first and him oppose
Of all the Secretts of our Stone,
Which if he know not thou nedyth not to lose;
Medyll thou not ferther, but let him gone,
Make he never so pytyose a moan:
For than the Fox can fagg and feign
When he would faynyst his prey attain.
If he can answer as ought a Clarke,
How be hit he has not provyd indede;
And if thou wylt help him to his Warke,
If he be vertuose I hold hit mede,
For he will the quyte if ever he speed:
And thou shall weete by a little anon
If he have knowledge of our Stone.
One thing, one Glass, one Furnace and no mo,
Behold this pryncypyll if he take,
And if he do not, then lat him go;
For he shall never thee rych man make:
Trewly yt is better thou him forsake,
Then after with loss and varyaunce,
And other manner of dysplesaunce.
But and God fortune the for to have
This Science by doctrine which I have told;
Dyscover yt not whoever thee crave,
For Favor, Fere, Sylver, nor Gold:
Be none Oppressor, Lecher, nor boster bold;
Serve thy God, and help the power among,
If thou this life list to continue long.
Unto thy self thy secretts keep
From sinners which has not God in dred;
But will the cast in Prison deep,
Till thou them tech to do hit in deed,
Then slander on the should spryng and sprede,
That thou did coin then would they sey,
And so undo the for ever and aye.
And if thou teache them this conyng,
Their sinful levyng for to maintain;
In Hell therefore might be thy wonnyng,
For God of the then would disdain,
As thou naught cowd for thy self said:
That Body and Soul you may both save,
And here in piece thy levyng have.
Now in this Chapter I have the tought,
How thou the bodies must Putrefy:
And so to guide the thou be not cawght,
And put in duraunce, loss, and vylanye:
My doctrine therefore remember wyttyly,
And pass forth toward the Syxth Gate,
For this the Fyfthe is tryumphate,
OF CONGELATION. The sixth Gate.
OF Congelacyon I need not much to write,
But what yt is now I will first declare:
It is of soft things Induracyon of Color White,
And confyxacyon of Spyrits which fleyng are:
How to congele thee nedyth not much to care*
For Elements will knyt together sone,
So that Putrefaccyon be kyndly done.
But Congelacyons be made in dyvers wise,
And Spyryts and Bodies dyssolvyd to water clear,
Of Salts also dyssolvyd ons or twyse,
And then to congele in a fluxyble Matter;
Of such Congelyng folys do clatter:
And some dyssolvyth devydyng manually
Elements, them after congelyng to powder dry.
But such Congelyng is not to our desire:
For unto owers yt is contraryose.
Our Congelacion dredyth not the fire:
For yt must ever stond in yt unctuos,
And also in his Tincture be full bounteous,
Which in the Air congelyd will not relent
To Water, for then our Work were shent.
Moreover Congele not into so hard a Stone
As Glass or Crystal which meltyth by fusyon;
But so that hit like wax will melt anon
Wythouten blast: and beware of Delusyon;
For such Congelyng longyth not to our Conclusyon
As will not flow and ren to water again,
Like Salts congelyd, then laboryst thou in vain.
Which Congelacyon avaylyth us never a dell,
Hit longyth to Multyplyers which Congele vulgarly;
If thou therefore list to do well,
(Sith thy Medcyne shall never flow kyndly,
Nether Congele, without thou first yt Putrefye)
First Purge and Fyx the Elements of our Stone,
Till they together Congele and flow anon.
For when the Matter is made parfyt White,
Then will thy Spryte with the Body Congelyd be;
But of that time thou must have long respyte,
Yer yt appear Congelyd like Pearls unto the,
Such Congelacyon be glad for to see;
And after like graynys red as blod,
Rychyr then any worldly good.
The erthly Grosnes therefore first mortyfyed
In Moystnes, Blacknes ingend^yd is;
This pryncypell may not be denied,
For natural Philosophers so seyth I wys,
Which had, of Whytenes thou may not mys:
And into Whytenes if thou Congele hit ons,
Thou have a Stone most presyose of all Stonys.
And by the Dry like as the Moist did putrefy,
Which caused in colors Blacknes to appear;
Right so the Moist Congelyd by the Dry,
Ingendryth Whytenes shyneyng with might sull clear,
And Drynes procedyth as Whytyth the matter:
Like as in Blackyng Moisture does him show,
By colors varyante aye new and new.
The cause of all this is Hett most temperate,
Workyng and mevyng the Matter contynually;
And thereby also the Matter is alterate,
Both inward and outward substancyally,
And not to as does folys to sight sophystycally:
But every part all fire for to endure,
Fluxybly fyxe and stabull in tyncture.
And Physycke determyneth of each Dygestyon,
First don in the Stomach in which is Drynes,
Causyng Whytnes without questyon,
Like as the second Dygestyon causyth Rednes,
Complet in the Lyver by Hete and temperatnes;
And so our Stone by Drynes and by Hete,
Dygestyd is to White and Red complete.
But here thou must another secret know,
How the Philosophers Child in the Air is borne:
Besy thee not to fast at the Cole to blow,
And take that nether for mock nor skorne,
But trust me truly else thy work is all forlorn:
Without thine Earth with Water revyvyd be,
Our true Congelyng shall thou never see.
A soul betwyxt Hevyn and Earth being,
Arysyng fro the Earth as Air with Water pure,
And causyng life in every lyvely thing,
Incessably runnyng upon our foresaid Nature,
Enforsyng to better them with all his cure;
Which Air is the Fire of our Philosophy,
Named now Oil, now Water mystyly.
And thus mean Air, which Oil, or Water we call,
Our Fire, our Ointment, our Spryte, and our Stone,
In which one thing we grownd our wysdomes all,
Goyth nether out nor in alone,
Nether the Fire but the Water anon;
First yt outeledyth, and after bryngyth yt in,
As Water with Water which will not lightly twyn.
And so may Water only our Water meve,
Which mevyng causyth both Death and Life,
And Water does kyndly to Water cleve
Without repugnance, or any strife,
Which Water to Folys is nothing ryfe;
Being of the kind wythowten dowte
Of the Spryte, called Water and leder owte.
And Water is the secret and life of every thing
That is of substance in this world y found;
For of the Water each thing has beginning,
As showyth in Woman when she shallbe unbound
By water which passyth before, if all be sound,
Called Albyen, first from them rennyng,
With grevose throwys before there chyldyng.
And truly that is the cause pryncypall,
Why Philosophers chargyd us to be pacyent
Till time the Water were dried to powder all,
With nurryshyng hete contynuall but not vyolent,
For qualytes be contrarious of every element,
Till after Black in White be made a unyon,
And then forever congelyd without dyvysyon.
And furthermore the preparacion of this conversyon
Fro thing to thing, fro one state to another,
Is done only by kyndly and descrete operacion
Of Nature, as is of Sperme within the Mother:
For Sperme and Hete as Sister be and Brother,
Which be converted within themself as Nature can
By accion, and passion, and at the last to parfyt Man.
For as the bodily part by Nature which is consumate
Into Man, is such as the begynner was,
Which though yt thus fro thing to thing was alterat,
Not out of kind to menge with other kynds did yt pas;
And so our Matter spermatycall within one Glass,
Within hit self must turn fro thing to thing,
By hete most temperate only hit noryshyng.
Another example natural I may thee tell,
How the substance of an Egg by nature is wrought
Into a Chyk, not pasyng out of the shell,
A playner example cowd I not have thought,
And there conversions be made till forth be brought
Fro state to state the like by like in kind,
With nurryshyng hete: only bear this in mind.
Another example here may you also read,
Of Vegetable things taking consyderacyon;
How every Plant growyth of his own sede,
Through Here and Moisture by natural operacyon,
And therefore Mineralls be nurryshyd by mynystracyon;
Of Moisture radycall, which their beginning was,
Not passiyng theyer kind within one Glass.
There we them turn fro thing to thing again,
Into there Mother the Water when they go;
Which pryncyple unknowen thou labourest in vain:
Then is all Sperme, and things there be no mo,
But kind with kind in number two;
Male and Female, Agent and Pacyent,
Within the matryce of the Earth most oryent.
And these be turnyd by Hete fro thing to thing
Within one Glass, and so fro state to state,
Till time that Nature do them bring
Into one substance of the Water regenerate,
And so the Sperme within his kind is alterate,
Abyll in lykenes his kind for to Multeplye,
As does in kind all other things naturally.
In the time of this seyde process natural,
While that the Sperme consevyd is growyng,
The substance is nurryshed with his own Menstruall,
Which Water only out of the Earth did bring,
Whose color is Green in the first showing,
And for that time the Son hydyth his light,
Taking his course through owte the North by night.
The said Menstrue is, (I say to the in council)
The blod of our Grene Lion, and not of Vytrioll,
Dame Venus can the truth of this the tell,
At thy beginning to council and if thou her call:
This secret is hyd by Philosophers great and small;
Which blood drawn owte of the said Lion,
For lac of Hete had not perfyt Dygestyon.
But this blood our secret Menstruall,
Wherewyth our Sperme is nurryshed temperatly,
When it is turnyd into the fecys Corporal,
And become White perfytly and very Dry,
Congelyd and Fyxyd into his own body;
Then brustyn blod to sight yt may well seem,
Of this warke named the milk white Dyademe.
Understonde now that our fyery Water thus acuate,
Is called our Menstruall water, wherein
Our Earth is losyd and naturally Calcenat
By Congelacyon that they may never twyne:
Yet to Congele more water thou may not blyn
Into three parts of the acuate water said before,
With the 4th part of the Earth congelyd and no more.
Unto that substance therefore so congelat,
The fowerth part put of water Crystalline
And make them then together to be Dysponsat
By Congelacyon into a myner metallyne,
Which like a sword new slypyd then will shine,
After the Blacknes which first will show,
The fowerth part geve yt them of water new.
Mo Inbybycyons many must we have yett;
Geve yt the second, and after the third also,
The said proportyon keep well in thy wit;
Then to another the fowerth time look thou go,
The fyfth time and the syxth, pass not there fro:
But put two parts at each time of them three,
And at the seventh time fyve parts let there be.
When thou have made thus seven times Inbybycion,
Again then must thou turn thy Whele,
And Putrefy all that Matter wythowte addycyon:
First Blackness abydyng if thou wylt do well,
Then into Whytenes congele yt up each dele,
And by Rednes into the Sowth assend,
Then have thou brought thy Base unto an end.
Thus is thy Water then devydyd in parties two,
With the first party the Bodies be Putryfycat,
And to thine Inbybycions the second part must go,
With which the Matter is afterward Denygrat,
And sone upon by esy Decoccyon Albyfycate:
Then yt is named by Philosophers our Sterry Stone,
Bring that to Rednes, then is the syxth Gate won.
OF CIBATION. The seventh Gate.
NOw of Cibacion I turn my pen to write,
Sith yt must here the seventh place occupye;
But in few words yt wylbe expedyte,
Take tent thereto, and understond me wyttyly;
Cibacion is called a fedyng of our Matter dry
With Milk, and Mete, which moderatly they do,
Till yt be brought the third order unto.
But geve yt not so much that thou hit glut,
Beware of the Dropsy, and also of Noyes Flood;
By lyttyll and lyttyll therefore thou to hit put
Of Mete and Drink as semyth to do hit good,
That watery humors not overgrow the blood:
The Drink therefore let hit be mesuryd so,
That kyndly appetyte thou never quench therfro.
For if yt drink to much, then must yt have
A Vomyte, else will yt be syk to long;
Fro the Dropsy therefore thy Womb thou save,
And fro the Flux, else will hit be wrong,
Which rather lat yt thyrst for drink among:
Then thou should geve yt overmuch at ons
Which must in youth be dyattyd for the nons.
And if thou dyatt hit (as Nature does require)
Moderatly till hit be grown to age,
Fro Cold hit keeping and nurryshyng with moist Fire;
Than shall yt grow and wax full of corrage,
And do to thee both pleasure and advauntage:
For he shall make dark Bodies hole and bright,
Clensyng theyer Leprosenes through his might.
Three times thus must thou turn about thy Whele
Abowte keeping the rewle of the said Cibacyon,
And then as soon as yt the Fire does feel,
Like Wax yt wylbe ready unto Lyquacyon;
This Chapter nedyth not longer protestacion:
For I have told thee the dyatory most convenyent
After thine Elements be made equypolent.
And also how thou to Whytnes shall bring thy Gold,
Most like in figure to the lenys of an hawthorn tree,
Called Magnesya before as I have told;
And our White Sulfur wythowte conbustebyllyte,
Which fro the fire away will never fle:
And thus the seventh Gate as thou desired*
In the upspryng of the Son is conqueryd.
OF SUBLIMATION. The eight Gate.
HEre of our Sublimacion a word or two,
I have to speak, which the eyghth Gate is
Folys do Sublyme, but Sublyme thou not so,
For we Sublyme not like as they do I wys;
To Sublyme trewly therefore thou shall not mys:
If thou can make thy Bodies first spiritual,
And then thy Spyryts as I have tought the corporal.
Some do Mercury from Vitriall and Salt sublyme,
And other spryts fro Scales of Yern or Steel,
Fro Eggshells calcynyd and quyk lyme,
And on theyer manner hit they Sublyme right well,
But such Sublymyng accordyth never adele
To our intent, for we Sublyme not so,
To true Sublymyng therefore now will I go.
In Sublymacyon first beware of one thing,
That thou Sublyme not to the top of thy Vessel,
For without vyolence thou shall yt not down bring
Again, but there yt will abide and dwell;
So hit rejoysyth with refrygeracion I the tell:
Keep hit therefore with temperat hete adowne
Full forty days, till hit wex black abowen.
For then the Soul begynnyth for to com owte,
Fro his own vaynys; for all that subtle is,
Will with the Spryts assend withouten dowte:
Bear in thy mind therefore and think on this,
How here eclypsyd been thy Bodies:
As they do Putrify Sublymyng more and more,
Into the Water till they be all up bore.
And thus there venom when they have spowtyd out
Into the water, than Black yt does appear,
And become spiritual every dele without dowte,
Sublymyng esyly on our manner
Into the water which does him bear:
For in the Air one Child thus must be bore
Of the Water again as I have said before.
But when these to Sublymacyon continual
Be laboryd so, with hete both moist and temperate,
That all is White and purely made spiritual;
Than Hevyn upon Earth must be reitterate,
Unto the Soul with the Body be reincorporate:
That Earth become all that before was Hevyn,
Which will be done in Sublymacyons sevyn.
And Sublymacyon we make for causys three,
The first cause is to make the Body Spiritual;
The second that the Spryt may Corporal be,
And become fyx with hit and substancyall:
The Third cause is that fro his fylth orygynall
He may be clensyd, and his fatnys sulphuryose
Be mynyshyd in him which is infectuose.
Then when they thus togeder depuryd be,
They will Sublyme up whyter then Snow;
That sight will greatly comfort the;
For than anon parfytly shall thou know
Thy Sprytts shall so be a down I throw:
That this Gate to the shall be unlockyd,
Out of this Gate many one be shyt and mockyd.
OF FERMENTATION. The ninth Gate.
True Fermentacyon few Workers do understond,
That secrett therefore I will expound to the,
I travelyd trewly through many a Land:
Or ever I might find any that cold tell hit me;
Yet as God would, (evermore blessed he be,)
At the last I cum to knowledge thereof parfyt,
Take heed therefore, thereof what I do write.
Fermentyng in dyvers manners is don,
By which our Medcyns must be perpetuate,
Into a clear Water, some lesyth Son and Moan;
And with there Medcyns makyth them to be Congelate;
Which in the Fire what time they be examynate,
May not abide nor alter with Complement,
For such Ferments is not to our intent.
But yet more kyndly some other men don
Fermentyng theyer Medcynes in this wise,
In Mercury dyssolvyng both Son and Moan,
Up with the Spryts till time will arise,
Sublymyng them together twyse or thryse:
Then Fermentacyon thereof they make,
That is a way, but yet we hit forsake.
Some other there be which has more hap
To touch the trothe in part of Fermentyng;
They Amalgam there Bodies with Mercury like papp;
Then theruppon there Medcyns relentyng,
These of our Secretts have some hentyng:
But not the truth with parfyt Complement,
Because they nether Putrefy nor alter there Ferment.
That point therefore I will dysclose to thee,
Look how thou dydyst with thy unparfyt Body,
And do so with thy parfyt Bodies in every degree;
That is to sey first thou them Putrefye
Her prymary qualytes destroying utterly:
For this is wholey to our intent,
That first thou alter before thou Ferment.
To thy Compound make Ferment the fowerth part,
Which Ferments be only of Son and Moan;
If thou therefore be Master of this Art,
Thy Fermentacion lat this be done,
Fyx Water and Earth together sone:
And when the Medcyn as wax does flow,
Than upon Malgams look thou hit throw.
And when all that together is myxyd
Above thy Glass well closyd make thy fire,
And so contenew hit till all be fyxid,
And well Fermented to desire;
Than make Projeccyon after thy pleasure:
For that is Medcyn than each dele parfyt,
Thus must you Ferment both Red and White.
For like as flower of Whete made into Past,
Requires Ferment which Leven we call
Of Bred that yt may have the kyndly taste,
And become Fode to Man and Woman most cordyall;
Right so thy Medcyn Ferment thou shall,
That yt may taste with the Ferment pure,
And all assays evermore endure.
And understond that there be Ferments three,
Two be of Bodies in nature clean,
Which must be altryd as I have told thee;
The third most secret of which I mean,
Is the first Earth to his own Water grene:
And therefore when the Lion does thurst,
Make him drink till his Belly burst.
Of this a Questyon if I should meve,
And ask of Workers what is this thing,
Anon thereby I should them preve;
If they had knowledge of our Fermentyng,
For many man spekyth with wondreng:
Of Robyn Hode, and of his Bow,
Which never shot therein I trow.
But Fermentacion true as I the tell
Is of the Soul with the Bodies incorporacyon,
Restoryng to hit the kyndly smell;
With taste and color by natural conspysacyon
Of things dysseveryd, a dew redyntegracyon:
Whereby the Body of the Spryte takyth impression,
That either other may help to have ingression.
For like as the Bodies in there compaccyon corporal
May not show out there qualytes effectually
Untyll the time that they become spyrituall:
No more may Spryts abide with the Bodies steadfastly,
But they with them be first confyxat proportionably:
For then the Body techyth the Spryt to suffer Fire,
And the Spryt the Body to endure to thy desire.
Therefore thy Gold with Gold thou must Ferment,
With his own Water thine Earth clensyd I mean
Not else to say but Element with Element;
The Spryts of Life only going between,
For like as an Adamand as thou have seen:
Yern to him draw, so does our Earth by kind
Draw down to him his Soul borne up with Wynd.
With mind therefore thy Soul led out and in,
Meng Gold with Gold, that is to say
Make Elements with Elements together ryn;
To time all Fire they suffer may,
For Earth is Ferment wythouten nay
To Water, and Water the Earth unto;
Our Fermentacion in this wise must be do.
Earth is Gold, so is the Soul also,
Not Common but Owers thus Elementate,
And yet the Son thereto must go,
That by our Whele yt may be alterate,
For so to Ferment yt must be preparat:
That hit profoundly may joynyd be
With other natures as I said to thee.
And whatsoever I have here said of Gold,
The same of Sylver I will thou understond,
That thou them Putrefye and alter as I have told;
Ere thou thy Medcyn to Ferment take in hond,
Forsowth I cowde never find him within England:
which on this wise to Ferment cowde me teache
Without error, by practyse or by speech.
Now of this Chapter me nedyth to trete no more,
Sith I intend prolixite to eschew;
Remember well my words therefore,
Which thou shall preve by practys true,
And Son and Moan look thou renew:
That they may hold of the fyfth nature,
Then shall their Tynctures ever endure.
And yet a way there is most excellent,
Belongyng unto another workyng,
A Water we make most redolent:
All Bodies to Oil wherwyth we bring,
With which our Medcyn we make floyng:
A Quyntessens this Water we call
In man, which helyth Dysesys all.
But with thy Bace after my Doctrine preperat,
Which is our Calx, this must be don;
For when our Bodies be so Calcenat,
That Water will to Oil dyssolve them sone;
Make therefore Oil of Son and Moan
Which is Ferment most fragrant for to smell,
And so the 9th Gate is Conquered of this Castle.
OF EXALTATION. The tenth Gate.
Proceed we now to the Chapter of Exaltacion,
Of which truly thou must have knowledge pure,
Full lyttyll yt is dyfferent from Sublymacyon,
If thou conceve him right I thee ensure:
Herto accordyth the holy Scripture:
Christ seeing thus, If I exalted be,
Then shall I draw all things unto me.
Ower Medicine if we Exalt right so,
Hit shall thereby be Nobylyzate,
That must be done in manners two;
Fro time the parts be dysponsate,
Which must be Crusyfyed and examynat:
And then contumulate both Man and Wife,
And after revyvyd by the Spyryts of Life.
Than up to Hevyn they must Exaltyd be,
There to be in Body and Soul gloryfycate;
For thou must bring them to such subtylyte,
That they assend together to be intronyzate,
In Clouds of clerenesse, to Angels consociate:
Then shall they draw as thou shall se
All other Bodies to there own dygnyte.
If thou therefore thy Bodies will Exaltat,
First with the Spryts of Life thou them augment,
Till time thy Earth be well subtylyate,
By natural rectyfyyng of each Element;
Him up exaltyng into the Fyrmament:
Than much more presyose shall they be than Gold,
Because they of the Quyntessence do hold.
For when the Cold has overcum the Hete,
Then into Water the Air shall turnyd be;
And so two contrarys together shall mete,
Till either with other right well agree,
So into Air thy Water as I tell the;
When Hete of Cold has got domynacyon,
Shall Be convertyd by craft of Cyrculacyon.
And of the Fire then Air have thou shall,
By losyng Putrefyyng and Sublymyng;
And Fire thou have of the Earth materyall:
Thine Elements by craft thus dysseveryng,
Most specially the Earth well Calcenyng:
And when they be each on made pure,
Then do they hold all of the fyfth nature.
On this wise therefore make them to be Cyrcular,
Each unto other exaltyng by and by,
And in one Glass do all this surely sygylate,
Not with thy honds, but as I teache the naturally,
Fire into Water then turn first hardely;
For Fire is in Air wych is in Water exystent,
And this Conversyon accordyth to our intent.
Than ferthermore turn on thy Whele,
That into Earth thy Air convertyd be,
Which wylbe don also right well:
For Air is in Water being in the Earth trust me,
Then Water into Fire contraryose in there qualyte:
Sone turn thou may, for Water in Earth is,
Which is in Fire conversyon, true is this.
Thy Whele is now nygh turnyd abowte,
Into Air turn Earth, which is the proper nest
Of other Elements there is no dowte,
For Earth in Fire is, which in Air takyth rest,
This Cyrculacyon thou begin must in the West:
Then forth into the Sowth till they exaltyd be,
Proceed dewly as in the Figure I have towght the.
In which process thou may clerly se,
From an extreme how to another thou may not go.
But by a mean, sith they in qualyte contraryose be;
And reason will forsooth that hit be so,
As hete into cold with other contraryose mo:
Without their menys as moist to hete and cold,
Examples suffycyent before this have I told.
Thus have I tawght the how for to make,
Of all thy Elements a parfyt Cyrculacyon,
And at thy Figure example for to take,
How thou shall make this foresaid Exaltacyon,
And of thy Medcyn in the Elements true graduacyon:
Till hit be brought to a quynaryte temperat,
And then thou have conqueryd the Tenth Gate.
OF MULTIPLICATION. The eleventh Gate.
MUltyplycacyon now to declare I proceed,
Which is by Philosophers in this wise dyfynyd,
Augmentacyon yt is of that Elixer indede,
In goodness, in quantyte, both for Whyt and Read,
Multyplycacyon is therefore as they have said:
That thing that does Augment the Medcyns in each degree,
In Color, in Odor, in Virtue, and also in Quantyte.
And why thou may thy Medcyn multeply,
Infynytly the cause forsooth is this.
For yt is Fire which tyned will never dye:
Dwelling with the as Fire does in housys,
Of which one spark may make more Fyers I wys;
As musk in Pygments, and other spycys mo,
In virtue multyplyeth and our Medcyn right so.
So he is rich the which Fire has les or more,
Because he may so greatly Multeply;
And right so rich is he which any part has in store
Of our Elixers which be augmentable infynytly:
One way if thou dyssolve our Powders dry,
And often times of them make Congelacyon,
Of hit in goodness thou makyst then Augmentacyon.
The second way both in goodness and in quantyte,
Hit Multyplyeth by Iterat Fermentacion,
As in that Chapter I showyd plainly unto the,
By dyvers manners of natural Operacyon,
And also in the Chapter of our Cybacyon:
Where thou may know how thou shall Multeply
Thy Medicine with Mercury Infynytly.
But and thou both will Loose and also Ferment,
Both more in quantyte and better will hit be;
And in such wise thou may that so augment,
That in thy Glass yt will grow like a Tree,
The Tree of Hermes named, seemly to se:
Of which one Pepyn a thousand will Multyply,
If thou can make thy Projeccyon wyttyly.
And like as Saffron when yt is pulveryzate,
By lyttyll and lyttyll if hit in Lycour be
Temperyd, and then with mykyll more Lycour dylate;
Tyngyth much more of Lycour in quantyte,
Than being hole in his own gross nature: so shall thou se
That our Elixers the more they be made thyn,
The farther in Tyncture sothfastly will run.
Keep in thy Fire therefore both evyn and morrow,
Fro house to house that thou need not to run
Among thy Neyghbors, thy Fire to sech or borow,
The more thou kepyst the more good shall thou wyn,
Multyplyyng ey more and morethy Glass wy thin:
By fedyng with Mercury to thy lyvys end,
So shall thou have more than thou nedyst to spend.
This matter is plain, I will no more
Write now thereof, lat Reason the guide;
Be never the bolder to Syn therefore,
But serve thy God the better at each tide;
And whylls that thou shall in this life abide,
Bear this in mind, forget not I the pray,
As thou shall apere before thy God at domys day.
His own great Gyfts thefore and his Tresure,
Dyspose thou vertuosely, helpyng the poor at need,
That in this World to the thou may procure
Mercy and Grace with Hevenly blys to mede,
And pray devoutly to God that he the led
In at this eleventh Gate as he can best,
Sone after then thou shall end thy conquest.
OF PROJECTION. The twelfth Gate.
IN Projeccyon hit shall be provyd if our practice be profitable
Of which yt behovyth me the secrets here to meve;
Therefore if thy Tyncture be sure and not vaiyable,
By a lyttyll of thy Medcyn thus shall thou preve
With Metal or with Mercury as Pyche yt will cleve:
And Tynct in Projeccyon all Fyers to abide,
And sone yt will enter and spread him full wide.
But many for Ignorans does mar that they made,
When on Mettalls unclensyd Projeccyon they make,
For be cause of corrupcyon their Tynctures must vade;
Which they would not awey first fro the Bodies take,
Which after Projeccyon be bryttyl, bloe, and black:
That thy Tyncture therefore may evermore last,
Upon Ferment thy Medcyn look first that thou cast.
Then brottyl will thy Ferment as any glass be,
Upon Bodies clensyd and made very pure,
Cast thy brottyll substance and sone shall thou se,
That they shall be curyosely coleryd with Tyncture,
Which at all assays for ever shall endure:
But at the Psalmys of the Sawter example thou take
Profitable Projeccyon parfytly to make.
On Fundamenta cast first this Psalm Nunc Dimittis,
Upon Verba mea then cast Fundamenta blyve;
Than Verba mea upon Diligam, conseve me with thy wytts;
And Diligam on Attend if thou list to thryve:
Thus make thou Projeccyons three four or fyve,
Till the Tyncture of thy Medcyn begin to decrese,
And then yt is time of Projeccyon to cese.
By this mysty talkyng I mean nothing else,
But that thou must cast first the less on the more,
Incresyng ever the Number as wise men the tells,
And keep thou this Secrett to thy self in store,
Be covetuose of connyng yt is no burden sore:
For who that joyneth not the Elixers with Bodies made clean,
He wot not what sykerly Projeccyon does mean.
Ten if thou Multyply first into ten,
One hundredth, that number will make sykerly;
If one hundredth into an hundredth be Multyplyed then,
Ten thousand is that number count hit wyttyly,
Then into as much more ten thousand multyply:
That is a thousand thousand, which multyplyeth I wys,
Into as much more as a hundred myllyons is.
That hundred myllyons being multyplyed lykewys,
Into ten thousand myllyons, that is for to sey,
Makyth so great a number I wot not what yt is,
Thy number in Projeccyon thus Multyply alwey:
Now Child of thy curtesy for me thou pray;
Sith that I have told the our secretts all and some,
To which I beseech God by Grace thou may com.
Now thou have conqueryd the twelve Gates,
And all the Castle thou holdyst at will,
Keep thy Secretts in store unto thy selve;
And the comaundements of God look thou fulfull:
In fire conteinue thy glass still,
And Multeply thy Medcyns ay more and more,
For wise men done sey store is no sore.
The end of the Twelve Gates.
THE RECAPITULATION.
FOr to bring this Tretys to a fynall end,
And brevely here for to conclude these Secretts all,
Dylygently look thou, and to thy Figure attend:
Which does in hit conteyne these secrets great and small,
And if thou conceve both Theorycall and Practycall:
By Fygures, and by Colors, and by Scripture plain,
Which wyttely consevyd thou may not work in vayn.
Consider first the Latytude of thy Precious Stone,
Beginning in the first side notyd in the West,
Where the Red Man and the White Woman be made one,
Spowsyd with the Spryts of life to lyve in love and rest,
Earth and Water equaly proportyond that is best;
And one of the Earth is good and of the Spryts three,
Which twelve to four also of the Earth may be.
Three of the Wife and one of the Man then must thou take,
And the less of the Spryts there be in this dysponsation,
The rather thy Calcynatyon for certain shall thou make,
Then forth into the North proceed by obscuratyon;
Of the Red Man and his White Wife called Eclypsation:
Losyng them and alteryng betyxt Winter and Vere,
Into Water turnyng Earth dark and nothing clear.
Fro thens by colors many one into the Est assends,
There shall the Moon be full apperyng by day light;
Then is she passyd her Purgatory and course at an end;
There is the upry sing of the Son apperyng whyt and bright,
There is Somer after Vere, and day after night:
Than Earth and Water which were so black be turnyd into Air;
Than clouds of darkness be overblowyn and all aperyth fair.
And like as the West beginning was of the Practyse,
And the North the parfyt mean of profound Alteratyon,
So the Est after them the beginning of Speculacyon is;
But of this course up in the Sowth the Son makyth Consumation
There be thy Elements into Fire turnyd by Cyrculacyon:
Then to win to thy desire thou needst not be in dowte,
For the Whele of our Philosophy thou have turnyd abowte.
But yet again turn abowte two tymys thy Whele,
In which be comprehendyd all the Secretts of our Philosophy,
In Chapters 12 made plain to the if thou conseve them well;
And all the Secretts by and by of our lower Astonomye,
How thou Calcin thy Bodies, parfit, dissolve, devide and putrefie:
With parfyt knowledge of all the polys which in our Hevyn ben
Shynyng with colors inexplycable never were gayer seen.
And this one Secrett conclusyonal know thou wythouten fail,
Our Red Man teyneth not till he teynyd be;
Therefore if thou list thy self by thy craft to avayle,
The Altytude of thy Bodies hyde and show out their profundyte,
In every of thy Materyalls dystroyyng the first qualyte:
And secundary qualytes more gloryose repare in them anon
And in one Glass with one governaunce 4 Naturs turn into one.
Pale, and Black, with falce Citryne, unparfyt White and Red,
Pekoks feathers in color gay, the Raynbow which shall overgoe
The Spottyd Panther with the Lion green, the Crowys byll bloe as led;
These shall appear before the parfyt White, and many other more
Colors, and after the parfyt Whyt, Gray, and falce Citrine also:
And after all this shall appear the blod Red invaryable,
Then have thou a Medcyn of the third order of his own kind Multyplycable.
Thou must devyde thy Elixer white into parties two,
After thou rubify and into Glassys let him be don,
If thou wylt have the Elixers both for Son and Moan do so;
With Mercury then hem Multeply unto great quantyte sone:
If thou at the beginning had not as much as would into aspone:
Yet moght thou them so Multeply both the White and Red,
That if thou levyd a thousand year they should the stond instead.
Have thou recourse to thy Whele I council the unto,
And stody till thou understond each Chapter by and by,
Medyll with no falce Fantesys, Mul^^plyers, let them go,
Which will the flatter and falcely sey they are connyng in Phylosophye,
Do as I bid the and then dyssolve these foreseyd Baces wyttely;
And turn him into parfyt Oylys with our true water ardent,
By Cyrculacion that must be don according to our intent.
These Oylys will fyx crude Mercury and convert Bodies all,
Into parfyt Sol and Lune when thou shall make Projeecyon,
That Oylysh substance pure and fyx Raymond Lully did call
His Basylyske, of which he made never so plain deteccyon,
Pray for me to God that I may be of his eleccyon:
And that he will for one of his on Domys Day me kene,
And grant me in his blys to reygne for ever with him, Amen.
Gloria tibi Domine.
An Admonition, wherein the Author declares his Erroneous experiments.
AFter all this I will thou understonde,
For thy savegarde what I have done,
Many Experyments I have had in hond;
As I found written for Son and Moan,
Which I will tell the rehersyng sone:
Beginning with Vermylion which provyd naught,
And Mercury sublymyd which I dear bought.
I made Solucyons full many a one,
Of Spyrytts, Ferments, Salts, Yerne and Steel;
Wenyng so to make the Philosophers Stone:
But finally I lost each dele,
After my Boks yet wrought I well;
Which evermore untrew I provyd,
That made me often full sore agrevyd.
Waters corrosyve and waters Ardent,
With which I wrought in diverse wise,
Many one I made but all was shent;
Eggs shells I calcenyd twice or thryse,
Oylys fro Calcys I made up-ryse;
And every Element fro other I did twyne,
But profyt found I right none therein.
Also I wrought in Sulphur and in Vitriall,
Which folys do call the Grene Lion,
In Arsenike, in Orpement, foul mot them fall;
In debili principio was mine Incepcyon:
Therefore was frawde in fine the Conclusyon;
And I blew my thryft at the Cole,
My Clothys were bawdy, my Stomache was never hole.
Sal Armonyake and Sandever,
Sal Alkaly, sal Alembroke, sal Attinckarr,
Sal Tarter, sal Common, sal Geme most clear;
Sal Peter, sal Sode, of these beware;
Fro the odor of Quycksylver keep the fare:
Medyll not with Mercury precipitate,
Nether with imparfyt Bodies rubyfycate.
I provyd Uryns, Eggs, Here, and Blod,
The Scalys of Yern which Smethys do of smite,
Aes Ust, and Crokefer which did me never good:
The soul of Saturn and also Marchasyte,
Lythage and Antemony not worth a myte:
Of which gey Tyntures I made to show,
Both Red and White which were untrew.
Oil of Lune and water with labor grett,
I made Calcynyng yt with salt precipytate,
And by hit self with vyolent hett
Gryndyng with Vynegar till I was fatygate:
And also with a quantyte of Spyces acuate;
Upon a Marble which stood me often in cost,
And Oils with Corrosyves I made; but all was lost.
Many Amalgame did I make,
Wenyng to fix these to grett avayle,
And thereto Sulphur did I take;
Tarter Eggs whyts, and the Oil of the Snayle,
But ever of my purpose did I fail:
For what for the more and what for the less,
Evermore somethyng wantyng there was.
Wine, Milk, Oils, and Runnett,
The Slyme of Sterrs that falls to the grownde,
Celydony and Secundynes with many more yett,
In these I practysyd as in my books I found,
I wan right naught, but lost many a pownde;
Of Mercury and Mettalls I made Crystal stones,
Wenyng that hit had been a work for the nonys.
Thus I rostyd and boylyd as one of Gebers Cooks,
And often times my wynnyng in the Asks I sought;
For I was dyscevyd with many falce Books
Whereby untrue thus truly I wrought:
But all such Experyments avaylyd me naught;
But brought me in danger and in combraunce,
By loss of my goods and other gravaunce.
For the love of our Lady such lewdnes eschew,
Medyll with no falsehood which never prevyd well;
Assay when thou wylt and thou shall find me treue;
Wynn shall thou naught but lose every dele,
Pence in thy Pauwkner few shall thou feel:
In smokes and smells thou shall have myckle woe,
That unnethe for syknes on Earth shall thou go.
I never saw true work treuly but one,
Of which in this tretys the truth I have told.
Stody only therefore to make our Stone:
For thereby may thou wyn both Sylver and Gold,
Upon my writing therefore to ground the be bold:
So shall thou lose naught if God be thy gyde,
Trust to my Doctrine and thereby abide.
Remember how Man is most noble Creature,
In erths Composycyon that ever God wrought,
In whom are the four Elements proportyonyd by nature:
A natural Mercuryalyte which cost right naught,
Out of his myner by Art yt must be brought;
For our Mettalls be naught else but myners too,
Of our Soon and our Moon, wise Reymond said so.
The clerenes of the Moon and of the Soon, bright,
Into these two Myners desendyth secretly,
Howbeyt the cleernes be hyd fro thy sight:
By craft thou shall make ytt to appear openly,
This hyd Stone, this one thing therefore putrefye:
Wash him with his own broth till white he becoom,
Then Ferment him wyttely, now here is all and soom.
Now to God Almighty I thee Recommend,
Which grant the by Grace to know this one thing,
For now is this Treatys brought to an end:
And God of his Mercy to his bliss us bring,
Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, where Angels do sing:
Praysyng without ceasynge his gloriose Majesty,
Which he in his Kingdom grant us for to see.
AN. DOM. 1471.
Explicit Alchimiae Tractatus Philosophiae,
Cujus Rypla George, Canonicus, Auctor erat;
Mill, quadringentis septuaginta unoque
Annis qui scriptus compositusque fuit.
Auctori lector praebe praece, quaeso Iuvamen,
Illi purgamen leve post vitam ut sit Amen.
Englished.

Thus here the Tract of Alchimy does end,
Which (Tract) was by George Ripley Chanon penned;
It was Composed, Writ, and Signed his own,
In Anno twice Seav'n hundred seav'nty one:
Reader! Assist him, make it thy desire,
That after Life he may have gentle Fire.
Amen.
LIBER PATRIS SAPIENTIAE.
Thou that in this Book begins to read,
Keep well this Council the better schalt thou speed:
Be thou in a place secret by thy self alone,
That noe man see or here what thou schalt say or done.
Yet ere thou begin to read much, take thou good head,
With whom thou kepest company I council thee indede;
Trust not thy friend too much, wheresoere thou go,
For he that thou trustest best sometime may be thye Foe.
And take heed to the words of the Fader of Wysdom,
How he techeth his Son how he schould done;
To keep his presepts of bodily governance
And with his Conyng he will the greatly advance.
And if thou wylt not to his wordys take heed,
Thou schalt stand here often in great fear and dred.
For he that has a fore wytt he needs not do amysse,
And he that does Folly the Folly schalbe his.
Now my dear Son be thou not a know
To Learned nor to Lewd, to High nor to Low:
Neither to Young nor Old, Rych nor Poor,
Unto them thou tech nothing my Lore.
Also to scuche men that hold themselves wise,
And so forth to the foolys that glyde on the Ice:
They ween in great Books schould be the Art
O^ the Science of Alchemy, but they be not worth a fart.
Therefore my Son to thee this Science I may well teach,
And if thou wylt upon thy enemy be wreach;
Or to purchase or build any good thing,
It schalbe to thy great furtheryng.
This worthy Science of Alchemy if thou wylt it leare,
A little money out of thy purse thou must forbear;
To buy therewyth Flos Florum it is most worthiest,
And to build well her Cabyn and her Nest.
And if thou put out money for any other thing,
It is to thy loss; and to thy great hindering:
Except yt be for thy works natural Food,
Which is had out of Stone, Air and Wood.
And if thou have all things within the growing,
Then thou need not to buy any manner of thing,
That schould be to this Science belonging,
But beware of thy self for fear of hanging.
For then thou and this Science were for ever lost,
If thou make thereof any manner of boast,
To any Man or Woman, Old or Young,
Beware of thy self for fear of discovering.
For if thou make any man privy
Of thy Council, Rich or Needy,
Thou must so beware Sleeping or Waking,
For once ymagining of Money making.
For if God sends thee grace and understanding,
With this Science thou may have good lyving:
But beware of speech of Women liberal,
And of the voice and sight of Children general.
Son in thine own house thou may well get
A good Morsel of meat thy mouth to sweet,
Both Pheasant, Partridge, Plover and Leveret,
Though thou cry yt not owte in the common Market.
Therefore keep close of thy Tongue and of thy Hand,
From the Officers and Governors of the Land;
And from other men that they of thy Craft nothing know,
For in wytnes thereof they will thee hang and draw.
And thereof the People will the at Sessions indight,
And great Treason against the they will write;
Wythowt that the Kings grace be to thee more,
Thou schalt for ever in this world be forlore.
Also wythowt thou be sure of another thing,
To purchase the License of thy King:
For all manner of doubts thee schall betide,
The better thou maiste Work, and both go and ride.
Also another thing I schall thee lere,
The poor People take thou nothing dear,
But ever serve thy God always at the beginning,
And among the poor People the better schalbe thy livyng.
Now my Child to my precepts look thou take heed;
Whatsoever fall after the better schall thou speed.
Better it is to have a thing, then for it to wish,
For when thou feelst a Sore it is hard for thee to get a Leech.
Now my dear Son to the I will declare,
More of this Warke which schalbe thy welfaire;
If thou can consider all my sayings,
For therewyth thou may find a full precious thing.
And Son though this Writing be made in Ryme,
Yet take thou thereat noe great disdain.
Till thou have proved my words in deed and in thought,
I watt it well it schalbe set at naught.
Therefore of all Bodies and Spyrits more or less,
Mercury is called Flos Florum and worthiest Pryncesse:
For her Birth and marvelous dealing,
Sche is most worthiest to have byne King.
For sche is Earth and Water most heviest,
And sche will conjoyne with Fire and Air most lyghtest;
And so forth with her love sche will run and flee,
For sche delights noe other game or glee.
Some say that of Sulphur and Mercury all Bodies mineral are made,
Ingendered in the Earth with diverse Colors cladd:
By the virtue of Decoccion before Preperacion,
To the lykenes of every body Mynerall in there fashion.
I will first begin with Saturn after other men's sayings,
How he is ingendered in the Earth with unclene Mercury flying:
And of Mercury he is most heviest with black Sulphury Earth mixed,
Save he is soft of fusion, and his Sulphur nothing fixed.
Jupiter is a white Body made of pure Mercury outward,
And of clear Sulphur somewhat Erthly and white inward;
He is in kind softest and well in his fixation,
For he is almost fixed, but he lacks Decoction.
Mars is a white Body most of unclene in the Earth y'made,
And he is hardest of fusion with Sulphur Erthly cladd;
To blacknes and rednes he will soonest consume,
By heat or by corrosive when the Spirit begins to fume.
Sol is the purest, somewhat red, and is made of clean and Sulphur fixed,
Ingendered with clear red Sulphur, in the Earth well mixed,
And therefore he is without defalt and lacks no degree;
For he is almost hardest of Fusion and heviest in ponderossity.
Venus is a Body more red of pure made in his substance,
Most of red Sulphur and green and therein is great variance:
In the Earth ingendered with Corrosive and bitter substance,
Well fixed and hard of fusion, rude in governance.
Mercury is a Body if he be with a Substance moved,
Mixing one kind with his kind, so schall he be loved;
One Spirit received with another, the which of them be maine,
Is cause of ingeneration of every body Mettalyne.
Luna is a pure white Body of clean Mercury and Sulphur white ingendered
And sche is a little hard of fusion and almost well fixed,
And sche is next cleanest in Tincture of whitenes,
Of Ponderosity light, of Jupiter bearing his whitenes.
And so after the Color of that Earth is Sulphuri and receptuall,
Some men do say is engendered every Metal;
But my Son the perfect work of this alteration,
I schall inform the true way of another fashion.
Now have I declared the working of the Bodies Mynerall,
Whereof they be ingendered after other men's sayings over all;
And as in place of the Earth one Body was fully wrought,
So must the artificial Medicine, be or else it is naught.
Now will I declare the worthiness of Mercury in special,
How sche is the notablest Spirit that is mynerall,
Most marvelous in working and in degree,
Sche is called the Matter principallest of the three*
Also sche is very subtle in many things artificial,
Sche will both give and take Tincture most special,
To him or of him that sche loves most best,
In special when sche is warmed in her Nest.
My Son Mercury is called the mightiest Flos florum,
And most royal, and richest of all Singulorum;
Sche is very Patron and Princes most royal,
And sche is very Mother of every Metal.
Sche is Vegitable, Animalle and Mineral,
Sche is Four in kind, and One in general:
Sche is Earth, Air, Water and Fire,
Among all other sche has no Peer.
Sche kylleth and slays, and also does calcine,
Sche dies, and also does sche live again;
Sche gives life and also ingression,
For jointly sche is three in one.
Sche is a very friendly mixar,
The progeneration of a great Elixar:
Sche is both Body Soul and Spirit,
In Color very red, black and white.
Many be the wooers that hang on her tail,
But sche will not with them I'deale;
They would her wedd against her will,
With foemen that liken her full ill.
Sche will deal with no manner of wight,
But with her Husband as it is great right:
With him sche will bear much fruit,
For he is by nature of her self same suit.
My Son of hem Fools have much dispight,
And therein such Fools loose their light:
For sometimes he is dark, and sometimes bright,
For he is like no other wight.
For if they have their kind ingendering,
Their natural food and good keeping,
They schall increase fruit by dene,
Very red and white, King and Queen.
My Son in this Science I do deny,
All things that be discording truly,
All manner of Salts I do defy,
And all manner of Sulphurs in waters of Corrosie.
Also Alloome, Vitriall, Auripigmentum and Hair,
Gold, Silver, Alkaly and Sandiver;
Honey, Wax, and Oils or Calx else,
Gumms, Galls, and also Egg shells.
Also I defy Antimony, Berrall, and Crystal,
Rosin, Pitch, also Amber, Jett and Corrall;
Herbs, Dated Stones, Marble, or Tinglas,
If there come any of all these it is the worse.
Also Berrills, Gotts Horns, and Alome plome,
Good with them will none be done;
All things that discordeth from Metal,
It is contrary to this work in general.
My Son many fools to me have sought,
But they and I accord right naught;
I leave them there as I them find,
And as Fools I make them blind.
For which Mercury they have errd full sore
And then when they had they could do no more,
Therefore in Philosophers sche bear'th the floower,
For sche is King, Prince, and Emperor.
Yet my dear Son be thou not a known
To Learned, nor to Lewd, to High, nor to Low;
That this work stands by Mercury and in her fire,
Her own special Love both life and dear.
For he is her Son, sche is his Fright,
In whom sche works all her might:
He is her Son, sche is his Mother,
Sche loves him peramore and no other.
In Sol, and Lune, in her meeting is all love,
For of Mercury only is all her behove,
And with them sche works all her might,
But they may never increase on fright.
Therefore it is possible to cast a Projection pure,
Upon a Million to make a perfect Body of tincture:
With Medicine of Spirits well joined and fixed,
It schall not be perceived where it is well mixed.
And therefore if there com Silver or Gold in at thy Gate,
The which men use in Aoyne or in common Plate;
I swear by God that all this world has wrought,
All thy labor and warke schall turn to naught.
For with what Metal soever that Mercury be joined,
Because of her Coldness and Moistnes sche is acloyd:
Put them never so close togeder sche will fume anon,
And when they come into the fire sche will sone be gone.
Therefore Mercury has a Lover that passes them
A thousandfold, who so will him ken
And he is her Lover and her Leman sweet,
And so his Council sche will keep.
Both in his Chamber and also in his Bed,
Also alive and when they byne dead;
Seek ye forth fools as ye have sought,
For in all other things find ye right naught.
Now my dear Son to thee I will indight,
The truth in word and deed I will write:
How that a precious Stone shall be made,
Thee to rejoice and make thee full glad.
As I said in the 32. Chapter unto my Conclusion,
How I schould inform the truth after another fashion,
And to perform this Science both in word and deed,
In making of our Medicine God must us speed.
The which is called the great Elixer,
And is verily made with a strong mixar;
The which is a Stone very Mineral,
And thou may him wellgett ever all.
My Son thou schalt take to Mercury no other thing,
But Earth that is heavy and hard and stiff standing:
The which in himself is derke bright dry and cold,
To join them togeder thou may be full bold.
One of them to 10 parts of that Water running most heaviest
And they schalbe both one, and to thy warke most mightiest:
Then have thou Man and Woman togeder brought,
The which is done by great love in a thought.
The which two be both Spirits, and one Body most heaviest,
When they be in your Chamber and bed joined in the Element lightest,
The which is more bigger, and bigger hott and dry,
And therein they will both kiss togeder and neither weep nor cry.
For when Earth and Water is well mixed,
By the virtue of the lightest Element well hardened and fixed:
For before that time they be Water running both,
And then schall turn to fix body be they never so loath.
For in their bed they schall make a perpetual Conjunction,
After the feeding of the light Element and of their proportion;
So schould they be decoct, having the parfeit fixascion,
In the likeness of a body in fusion having his fashion.
But at the first in their Bed they may endure no great heat,
So as they may well labor in their Bed for sweat:
At the first if there be in their Chamber overmuch red Color,
Hastily going thereto will cause great Dolor.
For in their first Nest they schould be both water running,
And because of heat they schould be ever drying.
And so therein hecome a subtle dry Substance,
The which warke schall thee greatly avaunce.
Therefore their Nest must be made of a strong kind,
Of the most hardest and cleerest Body, that they not out wind;
For if it so be that their Chamber or Nest begin to break,
Anon out thereof they will begin to Creake.
And then is all thy warke and thy great labor lost,
Then thou may begin again upon a new cost,
And so thou may not be negligent and hasty, but of the bed be sure,
Without it be hard stuff and clear it will not endure.
And if thou will at the first hand give sudden heat,
It will unto thy Warke be nothing meet;
And if thou let him have any sudden great Cold,
All this schall break thy warke, then art thou to bold.
Let their Nest be somewhat large with a broad roufe,
And therein they schall abide if it be strong and close above;
And in proportion put thereto nothing more nor less,
But as is said before if thou do yt is the worse.
Also from the beds head there must rise a high Spoute,
And another almost down to the bottom that the Spirit go not out;
For thou must save the flyers that swim into the upper place,
For they may hereafter engender a body as well as the other in space.
Also be sure that thou put in their Bed no other thing,
Then thereof thou schalt have no great winnyng,
If thou do this it schall be to thee for the best
To keep them close from flying and warm in their Nest.
First with soft fire her Nest must be warmed,
With a little bigger Fire with overmuch they schalbe harmed,
Under thy Chamber flower measure thy Fire with time,
Then comes the reward, Gold and Silver fine.
After the quantity space and time must be had,
For to deal togeder they be in their dealing glad.
And how long space and time I cannot well say,
That they in their Chamber and Nest will be in sport and play.
Behold the uppermost of their Nest what there comes out,
The sweting of their Bodies laboring round about,
And when they have played and sweat and labored so sore,
They will be still, and neither labor nor sweat any more.
Then let them cool easily, and draw their breath,
And then there schalbe some above and some beneath:
There thou schalt see a Stone as it were gray pouther,
Which schalbe to the a right great wonder.
Then take them out of their Chamber and Bed anon,
And lay them upon a Marble stone and break them thereon:
And look what thou have in of Color and Ponderosity,
Put to him as much of Flos florum greatest in dignity.
That is the same Spirit that thou had before,
And so meddle them togeder and leare them the same lore;
Altogeder in another Bed and in their Chamber they must be,
For a marvelous warke thereof thou schalt understand and see.
And thus so often thou must Multiply thy Warke,
To ascend and descend into the Air as does the Lark;
For when the Lark is weary above in his stound,
Anon he falls right down to the ground.
Behold well their Body, and to their head lay thine Ear,
And harken thou well what warke they make there:
If they begin to sing any manner of voice,
Give them more heat till thou hear no noyce.
And thus give them more heat in their Chamber and Bed also,
Till thou hear no manner of noise rumbling to nor fro:
And thus continue in their Bed in their sporting plays,
After the quantity thereof continue so many days.
When their play and wrestling is all well done,
In their voice singing and crying and sweating up and down;
Give their Chamber bigger heat till their Nest be red,
And so bring them down low and have no fear nor dread.
For thus with heat they schalbe brought full low,
That they schall in their Bed ne cry nor crow,
But as a Body lie still down in their Bed,
In their own liknes as they were bodies dead.
Of Gray and White is all his chief Color,
For then he is past all his great Dolor:
I swear by Almighty God that all has wrought;
Thou have found out that many other Men has sought.
Then take thou him out of his Cchamber and Bed,
And thou schalt then find a fixed Body as he were dead;
Keep thou him close and secretly within thy place,
And thank Almighty God of his grace.
Now my Son before this, after this Science I have right well sought
And thus to thee I have the White Elixer parfetly wrought;
And if thou wilt of the Red Elixer parfetly understand,
Thou must take such another warke in hand.
My Son when thou have wrought more upon more,
Dubling each time as I said before;
Make thou what thou wilt of Red substance,
As I did the White warke in manner of Governance.
Then thou must take the Red Stone that is all ponder,
And lay on a Mable Stone and break him a sunder;
And to meddle him with the white Spirit and Water clear,
And so put him in his Bed and Chamber in the Fire.
And so in his Chamb. and in his Bed, he must all this while be
Till thou have turned and brought him to another manner of glee:
This Red Elixer if thou wilt open work hear,
This manner of School thou must right well leare.
Thou must hang him in his Chamber with red Color,
Till he be fixed and brought from his great Dolor:
Then of this worthy warke be not thou aghast,
For in the warke all the worst is past.
And so in his fiery Nest and Chamber let him be sure,
For the longer he be in, the better schalbe his tincture;
So that he runn not like blood overcoming his fusion,
Then have thou parfectly this work in conclusion.
Thus he must continue in this great heat of Firing,
Till he be full fixed that he be not running nor flying:
Then he will give tincture without Number running like wax,
Unto his like of fusion he will both join and mix.
And if thy Warke be thus well guided and so forth led.
Then have thou in thy Warke right well and wittily sped:
For if thou do otherwise then I have thee told,
In the adventure of thy warke thou may be to bold.
For if thou warke by good measure and parfect time,
Thou schalt have very good Gold and Silver fine;
Than schalt thou be richer in thy self than any King*
Wythowt he labor the Science and have the same thing.
Now my dear Son I schall teach thee how to cast a Projection,
Therein lies all the great prafetnes with the Conclusion:
To lead an imparfect Body to his great parfectnesse,
In joining that like to his like thou stand in no distres.
For when thou have joined the milk to the Bodies dry,
Than have thou the White and Red Elixer truly:
The which is a Marvilous and very precious Stone,
For therein lies in this Science all the work upon.
In this Science these Stones be in themselves so precious,
That in their working and nature they be marvelous:
To schew thee the great virtue furthermore I will declare,
That if thou can with this manner of working well fare.
First thou must take of that Body which is next Sol in perfection,
And of his color toward in ponderosity and proportion:
Being soluble as it were clear blood running.
In the hot Element yt is always lightest and fleeting.
Then take part of the Red Elixer that is the precious Stone
And cast him upon that body that is blood running anon:
And when thou have thus parfectly this warke wrought,
It schalbe turned into parfect Sol with little labor or naught.
On the same wise do for Luna that is in the Color so white,
In joining with that body that is schining and somewhat light;
In the same proportion cast him the very white Stone,
And then is all thy greatest warke both made and done.
Than have thou both the Red warke and the White,
Therefore blessed be that time both day and night:
For this warke that stands by great virtue and love,
Thou must thank Almighty God in heaven above.
Son in the 21. Chapter there write I a full true Rhyme,
That is to say unto this warke thou have no great disdain;
Till thou have proved my words in deed and thought,
I know it well this Science schalbe set at naught.
My Son to these last precepts look thou take good head
For better 'tys to have then to wish for in time of need:
For who so is bold in time to a Friend to break,
He that is thy Friend may be thy Fo and his emnity wreake.
And therefore my Son I schall give thee a great charge,
In uttering of speech be thou not to large;
To tell every man what thou have in Silver or Gold,
For to have it from thee many men will be right bold.
Also use not to revill or ryott that schould exceed
To thy bodily health, the better schalt thou speed;
Use temperate diet and temperate travel,
For when Physician thee fails this schall thee avail.
And leave all blind warkes that thou have seen or heard of Conclusions
Or proved by Sublimations, Preperations, Distillations, or Dissolutions;
Of such manner of things great Books do greatly specify
And all those contrary sayings in this Craft I do plainly deny.
Also my Son remember how thou art mortal,
Abiding but a while in this World which is terrestrial:
Thou wottest not how long nor hence how soon,
That death schall thee visitt and unto thee Come.
And remember thee well at thy departing,
Whom thou lovedst and trustedst best old and young:
Make him thine Heir and most of thy Council,
And give him thy Cunning or thy Book every deal.
But beware of flattering and glosing People,
Of Boasters and Crackers for they will thee begu^le:
Of thy precious Cunning behind or beforne,
And when they have their intent they will give thee a scorn.
Therefore make no Man of thy Council rude nor rustie,
But him that thou know both true and trusty;
In ryding and going sleeping and waking,
Both in word and deed and in his disposing.
Also in thy own Chamber look thou be secret,
That thy doors and windows be close shet;
For some will come and look in every Corner,
And anon they will ask what thou make there.
And therefore a good excuse must soon be had,
Or else thou schalt verily wine for to run madd;
Say thou labourest sore both sleeping and waking,
To the perfect way of strange Colors making.
As yt be sure Bice, Vermillion, Aurum Musicum, and others more
Or else with some people thou schalt never have a do;
Also thereof thou must have many samples to schew,
Or else they that harms think will say so.
Also furthermore I give thee right good warning,
Beware of thy warking and also of thy uttering,
For the examination of the People better or worse,
Ere thou have for thy warke thy money in thy purse.
Therefore take heed my Son unto these Chapters sixscore
And all manner of things said what schould be don before:
For in Astronomy thou must have right good feeling,
Or else in this Book thou schalt have simple believing.
For thou must know well of seven principle Characters,
To what Bodies in heaven moving that they be likned in those figures
And to understand their properties and their Conditions,
In Colors, qualities, softnes, hardness, and in their proper fashions.
Now Son to thee that understandest parfection and Sciences
Whether it be Speculative or Pracktick to my sentences:
In this Science and labor I think it great ruthe,
Therefore I write to thee very truth.
And to thee that understandest no parfection nor practike
In no conclusion proved that schould be to his warke like,
By Almighty God that all this world has wrought,
I have said and performed to thee right naught.
Therefore my Son before that thou this Book begin,
Understand wisely in this what is written therein:
For if thou can not find by this Book neither Sol nor Moyn^,
Then go forth and seek thou further as other fools have done.
Explicit Liber dictus Pater Sapientiae.
Vaughan sculp:


IN the name of the holy Triniti,
Now send us grase, so hit be:
First God made both Angel and Heaven,
Na alleso the World with Planets seven;
Man and Woman with great sensewalite,
Sum of estate, and other in her degree;
Both Best and Worm for in the grown crepe,
Everyech in his kind to receve his mete.
Egles and Fowls in the Air donfle,
And swemynge of Fycheys also in the Sea:
With vygital moystter and of the red Grap,
And alleso of the why^e hos can him take:
All meneral thing that growyth in grownd,
Sum to encrese and sum to make an end:
All these brings now to owre house,
The mightti Ston that is so precius,
This rich (...) that sto^n of price,
The which (...) send out of Paradyce:
Thus made the great God of heven,
Which all ben rewled under Planets seven:
God send us part of this secret,
And of that heven that is sweet.
AMEN.
IYfe thou wilt this warke begin,
Than schrevy the clean of all thy Seyne:
Contryte in heart with all thy thowght,
And ever thenke on him that the der bowght.
Satisfaction thou make with all thy might,
Than three fair flowers thou have in sight;
Yet needs the mor to thy conclesyon,
Take thou good head now to this lessen;
Thou must have Grase, Nature, and Resen,
Spekelatif, and Coning, with good Condition:
Yet thou must have more now herto,
Experience, with Pracktik, Prudent also;
Patient that thou be, and Holy in Lysyngs,
Thenke thou on this in thy beginings;
These fowrtyn Hestys as I the say,
Ever keep thou man both night and day,
Of thy desires thou may not mysse,
And alleso of heven that swezt bless.

Conyng
Experience
Pracktike
Prudent
Patience
Gras
Nature
Reason
Spekelative
Holy lifing

HERMES BIRD.
PRoblemis of old likeness and fuguris,
Wych proved been fructuos of sentens;
And have auctorite grounded in Scripture,
By resemblaunce of notabil apperence;
Wych moralites concludyng on prudence:
Like as the Bibel reherseth be writing,
How Trees sum time chese hemselfe a King.
First in their choice they named the Olyve
To regne among hem, Iudicium does expres;
But he himself can excuse him blyve,
He might not forsake his fatnes:
Nor the Fig Tree his amorus swetnes:
Nor the Vine his holsum fresche terrage:
Wych gyveth comfort to all manner of age.
And sembleabil Poyetes laureat,
By derke parables full convenient;
Feyn^in that Bird is and Bests of estate
As rial Egeles and Lions by assent,
Sent owte writtes to hold a Parliament;
And made degrees brevely for to sey,
Sum to have Lordschip and sum to Obey.
Egeles in the Air highest take their flight,
Power of Lions on the grownde is seen;
Cedre among Trees highest is of sight,
And the Laurer of nature is ever grene,
Of flowris all Florra Gods and Queen:
Thus of all thing there been diversites,
Sum of estate and sum of lower degres.
Poyetys write wonderful lyknes,
And Covert keep hemselfe full clos;
They take Bestes and Fowls to witness:
Of whose feynyng Fabelis furst a ros,
And here I cast unto my purpos,
Owte of the Frensche a tale to transcelate,
Which in a Pamphlet I red and saw as I sat.
This Tale wych y make of mention,
In gros reherseth plainly to declare,
Three Proverbys paid for ransom
Of a fair Bird that was take in a snare,
Wonder desirus to escape owte of her care:
Of mine Auctor followyng the prosses,
So as it fell in Order y schall expres.
Whilom there was in a small vilage,
As my Auctor makes rehearsal;
A Chorle the which had lust and great courage,
Within himself by his deligent travel,
To array his Garden with notabil reparel:
Oflenght and bread y lyche square and long,
Heggyd and dychyd to make yt sure and strong.
All the Aleys made plain with Sand,
Benches coverid with new Turves grene,
Set Erbes with Condites at the end;
That wellid up again the Sun schene,
Like Silver stremys as any cristal clean:
The burbely Waves up there on boylyng,
Rownde as Beral their bemys owte chedyng.
Mides the Garden stood a fresh Lawrer,
There on a Bird syngyng both day and night;
With shinyng federis brighter then Gold weer,
Wych with her song made hevy hertis light;
For to behold hit was an hevenly sight:
How towerd evyn and in the dawnyng,
Sche did her pain most amens to sing.
Esperus enforced her courage,
Towerd evyn when Phoebus went to nest;
Among the branches to her avauntage:
To sing her complyn as yt was best,
And at the rysyng to the Queen Alcest
To sing again as hit was to her dew,
Erly on the morrow the day-ster to salew.
Hit was a very hevenly melody,
Evyn and Morn to her the Byrd song;
And the sote sugeryd Armony:
Of uncoud Warbelis and twenes drew along,
That all the Garden of the noise rong:
Till on a morrow that Tytan schone full cler,
The Byrd was trapped and cawt in a Panter.
The Chorle was glad that he this Byrd has take
Mere of cher look and of visage:
And in all have he cast for to make
Within his house a lytil prati Cage,
And with her songto rejoice his courage:
And at the last the sely Byrd abrayde,
And sobirly to the Chorle sche said:
I am now take and stond under danger,
Hold streyte that y may not fle;
Adieu my song and al my notes cler,
Now that y have lost my liberte,
Now y am thrall and sumtyme was fre:
And trust well y stand in distres,
Y can not sing ne make no gladness.
And though my Cage forged were of Gold
And the penacles of Beral and Cristal:
Y remember a Proverb said of old;
Who lisit his fredom in sooth he is in thral,
For me had laver upon a branche small,
Merle to sing among the wodis grene,
Than in a Cage of Gold bright and chene.
Song and Presun have non acordaunce,
Trowys thou y will sing in Presun,
Song procedet of joy and plesaunce;
And Presun causes death and destruction,
Ryngyng of Feteris makes no mere sown;
Or how schoulde he be glad and jocownde,
Ageyn his will that lyth in cheynys bownde.
What avayleth a Lion to be a King of Bestes
Fast schut in a Tower of ston alone;
Or an Egell under stryte cheynys,
Called also the King of Fowlys everichon,
Fie on Lordschyp when Liberte is gone:
Answer herto and hit not a start,
Who syngeth mere that syngeth not with heart.
If thou wilt rejoice the of my syngyng,
Let me go fleen fre fro dawnger:
And every day in the morning
Y will repair to thy Lawrer,
And fressely to sing with notis cler;
Under thy Chaumber or before thy Hal,
Every season when thou list me call.
To be schut and pyned under dread,
No thing acordyng to my nature:
Though I were fed with Milk and Wastelbrede;
And sweet Crudis brought to my pasture,
Yet had y lever do my bese cure:
Erly in the morrow to shrape in the Vale,
To find my dener amongs the Wormys small.
The Laborer is gladder at his Plough,
Erly on the morrow to feed him on bakon:
Then sum ben that have tresour y nowgh;
And of al deyntes plente and foyson;
And no fredom with his pocession;
To go at large but as Bear at the stake,
To pas his bonds but if he leve take.
Take this answer full for conclusion,
To sing in prison thou schalt not me constreyne:
Till y have fredom in woddis up and down:
To fle at large on bowys both rough and plain,
And of reason thou schuldest not disdeyn:
Of my desire but laugh and have good game,
But who is a Chorle would every man were the same.
Well quod the Chorle since hit woll not be,
That y desire by my talkyng;
Magre thy will thou schalt chese on of three:
Within a Cage merele to sing,
Or to the Kychyn y schall thy bode bring:
Pull thy federis that been so bright and clear,
And after roast or bake the to my dynere.
Then quod the Bird to resson y sey not ney,
Towchyng my song a full answer thou have:
And when my federis pulled been awey,
Ify be roasted or bake in a past,
Thou schalt of me have a small repaste:
But if thou wylt work by my council,
Thou may by me have a great avayle.
If thou wolt to my read assent,
And suffer me go frele fro Preson:
Witowte raunsom or any oder rent;
Y schall the gyf a notabil great gwerdon,
The three great Wysdomys acordyng to reason;
Mor of value, take heed what y profer,
Than all the Gold that is shet in thy Cofer.
Trust me well y schal the not deceyve.
Well quod the Chorle tell and let se:
Nay quod the Bird a forne conseyve;
Who schal teache of Reason he most go fre,
Hit fitteth a Master to have his Liberte:
And at large to teache his lesson,
Hafe me not suspecte y mean no treson.
Well quod the Chorle y hold me content,
Y trust the promys which thou have made to me;
The Bird fle forth the Chorle was of sent:
And took his flight up to the Lawrer tree,
Then thought sche thus now that y stand fre:
With snaris panters y cast not al my lyve,
Not with no lyme twigs no mor to strive.
He is a Fool that schaped is daungere,
That broke his feteris and fled is fro Preson,
For to resort agene: for burnt child dreds fire:
Each man bewar of Wisdom and reason,
Of sugar strawed that hides false poison;
There is no venom so perilus in scherpnes,
As when yt has triakcle of lyknes.
Who dredeth no perell in perell he schal fall,
Smothe Watres been of sithes deep:
The Quayle pipe can most falsely call;
Till the Quayle under the net does crepe;
A bleryed Fowler trust not though he weep:
Exchew his thumb, of weping take no head,
That small Byrdys can nyp by the head.
And now that y such danger am escaped,
Y will bewar and before provide:
That of no Fowlar y will no more be Japed,
From their lyme twigs to fly far aside,
There perel is perel to abide:
Com ner thou Chorle, take heed to my speech,
Of three Wysdomys that y schal the teache.
Yef not of Wysdom to hasty credens,
To every Tale nor each tydyng:
But consider of Reason and Prudens;
Among Talys is many a great lesyng,
Hasty credens has cawsed great hynderyng:
Report of talis and tydyngys brought up new,
Makes many a man full on true.
For on party take this for my Raunsom,
Learn the second grownded of scripture:
Desire thou not by no condition
Thing that is ympossybyl to recure,
Worldly desires stante all in a venture:
And who desires to soar high a lofte,
Often time by soden turn he falls on soft.
The third is this, bewar both even and morrow,
Forget yt naught but learn this of me:
For Tresor lost, make never to great Sorrow;
Wych in no wise may not recovered be,
For who that takes sorrow for loss in that degree:
Reken first his loss, and afte^ reken his pain,
Of one sorrow he makes Sorrowys tweyne.
Aftur this Lesson the Bird began a song,
Of her ascape gretely rejoycyng:
And sche remembered her alleso of the wrong
Don by the Chorle, first at her taking,
And of the affray, and of her impresonyng:
Glad that sche was at large and owte of dread,
Seyde unto him hoveryng above his head,
Thou were quod sche a very natural Fool
To suffer me depart of thy lewdnes:
Thou owthtys of right to complain and make dole,
And in thy heart have great hevenes,
That thou have lost so passing great riches:
Wych might suffice by value in rekeyng
To pay the raunsom of a mighty King.
There is a Stone wych is called Jagownce,
Of old engendered within mine entrayle:
Wych of fine Gold poyseth a great unce;
Setryne of Colors like Garnetis of entayle,
Wych makyth men victorius in battle;
And who that bears on him this Stone,
Is full asured again his mortal Fone.
Who that has this in poscession,
Schal suffer no Povert ne non Indygens:
But of Tresour have plente and foyson,
And every Man schal don him reverence,
And non Enemy schal don him non offense;
But fro thy hondes now that I am gone,
Pleyne gyf thou wilt for thy part is none.
As y the abrayde her before,
Of a stone now that I had:
The wych now thou have forlore;
Be all reason thou schuldys ben sad,
And in thy heart nothing glad:
Now Chorle y the tell in my device,
I was eyred and bred in swite Paradyce.
Now mo namys y schal the tell,
Of my stone that y call Jagownce:
And of his vertuis with his smell;
That been so sweet and so odeferus,
With Ennock and Ely has be my servis:
My sweet song that sowndeth so scherpe,
With Angels voyse that passes any harp.
The nigrum deamond that is in Morienis sees
And the white Charbonkkel that rolleth in wave;
The setryne Reby of rich degrees:
That passes the stonys of comen saw,
In the Lapidery is grown by old law;
He passes all stonys that is under hevyn,
After the cowrse of kind by the Planets sevyn.
Hit is for none Chorle to have schuch tresour,
That exsedeth all Stonys in the lapidery:
And of all vertuis he bears the flowr,
With all joy and grace yt makes man merry,
That in this world schal never been sorry;
Now very Chorle thou passes thy gras,
Y am at my leberte even as I was.
As Clerkys fyndeth in the Bybell,
At Paradys yatis when he was cast;
By an Angel both fair and still,
A down King Elysawnder there I threst,
And of all stonys yt was y lest;
Soche stonys in place few ben y brought,
Soroful is the Chorle and hevy in his thowte.
Now more Chorle yt tell y can,
And thou wolt to me take heed:
The Bird of Ermes is my name,
In all the world that is so wide,
With gletering of grace by every side,
Hose me might have in his covertowr,
He were rychcher than any Emperowr.
Elysawnder the conquerowr my Ston smot down
Upon his helm when hit pyght:
No mor then a pese that is so rownde,
Hit was there to no manys sight,
That leyde so pleyne the manly Knight;
Now y tell the with melde Stevyn,
This mighty grace came owte fro Hevyn.
Hit cawseth Love and makes men Gracius,
And favorabel in ever man's sight:
Hit makes acorde of two Folks envyus;
Comfort Sorrowful and makes hevy herts light,
Like passing of colur Sunny bright:
Y am a fool to tell the at onys,
Or to teache a Chorle the price of precious Stony^.
Men schalle not put a precius Margareyt,
As Rubeys, Saferys, and odther Stonys ynde;
Emeraudys, nor rownde Perlys white,
Before rude Swyne that love draffe of kind:
For a Sow delyteth her as y find
Mor in foul draffe her Pigs for to glad,
Than all the Perry that comes owte of Granad.
Heche thing draws to his semblable,
Fysshes in the Sea, Bestys on the Stronde;
The Eyr for Fowlys is commendabyl,
To the Plowghman for to till his Land,
And to a Chorle a Muk-forke in his hand.
Y lose my time any more to tare
To tell the bewar of the Lapidare.
That thou had thou getyst no more,
Thy Lyme twigs and Panters y defy;
To let me gone thou were foul over seen,
To lose the richches only of folly:
Y am now fre to sing and to fle
VVher that my list: and he is a Fool at all
That goth at large, and makes himself thrall.
To here of VVisdome thi^neres be half defe,
Like a Nasse that lysteth upon an Harp;
Thou must go pype in a Ive leffe:
Better is to me to sing on Thorns scharpe,
Than in a Cage with a Chorle to carpe:
For hit was said of Folks many year agone,
A Chorles Chorle y^ often wo^ be gone.
Now Chorle y have the her told,
My vertuys her with great experience;
Hit were to sum man better than Gold;
To the yt is no fructius a sentence,
A Chepys Croke to the is better than a Lance:
Adieu now Globb^ with heart sore,
In Chorles clowchys com y never more.
The Chorle felt his heart part in tweyne,
For very sorrow and in sunder ryve:
Alas quod he y may well weep and pleyne;
As a wreche never like to thryve,
But for to endure in povert all my lyve:
For of folly and of wylfulnes,
Y have now lost all holy my riches.
I was a Lord y cry owte on Fortune,
And had great Tresor late in my keepyng;
Wych might have made me long to contune;
With that ilke Stone to have levyd a King,
If y had set hit in a Ryng:
Borne it upon me y had good y now,
Than schuld y no mor have gone to the plowe.
When the Byrds saw the Chorle thus morn,
That he was hevy of his chere,
Sche take her flight and again return:
Toward him and said as ye schal here,
O dull Chorle wisdom for to lere;
That y the taute all is lefe byhynde,
Raised awey and clean owte of thy meynde.
Taw tey the not this Wisdom in sentens,
To every tale brought up of new,
Not to hastyle gyf not there to credens;
Unto time thou know hit be true,
All is not Gold that scheweth Goldys hew:
Nor stonys all by nature as y find,
Been not Saferus that schewyth color ynde.
In this Doctrine y lost my labor,
To teache the such Proverbys of substance;
Now may thou see thy lewd blind error;
For all my body poysed in Balans,
Weyth not a nounce lewd is thy remembrance;
Yet have y mor poyse closyd in mine entrayle,
Than all my Body set for Countervayle.
All my Body weyth not an unce,
How might y have then in me a ston:
That poyseth mor than does a great Jagounce:
Thy brain is dull thy wit almost gone,
Of hre Wysdomys thou have lost on;
Thou schulds not after my sentence,
To every tale gefe to hastyly credence.
I badde also bewar both even and morrow,
For thing lost by suden adventur;
Thou schulds not make to much sorrow;
When thou seyst thou may not hit recover,
Her thou faylest wych does thy besy cure;
In the snare to catch me again,
Thou art a Fool thy labor is in vain.
In the third also thou do rave,
Y bad thou schulds in no manner wise
Covet thing the wych thou may not have,
In wych thou have fogetyn mine empryse,
Thaty may say plainly to devyse,
Thou have in madness forgetyn all three,
Notabyl Wysdomys that y taute the.
Hit were but folly mor with the to carpe,
Or to teache of Wysdomys mor or less;
Y hold him mad that bryngs forth his Harp,
Thereon to teache a rode for doilyd Ass,
And mad is he that syngyth a Fool a Mass:
And he is most madd that does his business,
To teache a Chorle the termys of Gentleness.
And semeblabilly in Apryll and in May,
When gentyl Byrds most make melody;
But the Cockow can sing butoo lay;
In odthir tewnys sche has no fantesy:
Thus every thing as Clerks do specify;
As Fruit on the Trees, and Folk of every age,
Fro whense they come they have a tallage.
The Winter tretyth of his Welsom wyndys,
Of the gentle Fruit bostys the Gardener;
The Fysher castyth his hokys and his lynys,
To catch Fysshe in the fresh Revyr,
Of tyllyth of Land tretyth the power;
The Gentylman tretyth of Gentry,
The Chorle delytith to speak rebawdry.
Al on to a Faucon and a Kyte,*
As good an Owl as a Popyngay;
A dunghyll Douke as deyntieth as a Snyte,
Who servys a Chorle hase many a woeful day,
Y cast me never her after mor with the play;
To fore a Chorle any more to sing,
Of Wisdom to carpe in my lyfyng.
The Folk that schall this Fabyl se and read,
New Forged Talys y council them to fle
For loss of Good take not to great head,
Be not to Sorrowful for noon adversyte;
Covet not thing that may not be,
And remember where ye goan,
A Chorlys Chorle is often woe begone.
Unto purpose this Proverb is full ryve,
Read and reported by old remembrance:
A Chyldys Bird, and a Chorlys Wife,
Has often sythys soror^ and mischaunce.
Who hat fredom ^ath sufficiaunce:
Better is Fre^om with little in gladness,
Than to be Chorle with all worldly rychches.
Go lytyl Quiar and rcommaunde me
To my Master with humbyl affection,
Be sekyng him lowly of mersy and pete
Of this rude making to ha compassion:
And as towchyng this Translacyon
Owte of the Frenshe, how so ever the Englysh be,
All thing is said under correccyon,
With supportation of yowr benygnite.
FINIS.
M: S:
Imago Chauceri


Qui fuit Augsorum Vates ter maximus olim 25 Octobris 1400.

Vaughan sculps:

1556.

depiction of Chaucer's tomb

THE TALE OF THE CHANONS YEOMAN.
Written by our Ancient and famous English Poet, Geoffry Chaucer.
THE PROLOGUE OF The Chanons Yeoman.
When ended was the Life of Saint Cecyle,
Er we fully had rydden fyve mile:
At Boughton under the blee us began a take
A Man that clothed was in clothes blake;
And under that he had a white Surplyse,
His hakeny that was all pomely gryse;
So sweet that itt wonder was to see;
It seemed that he had precked miles three.
The horse eke that his Yoman rode upon,
So Sweet, that vimeth migh he gone:
About the paytrell stood the foam full hye,
He was of foam as flecked as a pie:
A Male twyfolde on his croper lay;
Itt seemed that he carried letel Array;
All fight for somer rode this worthy Man,
And in my heart wondren I began,
What that he was, till I understode,
How that his cloak was sewed to his hode:
For which when I had long avysed me;
I demyd him some Chanon for to be:
His hatt hynge at his back by a Lace,
For he had rydden more then trot or pace.
He rode aye pryckyng as he were wode,
A Clote leaf he had laid under his hode,
For Swett and for to keep his heed from hete,
But itt was joy for to se him sweet:
His foreheed dropped as a Stillatorie,
But full of Playntaine or of Peritorie:
And when he was come he began cry,
God save (quod he) this Jolly company:
Fast have I pricked (quod he) for your sake,
Because that I would you overtake,
To ryden in this merry company.
His Yoman was eke full of curtesy,
And said, Syrs, now in the morrow tide,
Out of your hostrye I saw you ride,
And warned here my Lord and Soverayne,
Which that to ryden with you is full feign:
For his disporte, he loves dalyance.
Frede for thy warning God yeve thee good chance.
Then said our Host, certain itt would seem
Thy Lord were wise, and so I may well deem:
He is full locunde, also dare I lay,
Can he ought tell a merry Tale or tway,
With which he glad may this company?
Who Sir my Lord? ye without lie,
He can of myrthe and eke of Iolyte,
Not but enough also Sir trusts me;
And ye him knew also well as do I,
Ye would wonder how well and thriftely
He con the work and that in sundry wise;
He has taken on him many a great Empryse:
Which were full hard for any that is here,
To bring about, but they of him itt lere.
As homely as he rides among you,
If ye him knew itt would ben for your prowe:
Ye nolde not forgon his aquayntaunce,
For Mochel good I dare lay in balaunce
All that I have in my possession;
He is a man of hye discression:
I warn you well he is a passing wise man.
Well (quod our Host) I pray thee tell me than,
Is he a Clerk or non? tell what he is.
A Clerk! nay greater then a Clerk I wys,
Said the Yoman, and in words few,
Host of his Craft somewhat wol I show;
I say my Lord can such a subtelte,
But of his Craft ye may not wete of me:
And somewhat help I yett to his worchyng,
That all the ground that we be on rydyng,
Till we come to Canterbury Town,
He could all clean turn up and down:
And pave it all of Silver and of Gold.
And when this Yoman had thus I told
Unto our Host, he said benedicite,
This thing is wonder and mavelous to me:
Sens that thy Lord is of so high prudence,
(Because of which men should him reverence,)
That of his worship recketh he so lyte,
His overest slopp is not worth a myte;
As in effect to him so mote I go,
It is all bawdy and to tore alfoe.
Why is thy Lord so slotlyche I thee pray,
And is of power better clothes to bey?
If that his deed accord with thy speech,
Tell me that and that I thee beseech.
Why (quod this Yoman) whereto ask ye me?
God help me so, for he shall never ythe:
But I wol not avow that I say,
And therefore keep itt secrett I you pray;
He is to wise in fay as I believe,
That is overdone will not preve;
And right as Clerks said itt is a vice,
Wherefore I hold him in that leude and nyce;
For when a man has over great a wit,
Full often it happeth him to misusen itt:
So does my Lord, and that me greveth sore;
God amend itt, I can say you no more.
Thereof no force good Yoman (quod our Host)
Sens of the connyng of thy Lord thou wost:
Tell how he does I pray the hertely,
Sens that he is so crafty and so sly,
Where dwellen ye if itt to tell be?
In the Subbarbes of a Town (quod he)
Lurkeyng in hernes and in lanes blind,
Where these Robbers, and Thieves by kind
Holden her privy fearful residence,
As they that dare not shown her presence;
So fare we if that I shall say the sothe,
Yett (quod our Host) let me talk tothe.
Why art thou so discolored in thy face?
Peter (quod he) God yeve itt hard grace;
I am so used in the hott fire to blow,
That itt has changed my color as I trow:
I am not wont in no mirror to prye,
But swynke sore and learn to Multiplye.
We blondren ever and pooren in the fire,
And for all that we faylen of our desire:
For ever we lacken our conclusion,
To much folk we do illusion:
And borrowe Gold be itt a pound or two,
Or ten or twelve or many somes mo,
And make hem wene at the least way,
That of a pound we could make tway;
Yett is itt false, and ay have we good hope
Itt for to done, and after it we grope.
But that Science is so far us by forne,
We mow not all though we had itt sworn
Itt overtake, itt flytte away so fast,
Itt wol us make Beggars at the last.
Whiles this Yeman was thus in his talking
This Chanon drew him nere and herd all thing
Which this Yeman spoke, for suspection
Of men's speech ever had this Chanon:
For Cato says, he that giltye is,
Deemeth all thing be speak of him Iwys:
Because of that he began so nyghe to draw,
To his Yeman to harken all his saw;
And thus he said unto his Yeman tho,
Hold now thy peace and speak no words mo,
For if thou dee, thou shall it sore abye,
Thou standerest me here in this Company:
And eke discoverest that thou sholdest hyde.
Ye (quod our Host) tell on what soever betyde,
Of all his thretynge recke the not a myte.
In faith (quod he) no more do I but lyte.
And when this Chanon saw itt would not be,
But his Yeman would tell his privyte,
He fled away for very sorrow and shame.
A (quod the Yeman) here shall rise a game,
All that I can anon woll I you tell,
Sens he is gone the foul Fend him quell;
For never hereafter wol I with him mete,
For penny ne for pound I you behete;
He that me brought first unto that game,
Er that he dye sorrow have he and shame;
For it is ernest to me by my faith,
That feel I well whatsoe any man says:
And yett for all my smerte and all my grief,
For all my sorrow, labor and mischeife,
I couthe never leave it in noe wise:
Now would God my wit might suffyse,
To tellen all that longs to that Art.
But nathelesse, yet wol I tell you a part:
Sens that my Lord is gone I wol not spare;
Such thing as I know I wol declare.
Here ends the Prologue of the Chanons Yeoman, and here follows his Tale.
THE TALE OF The Chanons Yeoman.
WIth this Chanon I dwelt seven year,
And of this Science am I never the nere:
All that I had I have lost thereby,
And God wotte so has many more then I,
There I was wont to be right, fresh and gay,
Of clothing and eke of other good array;
Now may I wear an hose upon mine heed:
And where my color was both fresh and reed,
Now itt is wanne and of a leaden hew,
Who so itt uses, sore shall him rewe.
And of my swynke yett blered in mine Eye,
Lo which avauntage itt is to Multiply:
That slyding Science has me made so bare,
That I have noe good where that ever I fare:
And yett I am indetted so thereby,
Of Gold, that I have borrowed truly,
That while I live I shall itt quitt never,
Let every man beware by me ever;
What manner man that casts him thereto,
If he continue I hold his thrifte I do:
So help me God thereby shall he never wyn,
But empte his purse and make his wits thyn;
And when he through his madness and folly,
Has lost his own good through Jeopardye:
Than he exiteth other men thereto,
To lose her good as himself has do;
For unto shrewes joy it is and ese,
To have her fellows in pain and disese;
For thus was I ones served of a Clerk;
Of that noe charge, I wol speak of our work.
When we be there as we shall exercise
Our elvish Craft, we semen wonder wise.
Our terms ben so Clergiall and so quaynte,
I blow the fire till mine heart faynte.
What should I tell each proportion
Of things which we werchen upon?
As on fyve or six unces, may well be
Of Silver or of some other quantite;
And besye me to tellen you the names,
Of Orpiment, brent Bones, Iron squames;
That into powder grounden ben full small,
And in an Erthen pott how putt is all:
And salt y put in and also pepere,
Before these powdres that I speak of here:
And well y covered with a lompe of Glass,
And of much other thing that there was.
And of the potts and glass englutyng,
That of the air might pass out nothing;
And of the easy fire and smerte also,
Which that was made, and of the care and woe
That we had in our matters Sublymeing,
And in Amalgamyng and Calsenyng:
Of Quicksilver icleped Mercurye rude,
For all our slight we conne not conclude.
Our Orpyment and Suolymed Mercury;
Our ground Litarge eke on the porphirye:
Of each of these unces a certain
Not helps us, our labor is in vain;
Ne eke our Spyrites assnecioun,
Ne yet our matters, that lain al six adoun:
Mow in our werkyng nothing avayle,
For lost is our labor and our travayle.
And all the Cost, a twenty dyvel away,
Is lost also which we upon itt lay.
There is also full many another thing,
That is to our Craft apertaynyng:
Though I by order hem^ne reherce can,
Because that I am a lewd man.
Yet wol I tellen hem as they come to mind,
Though I ne can set hem in her kind,
As bole Armonyake, Verdegreece, Boras,
And sundry Vessles made of Earth and Glass.
Our Urynalls and our Discensories,
Vyols, Crosseletts and Sublimatories:
Concurbytes and Alembykes eke,
And other such dear enough a leke:
It needs not to reherce them all,
Waters rubyfyeng and Boles, Gall;
Arsneke, Sal Armonyake and Brymstone,
And herbs could I tell eke many one:
As Egrimonye, Valeryan, and Lunarye,
And other such if that me list to tarry;
Our Lamps brennyng both night and day,
To bringen about our Craft if that we may;
Our Fournyce eke of Calcination,
And of our Waters Albifycation.
Unsleked Lyme, Chalk, and glere of an Eye,
Poudres diverse, Ashes, Dong, Piss, and Cley:
Sered pokettes, salt Peter, and Vitriole,
And diverse fyres made of wood and cole;
Sal Tartre, Alkaly, and Sal preparate,
And combust matters, and coagulate,
Cley made with horse donge, man's here and Oil,
Of Tartre, Alym, Glass, Berme, Worte and Argoyle:
Resalgor and other matters enbybyng,
And eke of our Matters encorporing;
And of our Silver Citrynacion,
Our Cementyng, and eke Fermentacyon;
Our Ingottes, Testes and many mo.
I wol you tell as was me taught also,
The four Spyrites and the bodies seven,
By order as often I herd my lord nemene.
The first Spyrite Quicksilver cleped is,
The second Orpyment, the third I wis
Armonyake, the fourth Brimstone.
The Bodies seven eke lo here hem anon,
Sol Gold is, and Luna Sylver we threpe,
Mars, Iron, Mercury, Quicksilver we clepe:
Saturnus Led, and Jupiter is Tynne,
And Venus Copper, by my father kynne.
This cursed Craft who so wol exercise,
He shall noe good have that may him suffyse;
For all the good he spends thereaboute,
He lose shall thereof have I no doubt;
Whosoever that lysten to utter his solye,
Let him com forth and learn to Multiplye:
And every man that has ought in his cofer,
Let him apere and wexe a Philosopher:
Askaunce that Craft is so light for to lere;
Nay God wot all be he Monk or Friar,
Priest, or Chanon, or any other wight,
Though he sytte at his book both day and might;
In lernyng of this Elvysh nyce lore,
All is in vain, and parde much more;
Is to lere a leude man this subtelte,
Fie speak not thereof, itt wol not be;
Al could he lettrure or could he none,
As in effect he shall find itt all one;
For both two by my Salvacyon
Concluden in Multyplycacyon:
Ilyche well when they have al ydo,
This is to sayen, they faylen both two.
Yet forgate I much rehersayle,
Of waters Corosyfe and lymayle:
And of Bodies molifycacion,
And also of her Induration:
Oils, Ablucyons, Metal fusyble
To tellen you all, would pass any Bible:
That O where is, wherefore as for the best
Of all these names now woll I rest.
For as I trow I have you told ynowe
To reyse a Fend, al look he never so row.
A nay let be the Philosphers Stone;
Alixer cleped, we seken fast echeone,
For had we him, than were we syker ynowe:
But unto God of Heaven I make a vow,
For all our craft when that we han al ydo,
And all our sleyght, he wol not come us to;
He has made us spend much good,
For sorrow of which almost we wexen wode;
But that good hope crepeth in our heart,
Supposyng ever though we sore smerte,
To ben releved by him afterward,
Supposyng, and hope is sharp and hard;
I warn you well it is to syken ever,
That future temps has made men discever,
In trust thereof, all that ever they had,
Yet of that Art, they could not wax sad;
For unto him itt is a bitter sweet,
So seems itt, for ne had they but a shete:
Which that they might wrappen hem in a night,
And a bratte to walken in a day light;
They wolden hem sell and spend it on this Craft,
They conne not stynte, till nothing be lafte;
And evermore where that ever they gone,
Men may hem ken by smell of Brimstone:
For all the world they stynken as a Got,
Her Savor is so rammish and so hot:
That though a man a mile from him be,
The savor wol infecte him trusts me.
Lo thus by smelling and by threde-bare array,
If that men list this folk know they may:
And if a man wol ask him prively,
Why they be clothed so unthriftely:
Right anon they will rowne in his ere,
And said if that they aspyed were,
Men would hem slay because of her Science,
Lo thus these folk betrayen innocence.
Pass over this I go my tale unto,
Ere that the pott be on the fire ydo:
Of Metalls with a certain quantyte,
My Lord hem tempreth and no man but he:
Now he is gone I dare say boldly,
For as men said, he can done craftily;
Algate I wotte well he has such a name,
And yet full often he renneth in the blame,
And wotte ye how full often itt happeth so,
The pot to breaks and farewell all is go.
These Mettalls ben of so great violence,
Our walls may not make hem resystence;
But if they were wrought of lyme and stone,
They percen so and through the wall they gone;
And some of them synken into the ground,
Thus have we lost by times many a pound:
And some are scattered all the floor about,
Some lepen into the rofe withouten doubt:
Tho that the fend not in our sight him show,
I trow that he with us be, that ilke shrewe:
In hell where that he is Lord and sire,
Ne is there no more woe, ne anger, ne ire:
When that our pot is broke as I have said,
Every man chyte and holte him yvell apayde.
Some said itt was long of the Fire making,
Some said nay, it was on the blowing:
Than was I ferd, for that was mine office,
Straw (quod the third) ye ben lewd and nyce;
It was not tempered as it ought to be,
Nay (quod the fourth) stynte and harken me:
Because our fire was not made of beche
That is the cause, and none other so teache;
I can not tell whereon itt is alonge,
But well I wotte great strife is us among.
What (quod my lord) there nys no more to done,
Of these peril I will beware often soon;
I am right Syker that the pot was crased,
Be as be may, be ye not amassed;
As usage is, let swepe the floor as swythe,
Pluck up your heart and be glad and blythe.
The Mullocke on an heap yswepte was,
And on the floor cast a Canvas;
And all this Mullocke in a syve y throw,
And ysyfted and yplucked many a throw.
Parde (quod one) somewhat of our Metal;
Yet is there here though we have not all;
And though this thing mishapped has as now,
Another time it may ben well ynowe;
We mote put our good in aventure,
A Merchant parde may not aye endure;
Trusts me well in his prosperyte,
Sometime his good is drowned in the sea:
And sometime it comes safe unto the land.
Peace (quod my lord) the next time I wol fond,
To bring our Craft all in another plyte,
And but I do Syrs let me have the wit:
There was default in somewhat well I wot.
Another said the Fire was over hot.
But be it hot or cold I dare say this,
That we concluden evermore amys:
We faylen of that which we would have,
And in our madness evermore we crave;
And when we be together everychon,
Every man seems as wise as Solomon,
But all thing which that shyneth as the Gold,
Is not Gold as I have here told:
Ne every Apple that is fair at Eye,
Nys not good what so men clappe or cry.
Right so itt fares among us;
He that seems the wysest by Jesus
Is most fool when it comes to the prefe,
And he that seems truest is a Thief:
That shall ye know er that I from you wend,
By that I of my Tale have made an end.
There was a Chanon of Religyoun
Among us, would enfect all a Town,
Rome, Alysaundere, Troy, and other three,
His sleyght and his infynyte falsenesse,
There couthe no man written as I guess;
Though that he might lyve a thousand year
In all this world of falsenesse nigh his pere:
For in his terms he wol him so wind,
And keep his words in so slye a kind,
When he comen shall with any wight,
That he wol make him dote anon right.
But it a feude be as himself is,
Full many a man has he begysed er this;
And mo wol, if that he may lyve a while,
And yet men ryden and gone full many a mile
Him for to seek and have acquayntaunce,
Not knowing of his false governaunce:
And if ye lust to give me audience,
I wol it tellen here in your presence.
But worshipful Chanons relygyouse,
Ne demeth not that I sclaunder your house;
Although my tale of a Chanon be,
Of every order some shrewe is parde:
And God forbid that al a Company
Should rue a syngle man's folly.
To slander you is not mine entente,
But to correct that mysse is mente;
This tale was not only told for you,
But eke for other more ye wotte well how;
That among Christ's Apostles twelve,
There was no traitor but Judas himselve:
Then why should the remenant have blame
That gyltlesse were? by you I say the same:
Save only this, if you wol harken me;
If any Judas in your Cov^ be,
Remeveth him betyme I you read,
If shame or loss may causen any dread,
And be nothing displesed I you pray,
But in this case herkenneth what I say.
In LONDON was a Priest annuellere,
That therein had dwelt many a year,
Which was so plesaunt and so servysable
Unto the Wife, where he was at table;
That she would suffer him nothing to pay
For board, ne clothing, went he never so gay;
And spending Sylver had he right ynowe,
There of no force I wol proceed as now:
And tell forth my tale of the Chanon,
That brought this Priest to confusyon.
This false Chanon came upon a day
Unto this Preests chamber where he lay,
Beseechyng him to leve him a certain
Of Gold, and he would quyte him again:
Leveth me a Mark (quod he) but days three,
And at my day I wol quyte itt the;
And if it so be, that thou find me false,
Another day hang me by the halse.
This Priest took him a Mark and that swyth,
And this Chanon him thanked often sith;
And took his leve, and went forth his wey,
And at his third day brought his money.
And to this Priest he took this Gold again,
Whereof this Priest was glad and fayn.
Certes (quod he) nothing anoyeth me
To lend a man a Noble, two or three;
Or what thing were in my possession,
When he so true is of Condition:
That in no wise he break wol his day,
To such a man I can never say nay.
What (quod this Chanon) should I be untrewe,
Nay! that were a thing salsen of new,
Truth is a thing that wol ever I keep
Unto the day, in which I shall crepe
Into my Grave, or else God forbede:
Beleveth this as syker as your Creed:
God thank I and in good time be it said,
That there was never man yett yvel apayd;
For Gold ne Sylver that he to me lent,
Ne never falsehede in mine heart I meant.
And Sir (quod he) now of my privyte,
Sens ye so goodlych have been to me;
And kythe to me so great gentleness,
Somewhat to quyte with your kyndnesse;
I wol you show if ye wol it lere,
(I shall it show to you anon right here)
How I can werche in Phylosophye:
Takes good head ye shall it se with your Eye,
That I woll done a Maistrye or I go.
Ye Sir (quod the Priest) and wol ye so?
Marye thereof I pray you hertely.
At your Commandment Sir truly,
(Quod the Chanon) and else God forbede,
Lo how this thief con the his servyce bid.
Full sothe itt is that such proffered servyse
Stynketh, as wittnesseth the old wise:
And that full sone I wol it verefye,
In this Chanon rote of all treachery,
That evermore delight has and gladness:
Such fendly thoughts in his heart empress,
How Christ's people he may to mischief bring,
God keep us from his false dissymuling.
What wist this Priest with whom that he delte,
Ne of his harm coming nothing he felt.
O sely Priest, O sely Innocente.
With Covetyse anon thou shall be blente*
O graceless full blind is thy conceyte,
Nothing art thou ware of his deceyte.
Which that this fox has shapen to the,
His wylye wrenches thou may not flo.
Wherefore to go to thy Conclusyon,
That refers to thy confusyon:
Unhappy man anon I wol me hye,
To tell thyn unwitte ne thy folly:
And eke the falsenesse of that other wretch,
As fer forth as my connyng wol stretche.
This Chanon was my Lord ye would wene,
Sir host in faith and by the heven Queen:
It was another Chanon and not he,
That can an hundredfold more subtelte:
He has betrayed folk many a time,
Of his falsenesse it doleth me to ryme;
Ever when I speak of his falseheed,
For shame of him my chekes waxen reed:
Algates they begennen for to glowe,
For redness have I non right well I know
In my visage, for fumes dyverce*
Of Metalls which ye have herd me reherce,
Consumed and wasted has my redness,
Now take heed of this Chanons Cursednesse.
Sir (quod he) to the Priest, set your Man gone,
For Quicksilver that we it had anon;
And let him bring unces two or three,
And when he comes as fast shul ye se
A wonder thing which ye saw never er this;
Sir (quod the Priest) itt shall be done iwys:
He badd his servaunte fetch him this thing,
And he already was at his bydding;
And went him forth and came anon again
With this Quicksylver shortly for to said:
And took these unces there to the Chanoun,
And he hem said well and fair adoun:
And bade the servaunt Coals for to bring,
That he anon might go to his werkyng.
The Coals right anon were yfet,
And this Chanon took out a Crosselett
Of his bosom, and showed it to the Priest:
This Instrument (quod he) which that thou feast
Take in thy hond, and put thy self therein
Of this Quicksylver an unce and begin
In the name of Chist to wexe a Philosopher,
There be full few which I would it profer;
To show him this much of my Science,
For here shul ye se by experience,
That this Quicksylver I wol mortifye
Right in your sight anon withouten lie,
And make it as good Sylver and as fine,
As there is any in your purse or mine,
Or elsewhere, and make it malliable,
Or else hold me false and unstable;
Among folk ever to appear.
I have a poudre that cost me dear,
Shall make all good, for it is cause of all
My connyng, which I you show shall;
Voydeth your Man, and let him be therout,
And shette the door, whiles we ben about
Our privetie, that no man us espy,
Whiles that we Werken in our Philosophye.
Al as he bade fulfilled was indede:
This ylke servant anon out yede,
And his Master shette the door anon,
And to her labor spedily they gone.
This Priest at this cursed Chanons byddyng,
Upon the fire anon set this thing;
And blewe the fire and besyed him full fast,
And this Chanon into this croslet cast
A powder, I not whereof it was,
Ymade either of Chalk, Earth, or Glass
Or somewhat else, was not worth a fly,
To blind with this Priest, and bade him hye
These Coals for to couchen al above
The Crosslet for in token that I the love;
(Quod this Chanon) thyn hondes two,
Shall work al thing that here shall be do;
Grant mercy (quod the Priest) and was full glad,
And couched coals as the Chanon bad.
And while he besy was, this fendely wretch,
This false Chanon, the foul fend him fetch;
Out of his bosom took a bechen cole,
In which full subtelly was made an hole,
And therein was put of Sylver lymayle,
An unce, and stopped was without fail,
The hole with wax to keep the Limayle in.
And understands that this false gyn
Was not made there, but it was made before;
And other things that I shall you tell more
Herafter, that which he with him brought,
Er he came there to begyle him he thought:
And so he did er they went a twynne
Till he had turned him, could he not blynne,
It dulleth me when that I of him speak,
On his false head feign would I me wreke,
If I wyste how, but he is here and there,
He is so varyaunt he bydeth no where.
But takes heed Syrs now for Godds love,
He took his Cole of which I spoke above,
And in his hand he bare it prively,
And whiles the Priest couched besily
The Coals, as I told you er this,
This Chanon said, Friend ye done amys:
This is not couched as it ought to be;
But sone I shall amend it (quod he)
Now let me meddle therewith but a while,
For of you have I pity by Saint Gyle:
Ye ben right hot, I se well how ye sweet,
Have here a clothe and wype away the wete:
And while the Priest him wyped hace,
This Chanon took the Cole, I shrewe his face:
And laid it aboven upon the mydwarde
Of the Croslet, and blewe well afterward,
Till that the Coals gonne fast brenne.
Now yeve us drink (quod this Chanon) then,
As swythe al shall be well I undertake,
Sytte we down and let us merry make;
And when this Chanons bechen Cole
Was brent, all the Limayle out of the hole
Into the Croslet anon fell adoun,
And so it must needs by resoun,
Sens it so even above couched was,
But thereof wyste the Priest nothing alas:
He demed all the coals lyche good,
For of the sleyght nothing he understoode.
And when this Alkamistre saw his time,
Ryseth up Sir Priest (quod he) and stondeth byme;
And for I wott well yngot have I none:
Gothe walks forth and bring a chalk stone,
For I wol make it of the same shappe,
That an yngott is if I may have hap;
And bring eke with you a bolle or a pan
Full of water, and you shall se thanne,
How that our business shall hap and preve,
And yet for ye shall have no misbyleve,
Ne wrong conceyte of me in your absence,
I wol not ben out of your presence:
But go with you and come with yon again.
The Chamber door shortly to said,
They opened and shette and went forth her wey,
And forth with him they carried the key;
And comen again withouten any delay,
What should I tarry all the long day?
He took the Chalk and shope it in the wise
Of an yngot as I shall you devyse.
I say he took out of his own sleve
A teyne of Sylver, yvel mote he cheve;
Which that was but an unce of weight,
And takes heed now of his cursed slight,
He shope his yngot in lenght and in bread
Of the teyne withouten any dread,
So slily that the Priest it not aspyde,
And in his sleve again he began it hyde;
And from the fire took up his Mattere,
And into the yngot it put with merry chere:
And into the water-vessele he it cast
When that him list, and bade the Priest as fast
Look what there is put in thyn hand, and grope,
Thou shall find there Sylver as I hope;
What dyvel of hell should it else be?
Shaving of Sylver, Sylver is parde.
He put in his hand and took up a Teyne
Of Silver fine, and glad in every vein
Was this Priest, when he saw itt was so,
Gods blessing and his Mothers also:
And al hallowes have ye Sir Chanon
Said this Priest, and I her Malyson.
But and ye vouchsafe to teache me
This noble Craft, and this subtelte;
I wol be yours in all that ever I may.
Quod the Chanon yet woll I make assay
The second time, that ye mow take heed,
And ben expert of this and in your need
Another day assay in mine absence,
This Disciplyne and this crafty Science.
Let take onother ounce (quod he) tho
Of Quicksylver withouten words mo,
And don therewith as I have don er this,
With that other which that now silver is.
This Priest him besyeth in all that he can,
To don as this Chanon this cursed man
Commanded him, and fast blew the fire
For to come to the effect of his desire;
And this Chanon right in the mean while,
All ready was, this Priest efte to begyle;
And for a Countenance in his hand bare
An holow stick, take keep and beware;
In thend of which an unce and no more
Of Sylver Lymayle put was, as before,
Was in his cole, and stopped with wexe well,
For to kepen in his Lymaile every dele.
And whiles this Priest was in his business
This Chanon with his stick began him dress
To him anon, and his poudre cast in,
As he did erst, the Dyvell out of his skyn
Him torn, I pray to God for his falshede,
For he was ever false in thought and deed:
And with his stick above the Crosslette,
That was ordained with that false iette,
He styreth the coals till all relent began
The wax again the fire, as every man,
But he a fool be, wot well it mote need,
And all that in the hole was out yede:
And into the crosslette hastily it fell.
The Priest supposed nothing but well,
But besyed him fast and was wonder feign,
Supposing naught but truth, soth to said:
He was so gladd that I cannot express,
In no manner his mirth and his gladness;
And to the Chanon he proffered eft soon
Body and good: ye (quod the Chanon) anon,
Though I be poor, crafty thou shall me find,
I warn the yet is there more behind,
Is there any Copper here within said he?
Ye Sir (quod the Priest) I trow there be.
Else go bye some and that aswythe.
Now good Sir go forth thy way and hythe.
He went his way and with the Coper he came,
And this Chanon in his hand it name;
And of that Coper wayed out but an unce,
All to simple is my tongue to pronounce:
As to ministre by my wit the doubleness
Of this Chanon, root of all cursydnesse:
He seemed freindly to hem that knew him naught.
But he was fendly both in work and thought,
It weryeth me to tell of his falsenesse
And nathlesse, yet wol I it express,
To the intent that men may beware thereby,
And for none other cause truly.
He put this unce of Coper into the Crosslett,
And on the fire as swythe he has it set;
And cast in powder, and made the Priest to blow,
And in his workeing for to stoop low:
As he did erste, and all nas but a jape,
Right as him list, the Priest he made his Ape;
And afterward in the yngot he it cast,
And in the pan put it at the last
Of water, and in he put his own hand,
And in his sleve, as ye by forehonde
Herd me tell, he had a Sylver Teyne,
He slily took it out, this cursed heyne,
Unwetyng this Priest of his false craft,
And in the pannes botome he has it lafte,
And in the water rombleth to and fro:
And wonder prively took up also
The coper Teyne, not knowing this Priest,
And hid itt, and hent him by the breast;
And to him spoke, and thus said in his game,
Stoupeth adowne, by God ye be to blame,
Helps me now, as I did you whylere:
Put in your hand, and looks what is there.
This Priest took up this Sylver Teyne anon,
And then said the Chanon, let us gone
With these three Teynes which we han wrought
To some Goldsmythe, and wete if it be ought:
For by my faith, I nolde for my hoode,
But if it were Sylver fine and good,
And that as swythe wellproved shall be.
Unto the Goldsmythe with these Teynes three,
They went and put them in assaye,
To fire and hammer, might no man say nay,
But they were as them ought for to be.
This sotted Priest who was gladder then he,
Was never Byrd gladder agenst the day,
Ne Nightyngale agenst the ceason of May,
Was never none, that list better to sing,
Ne Lady lustier in Carolyng:
And for to speak of love and woman head,
Ne Knight in arms to done a herdy deed,
To stonden in grace of his Lady dear,
Then had this Priest this craft to lere,
And to the Chanon, thus he spoke and said
For the love of God, that for us all deyd,
And as I may deserve it unto you,
What shall this receite cost, tells me now?
By our Lady (quod this Chanon) it is dear,
I warn you well, save I and a Friar:
In ENGLAND there can no man it make.
No force (quod he) now Sir for Gods sake,
What shall I pay? tell me I you pray.
I wys (quod he) it is full dear I say.
Sir at one word if that ye list it have,
Ye shall pay fortye pound, so God me save:
And nere the freindshyp that ye did er this
To me, ye shulden pay more y wys.
This Priest the some of forty pound anon
Of Nobles fette, and told hem everychon
To this Chanon for this ilke receyte,
All his worchyng was fraud and deceyte.
Sir Priest he said; I keep for to have no loos
Of my craft, for I would itt were kept cloos:
And as ye love me keeps it secre,
For and men know all my Subtelte,
By God men would have so great envye
To me by cause of my Phylosophye:
I should be deed, there were none other way.
God it forbid (quod the Priest) what ye say:
Yet had I lever spend all the good,
Which that I have, or else wax I wood
Than that ye should fallen in such mischeife:
For your good will have ye right good prefe,
(Quod the Chanon) and farewell grant mercy:
He went his way, and never the Priest him sey
After that day: And when that this Priest should
Maken assay at such time as he would,
Of this receyte, farewell it nold not be:
Lo thus bejaped and begyled was he.
Thus makes he his Introduction,
To bring folk to her destruction.
Consydereth Sirs, how in each estate:
Betwixt Men and Gold is debate,
So fer forth, that unneths there is none,
This Multiplyeng blyndeth so many one;
That in good faith, I trow that it be
The greatest cause of such scarsyte:
These Philosophers speken so mistily,
In this Craft, that men cannot come thereby,
For any wit that men have now adays,
They may well chattre and jangle as does the Jayes:
And in her terms set her lust and pain,
But to her purpose shall they never attain;
A man may lightly learn if he have ought,
To Multiply and bring his good to naught:
Lo such a Lucre is in this lusty game,
A man's myrthe it wol turn all to grame:
And emptien also great and hevy purses,
And maken folk to purchase curses:
Of hem that han also her good ylent.
O fie for shame, they that han be burnt:
Alas cannot they fly the fyres hete,
Ye that it usen, I read that ye it let:
Lest ye lesen al, for bet then never is late,
Never to thryve were to long a date,
Though that ye prolle aye ye shall it never find,
Ye ben as bold as is Bayarde the blind;
That blondereth forth, and peril casts none;
He is as bold to run agenst a stone,
As for to go beside in the way;
So faren ye that multiplyen I say;
If that your Eyes can not seen aright,
Looks that your Mind lack not his sight;
For though ye look never so broad and stare,
Ye shall not win a myte in that chaffare:
But waste all that ye may repe and run,
Withdraw the fire least it to fast brenne:
Medleth with that Art noe more I mean;
For if ye done your thrifte is gone full clean.
And right as swythe I woll you tellen here,
What that the Philosophers said in this mattere.
Lo thus says Arnolde of the new town,
As his Rosarye makes mencioune:
He says right thus withouten any lie,
There may noe man Mercury mortifye;
But if it be with his brothers knowlegyng;
Lo how that he which first said this thing
Of Philosophers father was, Hermes.
He says how that the Dragon doutlesse
Ne dies not, but if he be slain
With his brother: and this is for to said,
By the Dragon Mercurye and none other,
He understood that Brimstone was his brother.
That out of Sol and Luna were ydrawe,
And therefore said he, take heed to my saw.
Let no man besye him this Art for to seche,
But he that the Entention and speech
Of Philosophers understonde can,
And if he do he is a lewd man:
For this Science, and this connyng (quod he)
Is of the Secre, of the Secres parde.
Also there was a Disciple of Plato,
That on a time said his Master to:
As his book Senior wol bear witness,
And this was his demand in sothfastnesse.
Tell me the name of the privy Stone?
And Plato answered unto him anon,
Take the Stone that Tytanos men name.
Which is that (quod he?) Magnatia is the same,
Said Plato: ye Sir, and is it thus?
This is ignotum per ignotius:
What is Magnatia good Sir I you pray?
It is a Water that is made I say
Of Elements four (quod Plato)
Tell me the Rock good Sir (quod he tho)
Of that Water, if it be your will.
Nay nay (quod Plato) certain that I nyll,
The Philosophers were y sworn echone,
That they should discover it unto none;
Ne in no Book it write in no manner,
For unto Christ it is so lefe and dear,
That he wol not that it discovered be,
But where it likes to his deite;
Man to enspyre and eke for to defend,
When that him lyketh, lo this is his end.
Then conclude I thus, sens the God of heaven,
Ne will not that the Philosophers nemen:
How that a Man shall come unto this Stone,
I read as for the best, let itt gone;
For who so makes God his adversary,
As for to werche any thing in contrary:
Unto his will, certes never shall he thrive;
Though that he Multiplye term of his live,
And there a point: for ended is my Tale,
God send every true man Bote of his bale.
THE WORK OF JOHN DASTIN.
NOt yet full sleping, nor yet full waking,
But between twain lying in a trance;
Half closed mine Eyne in my slumbering,
Like a Man rapt of all cheer and countenance;
By a manner of weninge and Remembrance
Toward Aurora, ere Pheebus uprose,
I dreamed one came to me to do me pleasaunce
That brought me a Book with seven seals close.
Following upon I had a wonderful dream,
As seemed unto my inward thought,
The face of him shone as the Sun-beame:
Which unto me this hevenly Book brought,
Of so great Riches that yt may not be bought,
In order set by Dame Philosophy,
The Capital and the flowrishing wrought
By a wise Prince called Theology.
This Book was written with letters aureat,
Perpetually to be put in memory,
And to Apollo the Chapters consecrate,
And to the seven Gods in the hevenly Consistory:
And in Mercuries little Oratory,
Grows all the fruit in brief of this Science,
Who can express hem and have of hem Victory,
May claim the triumph of his Mineral prudence.
Of this matter above between Stars seven,
By Gods and Goddesses all of one assent,
Was sent Caducifer to Earth down form Heaven:
Saturnus as Bedell by great advisement;
For to summon a general Parliament,
By concord of all both old and young of age,
To say in Breife their Council most prudent:
For Common proffit to knitt up a Marriage.
Between twain Borne of the Imperial blood,
And descended from Jupiters line,
Of their Natures most pure and most good;
Wythowte infeccion their seed is most divine:
That noe Eclips may let them for to shine,
So that Mercury does stint all debate,
And restrain their Courage by meaknes them incline;
That of frowardnes they be not indurate.
For the Sun that sits so heigh a loft,
His golden dew-droppes shall clearly reign down,
By the mean of Mercury that moven first made soft:
Then there schalbe a glad Conjunccion,
When there is made a Seperacion:
And their two Spermes by Marriage are made one;
And the said Mercury by devision,
Has taken his flight and from both is gone.
These be the two Mercuries chief of Philosophers,
Revived again with the Spirit of life,
Richer then Rubies or Pearls shut in Cofeurs;
Washed and Baptized in waters vegitative,
The body dissevered with heat nutrative:
By moderate moisture of Putrefaccion;
So that there is no excess nor no strife
Of the four Elements in their Conjunccion.
The grain of Wheat which on the ground does fall,
But it be dead it may not fructify,
If it be hole the virtue does appayle;
And in no wise it may not Multiplye,
The increase does begin when it does Putrefie;
Of good Grafts comes Fruits of good lastage;
Of Crabs Verjuyce, of Ash is made Lie,
Of good Grapes follows a good Vintage.
Who sows good Seed repeth good again,
Of Cockles sown there can grow no good Wheat,
For as such a Ploughman traveleth in vain,
To fruitful Land Cockle is not meet;
Gall is ever bitter, Honey is ever sweet,
Of all things contrary is false Conneccions,
Let Male and Female together ever meet;
But both be cleansed of their Complexions.
A Man of Nature ingendereth but a Man,
And every Beast ingendereth his semblable;
And as Philosophers rehearse well can,
Diana and Venus in marriage be notable,
A Horse with a Swine joyneth not in a stable,
For where is made unkindly geniture,
What follows but things abominable?
Which is to say Monstrum in Nature.
All this I find in the said Book,
Brought to me when I lay a sleep;
And of one thing good heed I took;
The Wolf in kind is Enemy to the Sheep.
The Rose full diverse to the wild Neepe:
For things joined that be contrary;
Dame Nature complaining does sit and weep:
For falce receipts found in her Library.
And there it was so pitiously complained,
That men so err by false Opinions
That be so far from truth away restrained,
Like as they had lost wholly their Reasons,
Not considering in their discretions;
What mischeife follows as is often seen,
By these false froward Conneccions:
As does leapers with folks that byne clean.
Notwithstanding he that is sat so high in heaven,
Crowned with a Crown of bright stones clear,
Borne there to rain as chief chosen of seven:
Equal with Phoebus shone in the same sphere,
Without difference as Clerks to us leare,
Sat there most royallin his diadem:
Very Celestial and Angelike of cheer;
And in all virtue like as he did seem.
And in that Book I found well by writing,
Like as the process made mention:
How that there was once a mighty rich King,
Clean of nature and of Complexion:
Void of deformity from head so forth down,
Which for his beauty as it is specified,
And for his cleanes most soverayne of renown:
Was among Planets in heaven stellefyed.
Certain Brethren I found he had in Number,
And of one Mother they were borne every each one:
But a Sickness did them sore cumber,
That none was whole on his feet to gone,
Hoarse of language, clear voice had they none:
For with a scabb that was contagious,
They were infected, hole was their none;
For ever exiled because they were Leaprous.
The said King rose up in his Royal see,
Seeing this mischeife cast his Eye down,
And of his mercy, and fraternall pittye,
Surprised in heart, full of Compassion:
And began to complain of their Infeccion,
Alas quoth he how came this adventure,
Under what froward or false Constelacion;
Or in what hour had ye your ingendure.
But sithence this mischeife is to you befall,
There is nothing which were more expedient,
Then to choose one out amongst us all,
Without spott all clear of his intent,
For you to dye by his own assent,
To save the people from their Damnation:
And with his blood ere yo be fully shent,
To make of his mercy your remission.
The which Liquor most wholesome is and good,
Against leprous humors and false infeccions,
When from a vein taken is the blood;
Cleansing each part from all corrupcions,
The Original taken from generacions:
Which is descended down from stock royal,
Nourished with Milk of pure complexion;
With menstrous which are not superficial.
But when the Brethren of this worthy King
Heard the Language, they fell in full great dread,
Full sore weeping and said in Complaining
That none of them was able to bleed,
Because their blood was infeccious indeed,
And of corrupt blood made is noe Sacrifice,
Wherefore alas there is noe way to speed,
That we can find, to help us in any wise.
Of our Birth and of our Original,
Clearly and truly to make mention;
Excuse is there none in part nor in all;
In sin was first our concepcion:
Our bringing forth and generation,
Fulfilled was in sorrow and wickedness,
And our Mother in a short conclusion
With Corrupt milk us fostred in distress.
For who may make that seed to be clean,
That first was conceived in uncleanes,
For cancred rust may never I mean,
By noe craft show forth parfect brightness:
Now let us all at once our Course addres;
And go unto our Mother to ask by and by,
The final cause of our Corrupt sickness;
That she declare unto us the Cause and why.
The said Children uprose in a fury
Of woeful rage, and went by one assent
Unto their Mother that called was Mercury:
Requiring her by great advisement,
Before her Goddesses being every one present.
To tell them truly and in noe part to feign,
Why their nature was corrupt and shent;
That caused them evermore to weep and complain.
To whom the Mother full bright of face and hew,
Gave this answer remembered in Scripture,
First when I was wedded a new,
I conceived by prosses of true Nature:
A Child of seed that was most clean and pure,
Undefiled, most orient, fair and bright,
Of all the PLANETS chief of ingendure:
Which now in Heaven gives so clcere a light.
Whose Complexion is most temperate,
In heat and cold and in humidity,
In Earth also that there is noe debate,
Nor noe repugnaunce by noe quallity:
Nor none occasion of none infirmity,
That among them there may be none discord,
So well proportioned every-each in his degree,
Each hour and space they be of so true accord.
Whose Nature is so imperial,
That fire so burning does him noe distress:
His royal kind is so celestial,
Of Corrupcion he takes no sickness;
Fire, Water, Air, nor Earth with his drines,
Neither of them may alter his Complexion,
He fixes Spirits through his high noblenes;
Saves infected bodies from their Corrupcion.
His Heavenly health death may not assail,
He dreadeth noe venom, nor needs no treacle,
Wind Tempest ne Wether against him may prevail,
So high in Heaven is his Tabernacle,
In Earth he works many a miracle:
He cures Lepers and fetches home Fugitive,
And to gouty Eyne gives a clear Spectacle:
Them to go that lame were all their lief.
He is my Son and I his Mother dear,
By me conceived truly in Marriage;
As touching your Birth the sickness does appear,
Of Menstruous blood brought forth in tender age,
Your Leprie is showed in Body and in Visage,
To make your hole Medicine is no other
Drink, nor potion to your advantage,
But the pure blood of him that is your dear Brother.
A good Shephard must dye for his Sheep,
Without grudging to speak in words plain,
And semblable take hereof good keep,
Your Brother must dye and new be borne again,
Though he be old, be hereof well certain;
To youth again he must be renewd,
And suffer passion or else all were vain,
Then rising again right fresh and well hewd.
Old Aeson was made young by Medea,
With her drinks and with her potions,
So must your Brother of pure Volunta
Dyeand be young through his operation,
And that through subtle natures Confections,
By whose death plainly to express;
Ye shall be purged from all infeccions:
And your foul leaprie changed to cleanes.
With the said words the King began to abrayd
The tale adverting that she had told,
How might a Man by nature thus he said
Be borne again, namely when he is old?
Then said his Mother by reason manifold:
But if the Gospel thus does mean,
In Water and Spirit be renovate hott and cold,
That he shall never plainly come into Heaven.
The King was tristy and heavy of cheer,
Upon his Knees meekely kneeled down,
Prayed his Father in full low manner,
To translate the Challice of his passion,
But for he thought the redemption
Of his brethren, might not be fulfilled,
Without his death nor their Salvation;
For them to suffer he was right willed.
And for to accomplish his purpose in sentence,
By clear example who so looks right,
Heavy things from their Circumferance,
Must up assend and after be made light,
And things light ready to the flight
Must descend to the Center down,
By interchaunging of natures might,
As they be moved by mean of Revolucion.
So as Jupiter in a Cloud of Gold,
Changed himself by transformacion,
And descended from his hevenly hold
Like a Golden dew unto Danae down,
And she conceived as made is mention,
By influence of his power divine;
Right so shall Phoebus right sovereign of renown
To be conceived of his Golden rain decline.
And to comfort his Brethren that were full dull,
The Sun has chosen without war or strife,
The bright Moon when she was at the full,
To be his Mother first, and after his wedded wife;
In time of Ver the season vegetative,
In Aries when Titan does appear,
Inspired by grace with the Spirit of life,
This marriage hallowed at midday Sphere.
And at this feast were the Gods all,
Saturn from blacknes was turned to white;
And Jupiter let his mantle fall,
Full pale and meager of great delight,
Clothed in lylies that every manner wight,
Of Heaven and Earth, and Gods of the Sea,
Rejoiced in Heart, and were full glad and light,
To be present at this great Solemnity.
Mars forgot there his sturdy black hardines,
Cast off his Habergeon fret with old rust;
Venus forsook her mineral rednes,
Took Gold for green and she again also for lust,
Because she had in Phoebus such a trust,
That he should this feast hold of most noblenes:
Of brotherly pity needs as he must,
Give her a mantle of Oriental brightness.
After this Wedding here before devised,
Of fair Phoebus and fresh Lucine;
Philosophers have prudently practiced,
A Closset round by their wise Doctrine,
Clear as Crystal of Glass a little shrine;
With heavenly deawe stuffed that dungeon,
Kept night and day with glorious maidens nine;
To keep the Queen in her Concepcion.
Religiously they kept their Silence,
Till that from heaven their a royal light,
And there with all in open audience;
Was heard a voice almost at mid night,
Among the Virgins most amiable of sight,
That said unto them, to save that was forlorn;
I must again through my imperial might,
Be of my Mother new conceived and borne.
I must pass by water and by Fire,
The brunt abide and there from not decline,
To save my brethren I have so great desire,
With new light their darkness to yllumine,
But sore I dread that venomous Serpentine,
Which ever advances with his violence,
My tender youth to hurt and to invenome,
But in your keeping do you your diligence.
The King thus entered in his bed royal,
The Queen conceived under a Sun bright;
Under her feet a mount like Crystal,
Which had devoured her husband anon right,
Dead of desire and in the Maidens sight;
Lost all the Color of his fresh face,
Thus was he dead, the Maidens feeble of mighr
Dispaired, flept in the same place.
The Serpent bold shed out his poison,
The Queen and Maidens for fear took them to flight,
Seven times assending up and down
With in a vault, now dark, now clear of light,
Their generation was so strong of might,
Tfter death now passes Purgatory;
Ao Resurreccion as any Sun bright,
Things that were lost to bring to his glory.
The Queen took her full possession,
The Soul reviving of the dead King;
But of old hatred the toxicate poison,
Was by the Serpent cast in to their hindering;
The Prince was buried, but of his rising,
The Btethren were glad the truth was seen,
When they were washed by his natural clensing;
And their old Leprie by Miracle was made clean.
The full Moon half shaddowed the Sun,
To putt away the burning of his light;
Black shaddowed first the skies were so dunn,
The Ravens bill began who looks right,
Blacker then Jett or Bugle to sight;
But l^tle and little by ordinary appearance,
The temperate fire with his cherishing might
Turned all to white, but with noe violence.
Time to the Queen approached of Childing,
The Child of Nature was ready to fly,
Passage was there none to his out going:
He spread his wings and found no liberty;
Of nine Virgins he devoured three,
The other six most excellent and fair,
Fearful for dread in their greatest beauty,
Spread their feathers and flew forth in the Air,
The Child colored first Black and after White,
Having noe heat in very existence,
But by cherishing of the Sun bright,
Of foreign fire there was noe violence:
Save that men say which have experience,
He drank such plenty of the Water of the well,
That his six sisters made noe resistance;
But would have devowred; Dasten can you tell.
Sometimes black, sometimes was he redd,
Now like ashes, now Citrine of Color:
Now of Safforne hew, now sanguine was his head,
Now white as a lylie he showed him in his bower,
The Moon gave nourishment to him in his labor;
And with all their force did their buisnes,
To cloth him fresher then any flower,
With a mantle of everlasting whitnes.
PEARCE THE BLACK MONK upon the Elixir.
TAke Earth of Earth, Erths Mother,
And Watur of Earth yt is no oder,
And Fire of Earth that beryth the pryse,
But of that Earth louke thou be wise,
The true Elixer if thou wylt make,
Earth owte of Earth look that thou take,
Pewer sutel fair and good,
And than take the Water of the Wood:
Clear as Crystal schynyng bright:
And do hem togeder anon right,
Three days than let hem lie,
And than depart hem pryvyly and slye,
Than schale be browght Watur schynyng,
And in that Watur is a soul reynynge,
Invisible and hyd and unseene,
A marvelous matter yt is to ween.
Than depart hem by dystillynge,
And you schalle see an Earth apperinge,
Hevie as metale schalle yt be;
In the wych is hyd great prevety,
Destil that Earth in grene hew,
Three days during well and true;
And do hem in a body of glass,
In the wych never no warke was.
In a Furnas he must be set,
And on his head a good lymbeck;
And draw fro him a Watur clear
The wych Watur has no peer,
And aftur macke your Fire stronger,
And there on thy Glass continue longer,
So schal you se come a Fire;
Red as blood and of great ire,
And aftur that an Earth leave there schale,
The wych is cleped the Mother of all;
Then into Purgatory sche must be do,
And have the pains that longs thereto,
Till sche be bryghter than the Sune,
For than thou have the Maystrey wone;
And that schalbe within hours three,
The wych forsooth is great ferly:
Than do her in a clean Glass,
With some of the Watur that hers was.
And in a Furnas do her again,
Till sche have drunk her Watur certain,
And aftur that Watur give her Blood,
That was her own pewre and good,
And when sche has drank all her Fire,
Sche will wex strong and of great ire.
Than take you mete and mylcke thereto,
And feed the Child as you schowlde do,
Till he be grown to his full age,
Than schal he be of strong courage;
And turn all Bodies that leyfull be,
To his own power and dignitye,
And this is the making of owre Stone,
The truth here is towlde you evereech one.
For all that takes any other wey,
Mouch they loses and mouch they may,
For trewly there is no other way of right,
But Body of Body and Light of Light,
Man of Man begottyn is,
And Best of Best to his lykenes,
All the fools in the world seeken;
A thing that they may never meeten,
They would have Metalle owte of hem,
That never was fownde by worldly men:
Ne never was fownde by Goddis might,
That they schould bear any such fryghte.
All Saltes and Sulphures far and nere,
I interdite hem all in fere,
All Corosive waters, Blood and Hair,
Pyss, Horns, Worms and Saudiver,
Alume, Atriment, all I suspende,
Rasalger and Arsnick I defend,
Calx vive, and Calx mort his Brother,
I suspende them both, one and other,
For of all things I will no more,
But four Elements in General I say so,
Sun and Moon, Earth and Water;
And here is all that men of clatter,
Our Gold and Sylver ben no common plate,
But a sperme owte of a Bodi I take,
In the wych is all Sol, Lune, Life and Light
Water and Earth, Fire and Fryght:
And all commyth of one Image,
But the Water of the Wood makyth the marryage;
Therefore there is none other way,
But to take thee to thy Beads and pray:
For Covetous Men yt fyndyth never,
Though they seek yt once and ever,
Set not your Hearts in this thing,
But only to God and good lyvynge.
And he that will come thereby,
Must be meek, and full of mercy:
Both in spyrit and in Countenannce,
Full of Chereti and good Governaunce;
And evermore full of alms deed,
Simple and pewerly his life to lead:
With Prayers, Pennaunces, and Piety,
And ever to God a lover be,
And all the riches that he is sped,
To do God worschyppe with Alms deed.
In Arsenyck sublymed there is a way straight,
With Mercury calcyned nine times his weight
And grownde together with the Water of might
That bears ingression life and light,
And anon as they together byne,
All runnyth to Water bright and shene,
Upon this Fire they grow togethyr,
Till they be fast and flee no whythyr;
But than feed hem fowrth with thy hond,
With milk and meat tyle they be strong,
And thou schalt have there a good Stone,
Whereof an Ounc on fowrty will gone:
Upon Venus or on Mercury,
This Medicyn will make thee merry.
All you that have sowght mani a day,
Leave work, take yowre Beads and pray,
For the longer that you seeken,
The longer yt is or you meeten;
And he that now feign would be sped,
Lysten to my Daughter Megg:
For schhe scall tell you truth and right,
Hearken now with all your might.
I am Mercury the mighty Flower,
I am most worthy of Honor;
I am sours of Sol, Luna, and Mars,
I am genderer of Iovis, many be my snares:
I am setler of Saturn, and sours of Venus,
I am Empress, Pryncesse and Regal of Queens,
I am Mother of Myrrour, and maker of light,
I am head and highest and fairest in sight:
I am both Sun, and Moon,
I am sche that all things must done.
I have a Daughter hight Saturn that is my darlyng,
The wych is Mother of all werkyng,
For in my Daughter there byne hydd,
Four things Commonly I kydd:
A Golden seed, and a spearme rych,
And a Silver seed none him lich;
And a Mercury seed full bright,
And a Sulphur seed that is right.
Of my Daughter wythowten dred,
Been made Elyxirs white and redd,
Therefore of her draw a Water cler,
The Science if thou list to leare.
This Water reduces every thing,
To tenderness and to fyxing:
It burgeneth growyth and gyveth fryght and light,
Ingression life and lastyng in sight:
All ryghteous works sooth to say,
It helps and bryngyth in a good way:
This is the Water that is most worthy,
Aqua perfectissima and flos mundi:
For all works this Water makyth white,
Reducyng and schyning as Sylver bright:
And of the Oil great marvel there is,
For all things yt bryngyth to rednes:
As Cytrine gold he is full high,
None ye so redd nor none is so worthy:
And in the Earth great marvele is hyd,
That is first so black, and than so red:
And all is done in hours three,
This may be cleped Gods Prevetie:
Than the Earth shall torn red as blood,
Citrine Gold, natural clear and good,
And than the red Oil to hem schall go,
Red Ferment, and red Mercury also,
And grow togeder weeks seven,
Blessed be Almighty God of Heven:
One Ounce of this Medycine worthy
Cast upon two hundred ownces of Mercury:
Schall make Gold most royal,
And ever enduring to hold trial;
Fire and Hammer Tuch and Test,
And all essays most and least.
And yt is Medycen above common Gold,
To man's body as God yt would.
For Gold that comes from the Oar,
Is nourished with foul Sulphur:
And Engendered upon Mercury he is,
And nouryshed by Earth and Sulphur I wys,
And our Gold is made of three pewre souls,
In the wych is noe Corrupcyon foul:
But purged pewre as clean as Crystal,
Body and Spyryt and Soul with all;
And so they grow into a stone,
In the wych Corrupcyon there is none;
And than cast him upon Mercury,
And he schalbe Gold most worthy,
Now have you heard the making of our Stone,
The begynyng and endyng is all one.
THE WORK OF RICH: CARPENTER.
OF Titan Magnasia take the cler light,
The read Gum that is so bright,
Of Philosofris the Sulfer vife,
I called Gold wythouten strife;
Of hem draw owte a Tincture,
And make a matrymony pure:
Between the husband and the wife,
I spoused with the Water of life:
And so that none dyvysion
Be there, in the conjunccion
Of the Moon and of the Son,
After the marriage is begone;
And that Mercury the planete,
In loef make hem so to mete:
That eyder with oder be joined even,
As a Stone engendered sent down fro heven;
Of hem make water clear rennynge,
As any Crystal bright schynynge.
Drawn out of bodies fyxed,
By Nature prively mixed
Within a vessal depured clean,
Of Philosofris bright and schene;
Beware the Fume escape the nowght,
And alleso marked well in thy thowght;
That of the Fire the quallitee,
Equal to Phebez bemes be;
In the month of June and Iule,
Understand me be not dulle;
For thou schalt see marveles great,
Colures spring out of the heat:
First Blakke and White, and so Read,
And after Setryne wythouten dread:
And so within hours three,
That Stone schall through perced be
With Aier that schall upon him light,
The wych is a wonder sight:
Whenne the spiryt is refreyned,
And with the Body so constrained,
That hem asounder may nothing part,
So Nature hem does there so coart,
In matrise whenne they both ben knyte,
Let never thy Vessel be unshytte;
Till this engendered have a stone,
That in this world is not such on:
For hit is called Anymal,
Richer then the Mineral.
Wyche is founden in every plase,
Who foundeth hit might have grase:
In the and me and over all
Both Vegetables and Sophistical:
On Hills hye and Valeys low,
He grows who cowde hit know,
Take this for an informacion,
In Caryt and in Proporcion,
Lyth all who so could seek out,
In Bus and Nubi is all the doubt:
He that puttes hemself in pres,
To Genis and to Species:
Qualitas and every Quantite,
To mane a man hit wol not be,
To bring about this treseur,
I mean owre Stone of such valor;
And yet who could well understonde,
May find hit ready at his hand:
For Fowls that in the Air done flee,
And also Fisches in the Sea:
The moyster of the read Grape
And of the White, who coud him take:
Virtues of Erbes vegetyff,
And souls of Bestes sensytyff:
Reysons of Angels that does discern,
Goude and Yeul Man to govern,
All bryngs to thyn house
This Noble Ston so precious,
And Soverente of all this Work,
Both to Lewd and to Clerk:
This lyth all by discrecion,
In Fire, and in Decoccion:
The craft records yif he can read,
How all and sum who shall speed;
In Books eler as ye may see,
Stat in Ignis regimine:
To bring fosth at my devys,
This rich Rubye, this Ston of prys:
Hard hevy and percyng,
Now is this a wonder thing:
I could never such on a spy;
Save that I find how on Marie:
First found hit wythouten lose,
The wyche was suster to Moysez:
But who hit be that schall hit work,
Let hem not begenn in the derke:
For he may fail for fault of light,
But the Sun schyne full bright:
Advyse the well er thou begene,
Or else little schalt thou win.
THE HUNTING OF the GREENELYON.
ALL hail to the noble Company
Oftrue Students in holy Alchimie,
Whose noble practice does hem teach
To veil their secrets with mistie speech;
Might yt please your worshipfulnes
To hear my silly soothfastnes,
Of that practice which I have seen,
In hunting of the Lion Green:
And because you may be apaid,
That is truth, that I have said;
And that you may for surety ween,
That I know well this Lion green:
I pray your patience to attend
Till you see my short writ end,
Wherein I Will keep my noble Masters read,
Who while he lived stood me in steed;
At his death he made me swear him to,
That all the secrets I schould never undo
To no one Man, but even spread a Cloud
Over my words and writes, and so it shroude,
That they which do this Art desire,
Should first know well to rule their Fire:
For with good reason yt does stand,
Swords to keep fro mad Men's hand:
Least the one should, kill the other burn,
Or either do some sore shroud turn:
As some have done that I have seen,
As they did hunt this Lion green.
Whose color doubtless is not so,
And that your wisdoms well do know;
For no man lives that ever has seen
Upon four feet a Lion colloured green:
But our Lion wanting maturity,
Is called green for unripenes trust me,
And yet full quickly can he run,
And soon can overtake the Sun:
And suddenly can him devour,
If they be both shut in one tower:
And him Eclipse that was so bright,
And make this read to turn to white:
By virtue of his crudytie,
And unripe humors which in him be,
And yet within he has such heat,
That when he has the Sun up eat,
He brings him to more perfection,
Than ever he had by Natures direccion.
This Lion makes the Sun since soon
To be joined to his Sister the Moon:
By way of wedding a wondrous thing,
This Lion should cause hem to begett a King:
And it is as strange that this Kings food,
Can be nothing but this Lions Blood;
And it is as true that this is none other,
Than is it the Kings Father and Mother.
A wonder a Lion, and Sun and Moon,
All these three one deed have done:
The Lion is the Priest, the Sun and Moon the wedd,
Yet they were both borne in the Lions Bed;
And yet this King was begott by none other,
But by Sun and Moon his own Sister and Brother.
O noble Master of pardon I you pray,
Because I did well-neere bewray
The secret which to me is so dear,
For I thought none but Brothers were here:
Than schould I make no doubt
To have written plainly out,
But for my fealty I must keep aye,
I Will turn my pen another way,
To speak under Benedicite
Of this noble Company:
Wych now perceives by this,
That I know what our Lion is.
Although in Science I am noe Clerk,
Yet have I labored in this warke:
And truly wythouten any nay,
If you will listen to my lay:
Some thing thereby you may find,
That well may content your mind,
I will not swear to make you give credence,
For a Philosopher will find here in evidence,
Of the truth, and to men that be Lay,
I skill not greatly what they say.
For they ween that our Lion is
Common Quick silver, but truly they miss:
And of this purpose evermore shall fail,
And spend his Thrift to little avail,
That weeneth to warke his will thereby,
Because he does so readely fly;
Therefore leave off ere thou begin,
Till thou know better what we mean;
Which when thou do than will thou say
That I have tought thee a good lay,
In that which I have said of thee before,
Wherefore lysten and mark well my lore.
When thou have thy Lion with Sol and Luna well fedd,
And laid them clenly in their Bed;
An easy heat they may not miss,
Till each the other well can kiss;
And that they shroude them in a skin,
Such as an Egg yelke lies in:
Than must thou draw from thence away,
A right good secret withouten any nay:
Wych must serve to do thee good,
For yt is the Lions Blood:
And therewith must the King be fedd,
When he is risen from the dead:
But long time it will be,
Or ere his death appear to thee;
And many a sleep thou must lack,
Or thou him see of Color black.
Take heed you move him not with ire,
But keep him in an easy fire;
Until you see him separate,
From his vile Earth vituperate;
Wych will be black and light withal,
Much like the substance of a fusball:
Your magnet in the midst will be,
Of Color fair and white trust me;
Then when you see all this thing,
Your fire one degree increasing;
Until you well may se thereby,
Your matter to grow very dry:
Then yt is fit without delay,
The excrements be taken away;
Prepaire a Bed most bright and shine
For to lodge this young Child in:
And therein let him alone lie,
Till he be thoroughly dry;
Than is time as I do think,
After such drouth to give him drink:
But thereof the truth to show,
Is a great secret well I know;
For Philosophers of time old,
The secret of Imbibition never out told;
To create Magnesia they made no care,
In their Books largely to declare;
But how to order it after his creacion,
They left poor men without consolacion;
So many men thought they had had perfeccion,
But they found nothing in their Projeccion:
Therefore they mard what they had made before,
And of Alchimy they would have no more.
Thus do old Fathers hide it from a Clearke,
Because in it consists the whole subtle warke;
Wych if ye list of me to know,
I shall not fail the truth to show.
When your pure matter in the glass is fit,
Before that you your vessel shitt;
A portion of your Lions sweat
Must be given it for to eat:
And they must be grounded so well together,
That each fro other will flee noe whither;
Then must you seal up your Glass,
And in his Furnace where he was,
You must set them there to dry.
Which being done then truly,
You must prepare like a good Physician,
For another Imbibition:
But evermore look that you dry
Up all his drink, that none lie by,
For if you make him drink too free,
The longer will your workeing be,
And if you let him be too dry,
Than for thirst your Child may dye;
Wherefore the mean to hold is best,
Twixt overmoyst and too much roast;
Six times thy Imbibitions make,
The seventh that Saboath's rest betake:
Eight days twixt ilke day of the six,
To dry up moist and make it fix;
Then at the nynth time thy Glass up seal,
And let him stand six weeks each deal:
With his heat temperd so right,
That Blacknes past he may grow white;
And so the seventh week rest him still,
Till thou Ferment after thy will;
Which if thou wilt Ferment for White,
Thereby thou against noe great profitt;
For I assure thee thou need not dred,
To proceed with fire till all be Redd;
Than must thou proceed as did Philosophers old
To prepaire thy Ferment of peure Gold,
Which how to do though secret that it be,
Yet will I truly teach it thee.
In the next Chapter as erst I did say,
That so the truth find you may,
Therefore of Charity and for our Lords sake,
Let noe man from my writings take
One word, nor add thereto,
For certainly if that he do,
He shall show malice fro the which I am free,
Meaning truth and not subtilty;
Which I refer to the Judgment
Of those which ken the Philosophers intent:
Now listen me with all your might,
How to prepare your Ferment right.
O noble Work of works that God has wrought,
Whereby each thing of things are forth aye brought;
And fitted to their generation,
By a noble fermentacion;
Which Ferment must be of such a thing,
As was the works begyning;
And if thou do progress aright
When thou have brought the work to whight;
And than to stay is thy intent,
Do after my Commandment;
Work Luna by her self alone,
With the blood of the green Lion:
As erst thou did in the beginning,
And of three did make one thing,
Orderly yiedling forth right,
Till thy Magnet schew full white;
So must thou warke all thy Ferment,
Both White and Red, else were yt shent.
Red by yt self and so the White,
With the Lions Blood must be deight;
And if thou wilt follow my lore,
Set in thy Ferment the same hour,
Of Sol for Redd, of Luna for White,
Each by himself let work tight;
So shall thy Ferment be ready edress,
To feed the King with a good mess
Of meats that fit for his digestion,
And well agreeing to his Complexion;
If he be of Color White,
Feed him than with Luna bright;
If his flesh be perfect Red,
Than with the Sun he must be fedd,
Your Ferment one fourth part must be,
Into your Magnet made evenly,
And join hem warm and not cold,
For raw to ripe you may be bold
Have disagreement so have heat and cold:
Therefore put hem warm into thy Glass,
Then seal it up even as it was:
And Circle all till yt be won,
By passing degrees every each one:
Both black and white, and also redd,
Than of the Fire here have noe dread;
For he will never dread the fire,
But ever abide thy desire.
And here a secret to thee I must show,
How to Multeplie that thou must know,
Or else it will be over micle pain
For thee to begin thy work again:
I say to thee that in noe fashion,
It Is so well Multeplied as with continual Firmentation:
And sure far it will be exalted at the last,
And in Projeccion ren full fast:
There for in fire keep Firment always,
That thy Medicine augment may aye;
For if the maid do not her leaven save,
Then of her Neighbors sche must needs go crave;
Or sche must stay till sche can make more,
Remember the Proverb that store is no sore:
Thus have I tought thee a lesson, full of truth,
If thou be wicked therefore my heart is reuth:
Remember God his blessing he can take,
When he has given it, if abuse any you make,
For surely if thou be a Clerk,
Thou wilt find truth in this work:
But if so be that thou be lay,
And understond not what I say,
Keep Council then and leve thy Toy,
For it befitts no Lymmer loy,
To meddle with such great secrecy:
As is this high Phylosophye.
My Council take, for ^how schalt find it true,
Leave of seeking this Lion to pursue,
For him to hunt that is a pretty wyle,
Yet by his Craft he does most Folk beguile,
And hem devour and leave hem full of care,
Wherefore I bidd thee to beware.
And Council give thee as my friend,
And so my Hunting here I end.
Praying God that made us we may not myss
To dwell with him in his Hevenly blyss.
THE BREVIARY OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY.

Compiled by the unlettered Scholar THOMAS CHARNOCK.

Student in the most worthy Science of Astronomy and Philosophy. The first of
January Anno. Dom. 1557.

Anno. Dom. 1557. The first day of the new year This Treatise was begun as
after may appear.

The Book Speaks.
COme hither my Children of this Discipline,
Which in natural Philosophy have spent so long time;
To ease your painful Study I am well willed
And by the grace of God it shall be fulfilled;
If he in me (my Author) will shed one drop of grace,
The better he shall finish me and in shorter space.
And if you will know what I am surely,
I am named the The Breviary of natural Philosophy.
Declaring all Vessels and Instruments,
Which in this Science serve our intents.
For more things belong unto the same,
More then any Author has written the Name;
Which has brought many a one in great doubt,
What is the Implements that longs thereabout;
Wherefore in good order, I will anon declare,
What Instruments for our Art you need to prepare.
The Preface of the Author.
Go forth little Book in volume but small,
Yet have thou in thee that is not in them All,
For satisfying the minds of the Students in this Art,
Then art thou worth as many Books, as will lie in a Cart:
Glad may he be that has thee in his keeping,
For he may find through diligent seeking,
All things in thee which shall be necessary,
As Vessels and Instruments belonging to Alchimy;
Which would set many a Man's heart on fire,
To have the same knowledge they have so great desire.
And no mervaile though they be glad and feign,
For they have spent many a pound in vain;
In making of Vessels of many diverse sorts,
And have brought them out of many strange Ports:
Because they did not well understand,
That all things we need we have in England.
Now think you that this will not save many a Mark,
Unto those that have wrestled so long in our Warke?
Yes some would spend all the Money in their pouch,
If they knew but this or half so much.
Wherefore of pity I will no longer refrain,
But declare all things their purpose to attain.
Wherefore if you do happen on my Book,
Either by Casualty, Hook, or by Crook:
Yet pray for my Soul when I am dead and rotten,
That of Alchimy Science the door has let open;
Sufficient for thee if thou have any Brain,
Now sharpen thy wits that thou may it attain.
The Breviary of Philosophy.
The first Chapter.
NOw will I declare all things at large,
Of Implements of this Work and what is the charge:
And first with the Potter I will begin,
Which cannot make that which he has never seen;
Whether that thy Vessels be made to thy mind,
Stand by while he works more surety to find,
And show him what to do by some sign or similitude,
And if his wits be not to dull nor rude,
He will understand what thou do mean,
For I think few Potters within this Realm
Have made at any time such cunning ware,
As we for our Science do fashion and prepaire;
And when he has formed them unto thy purpose,
For what occasion thou need not disclose:
But if he say unto you, Good Master mine,
Tell me for what purpose or what engine
Shall these Vessels serve that thou cause me to make,
For all my life hitherto I dare undertake
I never formed such, nor the like of them;
Yet are they but plain without wrinkle or hem,
One within another, it is a pretty feate,
The third without them to guide up the heat:
Then say unto him to satisfy his mind,
That ye have a Father which is somewhat blind,
Who if it please God you will endeavor,
To still a water his blindness to dissever:
Which is the Elixir of life as wise men say,
And in this doing God send me my pray;
Then will he say this or the like,
I pray God to send ye that which you seek,
And thus with the Potter thou have now done,
Without thou break thy Pots with the heat of the Sun:
Which if it do it turns thee to pain,
And there is no way but to make them new again.
As soon as with the Potter thou have made an end,
Then with a Ioyner thou must Condescend,
Who also must have this Council and wit,
To make a Tabernacle the Vessel to fit;
Which will be also in great doubt,
For what purpose it will serve about;
In that he never made nor framed none such,
Although it be made like to a Hutch:
Then tell him a Tale of a roasted Horse,
Unto the which he will have no remorse:
And laugh and say it is a Borrough for a Fox,
Although it be made sure with Keys and lock,
And thus with the Ioyner thou have made an end,
Without thou set it on fire as I did mine.
As for Glassemahers they be scantin this land,
Yet one there is as I do understand:
And in Sussex is now his habitacion,
At Chiddinsfold he works of his Occupacion:
To go to him it is necessary and meet,
Or send a servant that is discreet:
And desire him in most humble wife
Ito blow thee a Glass after thy devise;
If were worth many an Arm or a Leg,
The could shape it like to an egg;
To open and to close as close as a hair,
If thou have such a one thou need not fear.
Yet if thou had a number in to store,
It is the the better, for Store is no sore.
The second Chapter.
NOW LORD of thy grace I beseech thee suffer me,
To finish my pretense in this rude Study:
For this nor ought else without thy help can be done,
As neither the Conjuncion of Sun nor Moon:
Nor yet other Planets can motion themselves an hour,
Without thy providence and thy divine power:
Wherefore in all things that we do begin,
Let us with prayer call for help of him:
That he bring our doings to effect,
Which must be done very Circumspect:
Wherefore if you think to obtain your intent,
Fear God and keep his Commandment:
And beware of Pride and let it pass,
And never be looking too much in thy Glass;
Deceive noe man with false measure,
For truly that is ill gotten treasure:
But let thy weights be true and just,
For weight and measure every man must
Unto his Neighbor yield uprightly,
And so must thou in the work of Philosophy:
And also feed him which is hungry,
And give him drink which is thirsty.
Give liberally I say as riches do arise,
And from thirsty body turn not away thy Eyes.
What and two poor Men at one time come unto thee
And say, Master; for the love of God and our Lady,
Give us your Charity whatsoever you please,
For we have not one penny to do us ease;
And we are now ready to the Sea pressed,
Where we must abide three months at the least;
All which time to Land we shall not pass,
No although our Ship be made but of Glass,
But all tempest of the Air we must abide,
And in dangerous roades many times to ride;
Bread we shall have none, nor yet other food,
But only fair water descending from a Cloud:
The Moon shall us burn so in process of time,
That we shall be as black as men of Inde:
But shortly we shall pass into another Clymate,
Where we shall receive a more purer estate;
For this our Sins we make our Purgatory,
For the which we shall receive a Spiritual body:
A body I say which if it should be sold,
Truly I say it is worth his weight in Gold:
Son give these two, one penny in their Journey to drink,
And thou shall speed the better truly as I think.
The third Chapter.
NOw have I good will largely to write,
Although I can but slenderly indite;
But whether I can or cannot indeed,
With the Chapter of Fire I will proceed:
Which if thou know not how to govern and keep,
Thou were as good go to bed and sleep,
As to be combred therewith about,
And therefore I put thee most certainly out of doubt;
For when I studied this Science as thou do now,
I fell to practice by God I vow:
I was never so troubled in all my life beforne,
As intending to my Fire both Midday Eve and Morn:
And all to keep it at an even stay;
It has wrought me woe more then I will say.
Yet one thing of truth I will thee tell,
What great mishap unto my Work befell;
It was upon a Newyeares day at Noone,
My Tabernacle caught fire, it was soon done:
For within an hour it was right well,
And straight of fire I had a smell.
I ran up to my work right,
And when I came it was on a fire light:
Then was I in such fear that I began to stagger,
As if I had byne wounded to the heart with a dagger;
And can you blame me? no I think not much,
For if I had been a man any thing rich,
I had rather have given 100 Marks to the Poor,
Rather then that hap should have chanced that hour.
For I was well onward of my Work truly,
God save my Masters life, for when he thought to dye,
He gave me his work and made me his Heir,
Wherefore always he shall have my prayer:
I obtained his grace the date herefro not to vary,
In the first and second year of King Phillip and Queen Mary.
Yet lewdly I lost it as I have you told,
And so I began the new and forgot the old,
Yet many a night after I could not sleep in Bed
For ever that mischance troubled my head,
And fear thereof I would not abide again;
No though I should reap a double gain,
Wherefore my charge rose to a greater sum,
As in hyring of a good stout Groom;
Which might abide to watch and give attendance,
Yet often times he did me displeasaunce,
And would sleep so long till the Fire went out,
Then would the Knave that whoreson Lout,
Cast in Tallow to make the fire burn quicker,
Which when I knew made me more sicker;
And thus was I cumbred with a drunken sott,
That with his hasty fire made my Work too hott;
And with his sloth again he set my work behind;
For remedy thereof to quiet my Mind,
I thrust him out of doors, and took my self the pain,
Although it be troublesome it is the more certain;
For servants do not pass how our works do frame,
But have more delight to play and to game.
A good servant says Solomon let him be unto thee,
As thine own heart in each degree.
For it is precious a faithful servant to find,
Esteem him above treasure if he be to thy mind;
Not wretchles, but sober, wise, and quiet,
Such a one were even for my diet:
Thus having warned thee of an ill servant sufficient,
But a good servant is for our intent.
The fourth Chapter.
WHen my Man was gone I began it anewe,
And old troubles then in my mind did renew;
As to break sleep oftentimes in the night,
For fear that my Work went not aright;
And oftentimes I was in great doubt,
Least that in the night, my fire should go out:
Or that it should give to much heat,
The pensivenes thereof made me to break sleep:
And also in the day least it should miscary,
It has made my mind oftentimes to vary;
Wherefore if thou will follow my read,
See thy fire safe when thou go to Bed:
At Midnight also when thou do arise,
And in so doing I judge thee to be wise:
Beware that thy Fire do no man harm,
For thou know many a man's House and Barn
Have byne set on fire by mischance,
And specially when a Fool has the governance;
Our Fire is chargeable, and will amount
Above 3. pound a week, who has list to cast account,
Which is chargeable to many a poor man,
And specially to me as I tell can:
And Geber bids poor men be content,
Haec Scientia pauperi and agento non convenit
Sed potius est illis inimica, and bids them beware,
Because their money they may not well spare;
For thou must have Fires more then one or two,
What they he George Ripley will thee show;
Above a hundred pounds truly did I spend,
Only in fire ere 9. months came to an end;
But indeed I begun when all things were dear,
Both Tallow, Candle, Wood, Coal and Fire:
Which charges to bear sometimes I have sold,
Now a Jewel, and then a ring of Gold:
And when I was within a Months reckoning,
Wars were proclaimed against the French King.
Then a Gentleman that ought me great malice,
Caused me to be pressed to go serve at Callys:
When I saw there was none other boot,
But that I must go spite of my heart toote;
In my fury I took a Hatchet in my hand,
And brake all my Work whereas it did stand;
And as for my Potts I knocked them together,
And also my Glasses into many a shiver;
The Crows head began to appear as black as Iett*
Yet in my fury I did nothing let:
But with my work made such a furious fair,
That the Quintessence flew forth in the Air.
Farewell quoth I, and seeing thou art gone,
Surely I will never cast of my Fawcon,
To procure thee again to put me to hinderance,
Without it be my fortune and chance,
To speak with my good Master or that I dye;
Master I. S. his name is truly:
Nighe the City of Salisbury his dwelling is,
A spiritual man for sooth he is;
For whose prosperity I am bound to pray,
For that he was my Tutor many a day,
And understood as much of Philosophy,
As ever did Arnold or Raymund Lullie:
Geber, Hermes, Arda, nor yet King Caleb,
Understood no more then my good Master did.
I traveled this Realm Est and West over,
Yet found I not the like between the Mount and Dover:
But only a Monk of whom I Will speak anon,
Each of them had accomplished our White Stone:
But yet to the Red Work they never came near,
The cause hereafter more plainly shall appear;
And thus when I had taken all this pains,
And then could not reap the fruit of my gains:
I thought to my self, so to set out this Warke,
That others by fortune may hit right the Mark.
The fifth Chapter.
I am sorry I have nothing to require my Masters gentleness,
But only this Book a little short Treatise;
Which I dare say shall as welcome be to him,
As if I had sent him a Couple of Milch Kine:
And here for his sake I will disclose unto thee,
A great seacret which by God and the Trinity,
Since that our Lord this world first began,
Was it not so opened I dare lay my hand,
No, all the Philosophers which were before this day,
Never knew this secret I dare boldly say.
And now to obtain thy purpose more rathe.
Let thy Fire be as temperate as the Bath of the Bathe.
Oh what a goodly and profitable Instrument,
Is the Bath of the Bathe for our fiery intent!
To seek all the World throughout I should not find,
For profit and liberty a Fire more fit to my mind.
Go or ride where you list for the space of a year
Thou need not care for the mending of thy Fire.
A Monk of Bath which of that house was Pryor,
Told me in seacret he occupied none other fire,
To whom I gave credit even at the first season,
Because it depended upon very good reason:
He had our Stone, our Medicine, our Elixir and all,
Which when the Abbie was suppressed he hid in a wall:
And ten days after he went to fetch it out,
And there he found but the stopple of a Clout.
Then he told me he was in such an Agony,
That for the loss thereof he thought he should be frenzy,
And a Toy took him in the head to run such a race,
That many year after he had no settling place;
And more he is dark and cannot see,
But has a Boy to lead him through the Country.
I happened to come on a day whereas he was,
And by a word or two that he let pass,
I understood straight he was a Philosopher,
For the which cause I drew to him near;
And when the Company was all gone,
And none but his Boy and he and I alone,
Master quoth I for the love of God and Charity,
Teach me the seacrets of Natural Philosophy.
No Son, quoth he, I know not what thou art,
And shall I reveal to thee such a preciuos Art?
No man by me shall get such gains,
No not my Boy which takes with me such pains,
That to disclose it lies not in my Bands,
For I must surrender it into the Lords hands,
Because I hear not of one that has the same;
Which lifts up his mind and is apt for the same,
Which if I could find I would ere I dye,
Reveal to him that same great mystery:
Yet one there is about the City of Salisbury,
A young man of the age of Eight and Twenty,
Charnock is his name of Tennet that Isle,
His praise and Comendacions sounds many a Mile;
That for a Young man he is toward and apt,
In all the seven liberal Scyences set none apart:
But of each of them he has much or title,
Whereof in our Science he may claim a title:
His praise spreads also for his good indighting,
And of some of his doings I have heard the reciting,
Both of Prose and Meeter, and of Verse also,
And sure I commend him for his first show,
I think Chancer at his years was not the like,
And Skeleton at his years was further to seek;
Wherefore for his knowledge, gravity and wit,
He may well be Crowned Poet Laureat.
Cease Father quoth I and hear me speak,
For my name is Charnock upon whom you treat;
But this which you say to me is great wonder,
For these quallities and I am far assunder;
I am no such Man as you have made reckoning,
But you shall speak for me when I go a wiving:
Your praise will make me speed, though it be not true,
Nor yet my substance worth an old horse shoe.
Is your name Charnocke, and the same Man?
Yea Sir quoth I: then stumbled he to give me his hand:
And talked an hour with me in the Philosophers speech,
And heard that in no question I was to seeche,
My Son quoth he let me have thy prayer,
For of this Science I will make thee mine heir;
Boy quoth he lead me into some secret place,
And then depart for a certain space,
Until this man and I have talked together:
Which being done, quoth he, now gentle Brother,
Will you with me to morrow be content,
Faithfully to receive the blessed Sacrament,
Upon this Oath that I shall here you give,
For ne Gold ne Silver as long as you live,
Neither for love you bear toward your Kin,
Nor yet to no great Man preferment to win:
That you disclose the seacret that I shall you teach,
Neither by writing nor by no swift speech;
But only to him which you be sure
Has ever searched after the seacrets of Nature?
To him you may reveal the seacrets of this Art, (depart.
Under the Covering of Philosophy before this world ye
What answer will you give me: let me hear?
Master quoth I, I grant your desire.
Then Son quoth he keep this Oath I charge thee well
As think to be saved from the pit of Hell.
The next day we went to Church, and after our devocion
A Priest of his Gentleness heard both our Confessions;
Which being done, ^o Mass straight we went,
And he ministered to us the holy Sacrament;
But he never wist what we meant therein:
For with a contrary reason I did him blind,
And so home to dinner we went to our host,
All which refeccion I paid for the Cost.
When dinner was done I walked in the field
Large and plain, where people pass by but sield,
And when we were in the midds, Boy quoth he go pick a Thistle
And come not again before I for thee whistle.
Now Master quoth I the Coast from hearers is clear,
Then quoth he my Son hearken in thine Ear;
And within three or four words he revealed unto me,
Of Mineralls prudence the great Mystery.
Which when I heard my Spirits were ravished for Joy,
The Grecians were never gladder for the wynning of Troy:
As I was then remembering my good Master thoe,
For even the self same secret he did me show:
Nine days and no more I tarried with him sure,
But Lord in this time what secrets of Nature
He opened to me at diverse sundry times,
As partly I have told thee in my former Rimes:
The rest is not to be written on pain of Damnacion,
Or else in this Book truly I would make relation;
Now Father quoth I, I will depart you froe,
And for you I will pray whether soever I go;
Son quoth he Gods blessing go with thee and thine,
And if thou speed well, let me hear of thee again.
The sixth Chapter.
WHen I was gone a mile or two abroad,
With fervent prayer I praised the Lord:
Giveing him thanks for that prosperous Journey,
Which was more leaver to me then an 100 l. in money:
Surely quoth I my Master shall know all this,
Or else my Brains shall serve me amiss;
Which if they were so good as the Monk made mencio^,
Then would I write to my Master with a better invencio^,
O Lord quoth I what a solemn Oath was this given!
Surely in sheets of Brass it is worthy to be graven;
For a perpetual memory ever to remain
Among the Philosophers, for an Oath certain:
And when I was two days Journey homeward,
To ask him a question to him again I fared,
Which I had forgotten, and would not for my Land,
But that doubt truly I might understand.
I thought it not much to go back with all speed,
To seek him out, and to the house where I left him I yed,
And there in a Chamber anon I found him out,
Praying upon his Beads very devout:
Father quoth I a word with you I do beseech:
Who is that quoth he? my Son Charnock by his speech:
Yea forsooth quoth I, I am come back to you,
Desiring you heartily to tell me one thing true:
Which is this. Who was in Philosophy your Tutor,
And of that Seacret to you the Revealer?
Marry quoth he and speak it with hearty Joy,
Forsooth it was Ripley the Canon his Boy:
Then I remembered my good Master again,
Which told he did it never attain
Of no manner of Man but of God, he put it in his head,
As he for it was thinking lying in his Bead:
And thus I tarried with him all that night,
And made him as good Cheer as I might.
In the morning I took my leave of him to depart,
And in the process of time came home with a merry heart;
But that mirth was shortly turned to care,
For as I have told you so my Work did fare.
Once I set it on fire which did me much woe,
And after my Man hindered me a Month or two;
Yet the Gentleman did me more spite then the rest,
As when he made me from work to be pressed,
Then Bedlam could not hold me I was so frett,
But sowst at my work with a great Hatchett;
Rathing my Potts and my Glasses altogether,
I wisse they cost me more or I got them thither:
The ashes with my stur flew all about,
One Fire I spilt and the other I put out:
All the Rubish to the dunghill I carried in a Sack,
And the next day I took my Coats with the Cross at the back;
And forth I went to serve a Soldiers rome
And surely quoth I, there shall come the day of Dome;
Before I practice again to be a Philosopher,
Wherefore have me Commended to my good Master.
And now my students in this Art, my promise I have kept justly,
And that you shall find true when you understand me truly;
Which before that day never think to speed,
For a plainer Book then this never desire to read:
And true it is also if you can pick it out,
But it is not for every Cart slave or Loute;
This to understand, no though his wits were fine,
For it shall be hard enough for a very good Divine
To Conster our meaning of this worthy Science,
But in the study of it he has taken great diligence:
Now for my good Master and Me I desire you to pray,
And if God spare me life I will mend this another day.
Finished the 20th of JULY, 1557. By the unlettered Scholar THOMAS CHARNOCK,
Student in the most worthy Science of ASTRONOMY and PHILOSOPHY.
Aenigma ad Alchimiam.
When vii. times xxvi. had run their raze,
Then Nature discovered his black face:
But when an C. and L. had overcome him in fight,
He made him wash his face white and bright:
Then came xxxvi. with great rialltie,
And made Black and White away to fle:
Me thought he was a Prince off honor,
For he was all in Golden armoure;
And one his head a Crown off Gold
That for no riches it might be sold:
Which till I saw my hartte was cold
To think at length who should wine the filde
Till Black and White to Red did yield;
Then heartily to God did I pray
That ever I saw that joyful day.
1572. T. Charnocke.

Aenigma de Alchimiae.
WHen vii times xxvi had run their raze,
Then Nature discoved his black face.
But whith an C. and L. came in with great blost
And made Black nigh to fly the Cost:
Yet one came after and brought 30. off great might,
Which made Black and White to flee quite;
Me thought he was a Prince off honor,
For he was all in Golden Armoure,
And one his head a Crown off Gold:
That for no riches it might be sold,
And trewly with no Philosopher I do mock;
For I did it my sellffe Thomas Charnocke:
Therefore God coomforte the in thy warke
For all our wrettinges are very dark,
Despise all Books and them defye,
Wherein is nothing but Recipe and Accipe;
Few learned men with in this Realm,
Can tell the aright what I do mean;
I could find never man but one,
Which cowlde teach me the secrets off our Stone:
And that was a Pryste in the Close off Salesburie,
God rest his Soll in heven full myrie.
1572. T. CHARNOCKE.

BLOOMEFIELDS BLOSSOMS: OR, The Camp of PHILOSOPHY.
WHen Phoebus was entered the sign of the Ram,
In the Month of March when all things do spring;
Lying in my bed an old Man to me came,
Laying his hand on my buisy head flumbering;
I am, said he, Time, The Producer of all thing:
Awake and rise, prepaire thy self quickly,
My intent is to bring thee to the Camp of Philosophy.
Bloomes and Blossoms plentifully in that field,
Been plesantly flourishing dickt with Color gay,
Lively water fountains eke Beasts both tame and wild;
Over shaddowed with Trees fruitful on every spraye,
Mellodiously singing the Birds do sit and say:
Father Son and holy Ghost one God in persons three,
Impery and honor be to thee O holy Trinity,
Lo thus when he had said I arose quickly,
Doing on my Clothes in have with agility,
Toward the Camp (we went) of Philosophy:
The wonderful sights there for to see;
To a large great Gate father Time brought me,
Which closed was then he to me said,
Each thing has his Time, be thou then nothing dismayed.
Then great admiration I took unto my self,
With sore and huge perturbacion of mind,
Beholding the Gate fastened with locks twelve:
I fantised but smally that Time should be my friend:
Why studiest thou man, quoth he, art thou blind?
With a rodd he touched me. whereat I did down fall
Into a strong sleep, and in a Dream he showed me all.
Igitur audite somnium meum quod vidi.
In the thousand year of Christ five hundred fifty and seven
In the Month of March a sleep as I did lie,
Late in the night, of the clock about Eleven,
In spirit wrapped I was suddenly into Heaven:
Where I saw sitting in most glorious Majesty
Three I beholding: adored but one Deity.
A Spirit incircumscript, with burning heat incombustible,
Shining with brightness, permanent as fountain of all light.
Three knit in one with Glory incomprehensible;
Which to behold I had a great delight:
This truly to attain to, surmounteth my might:
But a voice from that Glorious brightness to me said,
I am one God of immensurable Majesty; be not afraid.
In this Vision clear, that did it self so extend
With a voice most pleasant being three in one;
Peirced my Mind, and tought me to Comprehend
The dark sayings of Philosophers each one;
The Altitude, Latitude, and Profundity of the Stone,
To be three in Substance, and one in Essence;
A most Heavenly Treasure procreate by Quintessence.
Then studied I what this Quintessence should be,
Of visible things apparent to the Eye;
The fifth being even a strange privetie,
In every substance resting invisibly;
The invisible Godhead is the same thought I;
Primer cause of being, and the Primer Essence:
And of the Macrocosmy the most sovereign Quintessence.
This is that heavenly seacret potentiall,
That divided is, and rests invisible
In all things Animal, Vigetall and Mineral;
Whose virtue and strength in them is indivisible:
From God it comes, and God makes it sensible,
To some Elect, to others he does it denay,
As I sat thus musing a voice to me did say.
Study thou no more of my Being, but sted fastly
Believe this Trinity equally knit in One;
Further of my Secrets to muse it is but folly,
Passing the Capacity of all humane reason;
The Heavens closed up again at that season:
Then Father Time set me at the Gate,
And delivered me a Key to enter in thereat.
The Key of knowledge and of Excellent Science;
Whereby all secrets of Philosophy are reserate;
The seacrets of Nature sought out by diligence;
Avoiding fables of envious fools inveterate:
Whith Recipe and Decipe this Science is violate.
Therefore to me this Key he did dispose
The seacrets of this Art to open and disclose.
Thus said Father Time this Key when he me took;
Unlock quoth he this Gate now by thy self,
And then upon him sorrowfully did I look,
Saying that one Key could not undo Locks twelve,
Whose Axe quoth he is sure both head and helve
Hold will together, till the Tree down fall,
So open thou the first Lock and thou have opned all.
What is the first Lock named tell me then
I pray thee, said I, and what shall I it call?
It is said he the Seacret of all wise Men;
Chaos in the bodies called the first Original:
Prima materia, our Mercury, our Menstruall:
Our Vitrioll, our Sulphur, our Lunary most of price;
Put the Key in the Lock, twill open with a trice.
Then the Key of knowledge I busily took in hand
And began to search the hollownes in the Lock,
The words thereof I scarce did understand,
So craftily conveid they were in their stock;
I proved every way, and at last I did unlock
The crafty Gynns thus made for the nonce,
And with it the other Locks fell open all at once.
At this Gate opening even in the entry
A number of Philosophers in the face I met,
Working all one way the secrets of Philosophy
Upon Chaos dark that among them was set,
Sober men of living, peaceable and quiet;
They buisily disputed the Materia Prima,
Rejecting clean away Simul stulta and frivola.
Here I saw the Father of Philosophers, Hermes,
Here I saw Aristotle with cheer most jocund;
Here I saw Morien, and Senior in Turba more or less,
Sober Democritus, Albert, Bacon and Ramund,
The Monk and the Chanon of Bridlington so profound,
Working most seacretly, who said unto me;
Beware thou believe not all that thou do see.
But if thou will enter this Camp of Philosophy
With thee take Time to guide thee in the way;
For By-pathes and Broad ways deep Valies and hills high
Here shall thou find, with sights pleasant and gay,
Some thou shall meet with, which unto thee shall say,
Recipe this, and that; with a thousand things more,
To Decipe thy self, and others; as they have done before.
Then Father Time and I by favor of these men
Such sights to see passed forth toward the Camp,
Where we met disguised Philosophers lean,
With Porpheries, and Morters ready to grind and stamp,
Their heads shaking, their hands full of the Crampe:
Some lame with Spasmer, some feeble, wan and blind
With Arsnick and Sulphus, to this Art most unkind.
These were Brook the Priest, and York with Coats gay,
Which robbed KING HENRY of a Million of Gold,
Martin Perien, Major, and Thomas De-la-hay
Saying that the King they greatly enrich would,
They whispered in his Ear and this Tale they him told.
We will work for your highness the Elixer vitae,
A princely work called Opus Regale.
Then brought they in the Viccar of Malden
With his Green Lion that most Royal seacrett,
Richard Record, and little Master Eden,
Their Mettalls by Corrasives to Calcine and frett;
Hugh Oldcastle and Sir Robert Green with them met.
Roasting and boiling all things out of kind,
And like Foolosophers left of with loss in the end.
Yet brought they forth things beautiful to sight,
Deluding the King thus from day to day,
With Copper Citrinate for the Red, and albified for the White.
And with Mercury rubified in a glass full gay,
But at the last in the fire they went away.
All this was because they knew not the verity,
Of Altitude, Latitude and Profundity.
Thence Father Time brought me into a Wilderness,
Into a Thicket having bypath many one;
Steps and footeings I saw there more and less
Wherein the aforesaid men had wandered and gone,
There I saw Marcasites, Mineralls, and many a stone.
As Iridis, Talck, and Alome, lay digd from the ground
The Mines of Lead, and Iron, that they had out found.
No marvel I trow though they were much set by
That with so great Riches could endue the King,
So many Sundry ways to fill up his Treasury;
With filty matters great charges in to bring,
The very next way a Prince to bring to begging;
And make a noble Realm and Common wealth decay,
These are Royal Philosophers the clean contrary way.
From thence forth I went (Time being my guide,)
Through a green Wood, where Birds sing clearly,
Till we came to a field pleasant large and wide
Which he said was called The Camp of Philosophy;
There down we satt to hear the sweet Harmony
Of diverse Birds in their sweet Notes singing,
And to receive the Savor of the flowers springing.
Here Juno, here Pallas, here Apollo do dwell;
Here true Philosophers take their dwelling place
Here duly the Muses nine drink of Pyrenes Well,
No boasting broyler here the Art can deface;
Here Lady Philosophy has her royal Palace:
Holding her Court in most high Consistory,
Sitting with her Counselors most famous of memory.
There one said to me, an ancient Man was he,
Declaring forth the Matter of the Stone;
Saying that he was sent thither to Council me,
And of his Religion to choose me to be one;
A Cloth of Tishue he had him upon,
Verged about with Pearls of Color fresh and gay,
He proceeds with his Tale, and again he did thus say.
Here all occult seacrets of Nature known are,
Here all the Elements from things are drawn out;
Here Fire, Air and Water in Earth are knit together:
Here all our seacret work is truly brought about,
Here thou must learn in thy buisines to be stout,
Night and day thou must tend thy work buisily,
Having constant patience never to be weary.
As we satt talking by the Rivers running clear,
I cast mine Eye aside and there I did behold
A Lady most excellent sitting in an Arbor
Which clothed was in a Robe of fine Gold,
Set about with Pearls and Stones manifold.
Then ask't I Father Time what she should be?
Lady Philosophy quoth, hemost excellent of beauty.
Then was I stricken with an ardent Audacity,
The place to approach to where I saw this sight,
I rose up to walk and the other went before me,
Against the Arbor, till I came forth right,
There we all three humbly as we might,
Bowed down our selves to her with humility,
With great admiration extolling her felicity.
She showed her self both gentle and benign,
Her gesture and Countenance gladded our coming:
From her seat imperial she did her self decline,
As a Lady loving perfect wisdom and Cunning,
Her goodly Poems, her Beauty was surmounting:
Her speech was decorate with such aureat sentence,
Far excelling famous Tullies Eloquence.
Then Father Time unto that Lady said,
Pleases it your highness this poor Man to hear,
And him to assist with your most gracious aid:
Then she commanded him with me to draw near
Son, said the Lady, be thou of good Cheer.
Admitted thou shall be among great and small
To be one of my Scholars principal.
Then she committed me to Raymund Lullie,
Commanding him my simplenes to instruct,
And into her Secrets to induce me fully,
Into her privy Garden to be my conduct:
First into a Tower most beautiful construct,
Father Raymund me brought, and thence immediately
He led me into her Garden planted deliciously.
Among the fair Trees one Tree in special,
Most vernant and pleasant appeared to my sight.
A name inscribed, The Tree Philosophical,
Which to behold I had great delight:
Then to Philosophy my troth I did plight
Her Majesty to serve; and to take great pain,
The fruits of that Tree with Raymund to attain.
Then Raymund showed me Budds fifteen
Springing of that Tree, and fruits fifteen more,
Of the which said Tree proceeds that we do mean;
That all Philosophers covet to attain unto
The blessed Stone; one in Number and no more:
Our great Elixer most high of price,
Our Azot, our Basaliske, our Adrop, and our Cocatrice.
This is our Antimony and our Red Lead
Gloriously shining as Phoebus at midday,
This is our Crown of Glory and Diadem of our head;
Whose beams resplendant shall never fade away;
Who attaines this Treasure, never can decay:
It is a Jewel so abundant and excellent,
That one grain will endure ever to be permanent.
I leave thee here now our seacrets to attain,
Look that thou earnestly my Council do ensue,
There needs no blowing at the Cole, buisines nor pain:
But at thine own ease here may thou continue,
Old Ancient writers believe which are true:
And they shall thee learn to pass it to bring.
Beware therefore of too many, and hold thee to one thing,
This one thing is nothing else but the Lion green,
Which some Fools imagine to be Vitrioll Roman,
It is not of that thing which Philosophers mean,
For nothing to us any Corosive does pertain,
Understand therefore or else thy hand refrain
From this hard Science, least thou do work amiss,
For I will tell thee truly; now mark what it is.
Green of Collor our Lion is not truly
But vernant and green evermore enduring
In most bitterness of death, he is lively:
In the fire burning he is evermore springing;
Therefore the Salamander by the fire living,
Some men do him call, and some na other name,
The Mettasline Menstruall, it is ever the same.
Some call it also a Substance exuberate,
Some call it Mercury of Mettaline essence,
Some Limus deserti from his body evacuate,
Some the Eagle flying from the North with violence:
Some call it a Toade for his great vehemence.
But few or none at all do name it in his kind,
It is a privy Quintessence; keep it well in mind.
This is not in sight, but restest invisible;
Till it be forced out of Chaos dark,
Where he remains ever indivisible,
And yet in him is the foundation of our warke,
In our Lead it is, so that thou it mark.
Drive it out of him so out of all other,
I can tell thee no better if thou were my Brother.
This Chaos dark the Mettalls I do call,
Because as in a Prison it rests them within,
The seacret of Nature they keep in thrall:
Which by a mean we do warily out-twyne,
The working whereof the easier to begin.
Lift up thy head and look upon the heaven,
And I will learn thee truly to know the Planets seven.
The second part of the BOOK.
Saturn in all, to this Art has most respect,
Of whom we draw a Quintessence most excellent,
Unto our Magistery himself he does connect,
United in quallitie, and also made equipolent
In strength and in virtue; who lists to be diligent,
Shall find that we seek an heavenly tresure
And a precious Jewel that ever shall endure.
Jupiter the gentle, endewed with Azure blew,
Examiner by Justice declares true Judgment,
Altering his Colors ever fresh and new,
In his occult Nature to this Art is convenient;
To Philosophy is serviceable and also obedient,
Joined with Lunary after his own kind,
Conteyneth this Art and leaves nothing behind.
Mars that is Martial in City and Town,
Fierce in Battle, full of debate and strife,
A noble Warrior, and famous of renown,
With fire and sword defends his own life,
He staineth with blood and slaieth with a knife
All spirits and bodies, his Arts be so bold,
The hearts of all others he wyns to him with Gold.
The Sun most glorious shining with power potent,
Above all other fair Planets seven,
Shedding his light to them all indifferent,
With his glorious Beams and glistering shine,
He lightneth the Earth and the Firmament of Heaven:
Who can him dissolve and draw out his Quintessence,
Unto all other Planets he shall give influence.
Lady Venus of love the fair Goddess
With her Son Cupid apperteyneth to this Art,
To the love of the Sun when she does her address,
With her Darts of love strikes him to the heart,
Joined to his seed of his substance she takes part:
Her self she endueth with excellent Tissue,
Her corrupt nature when she does renew.
Mercury this seeing begineth to be fugitive,
With his rodd of Enchantment little does he prevail,
Taken often Prisoner himself does revive;
Till he be snared with the Dragons Tail
Then does he on a hard Coat of Male,
Soudred together with the Sunn and Moon,
Then is he Mastered and his Enchantment done.
The Moon that is called the lesser Lunary,
Wife unto Phoebus, shining by Night,
To others gives her Garments through her herb Lunary,
And from the North to the South shines full bright,
If you do for her look she hydeth from your sight.
But by fair entreaty she is won at the last,
With Azot and Fire the whole Mastery thou have.
The Maistery thou gettest not yet of these Planets seven,
But by a misty meaning known only unto us;
Bring them first to Hell, and afterward to Heaven:
Betwixt life and death then thou must discuss,
Therefore I council thee that thou w^rke thus.
Dissolve and Separate them, Sublime, Fix and Congeale,
Then have thou all: therefore do as I thee tell.
Dissolve not with Corrosive nor use Separacion
With vehemence of Fire, as Multipliers do use,
Nor to the Glass topp make thou Sublimacion;
Such ways inordinate Philosophers refuse,
Their sayings follow, and wisely them peruse:
Then shall thou not thy self lewdly delude
In this goodly Science: Adieu, I thus conclude.
Incipit Theorica.
WE intend now through grace divine
In few words of Chaos for to write,
Light from Darkness to cause forth to shine,
Long before hidden as I shall recite,
In every thing unknown it is requisite
A Seacret to search out which is invisible,
Material of our Maistry, a substance insensible.
Because I should not seem to enclose
Long hidden seacrets unto me committed,
Of my Lord God. Therefore plainly of Chaos,
My purpose shall be thereof to be acquitted,
For dangerous burdens are not easily lighted.
In faith therefore I shall my self endeavor,
Lightly to discharge me before God for ever.
Devotely therefore unto thee O Lord I call,
Send me thy Grace to make explicacion
Of Chaos: For thou art opener of seacrets all:
Which ever art ready to hear the Suplicacion
Of thy meek Servants, which with hearty humiliacion
To thee do I apply: send me now thy grace
Of thy Secrets, to write in due order time and place.
Chaos is no more to say, this is doubtless,
(As Ovid writes in his Metamorphosin)
But a certain rude substance, indigestaque; moles,
Having diverse Natures resting it within,
Which with the Contrary we may it out twyne.
By Philosophers Art, who so the feat does know
The four Elements from Chaos to out draw.
This Chaos as all things has Dimensions three,
Which well considered shall follow the effect,
That is Altitude, Latitude and Profunditie,
By which three all the Water is direct:
Unto these Dimensions who has no respect
Shall never divide the Chaos in his kind,
But after his labor shall find fraud in the end.
Chaos is to us the Vine-tree white and red,
Chaos is each Beast, Fish and Foul in his kind,
Chaos is the Oar, and Mine of Tinn and Lead,
Of Gold and Silver that we out find,
Iron and Copper which things do bind:
And hold our sights and wits unto them bound,
The seacrets hid in them which we ne understand.
Out of this misty Chaos, the Philosophers expert,
Do a substance draw called a Quintessence.
Craftily deviding the four Elements by Art:
With great Wisdom study and Diligence,
The which high Seacreat has a divine Influence;
That is supernatural of Fools thought impossible,
An Oil or such like called Incombustible.
The Maystery of this plainly to show thee,
In form heareafter I will it declare:
Setting forth here the Philosophers Tree,
Wherein now the whole Art I shall Compare:
In this fair Tree Sixteen fruits are,
More precious then Gold in the Stomach to digest,
Put thy hand thereto and take of the best.
And lest the fault imputed should be,
In me, or nothers that of this Art does write.
I set before thee the true figure of the Tree,
Wherein orderly the Art I will recite;
Understand my Sentence that thou may work right,
Consider that I said that Chaos is all thing
That we begin of, the true way of working.
Put case thy Chaos be Animal, Vegitall or Mineral,
Let reason guide thee to work after the same;
If thou workest out of kind, then loosest thou all:
For Nature with Nature rejoices and makes true game,
Work Animal with his kind and keep thee out of blame;
Vegetable and Mineral in their Order due,
Then shall thou be counted a Philosopher true.
When thou have found what it is indeed,
Then know thou thy form by reason it must be,
Search it wittily and draw from him his seed:
Then is there thy Altitude superficial to see,
The Latitude shall appear anon believe me.
When thou have divided the Elements assunder,
Then the Profundity amongst them lies hid under.
Here is Materia Prima, and Corpus confusum,
But not yet the Matter of which Philosophers do treat,
Yet this one conteyneth the other in Sum:
For Forma, Materia and Corpus together are knit;
With the Menstruall Water first thou must them frett:
That the Body first be finely Calcinate,
After dissolved and purely evacuate,
Then is it the true Mercury of the Philosophers,
Unto the Maystery apt needful and serviceable;
More of this thing I need not much rehearse:
For this is all the Secret most Commendable;
Materia Prima it is called Multiplicable,
The which by Art must be exuberate,
Then it is the Matter of which Mettalls were generate*
Sulphur of Nature and not that which is common,
Of Mettalls must be made; if that thou wilt^ speed,
Which will turn them to his kind every each one;
His Tincture into them abroad he will spread,
It wili fix Mercury common at thy need.
And make him apt true Tincture to receive.
Work as I have told thee, and it shall not thee deceive.
Then of Sun and Moon make thou Oil incombustible,
With Mercury vegetable or else with Lunary,
Inserate therewith and make thy Sulphur fluxible
To abide thy Fire and also thy Mercury
Be fixed and flowing, then have thou wrought truly.
And so have thou made a Work for the nonce,
And got a Stone more precious then all Stones.
Fix it up now with perfect Decoccion,
And that with easy heat, and not vehement,
For fear of Induracion, and Vitrifica^ion,
Least thou loose all and thy labor misspent:
With Eight days and nights, this Stone is sufficient,
The great Elixir most high of price,
Which Raymond called his Basiliske and Cocatrice.
To this excellent work great Cost need not be,
Many Glasses or Potts about it to break,
One Glass, one Furnace and no more of necessity,
Who more does spill, his wits are but weak,
All this is stilled in a Limbeck with a Beak.
As touching the Order of Distillacion,
And with a blind head on the same for Solucion.
In this thy Mercury takes his true kind,
In this he is brought to Multiplicacion;
In this made he his Sulphur, bear it well in mind,
Tincture he has herein, and inceracion,
In this the Stone is brought to his perfect Creacion;
In one Glass, one Thing, one Fire and no mo,
This Work is Complete. Dagloriam Deo.
Incipit Practica.
WE have sufficiently declared the Theorique,
In words mystical making declaracion.
Let us now proceed plainly with the Practique,
Largely of the Matter to make explanacion:
I will therefore that you mark well my Narracion,
As true Disciples my Doctrine to attend
My Testament, and last Will to you I do comend.
Be you Holy therefore, Sober, Honest, and Meek;
Love God and your Neighbor, to the Poor be not unkind;
Overcome Satan, Gods Glory see you seek,
My Son be gentle to all men, as a Friend;
Fatherles and Widow have always in thy mind,
Innocente love as Brothers, the wicked do eschew,
Let Flasehood and Flattery go, least thou it rue.
Devoutely serve God, call daily for his grace,
Worship him in Spirit with heart contrit^ and pure,
In no wise let Satan thy prayers deface:
Look thou be steadfast in faith and trust most sure,
Lay up treasure in heaven which ever shall endure:
In all Adversity be gentle in thy heart
Against thy Foe; so shall thou him convert.
Most heartily therefore O Lord to thee I call,
Beseeching thee to aid me with thy heavenly grace,
Lovingly thy Spirit upon me down let fall;
Overshaddowing me that I at no time trespass,
My Lord and my God grant me to purchase
Full knowledge of thy Secrets, with thy mercy to wine,
Intending thy truth this Practice I begin.
Listen thou my Son, and thine Ears incline.
Delight have thou to learn this Practice sage and true,
Attend my saying, and nore well this Discipline:
These Rules following do as it does ensue,
This labor once begun thou must it continue
Without tedious sluggardice, and slothful wearines:
So shall thou thereby acquire to thee great Riches.
In the name of God this Seacret to attain,
Join thou in one Body with a perfect unity:
First the red Man, and the white Woman these twain:
One of the Man's substance; and of the Woman's three,
By Liquefaction joined together must they be:
The which Conjunction is called Diptative,
That thus is made between Man and Wife.
Then after that they be one Body made,
With the sharp teeth of a Dragon finely,
Bring them to Dust, the next must be had,
The true proporcion of that Dust truly,
In a true Balance weighing them equally;
With three times as much of the fiery Dragon
Mixing altogether, then have thou well done.
Thy Substance thus together proportionate,
Put in a Bed of Glass with a bottom large and round,
There in due time to dye, and be regenerate
Into a new Nature, three Natures into one bound,
Then be thou glad that ever thou it found.
For this is the Jewel shall stand thee most in stead,
The Crown of Glory, and Diadem of thy head.
When thou have thus mixed thy Matter as is said,
Stop well the Glass that the Dragon go not out;
For he is so subtle that if he be overlayd
With Fire unnatural, I put thee out of doubt,
For to escape he will search all about;
Therefore with gentle Fire look that thou keep it in,
So shall thou of him the whole Maystery win.
The whole Maystery hereof duly to fulfill,
Set thy Glass and Matter upon thine Athenor;
Our Furnace called the Philosophers Dunghill,
With a temperate heat working evermore;
Night and day continually have Fuel in store,
Of Turfe, of Sawdust, or dry chopped segges,
That the heat be equipolent to the Hen upon her Eggs.
Such heat continually look thou do not lack,
Forty days long for their perfect union
In them is made; For first it turns to Black,
This Color betokens the right Putrefaction,
This is the beginning of perfect Conception
Of your Infant into a new generation,
A most precious Jewel for our Consolation.
Forty days more the Matter shall turn White,
And clear as Pearls; which is a declaration,
Of voiding away of his Clouds dark night;
This shows our Infants full organization,
Our White Elixir most clear in his Creation.
From White into all Colors withouten fail,
Like to the Rainebow or the Peacocks Tail.
So forth augment thy Fire continually,
Under thy Matter easily they must be fedd,
Till these Colors be gone use it wisely;
For soon after appears Yellow the messenger of the Redd,
When that is come then have thou well sped,
And have brought forth a Stone of price,
Which Raymund calls his Basiliske and Cocatrice.
Then 40 days to take his whole Fixation,
Let it stand in heat most temperate,
That in that time thou spare thy Fermentation,
To increase him withal that he be not violate,
Beware of Fire and Water, for that will it suffocate.
Take one to a hundred of this Confection,
And upon crude Mercury make thou Projection.
One of thy Stone I mean upon an hundred fold,
After the first and second right Fermentation,
Of Mercury crude, turns it to fine Gold,
As fine, as good, and as natural in ponderation,
The Stone is so vehement in his penetrations,
Fixed and Fusible as the Goldsmiths Souder is,
Work as I have said, and thou can not do amiss.
Now give thanks to the blessed Trinity,
For the benefit of this precious Stone,
That with his grace has so much lightened thee,
Him for to know being three in one,
Hold up thy hands to his heavenly Throne.
To his Majesty let us sing Hosanna,
Altissimo Deo sit honor and gloria.
The Conclusion.
OUr Magistery is Three, Two, and One:
The Animal, Vegitable and Mineral Stone.
First I say in the name of the holy Trinity,
Look that thou join in One, Persons Three.
The Fixed, the Variable and the Fugitive,
T^ll they together taste Death and Live.
The first ^^ the D^agon fell,
That shall the other twain both slay and quell:
The Sun and Moon shall loose their light,
And in mourning Sables they shall them dight,
Threescore days long or neer^ thereabouts:
Then shall Phoebus appear first out,
With strange Colors in all the Firmament,
Then our Joy is coming and at hand present:
Then Or^ent Phoebus in his hemisphere
To us full gloriously shall appear:
Thus who can work wisely
Shall attains unto our Ma^stery.
FINIS.
SIR EDWARD KELLE'S WORK.
ALL you that feign Philosophers would be,
And night and day in Geber's kitchen broyle,
Wasting the chipps of ancient Hermes Tree,
Weening to turn them to a precious Oil,
The more you work the more you loose and spoil.
To you I say, how learned soever you be,
Go burn your Books and come and learn of me.
Although to my one Book you have red tenn,
That's not enough, for I have heard it said,
The greatest Clerks are not the wisest men,
A Lion once a silly Mouse obeyed,
In my good will so hold your selves appaid:
And though I write not half so sweet as Tully,
Yet shall you find I trace the stepps of Lully.
Yt does you good to think how your desire,
And self-conceit does warrantize vain hope,
You spare no cost, you want no coals for fire,
You know the virtues of the Elitrope,
You think your selves far richer then the Pope.
What thing has being either high or low,
But their Materia prima you do know.
Elixir vitae, and the precious Stone,
You know as well as how to make an Apple;
If'te come to the workinge then let you alone,
You know the coullers black brown bay and dapple,
Controwle you once then you begin to fraple.
Swearing and saying, what a fellow is this?
Yet still you work but ever work amiss.
No no, my friends, it is not vauntinge words,
Nor mighty oaths that gains that sacred skill;
It is obtained by grace and not by swords;
Nor by great reading, nor by long sitting still,
Nor fond conceit nor working all by will.
But as I said by grace it is obtained,
Seek grace, therefore, let folly be refrained.
It is no costly thing I you assure,
That does beget Magnesia in her kind.
Yet is her self by leprosy made pure:
Her eyes be cleerer being first made blind:
And he that can Earths fastnes once unbind,
Shall quickly know that I the truth have told,
Of sweet Magnesia, Wife to purest Gold.
Now what is meant by Man and Wife is this,
Agent and Patient, yet not two but one,
Even as was Eva, Adams Wife I wisse:
Flesh of his Flesh and Bone of his Bone,
Such is the Unionhood of our precious Stone.
As Adam slept until his Wife was made,
Even so our Stone, there can no more be said.
By this you se how thus it came to pass,
That first was Man, and Woman then of him:
Thus Adam here as first and cheifest was,
And still remaineda Man of perfect limme,
Then Man and Wife were joynd together trim.
And each in love to other straight addressed them,
And did increase their kind when God had blessed them.
Even so the Man our Stone is said to sleep,
Until such time his Wife be fully wrought;
Then he awakes, and joyfully does keep
His new made Spouse, which he so dearly bought,
And when to such perfection they be brought,
Rejoice the beauty of so fair a bride,
Whose worth is more then half the world beside.
I doubt as yet you hardly understand,
What Man or Wife does truly signify,
And yet I know you bear your selves in hand,
That out of doubt it Sulpher is and Mercury,
And so yt is, but not the common certainly:
But Mercury essential is trewly the true Wife,
That killes her self to bring her Child to life.
For first and foremost she receaves the Man,
Her perefct love does make her soon conceive:
Then does she strive with all the force she can,
In spite of love, of life him to bereave,
Which being done, then will she never leave,
But labor kindly like a loving Wife,
Until again she him have brought to life.
Then he again her kindness to requite,
Upon her head does set a Crown of glory,
And to her praise he Poems does indite,
Whose Poems make each Poet write a story,
And that she slew him then she is not sorry.
For he by virtue of his loving Wife,
Not only lives, but also gives life.
But here I wish you rightly understand,
How here he m^k^s his Concubine his Wife,
Which if you know not, do not take in hand,
This work which unto fools is nothing rife,
And look you make attonem^nt where is strife.
Then strip the Man into his shi^t of T^shew,
And her out of her smock to engender issue.
To tell you troath he wants for no Wives
In Land, or Sea, in Water, Air, or F^re,
Without their deaths he wa^eth not their lives.
Except they live he wants his chief desire,
He binds them prentice to the righte^^ D^er,
And when they once all Sorrows have abidden,
Then find they Joys which from them first were hidden.
For then they find the Joy of sweet increase,
They bring forth Children beautiful to sight.
The which are able Prisners to release;
And to the darkest Bodies give true light,
Their hevenly Tincture is of such great might.
Oh! he that can but light on such a treasure,
Who would not think his Joys were out of measure?
Now by this question I shall quickly know
If you can tell which is his Wife indeed:
Is she quick footed, fair faced yea or no,
Flying or fixed as you in Books do read?
Is she to be fed or else does she feed?
Wherein does she joy, where is her habitation?
Heavenly or Earthly, or of a strange nation?
What is she poor? or is she of any wealth?
Bravely of her attire, or mean in her apparel?
Or is she sick? or is she in perfect health?
Mild of her Nature? or is she given to quarrel?
Is she a Glutton? or loves she the Barrel?
If any one of these you name her for to be,
You know not his Wife, nor never did her see.
And that will I prove to you by good reason,
That truly noe one of all these is she,
This is a question to you that is geason:
And yet some part of them all she must be,
Why then, some part is not all you may see.
Therefore the true Wife which I do mean,
Of all these Contraries is the Mean between.
As Meal and Water joined both together,
Is neither Meal nor Water now but Dow;
Which being baked, is Dow nor Water neither:
Nor any more will each from other go,
The mean between is Wife, our Wife even so:
And in this hidden point our seacret lies,
It is enough, few words content the wise.
Now by this simile here I do reveal,
A mighty Seacret if you mark it well;
Call Mercury Water, imagine Sulphur Meal,
What Meal I mean I hope the wise can tell:
Bake them by craft, make them together dwell,
And in your working make not too much have,
For Wife she is not while she is in Paste.
This lesson learned now give me leave to play,
I shall the fitter be to learn another,
My mind is turned clean came another way.
I do not love sweet secret thoughts to smother,
It is a Child you know that makes a Mother.
Since so it is then must we have a Child,
Or else of Motherhood we are beguild.
What will you say if I a wonder tell you,
And prove the Mother is Child and Mother too?
Do you not think I go about to sell you
A bargain in sport, as some are wont to do?
Is It possible the Mother, to wear her Infants shoe?
In faith it is in our Philosophy,
As I will prove by reason by and by.
Ripley does bid you take it for no scorn,
With patience to attend the true Conjunccion,
For says he in the Air our Child is borne,
There he receives the holy Unction,
Also with it a heavenly function.
For after death revived again to life,
This all in all both Husband Child and Wife.
Whilst all is Earth Conception it is termed,
And Putrefaction time of lying in,
Perfect Conjunction (by artes-men is affirmd)
The woman's Childing where does all Joy beg
Who knows not this, his wits are very thin.
When she is strong and shines fair and bright,
She Is termed the Wife most beautiful to sight.
Lo thus you see that you are not beguiled;
For if you mark it I have proved by Reason,
How both is one the Mother and the Child,
Conception, Breeding, Childing, every season:
I have declared to you without all Treason,
Or any false ambiguous word at all;
And hewn you work then find it true you shall.
This is that Mercury essential truly,
Which is the principal of the Stone material,
And not those crude Amalgames began newly;
These are but Mercuries superficial,
This is that Menstrue of perfect ^incturiall:
This is most truly that One thing,
Out of the which all profitt must spring.
If this content you not, abide displeased for me,
For I have done. If Reason take no place,
What can be said, but that there doubts will be,
Do what one can, where folly wins the race.
Let it suffice, this is the perfect Base,
Which is the Stone that must dissolved be.
How that is done I will declare to thee.
This is the Stone that Ripley bidds you take,
(For until thus it be it is no Stone)
Be ruled by me, my council not forsake,
And he commands, Let Crudities alone,
If thou have grace to keep thee free from moan.
Then stick to this, let Phansey not o'resway thee,
Let Reason rule, for Phansey will betray thee.
Take thou this Stone, this Wife, this Child, this All.
Which will be Gummous, crumbling, silken, soft:
Upon a Glass or Porphire beat it small,
And as you grind, with Mercury feed it often,
But not so much that Mercury swim aloft,
But equal parts, nipt up their seed to save;
Then each in other are buried within their grave.
When thus and there you have it as is said,
Work in all points as Nature wrought at first:
For Blacknes had thou need not be afraid,
It will be White, then art thou past the worst,
Except th ou break thy Glass and beaccurst;
But if through Blacknes thou to Whitenes march,
Then will it be both White and soft as Starch.
This very place is called by many names,
As Imbibition, Feeding, Sublimation,
Clyming high Mountains, also Childrens Games;
And rightly it is termed Exaltation,
When all is nothing else but Circulation
Of the four Elements whatsoere fools clatter,
Which is done by heat upon Form and Matter.
Earth is the lowest Element of All
Which Black, is exalted into Water,
Then no more Earth but Water we it call;
Although it seem a black Earthy matter,
And in black dust all about will scatter,
Yet when so high as to Water it has clym'd,
Then is it truly said to be Sublym'd
When this black Mass again is become White,
Both in and out like snow and shining fair,
Then this Child, this Wife, this Heaven so bright,
This Water Earth sublimed into Air,
When there it is it further will prepare
It self into the Element of Fire,
Then give God thanks for granting thy desire.
This Black, this White, do we call Separation,
Which is not manual but Elementall;
It is no crude Mercuriall Sublimation,
But Natures true work consubstantiall,
The White is called Conjunction natural,
Secret and perfect Conjunction not gross;
Which brings profitt all other loss.
When thrice ye have turned this Wheel about,
Feeding and working it as I have said,
Then will it flow like Wax without doubt:
Giving a Tincture that will not vade.
Abiding all trials that can be made.
If wisely Project you can and keep free,
Both profitt and creditt to you it will be.
Your Medicine fixed and perfectly flowing,
White you must think will Whitenes increase;
So Red begets Red as Seed in the sowing
Begets his like or as kind does in Beasse,
And fire must be the true maker of peace:
For white or red Ferment your Medicine augmenteth,
And perfectly tinckteth and soon it relenteth.
That is to say, your Medicine ended,
If White melt down Silver and thereon Project it,
If Red melt down Sol, for so it is intended;
Like unto like in no wise reject it,
And out of the purest look you elect it.
Medicen one part upon Ferment ten,
That One on one Thousand of Jupiter then.
Your Jupiter standing red hot on the fire,
So soon as your Medicine upon him is cast,
Presently stands so hard as a Wyre,
For then he is fixed and melts by blast,
And of all your working thisis the last.
Then let it by Test or strong water be tryde,
The best Gold or Silver no better shall bide.
Mercury erude in a Crucible heated,
Presently hardens lik Silver anealed;
And in the high Thrown of Luna is seated,
Silver or Gold as Medicine has sealed:
And thus our great Secret I have reveled.
Which diverse have seen, and my self have wrought,
And dearly I prize it, yet give it for naught.
E. K.

FINIS.
SIR ED: KELLEY CONCERNING the Philosophers Stone written to his especial good
Friend, G. S. Gent.
THe heavenly Cope has in him Natures four,
Two hidden; but the rest to sight appear:
Wherein the Spermes of all the Bodies lower;
Most secrett are, y^tt spring forth once a year,
And as the Earth with Water, Authors are,
So of his part is Drines end of care.
No Flood so great as that which flows still,
Nothing more fixed than Earth digested thrice:
No Wind so fresh as when it serves will;
No Profitt more, then keep in, and be wise,
No better happ, then dry up Air to dust,
For then thou may leave of, and sleep thy lust.
Yett will I warn thee least thou chance to fail,
Sublyme thine Earth with stinkeing Water erst,
Then in a place where Phoebus onley tail
Is seen at midday, see thou mingle best:
For nothing shines that does want his light,
Nor doubleth beams, unlosse it first be bright.
Let no man lead, unless he know the way
That wise men teach, or Adrop leads in,
Whereof the first is large and easiest pray;
The other hard, and mean but to begin.
For surely these and no one more is found,
Wherein Appollo will his harp-strings sound.
Example learn of GOD that plaste the Skies,
Reflecting virtues from and t'every point,
In which the mover wherein all things lies,
Does hold the virtues all of every Joint:
And therefore Essence fifth may well be said,
Containing all and yett himself a Maid.
Remember also how the Gods began,
And by Descent who was to each the Sire,
Then learn their Lives and Kingdoms if you can,
Their Manners eke, with all their whole Attire;
Which if thou do, and know to what effect;
The learned Sopheis will thee not reject,
If this my Doctrine bend not with thy brain,
Then say I nothing though I said too much:
Of truth it is good will moved me, not gain,
To write these lines: yett write I not to such
As catch at Crabs, when better fruits appear,
And want to choose at fittest time of year.
Thou may (my Friend) say, what is this for lore?
I answer, such as ancient Phyficke taught:
And though thou read a thousand Books before,
Yett in respect of this, they teach thee Naught:
Thou may likewise be blind, and call me Fool
Yett shall these Rules for ever praise their School.
TESTAMENTUM JOHANNIS DEE PHILOSOPHI SUMMI ad Johannem Gwynn, transmissum 1568.
THis Letter third and last I mind to make,
At your request for very virtues sake;
Your written panges, and methods set aside,
From that I bid, look that you never slide.
Cut that in Three, which Nature has made One,
Then strengthen hit, even by it self alone,
Wherewith then Cut the poudred Son in twain,
By length of time, and heal the woonde again.
The self same Sun twys yet more, ye must wound,
Still with new Knives, of the same kind, and ground;
Our Monas true thus use by natures Law,
Both bind and lewse, only with ripe and raw,
And ay thank God who only is our Guide,
All is ynugh, no more then at this Tide.
THOMAS ROBINSONUS DE LAPIDE PHILOSOPHORUM.
THe Heavens, the Earth, and all that in them is,
Were in six Days perfected from Abisse:
From One sprung four; from four a second One;
This last a Gritt; that first the Corner Stone.
Without the First the Last may not be had;
Yet to the First the Last is too too bad.
When from the Earth the Heavens were separated,
Were not the Heavens with Earth first cohobated?
And when the Heavens, and Earth and all were not;
Were only Heavens create; and Earth forgott?
No: Heavens, and Earth sprung all from one at first:
Then who can say or Heavens, or Earth is worst?
Is not the Earth the Mother of them all?
And what the Heavens, but Earths essential?
Although they have in Heaven no Earthly residence,
Yet in the Earth does rest their Heavenly influence:
Were not the Earth, what were the other Three?
Were not the Heavens, what on the Earth could be?
Thus as they came, so shall they pass together;
But unto Man not known from whence, or whither.
And for the time of Earths Heaven purifying,
Six thousand years they live, and have their dying:
Then all shall rest eternal and divine,
And by the beauty of the Godhead shine.
I swear there is noe other truth but this
Of that great Stone; which many seek and miss.
FINIS.
EXPERIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY.
HAve you not heard ye Princes great, you Lords and Ladies all,
Of the mishap and heavy chance that now of late did fall?
A woeful Tale to tell
Who could express it well:
Oh that some learned Poet had byne
With me, to se that I have seen:
Or else some other standing by,
That well could write a Tragidy
Of lasting fame and memory.
For yet not since this World began,
Such cry, such clamor as was than
Heard never any earthly Man.
Experience that Princess great, I saw her in her Throne
Of glory, where her Majesty delights to sit upon;
And on her waiting by
A blessed Company
Of Virgins pure, that as I guess,
Were Children to that great Goddess:
Their Princely port, their Comely grace,
Their pierles featured hands and face
Did show them of most Noble race:
But of their prudent skill to tell,
In Arts where in they did excel,
No earthly Tongue can do it well.
And as I gazed thus upon that strange and dreadful sight,
I saw how that Experience did teach these Ladies right,
The seven Arts Divine,
With desent discipline,
By diverse rules and orders grave,
As she thought good for them to have.
But for to see how diligent
And buisily their time they spent
To learn those Arts most excellent,
The endless travells that they took
From place to place, from book to book,
Amazed me on them to look.
For some in diverse Languages did reason and dispute,
And other some did sing and play on Organ, Harp and Flute;
And some with Compass found
All Measures square and round:
And some by Cyphering could tell
Infinite Sums and Numbers well:
And some with Eloquence began
As Poets and Orators to scan
The Causes between Man and Man:
And some upon the Stars did gaze,
And other some sat in a Maze,
To judge of Seacrets that there was.
So that nothing created was under the Firmament,
That has a Being or Life by any Element,
No Simple nor Compound
In all the World is found
Under the Sky, or Clouds that fly,
But they sought out the privity:
This Rocky Earth, this heavy Mass,
This Articke Virgin, this let not pass
To seek the thing that therein was:
But put themselves in press to creep
Into the Center of the Deep,
Where sundry Souls and Spirits do sleep.
This thing Experience began prudently to debate,
With cheerful look and voice full mylde, as seemed to her state.
And soon decreed she
Of her benignity:
Not for their sundry pains I take,
But only for her Glory sake,
That all these Ladies in a row
Should further of her Secrets know,
That from her Majesty did grow;
Wherewith to Council called she
A Lady grave of great degree,
That named was Philosophy.
And after their discourse and talk, that Lady fell down flatt
On hands and knees before the Queen in heaven where she satt.
And looking upon her face
Did say unto her grace:
Blessed be thou Experience,
Full mighty is thy Influence;
Thy wondrous works records full well
In wordell of wordels where thou do dwell,
In Earth, in Heaven, and in Hell;
That thou art now the very same,
That of Nothing All things did frame,
Wherefore now blessed be thy Name.
Wherewith the Heavens opened, and fiery flames did fall
Down from the Throne of endless Joy and seat imperial,
Where Angels infinite
Like glistering Stars did fit:
So pure and simple was the Light,
As all the World had burnt bright;
The flames and floods began to roar,
And did present their hidden store,
Of Spirits that fing for evermore,
All glory and magnificence,
All humble thanks and reverence
Be given to EXPERIENCE.
Then silence fell upon the face of Heaven Christalline
Where all the Powers mustered full ready ^o incline;
To that most Sapient,
The high Omnipotent:
That said be it, and it was don,
Our Earth, our Heaven were begun;
I am said it the most of might,
In word in life and eke in light.
I am Mercy and Judgment right,
The Depth is mine so is the Hight:
The Cold, the Hot, the Moist, the Dry,
Where All in All is there am I.
What thing can tell when I began, or when I make an end?
Wherewith I wrought, and what I might, or what I did intend?
To do when I had done
The work I had begun.
For when my Being was alone
One thing I made when there was none,
A Mass confused darkely clad
That in it self all Nature had
To form and shape the good and bad;
And then as Time began to fall,
It pleased me the same to call
The first Matter, Mother of all.
And from that Lump divided I four sundry Elements,
Whom I commanded for to reign in diverse Regiments:
In Kind they did agree,
But not in Quality.
Whose simple Substance I did take,
My seat invisible to make:
And of the Qualites compound,
I made the Starry Sky so round
With living Bodies on the ground;
And blessed them infinitely,
With life and long prosperity,
And bad them grow and Multiply.
Respecting these divided things so created by me,
Their light and lively spreading forth of them in their degree;
Retourning to the Mass,
Where there beginning was,
And saw the refuse of the same,
How Void and Empty it became,
All dark, and nothing to remain,
I put with wrath and great disdain,
My only Curse there for to raygne;
For I the Author of all Light
Did banish Darkness from my sight,
And blessed all things that shined bright,
So that I mard nothing I made, for that I made is still,
And so shall be unto the end, only to work my will:
One thing was first imployd,
And shall not be destroid,
It compasses the World so round,
A Matter easy to be found:
And yet most hardest to come by:
A Secret of Secrets pardye,
That is most vile and least set by,
And it my Love and my Darling,
Conceived with all living thing,
And travells to the Worlds ending.
What need have I of man's Devise of Penny or of Pound,
Of Gold or Silver, Lead or Tynn, or Copper in the ground,
Iron or Silver Quick,
Whereat the blind do prick;
Of Cankered Corosives that rust,
By Salts and sulphurs all to dust?
Seek out therefore my darllng dear;
For unto me it is most near,
My spouse my Love and my Compeare:
And unto it look thou direct
My seven Children long elect,
That all things else they might reject.
A Child begetting his own Father, and bearing his Mother,
Killing himself to give life, and light to all other:
Is yt that I do mean,
Most myld and most extreme.
Did not the Word that dwelt in me
Take form and walked visibly;
And did not I then dwell in it,
That dwelt in me for to unite
Three powers in one seat to sit?
And then Experience did say
Now know thou all, here lies the Key,
And then she vanished clean away.
There with arose Philosophy as one filled with grace,
Whose looks did show that she had byne in some Heavenly place:
For often she wipt her Eyes,
And often she bowd her knees.
And often she kissed the Steps with dread,
VVhereon Experience did tread;
And often she cast her Head on high
And often full low she cast her Eye
Experience for to espy:
But when she saw that she was gone,
And that her self was left alone:
I never hread thing make such moan.
FINIS.
THE MAGISTERY.
THrough want of Skill and Reasons light
Men stumble at Noone day;
Whilst buisily our Stone they seek,
That lies in the way.
Who thus do seek they know not what
Is It likely they should find?
Or hitt the Mark whereat they aim
Better then can the Blind?
No, Hermes Sonns for Wisdom ask
Your footesteps she will direct:
She Will Natures way and secret Cave
And Tree of life detect.
Son and Moon in Hermes vessel
Learn how the Colors show,
The nature of the Elements,
And how the Daisies grow.
Great Python how Appollo slew,
Cadmus his hollow-Oake:
His new raised army, and Jason how
The Fiery Steeres did yoke.
The Eagle which aloft does fly
See that thou bring to ground;
And give unto the Snake some wings,
Which in the Earth is found.
Then in one Room sure bind them both,
To fight till they be dead;
And that a Prinee of Kingdoms three
Of both them shall be bred.
Which from the Cradle to his Crown,
Is fed with his own blood;
And though to some it seems strange,
He has no other Food.
Into his Virgin-Mothers womb,
Again he enter must;
So shall the King by his new-byrth,
Be ten times stronger just.
And able is his foes to foil,
The dead he will revive:
Oh happy man that understands
This Medicen to atchive!
Hoc opus exigium nobis fert ire per altum. DECEMBER, 1633. W. B.

ANONYMI: OR, SEVERAL WORKS OF unknown Authors.
NOw I schall her be gynne,
To teache the a Conclusion;
In the name of the Trenete
Send us grace that well hit be;
Now take two Onces as much of anoder,
And dyssolve on there with the toder,
Y tell the trowthe as my brother,
Put in to a Glass with owtten oder:
Than take three Onces of the bitter,
And meng him with the swetter;
And put them than into a Glass,
Even right as the toder was:
Than take a unc of the best,
And do with him as thou did erst,
In a Glass than thou him put,
And look thy mowth be well I shut;
Now thou have here Glasses three,
Even like unto the Trynete,
Than hem stop these everychon,
Even a suit as thou have on:
About thy Glasses a wall thou make,
Last the wind ham al to crake,
Than thy Glassys now all I three,
With in that grave they schal be;
Now this I fed with moysty hete,
To make that Glassys swynke and sweet,
Then let hem stand thus wekys three;
And well the beter they schal be.
Than put hem all now into on,
The which is like than be a stone;
Than let hem stand so theryn,
When thou have made thy Conjunction:
Till sevyn days be al I don,
Much the better woll be thy Ston;
Than upon thy Glass thou set
A fair heed and well I met,
Draw up thy water with esy fire,
Within a Rotunde good and cler,
Till thy Matter wol still no mer,
Than set thou hem in dry Fyr,
Than se thou still with reasonabyl hete,
Till thy Matter wol no more let.
When he is there both good and dry,
Full feign would he than be moysty;
Than wey that Stone within the Glass,
And put him his Lecur has it was;
Now when this fryst drawte is don,
Thou must Embybe with good proporciun:
Now look thou well what is his whyght,
And with the fourth part than him dyght,
And evermore with partys fowr,
Now till he be of White colowr;
And thus look thou make good wache,
Till the Body thy Spirit can cache;
And also thy Soul so must he,
Than understand thou have three.
Now schyt thy Glass as hit was er,
And work hit forth on this manner;
When tho three to gedur ben knyte,
With much joy than thou may sit.
For than art thou ricchar than the King,
But he have the same thing.
Thus is all thy Medcyn wroght,
Evyn after thin own thought;
How this Medcyn thou schalt encres,
And make hit mor till thou list sees;
The trowth I schall now the certefie,
How thou schalt hit thus Multyply:
Look as thou did thy Work before,
Encres hit forth with mor and mor:
As thou did at the beginning,
So continu forth to the endyng:
Thus for soth infynytely
Thou may this craft forth Multiply:
Like as a man has lytil Fyr,
And mor to make is his desyr;
He be hovyth this is no nay,
More Wode or Cole there to lay:
And thus he may his Fyr encres,
That he schall never be fyreles.
One the same wise thou understande,
Ever thy Medcyn must be growande;
And when the list Projecciun make,
Look to this lesson good tent thou take;
When thy Medcyn is very parfit,
Thou schalt him cast on his like;
Als evyn than as thou can gese,
On part on Ten look thou not mess,
The trowthe if thou will wete,
Than is thy Lexer evyn complete;
And than of that On part thou take,
The true Projeccion thus schalt thou make;
Cast that on Ten of Tyn or Leede,
Or Coper or Mercury there in that steed,
Into fine Lun hit schal be brought,
Or into Sol evyn after thy thought:
After that thy Lexer is,
Be hit White or Read I wys,
If thou hit cast on Iren also,
If it schal be Lun or Sol there to:
This ar the Secrets of Phylosophie,
I council the keep hit secretlye;
And serve thy God both night and day,
The better thou shall speed, this is no nay.
Now I have taught the how thou schalt do,
The blys of hevyn God bring hus to.
drawing of lunary plant

HER is an Erbe men calls Lunayrie,
I blesset mowte his maker be.
Asterion he is, I callet all so,
And other namys many and mo;
He is an Erbe of great might,
Of Sol the Sunn he takes his light,
He is the Fader, to Croppe and Rote;
With fragrant Flowris that been sote,
Flowrys to bear in that stead,
Swm ben White, and swm ben Red:
His Lewys grwyth, both day and night,
Like to the Ferment that is so bright:
I shall declare, this Erbe so light,
To many a man hit is a fair seyght;
Frist at the Rote I wolle be gynne,
That cawsyth all thing for to spring;
A growyth a pon a Mowntayne brym,
Where Febis has great dominacion:
The Sune by day, the Moon by nygh^,
That makes him both fair and bright,
The Rote growyth on stonns clear,
White and Read, that is so peyre:
The Rote is black, the Stalk is red;
The wyche schall there never be deed,
The Lewis ben rownd, as a Nowbel son,
And wexsyth and wanyth as the Mon:
In the meddes a mark the bread of a peni,
Lo this is like to owre sweght Lunayre:
His Flowrys schynith, fair and cler,
In all the World thaye have non pere,
He is not fownde in no manner wise,
But of a Schepeherd in Godis servyse:
The good Schepeherd that I her mean,
Is he that keeps his Soul clean:
His Flowrys ben great and sum ben small,
Like to hem that growyth in Dale;
With many a virtue both fair and cler,
As there ben days in all the year,
Fro falling Ewel and all Sekeneys,
From Sorrow he brengyth man to Bles;
Unto that blese that we may come,
Byth the help of Marys Son:
And of his Mother that is so fre,
Amen good Lord for cherite.
Spiritus, Anima, Corpus.


I Schal you tell with heart mode,
Of three Kynggys that been so goude,
And how thaye came to God almyght,
The which was there a sweet sight.
I figure now howr besset Stone,
Fro Heven wase send down to Solomon:
By an Angele both goude and stylle,
The wych wase than Christis will.
The present of hem in Bedlem than,
To Christ brwght Aurum Tus and Myrham.
Owre Sol and Sulphir with his Mercuri,
Both Bodi and Soul with our Luneyre.
Aurum betokens here, owre Bodi than,
The wych was brwght to God and Man.
And Tus alleso owre Soul of life,
With Myrham owre Mercurye that is his Wife
Here be the three namys fair and good
And all thaye ben but one in mode.
Like as the Trenite is but on,
Right so conclude the Phylosofeers Stone.
Thou may a se her now in sight,
Off owre Stone figuriet a right.
How send he wase out of Heven,
By an Angele with mylde Stefyn.
And by his figure thou may se
That hit is like to personis Three.
To Fader and Son and holy Ghost,
The wych was and is of mytis most;
Into his blyse now come we,
Amen goud Lord for cheyte.
Ishew you here a short Conclusion,
To understand it if ye have grace,
Wrighten without any delusion;
Comprehended in a little space.
All that in this Book wrighten is,
In this place comprehended is,
How Nature works in her kind,
Keep well this Lesson in your mind:
I have declared micle thing,
If you have grace to keep in mind,
How that our Principle is One thing,
More in Number and One in kind;
For there ben things Seven
That in a Principle do dwell,
Most precious under Heven,
I have so sworn I may not tell.
In this Book I show to you in wrighting,
As my Brethren do each one,
A similitude of every like thing,
Of the which we make our Stone.
Our Stone is made of one simple thing,
That in him has both Soul and Life,
He is Two and One in kind,
Married together as Man and Wife:
Our Sulphur is our Masculine,
Our Mercury is our Femenine,
Our Earth is our Water clear;
Our Sulphur also is our Fire,
And as Earth is in our Water clear,
So is Aer in our Fire.
Now have ye Elements four of might,
And yet there appears but two in sight;
Water and Earth ye may well see,
Fire and Aer be in them as quality:
This Science may not be taught to every one,
He were acurst that so schould done:
How schould ye have Servants than?
Than non for other would ought done,
To till the Land or drive the Plough,
For ever each man would be proud enough;
Learned and leude would put them in Press,
And in their works be full busy,
But yet they have but little increse,
The writings to them is so misty.
It is full hard this Science to find,
For Fools which labor against kind;
This Science I pray you to conceal,
Or else with it do not you meal,
For and ye cannot in it prevail,
Of much sorrow rhen may you tell:
By sudden mooving of Elements Nature may be let,
And where lacks Decoction no perfection may be,
For some Body with leprosy is infected;
Raw watery humors cause superfluity:
Therefore the Philosopher in his reason has contrived
A perfect Medicine, for bodies that be sick,
Of all infirmetyes to be releeved,
This heleth Nature and prolongeth life eak;
This Medicine of Elements being perfectly wrought,
Receypts of the Potecary we need not to buy,
Their Druggs and Dragms we set at naught,
With quid pro quo they make many a ly.
Our Aurum potabile Nature will increase,
Of Philosophers Gold if it be perfectly wrought,
The Physicians with Mineral puteth him in prese:
Little it avails or else right naught.
This Science shall ye find in the old book of Turb;
How perfectly thisMedicine Philosophers have wrought,
Rosary with him also does record,
More then four Flements we occupy naught;
Comune Mercury and Gold we none occupy,
Till we perfectly have made our Stone,
Then with them two our Medicine we Multiply,
Other recepts of the Potecary truly we have none.
A hundred Ounces of Saturn ye may well take;
Sees them on the fire and melt him in a mould,
A Projection with your Medicin upon hem make,
And anon ye shall alter him into fine Gold;
One Ounce upon a hundred Ounces is sufficient,
And so it is on a thousand Ounces perfectly wrought,
Without dissolucion and Subtillant;
Increasing of our Medicine else have we naught.
Joy eternal and everlasting bliss,
Be to Almighty God that never schal miss.
In some Copies I found these following Verses set before this Work.
EArth out of Earth cleansed pure,
By Earth of himself through his nature,
Rectified by his Milk who can it tie,
And afterward united with Water of life truly:
A Dragon lying in his deep den,
Rotting in Water to Putrefie then:
Leprouse huge and terrible in sight,
By bathing and balning the Dragon comes to light;
Evermor drowned in the bottom of his Well,
Till all his Leprousie will no longer dwell,
In his own Nature he alters clean
Into a pure substance, ye wat what I mean.
I show you here a short Conclusion, etc.
WHy art thou so Poor and I so Rich,
Abundance of Tresure in me thou may
In all the World I am nothing so liche;
As Man that is so proginitous to my kind,
The Rych man on the Poor has no pity,
In me therefore have thou affiance,
It is often times seen in Town and City:
He is evyll at ease that has no Craft nor Science.
The Rich men of the Poor now have great dispight,
That they should with thyr cunyng any good thing wyn;
And to give to the Poor alms they have no delight,
Little is the Charity that is them within,
And Ensample of Dives as the Scripture can tell,
Poor Lazerus at his Gate for default dyed;
Had he given him Alms he had not gone to hell,
Now for to repent him truly it is too late.
Man thou have no goods but God does them send,
Depart with thy Brother as God does thee Command.
Thy life that will the better amend,
Death will with thee make a sudden hand,
Thy worldly goods thou schalt forsaken:
Give every Beast again his due,
And than schall thy body be full naked:
Death on the will nothing rue.
Why so far and I so near?
Have thou no grace Man me to meet,
So oftyn as I to the do appear;
And yet of me thou take no keep,
In common Mercury thou do me seek:
In Alkali and in Alembroke,
In common Sulphur and Arsenick eke,
Which makes many a man to dote.
Common Mercury is not good,
It brings many a man to care;
It makes his Hair grow through his hood,
And his Purse both thin and bare.
Mercury and I are of allye,
But she with me may not compare;
In nature she is both cold and dry,
Therefore I council thee to beware:
Many a man she makes full bare,
Because she lacks humidity,
On her to spend they would spare,
She brings many a man to poverty.
I am she which wise men seek,
Mercury which is most of might;
Hot and moist, light and weak,
Of the Elements I am full right,
Water, Earth, Air and Fire,
Quality, and Quantity, you can never have your desire,
Without Concoction perfectly,
Great riches in us be,
Who has grace us for to know,
By virtue of her humidity,
In the Fire our Stone does grow.
Thou needy man, where is thy mind?
I council thee this lesson leare:
Our Mercury is but of one thing,
In our Vessel thin and clear.
Common Mercury in him is none,
Neither Gold nor Silver in him none is;
Of Mettalls we make not our Stone,
By proportion more or less,
All manner of Mettalls we deny,
Until the time our Stone be wrought,
All other Receipts we defy
That of the Potecaryes be bought,
With all Spices, save only Mercury.
Gould with him stands us in steed,
Our Medicine for to Multiply,
After our Phisicks Stone be Red.
A true Lesson I have thee tought,
Pray for me and forget it naught:
Many Books may thou see,
That is not writ so openly.
And as I am true Christian man,
A truer Book find thou none;
And thou will of this Science leare
In riches thou shall have no pear;
He that made this Book has it well preved,
The better therefore he may be believed;
Therefoee I pray you for charity,
To keep this Book very secretly.
If any man this Science of you will crave,
Know he be Sapient that the Copy shall have
I made it not for every man,
Neither for them that little good can,
But for me and for my Brother,
Such as have Reason and no other;
Keep this Lesson well in mind,
Beware thou work not against Kind;
And in thy Work make no great have,
That thou labor not in wast:
Work in light and not in dark,
And ask Council of a Clerk:
Else may you both lightly fail,
Without you have both good Counsel.
TAke our Rose with the red Flower,
Which thou may know by his Color;
And him knock into Plates small,
A like thin beat over all.
And with a Corosive good and fine,
Forthwith draw the same tyne;
Of things that be new and good,
And diverse in Nature and one in Mood,
And put together with strong grinding,
In Horse womb ever abiding;
In a Vessel good and strong,
Thou so it rule and think it not long,
For within a Month or little more,
And with his might the Body slo;
Thy Corrosive will thy Rose so frett,
Till he be thin as Milk in Meat.
But how the Corrosive made shall be,
I will it show plainly to thee;
As I said to thee before,
Elss know thou little of this lore.
Take Maidens Urine young of age,
Ashes, Salt, and Lyme,
Of him together make a marriage.
Then the Corrosive is both good and fine:
For without this Corrosive shortly said,
Well compound together in One,
All your Work is but void;
As Philosophers write every each one:
For Doctors both to lay and Clearke,
Written that our first Warke
Is to bring our Body all and some;
And him to reduce in Mercurium.
Then is our Work well begun,
If the first love be thus wone.
Now say Philosophers much more,
Our second Work if thou will know,
Labor with pain and travel therefore:
And God is ready thee it to show,
To bring our Water into Air,
Of Philosophers the second verse,
Spare not to work and be not afraid;
For so it will be without lose,
But yet be wise in the Warke,
For hasty men never lack woe:
And ask the Councll of a Clarke,
For sober thrift is best thereto,
And so Continue night and day
I thee charge, and sleep thee not,
For in six Weeks truly in fay,
All into Earth it will be brought:
So the Fire continued be,
Every Decoction to even measure,
And after that fire his quality,
Thou must all the Work rule,
For when it is in Earth full black,
Then is it our black Stone,
He is so strong he may not lack,
Till all thy Work be y done.
The third degree as I thee say,
Of our Stone now black as pitch,
Thou must him wash with waters gay;
And make him white for so did Ich;
And when thou have washed him clean,
Then is his blacknes gone;
Then is he bright and shine,
As Carbuncle or Beril stone:
But ere he come to that degree,
It will be labor but think not long,
For many a Color change will he,
Brown, Red, Russet, ever among:
After that to many other mo,
Green, Blew, Pale and White,
But all these let them go,
They are not to thy profit,
And when thou have thus wrought,
By six weeks and a day,
Then is the Earth truly sought,
A white powder collor'd in fay:
But then spare the fire,
And bate him even to measure;
And within a month and little mo,
The White Stone has nigh sure done,
Which will shine and melt as wax,
He must needs Masteries do,
The Spirit and Soul make him so lax;
That all other kinds he turn him to.
Then Ferment him with his like,
By joining of true Decoction,
And feed him forth by little and lite,
That both together be brought in one,
In Color sight and Demean,
That there be no division:
As thou have wrought so will it prove,
Take heed how thou have done
In this work of Conjunction;
Thou shall se marvells great,
Both going up and coming down,
Of Colors springing by the heat:
For the soul that is so withheld,
Andthe spirit that is so bright,
I men it seen say they would,
Certain it were a wondrous sight,
And all this is past,
That God and Kind has done his cure,
Of the White Stone be not aghast,
He will not flee but bide the Fire.
Now farther if thou will Work,
To have the ready way,
Take good heed and be not dull,
For i will tell thee the truth in fay:
Hold always as thou did
Before in the other Stone,
Thou cannot fail God be thy speed,
As Clerks write every one,
For your Fire will him dear,
So it be dry and lastingly;
Save other while the changing cheer,
Till he have sottill fasting and slye.
First I wot well change he woll,
Into Citrine and pure degree;
And after that Color is full,
He shall never but be White ay,
After that Tawny and Color de Pale,
He changes often in such lay:
Till he be Red withouten fail,
As good Coroll or Rose in May.
Then dread he nothing I wis,
Of this Worlds adversity,
An Emperor of conquest then he is,
The Philosophers said worthy to be:
And when thou have thus done,
And thereof seen the privity,
Thank God and Christ his only Son.
Together with our blessed Lady.
TAke of the eger blood that is so Red,
And distill that by Lymbick till it be bright,
Therewith dissolve the Philosphers lead,
Filtering it till it be clear in sight,
Evaporating it if ye do right.
And from the Medicine with strong Fire,
D^still our Mercury most of might,
Read as blood and strong of Air,
And there you have your Stone I wysse,
Containing in them all that you need,
The Earth thereof true Ferment is.
Of our purpose if you will speed,
In other Books whatsoever you Reed,
From this Doctrine you never flitt,
But further with these Stones proceed;
Into four Elements dividing it,
Air, Water and Oil well rectified,
The Earth by boiling make white as Whale bone,
Again together them neately join,
And of them make a precious stone;
The matter goes to the White alone,
This Aristotle tought Alexander his lore,
The Stone thus fixed make fugitive,
Again with Aer reserved in Store;
And then again make fix belyve:
Multiply it in one and more,
With Nature and Oil reserved in store,
Both white and red as you did first,
This secret made me study full sore,
Many a night ere I it wyste;
For my Master from me it hidd.
Now is one point yet behind,
With this Stone that must be done:
Ingendering him of Water, Air and Wind,
The Red on Sun the White on Moon,
Molten look thou cast full soon;
And Multiply in them their Tincture,
And then take of the powder with a spoone,
And strain it on Mercury hott and pure;
And a marvelous Battle thou shall se soon
Between that and the said Mercury,
Either it will turn it Sun or Moon,
And then thou shall the Mastery unfold,
And thus proceeding Multiply,
In every thing as I have told;
And thus ends our PHILOSOPHY.
THe World is in a Maze, and wot you why?
Forsooth of late a great rich Man did dye;
And as he lay a dying in his Bed,
These words in secret to his Son he said.
My Son quoth he, it is good for thee I dye,
For thou shall much the better be thereby;
And when thou see that life has me bereft,
Take what thou findst, and where I have it left
Thou do not know, nor what my riches be,
All which I will declare, give Ear to me.
An Earth I had all Venom to expel,
And that I cast into a mighty Well;
A Water eke to cleanse what was amiss,
I threw into the Earth and there it is;
My Silver all into the Sea I cast,
My Gold into the Air, and at the last
Into the Fire for fear it should be found,
I threw a Stone worth forty thousand pound:
Which Stone was given me by a mighty King,
Who bad me wear it in a fore-fold Ringe:
Quoth he this Stone is by that Ring found out,
If wisely thou can turn this Ring about:
For every Hoope contrary is to other,
Yet all agree and of the Stone is Mother.
And now my Son I will declare a wonder,
That when I dye this Ring must break assunder:
The King said so, but then he said withal,
Although the Ring be broke in pieces small;
An easy Fire shall soon it close again;
Who this can do he need not work in vain.
Till this my hidden Treasure be found out
(When I am dead) my Spirit shall walk about;
Make him to bring your Fire from the Grave,
And stay with him till you my Riches have;
These Words a wordly man did chance to here,
Who daily watched the Spirit but nere the near;
And yet it meets with him and every one,
Yet tells him not where is this hidden STONE.
A Dialogue betwixt the FATHER and the SON, Concerning the two Principles of
the BLESSED STONE.
Father. MY Son if that Sulphur be absent away,
Our work is reproved what ever they say,
And it is Water and Fire as true as your Creed
Which constrains a Body till it be dead:
Of him shall thou never have your desire,
Till he be blew as Lead through his own Fire,
I do liken our Sulphur to the Magnet Stone,
That still draws to her Naturally,
So with our Sulphur the firey Woman Mercury,
When she would from her husband fly.

Son. Father I pray you for Charity,
Where shall I this Sulphur find?
For I never did him se with Eye;
Nor never knew him in his kind.

Father. In our Water my Son keep it in your mind,
Where he will appear so white as any snow,

Son. Grammercy Father ye be full kind,
For through your teaching full well I know.
Now teach me the Red stone when it is in mind,
How it is made by Natures Law.

Father. The White and Red be both of one kind,
Now have thou my Son all thy desire,
Whose tincture by growing thou shall it so find,
Through virtue of the Sun and regiment of Fire
His riches there he does increase,
Far passing all that I can name,
If they in Fire shall come in press:
Gune is their glory but he the same,
For the virtues of the Planets seven
Shall have, and also from the Pole of heven,
Since the World began noe Gemme is found
Equal him till in virtues all,
The Saphir, nor the Diamond,
The Ruby rich behind shall fall,
So shall the Turkey and Carbuncle:
If they in fire together shall fight,
All One except shall loose their might,
The fire on him has power none,
His Elements be so coequall,
An Incombustible Oil is this our Stone
In power far passing others all.

Son. In what Element Father is our Sulphur bright?
Is it in all, or is it in one?

Father. In all Son he must need be of right,
For Seperacion of Elements we make none:
And yett in them we can it not see,
For sensual matter is he none,
But equallitie only intellectual,
Without which our Stone never fixed be shall.
Quality Son also grows in the fire;
Betwixt the White stone and the Read,
For Colors many to you shall appear,
Until the time the Woman be dead:
The which things if ye shall not see,
Red shall your Stone at noe time be;
For where the Woman is in presence,
There is much moisture and Accidence:
Watery humors that in her be
Will drown and devour our qualitye,
Remember and think of Noah's flood,
For too much Water was never good:
And yet as quality is hid in quantity,
So must in Water our Earth be:
Riches in him thou shall much find,
After alteracions all due to his kind;
When Oil in him is coagulate,
Then is our Stone body made liquefact:
When Sulphur Water and Oil be one,
Endued with riches then is our Stone.
I cannot thee tell a richer thing;
Then is our Stone when he is fire dureing,
Our Fire makes her so strong.

Son. Father how to make our Stone,
Feign would I know that have we done;

Father. My Son with lent and easy heat,
The Elements together will kindly meat:
Haste not to fast whilst they be raw,
Keep well the Fie, beware of the low.
Shutt well the Vessle least out pass the Spirit,
So shall you all things the better keep;
For if the Spiritts do pass you from,
Remedy to get them again have you none:
And how marveillous it is the Elements to meet
Keep this as your principal secret,
At your beginning give God the praise;
And keep your Matter in heat forty days,
But so that all things be made clear,
Or else you are never the near:
And within this time itt will be Black;
And often chainge color till it be White,
There you may cease and further proceed,
By mendinge the heat to your mesure indeed;
And there withal now will I end,
And to God only thee Commend.

JOHN GOWER CONCERNING The PHILOSOPHERS STONE.
AND also with great diligence,
They fond thilke Experience:
Which cleped is Alconomie,
Whereof the Silver multeplie;
They made, and eke the Gold also.
And for to tell how itt is so:
Of bodies seven in Special,
With four Spirits joint withal;
Stant the substance of this matere,
The bodies which I speak of here,
Of the Plannets ben begone,
The Gold is titled to the Son:
The Moon of Silver has his part,
And Iron that stand upon Mart:
The Leed after Saturn grows,
And Jupiter the Brass bestows;
The Copper set is to Venus:
And to his part Mercurius
Has the Quicksilver, as it falls,
The which after the Book it calls,
Is first of thilke four named
Of Spirits, which ben proclaimed,
And the Spirit which is second,
In Sal Armoniake is found:
The third Spirit Sulphur is,
The fourth Sewende after this,
Arcennium by name is hot
With blowyng, and with fires hot:
In these things which I say,
They worchen by diverse way.
For as the Philosopher told,
Of Gold and Sylver they ben hold,
Two principal extremitees,
To which all other by degrees,
Of the mettalls ben accordant,
And so through kind resemblant:
That what man couth away take,
The rust, of which they waxen blake,
And the savor of the hardness;
They shulden take the likeness;
Of Gold or Silver parfectly,
But for to worche it sykerly,
Between the Corpse and the Spirit,
Er that the Metal be parfite,
In seven forms itt is set
Of all, and if one be let,
The remnant may not avayle,
But otherwise it may naught fail;
For they by whom this Art was found,
To every point a certain bound,
Ordeinen that a man may find,
This Craft is wrought by wey of kind;
So that there is no fallace in;
But what man that this work begin;
He mote awaite at every tide,
So that nothing be left aside.
First of the Distillacion,
Forth with the Congelacion,
Solucion, Disscencion,
And keep in his entencion,
The point of Sublimacion,
And forthwith Calcinacion,
Of very Approbacion,
So that there be Fixacion,
With temperate hetes of the fire,
Till he the perfect Elixer,
Of thilke Philosophers Stone,
May get, of which that many one
Of Philosophers whilome write:
And if thou wolt the names wite,
Of thilke Stone with other two,
Which as the Clerks maden tho;
So as the Books itt recorden,
The kind of hem I shall recorden.
These old Philosophers wise,
By wey of kind in sundry wise;
Three Stones made through Clergy,
The first I shall specify,
Was cleped Vegetabilis;
Of which the proper virtue is,
To man's heal for to serve,
As for to keep, and to preserve,
The body fro sickness all,
Till death of kind upon him fall.
The second Stone I the behote,
Is Lapis Animalis hot:
The whose virtue, is proper and couth,
For Ear and Eye, Nose and Mouth;
Whereof a man may here, and see,
And smell and taste, in his degree,
And for to feel and for to go,
Itt helps a man of both two:
The wits five he underfongeth
To keep, as it to him belongs.
The third Stone in special
by name is cleped Mineral,
Which the Mettalls of every mine,
Attempreth, till that they ben fine;
And pureth hem by such a wey,
That all the vice goth awey,
Of Rust, of Stynke, and of Hardness:
And when they ben of such clennes,
This mineral so as I find,
Transformeth all the first kind,
And makes hem able to conceive,
Through his virtue and receive
Both in substance and in figure,
Of Gold and Silver the nature.
For they two ben the extremitees,
To which after the propertees,
Has every metal his desire,
With help and comfort of the fire.
Forth with this Stone as it is said,
Which to the Son and Moon is laid:
For to the Red, and to the White,
This Stone has power to profit;
It makes Multiplicacion
Of Gold and the fixacion,
It cause^h and of this babite,
He does the work to be parfite:
Of thilke Elixer which men call
Alconomy, as is befalle
To hem, that whilome were wise;
But now it stant all otherwise:
They speken fast of thilke Stone,
But how to make it now wot none.
After the sooth Experience,
And nathles great diligence,
They setten up thilke deed,
And spillen more then they speed;
For alwey they find a let,
Which brings in povetee and Debt;
To hem that rich were to fore,
The Loss is had the Lucre is lore:
To get a pound they spenden five,
I not how such a Craft shall thrive:
In the manner as it is used,
It were better be refused,
Then for to worchen upon wene,
In thing which stant not as they wene:
But not for thy who that it knew,
The Science of himself is true:
Upon the form as it was founded,
Whereof the names yett be grounded;
Of hem, that first it founden out:
And thus the fame goth all about,
To such as soughten besines,
Of vetue and of worthiness,
Of whom if I the names call,
Hermes was one the first of all,
To whom this Art is most applied,
Geber thereof was magnified,
And Ortolane and Morien,
Among the which is Avicen.
Which found and wrote and great party,
The practicke of Alconomie,
Whose books plainly as they stand,
Upon this Craft few understonde.
But yet to put hem in assay,
There ben full many now a day,
That known little that they mean,
It is not one to wite and wene,
In form of words they it trete;
But yet they failen of beyet.
For of to much, or of to lite,
There is algate found a wite:
So that they follow not the line,
Of the perfect Medicine,
Which grounded is upon nature;
But they that written the Scripture;
Of Greek, Arabe, and Caldee,
They were of such Auctoritee,
That they first founden out the wey,
Of all that thou have herd me sey,
Whereof the Cronicke of her Lore,
Shall stand in price for evermore.
THE VISION OF Sr: GEORGE RIPLEY: CHANON of BRIDLINGTON.
WHen busy at my book I was upon a certain night,
This Vision here expressed appeared unto my dimmed sight,
A Toade full rudde I saw did drink the juce of grapes so fast,
Till over charged with the broth, his bowels all to brast;
And after that from poisoned bulk he cast his venom fell,
For grief and pain whereof his Members all began to swell,
With drops of poisoned sweat approaching thus his secret Den,
His cave with blasts of fumous air he all be-whyted then;
And from the which in space a golden humor did ensue,
Whose falling drops from high did stain the soil with ruddy hew:
And when this Corpse the force of vital breath began to lack,
This dying Toade became forthwith like Coal for color black:
Thus drowned in his proper veins of poisoned flood,
For term of eighty days and four he rotting stood:
By trial then this venom to expel I did desire,
For which I did committ his carkase to a gentle fire:
Which done, a wonder to the fight, but more to be rehear'st,
The Toade with Colors rare through every side was pear'st,
And White appeared when all the sundry hewes were past,
Which after being tincted Rudde, for evermore did last.
Then of the venom handled thus a medicine I did make;
Which venom kills and saves such as venom chance to take.
Glory be to him the graunter of such secret ways,
Dominion, and Honor, both with Worship, and with Praise.
AMEN.
VERSES BELONGING TO AN EMBLEMATICALL SCROVVLE: Supposed to be invented by GEO:
RIPLEY.
I Shall you tell with plain declaracion,
Where, how, and what is my generation:
Omogeni is my Father,
And Magnesia is my Mother:
And Azot truly is my Sister,
And Kibrick forsooth is my Brother:
The Serpent of Arabia is my name,
The which is leader of all this game:
That sometime was both wood and wild,
And now I am both meek and mild;
The Sun and the Moon with their might,
Have chastised me that was so light:
My Wings that me brought,
Hither and thither where I thought
Now with their might they down me pull,
And bring me where they woll,
The blood of mine heart I wiss,
Now causes both Joy and bliss:
And dissolveth the very Stone,
And knitteth him ere he have done;
Now makes hard that was lix,
And causes him to be fix.
Of my blood and water I wis,
Plenty in all the World there is.
It runs in every place;
Who it finds he has grace:
In the World it runs over all,
And goes round as a ball:
But thou understand well this,
Of the work thou shall miss.
Therefore know ere thou begin,
What he is and all his kin,
Many a Name he has full sure,
And all is but one Nature:
Thou must part him in three,
And then knit him as the Trinity:
And make them all but one,
Lo here is the Philosophers Stone.
THe Bird of Hermes is my name,
Eating my wings to make me tame.
IN the Sea withouten less,
Stands the Bird of Hermes:
Eating his Wings variable,
And thereby makes himself more stable;
When all his Feathers be agon,
He stands still there as a stone;
Here is now both White and Red,
And also the Stone to quicken the dead,
All and sum withouten fable,
Both hard, and nesh and malliable
Understand now well aright,
And thank God of this sight.
TAKE thou Phoebus that is so bright,
That sits so high in Majesty;
With his beams that shines so light,
In all places where ever that he be,
For he is Father to all living things,
Maynteyner of Life to Crop and Root,
And causes Nature forth to spring;
With his wife being soote,
For he is salve to every sore,
To bring about this precious work;
Take good heed unto his lore,
I say to learned and to Clerk,
And Omogeny is my Name:
Which God shaped with his own hand,
And Magnesia is my Dame;
Thou shall verily understand,
Now here I shall begin,
For to teach thee a ready way:
Or else little shall thou wyn,
Take good heed what I say;
Devide thou Phoebus in many a part;
With his beams that been so bright,
And thus with Nature him Coarte,
The which is mirror of all light:
This Phoebus has full many a Name,
Which that is full hard for to know;
And but thou take the very same,
The Philosophers Stone thou shall not know,
Therefore I council ere thou begin:
Know him well what it be,
And that is thick make it thin;
For then it shall full well like the.
Now understand well what I mean,
And take good heed thereunto,
The work shall else little be seen:
And turn thee unto mikle woe,
As I have said in this our Lore,
Many a Name I wiss it have,
Some behind, and some before;
As Philosophers of yore him gave.
ON the Ground there is a Hill,
Also a Serpent within a Well:
His Tail is long with Wings wide,
All ready to fly on every side,
Repair the Well round about,
That the Serpent pas not out;
For if that he be there agone,
Thou loosest the verue of the Stone,
What is the Ground thou may know here,
And also the Well that is so clear:
And eke the Serpent with his Tail,
Or else the work shall little avail,
The Well must brenne in Water clear,
Take good heed for this thy Fire,
The Fire with Water brent shal^e,
And Water with Fire wash shall he;
Then Earth on Fire shall be put,
And Water with Air shall be knit,
Thus ye shall go to Putrefaccion,
And bring the Serpent to reduction.
First he shall be Black as any Crow,
And down in his Den shall lie full low:
I swelled as a Toade that lies on ground,
Burst with bladders sitting so round,
They shall to brast and lie full plain,
And thus with craft the Serpent is slain:
He shall show Colors there many a one,
And turn as White as will be the bone,
With the Water that he was in,
Wash him clean from his sin:
And let him drink a little and a lite,
And that shall make him fair and white,
The which Whitnes is ever abiding,
Lo here is the very full finishing:
Of the White Stone and the Red,
Lo here is the true deed.

THE MYSTERY OF ALCHYMISTS, Composed by Sir Geo: Ripley Chanon of Bridlington.
WHen in and Phoebus shines bright,
The Elements reviving the new Year springing
The Son by his virtue gives Nature and Light,
And moisture refreshes all things growing:
In the season of the Year when the Sun waxes warm,
Freshly and fragrante the Flowers do grow,
Of Natures subtle working we cannot discern,
Nor yet by our Reason we can it not know,
In four Elements is comprehended things Three,
Animalls, Vegetabills, Mineralls must be,
Of this is our Principle that we make our Stone,
Quality and Quantity is unknown to many one.
Son. Quality (Father) would I feign know,
Of what nature it is and what it has in his kind.

Father. As Colors diverse which on the ground do grow,
Keep well this secret (Son) and mark it in thy mind.

Son. Without Proportion (Father) how should I it know,
This working now is far from my mind.

Father. Nature and kind *Son) together do grow,
Quality by weight (Son) shall thou never find.

Son. To separate Elements (Father) I must needs know,
Either in Proportion which be more or less.

Father. Out of our Principle four Elements thou shall draw,
Thou shall need nothing else that needful is;
Our Principle in quality is so perfectly mixed,
By virtue of the Son and his quality,
So equaly Joined, so thoroughly fixed,
As nothing so well mixed may be.

Son. This Principle (Father) is but one thing,
Good (Father) tell me where it does grow.

Father. In every place (Son) you shall him well find;
By Taste and by Color thou shall him well know;
Fowls in the Air with it do fly,
And Fishes do swim there with in the Sea,
With Reason of Angels you may it diserne,
Both Man and Woman to govern,
With our fixed Body (Son) we must thus begin.
Of him make Mercury and Water clear,
Man and Woman is them within,
Married together by virtue of our Fire,
The Woman in her working is full wild,
Be well aware she go not out;
Till she have conceived and borne a Child,
Then all his Kin on him shall lout;
In their works they be unstable,
The Elements they be so raw;
And in their Color so variable,
As some time like the head of a Crow,
When he is black ye may well like,
Putrefaction must go beforne,
After Black he will be White,
Then thank ye God the Child is borne.
This Child is both King and Emperor,
Through his region both far and near;
All the World does him honor,
By the virtue he has taken of the Fire:
His first Vesture is White and pure,
As any Crystal shining clear,
Of White tincture then be you sure;
By verture taken of our Fire,
His first Vesture that is so White,
Betokens his Virginity,
A similitude even thereto like,
And according to the Trinity:
Our Medicen is made of things Three,
Against which the Philosophers cannot say nay,
The Father, the Son in one degree,
Corpus, Spiritus and Anima.
When Nature is with Nature, thou may fruit find,
By proportion more or less,
In practice hereof many men be blind,
Because they understand not what Nature is;
His second Vesture as Gold is Red,
In his Vessel bright shining,
A Diadem set on his head,
Richer then any earthly thing.
His third Vesture is Purple pure,
Like Sunbeams he shines bright and clear,
Of Red tincture then be you sure:
By the virtue he has taken of our Fire.
My beloved Son I command thee,
As thou will have my love and blessing,
That thou to God kneel on thy knee,
Unto him give laud and thankeing;
For these gifts of grace geven unto thee,
To have true knowledge of this worthy Science,
That many men seek by land and sea,
And cannot find it for any expense:
I shall show thee my Son here a hid Secret,
Because thou art virtuous in thy living,
Of me else should thou never it weet,
And for thou art wise in thy Council keeping,
And therefore I charge thee on my blessing,
Not to show it to any man living,
For it is the first Principle of our blessed Stone,
Through which our noble work is releeved,
Note well that I show now to thee my Son,
If Sulphur be absent our work is deprived;
Our Sulphur my Son is Water and Fire,
Constraining the Body till it be dead,
Of hem thou have never thy desire,
Till he be bloe as any Lead,
After all this he does revive,
That in his Vessel before was dead;
I can no better in my reason contrive,
Then to figure him to the great God head.
For as there dyed no more then One,
Howbeit that there be persons Three,
The Father, the Son by might is one:
The holy Ghost make our full Trinity:
A similitude like unto our Stone,
In him ben things three which be concluded all in one,
Our Sulphur is likened to the holy Ghost,
For he is quick, called the Spirit of Slyfe,
In his working of might he is most.
He raises our Body from death to life,
Many (my Son) with him do rise,
The holy Gospel therein is expert,
The number my reason cannot contrive,
Multum and quantum fructum adfert:
I liken our Sulphur to the Adamant Stone,
That Steel draws to him naturally,
So does our Sulphur the woman,
When she from her husband would fly.

Son. I muse greatly (Father) and mervaile in mind,
Whereof this Stone is ingendered,
And also of what manner of kind,
For I have traveled many a Country,
In valleys low and on hills high,
And spurred therefore of foes and friend,
Yet could I never that Sulphur see,
Nor in any place wat I where him to find.

Father. Son he is made of the Elements,
That God has given both soul and life,
From Metal he may never be absent,
For he rules both man and wife.

Son. Father I pray you for charity,
Where shall I this Sulphur find,
For perfectly I know him not by quality,
Nor yet to fore know him by kind.

Father. In our Water Son keep this in mind,
For there he will appear as white as snow.

Son. Gramarcy Father to me ye be full kind,
For through your teaching full well I it know,
Now Father I pray you for charity,
The while it is in your mind,
To ken the red Sulphur that you will teach me,
And then I trust your Doctrine to find.

Father. White and Red Son be both one in kind,
Now have thou all thy desire,
Keep well this secret and close it in thy mind,
His tincture and growing is by virtue of our Fire,
For in our Fire our Stone will grow,
And there his riches he does increase,
And so does no Stone that I do know,
That in the fire will put him in prease;
We liken him therefore unto the Sun,
That to all Elements gives light.
Never since the World was begun,
Was any but he of so much might,
Were he never of so high degree,
Saphir, Diamond or Emarald Stone,
The Turcas, or the rich Ruby,
Of all virtuous Stones set ower alone,
The greatest Carbuncle that is full of light,
May not with our Stone Compaire,
For if they in the Fire should fight,
The Carbuncle of virtue should be full bare,
To destroy our Stone, Son that will not be,
The Elements in him be so equal;
He is an Oil incumbustible,
And of all things most imperial.

Son. In which Elements (Father) is our Sulphur in?
Is he in all, or in any one?

Father. In all (Son) he needs must be,
For Separation of Elements make we none,
Sulphur in Elements Son we may not see,
By Nature in them he is so privily mixed,
In Elements he is a quality,
Our Stone will never else be perfectly fixed.
Quality (Son) grows also in fire,
Betwixt the White Stone and the Redd,
For many Colors there will appear,
While the time the Woman be dead.

Son. Father must the Woman needs be dead?

Father. Our Stone else my Son will never be Redd;
For whereas a Woman is in presence,
There is much moisture and accidence,
Wetnes and humors in her be,
The which would drowned our Quality;
Perceive well (Son) by Noah's flood,
To much moisture was never good.
Like as quality is hid in quantity,
So must our Earth in Waters be,
The riches in him thou shall find,
After alteration of kind,
His Oil in him is congelate,
This makes our Body liquefact,
Sulphur and Oil all of one kind,
Which makes our Stone rich and couloring;
I cannot tell thee Son a richer thing,
Then he is in the Fire during,
The Fire to him may do no wrong,
Sulphur of Nature makes him so strong.

Son. How to make our Stone (Father) I would feign know.

Father. In soft heates my (Son) Elements will meet,
Have not to fast whilst they be raw,
In the Vessel (Son) the better thou shall him keep,
Rule well the Fire and and beware of the Law,
Shut well the Vessel for going forth of the Spirit;
So shall you all things the better keep;
For how to get him again it is strange to know,
It is hard for some men to make Elements mere,
Keep well this Secret Son and God daily praise,
Put into thy Vessel Water clear,
And set it in Fire full forty days,
And then in the Vessel blacknes will appear,
When that he is black he will change tyte,
Many Colers in him then will appear,
From color to color till it be white,
Then it is time Son to change the Fire,
And melt the heat to your desire;
And if you will have him White still,
Then must you your Medicine apply,
A dry Fire put him till,
And a moist Fire naturally,
Till he be made fixed,
For to take Mercury before his flight,
As he is by nature privily mixed,
Of fusion then he shall be light,
And if you to his proportion take,
Fine Luna then will he make,
So micle of piercing will he be,
Both fluxible with penetrabilitie;
And (Son) if thou will have thy Medicine Red,
In a dry Fire thou shall him keep,
Ever still in one steed,
That never your Vessel come to wet.

Son. So hard, so heavy and so peircing,
(Father) this a wondrous thing,
So hot, so moist, so light, so wet,
This great Secret Father will I keep,
So white, so red, so profitable,
Of all Stones most incomparable.

Father. He may do more then any King,
He is so rich Son in his working,
Gould and Silver men would feign have,
Poor and rich for it do crave,
They that of it have most abundance,
Of the people have most obaisance,
To serve them both day and night,
And in the feeld will for it fight,
Therefore Son upon my blessing,
Keep secretly this precious cunning,
Of thy Council make neither King nor Knight,
If they knew they would set it light;
For when they have what they will,
God's curse will come they say the until,
For had I wist and had I wend,
That comes evermore behind,
Our Mercury my (Son) is white and thin,
In our Vessel shining bright and clear,
Our Sulphur is in him within,
Burning him more then our dry Fire,
He fixes him more in one year,
By his natural working I understand,
Then does the Son by his dry Fire,
In years a long thousand,
In short space we may have done,
When our Medicine thou will assay,
Thou may make both Sol and Lune.
In less space then in one day.

Son. Father is it Water in the well springing,
Or is it Water in the river running?
Other Water (Father) can I not find.

Father. Noe (Son) it is of another kind,
Howbeit it is Water clear,
Our Sulphur in him is so cleving,
He may not be departed by any fire,
I tell thee the throath in this thing.

Son. By no fire (Father) how may that be?

Father. Fire he is ever brenning,
Our Sulphur is made of the Sun and such humidity
That in the Fire he is ever during.

Son. The time of our working would I know,
In what space might be made our Stone,
By Corn and by Frut (Son) thou may it welknow.
Once in a year it is before thee done;
The Sun in the Zodiac about does gonne,
Through the twelve Signs once in a year,
So long it is e^e we can make our Stone.

Father. Haste not to fast but rule well thy Fire,
The virtue of our Stone few men can tell,
The Elements in him be so mighty,
Abundance of treasure in him do dwell;
For in riches all Stones exceeds he.

FINIS.
The Preface prefixed to Sir Geo: Ripley's MEDVLLA;
Which he wrote Ann. Dom. 1476. and Dedicated to Geo: Nevell then Archbishop
of York.

RIGHT noble Lord, and Prelate Dear,
Vouchfafe of me these Verses take,
Which I present unto you here,
That mention of the Stone does make,
Of wise men meetered for your sake,
For which of you thus much I crave,
Your gentle favor for to have.
This Stone divine of which I write,
Is known as One, and it is Three;
Which though it have his force and might,
Of Triple nature for to be,
Yet do they Mettalls judge and try.
And called is of Wise men all,
The mighty Stone that Conquer shall.
Disdain you not nor yet refuse,
To learn the virtues of them now,
By which you may if you them use,
Your self preserve and eke know how,
Old age to hide, and Youth out show.
And Brass by them transmuted is,
And eger Bodies cleansed I wis.
Fined also and made full pure,
And Aurified be at the last.
The first of these I you assure,
Right hurtful is for Man to taste,
For Life it will resolve and wast.
Of Corrosives made corrupting all,
And named is the Mineral.
But Animal the second is,
The third forsooth the Vegitable,
To cure all things their virtue is,
In every cause what so befall,
Mankind in health preserve they shall:
Renews Youth and keeps it sound,
As true by proof the same is found.
And here I will teach you plain,
How for to make their Mixtures pure:
In order fair without disdain.
I will tell you no Dream be sure,
Believe me while my life may dure.
Look what with mouth to you I say,
My deeds shall prove it true always.
Yett shall some Figure my Meeter hide,
Least the Art with wings should fly aw^y,
And so as vile abroad to slide,
Whose sense, or Truth cannot decay,
And without fraud I will display
The matter plain on every side,
And true likewise what so betide.
Although ere this you have heard say,
That such as practice does this Art,
Their thrift in Ashes seek always:
And learn at length with heavy heart,
Not more but less to make their part,
Yet be not you dismayed therefore;
Ne fear nor shrink for it the more.
But trust the words which I you tell,
For truly I do flatly say,
I have both seen and known it well,
And witness will the same always,
This the Marrow called is I say,
A truer Text full well I wot,
In all this World find shall you not.
Then as this writing of our Wine,
Whereof I bring you here a taste;
Whose heavenly Water pure and fine,
Does all things work withouten waste,
To your desire the bodies fast
It does dissolve, make light and open
With other things, not yett of spoken.
Against Nature yet is it not,
But natural as may men trow,
Which being cleansed from his spott,
There Phoebus splendour shall forth show,
And cause it fragrantly to grow;
For how more fragrant it shall be,
So much of Valor more is he.
For Phoebus nature does surpass,
And bodies pure, and eke the sky,
It does beshine both Corn and Grass,
The Son renews from on hye,
And causes things to fructify.
Does mix, and fix, and natureth,
Drives plagues away and nourishes.
Abandoneth, draws, and cleanses the Air,
Makes dews sweet, floods and humors dry,
Makes soft, hard, sweet and fair;
And purifieth Natures perfectly,
By his working incessantly;
It makes all things to grow I say,
And chaseth Ugly things away,
In Laurel Tree, it is full green,
In Gold it lodges glistringly;
It decketh Stones with brightness sheene,
The shinening bodies are made thereby:
But if you will more certainly,
Of Phoebus virtue have knowledging,
Then Saturns Child must issue bring.
O Pastor meek draw Water clear,
From buds of Vynes out of a Glass,
As red as blood as Gold it were;
Which will you give a Gummy Mass,
As precious as ever was.
Thus without fraud made open is by wise,
The Art which you shall not despise.
It multiplyeth and makes also,
Gold Potable know this for true,
By it are things increased so,
That health thereby you may renew,
To learn those Secreats daily sue,
Which formally prolong well may
Your Life in joy from day to day.
For although many hate this Art,
Yet it is precious over all;
Try and discern within your heart,
By all the Lessons mystical;
A Gift it is Celestial
Which here is taught to you him by
That proved it has Assuredly.
This have I written for your sake,
Not in vain style, but order plain,
This little Book of him you take,
Which frankly does bestow his pain.
To God committinge you again,
And all that does wish well to thee,
In any place wheresoever they be.
If you unbroken long would keep,
In perfect health, your Vessel still;
Then for your Cannon look you seek,
Remembering him that has good will,
By your assistance to fulfill:
And in such sort your Work display,
As sound may to your lawd always.
A SHORT WORK That bears the Name of the aforesaid Author, Sir G. RIPLEY.
TAke Heavy, Soft, Cold, and Dry;
Cleanse him, and to Calx grind him subtily:
Dissolve him in Water of the Wood;
If thou can do any good
Thereof, take a Tincture
And Earthy Calx good and pure.
Of this may thou have with thy travail,
Both Mercury, Water, and Oil;
Out of the Air with Flames great,
Fire into the Earth does Creep;
In this Work if thou will winn,
Take heed wherewith thou do begin,
And in what manner thou do work,
For loosing thy way in the dark;
And where, with what, and how, thy matter shall end;
I tell and Council thee as my Friend:
Make Water of Earth, and Earth of Water;
Then art thou well onward in the matter.
For thou shall find hid in the mire,
Both Earth, Water, Air, and Fire:
I tell thee my Brother, I will not flatter,
Of our Earth is made our Water:
The which is clear white as Snow;
And makes our Earth Calcine and grow.
Blackness first to thee does show,
As by thy practice thou shall know:
Dissolve and Calcine often, and often;
With Congelation till the Body to whitnes be brought:
Make the Body fluxible, and flowing;
With the Earth, perfect, and teyning.
Then after Ferment is once done;
Whither thou will with Sun or Moon,
Dissolve him with the Water of life,
Ycalled Mercury withouten strife:
Put the Soul with the Body, and Spirit
Together in one that they may meet
In his Dammes belly till he wax great,
With giving Drink of his own sweat:
For the Milk of a Cow to a Child my brother
Is not so sweet as the Milk of his Mother:
This Child that is so marveilously wrought,
Unto his Heritage must be brought:
His livelihood is so worthy a thing,
Of abilitye to spend with a King:
He that bears all this in mind,
And understands these Parables all;
With Separation he may find,
Poor and Rich, great and small;
With our Sulphur we make our Antimony, White and Red;
And thereof we make our Mercury quick, and dead.
This is a Metal that I speak of one of the seven,
If thou be a Clerk read what I mean.
There is no Plannet of six neither great nor small,
But if he be put to them, he will Calcine them all.
Unto red blood he must be brought;
Else of him thou gettest right naught:
Reach him then with the Wood Water,
Man, and Woman Clothed under one hatter,
In and of them is conceived a Child
Lovely of beauty, meek and mild;
Out of the Earth with dropps strong,
Nourish the Child in his Mothers womb;
Till he be come to full age;
And then make thou a Marriage,
Between the Daughter, and the Son,
And then thou have the Mastery wonn.
The beginning of this Work, if thou will crave,
In holly Writ thou shall it have:
Both in Mass Book and in Psalter
Yea wrighten before the Priest at the Alter:
And what is Antimony that thou shall work,
I have written to thee if thou be a Clerk;
Look about before if thou can find
Plainly written, which makes men blind:
Our Work is bringing again our Mercury,
And that Philosophers call Solucion;
And if thou loose not the unclean body,
Thou werkest without discretion;
The Inbibition of Water, is not the loosing;
But bringing the Body into water again turning*
That is to say into such water,
That is turning the Body into his first Matter:
The second Work is to bring,
Earth and Water to Congealing;
The cleansing of the Third is another
Unto Whitenes; my own Brother;
With this Water of his own,
That is full marvalous to be known:
The fourth work is distilling
Of Water, and Earth upsweating.
And thus have thou by one assent,
Earth, Air, Water, and Fire; the four Elements:
The Ashes that are in the bottom of the Vessel,
Look thou despise them not though left,
For I tell thee right well,
There is the Diadem of our Craft.
FINIS.
JOHN LYDGATE MONK OF St. EDMUNDS BURY, In his Translation of the second
Epistle that King Alexander sent to his Master ARISTOTLE.
When Alysaundre as is Rehersyd here
This Phylosophre for virtues manyfoold,
Sent unto him a secret Messengeer,
Without exskus to come to his housoold,
But he ageyn for he was feeble and old,
And impotent on the the other side,
And unweldy for to goon or ride.
But chief cause why Alysaundre sent,
A purpoos take and a fantasye,
To declare pleynly what it mente;
He wist in sooth that in Philosophye,
With other secrets of Astronomye:
He was expert and most cowde understonde,
This was in chief Cause of the Kings sonde.
Powder of Planetys and mevyng of all Sterrys,
And of every heavenly Intelligence;
Dysposicion of Pees and ek of Werrys,
And of each othyr strange hyd Science,
As the sevene Goddys by their Influence
Dyspose the Orders of Incantacions,
Or of sevene Metallys the Transmutacions.
With other Craftys which that besecre,
Calculacion and Geomancye,
Dyfformacions of Circes and Meed:
Lokynge of Facys and Pyromancye,
On Land, and Watir, Craft of Geometrye.
Heyghte and Depnesse with all Experyence,
Therefore the King desires his presence.
But for all this within himself a thing
There was a Secre he kept not to disclose;
Nor to publishe opynly to the King,
Takeyng Example by two things in a Roose,
First how the Flower greet sweetness does dispoose:
Yet in the Thorn men find great sharpness,
And thus in Konnyng there may been a likeness.
In Herb and Flour, in Writeing, Word and Stoon,
Each has his virtue of God and of Nature,
But the knowing is hyd froo many oon:
And not declared to every Creature,
Wherefor he cast twen Reason and Measure:
To shape aweye both the King to plese,
Somewhat to unclose and set his heart at ese.
There is of right a greet difference,
Tween a Princes royal Dignite,
And a twen Commons rude Intelligence,
To whom not longs to meddle in no degree,
Of Konnynges that should be kept secre,
For to a Kings famous magnificence,
And to Clerkys which have Experience.
Itt cordeth well to search out Scripture,
Mysteries hid of Fowlys, Beeste, and Tree,
And of Angellys most sotyl of Nature;
Of Myneralls, and Fysshes in the Sea,
And of Stonys specially of Three.
Oon Myneral another Vegetatyff,
Partyd on Four to length a Mannys lyffe.
Off which I radde oonys among other Stonys,
There was oon calyd Anymal;
Four Elements wrought out for the noonys:
Earth, Watir, and Air, and in especyall,
Joined with Fire proporcyon maad egal.
I dar seyn breefly and not tarry,
Is noon swych Stoone found in the Lapidarye.
Irad Oonys of a Phylosophre,
Ageyn each syckenesse of value does most cure,
All the Tresure and Gould in Craesus Coffre;
Nor all the Stoonys that grow by Nature,
Wrought by Craft or forgyd by Picture.
Lapis and non Lapis, Stoon of greetest fame,
Aristotiles gaff it the same name.
And for I have but little rad or seyne,
To write or meddle of so high mateerys,
For presumcion some would have disdeyn;
To be so bold or clymbe in my desires:
To scale the Laddere above the nine Speerys,
Or meddle of Rubyes that yeve so clear a light,
On holy shrines in the dirk night.
I was nevir noon expert Joweleere,
In suych mateerys to put my sylfe in prees,
With Philosophres mine Eyes were not clear,
Nowthir with Plato nor with Socratees:
Except the Prince Aristotilees.
Of Philosophres to Alisaundre King,
Wrott of this Stone the mervaylle in all werking.
In prevy wise lych to his Ententys,
Secretys hyd cloos in Phylosophye,
First departing of the four Elementys;
And aftyrward as he does speceffye,
Every each of hem for to recteffye.
And after this lyk his Oppynyon,
Of this four to make a Conjunccyon.
In suych wise perform up this Stoon,
Seen in the joynynge there be noone outrage
But the false erryng has founyd many one;
And brought hem aftyr in full greet rerage,
By Expensys and outragyous Costage.
For lak of brayn they wern maad so wood,
Thing to begin which they not understood.
For he that list put in Experience,
Forboode secrees I hold him but a fool,
Like him that temptyth of wylfull negligence,
To stand up right on a three foot stool,
Or sparyth a stewe, or fyssheth a bareyn poole.
When all is done, he get noon other grace,
Men will skorne him and mokke his foltish face.
Itt is no Crafft poor men t'assayle,
It causes Coffers and Chestys to be bare,
Marryth wytts, and brains does affray;
Yet by writing this book does declare,
And be Resons list not for to spare,
With Golden Resouns in taast most lykerous,
Thing per Ignotum prevyd per Ignocius.
Title of this Book Labor Philosophorum,
Named also De Regimine principum,
Of Philosophres Secreta Secretorum,
Tresour compyled omnium Virtutum;
Rewle directory set up in a some,
As Complexions in health and sickness,
Dyspose them sylf to morning or to gladness.
The which book direct to the King
Alysaundre both in the werre and pees,
Like his request and royal commanding,
Full accomplished by Aristotiles,
Feeble for Age and impotent doubtless,
Hoole of courage and true in his intent;
T'obeye his byddyng this book he to him sent.
How Aristotle declares to King Alysaundre of the Stonys.
TOwching the Stone of Philosophres Oold,
Of which they make most Sovereyn mencyon;
But there is oon as Aristotle toold,
Which all excels in Comparison,
Stoon of Stoonys most Sovereyn of renoune;
Towching the virtue of this rych thing,
Thus he wrote to the most sovereyn King.
O Alysaundre grettest of dignite,
Of all this World Monark and Regent,
And of al Nacyons have the Sovereynte;
Echoon to obey and been obedyent,
And to conclude the fyn of our intent,
All worldly Tresure breesly shet in oon,
Is declared in virtue of this Stoon.
Thou must first conceiven in substance,
By a maneer uncouth dyvysion;
Watir from Eyr by a disseverance:
And fyr from Eyr by a departicion,
Echoon preservyd from all Corruptyon.
As Philosophres a form have speceffyed,
Which by Reason may not be denied.
Watir from Eyr departed prudently,
Eyr from Fyr and Fyr from Earth don,
The Craft conceyved devyded truly,
Withouten Error or Decepcyon,
Pure every Element in his Complexion.
As it perteyneth pleynly to his part,
As is remembryd perfyghtly in this Art.
This Stone of Color is sometime Citrynade,
Like the Son stremyd in his kind,
Gold tressyd makes hertes full glade;
With more Tresour then has the King of Inde,
Of pretyous Stoonys wrought in their kind.
The Cetryn Color for the Son bright,
White for the Morn that shyneth all the night.
This Philosophre brought forth in Paris,
Which of this Stoonys wroot fully the nature,
All the Dyvysion set by grett advys;
And thereuppon did his besy cure,
That the perfeccion long should endure,
Like the intent of Aristotle's sonde,
Which none but he cowd well bring on hand.
For though the mateer opynly not toold,
Of this Stoonys what Phylosophres mente,
Aristotiles that was expert and Oold;
And he of Paris that forth this present sent,
And in all his beheste feythfull true of Intent:
With Circumstances of Araby Inde and Perce,
Towching the Stoonys that Clerkys can rehearse.
Hermogenes had himself alloone,
With the said Phelip that with him was secre,
Knewh the virtue of every prevy Stone;
As they were dispoosyd of Degree,
From him was hyd noon uncouth prevyte.
This Hermogenes and he knewh every thing,
Of all suych virtues as long to a King.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
IN the name of the holy Trinity,
I will write of this Work breiflie;
Leaving matters of circumstance,
And promise the truth to advance:
I will not write Figuratively,
But declare the Matter plainly,
And how things must be made to accord,
By Natures true work and the help of our Lord:
The World is but one enclosed with heavens round,
Though diverse matters and forms be therein found:
The Earth this worlds Center borne up by the Air,
In kind has noe more but being baire,
And nearest to not being, Philosophers have told,
In kind of Complexion is full dry and cold;
And now for my Figure of rotundity,
I will show how Elements accord and disagree:
And though the Elements be so contrary,
Yett by heavens Influence they are brought to unite,
And when once together a body they bind,
Naught may them loosen without wrecke to the kind.
First Fire in Nature is hott and dry,
Air differs from Fire in moisture only:
Earth only for coldness from Fire disagrees,
This Concord and discord every man sees:
Air hot and moist of complexion and kind,
Water differs from Air but in heat we find:
So that in moisture we find them both one;
Natural heat in Water we find none;
Water cold and moiste of Complexion is,
Earth differs from Water in drynes I wis:
Earth agrees with Fire in drynes noe doubt,
Thus one in another the Wheel turns about.
From this round Circle proceeds a quadrant,
Each line unto another an equal distant:
And as the round Figure concludes all in One,
So the Quadrant of four things makes distinction.
From this Quadrant a Fire must proceed,
Which is Animal, Vegitable and Mineral we reed:
And with the Fire I will begin;
Pray God I be not too bold therein.
The whole Composition of this world is framed,
Of the Three things which before I have named:
Now to make things of Excellency,
We must take things nearest Nobility;
And as this great Mass conteines things Three,
So Blood, Flesh and Bone in the least World we see;
Yett less World and great World is all but One;
Thus still we keep an Unyon:
Whatsoever itt is that is alive,
Without Blood they may not thrive.
Sperme is Generation of each thing,
Of what kind soever itt been;
Blood is Sperme be itt White or Redd,
For without Blood each thing is dead:
Blood contains the three things I have told,
And in his Tincture has Nature of Gold:
Without Gold noe Mettle may shine bright,
Without Blood nobody has been fit of light:
Thus does the great and less World still,
Hold the Union according to Gods will:
Now of all things Blood Noblest is,
For nothing in the World may itt miss,
Blood has true proporcion of the Elements four,
And of the three species I spoke of before:
The Blood must be the principal matter of each thing,
Which has any manner of increasing:
Mercury in Mettalls is the Blood certain,
Sperme in Animalls getts the like again;
Vegetable moisture from heaven so good,
Yett all these three are but Blood:
Then Blood in procreation is nearest of kind,
This Secrett good Brother keep close in thy mind:
And upon that Condition,
Which Blood thou shall take I will make repeticion;
The true Blood of Mettalls is hard to have,
And long time of getting itt does crave:
Blood of Vegetables has moisture great store,
And therefore to have itt requires much labor:
The true Blood to find without labor and cost,
Thou know where to have it ere thy wits be lost.
Seek out the noblest as I said before,
For now of the Matter I dare say noe more.
This Secrett was never revealed till this time,
By any Man's writings that ere I could find,
But I which by practice have found itt true,
Knew how things caused things to renew:
God grant noe Alchymists meet with my Book,
For they would have Elixir by hook or by crook;
And he would spend what his Friends wan,
And be as near at the last as when he began,
And would promise to give men Gold great store,
But beware thou of Expense, as I said before.
CHAP. II. Of the manner of the Work.
NOW after the Matter the Manner compute,
How to bring this our Work about:
First take the Matter crude as itt is,
Which will cost you little or naught I wis:
Searce it so clean as it may be,
Until from filth itt is all free,
Which wilbee done in hours three or four,
Then will it be clear from his ill humor:
Then take the Faces which you shall find,
In the same which the Matter left behind:
Purge him also with the noblest Element,
Until that he to Earth be brent:
Then have you a Stone of wonderful might,
With small Cost a secret right.
Take ye this Stone and use Millers Craft,
Till it be fine powder and made very soft:
Then give him the moisture which from him ye took,
Then use him as ye shall find in this book.
But give him noe other Drink but of his own kind,
For elce you do not after my mind.
Let him drink noe more then will suffice,
Beware of Floods I you advise:
Then search him twice again as you did before,
And still put upon his own liquor:
Thus their first Order to pass is brought,
And your foulest Work fully wrought.
CHAP. III. Of the second Order.
NOW the second Manner I will show plain,
How you shall work it with little pain:
When your three searsings be done after my lore,
Then break the Stone as you did before:
Then must you have one Veschell,
Which must be made like an Eggshell,
Into the which Vessel the Matter you must putt,
Then see that itt be well closed upp:
The Vessels divided in parts three,
Whereof two still void must be:
This Vessel must be set in a kind heat,
That the Matter may kindly sweat;
The Spiritts must not be oppressed with Fire,
For then thou shall never have thy desire;
Neither must thy Vessel have cold,
For then itt will spoil as Philosophers have told;
But keep itt in a temperate heat always,
For the space of forty days:
Then Blackesse will appear to sight,
That Blackness thou must bring to be White.
ache out t he Glass at the forty days end,
And se that from cold thou do itt defend;
And set itt in a Furnace with dry fire,
Till itt be White after thy desire,
Which will be done in Weeks three,
And dried from his moisture utterly:
Then with the first Water thou first did imbibe
Again thou may feed it at this tide,
But give itt noe more, nor you do think
May suffice at once for itt to drink,
This done putrefy as you did before,
Even in the very self same manner,
And in the said time which it stood before,
Itt will become of black Color,
And in the same Order if it congeale White,
Then is your Work both perfect and right;
Now you must go learn the Bakers occupacion,
How he Leavens Bread by Fermentacion;
And truly to Ferment take noe plate of Gold,
But part of that the plates do hold.
You know that if Sol show not a fair Tincture,
Itt will be had but in little honor,
Then Tincture of Gold is a most noble thing,
With a grace to noble men of our workeing,
For that true proverb does well accord,
Base things befitt not a noble Lord.
Now have I told you what Ferment is,
To teach you to Ferment I will not miss;
This Chapter is now brought to an end,
And now the third Order to show I intend.
CHAP. IV. Of the third Order of this Work.
RECIPE Sol that is pure and good,
And see that from him you take his pure blood,
Your Stone you must divide in parts three,
And the fourth of the Ferment must be.
If you will have for Red, and White too,
To Red after this Order you must do,
And the White after the same,
Must be ferment with Lune by name,
And the matter equally divyde
One for the Red, the other for the White.
Another like Vessel for the White you must look,
As before is taught you in this Book.
When your Ferments to your matters be put,
Then your Vessel close you must shut;
And set it to Putrifye as you did before,
The full time as I said of yore:
And use itt in every degree,
As in the next Chapter before you may see.
But look that you know your two Ferments assunder,
Or elce of your folly itt were great wonder:
And when from his Blackness you have brought itt White,
Then have you Elixir of wonderful might:
Your Red to his perfection is not fully brought,
But your White is perfectly wrought.
Your Red with most strong heat must be fedd
In a close Furnace until itt be Redd:
When itt is Redd and will melt like wax,
Then of all that should be nothing laxe.
Now have you a Stone of wonderful might,
Which will take Mercury before his flight,
And command him to stay, and cause him to bring
All Mettalls unto him, and call him their King,
And make such obedyence without Digression,
That of him they shall all take Impression;
Now have you a Stone of wonderful power,
Which contains the three Species and the Elements four:
Fire in Color, Water by Effusion,
Earth to sight without delusion,
Air is in Water all men do know,
And thus the four Elements accords now:
As for the three Species I will show,
How in your Stone you may them know:
Tincture for Blood pertains to the Animal,
Moisture the Vegetable part possess shall;
All Earth is Mineral without any doubt,
Thus keep we in one Circle and never go out.
Now have I my Figure perfectly wrought,
Yett of the Center I have said right naught.
A Center is a prick of whatsoever itt be,
Without any manner of divisibilitie;
And made as Nature does well provide,
So as no Accident may itt divide:
Only by hand but in the Quantity,
But by noe Element separate the Quality;
If in great Fire you set it down,
A true Salamander itt will be found;
If in the Water thou throw I wis,
It will live there as does a Fish;
If in the Air you cast it up hye,
There will it live, and never dye:
If in the Earth thou bury itt fast,
Then will it remain there, and ever last.
Thus can no Element divide without doubt,
The Center which our Wheel turns about:
Now how to Multiply your Medicine I trow,
Would do you much good for to know;
For unless you know how to Multiply,
Your Medicine will be spent quickly:
Then would itt put thy mind to much pain,
To think that thou must make itt again:
Therefore the next Chapter shall teach thee right,
To Multiply this Stone of wonderful might.
CHAP. V. How to Multiply.
NOW in this Chapter I mean to show,
How to Multiply that thou may know:
If Iron to the Lodestone be not put certainly,
Itt will decreace wonderfully;
The Species of all things both more and less each one,
Are mainteyned by reason of Multiplication;
Then if they be not Multiplied they decay,
But Multiplication makes them be all away.
All things after Conception receive natural Food,
To maintain their kind as Nature sees good:
So likewise our Stone must needs Multiply,
Or elce the Species of that Stone will dye:
And Multiplication must needs be of such thing,
As the thing multiplied takes best likeing.
Fire which burns perpetually,
If Matter want Fire will dye;
But for to feed our Stone rightly,
The way I will show presently.
Take your Glass and Medicine withal,
And in a warm Fire set itt you shall;
And when itt begins to liquefy,
Put common Mercury to itt by and by;
And itt will be devoured anon
By virtue of heat that is in our Stone,
And as much as you putt in quantity,
So much does your Medicine augment truly:
Yett you must have reason not for to cloye,
With overmuch cooling, kind heat thereby:
And as of a Dragme you will make a Pound,
You may well do itt, if you keep round;
And when it is Multiplied sufficiently,
Then from the Fire set it by.
A man in this Land once I knew,
That marred that he made, and so may you;
Except ye do as I have taught,
And then need you to fear naught.
Another I knew which wanted good direccion,
And at once spent all at one projection.
These knew not how itt should be multiplied,
Which things I have taught you at this tide;
But see that the Mercury wherewith ye Multiply,
Be made so clean as itt may be.
Now to make him extend his perfection,
It is needful to know how to make projeccion:
Whereof in the next Chapter I will treat,
For of Multiplicacion I will noe more speak.
CHAP. VI. Of Projection.
NOw lack we but only this Lesson to take,
Perfectly projection for to make:
Take one part of the Medicine, and of or Tinn,
But see that you make them exceeding clean;
And when your Metal does Liquefy,
Then cast in your part of Medicine quickly.
Then will it be brought to such a pass,
That all will be as brittle a glass;
Take the brittle substance as it is,
And upon an (100.) to take do not miss.
That 100. upon 1000. so still increase you may,
And project noe more when your Tincture does decay.
This projection is sure without any doubt,
Thus is our Wheel turned round about.
In what Vessel to project I need not to tell,
For a Master of his Art knows it very well;
To project on Mettalls now you know,
And to project on man's body now will I show.
First the Body must be purged well,
And by swetting and bathing be made suttell.
And when you are clean according to your mind,
Take a dragme of your Medicine with the Quintessence of Wine;
Such a suddeine alteration itt will show,
As you need not to fear Corruption noe more:
Now of his Virtues I need not to declare,
They are fully shown by others elce-where.
Now to the holy Trinity I thee commend,
Thankeing him my Work is at an end:
Chargeing thee this Secret from bad men to keep,
Though with great Importance of thee they itt seek;
And beware itt go not from thy hand,
Except to a perfect honest man.
By Books the true Work I could never find,
Therefore left I this Book behind,
That to whose share soever itt might fall,
By itt they might know our Secretts all.
God grant noe Multiplyer meet with my Book,
Nor noe sinister Clerks thereon to look;
Then will they pay their debts surely,
And build Churches, and Steeples very hye;
Keep itt from these folks I thee pray,
As thou will answer before God at last day:
For whatsoever has bin said to our work does accord,
Therefore give honor, praise, and thanks to our Lord;
Holy and Reverend be his Name,
Which to me vile Sinner has revealed the same.
THE HERMET'S TALE.
IN Pilgrimage one only thing I found
Of worth in Lemnes nere to Vulcan's shopp,
A Crystal founteine running under ground,
Between a Valley and a Mounteines topp.
Pleased with this sight, I bid a Hermit tell
The story of the place, who there did dwell.
Within this Vale a hallowe dusky Cave
There is (quoth he) of great Antiquity,
Where plumes of Mars blew green and red you have:
Torn from his crest for his Iniquity.
The Troop of Smiths, as he for Venus lay,
Surprised and took him, yett he get away.
For as the Cyclops him in triumph brought,
To halting Vulcan to receive his doom,
They lifted up his beaver, and found naught
But vacant place and Armor in the room.
Of th'armour then they thought they had good prize,
But working it they found itt scyndarize.
The Smiths amazed finding themselves deluded,
Satt all in Counsel in their Masters Den,
Deliberating well, at length concluded,
There is no equal War twixt Godds and men,
Lett's find the Angry God and pardon crave,
Lett's give him Venus our poor selves to save.
They sought in Heaven Mars knew his fact so bad,
He came out there, then one began to tell,
Saturn turned from his Throne, a Place had
Not far from thence, hard by this Crystal Well.
Thither they wen, and found two Gods alone,
Sitting within a dark, but glittering throne.
Down fell old Vulcan on his crooked knee,
And said forgive, O mighty God of War,
My servants and my self (once God as ye)
Then use thy will with Venus my fair starr.
Saturn (quoth Mars) and I must not yet part,
Though she for whom thou art pard'ned has my heart.
With this the Cuckold with his sweaty Troop
Went to his Forge and seemed to make a leg,
At every step, where halting made him stoop,
In thanks to Mars, granting what he did beg;
In whose remembrance you shall ever have
Syndars, and fetters in that hollow Cave.
But let me tell you all that then befell,
Jove seeing this, meaning the Smith to right,
Sent down a winged God, he trusted well,
Disguised in habitt of a shineing light,
Which to the Valley from the Hill's high topp,
Affrighted all the smiths in Vulcans shopp.
A voice was heard from Jove's Ambassador,
To summon Mars t'appeare before the Gods:
With Saturn forth came Venus Paramour:
Thinkeing with might to get of right the odds:
Downward came he 9. miles, they upward four,
All met in mist, he fledd, they nere went lower.
Vulcan came hobling up to se what is done,
He finds nor light, nor Gods, but other shape;
To witness of this fact he calls the Son,
Who streght cries Murder, and made have to escape:
Some dyeing Soul groaned forth, Apollo stay,
Help wise Apollo ere thou go away.
With this Apollo lookeing round about,
Espies this fountain knows the voice was here,
And boweing down to find the party out,
Himself unto himself does straight appear.
There gazed he till a sturdy shower of rain
Took wise Apollo from himself again.
Farewell Apollo then Apollo said,
To morrow when this storm is fully past,
I Will turn and bring some comfortable aid,
By which I Will free thee ere the latter cast.
Then did itt cry as if the voice were spent,
Come sweet Apollo, so itt downwards went.
Vulcan went to his Forge, the Son to bed,
But both were up betimes to meet again;
Next morn after the storm a pale soul dead
Was found at bottom of this fair Fountain.
Smith (said Apollo) help to lade this spring,
That I may raise to life yonder dead thing.
Then Vulcan held Apollo by the heel,
While he lades out the Waters of the Well;
Boweing and straining made Apollo feel
Blood from his nose, that in the fountain fell.
Vulcan (quoth he) this Accident of blood
Is that or naught must do this Creature good.
He spoke the word, and Vulcan saw itt done,
Look Sol (said he) I see itt changes hue,
Few Gods have virtue like to thee o Son,
From pale itt is become a ruddy blue;
Vulcan (quoth Phoebus) take itt to thy forge,
Warm it, rubb it, let itt cast the Gorge.
Thus Vulcan did, itt spued the Waters out,
And then itt spoke and cry'de itt was a cold;
Then Vulcan stuffed and clothed it round about,
And made the Stone as hott as ere itt would.
Thus fourteen days itt sickly did endure,
The Son came every day to se the cure.
As itt grew well the Colors went and came,
Blew, Black, White, Redd, as by the warmth and heat,
The humors moved were within the same,
Then Phoebus bid him put it in a sweat;
Which Vulcan plyde so well, it grue all Red,
Then was itt sound, and called for drink and bread.
Stay (quoth Apollo) though itt call for meat,
Disgestion yett is week, 'twill breed relapse,
By surfett, therefore ere you let itt eat,
Some little exercise were good perhapps,
Yett had itt broth alowde the strength to keep,
But when 'twas on his legs it would scarce creep.
Sol saw some relics left of th'ould disease,
A solutine (quoth he) were good to cleanse,
With which the sickness he did so appease,
Health made the Patyent seek to make amense;
Who went away three weeks, then brought a Stone,
That in projection yielded ten for one.
This did he lay down at Apollo's feet,
And said by cureing one thou have saved three:
Which three in this one present jointly meet,
Offering themselves which are thine own to thee.
Be our Physician, and as we grow old,
We Will bring enough to make new worlds of Gold.
With that this Hermit took me by the hand
And ledd me to his Cell; Lo here (quoth he)
Could thou but stay, and truly understand
What thou now see, thou know this Mystery.
I stayed, I saw, I tryde, and understood,
A Heaven on Earth, an everlasting good.
A DESCRIPTION of the STONE.
THough Daphne fly from Phoebus bright,
Yet shall they both be one,
And if you understand this right,
You have our hidden Stone.
For Daphne she is fair and white:
But Volatile is she;
Phoebus a fixed God of might,
And red as blood is he.
Daphne is a Water Nymph,
And has of Moisture store,
Which Phoebus does consume with heat,
And dryes her very sore.
They being dried into one,
Of crystal flood must drink,
Till they be brought to a white Stone:
Which wash with Virgins milk,
So long until they flow as wax,
And no fume you can see,
Then have you all you need to ask,
Praise God and thankful be.
The standing of the Glass for the time of the Putrefaction, and Congelation
of the MEDICINE.
THe Glass with the Medicine must stand in the fire desire,
Forty days till it be Black in sight;
Forty days in the Blackness to stand he will
And then forty days more, till itt be White,
And thirty in the drying if thou list to do right;
And then is the Sulphur perfectly Calcinate,
To drink up his moisture for him, being preparate.
In this time the Glass neither open nor shutt,
But still let him stand all the aforesaid days,
Not once from the Furnace that ye take him upp:
For by Cooling the Matter the Medicine decays,
Therefore you must Fire continue always,
In one measure and temperatenes of heat,
Until all be White, and the Sulphur complete.
This heat suffices for this principle one,
Which is the chief ground of our Secretts all,
Without which Knowledge thou must not make the Stone,
If thou labor thy life time, not prosper thou shall,
Therefore merry beware thou do not fall.
But first truly learn, before thou begin,
And so to true workeing thou shall the better win.
Follow this Book, and wander not aside
Out of the way, to the left hand, nor the right,
But straight between both directly you guide
Thy Work, so as I to thee do write,
For in this Book I will thee plainly excite,
How thou shall make the Philosophers Lead,
That is Elixir to the White and the Redd.
And then the Golden Oil called Aurum potabile,
A Medicine most mervelous to preserve Man's health,
And of Transmutation the greatest that can be,
For in the same Oil is nothing but wealth;
Then glorious he is in the power of himself:
For noe sickness can stand where he is in place,
Nor poverty dwell in the pleasures of his Face.
Aenigma Philosophicum.
THere is no light, but what lives in the Sun;
There is no Sun, but which is twice begott;
Nature and Art the Parents first begone:
By Nature 'twas, but Nature perfects not.
Art then what Nature left in hand does take,
And out of One a Twofold work does make.
A Twofold work does make, but such a work
As does admit Division none at all
(See here wherein the Secret most does lurk)
Unless it be a Mathematical.
It must be Two, yet make it One and One,
And you do take the way to make it None.
Lo here the Primar Secret of this Art,
Contemn it not but understand it right,
Who fails to attain this foremost part,
Shall never know Arts force nor Natures might.
Nor yet have power of One and One so mixed,
To make by One fixed, One unfixid fixed.
D. D. W. Bedman.

FRAGMENTS COPPIED From THOMAS CHARNOCK 'S own hand writing.
WHen an hundredth and fourscore had run their
Then sone after in short time and space, (race
Blacknes began to show his Face, (in fight
But when a C. and L. had overcumde him
He made him wash his Face white and bright
Which unto me was a joyful sight.
Yet xx. at last came in with great bost,
And made both Black and White to fly the Cost.
Written by T. Charnock at the end of Scotus de Bufone.
HEre in Gods name take thy rest,
Quietly in thy warm nest,
For so Charnocke thinks it best,
Till the Sune has run West,
Seven times 600. and 16. just,
Then this Child awake thou must.
Written at the end of RIPLYE'S Cantalena.

ABowte 653. I dare be bold,
This Child shall put on a Crown of Gold;
Or at 656. at the most,
This Child shall rule the roste.
OTher Fragments scattered in the wast places of an Old Manuscript, written
with T. Charnock's own Hand.
WE work this Work of wonder,
By Wayght, Measure and Number.
Quoth THOMAS CHARNOCK.
WHen he is full Black then take some pain,
To wash him 7. times in the water of Jourdayne.
CHARNOCK.
FRo the time that he be Black and Ded,
Wash him 7 times, or he be perfect Red.
ANd when he is full Black then take some pain,
To wash him 7. times in the water of Jourdayne.
ANd when you see him perfect Redd,
Then take a stone and knock him on the hedd.
Id est.

ANd when this Woman is brought a bed,
Take the Child and knock him on the hedd.
CHARNOCKE, 1573.

PErfect White will not be accomplished,
Until it has byne twelve times circulated,
Id est.

Six times Black, and vi. times White.
BEtwixt true Black, and true White;
Will appear many Collers to sight.
T.C.

BEtwixt Purgatory and Paradyse,
The Raigne-bows Collers will arise.
T.C.

BEtwixt Black and White sartayne,
The Pekokes feathers will appear plain.
T.C.

Look you conceive my words aright,
And mark well this which I have sede;
For Black is Ferment unto the White,
And White shall be Ferment unto the Read:
Which I never saw till I had white here is upon my head. T. C.
1574. The 50 year of my age.
In some Coppies I have found these Verses placed before Pearce the Black Monk,
upon the ELIXIR.
MAN and Woman God has wrought,
And full mykle fruit forth they brought,
So multiplyeth the works of our heaven King
And yet come they but of one thing.
Now quod Marlin what may that be?
The slithe of the Earth so say we:
Earth it was, some Men would say nay,
And yet was it nether clean earth sand ne clay,
But the feces of earth it was of Color gray,
Which then turned to earth as it on earth lay.
The Water turned to blude to make man strong,
The Air and Fire was meddled theare among.
How be Air and Fire quod Marlin?
Through the works of our Lord quod Martin.
For the brightness of the holy Ghost is the Air,
And the lightness that gafe life is Fire.
Wheare have thowe go too Scolle to learn all this?
For that thou say is right true I wisse;
And I suppose it in thie thought,
That with iiii. Spirits it must be wrought.
Nay your Spirits are too wild quoth Marlin again,
Therefore I will not meddle with them certain:
I will have a Spirit made by kind naturally,
That will abide with every body kindly;
Such a Spirit could I macke quod Marlin,
And yet men would hold yt but in vein.
And yet of all works it is the best,
Lest of Cost and most surest:
For if it should fail then were we done all,
And therefore for the most parfitest work we it call;
It is so rich when it is wrought,
Though all the world were turned to naught:
As mennye rich bodies again make would he,
As ever were or ever should be.
Take Earth of Earth, Earths Brother, etc.
I have seen an old Copy of the said work of Pearce the Black Monk, to the
end of which these following Verses were joined.

NOW of this Matter derke and nothing clear,
An Exposicion I do mack here;
Wherein I charge you secre to be,
That friend ne foe do yt se;
Earth hyd within the bodies center is most fine,
Water of Wood Essell of Wine,
For by the moyster of the Grape,
This centrall Earth who can it take;
It and Sercion do our Maistry make,
For it shall become Mercuriall,
And after that Essential.
But now beware that you not fail,
For then you loose your great travail,
When you have drawn owte of the Gum,
All the Mercury that will come,
Understand that Lycowres three
In that Mercury contained be;
The first is the Watur of life Ardent,
By Bath departed that is most lent;
It burns as Aquavite by live,
And is called our Mercury attractive,
Wherewith is made Earth Christalline,
Out of all Colors Metallyne:
I speak no more thereof as yet,
For in this work we need not it.
Then runs a Water after thilke,
Little in quantity white as milk;
Which is sperme or nature of our Stone,
That is earnestly sought of many one:
For of Man, Best, and every thing,
Sperme is there begynyng,
Therefore we our Mercury do it call.
Which is found here and there and over all,
For without yt is nothing lyvyng,
Wherefore yt is in every thing:
As well in things most preciouse,
As in things most vile and odious;
Of yt they have there first nature,
This moyster to you as now is clear,
This is the Mercury that we call
Vigetable, Mineral and Animal:
Our Quicksilver and our lac Virginis,
Our Water permanent forsooth yt is;
With this Water Mercuriall,
We wasch the fylth Original
Of our Earth till yt be white,
Like a Gumm that flows lyte,
By dry fire after that schale cume
Oil wherewyth we make red Gumm:
Wych is our Tincture and our Sulfur vive,
The soul of Saturn the Gold of life.
Our Tincture and our airy Gould,
Wych before was never so plainly told;
God grant that I do no displeasure
To him in fulfillyng your desire.
Now Elements be divided every one,
With this Oil make red your Stone;
Owre Gumms two then have schall ye,
Without the wych no Elixir may be.
They go the Body and the Spirits betwixt,
Wythowte the wych our Ston cannot be fixed,
And makyth of him in a little space,
Two Elixirs by Gods Grace:
Whereby are trewly alterate,
All Metalline Bodies into a better state,
With Sol and Luna equal to be,
To help us in our necessity.
Now thanked be God most gracious,
Wych has this Secret lent to us,
His grace therewyth to us he leave,
To our Souls health us for to meve.
This following Fragment in some copies I have found placed at the end of the
aforegoing Exposition of Pearce the Black Monk. In others, immediately before
-- With Hic and with Hac, etc. and bearing this Title,

A CONCLUSION.
TAke Wind and Water, white and green,
And thereof draw a lac Virgin;
Where some it call a water clear,
The which water has no Peer;
And then make your Fire stronger,
When the white fume does appear;
Change your Receiver and continue longer:
And then shall you see come a Fire,
Red as blood and full of Ire.
Quod dicitur menstruum faetens, and sol philosophorum,
In quo fit nostra dissolutio, and congelatio.
Sublimatio, attractio, and etiam fixatio,
Et Sulphuris nostri, five foliati creatio.
WIth hic and with haec thus may ye do,
As Husband and Wife toogeather them wed;
Put them in a chamber both two,
And shet fast the door when they be a bed.
The woman is both wanton and wild,
With her husband she cannot rest,
Till she have conceived a Child;
Of all his kin he shall be best.
He is a Child of the Elements
Both by Father and by Mother,
None so worthy in presence,
Not perfect Sol his own Brother.
Sol and Luna owe unto him obedience,
And all that him needs they to him bring,
Saturn does to him obesance,
Howbeit he is next of his kin:
There is neither Emperor or King,
But of his presence they would be glad,
If he from them were one year wanting;
In their hearts they would be full sad.
In riches he exceeds all other,
The Elements in him are so even,
Luna is his Sister, and Sol is his Brother,
His Father dwells among the planets seven.
Nulla virtus mineralibus where shall we him seek,
Sit tibi principium principale Council we must it keep;
Reperitur ubique localis by way in every street.
An other Conclusion.
FIrst Calcine and after Putrefie,
Dissolve, distill, sublime, descend and fix
With Aquavitae oftymes wash and dry;
And make a marriage of Body and Soul the Spirit betwixt.
Which thus together naturally if ye cannot mix,
Then shall the Body utterly dye in the flix.
Bleeding and changing Colors as ye shall see,
In bus and nubi he shall uprise and descend;
First up to the Moon and after up to the Sun,
Only shipped within a little glasen Tun.
When he comes thither, then is all the Maistry won,
About which Journey great goods ye shall not spend,
And ye shall be Glad that ever it was begun;
Patiently if ye list, to your work to attend.
Who so shall our Pearl and our Ruby make,
Our Principle let him not forsake.
For at the beginning if his Principle be true,
And that he can by craft so him bake;
Trewly at the end his Work shall him not rue.
The whole Science.
THere is a bodi of a Bodi,
And a Soul and a Spryte,
With two Bodies must be knete.
There ben two Erthys at I the tell,
And two Waters with hem do dwell;
The ton is White the the other is Red,
To quick the Bodies that been ded.
And oon Fire in Nature y hydd,
And oon Air with hem that does the deed.
And all hit comes out of onn kind,
Mark this well Man and bear yt in mind.
TAke Mercury from Mercury which is his wife,
For Mercury wife to Mercury makes great strife:
But Mercurys wyfes Wife,
To Mercury makes no strife.
AND thou wed Mercury to Mercury with her wife,
Then shall Mercury and Mercury be merry withouten strife:
For Mercuries Wife to Mercury makes great strife,
But Mercuries wyfe's wife to Mercury makes no stryf.
A Ridle to you I will propose,
Of a Common thing which most men knows,
Which now in the Earth very reefe does grow,
But is of small Price as all men know;
And that without root, stalk or seed,
Wherewith of his kind another to breed:
Yet of that nature, that it cannot cease,
If you plant it by pieces it self to increase,
Right heavy by kind, yet forced to fly,
Stark naught in the purse, yet good in the Eye,
This something is nothing which seems full strange,
Having tasted the fire which makes the change:
And has many Colors yet shows but one,
This is the material of our STONE.
I Asked Philosophy how I should
Have of her the thing I would,
She answered me when I was able,
To make the Water malliable,
Or else the way if I could find,
To mesure out a yard of Wind:
Then shall thou have thine own desire,
When thou can weigh an ounce of Fire:
Unless that thou can do these three,
Content thy self, thou get'st not me.
LEt the old man drink wine till he piss:
The means to the blessed Stone is:
And in that menstrous water drown,
The radiant brightness of the Moon,
Then cast the Sun into her lapp,
That both may perish at a clapp.
So shall you have your full desire,
When you revive them both by Fire.
IF ye wolle to his Medicine aplye,
Make furst hevy, hard, hot and dry:
Nesshe, light, cold and wete,
Put ham togeder and make ham mete,
Thus may ye spend mor thann the King,
If ye have connyng of such a thing.
IF thou the Fixid can dissolve,
And that Dissolved do cause to fly,
That Flying then to Fixing bring,
Then may thou live most happily.
R. B.

ANNOTATIONS AND DISCOURSES, UPON Some part of the preceding Work.
Page 6. lin. 1. TO the honor of God --
FRom the first word of this Proeme, and the Initiall letters of the fix
following Chapters (discovered by Acromonosyllabiques and Sillabique
Acrostiques) we may collect the Authors Name and place of Residence: For those
letters, (together with the first line of the seventh Chapter) speak thus,

Tomas Norton of Briseto,
A parfet Master ye may him trow.
Such like Fancies were the results of the wisdom and humility of the Ancient
Philosophers, (who when they intended not an absolute concealment of Persons,
Names, Mysteries, etc.) were wont to hide them by Transpositions, Acrostiques,
Isogrammatiques, Symphoniaques, and the like, (which the searching Sons of Art
might possibly unridle, but) with design to continue them to others, as
concealed things; And that upon the Question no other Answer should be
returned, then the like of the Judge. 13. 18.
Angell's to Manoah.[His name was Peli, to wit, admirable and secret.]

In imitation of whom, it is probable our Author (not so much affecting the
vanity of a Name as to assist the lovers of Wisdom) thus modestly and
ingenuously unvailes himself; Although to the generality of the world he meant
to pass unknown, as appears by his own words: Nort. Ordinall. page 6.
For that I desire not worldly fame,
But your good prayers unknown shall be my name.


Deillustr. Angl. Script. page 666.
Iob^ Pitts from John Bale, and De Script. Br. Gent. 11. f. 67
he from Robert Record, relates, that this Thomas Norton, was Alchymista suo
tempore peritissimus, and much more curious in the Studies of Philosophy then
others, yet they pass some undecent and abusive Gensures upon him, with
referrence to this vain and frivolous Science, as they are pleased to term
it, (and a better opinion I find not they had even of the Hermetick learning it
self.) Indeed, every one that is educated a Scholar, is not borne to aff^ct
or be happy in every Art, some love one, some another, but few All. And this
arises from the various Influences of the Stars, which beget sundry
Inclinations and Affections-in-Men, according to the different Constitutions
and Temperatures of their Bodies; so that commonly what either a man does not
affect, or know, he despises or condemns, yet seldom with any show of Reason.
But it is no good Conclusion for Bliude men to affirm the Sun has no light,
because they were never so happy as to see it. For though thy self (says
Conwrath) art ignorant of a Matter, it is not denied to others to know the same.
However, our Author was so happy as to become a Master of this Science very
early: which he learned in Ord. p. 33.
forty days, and when he was Ordin. p. 88.
Scantly of the age of twenty eight years,

He earnestly moved his Master (who is generally thought to be Ripley) to
communicate the Red Medicine to him, which after some time (finding him capable
of it) he accordingly did.

Much more might be said in Honor of this Author, but I refer the Reader to
the Ordinall it self, which will abundantly satisfy.

Besides this work (which is called both by Pitts and Bale, Epitomen
Alchymiae, but by himself Ordinall. page 9.
Nanied of Alkimy the Ordinall,
The Creed mihi, the Standard perpetual)


He wrote another Book De transmutatione Metallorum; and to these Page 666.
Pitts adds a third De Lapide Philosophico.

In the time of Hen 8. there flourished Nine Brothers of the family of the
Nortons and all Knights, one of them (viz.) Sir Sampson Norton, Master of the
Ordnance to the said King (an Office of great Honor, and not usually conferred
but upon Men very eminent) lies buried in Wever's fun. Mon. fo. 526.
Fulham Church nere London, whose Tomb was adorned with several Hermeticke,
Hierogliphicall paintings, which have lately perished by the Ignorant zcale of
those that understood them not.

The Epitaph this.

Of yowr therite pray for the Soul of Sir Sampson Norton Knight, late Master
of the Ordinance of war, with King Henry the 8th and for the Soul of Dame
Elizabyth his wyff. Which Sir Sampson decessyd the eyghth day of February one
thousand five hundred and seventeen. Page 11. l. 7. That no Man, for better ne
for worse,
Chaung^ my writing for dread of Gods curse.

Doubtless Norton was truly sensible of the high injuries done ^o learned men
through the Erroneous Transcriptions of their Books, and had shared in the
unimaginable misfortune which thereby befell the then Students in Philosophy,
for be lived in those times that could not afford him the use of any other
Books save only Manuscripts (Printing having not served an Apprentiship to
England The first Printing-Presse was set up in Westmin. Abbey by Simon Islip,
An. 1471 and William Caxton the first that practiced it there. See Stowes Surv.
525.
when he wrote this Oridinall) and in that regard he lays this weighty charge
upon unfaithful Scribes who negligently or wilfully alter their Copy, whereby
the wariest Students are encombred with doubts, and missed, or plunged into
unhappy Errors.

How ordinary a fault this was amongst the Transcribers of former times may
appear by Chaucer, who (I am confident) took asgreate care as any man to be
served with the best and heedefullest Scribes, and yet we find him complaining
against Adam his Scrivener for the very same: Cbaucer to bis Scrivener.
Soofte a day I mote thy work renew,
It to Correct and eke to rub and serape,
And all is through thy neglegence and rape.


But as in other Arts and Sciences the ^^ult is scarce pardonable, so chiefly
in Hermetique learning, where the Injury may prove irreparable.

Ord. p. 11.
And changing of some one Syllable,
May make this Book unprofitable.
Page 33. l. 13. If I should write I should my fealty break
Therefore Mouth to Mouth I must needs sp^ake.

THis is part of the Letter which Norton's Master wrote when he invited him to
come and receive the Secret by word of Mouth, for without breach of his Oath he
durst not commit it to writing, lest he might cast the Childrens Bread to Dogs.

In like manner Aristotle refused to communicate to Alexander by Letter, things
apperteyning to this Mystery, until a personal meeting might allow him to do
it viva voce: for thus writes Lydgate out of Aristotle's Secreta secretorum.

There be Secrees of Materis hih and low,
Hyd in Nature conc^lyd and se^ree,
Which Aly ^andre des^red for to know;
By Aristotle's a certyn previtee,
Na^ speei^ed cloos in him sylff kept he,
Which was delayed of great providence,
Till he hymsylff came to his presence.
And this was for fear his Writings should come to the view of such whose Eyes
were not worthy the perusal of so sublime Secrets, and thereby suffer under
the Cap. 2.
contempt of the profane Vulgar, or by wicked men be abused to wicked uses.
(For a Secret discovered will not fail of doing Injury to one party or an
other) which (if by his means it should happen) might render him Criminal
before God, and a presumpiuous violator of the Calestiall Scales.

However the ancient Philosophers have used writings, and they as well obscur^
as ob^io^^, whereby the Ignorant might be more Ignorant, but the Wise
understand G. br.
and profitt, the one be deceived, the other alured: And like Aristotle who
(publishing his Acromaticall Discipline and) being therefore taxed by Alexander
(because he alone had learned them of him) answered Se scripfisse, and nou
scripfisse; edidisse quidem sed legentibus non intelligentibus. They have taken
much pains by Aenigmaticall and Parabolicall discoveries (according to their
affected Ideoms) to point out the Philosophers Mercury, and (with an univocall
consent) asserted the wondrous operations of an Agent and Patient united but
we must not look for the Name of that in plain words which hitherto never,
Anonymi.
any man durst name: For that they have locked up in s^rinio pectoris, and
purposely deprived of light.

Their chiefest study was to wrap up their Secrets in Fables, and spin out
their Fancies in Vailes and shadows, whose Radii seems to extend every way, yet
so, that they all meet in a Common Center, and point only at One thing.

Chauc. Prol. to his own Tale.
And thus ye wot that every Evangelist,
Thattelleth us the pains of Jesus Christ.
Ne says not al thing as his fellow does,
But nay the less her S^ntence is all soth.
And all accorden in her Sentence,
Albe therein her telling difference.
For some of he^ saine more and somelesse,
When they his piteous passion express.
I mean of Mark Matthew Luke and John,
But doubtless her Sentence is all one.
And to this effect is that of Count Trevisan. De chim. Mir. secunda pars Page
28.
He that well understands the Philosophers shall find they agree in all
things, but such as are not the Sonns of Art will think they clash most foully.

Page 33. l. 15. -- Mine Heir unto this Art
I will you make --

THere has ever been a tontinued Succession of Philosophers in all Ages,
although the beedlesse world has seldom taken notice of them; For the
Ancients usually (before they dyed) Adopted one or other for their Sonns, whom
they knew well fitted with such like qualities, as are set down in the letter
that Norton's Master wrote to him when he sent to make him his Heir unto this
Science. And otherwise then for pure virtues sake, let no man expect to attain
it, or as in the case of Tonfile.

Ordin. Page 41.
-- For Alms I will make no store,
Plainly to disclose it, that was never done before.
Rewards nor Terrors (be they never so Munificent or Dreadful) can wrest this
secret out of the bosom of a Philosopher: amongst others, witness ibid page
35.
Thomas Dalten.

Now under what Ties and Engagements this Secret is usually delivered, (when
bestowed by word of mouth) may appear in the weighty Obligations of that Oath
which Charnock took before he obtained it, for thus spoke his Master to him:

Brev. of Philos. cap. 5.
Will you with me to Morrow be content
Faithfully to receive the blessed Sacrament
Upon this Oath that I shall here you give,
For ne Gold ne Silver as long as you ^^ve,
Neither for love you bear toward your Kin,
Nor yet to no great Man preferment to win,
That you disclose the Secret that I shall you teach,
Neither by Writing, nor by no swyft Speech;
But only to him which you be sure,
Has ever searched after the Secrets of Nature,
To him you may reveal the Secrets of this Art,
Under the Covering of Philosophy before this World ye depart.
And this Oath he charged him to keep Faithfully and without Violation.

Chap. ibid.
As he thought to be saved from the pit of Hell. And if it so fell out, that
they met not with any, whom they conceived in all respects worthy of their
Adoption, Ord: page 37.
they then refigned it into the hands of God, who best knew where to bestow it.
However, they seldom left the World before they left some written Legacy
behind them, which (being the issue of their Brain) stood in room and place
of Children, and becomes to us both Parent and Schoolmaster, throughout which
they were so universally kind, as to call all Students by the dear and
affectionate Title of Sons in Pim^nd.
(Hermes giving the first President) wishing all were such, that take the
pains to tread their Fathers stepps, and industriously follow the Rules and
Dictates they made over to posterity, and wherein they faithfully discovered
the whole Mystery;

Ordin. pa. 10.
As lawfully as by their fealty they may,
By license of the dreadful Judge at domes day.
In these Legitimate Children they lived longer then in their Adopted Sons, for
though these certainly perished in an Age, yet their Writings (as if when they
dyed their Souls had been Transmigrated into them) seemed as Immortal, enough
at least to perpetuate their Memories, till Time should be no more. And to be
the Father of such Sons, is (in my Opinion) a most noble happiness.

Rand. Poems page 63.
Let Clownes ge^ Heirs, and Wealth; when I am gone,
And the great Bugbearegrisly death
Shall snatch this Idle breath,
If I a Poem leave, that Poem is my Son.
Page 34. li. 33. I made also the Elixir of life,
Which me bereft a Marchaunt's Wife.

THe Conjecture has much of probability in it which speaks this the Wife of
Will. Cannings, who was 5. times Major of Bristoll, contemporary with Norton,
and whose wealth was far beyond the best of those times, as appears by that
notable Work of his in building Saint Mary of Radcliff without the Walls of
Bristoll, into which Church there is a Stately ascen^ upon many Stairs, so
large withal, so finely and curiously wrought, with an arched Roof over head
of stone, artificially Imbowed; a Steeple also of an exceeding height, that all
the parish Churche^ in England which hitherto I have seen (says judicious
Brit. fo. 237.
Camden) in my judgment it surpasses many degrees.

The said William Cannings also Camb. Brit. fo. 238.
Instituted, (Isaacso^ says very much Chron. fo. 467.
augmented) the College of Westbury near Bristoll (not long before Godw. page
367.
founded by John Carpenter, Bishop of Worcester) and in his old age took upon
him the Sacerdotall function and became Deane thereof.

Page 38. li. 4. And Delvis at Teuxbury lost his head
Within two days after the 4. May 1471
Victory which Edw. the fourth obtained over Queen Margaret and Prince Edw.
(the Wife and Son of Henry the sixth) at Teuxbury; This Stow. Ann. fo. 424.
Delvis (the Sonneof Sir John Delvis then slain) was beheaded: Notwithstanding
a Pardon granted unto him and others by the King at the earnest solicitation of
a Priest who withstood his entrance into a Church, whither He and many more
were fled for Sanctuary, till the said Pardon was obtained. A just punishment
for betraying so honest a Philosopher as Dalton into the hands of so imminent
danger, as the Story at the latter end of the second Chapter mentions.

Page 39. li. 1. Tonsile was a Labourer in the Fire.
THe great Letter T. set in p. 2. 6. wherein the Gryphon is cut, should have
been placed the first Letter of the Line: But this mistake was committed in my
absence from the Press, for which the Printer beggs pardon, as also the
Engraver, for giving the Gryphons hinder Feet, those cloven ones of a Hogg,
instead of the ungued pa^es of a Lion.

What was contained within the lower compass of the said T. which in the
Original Manuscript was like a Capital Secretary T. seems (in my judgment)
a Coat of Arms, for although it was not drawn in the form of a shield or
Scucheon, yet within the compass of the Letter (which I take to be the field)
was Azure, a Gryphon Rampant, with Wings displayed, Argent. But to what Family
it belongs I cannot yet learn.

Pa. 52. l. 1. Brise whose Surname when the change of Coin was had.
THis alteration of our English Coin was in the An. 1465.
5th. of Edward the 4th. the value of Money at one rise was never so great
before or since; for he made of an Stow Annal. 418, Surv. 46.
old Noble of Gold a Ryall, and from the value of 6 s. 8 d. with adding 8. d.
in allay raised it to 10 s. (and so other Coins in like proportion) and yet
that Noble was by H. 4. made 4 d. in value less then the Rose Noble of Edw: 3.
coined Anno 1351. the Camb. Rem. page 172.
Gold whereof as is affirmed (by an unwritten-verity) was made by Projection or
Multiplication Alchimicall of Raimund Lully, in the Tower of London, and
besides the Tradition, the Inscription is some proof, for as upon the one side
there is the Kings Image upon a ship, to notify that he was Lord of the Seas,
with this title set upon the reverse, a Cross floury with Lioneux, inscribed,
Jesus autem tranfiens per medium eorum ibat, that is, as Jesus passed invisible
and in most secret manner by the midst of Pharisees, so that Gold was made by
invisible and secret Art amidst the Ignorant. Mayerus confirms this, and says
Simb. aur. page 418.
Raymond made most pure Gold in the Tower which is yet called Raymonds noble,
obrizi summaeque indicaturae, some of which himself had seen. It Is also worth
observing that Camb. Rem. page 172.
there was no Gold coined in England before the said Edward the third's Reign
An. 1443. and Raymond Lully was long in England before that, for See the ^atter
end of his Test. Nov.
An. 1332. he wrote his Testamentum Novissimum in St. K^therins Church near
the Tower of London, and Dedicated it (with other of his Works) to Edward the
third, and it may be presumed he was some while there before he wrote the same:
For, that he was brought over by Cremer Abbot of Westminster, afterward made
known to the King, and did furnish him with much Gold, as shall appear
hereafter in the Annotations upon Hermes Bird.

Pa. 61. li. 7. But the chief Mistress among Sciences all
For the help of this Art, is Magic natural,

Judicial Astrology is the Key of Natural Magic, and Natural Magic the
Door that leads to this Blessed Stone.

Howbeit, the Ignorance and Malice of some times, and the common Custom of
ours has most falsely and abusively called Necromancy (and what other Arts are
raised from the Doctrine of Devils,) Magic; without affording that just and
due distinction which ought to be made between them: and what greater Injury
to learning then without Distinction to confound Laudable knowledge, with what
is Impious and Devilish? For, if there be any thing in (what we call) Magic,
other then a searching into those hidden virtues which God has been pleased to
bestow upon created things (though closely locked up by the general Curse)
whereby we may aptly and naturally apply Agents to Patients, I say, if in it
there be any thing else, they are only subtle falsehoods that shelter and
shroud themselves under that Title, and which would gladly be esteemed Leaves of
that Plant, from whose Root they never sprung. And therefore is it not less
absurd, then strange, to see how some Men (who would have the World account
them learned, and whom I believe to be so learned, as to have read and found
what Latitude is due to the word Magus, how it is accepted by the Judicious,
and what a vast difference there is, between the Doctrine of a Magician, and
the abuse of the Word) will not forbear to rank True Magicians with
Conjurers, Necromancers and Witches (those grand Impostors) who Paracel. de.
occult Phil. cap. 11.
violently intrude themselves into Magic, as if Swine should enter into a
fair and delicate Garden, and (being in league with the Devil) make use of
his Assistance in their works, to counterfeit and corrupt the admiral wisdom
of the Magi, between whom there is as large a difference as between Angels
and Devils

The Magic here intended, and which I strive to Vindicate, is, Divine, True,
of the Wisdom of Nature, and indeed comprehedeth the whole Philosophy of
Nature, being Gaff. Curios. page 66.
a Perfect Knowledge of the works of God, and their Effects. It is that, which
Bac. adv. fo. 33.
reduces all natural Philosophy from variety of Speculations to the magnitude
of works, and Dr. Gells Sermon. 1650.
whose Mysteries are far greater then the natural Philosophy now in use and
reputation will reach unto. For by the bare application of Actives to Passives
it is able to exercise a kind of Empire over Nature, and work wonders: and
it is from the ignorance of such marvelous Operations that the Ignorant, (viz.
the most learned in other things (as well as the Illiterate) if they be not
learned in this,) either by an unwarrantable adoration esteem them as
Miracles, which only are the works of Natural or Mathematical Philosophy:
or else (which is an Error as wide on the left hand) forthwith censure and
slander those truly Natural as Diabolical, because wonderful strange and
beyond the random of their Apprehensions. The latter of which might as well
say Genesis 31. 37.
Jacobs practicing to make his Lambs of a Py'd Color was performed by the
assistance or ministry of the Devil, and as well condemn the use of Physic,
because the Devil has taught Witches diverse harmfull and uncharitable uses of
Herbs, Mineralls, Excrements, etc.

And as in some dull ages, and among some Gross Spirits it has proved
dangerous to be Learned, Witness our Renowned Roger Bachon, whom (Together
with Artepheus, Arnold, de villa nova, who were Philosophers of known
reputation and credit) De Prestigiis Daem. li. 2. ca. 4. page 140.
Wierus reckons among the Deplorati ingenii homines Seldom pref. to Hopt.
Concord
all whose Works fairly written and well bound, were by Religious pretending
Sciolists damned as Devilish, with long Nails through them fastened to desks in
the Franciscan Library at Oxford, and there with Dust and Moths consumed: Even
so our other famous Countryman [Profound Ripley] was also abused, Bale Cent.
8. fol. 633.
who after his death is said to have been branded with the name of a
Necromancer. Pope Silvester the second pas'd for a Magician (in the worst
sense) because he understood Geometry; and about 150. years ago (so blind an
age was it,) that to know Greek and Necromancy were one and the same thing, in
opinion of the Illiterate. However, let the Ignorant scoff and attribute that
to Deceit and Illusion which is the proper work of Nature produced by
exquisite knowledge, I am confident the ingenously learned will approve and
admire it.

But to tear off that ugly vizard which Envy has placed before the Face of so
Divine a Beauty, and to make way for the meaning of our Author, I think it
necessary (in the first place) that I touch upon the Word, that gives a name to
the Prosessors;

And that is Magus (primitively a Persian word) which only signifies or
imports a Contemplator of Heavenly and Divine Sciences, a studious Observer, an
expounder of Divine things, a name (says Par: prim. fo. 573.
Marcellus Ficinus) gracious in the Gospel, not signifying a Witch or a
Conjurer, but a wise man and a Priest. And in truth a true Magician,
acknowledges God, to be the true Cause and Giver of life and virtue to Nature,
and all Natural things, of the Causes of which things (as also of Magia
praecipua est pars Theologiae.
Divine) is the whole scope and effect of all their Writings and Discourses:

In the Next place, that I give the Definition of Magic (because as Pic. Mir.
fo. 81.
Myrandula says) it is an Art which few understand and many reprehend, and
therefore of necessity to be clearly evinced:) Receive it from a learned hand:
you will find it worth your observance.

Magic, is, the Connection of natural Agents and Patients, answerable each to
other, wrought by a wise Man to the bringing forth of such effects as are
wonderful to those that know not their causes. Thus He. Paracelsus called it
De Occult. Phil. cap. 11.
a most secret and hidden Science of supernatural things in the Earth, that
whatsoever is impossible to be found out by man's Reason may by this Art. And
shortly after to clear it from imputations adds, that it is in it self most
pure and not defiled with Ceremonies nor Conjurations as Necromancy is.

Agreeable to both (but more copiously delivered) is that of Corn: Agrippa, who
affirms, De Occult. Phil. lib. 1. ca. 2.
Magic to contain the profoundest Contemplation of most secret things,
together with the nature, power, quality, substance, and virtues thereof, as
also the knowledge of whole nature: That instructs us concerning the difference
and agreement, of things amongst themselves, whence it produces its wonderful
effects, by uniting the virtues of things through the application of them one
to the other, and to their inferior suitable Subjects, joining and knitting
them together thoroughly by the powers and virtues of superior Bodies. This
briefly is an account of that Learning, whose Operations and Effects (being
full of Mysteries) was by the Ancients esteemed as the highest and sacred
Phylosophie, the fountain of all good doctrine: Animadverto (says Pliny)
summum Literarum claritatem, gloria^que, ex hac scientia antiquitus, and penes
semper petitam.

What has been hitherto said, will not (I presume) offend the Ears of the
most Pious, for here is no Incantations, no Words, no Circles, no Charms, no
other fragments of invented Fopperies; nor needs there any: Nature (with whom
true Magicians only deal) can work without them, she finds Matter, and they
Art, to help and assist Her, and here is All.

To instance the Generation of Froggs, Lyce, Worms, Insects, etc. The work of
a Philosopher is therein only to Guli. Par. de. leg. cap. 24.
strengthen the Seeds of Nature, (for she alone Works) and so to quicken them
that they hasten the work of Generation (and by such means Tho. Aquinas
supposes Pharo's Magitians, produced Froggs) insomuch as it seems to the
Ignorant not to be the Work of Nature, (that usually operates more leasurely,)
rather the Power of the Devil. But they who are learned in those Arts, marvel
not at such working, but Glorify the Creator. To whose Honor alone these
Operations must chiefly tend, for Dr. Gells Sermon. 1650.
he is best praised in his works, and we knowing him in and by these visible
things, may through such knowledge understand his more Secret and Invisible
things, and thereby be better enabled to Glorify him, then men otherwise can.

Now I deny that any measure of understanding, in natural Magic, how large
soever, or the utmost and ^arthest search we can possibly make into that pure*
and primitive knowledge of Nature, to be a prying in^o those Hidden Secrets,
which God would have concealed and ranked among the number and nature of those
things he has prohibited us to search into, (as I know there are that will tell
you it is, and they such as wear the Coat^, and would be loath to want the
reputation of Scholars) And this is fully manifested from Adam, who Genesis 2. v.
19. 20.
before his Fall was so absolute a Philosopher, that he fully understood the
true and pure knowledge of Nature (which is no other then what we call Natural
Magic) in the highest degree of Perfection, insomuch, that by the light
thereof, upon the present view of the Creatures he perfectly knew their Naures,
and was as able to bestow names suitable to their Qualities and Properties, For,
This was a larger and cleerer Ray of the Light of Nature, then all the industry
of man (since the Fall) was able to hope for or attain unto, and (to attest
the allowance) bestowed upon him by God himself: Nor was it this Natural
knowledge that introduced his Fall, or can be any Offense or Sin in us (were it
possible) to arrive at his Perfection. No certainly; Adams transgression (for
which he fell) was of a higher Nature, [even that proud inquiry into the Bac.
advancement; fol. 5. and 43.
knowledge of good and evil, with no less intent then to make a total
defection from God, and depend wholly upon himself and his free will.]

Besides, it is worthy Observation, that God in constituting Moses to be a
Governor over his own people, seemed as willing to make choice of such a one
for that high Office, as was Act. 7. v. 22. Ench. Phis. Rest. Can. 11.
learned in all the Sciences, then in request with the Egyptians, among whom
Magic was the chief. And we find that upon Salomon's Prayer to God for
Wisdom he granted him a Heart as large as the Sea, and therein lodged so
great knowledge of Humane things, that he penetrated whatsoever the
understanding of Man might comprehend: and (to manifest the inoffensivenesse of
Natural Magic,) never ^eckons it up in all his Retractations Though he
thoroughly understood it, and in his practice attempted the highest Experiments,
which had it been unlawful, certainly he would not have omitted.

Thus much for a Preparative. And now that I may come closer to what Norton
intends, and bring Magic nearer to our purpose; We must understand that the
Order and Symmitry of the Universe is so settled by the Laws of Creation, that
the lowest things [the Subcelestiall or Elementary Region] should be
immediately subservient to the Middle; the Middle [or Calestiall] to those above;
and these [the Supercelestiall or Intelligible] to the Supreme Rulers beck.
With this it is further to be known that these Canon. 3.
Superiors and Inferiors have an Analogicall likeness, and by a secret Bond
have likewise a fast coherence between themselves through insensible Mediam^,
freely combiening in Obedience to the same supreme Ruler, and (also to the)
benefit of Nature: Insomuch, that if we take the said Harmony in the Reverse,
we shall find that things Cor. Agr. de oc. Phil. l. 1. cap. 38.
Supercelestiall may be drawn down by Celestial, and Supernatural, by
Natural. For this is the Maxim of old Hermes, Tab. Smaragd.
Quod est superius, est sicut id quod est inferius.

And upon this ground Cor. Agr. de Occult. Philos. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Wisemen conceive it no way Irrational that it should be possible for us to
ascend by the same degrees through cach world, to the very Original world it
self, the Maker of all things and first Cause.

But how to conjoyne ^he Inferiors with the virtue of the Superiors (which is
marrying Elmes to Vi^es) or how to call out of the hidden places into open
light, the dispersed and seminated Virtues (i e. Virtutes in centro centri
latentes,) is, the work of the Magi, or Hermetick Philosophers only; and
depends upon the aforesaid Harmony. For,

They know that the Production of things is Natural, but the bringing forth of
the virtue is not Natural: because the things are Create, but the Virtues
Increate.

Hence it is that the Power and Virtue is not in Plants, Stones, Mineralls,
etc. (though we sensibly perceive the Effects from them) but it is that
Universal and All-pier^ing Spirit, that One operative Virtue and immortal
Seed of worldly things, that God in the beginning infused into the Chaos,
which is every where Active and still flows through the world in all kinds of
things by Universal extension, and manifests it self by the aforesaid
Productions. Which Spirit a true Artist knows how-so to handle (though its
activity be a^ it were dul'd and straightly bound up, in the close Prison of
Gross and Earthie bodies) as to take it from Corporiety, free^ it from
Captivity, and let it loose that it may freely work as it does in the
Aetheriall Bodies.

But the means whereby it is to be done (which is the first Preparation) all
Philosophers have hitherto concealed. For,

Hunt. Green Lion.
To i. e. To tell what it is, though Aenigmatically.
Create Magnesia they made no care,
In their Books largely to declare.
But how to Order it after its Creation,
They left poor Men without Consolation.
And unless God please to reve^le it, (like the Jewish Fire) it must be kept
hidden, and till he does there is no bumane industry can forcibly wrest the
knowledge thereof out of the Almighties bands.

Augurel.
Si te fata vocant, aliter non. Look not then for it at the hand of Man, for
it is the Gift of God only.

Ordin. p. 13.
A singlular gift and grace of the Almighty. Nil dat quod non habet, Man has it
not, (that is,) he has it not to bestow where he will.

Chan. Yeom* Tale.
The Philosophers were y sworn each one,
That they should discover it unto none,
Ne in no Book it write in no manner,
For unto Christ it is solefe and dear:
That he wol ^^t that it discovered be,
But where it likes to his deite:
Man to inspire and eke for to defend,
When that him likes: lo this is his end,
In fine, if any man be so blessed as to discover and unvaile our Diana, he shall
find and confess that he was beholding to Natural Magic for directions at
the Beginning, Middle, and End; and when it is wrought up to his highest degree
of Perfection, he shall see things not fit to be written; for (may I aver it
with awful Reverence) Angelical wisdom is to be obtained by it.

Page 72. li. 25. Tasted our White Stone a part.
Unless the Medicine be qualified as it ought, it is death to east the least
Attome of it, because its Nature is so highly Vigorous and strong above that of
Man's; For if its least parts are able to strike so fiercely and thoroughly into
the Body of a base and corrupt Metal, as to Tinge and Convert it into so high
a degree as perfect Gold, how less able is the Body of Man to resist such a
force, when its greatest strength is far inferior to the weakest Metal? I
do believe (and am confirmed by several Authors) that many Philosophers
(having a desire to enjoy perfect Health,) have destroyed themselves by
adventuring to take the Medicine inwardly, ere they knew the true use thereof,
or how to qualify it to be received by the Nature of Man without destruction.

Pa. 88. li. 15. -- The Red Stone is preservative,
Most precious thing to length my life.

THis is the Stone which some builders up of life have refused, when in truth
it was the chief Stone in the Corner; It being produced from that undefiled
virtue which is yet left with the Creature (as a small remainder of the First
Blessing) and able to make a R. Bost. Phis. cap. 3,
perfect union between the Body, Soul and Spirit, whilst our lively Fire,
(that Medium between the Body and Spirit) by receiving this Aetheriall Medicine
consisting of heavenly virtues (that consume the Impurities and Superfluities
of the Body) is delivered from all Impediments, and the Body forced to agree
with that incomparable Nature into which it is changing by so sweet and
powerful Compulsions, and consequently life Prorogued.

As touching the Prolongation of life, we meet with some Presidents in
Histories, and they not Fables, where by the Application of things inward or
outward, the Spirit has been renewed, the Body strengthened the Vital and
Animal faculty quickened, decrepid and withered Age renewed, and Life enlarged.
Besides these Relations, we perceive Nature is so courteous to some kind of
Creatures, as the Heart, Eagle, and Serpent, that she affords them means to
obtain the benefit of Renovation (here Nature teaches them Natural Magic,
for it is no other) and why then may it not be granted to Man if sought after?
Nay the R. Bach. Ep. De Secret. Nature. cap. 6.
consideration of this Favorable Blessing afforded to Animalls has been the
principal ground whence many Philosophers have addicted themselves to the
search of this Mystery, hoping that might not be denied to Man, upon his
search, which is bestowed gratis upon the Creature.

It is apparent that our Severin. Idea Med. Philos. cap: 12.
Diseases proceed chiefly from Transplantation (though I deny not but some
Hereditary Corruption is entailed upon Posterity, from the decaying,
mouldering, and rotten Natures of our Ancestors) for, by what we Eat or Drink
as Nourishment; the corrupt and harmfull, nay deathfull qualities, which the
Sir W. Raw. Hist. fol. 65.
Divine malediction lodged in created things, is removed from them into our
Bodies, and there grow up and multiply till (having heightened the Sal, Sulphur
and Mercury, into an irreconcilable Contestation, through the impurities
wherewith they are loaded and burdened) they introduce a miserable decay,
which consequently become a Death: and this is the sooner hastened if thereunto
we add the heavy load of Luxuriousness and Glutony. Yet is not this Death
Natural but Accidental, and (as may appear by what has been said) a J W.
Epist.
Death arising out of the fruits of the great World which grows up by
Transplantation, the Rebellious Disobedience of man provoking God to plant a
Death in every thing that he had made, by the Curse wherewith he had cursed the
Earth. And to this the Doctrine which the 2 Esd. cap. 7. v. 11. 12. 13.
Angel taught Esdras is agreeable.

And though it is appointed all must dye, against which Decree no Elixir has
power to resist, yet this Medicine is a remedy for the particular corruption of
Man, to keep back those greifes and diseases which usually accompany and molest
Old Age; insomuch, that that Death which man eats in his Bread may be brought
to a Separation, and consequently (in the comfort of an Uninterrupted Health)
spin out his thread of life to the longest end of that Nature fallen from
Original Justice. For it is a certain truth that what we receive into our
Bodies, of that, Nature finds two Substances, the (one with a Gladsome
appetite,) she retains to feed Vitality, the other (with an abhorred dislike)
she expells, as not only useless but Putresactive and Dangerous: and if
thereupon we thoroughly advise with our selves we must needs confess Her way
is best to be imitated, in seperating the Pure from the Impure, (which are
joined together in every thing) before we make use of them, and where she does
manifestly Substract and Divide, let us not there add and multiply; for
doubtless the Faecis Roibm. Coment.
profit nothing, nay in sick persons they plainly oppress the penetrating
virtue of the Spirit it self, and commit that seperating Art to the diseased
Body, which through weakness is not able to perform the Task.

The Brevity of Life came in with the Fall of Adam, and though some of the
Ancients before the Flood lived almost a thousand years, yet certainly their
lives were prorogued by the use of this Medicine, with which they well knew how
to separate and correct the obnoxious Qualities of all things, and I much
question whether the generality of Persons then lived so long, or only those
who were the (z) true Ancestors; of Abraham, they not being always the eldest
Sir W. Raw. Hist. fo. 64.
and first begotten of the Patriarks, but such as God ch^se out of the Family
to continue the line, and had (by the permission of God, as a singular and
peculiar blessing) this Secret Traditionally committed to them.

Pa. 89. li. 27. -- I never made assay
Of the Red work before this day.

HEnce some affirm that Norton neither had nor knew how to make the Red
Medicine, but that is not so, for to the time of publishing his Ordinall, it is
true, he had not a second time gone about to make it, and why?

Ord. page 89.
The cause appears in this Book before,
When He was robbed then He would no more.
Yet that he was formerly at work, made it, and was robbed thereof appears
also Ord. page 34.
before, where he says the Sea Anot^. upon page 34.
Merchants Wife stole it from him, and that the misfortune thereof deterred him
from making further progress therein. Besides, he avers his Master taught it
him, and that he fully nw how to make it, for so himself witnesses.

Ord. page 89.
I had with Grace the true Doctrine
Of Confection of the Red Medicine.
And lastly, in the latter end of the 5. Chap. of the aforesaid Ordinall,
Norton truly and clearly declares how it is made; unto which I refer the
Reader.

Page 99. li. 31. Wherefore they being in warke of Generation,
Have most obedience to Constellation.

Here our Author refers to the Rules of Astrology for Electing a time wherein
to begin the Philosophical work, and that plainly appears by the following
lines, in which he chalkes out an Election fitly relating to the Business.

In the operative part of this Science the Rules of Astronomy and Astrology
(as elsewhere I have said) are to be consulted with.

Pat. Sapient.
For in Astronomy thou must have right good feeling,
Or else in this Book thou schalt have simple believing.
So that Elections, (whose Calculatory part belongs to Astronomy, but the
Judiciary to Astrology) are very necessary to begin this work with; and the
pains that Norton has taken manifests no less, most Authors hinting the
same, although we take but little notice thereof. For

Ord page 60.
Such simple kinds unformed and unwrought,
Must craftily be guided till the end be sought.
All which season they have more obedience,
Above formed Natures to sterrs Influence.
Generally in all El^ctions the Efficacy of the Stars are used as it were, by
a certain application made thereof to those unformed Natures that are to be
wrought upon; whereby to further the working thereof, and make them more
available to our purpose. Mar. Ficinus.
For since both inferior and superior Causes concur to every effect, it
follows that if the one be not considered as well as the other, this
Negligence will beget Error. And by such Elections as good use may be made of
the Celestial influences, as a Physician does of the variety of Herbs.
Agreeable to which is that of Ptolomy Aphor. 8. A Iuditious man helps forward
the Celestial operation, even as a discreet Husbandman assists Nature in his
plowing and preparing the Ground. But Nativities are the Radices of Elections,
and therefore we ought chiefly to look back upon them as the principal Root
and Foundation of all Operations, and next to them the quality of the Thing we
intend to fit, must be respected: so that by an apt position of Heaven, and
fortifying the Planets and Houses in the Nativity of the Operator, and making
them agree with the thing signified; the Impression made by that Influence,
will abundantly augment the Operation.

And this is upheld by very evident reason of Nature, Sir Chr: Heyd. Des. of
Astrol. page 363
for (says a learned Gent. whose Defense of Judicial Astrology (so long
since published) stands hitherto firm and unconfuted, notwithstanding all the
whifling Assaults of any Adversary) the Celestial Influences never cease to
flow into us, and therefore not unlikely that the like position or
Configuration to that under which we are borne, may by like* impression and
influence increase and strengthen the operation of the former, more then it
would if the Nativity were considered alone. And upon these grounds Norton
advises to make Elections like those he lays down.

Ordin p. 100*
Unless then your Nativity pretend infection,
In contrariety to this Election.
Which is the same in effect with that of Aphor. 6.
Ptolomy, where he says to this purpose, viz. Though an Election of a Day or
hour be well made, yet will it prove of little advantage unless sutably
constituted to the scheame of the Nativity, because else it cannot divert that
evil which in the Nativity the Planets threatened: and hence it comes that
Actions Thrive or Miscarry (though begun at one and the same time,) according
as the position of Heaven then agrees with the Nativity of the Persons that
manage them.

As touching the Necessity of Elections, to be used in Diet, Building,
Dwelling, Apparel, and the several Actions of our Life, let any that would be
satisfied, read Marcellus, Ficinus, Hesiode, Cato, Virgil, Vatro, Columella,
Pliny, who (and generally all Philosophers) ordered their affairs of planting,
sowing, lopping, etc. by them.

For in those things (here below) which have no sense (as well as those that
have) the Heavenly Influences always make Impression according to the measure
and Capacity of the Subject, and do evidently manifest their Dominion in them,
Gaff. Curios. page 219.
for nothing is more powerful then their Influences, when Impressio^ is once
made. Witness their power in Plants, Herbs, Corn, and what is Vegitable,
whose Seeds diversely prosper, or decay, according to the state of the with the
at the time of their sowing. This the Husband-mans Experience can tell the
world, and the Sun's Annual Access and Recesse makes manifest to the sense.

And great Reason there is in Nature why the Moons condition ought chiefly to
be observed, for she is the Planet nearest the Earth, and appointed as it were
the V^hiculum of all other heavenly Influences unto what is Sublunary, and in
that regard she is properly called Eccl. 43. 8.
An Instrument of the Armies from above: according to whose present Condition
things are steered; for if she be Fortunate by good Aspects, happy by Position,
swift of Course, and increasing in Light, things thrive apace and flourish; But
the contrary if she suffer. Impediments. We may ordinarily observe how poorly
and slowly the Seeds of Plants grow up, nay many times languish and degenerate
into an unkindly Quality and Taste, if sown in the Waine of the Moon, and the
Reason is because the Moisture and Sapp that should feed them is exceedingly
diminished; yet it is the fittest time for cutting down Timber, or what else
we would preserve from decaying.

Hist. Plant.
Thurneisserus (among many other admirable and useful Observations) gives us
the Position of Heaven under which several Plants are Impregnated with the
greatest virtue, the gathering of which at such times, for Physical uses,
deserves to be taken notice of; for the notable difference that evidently
appears betwixt their virtues and the virtues of such as are gathered without
that Consideration. In a word, by Elections we may Govern, Order and Produce
things as we please: Faber quisque Fortunae propriae.

Page 100. li. 1. Is a direct and fiery Ascendant.
IN this and the first Ten following lines, are laid down the Authors Rules
for framing an Election by, agreeable to which he erect you Scheames (about the
Latitude of 51. degrees) that are placed before the sixth Chap. which I have
caused to be exactly Copied from the Original, though some Planets, I must
acknowledge, are not placed in that exact order (for houses and signs) as
Astronomicall Rules direct, and the Doctrine of Astrology requires. For
Example, In the first House of the first Figure you have in 7. degr. of, the
Ascendent in 2. degr. of, and then the in the 18. Degr. of the same sign;
whereas the 2. degr of being fewer degrees of that Sign then 7. (wherein is
placed) should Antecede it. Again in the second Figure you have both and the
in the 11th House thereof, who should of Right be posited in the 10th. because
the 20th degree of is the Cuspe of the 11th, and therefore all Planets in
lesser degrees of that Sign are falling into the 10th. Besides you have placed
in every Figure so remote from the, that Astronomers must count it absurd,
since she is never above 48. degr. Elongated from him; and yet in the third
Figure she comes not within the compass of a * Aspect, nay in the second she
is almost in 8 to him.

For their Position; I could have placed them in Houses according to Art, but I
rather let them stand as I found them in the Original, being well assured they
were thus Posited by Design, and not through Ignorance or Mistake; for our
Author manifests himself a learned Astrologian, and too wary a Penman to be
guilty of either. And though it may seem contrary to Art for the Position of to
be so far distant from the, yet it is agreeable to his Rule of Election that she
is so often placed in the 4th House (especially seeing the Sign falls out to
be there in which she is exalted) because he appoints the Lord thereof to be
fortunate, Ord, page 100.
For this is Thesaurum absconditum of old Clerks.

Withal, the Planets as they stand here placed in Signs and Houses are not so
as that these Figures were the Elected times for the Authors own Operations
(or any others in that Faculty) but are rather fained and invented, only to
bring them within the compass of his Rules. And to satisfy my self herein, I
have taken some pains to Calculate the places of the Planets for several
years about the Authors time, but cannot find the three Superiors and place of
the to be in those Signs wherein he has posited them.

It is also worthy of our Observation to see how the Author continues his
Vailes and Shadows, as in other parts of the Mystery, so likewise in the very
Figures of some of the Planets, for he does not exhibit them under the
Characters commonly now (or then) used, but Hierogliphically in Figures
agreeable to their Natures, yet Aristotle.
diversity of Names (or Figures) makes no diversity in the things they
signify: For is pointed out by a Spade, by a Miter, by an Arrow, by a
beautiful Face, by the figure (in those days) usually stamped upon the
Reverse of our English Coin: Only the and are left us in that fashion the
Ancients bestowed upon them.

Page 100. li. 32. Trust not to all Astrologers, I say whi^:
For that Art is as ^ecret as Alkimie.

Astrology is a profound Science: The depth this Art lies obscured in, is not
to be reached by every vulgar Plumet that attempts to sound it. Never was any
Age so pestered with a multitude of Pretenders, who would be accounted (and
stick not to style themselves) Masters, yet are not worthy to wear the Badge
of illustrious Urania. And (oh to be lamented!) the swar^e is likely to
increase, until through their Ignorance they become the ridiculous object of
the Enemies to Astrology; (would that were all,) and Eclipse the glory of that
light, which if Judiciously dispensed to the World would cause admiration; but
unskilfully exposed, become the scorn and contempt of the Vulgar.

He that understands no more of Astrology (nor will make a further use of it)
then to quack with a few Terms in an Horary Question; is no more worthy to be
esteemed an Astrologian then He who has only learnt Hebrew may be accounted
a Caballisticall Rabbi. It Is true, he may be so fraught with words, as to amuse
the unlearned, with the Canting noise thereof, but what is that if compared to
the full and entire knowledge of the Language? Yet of this sort at present are
start up diverse Illiterate Professors (and Women are of the Number) who even
make Astrology the Bawd and Pander to all manner of Iniquity, prostituting
Chaste Urania to be abused by every adulterate Interest. And what willbe the
issue (I wish it may prove no Prophefie) ere long Astrology shall be cried
down as an Impostor, because it is made use of as a Stale to all bad Practices,
and a laudable Faculty to bolster up the legerdimane of a Cheat. And besides
having now grown famous by the true Predictions of some of her able and honest
Sons, shall grow into as much disgrace and infamy, by the unskilful
Prognostics of ignorant Illegitimate Bastards: who rather then they will
accuse themselves when they fail of truth in their Judgments, will not stick
to condemn Astrology it self as defective and lame, in what their slothful
negligence or ignorant blindness was not able to find out. And therefore
Norton here speaks truly, that Astrology (take it with all its Comprehensions)
is as Secret or Misterious as Alchimy, and as difficult to be thoroughly and
perfectly understood.

There are in Astrology (I confess) shallow Brooks, through which young
Tyroes may wade; but withal, there are deep Foards, over which even the
Giants themselves must swim. Such is the Doctrine of Nativities, Directions,
Annual Revolutions and what else depends thereupon, belonging to Man, the
little World: and beyond these, those of Comets, Eclipses, Great Conjunctions
and Revolutions, that refer to the great World. These are subjects of
Eminency, and being judiciously handled Magnify the Art. But, Ordin. cap. 5.
page 60.
Many men ween which does them read,
That they d^e understande them when they do not indeed.


I know some few Artists have satisfactorily manifested what excellency of
Skill there is in Judging an Horary Question, and how much of truth may be
drawn from that branch of Art; But they are those that are thoroughly read in
all other parts of Actrologia; for such only are able to give a true Resolution
to the Querent, and from the events of their considerate Predictions, bring
Honor to the Art, and gain Reputation to Themselves.

Page 104. li. 20. Ordeine therefore to fetch breath from your Foot.
IN regard of the violent Nature of the Medicine which is deadly indeed,
because its Nature is so infinitely strong above Man's, that it overcomes his
Spirits and poisons him; Norton therefore lets fall a hinte, what Parts an
Operator ought to Arm, and whence to fetch Breath: Meaning thereby, that those
Orifices of the Body be closely stopped (through which there is so open a
passage, that a Strong vapor would fly as speedily as lightning into the
inmost parts) while the Vessel is opening. But how to breathe the while is the
Difficulty. We have Practices something near it, as of those who attempt to
lie long under Water, etc.

And therefore let this be a Caution sufficient to young Practisers in this
Science, that when they work upon a Matter, and bring it (as they suppose) to
some perfection, if they can endure the opening of their Vessel without being
Armed, they may rest satisfied that nothing is more certain then that their
Matter is not the Philosophers Mercury, and their Practice erroneous.

Page 105. li. 17. Now have I taught you every thing by Name. -- Hor.
Hoc tibi dictum
Tollememor:

THis Verse ought to be heedfully observed by the Student in this Science, for
he speaks a real truth, Nihil praetermissum quod a quovis dici possit. Nothing
being wanting, nor nothing left out that is needful to be known to complete
this great Work: which many have not the happiness to apprehend, though it
should be more plainly discovered unto them. Much alike unfortunate as those
that Sandivogius speaks of, Praef. in Aenig. Philos.
to whom he had intimated the Art from word to word, but they could by no
means understand him, yet would be accounted Philosophers.

Seeing then a Man may be in the true Path and not know it to be so, it behooves
the serious Student earnestly to desire of God to Wisd. 1. 5.
remove from his Mind al thoughts without understanding, to make him a 1 These.
5. 5.
Child of the light as of the Day, that his Prove. 4. 25.
Eyes may behold the right, and his Eyelids direct his ways. That his Days
be not spent in vanity, nor his Years wast doing nothing: but that Psa. 19. 2.
one Day may teach another, and one Night add knowledge to another, And then he
shall find that though this Author has opened his Mouth in a Parable, yet he
has declared [or made plain] hard Sentences of Old.

Ord. pa. 106.
For in this Ordinall (he sets you out of doubt,)
Is nothing set wrong, nor no point left out.
Page 106. li. 21. In the year of Christ MCCCCLXXVII.
This Work was begun --

IN the search I have made after Authentic Manuscripts to complete this
Work, a private Gentleman lent me a very fair one of Norton's Ordinall, which
I chiefly followed; yet not admitting to compare it with fourteen other Copies.
It was written in Velame and in an ancient sert Hand, very exact and exceeding
neat. The Figures (whence I caused these herewith printed to be Graved) being
also most neatly and exquisitely lym'd, and better work then that which was
Henry the seventh's own Book, (as I am informed by those that have seen
both.) It had placed in the middle and bottom of the Compartiments of Flowers,
Birds and Beasts, the Nevell's Coat of Arms, with others which that Family
quartered. This induced me to believe it to be the Original (or one exactly
Copied from it) presented by the Author to George Nevell then Archbishop of
York, who was a most wealthy and Magnificent Bishop; as appears not only by
the rich Isaac. Chr. fo. 468.
Jewel he offered at Beckens Tomb, but for the great and stately
Entertainment he provided at More in Hartfordshire for Edward the 4th: to make
which more Magnificent he brought forth a Stow. Ann. fo. 426.
vast Treasure of Plate, that he had hid during the distractions of former
years, all which the King seized upon with his Money and Goods then valued at
20000 l. (a far more considerable sum of Money in those days, then now;) and
made of the Archbishops Mitre (set with preclous Stones) a Crown for himself.

I have been informed that there was great Correspondency between this
Archbishop and the Hermetique Philosophers of his time, and this is partly
confirmed to me from Ripley's See the Preface.
Dedication of his Medulla to him, Ann. 1476. as also the presentation of this
of Norton's Ordinall; for though I find the said Archbishop dyed the same
year this Ordinall was begun to be written, yet the certain time of that
year I cannot yet learn; But it was toward the latter end thereof, when his
Successor (Lawrence Booth) was Consecrate, viz. Godw. Succ. p. 482.
25. Sept. Besides, in all probability he lay not long sick, because he dyed
(at Birthlow) upon a Godw. page ibidem.
Journey from York: So that the Book might be finished and presented, (or if
not presented, yet intended) before he dyed, though begun but the lame year.

Page 107. The Compounde of Alchymie, etc.
THis Work (which is also called the Twelve Gates) was penned by Sir George
Ripley, and formerly An. 1591.
set forth in print by Ralph Rabbards; I have compared it with several other
Manuscript Copies, amongst which I happily met with one written near about the
time that Ripley lived, (and in these Streams of Learning the more clearest
and without the least of Mixture is to be found nearest the Springhead,) the
which I most relied upon. Yet where they differ, the Reader (if this Copy
please not) may make use of the former.

It appears at the end of this Page 193.
Work, that it was written in the year 1471. which I the rather take notice
of, because I have met with a kind of Retractation of Ripley's beginning,

Falix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. Wherein he beseeches all men,
wheresoever they shall meet with any of his Experiments written by Him, or
that go under his Name, (from the year 1450. to the year 1470.) either to
burn them or afford them no Credit, being written according to his este^me,
nor proof; and which (afterward upon trial) he found false and vain: for
so long was he seeking the Stone, but in the truth of practice had not found
it, till toward the end of that year, and then (says He) Inveni quem diligit
anima mea.

So that this Treatise of the 12. Gates being wrote the year after, is
unquestionably to be relied upon, because penned from a grounded experimental
Practice, as himself Testifies in his Admonition,

Ripl. Admonition.
I never saw work truly but one,
Of which in this Treatise the truth I have told.
In which (for the Students safeguard) he gives an account of his own Err^nious
Experiments, therein following Chaucer, Richardus Anglicus, Dio^ifius,
Zacharius the noble Trevisan, and diverse other honest and Conscientious
Philosophers.

Ludovicus Combachiu^ (who has Anno 1649.
lately set forth diverse of Ripl^y's Works in Latin) tells us Pref. ad Oper. G.
Rip.
that he then had in his hands these Twelve Gates rendered in most pure
Elegiaque verse, by one Nicholas May upon the Command of the Emperor Rudolph
the second, and that he could willingly have added it to that he published,
(which was translated out of English into Latin verse by Sir Edw: Kelley) for
the better understanding thereof, but that the Copy was none of his own.

The learned Faber, (1646.) bestowed much Pains and Cost in publishing to the
world Printed at To louse.
Basilius Currus Triumphalis, and others, in one Volume. In the Argument of
which Book Georgius Riplaeus Canonicus Anglus doctissimus and mirandus in quo
nihil falsi and supervacui ad metallorum omnium proprictates, and naturas
manifestandus, is thus Ingeniously acknowledged. He further assuresus that his
Works are worthy to keep pace with the best Philosophers; and knows that
Policy in Printing is surest, and takes well with the Judicious, to begin with
a good Work, and end with the best; to which place he refers on Ripley. But I
must needs tell the Reader that in page 338. and so to the end, he is by
mistake called Triplanus instead of Riplaeus. There are other the like
notorious faults which the Printer (most likely) is guilty of, as giving Isaac
Holland the name of Irsacus. Cornelius Drebble he prints Tornelius, (and
sometimes Fornelius) Prebellianus; and besides these, further causes of
Exception to other parts of the Work (too many to be mentioned here) amongst
the rest where Faber says they were all rendered into Latin out of Dutch, and
that this piece of Ripley's, which he there calls Triplanus de lapide
Philosophorum (but is indeed an Epitomy of these 12. Gates) was by one Nicholas
Barnard a Philosopher Translated out of Dutch into Latin, intimating withal
that it was Originally written in the Germain Tongue; which is very false,
injurious to our Author, and dishonorable to our Nation.

Thus much for the Work, and now to say something touching our Author.
Philemon Holland in his Translation of Cambden's Britania Printed 1636. is
pleased to take the liberty to tell us that the place of his Nativity was fol.
295.
Ripley, a Village in the County of Surrey, and calls him a Ringleader of our
Alchimists, and a mystical Impostor. This Imputation of Mystical Impostor
smells more of Envious dislike then faithful Account, and therefore I Will pass
it by. But as to the place of his Birth, I am induced to believe it to be about
Yorkshire, (not that he was a Foundling at Ripley in that County, or of so
obscure Parents, that the name of the place of his Nativity must be imposed
upon him in defect of a better) No certainly, his Name, Relation, and Kindred
discover him to be the Son of a Gentleman; and though I cannot exhibit his
Pedigree, yet it appears in some ancient Manuscript Copies of his toward the
end thereof.
Medulla (which I have seen) that his Relation of Kindred lay in the Northern
parts, where (he says) he had diverse Kindred, Gentlemen of Yorkshire and
Lincolnshire, as Yevarsall, Ripley, Medlay, Willoughbie, Burham, Waterton,
Flemming and Talboyes, who (as he there complains to the Archbishop Nevell,
to whom he dedicated that Work) were by the Conquering Sword of Edward the
fourth, (God so permitting) lamentably destroyed. It Is also considerable that
his Ecclesiastical Promotion happened to be at Bridlington, a Camb Brit. fo. 714.
Town in the East Riding of Yorkshire.

-- Pref. to his 12. Gates.
According to my Profession,
In Order Chanon Regular of Bridlington.
And probably such his Advancement, might be procured rather in that Country
where his Kindred and Friends lived, and himself that Countryman, then if he
had been a Stranger.

I determine not whether Holland has done the learned Antiquary or profound
Philosopher the greater Injury, in what he puts down concerning the place of
his Birth; for I must let the world know, it is not to be found in the Original
Latin which Cambden published Anno 1607. nor can I learn that there was any
other Impression, to the time of Translation, nor in probability could there be
when Holland Postcript to Camb. Brit.
fell to work immediately upon the coming out of the said Impression in 1607.
and set forth his Translation within four Years.

So that I cannot but wonder at the Boldness of this Translator, not only in
adding many things of his own score, but for abusing so learned a Philosopher
with the Term of Mystical Impostor, and putting it upon the Account of an
Author, who should he thus vilify one of so clear a Reputation, ingenious
Scholars might have just cause to question the Candidnesse of his Pen in other
things. But this kind of liberty I find Holland has taken in other parts of
that worthy work, The effects whereof, has rendered Banbury (amongst others)
much beholding to him for an eminent Flout: For, where Cambden fames it for
Nunc conficiendo Caseo notissimum fo. 266
Cheese only, he adds Cakes and Zeal: Neither of which are to be found in
the Original, though doubtless both in the Town, and for better purpose then
to be boasted of.

But to leave this Digression and return to Ripley. Pitts tells us, He was a
Man Pitts de illustr Aug. Scrip. page 677.
of a Quick, and (more then can be expressed) curious Wit, and that Totam sere
sua^ aetate^ in perscrutandis rerii Naturaliu^ occultis and abstrusis Causis
and effectibus consumpfit; He wasted almost his whole Life in searching out the
occult and abstruse Causes and Effects of Natural things. And that he might
more copiously and plentifully study Philosophy, and accomplish what he
conceived his mind, he boldly travailed through France, Germany, and Italy,
where he grew into familiarity with several of the most Learned men.

Leland says truly, that he Bale Cent. 8. fo. 622.
laid the foundation of his Studies in Italy, for there indeed he had the
blessing first to see Projection.

Cantalena G. Ripley.
In Romany partibus nuptiis Mercurii,
Accidit post studium semel quod interfui.
It Is further testified, that He always either Pitts p. 677
Writ, or Learnt, or Taught something; He was perfectly learned in all the
liberal Arts, and well red in all manner of Philosophy; a most famous
Mathematitian, a Rhetoritian and Poet, Bale. fo. 622
per eam aetatem, non vulgaris effectus. Combachius styles him Praef. ad oper
C. Rip.
Author procul dubio dignus, qui ab Amatoribus Chemiae sedulo evolvatur, cum in
sermon apertus sit rotundus and planus, nec ullis spink aliorum more obsitus:
A worthy Author without exception, who is diligently studied by the lovers of
Chimestry, forasmuch as he is open, well compact, and plain of delivery, and
not wrapped in any Thorns, after the custom of others. Habet insuper (says the
same Author) cum Lulii scriptis magnam affinitatem, ut unus alterum explicet,
etc. Besides, he has great Affinity with the Writings of Lully, insomuch that
the one explaineth the other.

Amongst other parts, abroad, he visited the Isle of Rhodes, and resided there
for some time with the Knights of the Order of Saint John of Jerusalem. An
Acquaintance of mine has in his custody certain private Observations of an
English Gentleman of good quality and credit, who in his Travells abroad,
Observes (amongst other things) that in the Isle of Malta he saw a Record,
which declares that this Sir George Ripley gave yearly to those Knights of
Rhodes 100000l. toward maintaining the war (then on foot) against the Turks.

But at length, that he might bid his farewell to the World, and wholly
consecrate himself to God, and betake him to his private Studies, upon his
Bale Cent* 8.
return into England he obtained an Indulgence of Pope Innocent the eighth,
that for the future he might be Tit. oper.
Exempt from Claustrall Observance, and always discharged and freed from the
burden of the Ceremonies and Observancy of his Order; but in regard the
Chanons admit no such things, he became a An. 1488.
Carmelite in the Monastery of Saint Butolph, which (says Leland) is a famous
Bale fo. 622.
Mart Town nigh the Banks of the River Lindus: This River I take to be the
River Witham in Lincolnshire (anciently called Camb. Brit. fo. 538.
Lindis) which passing from Lincoln, runs toward the maine Sea by Boston, more
truly called Ibid. fo. 532.
Butolphs Town, (for it carried that name from Butolph, a most holy and devote
Saxon:) And if you observe Cambdens Map of Lincolnshire, you shall see St.
Butolph stands near to Boston. So that in all likelihood this was the place of
Ripley's Retirement, where he continued an Anchorite until his Death, and was
there Buried Anno 1490.

The probability whereof, may be further confirmed from his Mcdulla, where it
appears he had then See the latter end of that work.
a great desire to return into England, and to that end therein became a Suter
to the Archbishop of York, that by his means he might obtain an abiding
place in some Religious house, within his Dioces. Which Archbishop presently
after dying, he could not perform, but not unlike Ripley having still an
earnest longing thereto, (because it was his native Country,) might without
doubt otherwise effect.

And whereas Bale says he obtained Pope Innocents Indulgence upon his return
into England, and thereupon became a Carmelite, An. 1488. It is manifest from
the aforesaid Medulla, that at the writeing thereof, which was in 1476. (at
least 12. years before the time Bale makes him to enter into that Order) he
had this Dispensation, for so he tells the Archbishop: And if so, then it must
be either Isaac. Chron. fo. 366.
Sixtns the fourth, or Paul the second (his Predecessor) that must grant it
unto him.

He wrote diverse Books worthy of perusing, but amongst those which Bale
Registers, I shall only cull out these, viz.
1. Compendium Alchimiae, seu Castellum Duodecim Portarum. 2. Concordantias
Guidonis and Raymundi. 3. Secreta Philosophorum. 4. Alcumistarum Misteria. 5.
Artem brevem vel Clangorem. 6. Practicam Ceremonialem. 7. Dictata Aegri. 8. De
Magia Naturali. 9. De lapide Philosophico, latin Tractatum rythimicum.
All which Pitts recites, and to them adds the following works.
10. Medullam Philosophiae. 11. Pupillam Alchimiae. 12. Terram Terrarum. 13.
Experimenta Philosophica. 14. De rerum temperaturis.
What follows Ludov: Combachius has lately printed, and added to some of the
aforementioned Pieces.
15. De Mercurio and lapide Philosophoru^. 16. Philorcium Alchimistarum. 17.
Clavis Aurae Portae. 18. Viaticum seu Varia Practica. 19. Accurtationes and
practicae Raymundinae. 20. Cantalena.
And lastly take into the Number the small Pieces published in this Theatrum.
viz. His
21. Epistle to Edw the fourth, page 109. 22. Vision. page 374. 23. Verses
belonging to his Scrowle -- Page 375.

24. Preface to his Medulla, 389. 25. A short work supposed to be his, Page
393.
Page 177. lin. ult. A Quintessence this Water we call,
In Man, which helps Disseases all.

Physic is a divine Science, even Gods Theology; for the Almighty wrote his
Scripture in that language, before he made Adam to read it. The Ten Fathers
before the Flood, and those that followed, together with Moses and Solomon,
were the great Physicians in former Ages, who bequeathed their heavenly
knowledges of natural helps to those they judged as well worthy in honesty
and industry, as capable thereof: and from their piercing Beams all Nations
enlightened their Tapers. Abraham brought it out of Chaldea, and bestowed much
thereof upon Egypt, and thence a refulgent Beam glanced into Greece. The
Coacks and Aesculapian Family, etc. God greatly encouraged to serve that Age.
Democritus and Hypocrates supported Ruinous Mankind, with their Physical
administrations, and Scholars successively supplied their places for at least
400. years, until Galen undertook by his strong Abilities and incessant
Pains to vivifie the then dying Genius of Physic: which has since most nobly
been Augmented, by the stupendous pains of Arabians and Europeans.

And in the Progress this Science has made into several parts of the World,
we may find, that God has evermore been pleased to call upon the stage
thereof in sundry Ages, some choice and eminent Men, whom (by the Illumination
of his blessed Spirit) he has furnished with ability to read the Characters
of his blessed will, writ in that ample and sacred Volume of the Creation, and
the several Pages of individual Natures. And further, to testify his care of
his Creatures, has also given them Balm in their hands to stop the
over-spreading contagiousnesse of bainefull Diseases. But to contract the Rays
of my Prospective to our own homes, the Physicians College of London does at
this day nourish most noble and able Sons of Art, no way wanting in the
choycest of Learning; And though we do not, yet the World abroad has taken
notice of sundry learned Fellows of that Society, as Linacres, Gilbert,
Ridley, Dee, Flood, etc. and at present Doctor Harvey, who deserves for his
many and eminent Discoveries, to have a Statue erected rather of Gold then of
Marble.

Nevertheless, it has been observed in other parts that we English will
socner abuse and detract from the worth of any of our own Nation (though never
so well deserving) then render them what they justly m^rit by a worthy
Applause: And rathercry up a Fry of Illiterate Quacks (for every Galen has
his Plague, [a mounting ignorant Thessalus] that cheat the poor and simple of
their Money, and (I wish they did not) often in Conclusion murder their
over-credulous Patients;) then give the learned Physician the due Eccles. 38.
Honor God has appointed us to pay him.

Now as God has formerly shed most eminent Beams of the first light upon a
few particular Men (as it were to gratify the deserving Laborers at all times
of his day;) So I am confident there are yet most noble seeds of that light of
Nature appointed to spring up for the Benefit of Posterity. The Glory whereof
we see has shined in other Horizons, shortly it will draw near to ours; and
that which with incessant Toil cannot yet be Discovered, shall in those days
be freely Revealed to some that little dream of it. I am more then Confident
Succession will meet with many advantages and helps, which this corrupt and
ungrateful Age deserves not, nor shall have; because we deride, what Posterity
will adore with a lasting admiration: The Circuit of that great and
Sabbathicall Conjunction of the two Superior Planets which began An. 1603. in
the Fiery Triplicity, will Illustrate, Enlarge, and Refine Arts like the tried
Gold, It shall produce more pregnant and famous Philosophers by Fire, (I mean
such as is Etheriall) then yet the world ere saw; and so purify some ingenious
Inquisitors, as to make them fit Metal for Angels to Project on. This Fiery
Trigon shall not pass, before that God make manifest what he commanded former
Ages to keep Secret, Where old Hermes his Aetheriall Physic (viz. this
Quintessentiall Water which Ripley here speaks of, and which is Sir E. K. to
G. S.
Such as ancient Physic taught, shall be Restored; whose perfect and
incorruptible Qualities of Heat, Cold, Moisture and Dryness are able not
only to Nourish, Fortisie, and Increase the Vital Spirits, but Digest,
Correct and Consume all Impediments and Corruptions, those hurtful and Impure
Seeds which crept in with the Curse, (and joining themselves with the Good,)
have ever since (like a growing Tide) encroached so far upon the Body of Man,
till he is almost overwhelmed and ready to Perish.

But it is to be acknowledged that those Chemists deserve a considerable share
of Honor, who, for want of this Aetheriall and Universal Medicine (which God
has hitherto granted to few) zealously apply themselves to find out a
Particular one, (that sedulous Industry may afford to more) and to raise up a
Body of Physic, from those Bost. Phis. cap. 4.
Three Principles which are to be found in every Body, because compounded of
them; (though strongly locked up) namely Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury: (to which De
Clave of late adds two more, viz. Earth and Phleagme) and so comfortably
relieve decaying Mortality, and heal Diseases by the means they are Cured.

In the painful and curious search of which Experiments, where there is more
of Nature that still lies hid, (yea she is as Infinite in her Productions, as
the Mind of Man can be Unsatiable, in the search) let the satisfaction the
Ingenious Artist finds in one Truth, lead him cheerfully on to make
Inquisition after a further, perhaps the Event of his Labors may discover a
Perfection in the knowledge he hunts after, and Providence may be as kind to
so diligent an Inquisitor, as Nature is to the Ant, who bestows Wings on her in
her declining Age, as a reward for her former Labors.

And albeit I magnify Chemicall Phisique, yet I do not lessen the due
commendations that belong to Galenicall: nor dare I, when so great an Hermetick
Philosopher as Arnoldus de villa Nova has taken so much pains to Join them
together. And besides him, it has been the work of Maierus, Faber, and many
other conscientious Philosophers, to reconcile them. Who laying aside (indeed
abhorring) all thought of Faction, conceive nothing to come nearer the Divinity
of Nature, or be any way more grateful to God and Good men, then to help the
Afflicted, and relieve the Sick; nor greater Charity then to bestow health, and
support dejected Nature. Nor is Galenicall Physic hard to come by, it being at
all times easy to be met with, the Superficies of the Earth never denying us
some thing or other for Medicine, and they, Mild, Gentle, and Safe for weak
and tender Natures. Moreover, it is observed by Nollius and others, that where
God strikes with any Disease, in those parts he also sends forth a Plant that
he endowes with virtue to cure it. And truly I cannot but admire at those
snarling humors, who make it their Ta^ke to disparage what they affect not,
(nay oftentimes what is beyond their own worth) and rent those noble parts of
Art asunder, which Nature has conjoined in an harmonious Agreement, and whose
wide breaches, honest hearted Philosophers endeavor to make up by a friendly
Reconciliation, it being not to be denied, but that each has their peculiar
Eminencies for which they deserve both Praise and Honor. For my own part, I
am none of the Detractors from Learning, but bear an Universal affection to
Arts, and am in freindship with each of their particular Branches; Nay even in
those I understand not, for I am persuaded by the satisfaction I have received
in things which before time I knew not, that there may be something deserving
of my fair Opinion, in what I am yet to know.

It has proved a great Bac. adv. page 37.
Error in some Practitioners, who (tumbling up and down their own
Speculations) seek out for Truth in the Little world, and withdrawing
themselves too much from the Contemplation of Experimental Natural
Obsevations, neglect to look for it in the great and common World: When
certainly such may far sooner arrive at that Truth they seek for in Man, if
they would but observe the Beginnings, Change, declination, and death of all
things, in and upon this inferior Globe, and compare their virtues with our
own internal Natures, for they are certainly See Davison's Curic. Chemic.
united by a Noble, excellent, and secret Harmony and Relation.

And having found the true Original and Cause of Diseases, then further to
search after a proper remedy; for all Diseases are not cured by one sort of
Physic (save that which is Aetheriall and Incorporeall) And therefore
according to the Doctrine of De occult. Phil. cap. 3.
Paracelsus, such as are bred from so light a cause ^s the impure Seeds of
Vegitables, viz. Meat, Drink, Fruits, Herbs, and the like Elementary things,
may be very easily cured with the Secrets of Herbs, Roots, and such like mild
and tender Medicines, of which sort Galenicall Physic is more plentifully
furnished then any of the ^est. Those that are produced from the more rude and
knotteer Qualities of Mineralls, and what is cast within the Compass of that
Tribe, the Chemicall Physician must expel by the power and force of his
Metalline Sulphurs, etc. Vegitables being (in this Case) too weak to Master
and Dissolve their tenacious and coagulated Spirits: Those which are derived
from the Influences of Heaven, must be removed by Plants, etc. Magically
gathered and prepared, or by Sigills, etc. framed or made under suitable
Positions and Aspects of the Planets, and impregnated with the rays of
Celestial Virtues, for without opening the Bodies, Infusing superior
Influences, and (by an additionall Artifice) fixing them to the said Bodies;
their own ordinary virtue (be Elections never so propitious) has not strength
enough to conquer Diseases of that Nature: and several of these choice Secrets
(of Nature and Art united) I my self have prepared, made and Experimentally
verified. Finally, where Diseases happen by Supernatural means, as by
Enchantments, etc. none of the other three are able to remedy the same, save
only Magical and Supercelestiall means, by and through the Virtues of
particular Intelligences, Or the Red Medicine wrought up to the highest degree
of Perfection. And in such cases the Hermetique Philosopher must appear, who
Anonymi.
-- In his Reason has contrived
A Perfeit Medicine, for Bodi^s that be sick
Of all infirmities to be releived,
This heleth Nature, and pro^onge^h life eke.


Therefore le^ all men cease to wonder why so many Diseases seem incurable;
when many times being Supernatural we judge them Natural, and the true Causes
unknown, no suitable Medicamen is administered.

And whereas I have touched upon Sigills, I think it will not be remote from
this discourse, if I give a little satisfaction to my Reader therein; Though
p^rh^ps it may be esteemed as a thing of too daring a Nature for my Pen Nor am
I ignorant how some, most learned Men, have extremly suffered under the heavy
and sharp Load of unworthy and rash Calumny, for manifesting or desending this
Doctrine; but it has only been (such is their Glory) by those that could
never sufficiently Answer their Arguments.

The framing of Sigills, Lam^ls, Talesmes (for all depend upon one Radix) is a
piece of Learning as See R Moses, his Ductor dubiorum.
Ancient as the Babilonian^ and Caldean Magi, (who first found out the Secret
power of Figures) a chief part of their Magic, And practiced by the greatest
Philosophers in the Eastern World; Where remain to this day, (as evident
Testimonies of their first Invention) very many and ancient Talesmes, the
miraculous effects whereof were admired and approved throughout all Aegipt and
Persia: although (I confess) their Name and Use be yet scarce known in these
parts of the World; Or if, only to such whose Wisdom thinks fit to conceal
and preserve the knowledge thereof, from the hands of the senseless and profane.

Among all other Philosophers (famous for this kind of knowledge) Apoloneus
Tyaneus was the Greg Observe. page 36.
mightiest, and his Works (in my Opinion) most Stupendous: Who though the
Envious and Ungrateful World, has thrown some dirt upon him, to blemish the
Innocence of his Operations, yet he never deserved other then well; all He did
being for the Mayerus Sym. Aur. Men's. page 127.
good thereof, and not for hurt; He was no less a Pious then Illustrious
Philosoph^r, Hi^ whole Life being strict and virtuous, and his Death not
blasted with any scandalous Exit. And for a justification of his Praxis, take
this Testimony of Justinus, who, says In quest. ad Orthod: quaest.
that he was a Man skillfull in the Dissent and Consent of all natural Powers;
and who wrought wonderful things by the means of this Science; (which were
only Natural and not Miraculous:) For which purpose, he made choice of such
fit Subjects, as might conduce to the perfection of what he intended to Effect:
And indeed God did not withstand those Works of his, in regard they were done
by the knowledge of Natural things, for the use and benefit of Man.

What I have further to say, shall only be to show what Natural powers,
Sigills, etc. Graved or Impressed with proper Characters and Figures, and made
under certain peculiar Constellations may have. Albumazar, Zabel, Haly,
Alba^egnus, and diverse other Arabians, give us several examples of such as
have been cured of the biting of Scrpents, Scorpions, Mad dogs, etc. by
Talismaticall Figures: And in other Authors we meet with a world of See Greg.
Observe. Gaff. Curos.
Stories which tell what Admirable effects they have wrought being rightly
prepared, (which should I here mention, would swell beyond the limits of my
Discourse) But this piece of Art is of extreme difficulty, and not to be
performed by every one that takes it in hand.

As for the use of such Characters, Letters, Words, Figures, etc. Formed or
Insculped upon any Matter we make use of, we are led to it by the president of
Nature, who Stampes most notable and marvelous Figures upon See Crolius de
signat. inter. rerum.
Plants, Roots, Seeds, Fruits, nay even upon rude Stones, Flints, and other
inferior Bodies.

Nor are these remarkable Signatures made and described by Chance, (for there
is a certain Providence which leads on all things to their end, and which
makes nothing but to some purpose,) but are the Characters and Figures of those
Stars, by whom they are principally governed, and with these particular
Stamps, have also peculiar and disterent virtues bestowed upon them. What
Artists therefore do in point of Character, is only to pursue the Track, that
is beaten out by Nature; And by how much the more the Matter whereupon such
Impressions are made, is suitable to the Qualities of those Sta^rs whose
Characters it is signed with: By so much more apt and inclineable it will be to
receive those virtues that shall empower it to produce an Effect, in things
whereunto it is applied.

Nevertheless, this is not all, for this Body must have as it were a Soul
insused, and be Impregnated with a Celestial vitality, or else it remains
Ineffectuall and Dead. In which respect other means must be found out before
we can obtain that Effect. And therefore we are to Consider, that the Soul of
the World is not confined, nor the Celestial Influences limited, but do
indifferently emit and communicate their Virtues alike, as well to things
Artificially made, as to those that are Naturally generated, though sometimes
they are more, at othertimes less vigorous and powerful, according to the
disserent Aspects under which they are wrought: In which regard a fit Election
must be built up from the foundation of Astrology, suitable to the Nature of
the Operation proposed, which being effected, and the Stars finding a figure
aptly disposed for receiving them, they forthwith Impresse their virtue, which
they retaining do afterward operate in that they find to be semblable. And
this is not strange if we reflect upon the Vulgar experiments of the
Loadestone, who communicating its virtue to a piece of Iron (a thing made fit
by Nature to attract and retain) that Piece thereby becomes of strength to
communicate this virtue to a third. But if we should consider the Operations of
this Magnet thoroughly (which proceeds only from a Natural Principle) there is
no other Mystery, Celestial, Elementall, or Earthly, which can be too hard,
for our Belief.

Moreover, these Celestial virtues and peculiar Gifts are not infused into
Individual and particular things, by the Idea, and by means of the Soul of
the World alone, But also are invited thither, through the Obedientiality of
their Matter, and a certain aptitude and likeness that these Inferiors bear
to their Superiors; which being once taken in, they thereupon contract and
retain (besides such as they receive from their own Specieo) those natural
Virtues and Roots of the Stars, wherewith they suscitate and stir up the
Influences of the Celestial Bodies; who are (as it were by compact when
United) Obliged to Operate in and for that purpose, which the Artist appoints
them. And more especially if the Mind of the Operator be vehemently inclined
toward the same. For that through the strength and Efficacy of the Imagination
and Passion, (being seriously intent upon any Operation) is joined with the
Mind of the Stars and Intelligences, and as suddenly fitted with Virtues, as
if it were the proper Receptacle of their Influences, and consequently helps
more effectually to infuse their Virtues into our Works: And the reason is;
because there is an appreheusion and power of all things in the Mind:
Whereupon all things having a natural Obedieuce to it, have also of necessity
an Efficacy; and more to that which desires them, with a strong and intent
Desire.

Notwithstanding, all these Wonders are not wrought but by the Cooperation of
second Causes dispositing of the Corporal Matter, God (the first cause of all
things) having variously distributed these virtues to every one as he pleases,
who by his Command and appointment are necessitated to produce their Effects.)
which Matter (by reason of its Purity or Inequality may cause the Celestial
virtues to err in their Actings, (for certainly Influences may be hindered, and
prove ineffectuall through the indisposition or insufficiency of the Matter.)
And therefore it is no ordinary Speculation to awaken the sleeping Spirit which
lies bound up in the straight Prison of the Body; to invite and allure that
propitious Spirit to descend from Heaven, and unite it self with that which is
Internal; and there withal to convey a Vniculum thereinto, that is of power
to hold fast and fix the Celestial Influencs, from recoyling back into their
united Centers.

This is the Series and Order of Nature conjoined with Art: and this, and all
this must be effected, before one true Magical Operation can be performed.

Page 194. Liber patris Sapientie.
THough I cannot yet satisfy the Reader who was the Author hereof, and
therefore must Register it, (together with Experience and Philosophy, the
hermets Cale) amongst the Anonymi: yet I can assure him He gives exceeding good
advice to the Student in this Science, where he bids him be Secret in the
Carriage on of his Studies and Operations, and not to let any one know of his
Undertakings, but his good Angel and Himself: and such a close and retired
Breast had Norton's Master, who

Ordin. p. 32.
When Men disputed of Colors of the Rose,
He would not speak but keep himself full close.
Privacy will (questionless) prove an unimaginable benefit to him, whereas on
the contrary Apertnesse exposes a true Philosopher to a multitude of
Misfortunes. Witness Sir Ed. Kelley, whose immoderate Ambition of spreading
his Name, lifted him up even to a Madness of public Carriage; which not
correcting in Time, he most miserably fell, through the fatal Virtego of
imprudent Glory. To such therefore I shall only add Chaucers Council which
may prove of no little advantage if they remember it.

Ten comman. of Love.
Make ^privy to your dealing as few as you may,
For three may keep Council if twain be away.
THe Figure cut in Brass and placed in Page 210. is an Hierogliphicall device
of Cremer sometime Abbot of Westminster, and Scholar (in this Science) to
Raymond Lully, which he caused to be painted upon an Arched Wall in Westminster
Abbey, where now the Statues of our Kings and Queens are set in their
respective Habits.

I met with it Limned in a very Ancient Manuscript, before the old Verses that
See page 211.
follow, which there seemed to serve as a Preface to that Work which bears
the Title of Hermes Bird. In it is conteyn'd the Grand Mysteries of the
Philosophers Stone, and not more Popish or Superstitious then Flamell's
Hierogliphicks portraid upon an Arch in St. Innocents Churchyard in Paris;
Notwithstanding it has pleased some, to wash the Original over with a
Plasterer's whited Brush. As also (of late) to break in Pieces the Glass
Window behind the Pulpit in St. Margarets Church at Westminster, wherein was
fairly Painted (but unhappily mistaken for a Popish Story) the whole Process
of the Work, in this manner.

The Window is divided into three Parts: In the Outermost whereof upon the
right hand was drawn a Man holding a Boy in his hand, and a Woman with a Girl
in hers, all standing in upright, naked postures, upon a green foliate earth:
The Man and Woman had Fetters, wherewith their Feet seemed to be chained to the
ground, which Fetters were presented as falling from off their Legs. Over the
heads of these persons were the Sun and Moon placed, and painted of a sad
dark red Color.

Within the Left side of the Window was a Beautiful Young man, clad in a
Garment of various Colors, bearing a Yellow Cross upon his Shoulders, his
Body Encircled with a Bright Glory, which sent forth Beams of diverse Colors,
He stood upon an Earth intimating Oculus Piscium.

At the Foot of the Middle Part of the Window was a fair large Red Rose full
spread, which issued Rays upward, and in the Middle an exeeding bright Yellow
Glory. Above the Rose was the Figure of a Man rising with Beams of Light
spread about his Head (somewhat like the Posture used to express Christ's
rising from his Sep^l^hre) He had a Garment of a Reddish Color, deepned with
Red and heightened with Yellow; In his left Hand, a White Stone, which he held
toward the Persons arising in that part of the Window on the Right Hand; and
in his Right Hand he held forth a Red Stone toward Him, whose Garments was of
various Colors.

In the uppermost part of this VVindow over the Figures was Transversely
written as follows:

In the first part of the Left Hand, Omnes gentes adepti plaudite quia dominus
frater vester. In the Middle Part.

S.... at mittens spiritum suum, ecee nova facio omnia celum and In this place
it is probable the word to be supplied is terram.
t... In the Third on the Right Hand.

Factus quasi unus ex......ia....angelio tibi -- Under these Figures in the
Left side of the VVindow were the Stawels and the Martyns Coats of Arms
quartered; And at the bottom of the Right side thereof, was this Coat of Arms
placed, (viz.) Argent, a Chevorok Elements of Armor. p. 95.
Embattelled, Gules, and Vert; which for the rareness of Bcaring I thought fit
to Blazon; and withal (because upon very diligent search among the Records of
English Coats of Arms it is not to be found) in hope it may come to the view
of such, who (if not at home) may from abroad produce the Bearer, and
consequently bring to light the Person that designed these Hierogliphicks, and
caused them thus to be Painted.

Page 213. Hermes Bird.
Which Piece (as it is thought) was written Originally by Raymund Lully (or at
least made English by the before mentioned Cremer) and that upon this Occasion.

Cremer traveling into Itally fell into the acquaintance of Lully, and so
exceedingly wrought upon him by his persuasions that he Vide Testament.
Cremeri.
brought him over into England, where within two years (but after thirty
years erroneous Experiments) he obtained the Secret from him. And afterward
bringing Lully to the sight and knowledge of Edward the third, upon some deep
Engagements and Promises that the King entered into to prosecute a War
against the Turks in person, to bestow somewhat on the House of God, but
nothing in Pride or Warring against Christians,) he was content permissione
Divina Regem sua Art divitem facere. Which when the King had obtained, he
brake his Promise, turned his Designc against France (the first Expedition
being Stow. Ann. fo. 234.
Anno 1337.) and finding that Lully (after he had seen him violate his faith
in destroying Christians in stead of Mahumetans) refused to further his
Ambition with new supply of Gold, He clapped him up in the Tower, where he lay a
long time, and seeing no possibility of Release, begun to study his Freedom,
and to that end made himself a L^aper, by which means he gained more Liberty,
and at length an Advantage of escaping into France, where in all probability he
penned this Piece.

The whole Work is Parabolicall, and Allusive; yet truly Philosophical: and
the Bird (that intitles it) the Mercury of the Philosophers, (whose virtues and
properties are therein largely described,) By the word Chorle, is meant the
Covetous and Iguorant Artist, the Garden is the Vessel or Glass, and the
Hedge the Furnace.

Page 233. The Tale of the Chanon's Yeoman.
ONe Reason why I selected out of Chaucer's Canterbury Tales, that of the
Chanon's Teoman was, to let the World see what notorious Cheating there has
been ever used, under pretense of this true (though Injured) Science; Another
is, to show that Chaucer himself was a Master therein.

For, in this Tale Chaucer sets forth the deceipts in Alchimy to the life, and
notably declaimes against all such villainous Pretenders, who being wholly
ignorant of Art, have notwithstanding learnt the Cunning, to abuse the World;
And this pains he took (as himself professes) merely Chan. Yeom. Tale.
To the intent that men may beware thereby,
And for no other cause truly.


Herein following the President of all sincere and conscientious Philosophers,
then whom, the Injured world cannot more condemn the abuses of these Impostors
that disgrace the Art, in that they are continually advising to shun them as
spreading Infection; and setting out Lights and Directions, that may serve as
so many Land marks, (if we will but take notice of them) to make us avoid the
Rocks of their Fraud and Deceit, which will otherwise split us.

The famous Art of Physiek is not more abused, with Quacking Mountebanks; nor
that other of Astrology more injured by some nibling Sciolists and ignorant
Iuglers: then this Divine Science has suffered by the Legerdemaine of some
Pretenders. What though some Modern Chemists rove beyond the Latitude of their
Profession, (being hurried on by a Covetous thirst, to obtain this Arcanum
Dei, this Thesaurus incomparabilis;) and by operating in strange Matters, and
torturing of various Bodies, bring Disparagement upon this worthy Science; yet
we ought not therefore to confound praiseworthy Arts, with the Abuses which
Imposters shuffle into them; or for the falsenesse or corruption of the bad,
condemn the pure and good: If so, Religion it self (as well as other
Learning, and Professions) would scarce be exempt from the like blemishes, and
wounds, if not destroyed and buried in scornful Ignorance.

This is the Misery, (and it is not ultra Caduceum for me to speak it) that
there are a Generation of People that rush headlong into the acquaintance of
such Men, there is nor staving them off, much like the doting Idiotts which so
eagerly courted Chaucer's Chanon, after whom Chan. Yeom. Tale.
-- Men riden and gone full many a Mile
Him for to se^ke and have acquaintance,
Not knowing of his false governanc^.
Let Philosophers say what they can, and wise men give never so good Counsel,
no warning will serve, they must be Couzened, nay they have a greedy appetite
thereunto; but it has been ever so, and we are told of old, that Ordin. page 7
Many Artificers have byne over swift,
With hasty Credence to fume away their thrift,
so strong and powerful a misleader is Covetousness.

Ord. page 17.
Norton describes these Cheats exactly, and give as full an account of their
Subtilties as he dare, for fear of encouraging such as bend their VVitts that
way. Chap. of Putrefac.
Ripley dissects them to the Bone, and scourges them naked to the view of all;
the like does many other Philosophers: Bloomefield gives us a Catalogue of the
chief of this Tribe in his time, and I may safely tell the Reader he shall
gain much benefit by this Work, if he pick but out what is said concerning
them, and study that First.

In some dark Passages it is as great a Courtesy to be taught to know Blocks,
as to be directed which way to avoid and get beyond them, and being so thank
Ripley for this his following Cautionary advice.

Chap. of Putrefac.
Beware therefore for Ihesus sake,
And medyll with nothing of great Cost,
For and then do, yt is but lost.
As also Norton, Ord. p. 126.
Cease Laymen cease, be not in lewdness ever,
Lewdness to leave is better late then never.


I wish I could say this Age, this Nation, the World, were not alured and
infected with the Cyrene notes of some grand, and notable Impostors, or that
the too too Credulous had not met with the same misfortune which Story tells us
others have undergone, even to Ruin. Yet to those that have been Decoyed into
the s^are, and would gladly for the future pursue a more hopeful Course, let
them hear Richard Carpenter.

See Carpent. work.
Avyse the well ere thou begin,
Or else little schalt thou win.
And with him Chaucer, Chan Yeom. Tale.
If that your Eyne cannot seen right,
Looks that your Mind lack not his sight.


And again, Let no man busy him this Arie to seche,
But he that the entention and Speech
Of the Philosophers understand can,
And if he do he is a lewd man.
For this Science and Connyng quod Arnold^ de villa nova.
he,
Is of the Secre of Secrees parde.


Let me tell them they may become happier and expect a Blessing in what they
seek; If with Job they can thus thoroughly purge themselves and say, If I have
made Gold my Hope, or fine Gold my Confidence, etc. that is, if they can study
this Science and not pursue it for Transmutation of Metals sake only, Pearce
Black Monk.
For Covetous men that finds never
Though they seek it once and ever,
and certainly the lucre of that will fix a Curse upon their Endeavors, and
plunge them headlong into an unfathomed depth of Misfortune.

If what has been delivered be not of force to make men watch over their
undertakings, and heedfully avoid the Springs and Ginns that are ordinarily
laid to entrap them into Ruin; but that on the contrary they carelessly slide
into a Venture upon any Terms, I Will leave them with this encouragement, o) Who
so that lysteth to utter his folly,
Let him come forth and learn to Multiply; Chan. Yeom. Tale.

And every man that has ought in his Cofer,
Let him appear and wexe a Philosopher.


Now as Concerning Chaucer (the Author of this Tale) he is ranked amongst the
Hermetick Philosophers, and his Master in this Science was Sir Jobn Gower,
whose familiar and near acquaintance began at the Inner Temple upon Chaucer's
return into England; for the Troubles of the Times toward the latter end of
Rieh: the second's Reign had caused him to retire out of their Danger into
Holland, Zeland, and France.

He is cited by Norton for an Authentic Author, in these words;

Ord. page 42.
And Chaucer rehearses how Tytans is the same. Besides he that Reads the
latter part of the Chanon's Yeoman's Tale, will easily perceive him to be a
Judicious Philosopher, and one that fully knew the Mystery.

Master Speght (in that commendable Account he gives of Chaucer's life,) is
persuaded he was borne in London, from something intimated in his Testament of
love. But Bale says, He was Bale Cent. 7. fol. 525.
Nobili loco natus, and that near unto Oxford, for (says he) Leland had
Arguments which made him believe he was borne either in Oxfordshire or
Bark-shire. But what those Arguments were we now know not, yet may believe them
to be of considerable weight, because they were doubtless such as he gathered
in his 6. years laborious search into the Libraries of our English Monasteries
and Colleges, being furthered by the liberal Encouragement and Commission of
Hen. 8. And had it not been for his indefatigable pains, All that was notable
in this Nation See his Newyeares gift to H. 8.
had in all likelihood been perpetually obscured, or at best, but lightly
remembered, as uncertain shadows. Nevertheless the fruits of this famous
Antiquaries labors, are no where now entirely to be seen, unless dispersed
through the works of some other men, who have most arrogantly and unworthily
made them their own: amongst the rest I perceive Polid. Virgil stole much
Timber from this worthy Structure, with part whereof he built up his Work, the
rest be enviously burnt, for thus I find Lelands Ghost Complaining.

Lelands Ghost.
Am I deceived? or does not Lelands Spirit,
Complain with Ghosts of English Notaries;
Whom Polidore Virgill robbed of merit,
Bereft of Name, and sacked of Histories,
While (wretch) he ravished English Libraries.
Ah wicked Booke-theefe whosoever did it:
Should one burn all, to get one single Creditt.
Am I deceived? or does not Lelands Spirit
Make Hue and Cry, for some Book Tresure stelth;
Rifling his Works, and razing Name and Merit;
Whereby are smothered a Prince-given Wealth,
A learned Writers Travail, wits, and Health:
All these he spent to do his Country pleasure,
Oh save his Name, the World may know ^is Treasure.
But begging Pardon for this Digression, (being on the behalf of so deserving a
Scholar) I return to Chaucer. Pitts Positively says he was born in Woodstock,
of noble Parents, and that Patre^ babuit Equestris Ordinis Viru^, his Father
was a Knigbt. And this may not be unlikely if we Consider, that not only the
Name is as Ancient as Roll. of Battle Abbey.
William the Conqueror's time, but that some of the Family have been both of
large fortunes and good quality. For we find Record in Tur. Land.
that Edw the 1. heard the Complaint of John Chaucer in the Damage of 1000 l.
And also, that there was in the Reign of H. 3. and Ed. 1. one Elias Chaucer,
of whom Record in Scacc:
-- Edwardus dei gratia, etc. liberate de Thesauro nostro Eliae Cbausecir'
december Solid: With which Speght in vit. Chaucer.
Cbaracters our Geffr^y Chaucer is written in the Records of Ed. 3. and Rich.
tbe second.

But wheresoever he was Borne, his Education was chiefly in the University of
Oxford in Canterbury-Colledge, Stow. An. fol. 957.
(suppressed by H. 8. and now joined to Christchurch) though for some time he
studied at Cambridge.

Court of Law. Chas. ^
Of Cambridge Clarke. -- He quickly became a Witty Logitian, a sweet
Rhetoritian, a pleasant Poet, a grave Philosopber, a holy Divine, a skilful
Mathematitian, his Tutors therein were Friar John Son, and Friar N. Lenne, Bale
s. 525.
(Friars Carmelites of Lynne remembered with honor in his Treatise of the
Astrolabe) and moreover (I may safely add) an able Astrologian, for almost in
every Work he inter-weaves most sound and perfect Astrology. In Brief, he was
Universally learned, and so affirms his Scholar Tbo. Occlev^.

Prolog. to H. 5. while Prince.
O Universal Fadre of Science. Pitts styles him Page 472.
Vir Belli Pacisque Artibus mi^e Florens. A Man that excelled in Arts both of
War and Peace, and a little after, Nam jam antequam virilem ^tatem
attigisset, erat Poeta Elegans, Et qui Poesim Anglicam ita illustravit, ut
Anglicus Homerus merito haberetur: For ere he came to Man's Estate, he was an
Elegant Poet, and one, who illustrated English Poesy, that he might have been
deservedly accounted the English Homer. Lidgate the Monk of Bury calls him the
Pref to Bochas.
Load star of our Language, and tells us that it was he, that

Jo. Lidgate de Nativ. Mar.
Made first to distill and Rain
The Gold dew dropps of Speech and Eloquener,
Into our Tongue through his Excellence.
And found the Flowers first of Rhetoric,
Our rude speech only to inlumine,
That in our Tongue was never non him like.
For indeed in his time all good Letters were laid asleep in most parts of the
World, and in England our Tongue was exceeding wild and rude, yet (through his
refining and polishing) it became more sweet and pleasant, in which regard he
is styled

Occl. de Reg. Princ^ cap. de Concill.
The first finder of our feire language. He spent many of his years in Fran^e
and Flanders: several Preferments he had at Course, for he was Pat. Rot. first
part of 50. Ed 3. M. 5.
Armiger Regis to Ed. 3. (a place of very good Reputation) In Pelsis Excitus
Scace.
Val^otus Hospitii, viz. Groom of the Palace, and after in R. 2. time Anno 8.
R. 2
Con^rouler of the Custom House London; With these he had several Annual
pensions during his Life granted from R. 2. and H. 4. His Abilities for
Foreign Employments were so far taken notice of, that he was twice or
thrice sent abroad into other Countries, and thought fit to be one of the
Ambassadors into France to move a Marriage between Richard the second (while
Prince of Wales) and the Lady Mary, Daughter to the French King. His Revenue
was 1000l. per annum. a very plentiful Estate, the times considered.

He dyed at London 25. October. Ann. 1400. as appears by the Inscription upon
his Tomb at Saint Peter's in Westminster Abbey, in an Isle on the South side of
the Church.

Mr. Nicholas Brigham built this Marble Monument to his Memory, the true
Pourtraicture whereof I have caused to be exactly graved in Brass, and placed
in page 226. There was formerly round the ledge of the Tomb these following
Verses, but now no remainder of them left.

Si rogites quis eram, forsan te fama d^cebit:
Quod si fama negat, mundi quia gloria transit,
Haee monumenta lege.
The Picture of Chaucer is now somewhat decayed, but the Graver has recovered it
after a Principal left to posterity by his worthy Scholar Tho. Occleve, who
has also these Verses upon it.

Occl. de Regem. Princ: cap. de Concilio. Upon the figure of Chaucer.
And though his life be queinte the resemblaunce*
Of him has in me so fresshe liffnesse,
That to put other men in remembrance
Of his person, I have here the liknesse
Do make, to this end in soth fastness,
That they that have of hem lost thoute and mind,
By this Peinture, may ageine him find.
Before Mr. Brigham built the aforesaid Monument it seems Chaucer had a Stone
laid over his Grave upon which was ingraved this following Epitaph.

Galfridus Chaucer Vates and fama Poesis,
Materna hac sacra sum tumulatus humo.
Page 257. Dastin's Dream.
I Am persuaded this Work called by the Name of Dastin's Dream; has been
turned into English Verse by some later Philosopher; for in his days we meet
with no such refined English, and in Latin we have his Vision with which (in
effect) this agrees.

The Time he lived in is not certainly known; I find none that mention it;
but it is believed it was long since. Our Countryman Cent. 10. page 49.
Bale speaks of him yet throws at him and this Science some uncomely abuses:
Nevertheless he calls him Alcumisticae artis aetate sua primus and in Anglia
Magister unicus; the Prime Alchymist of his Age, and the only Master thereof in
England; A Producer and Foret^ller of things which (it seems in his
apprehension) he could not attain to by Nature; He made a diligent search into
all things that might possibly be found out in Chemistry, insomuch that he
boldly wrote and published several Experiments.

And though Page 871.
Pitts renders him a very Poor man, and lays the blame upon his own
Artifice; (being so much addicted to Alchymie,) yet questionless (if he were
Master of such learning as they confess him to be, and his Poverty were not
voluntary;) he might have advanced himself to riches when he pleased. He wrote
these following Books,

1. Super Art Alcumistica. 2. Visiones ad huc alias. 3. Secreta Secretorum. 4.
Speculum Philosophorum. 5. Sapientum Aurinum.
Symb. Aur. Men's. page 458.
Maierus says he left behind him a considerable Chemicall Tract, which Janus
Lacinius has put in his Collestions. Not unlike but this may be in Lacinius
his Pretiosa Margarita novella de Thesauro, ac preciofissimo Philosophoru^
lapide; hut the Book I have not yet seen, and therefore cannot tell whether
what is there published of Dastin's, be any of the before mentioned Works.

Page 269. Take Earth of Earth, Erths Mother.
LUdovicus Combachius in his late Collections of some of Ripley's Works, put
this of Pearce the Black Monk's among them under the Title of Terra Terra
Philosophicae; and publishes it as Ripley's: and withal that Title [Terra
Terrarum] which Page 677.
Pitts also gives to one of his Works may seem to insinuate this; But I
conceive all are not Ripley's which walk under his Name, for questionless,
many Pieces are (of late Times) fathered on him which he never wrote; Bale has
not this at all among the Catalogue he delivers of what was Ripley's. And I
have met with it in so old a Manuscript under the title of Pearce the Black
Monk, that the Hand (as I Judge) speaks it to be antienter then Ripley's Time.

Page 275. Of Titan Magnesia take the clear light,
The Redd Gum that is so bright:

Some Anclent Copies have it also thus,

Of Spain take the clear light,
The Red Lion that is so bright.
Who to pitch upon for the Author, I was a long time ignorant of, yet at
length I happily met with an old Manuscript (and it was the ancientest
Handwriting I ever saw this Piece written in) to which was affixt the Name of
Richard Carpenter; and thereupon I have Entitled it, Carpenter's Work.

I find that in Anno 1447. John Carpenter then Bishop of Worcester Issacc.
Chron. fo. 467.
founded the College at Westbury near Bristoll, (mentioned Page 442.
before to be Augmented by William Cannings: Godw. p. 367.
by pulling down the old College, and in the new Building enlarged it very
much, compassing it about with a strong Wall, Embattaled; adding a fair Gate,
with diverse Towers, (more like unto a Castle then a College,) and lastly
bestowed much good Land for augmenting the Revenue thereof. Besides this he
built the Gatehouse at Hartleborough, a Castle near and Camb. Brit. fo. 574.
belonging to the Bishop of Worcester; and did several other Works of Piety
and Charity.

This Bishop Carpenter is supposed to be Brother, or near Kinsman to Richard
Carpenter our Author, and accounted an Hermetique Philosopher. He was
Contemporary with Norton, and Cannings; and for the most part lived near unto
them, at the aforementioned VVestbury; nay he had so great Affection to that
Place (not unlike for the Societies sake of Norton and Cannings or for some
special Blessing he met with there) that Godw. p. 442.
he intended to have it honored with a part of his Style; and to have taken
upon him the Name of Bishop of Worcester and VVestbury, which though he could
not effect, yet chose it for his Burial place where he lies Interred.

In another old parchment Manuscript (and that a very fair one) I met this
Work, Prefaced with what follows.

Ask ye of the Clerks that holden then so wise, what is the Where that most
be sown in the Earth, and whedere it is yorshed forth hot or cold. For if it
were i^ heat, it scholde never rote withput cold and moisture. Also sey to
hen^ all, all that ever was comen of ^^n, but it is dissevered in three, as
Favere, and Sone, and Holy Ghost, One way there is, and, no moo. Also look
which is the faver and Modere of all Metallez, For if thou draw or take any
other manner thing than his own kind, thou les^st all thy werk: For look
whennys he comes, and in his own Mod^r^s belly norshe him forth, and when he
is of age norsh him forth with his own Moders milk, and gif him is own
Moders milk. Page 278. The Hunting of the Green Lion.
IN the Camp of Philosophy, Bloomefield reckons up a Work that bears the
Title of the Green Lion, and amongst other Impostors (of his Time) calls the
Vicar of Maldon, (but in some Co^ies Vicar of W^lden) the Author; and
consequently esteems the Work spurious,

Bloomf. Blos. first part.
Then brought they in the Vicar of Maldon,
With his Lion Green, that most royal Secret;
But what Piece soever that was I know not: I am confident this, that I here
present my Reader with under that Title, is a perfect Work, and truly
Philosophical; besides some Copies own Abraham Andrews for their Author, and
is so confirmed to me by the Testimony of a credible Philosopher.

Page 293. l. 20. God save my Masters life --
THomas Charnock (the Author of the Breviary of Natural Philosophy) had the
happiness to have Two Masters that made him inheritor of this Secret; The
first was he, whom here he Mentions, and it seems Aenigm. de Alch.
Was a Priest in the Close of Salisburie. This he further confirms in his
Breviary, thus: Brev. of Phil. Cap. 4.
Master I. S. his name is truly,
Nigh to the Cit^y of Salisbury his dwelling is,
A Spiritual m^n forsooth he is.


It seems he had some acquaintance with this Priest, and in that time been his
Studies this way, Insomuch that the Priest falling sick (whilst his Work was
a going) thought Charnock deserving of it; for He Chap 3.
-- When hathought to dye,
Gave him his work and made him his Heir.


This Work Charnock continued going, till unhappily it perishes by Fire upon
a Newyeares day at Noone; probably it might be An. 1555. for that fell out in
the first and second of Phil. and Mar. and in those years of their Reign
(which was part in the year 1554. and part in 1555.) he Chap. ibid.
received the Secret from the aforesaid Priest, as himself Testifies. At which
time he was about 30. or 31. years of Age (though he intimates he was about
28. years Chap. 5.
old when he first met with the Prior of Bath) for Ann. 1574. he was 50. years
old, as appears at the end of his See page 426
Fragments, which I Coppied from his own Hand.

Page 2. 96line 3. Only a Monk of whom 'Ile speak anon.
THis Monk was Charnocks other Master, into whose Company he Chap. 5.
accidentally happened, his Name was William Bird, and by his Function, Prior
of Bath, at the Dissolution of that Abbey; Chap. ibid.


This Bird (while Prior) expended much Money by Godw Succ. page 308.
endeavoring what he might to finish the Abbey Church of Bath (the Cambd. Brit.
234.
foundation of which sumptuous Building was begun by Oliver King, but he dying
left it unperfect:) and had brought it to a perfection, when the Dissolution of
the Abbey, had once overthrown what before was set up.

It seems this Prior had the Elixir upon the Suppression of the Abbey: he hid
it in a Wall.

Chap. 5.
And Ten days after he went to fetch it out,
And there he found but the stople of a Cloute.
For it was taken away; It made their Hearts light who sound it, but his so
heavy, and the loss so discontented and afflicted him, Chap. ibid.
That many year after he had no settling place. and (losing his Eyes soon
after his Ecclesiastical preferments) was quite deprived of attempting to make
the Elixir again. Whereupon he lived obscurely, and grew very poor; and not
able to give Charnock entertainment, but his own Purse paid for it, both
times he was with him.

Page 298. lin 25. Charnock is his name, of Tenet that Isle.
TEnet or Tainet is an Isle that lies in the East part of Kent, and the
Birthplace of Charnock; however though he might be born there, yet he dwelt
about Chap. 5.
Salisbury, when he first met with his Master Bird. He calls himself the
Unlettered Scholar, and by several Fragments and Notes that I have seen of
his own VVriting, it does not appear, that he understood much Latin, or knew
how to write true English; yet though he wanted the Shell he obtained the
Kernel, and had the good fortune to meet with that in plain English, which
many (who have the assistance of other Languages) go without; Thus we see by
him, that God has not excluded all who are Masters of no other then their own
Language; from the happiness of understanding many Abstruse and subtle
Secrets; I could instance several in this Science: and this very Consideration
invited that noble Fraternity of the R. C. to publish their Fame and Consession
in Five several Languages, to the end the unlearned might not be deprived and
defrauded of the knowledge thereof. Nor was the Process (which all Students
may take notice of) tedious or long in delivering to Charnock. For thus he
says,

Within three or four words His Master Bird.
he revealed to me
Of Mineral Prudence the great Mystery.
He lived in the Rank of an Ordinary man, else I presume his Quality might
have privileged him from being Pressed for a Common Soldier. And from a
Memorandum of his own hand, it may be gathered, that he practiced Surgery;
for thereby it appears He bargained to have Five Marks for healing the Leg of
one Richard Deane, for the payment of which one John Boden and William Lawly
became Suretyes.

Page 300. li. 23. -- Remembering my Master tho. Page 301. li. 5. -- My Master
shall know all this. li 8. Then would I write to my Master -- Page 302. li. 1.
Then I remembered my good Master again.
IT is S. I. the Priest of Salisbury whom Charnock means in these several
places, and whose Christian Name was James: for in another private Memorandum,
written by Charnock, I find thus much;

Memorand' that Sir Robart which did confer with my Tutor Sir James, in king
Edwards days, dwells now in the Savoye in London, and has it a working
there, as Harry Hamond told me at Saint James Fair.

Anno Domi: 1566.

Page 301. li. ult. Forsooth it was Ripley the Chanon his Boy.
SOme will have this to bear a double Construction (either that Ripley was Boy
or Servant to a Chanon, as being bred up under a Chanon while a Boy; or that it
was one who was Ripleys Servant, and brought up with him when young; to whom
Ripley (finding him faithful) might commit the Secret) and so leave it
uncertain whether Ripley or his Scholar was Master to the aforesaid William
Bird. But I rather conceive the latter most probable; for, Ripley Bale Cent 8.
fo. 623. Pitts. page 678.
dyed about the year 1590. and the time that this Bird communicated this
Secret to Charnock, was at least 64. years after. So that questionless this
Bird was too young to be acquainted With so weighty a Mystery at the time of
Ripley's death. However William Bird had a Master, though Sir James the Priest
of Salisbury had none; but received it from Gods hands by inspiration: for
Charnock says he told him

Cap. 6.
-- He did it not attain,
Ofno manner of Man but of God, ve put it into his head
As he for it was thinking, lying in his bed.
Page 302. lin. 13. Yet the Gentleman did me more spite then the rest,
As when he made me from my work to be Pressed.

CHarnock was much hindered in the Course of his Practice by the Malice of this
Gentleman, who it seems was some ill Neighbor, that bore him a Grudge, and
executed it in as bad a time for the honest Philosopher as possible might be;
[even then when he was near finishing his work, -- Cap. 4.
Within a Months reckoning.] causing him to be pressed for a Soldier upon the
Design of relieving of Calis, (which was the Stow. An. 632.
beginning of Iannary Anno 1558. and almost six Months after he had finished
the Breviary of Philosophy,) whereupon in a Discontent he destroyed All.

Page 303. li. 6. And if God spare me life I will mend this another day.
THe Breviary of Natural Philosophy was begun to be written within two or
three years after he was Master of the Secret, and though he seem to promise
some other Work, yet I could never learn that he wrote any thing afterward,
save only His two Aenigmaes, (the which I have Marshald after his Breviary)
and the Fragments incerted, Page 424. What time he dyed, is uncertain, but
after the year 1577. I meet with nothing under his own Hand, although
several years before that, his Pen lay not still; for in diverse spare places
of his Books he inserted sundry Notes, to the which most commonly he affixt a
Date; some whereof I have published in this Theatrum.

Page 305. Bloomefield's Blossoms.
THe Auther himself also calls this Work the Camp of Philosophy, and the
Practick thereof he styles by the Name of his last Will and Testament. It was
written by William Bloomefield (some Copies have called him Sir William
Bloomefield) a Bachellor of Physic, admitted by H. 8.

I have seen a faite Manuscript of Norton's Ordinall, wherein (at the top of
the Leaf, that begins every Chapter and some other Eminent places,) is a
Scrowle, and in the first fold thereof is written [Myles] in the middle of it,
the Number of the Chapter, and in the third fold [Bloomefield] which Miles
Bloomfield I take to be the Owner of the Book (and perhaps some Brother or
Kinsman to our William Bloomefield:) Nevertheless by at Note in that Book (of
an indifferent ancient hand) I afterward found this Miles is called the Anthor
of Bloomefields Blossoms.

Page 324. Sir Edward Kelie's Work.
I Cannot give my Reader an Accout of Sir Edward Kelley, but I must also men
ion that famous Artist, Doctor John Dee; (whose last Will and Testament
follows Sir Edw. Kelle's Work) He being sometime his Intimate Friend, and
long Companion in Philosophical Studies, and Chemicall Experiments: Till at
length the worthy Doctor (leaving him in Germany) returned for England, and so
by Providence, escaped from being his further Companion; in tha^ straight
Confinement which Sir Edw. Kelley suffered, (by command of Radulph the 2.
Emperor of Germany) at Pragne.

Touching Sir Edward Kelley, he was borne at VV^^^ster, the Scheme of whose
Nativity (Graved from the Original Calculation of Doctor Dee, and under his
H^^d) I here Exhibit.

Anno isss. Aug. 1. Hora. 4. a Meridie Wigornioe Natus Dominus, Edouardus
Keleus: Philosophus Poli Altitudo gr: 52:10.


Which may be grateful and acceptable unto such that can read the Language of
the Heavens: Insomuch, that therein they shall find out more concerning him,
then Story has left us. For, whereas he by some is called Philosophue Dubious,
somewhat a better Opinion might be hence Collected, and that from the Position
of Mercury Lord of the Ninth, (the House of Knowledge, Wisdom and Science;)
and who is placed upon the Cuspe thereof in Virgo, where he is exceeding
Strong, and Fortunate, in Dignities; Essential and Accidental, [viz. in his
own House, and Exaltation, Direct, and Swift of Course, free from Combustion,
and in the Term, and Face of Venus; to whom he applies by a partile Sextile.]
Venus also is Angular, and beholding the Cuspe of the Ninth House, by a
Sextile; All which (with Consideration that the Degree Ascending is in the
Terms of Mercury,) do truly render him a Man of clear Understanding, quick
Apprehension, an excellent Wit, and of great propensity to Philosophical
Studies. And indeed, by all Reports he was very Ingenious, and a continual
Searcher, in the abstruse and difficult Secrets of Philosophy and Chemistry.

Yet for all this, he could not escape the hard Censures and Scandalls of those
that understood not what he did; which the Dragons Tail in the Ascendant, was
at all times ready to further and promote, and from whose Position the Nature
of those abusive Aspersions may be (Generally) gathered: and partly from a
story which VVever in his Funeral Monuments inserts, where, though he make him
an Acter in the worst part of Conjuration, and backs his Relation with some
Formal Circumstances; Yet that nothing was done in the Nature he Relates, good
and sound Reasons (too tedious to be touched here) induce me to belleve.

As touching Doctor Dee, he chiefly bent his Studies to the Mathematics; in
all parts of which he was an absolute and perfect Master. Witness his
Mathematical Preface to Euclids Elements, wherein are enumerated many Arts of
him wholly invented (by Nanc, Definition, Propriety, and Use) more then either
the Grecian or Roman Mathematitians have left to our knowledge: with diverse
and many Annotations, and In^entions, Mathematical, added in sundry places of
the said Bo^ke: Together with several Pieces of Navigation, Perspective, and
other rare Mathematical works of his in Manuscript.

His Epistle prefixed to Iobn Field's Ephemerides 1557 De usu Globi Coelcstis
to Ed. 6. De Nubium solis lunae ac reliquorum Planeta^um, etc. Distanti^s, etc.
to Ed. 6. Astronomicall and Logisticall Canons to Caculate the Ephemerides by;
De stella admira^da in Cassiopeae* Asterismo. An Advise and Discourse about the
Reformation of the Vulgar Year, speak him a learned Astronomer.

And lastly, that he was a good Astrologian, and a studious Philosopher, his
300. Astrologicall Aphorisms, His 120. Aphorisms De praestantioribus
quibusdam n^turae virtutibus. Monas Hierogliphicae. Speculum unitatis, (being
an Apology for our famous Friar Bacon) His Cabalae Hebraicae compendiosa
Tabula, with many others, afford no small Evidence to the World.

All which and many mo^e (in several other kinds of learning) as History,
Herald^y, etc. written by him before the year 1583. Some time He bestowed in
vulgar Chemistry, and was therein Master of diverse Secrets, amongst others he
28. Dec. 1579.
revealed to one Roger Cock, the Great Secret of the Elixir (as he called it)
of the Salt of Metalls, the Projection whereof was One upon a Hundred.

His great Ability in Astrology, and the more secret parts of Learning (to
which he had a strong propensity and unwearyed Fancy,) drew from the Envious
and Vulgar, many rash, lewd, and lying Seandalls, upon his most honest and
justificable Philosophical Studies; and many times forced him out of the
bitterness of his Soul (which was even Crucified with the malice of Impudent
Tongues) most seriously and servently to Apologize. Nor could he enjoy
Tranquillity in his Studies, but was oftentimes disquieted and vexed with the
sower dispositions of such as most Injuriously Scandalized both him and them,
Insomuch that the An. 1583.
^eare he went beyond Sea his Library was seized on, wherein was 4000. Books,
and 700. of them Manuscripts (aCaveat for all Ingenious and eminent
Philosophers to be more wise then to keep any dear or Excellent Books in their
own Houses.) And it is most probable that at this time his before mentioned
Speculu^ unitaris, might fall into those hands, that would never since suffer
it to see the Light, which might occasion the Learned Seldom to say, this Seld.
Pref. to H^^t. Concor.
Apology was long since promised by him; but intimating it was never Writ.
An. 1592. Nov. 9.
Master Secretary Walsingham, and Sir Tho: George were sent to his then
dwelling house at Mortclack by virtue of a Commission, to understand the Matter
and Causes for which his Studies were Scandalized. And for some other thing in
the like Nature, was he necessitated to send his Jan. 6. 1595.
Apologeticall letter to the Archbishop of Canterbury.

These kind of Persecutions were still Multiplied upon him, and he sometimes
Personally agreeved by them: for about the year 1594. he was under a kind of
Restraint, which occasioned him to 28. Oct. 1594.
write to the Lady Scydmore to move the Queen that either he might declare his
Case to the Body of the Council, or else under the Broade-seale have liberty
to go freely where he pleased.

And thus much concerning these two famous men in several; now shall I give
the Reader an Account of their joint Actions abroad, as also what relates to
Doctor Dee after his return into England: which I shall do from an
unquestionable Authority, even Doctor Dee's Diary, all written with his own
hand; where I shall take the larger Field to walk in, because I move upon so
certain ground: some of which passages may please (if not concern) the
Reader. For I think it not fit to suffer such Eminent lights longer to lie in
Obscurity, without bringing them forth to the view of the World.

It Is generally reported that Doctor Dee, and Sir Edward Kelly were so stangely
fortunate, as to find a very large quantity of the Elixir in some part of the
Ruins of Glastenbury-Abbey, which was so incredibly Rich in virtue (being one
upon 272330.) that they lost much in making Projection, by way of Trial;
before they found out the true height of the Medicine.

And no sooner were they Masters of this Treasure, then they resolved to
Travel into Foreign Parts, where falling into acquaintance with one Albertue
Laskey a Polonian Prince (which came into England the beginning of May, An.
1583.) on the 21. of Sept. following, They, their Wives, Children, and
Families, went beyond Sea with the said Prince.

And whether they found it at Glastenbury (as is aforesaid) or howsoever else
they came by it, it is certain they had it: for at Trebona in Bohemia (whither
they were come to Sept. 4. 1586
dwell) Sir Edward Kelley made Dec. 9. 1586
Projection with one small Grain thereof (in proportion no bigger then the
least grain of Sand) upon one Ounce and a Quatter of Common Mercury, and it
produced almost an Ounce of most pure Gold. This was done to gratify Master
Edward Garland and his Brother Franc^s, and in their presence; which Edward was
lately come to Trebona, being sent thither to Doctor Dee, from the Emperor of
Muscovia, according to some Articles before brought, by one Thomas Symkinson. I
also find this Note of Doctor Dee's, Jan. 5. 1586. Donum Dei 2. ounces. E. K
Moreover, for nearer and later Testimony, I have received it from a credible
Person, that one Broomfield and Alexander Roberts, told him they had often seen
Sir Ed: Kelly make Projection, and in particular upon a piece of Metal cut out
of a Warming-pan, and without Sir Edwards touching or handling it, or melting
the Metal (only warming it in the Fire) the Elixir being put thereon, it was
Transmuted into pure Silver: The Warming-pan and this piece of it, was sent to
Queen Elizabeth by her Ambassador who then lay at Prague, that by fitting the
Piece into the place whence it was cut out, it might exactly appear to be once
part of that VVarming-pan. The aforesaid Person has likewise seen in the hands
of one Master Frye and Scroope, Rings of Sir Edward Kellyes Gold, the fashion
of which was only Gold wyre, twisted thrice about the Finger: and of these
fashioned Rings, he gave away, to the value of 4000l. at the Marriage of one of
his Servant Maids. This was highly Generous, but to say truth he was openly
Profuse, beyond the modest Limitts of a Sober Philosopher.

During their abode at Trebona, they tried many Chemicall Experiments to see
whether they could make that Jewel they possessed, (the particular account of
their operations I need not here relate) yet I cannot hear that ever they
accomplished any thing; only I find the 27. of April noted by Doctor Dee
with several expressions of Joy and Gladness, as -- Haec est dies quam fecit
Dominus. Again -- Miserecordia Dei magna, and lastly, -- Omne quod vivit
laudet Dominum. And to testify what they meant, he writes upon the 30. day
following, Master Edward Kelley did open the Great secret to me. God be sharked.

Whiles they lived at Trebona, Sir Edward Kelley went dives times to Prague,
and the 15. of Ian. 1587. he went into Poland, but returned the 9 of Febr.
after, And it is probable these Iourncys were made in quest after some famous
Chemists Things were not carried here so privately, but Qeene Elizabeth had
notice given her of their Actions, whereupon she used several means by
Letters and M^ssages to invite them back into England, where it was believed
she had so far prevailed that Master Simkinson and Master Francis Garland's
Brother Robert, coming from England to 8. Dec. 1587
Trebona supposed they had been ready to come over to England upon the Queens
Letters formerly sent them. And though Sir Edward Kelley staid behind, yet
Doctor Dee 1 May 1589.
left Trebona and and came for England. But whether occasioned by some
unkindnesse received from Sir Edward Kelley or falling out of their Wives, or
the Solicitation of Queen Elizabeth (or all these concurring) I am not yet
certain, not unlike but each of them might contribute to their Separation.

For that there was some Great and Wonderful unkindnesse past from Sir Edward
Kelley, appears, by his sending for Doctor Dee, the beginning of Ian. 1588.
under show of Reconciliation, and discovering more then an Ordinary Intimacy
and Compliancy about that time, which fair shows the good Doctor notes with
this prayer. God lead his heart to all Charity and Brotherly love: As also by
Letters sent from Doctor Dee to Sir Edward Kelley and his Wife the end of March
following, requiring at their hands Mutual Charity, which May 9.
after upon Mistress Kelleys receiving the Sacrament she gave her hand to Doctor
Dee and his Wife in Token of Charity. But it seems these things were not
cordial but only outward; for 9. Sept. following, (the Lord Chancellor coming
to Trebona) the Rancour and Dissimulation was more evident to him, and it
seems grew up to a greater height then he could bear. And thereupon he
thought wisely to avoid the further Danger by leaving Germany which occasioned
him to 4. Jan. 1589.
deliver to Sir Edward Kelley the Powder, the Books, the Glass, with some
other things, and thereupon received his Discharge in writing under his Hand
and Seal.

While these Discontents continued, several Letters past between Queen
Elizabeth and Doctor Dee, whereby perhaps he might promise to return; At
length it so fell out, that he 1. Mar. 1589
left Trebona and took his Journey for England.

The ninth of April he came to Breame and had not stayed there three days,
but the Landtgrave of Hesse sent Letters of Civil Complements to him, and
within three days after, Doctor Dee presented him with his Twelve Hungarian
Horses, that he bought at Prague for his Journey. 27 June 1589.
Here that famous Hermetique Philosopher, [Doctor Henric Kunrath of Hamburgh]
came to visit him: The 16. of Nov. he went thence to Stade, where he met with
Mr. Edward Dyer going Ambassador for Denmark, who the year before had been
at Trebona, and carried back Letters from the Doctor to Queen Elizabeth; He
was a great Corespondent of Doctor Dees, and as earnest a Searcher after the
Stone.

The 23. of November. following, he arrived at Graves end having been out of
England 6. years 2. Months and 2. Days, and the 9th of December. presented
himself to the Queen at Richmond, where he was favored with a kind
Reception.

Being settled again at Mortclack, the Queen used to call at his House to
visit him, and showed herself very Courteous to him, upon all Occasions Against
Christmas 1590. she sent him Two hundred Angels where with to keep his
Christmas, and a hundred Makes against Christmas 1592. she li^ewise sent him
word by Mr. Thomas Candish, to do what he would in Alchymie and Philosophy,
and none should control or molest him: and not unlike by the Queens example,
diverse Personages of Honor at Court, frequented his Company, and sent him many
Guists, from time to time. Amongst others Sir Thomas Jones most nobly offered
him his Castle of Emlin in Wales, to dwell in, free with all Accomadations.

His Favor was fair at Court, the Queen her self bad him find out
something for her to bestow; yet all the preferment he gained was the 8. Dec.
1594.
Grant of the Chancellorship of St. Paul's, and the 27 of May 1595. his Patent
past the great Seal, for the Wardenship of Manchester, whither He, his Wife,
Children, and Family came the 14. of Feb. 1596. and the 20. day following was
Installed, and in this Wardenship (wherein he had the unhappiness to be often
vexed with the Turbulent Fellows of that College) dyed, deserving the
Commendations of all Learned and Ingenious Schollert, and to be remembered for
his remarkable Abilities*

After Doctor Dee came into England (as is before remembered) Correspondency was
still maintained between him and Sir Edward Kelley, in Letters sent by Mr.
Francis Garland and others: (and some expectancy of Sir Edwards coming over:
23. Dec. 1589.
Mr. Thomas Kelley (his Broher) putting the Doctor in hopes thereof likewise)
but at length Sir Edward was clapped up close Prisoner by the Emperor (for he
had so unwarily and openly managed the Secret, that it had given the Emperor
occasion to carry a strict Eye over all his Actions, out of a desire to be
sharer, with him in his good fortune) yet it seems the Emperor set him at 4
Oct. 1593
Liberty, and Doctor Dee had notice of it the 5. of December after. And though he
began to grow into the Emperors favor, in hopes to be entertained into his
Service (for so he certified Doctor Dee by Letters in August 1595.)
Nevertheless he was clapped up again into Prison, and attempting to make his
Escape out of a high Window, by the teering of his Sheets, which were tied
together to let him down, he (being a weighty Man) fell and broke his Leg,
and thereof dyed: (The Ascendent then coming by Direction to the place of the Sea the Scheme of the Nativity.
Moon with Latitude, she being Lady of the 8th. house in the Radix and posited
in Aquarius.) And this is one report of his Death; others there are, but Doctor
Dee mencions none at all of the manner thereof; only this, Anno 1595.
November. 25. News that Sir E. K. was stain.

Page 365. A Dialogue betwixt the Father and the Son.
THis Dialogue is there placed among the Anonymi, in regard I then knew not the
Author, but afterward I met with the entire Placed in page 338.
Work, and found it to be that of Ripley's, which is called the Mystery of
Alchymists, and that this Fragment was but drawn out of it, only dressed up with
another Title; which if the Reader compare he shall readily find.

For the want of Snese in some parts thereof, as also in other Elder Pieces; I
hope the Dimnes of the Taper will be excused where there was no cleerer light
to be found. For though (like the Sun) they may seem to have some Spots, yet
the candid Peruser must confess they are not without their pecullar Glories.
The truth is, some Passages through them were so obscure and dark, and the
Paths I followed so rugged and uneven, that I could neither stay in them
without manifest disparagement, or go out of them without some Danger: and
from my discoveries fraught thence, I am well assured I might have more
contented the Reader, could I have satisfied my Self better. However, I durst
not adventure to Rectify what I found amiss; but thought it better to leave
it to the Judgment of each that takes the pains to study them, then obtrude
my own sense, lest what I judge an Emendation, others may sensure as a Gross
fault: and withal ever remembering the strict Charge the generality of
Philosophers have continually given to succession, not to meddle or alter any
of their Works; I, (even in what I fear are manifest Imperfections) dare not
but most inviolably observe them, and amongst them all this Credible and Trusty
Philosopher is not unworthy of our taking notice of, who thus requires the same.

Hunt, green. Lion.
Therefore in Charity and for the Lords sake,
Let no man from my writing take
One word, or add thereto,
For certainly if that he do,
He shall show malice fro which I am free,
Meaning Truth and not subtily.
Page 368. lin, 5. And also with great diligence.
THis Piece is the Work of Sir John Gower, and Collected out of his Book Lib.
4. fo. 76.
De Confessione Amantis. He is placed in the Register of our Hermetique
Philosophers: and one that adopted into the Inheritance of this Mystery, our
famous English Poet, Geoffry Chaucer. In this little Fragment it appears he
fully understood the Secret, for he gives your a faithful account of the
Properties of the Mineral, Vegitable, and Animal Stones, and affirms the Art
to be true.

This Craft is wrought by wey of kind,
So that there is no fa^lace in.
And again,

The Science of himself is true,
Upon the form as it is founded.
He was an eminent Poes, and has Lib. 5.
written the story of the Golden Fleece, like an Hermetique Philosopher: which
Philosophical vein is to be traced through several other parts of his Works.
The first acquaintance between Him and Chaucer began at the Inner Temple,
where Sir John Gower studied the Laws, and whither Chaucer came to follow the
like course of studies upon his return out of France. He was (says Pitts) a
page 573.
noble and learned Man, Galfrido fere per omnia fimilem, quique eundem prorsu^
habuit omnium studiorum suorum propofitum finem, resembling Geoffry almost in
every thing, and who had surely the same proposed end of all their Studies;
they soon perceived the similitude of their manners, quickly joined in
Friendship and Labors; they had daily meetings and familiarity, and all their
endeavor was to refine and polish their Mother Tongue, that there might
appear the express footesteps o^ the Roman Eloquence in our English Speech.

This appears by Chaucer's sending to Gower his Troylus and Cressida after he
had finished it, for his perusal and amendments.

See the end of Troylus and Cres.
O Moral Gower, this Book I direct
To the, and to the Philosophical Strode
To vouchsase, there need is, to correct,
Of your Benignitees and Zeies good.
And surely these two added so much of splendor and ornament to our English
Ideome, as never any the like before them: for they set foot to foot, and
lovingly contended, whether should bring most honor to his Country both
endeavoring to overcome, and to be overcome each of other, they being not only
the Remembrancers but Imitators of him, Quod lingua Catonis and Enni,
Sermonem patrium ditaverit, and nova rerum
Nomina protulerit.


Surv. fo. 450.
Stow Margens it, that he was no Knight; yet we have it Cent. 7. 524.
from Bale that he was Vir Equestris Ordinis, of the Order of Knighthood, and
Leland says that Abillustri stemmate originem duxit, that he had his Original
from an Illustrious Pedigre.

He Stow. Ann. p. 326.
built a great part of St. Mary Overies Church in Southwa^ke; and when death
had snatched out of his bosom his dear Companion Geoffry Chaucer, he then
prepared a resting place for his own Body in the Chapel of Saint John in the
said Church where he founded a Chauntry. He was very old and blind when he dyed
and lived but two years after Chaucer. He had a stately Monument erected,
wherein was his whole Portraicture cut in Stone in the Wall on the North side
of the said Chapel. The Hair of his Head Aburne long to his Shoulders, but
curling up, and a small forked Beard; on his Head a Chaplet, like a Coronet of
four Roses, a habit of Purple, (Mr. Speght says Greenish) Damask down to
his feet, a Collar of Esses of Gold about his Neck, the Ornaments of
Knighthood, under his head the likeness of three Books which (among several
others) he compiled, the first Speculum Meditantis, written in French, the
second Vox Clamantis written in Latin, the third Confessio Amantis, penned in
English, which last was printed the 12. of March An. 1554. His Arms were
these, Argent, a Chevoran Azure, three Leopards heads thereon Or, their Tongues
Gules, two Angels Supporters, and on the Crest a Yalhot.

His Epitaph

Armigeri Scutum nihil a modo fertsibi tutum,
Reddidit immolutum morti generale tributum,
Spiritus Exutum se gaudeat esse solutum,
Et Vbivirtutum Regnum sine labe statutum.
-- Deus nobis haec Otia fecit.
A TABLE OF The several Treatises, with their Authors Names, contained in this
WORK.
ORdinall of Alchemie. Thomas Norton. page 1. Compound of Alchemie. George
Ripley. p. 107. Pater Sapientiae. Anonymus. page 194. Hermes's Bird. Anonymus.
page 211. Chanon's Yeoman's Tale. Geoffry Chaucer. page 227. Dastin's Dream.
John Dastin. page 257. Pearce (the Black Monk) upon the Elixir. page 269.
Richard Carpenter's Work. page 275. Hunting of the Green Lion. Abraham
Andrews. p. 278 Breviary of Natural Philosophy. Tho. Charnock. p. 291
Aenigmaes. Thomas Charnock. page 303. Bloomefields Blossoms. William
Bloomefield. pa. 305. Sir Edward Kelley's Work. page 324. Sir Edward Kelley to
G. S. Gent. page 332. Doctor John Dee's Testament. page 334. Thomas Robinson of
the Philosophers Stone. page 335. Experience and Philosophy. Anonymus. page
336. The Magistery. W. B. page 342. Anonymi, or several Works of unknown
Authors. page 334. and 404. John Gower upon the Philosophers Stone. page 368.
George Ripleys Vision. page 374. Verses belonging to Ripley's Scrowle. page
375. Mystery of Alchemists. page 380. Preface to the Medulla. Geo. Ripley. page
389. A short Work. George Ripley. page 393. Secreta Secretorum. John Lydgate.
page 397. Hermit's Tale. Anonymus. page 415. Description of the Stone.
Anonymus. page 420. The Standing of the Glass. etc. Anonymus. page 421.
Aenigma Philosophicum. W. Redman. page 423. Fragments. page 424.

A Table explaining the Obscure, Obselete, and mis-spell'd words used
throughout this WORK.
A A Bowen above. Abrayde, arose, recovered, upstatt. Agone, gone, fled.
Alconom^e, Alchemie, Chemistrie. Algates, Notwithstanding, ever, forsooth, even
now, altogether. Alleviate, Elevate, lift up. All, all. Als, also, as well.
Ana, of each, a like quantity. Anoder, another. Annuellere, secular. Appale,
decay. Appearage, appearing. Appetible, desirable. Askaunce, as though, as if,
aside. Askys, ashes. Auctors, Authors.
B Baines, Bathes. Bale, sorrow. Balne, Balnea Maria. Behite, or Behoote,
promise. Beliue, anon. Ben, vyn, be. Beyet, begotten. Blent, blind, turned
back. Blive, quickly, gladly. Bloe, blew. Blynne; cease. Boot, help. B^wne,
ready* Brast, break. Bread, breadth. Breve, brevely, brief, short. Brenuing,
burning. Brother, brother. Brwzt, brought. Burbelcy, bubling. Burgeon, bud.
Byforne, before. Byth, by. Bythe, be.
C Certes, undoubtedly. Cheese, choose. Cheepys, sheep. Cheve, thrive. Chorle,
slave, clown. Chrystis Christ his. Chyte, chiteth. Clatter, brable. Clapp,
prate. Clot ^ca^e, Bardana, or great Burdock leaf. Clypses, ^clipses. Coart,
enforce. Convenable, Convenient. Could, could Couthe pe^f^ctly know. Cowlys,
Monks hoods. Crop, topp Croslets, Crucibles.
D D^bonair, Humane, civil, meek, humble, gentle. Delen, deal. Demyd, demeth,
Judged. Deuigrate, make black. Depured, cleansed. Derke, dark. Discever, spend.
Dight, made ready, handled, used. Dole, grieve, sorrow. Done, does. Donc^e,
douce, sweet. Draff. filth.
E Emprisse, interp^ise, fashion, order. Engluting, stopping. Engine, wit,
device. Er, until. Erve, Herb. Erst, earnest. Essell, Viniger. Every each,
every one. Air, wrath.
F Fader, Father. Fagg and feign, gloss and flatter. Falls false. Fallacy,
Deceit. Fanels, fanes. Fastiely, firmly. Fault, want, lack. Fay, truth. Feign,
glad. Febis, Phoebus. Fecis, dreggs. Federis, feathers. Fet, fetched. Fend,
Devil. Ferle, strange. Feynein, faineth. Flewme, phlegm. Foemen, Enemies.
Foltish, fullich, sully. Falys, fools. Foyson, plenty. Frape, Company, a
rabble. Fright, fruit. Frist, first. Frore, frozen. Fructuous, fruitful.
Fychyes, Fishes.
G Gafe, gave. Gayer, Gaudier, Braver. Geason, strange, rare. Goude, good.
Gownds, gowns. Gl^ire, while. Goodle^ch, kind, respective. Grwyth, grows.
Guerdon, reward. Gyfe, manner. Gynns, snares.
H Halse, Neck. Hallow, hoslow. Haunt, use. Hause, embrace. Haubergeon, a Coat
of Male. Height, called. Hem, them. Hende, gentle. Henting, catching. Herdy
deed, stout act Hernes, valleys, corners. Heart, Heart. Hestys, wills, promises,
commandments. Heyle, health. H^yne, labourer, drudge. Hing, hang together.
Hole, whole. Hos, who so. Her, their. Hit, it.
I. Iape, Jest, yet by abuse drawn into a more wanton sense. I cleped, called.
Ich, I. I deal, meddle. Iette, device. Ilke, same. I lyche, alike. Ingine,
wit, devise. I now, enough. I not, I know not. Entreat, handle. Interdite,
prohibited. Iren, Iron. I take, taken. I wys, verily. Iyfe, if.
K. Keele, cool. Keep, care. Ken, know. Kid, made known. Kidles, Kindles, i.
e. faetus, young ones. Kythe, made known, show acquaint.
L. Latt, let, hinder. Land, praise. Laver, rather. Laurer, laurel. Lay. law,
song. Cease your Lay, hold your Tongue. Laysir, leisure. Leare, learn.
Leasings, lies. Leese, loose. Leah, Surgeon. Lefe, left. Leife, dear.
Leman, Concubine. Le^te, gentle. Lettrure, a Book of learning. Lewd,
ignorant. Lewys, leaves. Lexer, Elixir. Lyken, affect. Lite, little. Lix, soft,
pliable. Longyth, belongs. Lossells, Crafty fellows. Losen, lesyth, loses.
Lore, lost. Lore, Doctrine, learning, knowledge. Lo^f, love, Loute, kneel,
honor. Lyche, like. Lygg, lie. Lysten, likes, pleases. Lyvelode, livelihood.
M. Maden, made. Malison, curse. Maugre, despite. Maver, a broad drinkng-bowle.
Mede, mete, reward, help. Meddled, mingle. Meger, lean. Mele, meddle. Menge,
mingle. Merds, Turds. Mere, merry. Meveth, moves. Micle, much. Mo, more.
Mother, Mother. Mostock, Earth, Dung. Mote, must go. Might, mowt^, might.
N Nas, was not. Nathlesse, nevertheless. Ne, not. Nere, were not. Nemene,
name, Neshe, Tender. Wild Nepe, Catmine. Nis, is not. Nones, condition,
purpose. Noald, nolde, could not. Nowbelson, Rose noble. Nowther, neither. Nigh,
is not Nythe, near.
O Oder, edther, other. Often sytkes, ought. O^y^^yn^, Onix. Or ate, decked.
Ou^wyn, depart, separate. Owthtyo, ought.
P Panter, pitfall. Parde, truly. Parfite, perfect. Paukners, purses.
Plesaunce, delight. Plyte, condition. Plyght, turned, catched. Pomel^gryse,
daple-grey. Porpheries, Marble mingled with red. Poyetes, Poets. Prease,
subjection. Prefe, preve, proof. Preked, ridden fast. Prebitie, secret.
Prolle, to prole after a thing. Prowe, profit, honor. Pyght, cast, settled,
propped.
Q Queinte, strange. Quell, dash, destroy. Quyte, requite.
R Rach, a little cur Dog. Rad, read. Ragounce, a kind of precious stone.
Rath, quickly. Recorden, records. Recure, recover. Rebe, meaning. Read, help,
advice, speech, art. By Rewe, in order. Ribaudry, baudry. Ryghtfull, Just.
Row, ugly, blodily. Rowne, whisper. Rufe, red Rumbled, made a noise. Ruth,
lamentation. Ryfe, frequent. Ryve, rende.
S Salew, honor. Samples, sorts. Sans peer, without Fellow. Sauter, Psalter.
Scolys, schools. Schalt. shall. Sche, she. Schould, should. Schrevy, shreve.
Scuche, such. Seech, seeken, seek. Secree, secret. Seild, seldom. Sembleabyl,
like. Sewend, follows. Shene, schine, shining. Shent, harmed, infected.
Shrewes, Infortunes. Shrap, scrape. Since, by and by. Slotlyche, slovenly.
Slyped, burnished. Somedele, somewhat, something. Soote, sweet. Soothfastly,
insooth, truly, truth. Seurs, spring. Spray, sprig, bough. Spurred, enquire.
Squanes, stales. Stabull, stable. Stante, stand. Steven, Stefen sound, also
time. Stillatorie, Alembick. Stounde, time, moment, dumpe: Strande, a bank.
Sty^t, cease, slack. Substray, substract. Succended, inflamed. Suffren,
suffer. Suster, sister. Swezte, sweet. Swm, some. Swych, such. Swynke, labor.
Swythe, swiftly. Syker ynow, sure enough. Sykerley, assuredly, stedy. Syken,
certain.
T Tallages, payments, customs, taxes. Taunte, a reproachful Check. Temps,
times. Tente, heed. Teyne, an Ingot of Metal. Test, a device to try Gold
with. Tho, although some. Threpe, affirm. Titled, entitled. Toder, the other.
Tofore, heretofore. Togedur, together. Trenete, Trinity. Tristy, sad. Trome,
trust. Trowys, suppose. Trusten, confidence. Twain, two. A Twin, in two
separated, parted. Twenes, Tunes. Twifolde, double. Tyte, handsome.
V Vade, fade. Vere, spring. Vnbount, delivered. Vncoud, uncouth, strange.
Vnderfongeth, takes in hand. Uneath, scarce. Vnwist, unwitting, unknown.
Vybelyche, earnestly heartily.
W Walken, walk. Warke, work. Wastle bread, libellus fine Cimnell. Wax, W^x
increase. Weerish, waterish. Ween, thought, doubt. Weening, thinking. Wellid,
rises, springs. Wend, go. Wit, understanding. Werne, were. Whilome, ere
while, sometimes. Wile, deceit. Wist, known. Woll, will. Women, womb. Won,
dwell, plenty. Wood, mad. Woorche, woorchen, work. Woling, thinking, judging.
Woss, was. Woulden, would. Wreach, wreake, revenge, wrath. Wrenches, trapps.
Wrighten, written. Wych, which.
Y Ybore, borne. Ydo, stayed. Yef, Yeave, gyf, give. Yefet, fetched. Yern,
Iron. Yllumine, enlighten. Ynowe, sufficient. Ynde, Indie. Yode, yede, went.
Ire, erewhile. Ythe, thrive. Yvel, apaid.

FINIS,
It will concern the Studious Reader to Correct the faults escaped in this
Work, The most material whereof follow.
Page 2. l. 19. r. nolunt Page 21. l. 4. r. like a l. 5. r. did l. 25. r was a
page 22. l. 19. r. scan page 30. l. 22. r. part page 32. l. 7 r. the Motion
page 37 l. 12. Tr^y r. try page 45. l. 17. r. his page 46. l. 17. dele [I] l.
33. r. ultimum page 56. l. 7. r. made page 63. l. 19. r. know page 66. l. 14.
r. is page 74. l. 4. r unctuous page 77. l. 13. VVhcu r. Till p. 103. l. 1.
dele [call] p. 140. l. 16. r. moving p. 146. l. 3. r. certainly l. 13. r. with
p. 150 l. 1. r. principle l. 6. r. noe. p. 151. l. 14. r. and our red p. 168.
l. 1. 8. and 17. r. Imbibitions p. 170. l. 16. r. leaves p. 200. l. 15. r.
Philosophy p. 201. l. 2. r. Coin p. 213. l. 10. r. Iudicum p. 215. l. 14. r.
amcrous p. 220. l. 8. 30. r. Ragounce. page 223. l. 29. r. Tawte ythe page 224.
l. 12. r. Three p. 226. l. 1. r. recomaund p. 227. l. 16. r. unneth might p.
228. l. 12. r. Were l. 24. r. friend p. 229. l. 2. r. couthe p. 230. l. 10. r.
uil p 234. l. 18. r. papere l. 28. r. crude page 235. l. 1. r. Asccntion l. 2.
r. fix p. 240 l. 17. r. rave p. 240. after l. 31. r. Though i^ as great were
as Ninive p. 241. l. 7. r. commune l. 9. r. feinde l. 10. r. begiled p. 242. l.
16. r. lene l. 18. r. leneth p. 243. l. 2. r. fallen l. 24. r. couthe p. 245.
l. 5. r. three l. 15. r. Christ p. 267. l. 14. r. After l. 15. r. To p. 308. l.
3. r. wards p. 309 l. 1. r. There p. 312. l. 34. r. an p. 317. l. 16. r.
others p. 343. l. 17. r. exigu^^ p. 360. l. 33. r. If men p. 367. l. 16. r.
Eier p. 383. l. 24. r. life p. 416. l. 2. r. not l. 3. r. Palace l. 5. r. went
p. 418. 26. r. solutive p. 423. l. 20. r. Redman p. 432. l. 25. r. mineralib^^
p. 448. l. 29. r. grat^s p. 449. l. 17. r. knew p. 455. l. 5. r. omitting p.
458. l. 2. r in his p. 459. l. r 8. r. rythmicum p. 467. l. 39. r. defected. p.
465. l. 13 r. Vinculum. p. 478. l. 7. r. after Charnock l. 25. at r. a. p. 480.
l. 44. ^^^itatis


