ISHMAEL, And his MOTHER, Cast out into the WILDERNESS, Amongst the Wild Beasts
of the same NATURE: OR, A Reply to a Book entitulled, The Scriptures proved to
be the word of God, put forth by one of Ishmaels children, who calls himself a
Minister of the Gospel, and a Pastor of S. Austins and Savours Parish in
Norwich; but is clearly made manifest by the light of God in his Servants, to
be a scoffer, and an enemy to the Gospel, which the Saints of God are Ministers
of, and sufferers for, by such as he is, who Ishmael-like, has laid his folly
open, and is discovered to the faithful, who are of Abraham, and of the seed of
Promise.

ALSO, A clear distinction between the Ministers of Christ, who are of the seed
of Abraham, and the Priests of this generation, who are of Ishmaels root; who
with the Truth are plainly made manifest, by the light of Christ in us, who for
the testimony of God do suffer by the sons of Hagar, and this generation of the
Priests in Norwich: Given forth for no other end, but that the truth may be
cleared from such as scoff and deny it.

Given forth from the Spirit of the Lord in us that do suffer in the Goal of
Norwich for the truths sake, which is persecuted and slandered by the Priesis
and Rulers of this City: Whose names in the flesh is, Christopher Atkinson,
George Whitehead, James Lancaster, Thomas Simonds.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black Spread-Eagle, at the West end
of Paul's, 1655.

A bundle of papers, being brought unto our hands by one of the chief Priests
of Norwich, which he has raked up in his imaginations, against the harmless
people called Quakers, and being full of lies and deceit, we are moved of the
Lord for the truths sake, to clear the truth from his lies and deceit, and
false accusations, and to lay him and his two propositions (as he calls them)
open unto the simple minded; who have been bewitched and deceived by such
deceivers and blind guides as he is; and put forth by one Sampson Townsend, who
calls himself a Minister of the Gospel and a Pastor of Saint Austins and
Savours Parish in Norwich.

Priest. THE Title of thy confused papers is, The Scripture proved to be the
word of God, as also the only foundation of faith, and rule of our obedience,
or a clear conviction of the errors of the quakers, who blasphemously affirm
that the Scriptures are not the word of God, nor the foundation of Faith, nor
yet the only rule of our obedence; to which lies and falsehoods we are moved to
answer.


Answer. THe Scriptures proved to be the word of God is false, and one of the
blind, deceitful imaginations, which thousand thy generation has deceived
people with, telling them, that that is the word which says that God is the
word, who made himself manifest in the days of old, before the Letter was,
which word was Moses rule, who wrote forth Scripture, and not the Letter but
the word, which word by which Moses was guided to speak forth Scripture, and
this is that word the Prophets prophesied of which dwelt amongst us, which was
before the world was and seen before the Letter was written; now with the same
life and power by which the Scripture was spoken, do we challenge thee to prove
such a Scripture as says that it is the word of God, and thou that would make
people believe that the Letter is the foundation, would make void the
foundation, upon which the Prophets and Apostles were builded, which spoke
forth the Letter, and thou that would build upon the Letter, hates the Light
and the Foundation, which is Christ, from which the letter was spoken, and thy
foundation, and thy rule and obedience is tried with it, and by it thou art
judged, now that which is convicted by thy ayrie spirit is like unto thy self,
and is to be scorched up as the briars, but the children of light who are of
God and in the truth, cannot be convicted by such as thou art, who from the
light of God in thy Conscience is departed, and with it art to be coudemned, so
with the word and the life by which the Letter was declared thou art seen and
comprehended to be an enemy unto that from which the Scripture was declared,
and here again I challenge thee to be a perverter of it, notwithstanding al thy
prosession from it; and whereas thou have directed this confused paper unto us,
of whom thou have described the names, as follows, to Christopher Atkinson,
James Lancaster, George Whitehead, and Thomas Simonds now in Norwich Goal for
their Errors and Miscarriages.


Priest. Thou say if ever the truth of God were turned into a lie, it is by
us (thou say) that deny the Scriptures to be the Truth of God, and pretend
immediate Revelations to be our rule for our actions, and can not produce any
proof but the words of a dead man like thy self which thou calls Mr.
Buroughs; to which we answer.


Ans. By thee Priest Townsend, is the truth of God turned into a lie, and thou
art taken with one in thy mouth, who says that we before mentioned are in the
Goal of Norwich for errors and miscarriages, here thou slanderer we challeng
thee to prove what errors or miscarriages can be laid to our charge, what is
thy lies and slanders, that which you would make the people believe? and are we
counted deceivers for declaring the Truth, and testifying against thee and thy
generations, as it is counted an error in us to unvail thy deceits, and lay
thee open to all men: here in the presence of the Lord do we declare against
thee, for errors and miscarriages do we deny, and this thy confused stuff
wherein first thou say that we deny the Scripture to be the truth of God,
which is a lie, as thy own words makes it manifest, who in the same page of thy
shamelels discourse, which now is laid open to the understanding of the Simple.


Priest. And again thou say that we atknowledg the Scripture to be the
truth, and yet deny them to be the word of God, here let all that sees thy
confused paper judge thee, who art in Babel, where the confnsion is, and a
minister of it.


Ans. The Scripture we own as it was spoken forth by them that lived in the
word, and receive it as a Declaration of God, and of what he spoke unto them of
former ages, Luke i. i. but thy words and imaginations we do deny, who would
call that the word which says God is the word, and that the light which is not
the light, but says Christ is the light, which is thy condemnation, that hates
it in particular, and the worlds condemnation that hates it in general, as is
made manifest, who hates revelations and us who witness it, shutting thy self
forth from the Scriptures, and from them that gave them forth, whereas Christ
says, no man knows the Father, but the Son, and to whom the Son will reveal
him, as thou may read, Mat. ii. 27. here thou have plainly shown thy self to be
both without the knowledge of the Father and the Son, who art in thy mediate
natural knowledge, which from the light which comes from Christ is erred and
with it to be condemned; thou dreamer, what have thou to do to profess thy
self a Minister of the Gospel, who art but yet in thy mediate natural
conceivings, when the natural man knows not the things of God, for they are
Spiritually discerned; so we from God is unto thee thou deceiver, who would
make people believe that that which is natural and carnal is the foundation
of Faith and obedience, and so would bewitch people with thy lies, to draw them
from the anointing within to obscure something without them, as they did, that
would have drawn away the Galathians from the Spirit, as thou may read,
Galath. 3.


Priest. And whereas thou say in the third Page that thou will reason with
us, and tells us, that we did acknowledge the Scripture to be truth, which in
the page before thou did deny; and thus is making thy folly manifest, who says
that it is our judgment, that we are perfect and free from Sin, which thou
never heard us affirm, but these thy lies will clearly be made manifest by the
Scriptures which thou calls thy foundation of faith, and only rule of
obedience, by which thou shall be judged, for Christ says unto them whom he
taught, be ye perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect, Matthew 5.28.


Ans. But thou and thy generation hates this, and says that there is no
perfection to be attained here; Oh thou blind guide! did Christ ever command
any thing that might not be accomplished? or did he speak of being perfect not
till after death, here thou do deny the very end for which Christ came, who
came to take away Sin, and in him is no Sin, Mat. i. 2i. i John 3.3, 4, 5, 6.
and i John 5. i8. here thou have, plainly made it manifest, that thou art
without Christ and his knowledge, and in Antichrist, now what the Scripture
speaks, in our meafure do we witness concerning these things, and thee we do
deny, and all thy generation, thou enemy of God, who does pervert the
Scriptures, and wrest them to thy destruction, and here with the light that
never changed art thou to be condemned from God and all the Children of God.


Priest. Another of thy lies is made evident, thou slanderer, who art not
ashamed impudently to affirm, that we deny the power of the Magistrates in the
matters of God, and that we speak not evell only of Governors, but of
Government, and condemn the Ministers of the Church of England, and despise
them as salse teachers, and say they know nothing of the true light, and say we
condemn them for preaching for hire, and says we deny Ministers should take
any wages for their works.


Ans. The powers that are of God ordained, we own in our souls, and for
Conscience sake are subject to them, and such as rule well in the things of God
without respect of persons, which respects of persons is contrary to Scripture,
such we say are worthy of double honor, and such our souls are subject to, for
such executed the Law upon transgressors, and encourage them that do well, and
their honor lies not in a hat, or bending of the knee, which is nothing but
filthiness, which thou and thy generation upholds, but the honor and subjection
to him that rules well is in our souls, as it is written, Romans i3. i. and here
thy lies and thy slanders we do deny and charge it upon thee from the Lord, to
prove where ever we were not subject unto the power of Magistrates as it was of
God, or where ever we spoke evil of Governors or of Government: thus art thou
found with lies in thy right hand, thou enemy of God, and where thou say we
condemn the Ministers of the Church of England, the Ministers of Christ we own,
but such as thou art we deny, who seek for your gain from your quarter, and
such as call Steeple-house Church, and letter word, and foundation, and light,
and rule, when Christ says he is the way, and he is the light, and he is the
foundation, and he is the word, which was before the Letter was, i John i. 9.
and John 3. and Rev. i9. i. Cor. 3. i2. and here again we do deny all such as
say that sprinckling of Infants is the Baptism and the seal of the Covenant, as
thou Sampson Townsend did affirm, and take i2. pence for sprinkling of a poor
prisoners child here in this prison of Norwich, the sixteenth day of the
eleventh Month, and the Scripture says that the Baptism is with one Spirit
into one body, and the baptism is but one, and the Church but one, which is in
God, as thou may read, Ephesians. 4.5, 6. and i These. i. and here thou and thy
Church, and thy Baptism is shut out of Scripture, and with it judged, and with
the light condemned to be all upheld by such sottish blind guides as thou art:


Priest. And again thon say that the Ministers of England speaks nothing but
what is according to the Law and the Testimony of God in his word, which is the
rule to try all teachers by, and thou say that this our Judgment is contrary
to Tit. 2.15.


Ans. Whosoever read that Scripture will condemn thy blindness in these things,
who have pretended thy self a teacher of others, and yet shut up in perpetual
darkness; thou blind sot, where is it said in all the Scriptures that the
Letter is the rule to try all reachers by, or where does it ever say that the
Saints did ever try the Spirits by the Letter, or how can thou prove that
ever it was called by the Saints the only rule of obedience; or a written word
of God, with these thy lies thou and thy generation has deceived the blind
and: simple, taking their money for that which is no bread, making them believe
lies instead of truth, Oh, ye enemies of God, how long will ye despise the
truth, if Scripture had not been, these your filthy lies would have gone forth
as truth to those that are in darkness, but praised be the Lord who has
discovered your filthiness, and laid you open with his light, from which the
Scripture was spoken, by which light we read you in the Scripture to be among
the false Prophets in their steps, and in the ways of the Pharisees, and now
finding you in the latter times your condemnation is justly related in the
Scriptures, who go in the way of Cain, and run greedily after the error of
Balaam, as thou may read Jude. 4.10, 11. and 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.


Priest. And again thou say that Christ and his Apostles gave strong reasons
for their maintenance, and to prove it; thou brings those Scriptures Mat. 10
1^. (...) 10.7.


Ans. Let all that read those Scriptures judge thee by me to be a liar, who
formerly have testified, that the Scripture was the word of God, and thy rule
and foundation, and now calls it reason, which from reason was never spoken,
but holy men of God spoke them forth, as they were moved by the holy Ghost, now
the Apostle which was a Minister of Christ never took wages of the world,
neither did he compel them, though to them he preached the Gospel, and though
he robbed other Churches, yet he robbed not the World, neither took he wages of
the world, nor hired with them for a certain time, as thou and thy generation
do, and this was his boasting to cut off offenses, 2 Cor. i3. 9, 10.12. but
with the light of God in the offenses we find you, who take wages of the World
contrary to the Apostles, whose practices judges you to be without their life
whose entrance unto the Thessalonians, he plainly does declare, that it was
neither for pleasing men, neither of deceit, nor guile, nor a clack of
covetousnes, neither was their Gospel burthensom, as thou may read, i These. 2,
3, 4, 5, 6. contrary to which thou and thy generation art found in the steps of
them, the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles cried against, as thou may read,
Is^^. 56. and Ier. 5, and Mic. 3. and Mat. 23. and 2 Pet. 2. and Jude. 11. And
this is the Gospel the Apostles preached, which is witnessed by the same Spirit
which to thee is hid, and all thy generation, who out of their steps are found
walking in the steps of the false.


Priest. Again thou say the Apostle intimates that God is mocked, when His
Ministers are not maintaintained, and thou say that God will not be robbed.


Ans. Here is another of thy lies, who perverts the Apostles words, and (...)
thy lies to Scripture, when there is not such a word in all the Apostles words
as intimate, but thou and thy generation are seen to be both thieves and
robbers; who enters not in at the door, but climbs up another way, in your
inventions, consequences, and Imaginations, which are here plainly seen and
discovered to them that enter in at the door, and for dishonest gain you
destroy Souls, (...) 22.25, 26, 27. and as a Troop of Robbers wait for a man,
so do the company of Priests murder by consent, Hosea 6.9. and are found
Robbers of God, as the false Prophets were, who in the time of the Law took
tithes, and did not bring them to the storehouse, as thy generation now do, as
thou may read, Mal. 3.8, 9, 10.


Priest. And thou says thy design according to promise, is, to prove the
Scriptures to be the word of God, the only ground of faith, and rule for our
obedience, which thou say thou presented us with, and bids us read it,
examine it, if it be not truth, witness against it by truth, if it be so, as
undoubtedly you will find it truth, as thou say, and so bids us submit to
it, be ruled byit, and undoubtedly our bodies shall be freed from our deserved
imprisonment.


Ans: We have read it, and examined it, and thee both, and have found thee to
be a liar, and a denyer of the Word, and of the rule, and of the foundation,
which is Christ, and with that which thou calls the rule, and word and
foundation, art thou judged, and with the light thou art seen to be a wrester
of the Scriptures, and thy Rotten foundation being already to fail thee, for it
is among the blind Watchmen and greedy dumb Dogs, and hire lings, and among
the thieves and robbers, and among the Dogs and swine and filthy dreamers
which the Scriptures speaks of; and as for our deserved imprisonment, here thou
liar do we challenge thee and them that imprisoned us, to prove the breach of
any la wby us, for they that did imprison us as many can witness, could not
charge us with the breach of any Law; but by their wills to maintain such dumb
shepherds as thou art; for, for the truths sake, which witnesses against thee
and all thy generation do we suffer, for which thou and thy generation never
did suffer imprisonment, nor persecution of the world, for ye are of the world,
and the world speaks well of you, and hears you, as it did of your Fathers the
false Prophets, 1 Ioh. 4, 5, and Luke 6.26. drunkards swearers liars and
thieves speaks well of you and fights for you, and loves you, and pleads for
you, and there is your fruits and freedom; from our imprisonment will we never
speak for in yiedling to thy lies, and false accusations, as is plainly here
laid open.


Priest. And thou say from thy study January 29.


Ans. Here thy filthy rotten stuffed which thou have been such a long time of
gathering together in thy study, its tried and seen to be fuel for the fire,
and thou art seen to study divinations of thy own brain, and to be an inventer
of lies, contrary to Scripture, and where did ever any of the Saints go into a
study, and rake up such filthy stuff, and invent such lies as thou art
disaproved in, and with that which thou calls thy word, thy foundation, and
only Rule of obedience. Here let the life of all the holy men of God judge thee
to be both shut out of their life and out of the Scriptures.

Having returned answer to the former part of thy retten stuff, Sampson
Townsend wherein thy lies and deceit is uncovered to all them that have eyes to
see, may see thy nakedness and thy shame laid open: now for the Simple ones
sake, which thou by thy lies and divinations makes a prey upon, and through thy
covetousness makes Merchandise of, who pharisee-like would neither enter into
the Kingdom thy self, nor suffer others to enter in; now for their sakes are we
moved to unvaile thee and thy deceit, that they that see not might see thee in
thy lies and wresting the Scripture, as thou have also made it appear in the
latter part of thy book; wherein thou say,


Priest. That thou have undertaken against the Quakers these two propositions,
i. that the Scriptures contained in the Old and New Testament (commonly called
the Bible) is the revealed will and word of God, 2. That the Scripture which is
the word of God, is the only foundation of our Faith, and only rule for our
obedience, which thou say thou will prove, 1. by Scripture, 2. by reason,
and thou say that he that will not hear the voice of Scriptures is an
Infidel, and he that will not hear the voice of reason is a beast.


Answer. We who in scorn by thee and thy generation are called quakers, do own
Scriptures, but thee we utterly deny for an evil Beast, whose mouth must be
stopped, Tit. i. 10, 11, 12. who in thy filthy reason art going about to
maintain those things which thou can not prove by any plain Scripture, but to
it art found adding in thy reason, and thy invention, and thererefore the
plagues that are in it written is thy portion, and the Lake which is the
portion of all liars as thou art, Rev. 21.8. Rev. 22.18.19.


Priest. Again thou say that the Scriptures ought to convince us as
Christians, reason as rational men.


Answer. They that are Christians do see and comprehend thee, and thy reason,
thy faith, thy obedience, thy rule, thy foundation, to be without the
foundation and the word, which was before thy inventions was, and before Tuball
Came the inventer thy father was, in whose condition thou art, and the word and
foundation, and the way, was before the Beast and and false Prophet was, which
thou art, Isa. 9.15, 16. and this rule and foundation and word, did Moses,
David, and the rest of the holy men of God witness, who spoke forth Scripture,
which thou calls the word rule, and foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11. Psalm. 18.2.31.3.
Here thou would make Moses, David, and the rest of the holy men of God who
spoke forth Scripture, blind, like tey self, both without the word, rule, and
foundation.


Priest. Now to prove the Scripture the word of God, thou brings Exodus 20.1.
Levit. 10.3. and many other Scriptures thou brings to the same effect, how God
spoke these words.


Answer. Thou blind sot, we challenge thee in the presence of the living God,
to prove in any of these Scriptures, that the Scriptures are the written word
of God, or else stop thy mouth thou evil Beast, and slow belly, do thou
make no disterence between the word and these words? and here again we charge
thee to be a liar, and an adder to Scripture.


Priest. And thou brings these Scriptures Isa. 24.3. and Psalm. 12.5, and other
Scriptures to the same purpose, how the Lord says, and thus says the Lord,
and Jer. 1.1, 2.4.9. the words of Jeremiah to whom the word of the Lord came.


Answer. And the word of the Lord that came to Joel, Amos, and others, thou
dreamer, does ever Isaiah, Jeremiah, or David, or Joel, or Amos, or any of the
holy men of God, say that the Scripture is the written word, whenas God who is
the word, John 1. spoke these words unto them, whose voice thou never heard,
who spoke unto them before the Letter was written, which is a declaration of
what the word spoke unto them, or was that paper and Ink, or could it be
contained in paper and Ink, which came to the Prophets, whenas Jeremiah says
the word is fire in his heart, and a burning shut up in his bones, and a hammer
that breaks the rocks, Ier. 20.9. Ier. 23.29.30. and behold I am against the
Prophets says the Lord, that steal my word every one from his neighbors, and
behold I am against the Prophets says the Lord, that use their tongues, and
say he says, and behold I am against them says the Lord, that profess false
dreams and tell them as thou do, and cause my people to err by their lies,
and by their lightness, yet I sent them not, nor commanded them, therefore they
shall not profit the people at all says the Lord, and there thou art among the
false Prophets and dreamers, which Jeremiah who witnessed the word, cried woe
against such Pastors as thou art, Ier. 23.1.


Priest. Thou say thou shall not need to mention the sayings and doing of
our Savior Christ, which are frequently recorded in the New Testament, and
hence it is called the word of Christ, and thou bring that Scripture, Coloss.
3.16. let the word of Christ dwell in you.


Answer. Here again we challenge thee to be a liar, and an adder to the
Scripture: do thou make no difference between death and life, for Christ
says, my words gives life, and it was by his word that the dead was raised,
John 11. now that which Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John wrote of Christ, could
not give life, for that is called a Declaration of those things which was
freely delivered among them, Luke 1.1. and that thou calls the word which is
death and kills, as thou may read, 2 Cor. 3. and Paul was a Minister of the
New Testament, and not of the Letter, which thou calls the New Testament: ver.
6. and this word which dwelt in the Saints, they did neither call the Bible nor
the Letter, as thou do, here thou have manifested thy self to be a blind
guide, both ignorant of the Word and the Letter.


Priest. Thou say that it is all one to say the Scripture says, and God
says.


Answer. Thou blasphemous beast, do thou make no diffrence between the
Scripture and God, or is the Scripture God, when the Scripture says God who is
the word, was in the beginning, and by him was all things made, and this was
before the Scripture was written, John 1.1. which thou would make thy God of,
and here let all that reads this see thy blasphemic.


Priest. Again thou say the word Scripture is put for God speaking in the
Scripture, and thou brings Joshua 1.5.


Answer. Let all that reads that Scripture Judge and condemn thee to be a Liar,
for it speaks not such a word, as God speaking in the Scripture.


Priest. Again in the same page thou say, that all the rest that is written
in the volume is but a comment or exposition of those ten precepts.


Answer. Thou diviner, where do thou prove such a Scripture as comment? was
that which the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles spoke out a comment or
exposition? here again we charge thee Priest Townsand, to be an inventer and a
deviser of lies, which thou have no Scripture for


Priest. Again thou say that thus it appears that the Scriptures are the
word of God, because God writ them, and caused them to be written.

Answer. That which is written is the Letter, which is death and kills, 2.
Cor. 3.16. but the word is living, Heb. 4.12. there again with the Scripture
thou art disaproved to be a liar.


Pr. Again in another page thou say, that the Scriptures are called the
counsel of God, the will of the Lord, the mystery of Gods will, and thou bring
these Scriptures, Romans 3.2. 1 Pet. 4.11. Acts 20.27. Psalm. 33.11. and Pro.
19.21. Ephesians. 5.17. and to conclude this, thou say that God himself calls
the Scriptures his word, and to maintain that thou brings, Zach. 1.6.


Ans. Let all that reads these Scriptures, see thee to be a perverter of
Scripture, and adds thy inventions to them, for they that spoke forth these
Scriptures, knew the Counsel of God, and the mystery, and the Gospel, which
to thee is hid, whom the God of this world has blinded thy eyes, and out of
the mystery and Gospel, and rule, and foundation, thou art with that which thou
calls the only rule, and word, and foundation, art thou judged, and with light
seen and condemned, to be an inventer of lies and a deceiver of the blind, but
no further can thou proceed, for thy folly shall be made manifest to all men.


Priest. In a second reason of thine; thou say, the antiquity of the
Scriptures do clearly prove them to be of God, for man could never write of
things done before he had a being, but the works of the five first days
Creation, are mentioned in Scripture, but man was not made till the sixth day,
therefore they must needs be the word of God.


Ans. Here thou blind Beast, who art ignorant of God, who makes antiquity as
thou calls it, the perfect knowledge of God, and says that man could not
declare of things before ever he had a being, and so would make people believe
that the Scripture reveal God, thou blind Beast, whether was man, or the
Scriptures first? and whether did God make himself manifest unto? and thou that
say that the Scripture reveal God, thou art a liar, for God revealed himself
to Moses, before the Scripture was written, and Moses who was the first penman
of the Scripture, was 14 Generations after the fall, and yet he wrote of
things, before the fall was, and thy father Cain was before Moses was, and yet
he knew no Scripture, and thou that would make the Letter the light and way of
knowing God, art not so much as a Minister of the Letter, and here thou art
made manifest to be in the fall, in the death, which past over all men before
Moses was, and are not come to see the first days work, to see light divided
from darkness, and here let all the Prophets and holy men of God judge thee
with the Light, from which thou art erred, for they wrote of Christ, and saw
his day many Generations before he came in the flesh, and here thy antiquity,
and thy reasons, and the three persons thou dreams of, which would devide out
of one, like a conjurer are all denied, and thou shut up with them in
perpetual darkness for the Lake and pit, for thou have no Scripture that
mentious such things.


Priest. And where thou art telling that the Scripture converts the Soul, and
works Grace, and the opening thereof make hearts to tremble, and says that
Scriptures discovers men's thoughts, and makes Laws for them.


Ans. Here thou have made thy self manifest, where did ever any of the holy men
of God, say that the Scripture converts the Soul or make Laws for men's
thoughts? and what is that which opens the Scripture? or where is it, if the
bare Letter convert the Souls? here thou Priest of Baal, for that is thy name,
thy lies are made manifest and deceits laid open to the Children of the Light,
and art seen with the light from which the Scripture was spoken.


Priest. Again thou say the Scripture speaks to all men alike, but thus do
not the word of man, therefore thou say they are the word of God.


Ans. But thou thy self and thy generation are perverters of the Scripture, and
are respectors of persons, for you are called of men Master stands praying in
the Synagogues, has the chiefest places in the assemblies, and the greeting in
the Markets, and are pleading for cap and knee and says we do not reverence
Magistrates, because we do not put off our hats, and bend our knees, as thou
and the rest of thy generation of Hypocrites do, who have men's persons in
admiration, because of advantage, Jude. 16. and this which you calls the word,
speaks not to all men alike, for woe is pronounced in it to such as thou art,
who art found in the steps of the false Prophets and Scribes, and Pharisees, and
goes in the way of Cain, to envy, and after the error of Balaam for gifts and
rewards, which woe was never pronounced to the righteous, and woe unto thee thou
liar, who art a wrester of Scripture to thy own destruction, and art found with
so many Lies, as thou have here uttered.


Priest. In another place thou say no Creature (Angels men or Devils if all
were put together in one) could ever Diclare beforehand, what paarticular
person should be borne, and what should be their names, in so many thousands
years before their birth.


Ans. Here thou art taken with another lie, with which thou have stuffed up
this thy confused Book, for both by Angels and Men was Jesus Christ the Son
of-God prophesied of Moses, who was many years before Christ came in the flesh,
prophesied of Christ, and said, like unto me will God raise up a Prophet, him
shall the people hear, Mat. 1.17. see if thou can number the year of all these
generations which prophesied of Christ and when Christ came, he says, before
Abraham was I am, thus art thou-known and comprehended with the truth, which
all thy fathers and generations past persecuted, so be ashamed and stop thoy
mouth for evere


Priest. In that thou calls thy two propositions, 1. thou say the Scriptures
ar the means by which faith is wrought, and to prove that by thou brings Romans
10.17


Ans. Shame cover thy face, thou full of rottenness and filthy dreams, where
did thou ever read in Scripture that it is the means whereby faith is wrought,
when that Scripture says, faith comes by hearing, and hearing; by the word;
here thou art deaf, and never heard the word, and thy faith and word is
without, but the word of faith which we preach, is nigh in the heart and mouth,
Romans 10.8 therefore search thou the Scriptures with the Saduces who knew not
Christ, for in them thou and thy generation thinks to have eternal life, but
ye will not come unto Christ, that ye may have life, John 5.38, 39, 40.


Priest. Again thou say that the Scripture which thou calls the word, is an
everlasting rule so long as we live on earth.


Ans. Thou blind sot, see thy confusion; can that Letter be everlasting while
we live upon earth? here thou have showed thy reason where it is, that they
that are not stark blind may see thee, thy reason and thy foundation to be in
the mire and dirt, and may see thee to be a senceless natural bruit Beast, who
with thy lies art made to be taken and destroyed, 2 Pet. 2.12.


Priest. And again thou say, the most emminent believer sin in many things.


An. Here is the end of thy teaching, here is thy rule, and here is thy
foundation, and here is thy obedience, and here is thy fruits, and here is thy
service, who commits sin and a Servant to Sin, and free from righteousness;
John 8.24. Romans 16.20. Oh thou blasphemer and slanderer of the just, when will thou cease from thy Lies, and blasphemy, where do or can thou prove such a
Scripture as the most emmment believer, Sin in any things, when the Scripture
says he that believes is born of God, and he that is bore of God sins not,
for whosoever sins has not seen him, neither known him, and he that
commits sin is of the Devil, and there is thy condition, and he is thy Father
who is the father of all liars as thou art, i John 3.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.


Priest. And to conclude thy filthy rotten stuff, thou say they that make
not the word of God the rule for their actions are led either by their own
fancies, or the Devils temptations, or both.


Asn. Thee Priest. Townsend art here laid open, and thou art uncovered, and
here thou art found to be a denyer of the word, and rule, and foundation, and
thou art led by thy dreams and fancies, and thy foundation is in the dust, and
thou art reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, for everlasting fire,
and here thou in all these thy lies, art shut out from God, and all the
Children of God, among the dogs and Sorcerers, and the Lake is thy portion,
which is the portion of all liars, Jude. 6, 7, 8. thus have we returned a full
answer unto thy senseless stuff and in plainness have we dealt with thee, and
have not flatterd thee at all there, call it not railing, least thou violate the
Scriptures so with the word of truth thou art tried, and comprehended, and us
shall thou witness eternally, when the book of Conscience comes to be opened,
and thou judged out of it, so we remain, Sufferers for the truth, and witnesses
against thee and thy generation.


Named according to the flesh, Christopher Atkinson, James Lancaster, George
Whitehead, Thomas Simonds.

Several words spoken by this said Priest Townsend, before he sent these
Propositions.
THE 16. day of the 11. month, this Priest Townsend came to this Prison of
Norwich, and said that sprinkling of Infants was the seal of the Covenant, and
that it was an ordinance of Christ, and that it was to the seed of believers,
and he sprinkled a woman's Child in this prison aforesaid, who was imprisoned
for whoredom, and for sprincling of it he took twelve pence, and when he was
charged with it he denied it, and then it being laid further to his charge, he
then could not deny it, and he said he took it not for sprinckling of the
Child, but for coming to this prison, and he said the Labourer is worthy of his
hire; and he said that Paul was not sent to baptize, but to preach, but he said
he was sent both to baptize and to preach, and that he had a Commssion for
both, and he said we were of the Devils confederates, and he said the Devil
spoke in Christopher Atkinson, and he said the Lord rebule thee Satan, and he
said the Bible is the word of God, and he called Christopher Atkinson
sauce-box, and he said that we would take the Ministers maintenance away, that
they might go begging from door to door, and he said he would send four or five
propositions within a fortnight, and afterward he said he would send them
within a month, and he said that Paul had good victuals and strong beer at one
man's house, and he said we might reverence Magistrates in daffing the hat, and
having the heads uncovered, and in bowing, and he said that he that prays or
prophesies with his head covered, dishonors his head, and he being demanded why
the Priest had some of them two caps on when they pray, he said because of
infirmities of their bodies, and he said that he would have sent propositions
before now, but that he said he thought we would send them to be printed,
therefore he said he would be cautious and wary in writing them, and he said
that God recorded the Devils words.

These words were spoken by this said Sampson Townsend, who calls himself a
Minister of the Gospel and a Pastor.

FINIS.

