THE LIFE OF S. Augustine.

The First Part.

Written by himself in the first ten Books of his Confessions faithfully
translated.

S. Aug. de Bono Perseverantiae 20c. Quid autem meorum Opusculorum freque utius
and delectabilius immotescere potuit, quam libri Confessionum mearum?

LONDON, Printed by J. C. for John Crook, and are to be sold at the Sign of the
Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

The Stationer to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
I Congratulate that Title to thee; and assure my self, that the more thou art
Christian, the more thou will be, Here, a Reader. For thou can not, then, be
so great an enemy to thine own advancement in Piety, as to neglect the perusal
of this incomparable Piece, the History of the Life of S. Austin; One of the
greatest Saints, and most profound Divines, that ever the Church of Christ
enjoyed.

This first or upper Part of it (representing it as 'twere to the middle, even
to the 33. year of his age) was drawn by his own Hand in these ten Books,
containing an humble Confession to God; First of the vanity and vitiousness of
his youth; then, of his miraculous Conversion; and, lastly, of the remaining
imperfections of his Regenerate Condition: deploring the Evils, he had
committed; and giving thanks for the good things, he had received.

And it is here done into English, now, a third time; because the Author was
not satisfied, that in any of the former Translations either the profundity of
the sense (peculiar to S. Austin) was so exactly fathomed, or the African
elegancy of his style so cleanly and pathetically derived unto us. How much is
here rectified, thou will best see, by comparing.

If I may perceive this acceptable to thee, I shall be encouraged to
communicate shortly the other Part also; Relating the several accidents that
befell him and his various employments from his return into Africa, where this
story ends, until his death: being that portion of his time, which, as it was
the fullest of action; so was it the most eminent in devotion and sanctity too,
and therefore not passed to posterity (as the former) under his own
reflections; Yet I may say (in a manner still) under his own hand though;
because thou shall have it extracted, either out of the faithful naration of
his intimate domestic Friend, and second-self, Possidonius; or out of his own
works; by one who has scrupulously sifted them, and thinks it a Religion, to
show thee any thing for S. Austin, but S. Austin.

That so, having taken a true and full view of the high perfections of this
great Father of the Church, thou may be the more strongly excited to praise
God for his wonderful works in him, and to imitate his eminent virtues.

Farewell.
S. August. Retract. l. 2. c. 6.
COnfessionum mearum libri tredecim and de malis and de bonis meis Deum laudant
justum and bonum; atque in eum excitant humanum intellectum and affectum.
Interim, quod ad me attinet, hoc in me gerunt, cum scriberentur; and agunt,
cum leguntur. Quid de illis alii sentiant, ipsi viderint: multis tamen
Fratribus eos multum placuisse, and placere, scio.

A primo usque ad decimum de me scripti sunt: in tribus caeteris, de scripturis
sanctis: ab eo quod scriptum est: In principio fecit Deus coelum and terram
usque ad sabbati requiem.

THe thirten Books of my Confessions do praise God, the just and the merciful,
both for my evil, and for my good things; and do excite and raise up man's
understanding and affections toward him. At least, for what concerns my self,
such operation they had on me, when they were written; and have still, when
reviewed. Let others who read them, believe their own experience. Yet I know,
that many of my Brethren have been, and are much taken with them.

From the first, to the end of the tenth, Book, I write of my self; in the
three last, of the holy Scripture: From -- In the beginning God made the heaven
and the earth -- to his resting on the Sabbath day. -- [These three last,
therefore, as not contributing any thing to the Story of S. Austins life, are
here omitted.]

S. August. Epist. 89. Quaest 4.
Ego, qui haec scribo, perfectionem, de qua Dominus loqutus est, quando ait
diviti adolescenti [Vade, vende omnia quae habes, and da pauperibus, and
habebis thesaurum in coelo, and veni sequere me] Vehementer adamavi, and (non
meis viribus, sed gratia ipsius adjuvante) sic feci. Neque enim, quia dives non
fui, ideo minus mihi imputabitur. Nam neque ipsi Apostoli, qui priores hoc
fecerunt, divites fuerunt. -- Quantum autem in hac perfectionis via profecerim,
magis quidem novi ego, quam quisquam alius homo, sed magis Deus, qua ego. Et ad
hoc propositum, quantis possum viribus, alios exhortor; and, in nomine Domini,
haheo consortes, quibus hoc, per meum ministerium, persuasum est: Sic tamen, ut
praecipue sara doctrina teneatur, nec eos, qui ista non faciunt, vana
contumacia judicemus.

ANd I, who write this, was much enamoured on that perfection, which our Lord
recommended, when he said to the rich young man: Go; and sell that thou have
and give to the poor; Mat. 14.21.
and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come and follow me. And (not by my
own power, but by his Grace enabling me) I went and did so. Nor shall less be
imputed unto me herein, because I was not rich: For neither were the Apostles
rich, who did this before me. And how much I have advanced in this way of
perfection, I my self know better, than any man else; and God better than I.
And, to the same resolution, with my uttermost endeavors, I do exhort others;
and in the name of the Lord, have some associates in the same profession,
persuaded thereunto by my Ministry.

Ibidem.
QVibus non provenit corona martyrii, neque illius perfectionis de vendendis
rebus suis consilium tam grande tamque praeclarum receperunt, and tamen a
damnabilibus immunes ^riminibus esurientem Christum paverunt, sitienti potum
dederunt, nudum vestierunt, peregrinant^m susceperunt, non sedebunt quidem cum
Christo sublimiter judicaruri, Mat. 19.28.
sed ad ipsius dextram stabunt misericorditer judicandi.

THose who do not wear the Crown of Martyrdom, nor have embraced that, so high
and excellent counsel of Perfection of selling their substance; and yet, living
free from damnable crimes, have given meat to Christ an hungered, and drink to
him thirsty, have clothed him naked, and harbored him a stranger, such indeed
shall not, when the Son of man comes, sit with him to judge in state; but yet
they shall stand on his right hand, to be judged in mercy.

REader, where the sense is obscure, if it arises not from the mispointing, be
pleased to examine these Errata: As likewise in page 49. line 26. after
[without thee] insert these words, left out by the Printer, But my own guide to
a precipice? Or, when the best, what am I.

ERRATA.

Page 2. lin. 33. read whither. p. 6. l. 5. r. and would. p. 14. l. 35. r.
far. p. 21. l. 43, r. rejoice. p. 23. marg. 2 Cor. 12.7. p. 35. l. 35. r. to
be approved. p 40. l. 3. r. heavenly. p. 42. l. 42. r. and I. p. 53. l. 8. r.
baked. l. 17. r. reconvertest us. p. 54 l. 35. r. last. p. 61. l. 29. r. also
to be. p. 64. l. 12. r. his false. p. 72, l. 12. dele he. p. 80. l. 42. r. the
little. p. 85. l. 7. r. me. p. 89. l. 42. r. discovered. p. 90. l. 14. r.
Manichean's. p. 99. marg. r. Pandect. lib. 1. T. 12. p. 114. l. 17. r.
well-rivetted. p. 121. l. 10. r. substance, Thee. p. 127. l. 10. r. brakest. p.
132. l. 8 r. sanctified. p. 141. l. 12. r. thing I said. p. 144. l. 37. r.
recoile. p. 161. l. ult. r. care. p. 162 l. 34. r. she. p. 170. l. 36. r. (...)
p. 174. l. 27. dele then. p. 176. l. 14. dele which p. 177. l. 27. dele and.

LIB. I.
INvocation and praises of God so great, so incomprehensible, and yet so near,
and intimate, to his creatures, and requiring of man (so vile a thing by sin)
to love, to invocate, to praise, and to confess unto, him. This, in the five
Chapters following. An Account, * of S. Austins infancy, nourished and
sustained by the Divine Providence. Cap. 6 -- And*of its sins: And his praising
God for its good endowments. Cap. 7 An account of his Childhood; and of his
learning to speak. Cap. 8 Of*his going to School. Cap. 9 And* love of play:
with an aversion from his Book. Cap. 10 Of his, * sickness; and, in it, * his
desiring Baptism; for what reason, upon hopes of his recovery, deferred by his
Mother. Cap. 11 Of his sins and errorus at school, and of theirs that
instructed him. Cap. 12 Of his hating Greek, and other necessary learning, and
affection to Poetry and Fables. Cap. 13, 14 His offering up to God the fruits
of his learning. Cap. 15 Inveighing-against, * lascivious Fables. Cap. 16 And*
the mis-use of his Wit, Cap. 17 Mis-guided by vicious example, and more ashamed
of the breach of Grammar-rules, than of Gods law. Cap. 18 Of his lies to his
Governors; thefts from his Parents; cheating of his Play-fellows. Cap. 19 His
praising God for the many good endowments of his childhood. Cap. 20
LIB. II.
AN account of his Youth. Cap. 1 And of the unruly lusts thereof in the 16th.
year of his Age, Cap. 2 Advanced by his living idly at home; by the ill example
of his Companions; and by his Parents neglect to marry him: though his Mother
much dehorting him from fornication, and more especially from adultery. Cap. 3
Of his Theft, * done only out of wantonness. Cap. 4 -- And *void of excuse;
when as most sins pretend some good to the sinner. Cap. 5, 6 He laments this
offense: and praises God, for the remission thereof by Baptism. Cap. 7 Yet,
that he should not have done that Theft without company. Cap. 8
LIB. III.
OF his journey to Carthage, to finish his studies; and his amorous passions
there. Cap. 1 Of Stage Plays much affected by him, and of the faulty passions
they caused in him. Cap. 2 His concupiscence in the Church; the Ambition of his
studies; and Conversation amongst the jeering and abusive Wits. Cap. 3 In the
19. year of his age his reading of Cicero's Hortensius invites him from
affectation of eloquence to the search of Wisdom. Cap. 4 Not finding our
Savior in Phoilosophy he turns to the Scriptures: whose humble style, in
comparison of Tully's, gives him distaste. Cap. 5 In quest of Wisdom, he falls
into the society and errors of the Manichees, absurd, pernicious. Cap. 6 Their
questions that stumbled him; and the solutions of them. Cap. 7, 8, 9. The
Manichees opinion of the parts of God imprisoned in the creature. Cap. 10 His
weeping Mother comforted, * by a Vision, concerning his Conversion. Cap. 11
And* by the answer of a Bishop; who (notwithstanding) refused to reason with
him, as yet too self-conceited.
LIB. IV.
FRom the 19. to his 28. year continuing addicted to the Manichees. Cap. 1 Of
his teaching Rhetoric in Thagaste, the City where he was borne; his having a
Concubine, yet true to her bed; his playing a prize of Poetry on the Theater,
and refusing the assistance of the art of a Magician. Cap. 2 Yet addicted to
Astrology, and by a learned Physician diswaded from it. Cap. 3 His anxieties
for the death of his dearest friend, by him entangled in the same errors, but,
before his death baptized. Cap. 4 Why mourning so pleasant to the Afflicted.
Cap. 5 His wounded soul for his deceased Friend not finding any consolation,
Cap. 6 He forsakes the place of their acquaintance, and goes to Carthage. Cap.
7 His wound cured by, Time, and new friendships: Cap. 8 Yet these too failing
him. Cap. 9 All things loved besides God, pass away and leave the lover to
embrace sorrows. Cap. 10 The Transition of its parts is necessary to make this
Universe complete. Cap. 11 To rest our love upon God, and to love other things
only for, and, in, Him. Cap. 12 Much exercised in love, he writes a book De
Pulchro and Apto. Cap. 13 Dedicated, to Hierius a Roman Rhetorician, much
admired by him, only upon report. Cap. 14 His false imaginations concerning
these, being not yet enlightened by the Scriptures. Cap. 15 Of his strange
acuteness of wit, acquiring all the Liberal Sciences without a teacher, and yet
so grossly erring in Religion. Cap. 16
LIB. V.
OBlation of his Confessions to God, their end being to set forth his praise.
Cap. 1 Invitation of all other strayed sinners to return to the Omnipotent God
by confession. Cap. 2 The passages of the twenty ninth year of his Age. The
coming of Faustus, an eloquent Manichean Bishop to Carthage: The Philosophers
tenants in the sciences found much more probable than the Manichean's. Cap. 3
Sciences not beatifying -- Cap. 4 Yet the Mani he is ignorant also in them. Cap.
5 Faustus naturally eloquent, but very ignorant in those Arts wherein he was
reputed to excel. Cap. 6 S. Austines affection to the Manichean Doctrines much
abated upon the Discovery of Faustus his ignorance; whom he instructs in the
art of Rhetoric. Cap. 7 Much offended with the unrulynesse of his Scholars in
Carthage, he removes from thence beyond sea to Rome, to profess Rhetoric
there, extremely against his mothers will. Cap. 8 Coming to Rome he is stricken
with a dangerous fever, the recovery from which he imputes to his Mothers
prayers. Cap. 9 Recovered, he still consorts with the Manichees, retaining many
of their errors (the chief of which was his imagining God a corporeal
substance) but with much more remissness, than formerly. Cap. 10 Especially
finding the Manichees not clearly to answer to the objections of Catholics
made out of the scriptures. Cap. 11 Having set up a Rhetoric school at Rome,
his scholars there defraud him of their stipends. Cap. 12 Recommended by
Symmachus, he removes from Rome to teach Rhetoric at Millain, where he is
favorably received by S. Ambrose their Bishop, whose sermons he frequents only
for the fame of his eloquence. Cap. 13 And is by little and little taken with his
Doctrine, whereupon he resolves, abandoning the Manichean sect, to remain a
Catechumenus in the Church Catholic, till some further discovery of truth.
Cap. 14
LIB. VI.
HIs Mother Monica, passing many dangers at sea, comes to him to Millain. Her
vision at sea. Cap. 1 Her great piety, sobriety, obedience to Bishop Ambrose
prohibiting feastings at the tombs of Martyrs: then an^ usual custom in
Africa. Cap. 2 S. Ambrose his employment, S. Austin finds no opportunity of
private discourse with him; yet learns from his sermons, that Catholics held
not the doctrines charged on them by the Manichees. Cap. 3 Confuted, he blames
his former too much caution and jealousy, * in assenting to the Catholic
tenants. Cap. 4 And* in acknowledging the Divine Authority of the Scriptures,
as they are delivered by the Church. Cap. 5 His Ambition, and the cares
attending it. His great solicitude, being to speak a Panegyric before the
Emperor; much envying the secure mirth of a poor beggar seen in the street.
Cap. 6 Of his friend Alipius, his scholar at Carthage, whom he there reclaimed
from the vainsports of the Circus, but infected him with Manicheism. Cap. 7
Alipius, before S. Austins coming thither, a student of the Law at Rome, how
seduced there (though very averse) to behold, and then to delight in, the
bloody shows, of the Gladiators. Cap. 8 Of his being apprehended, when S.
Austins Scholar, at Carthage for a thief. His going to S. Austin to Millain,
where he practices in the law. Cap. 9. A memorable example of Alipius his
integrity. Concerning his other Friend Nebridius, deserting his Country, for S.
Austin's society, and the study of Wisdom. Cap. 10 S. Austin's reasoning with
himself concerning his, past, and present, condition, and the disposal of his
future life; the misery he apprehended to be in a single life. Cap. 11 The
disputes between him and Alipius (most chastely disposed) concerning marriage
and single life. Cap. 12 S. Austin Suitor to a young Maid, with whom marriage
is intended, but she as yet two years too young, His Mother seeks, but cannot
obtain any revelation from God concerning this marriage. Cap. 13 Their living a
many together, and having all things common, in a married condition, designed;
but soon laid aside. Cap. 14 His former Concubine (of whom see 4 l. 2. c.)
being removed (as an impediment to his marriage) and leaving with him the Son
he had by her, returns into Africa; vows continency, instead of whom he
privately takes another. Cap. 15 Yet his lusts somewhat restrained, from the
fear he had, * of death, and* of the souls immortality, and* of future
judgment. Cap. 16
LIB. VII.
HIs entrance now, being thirty years old, into man's estate. His apprehension
of God, as inviolable, incorruptible, immutable, every way infinite, but yet
corporeal. Cap. 1 Still unsatisfied concerning the cause of evil, and why
Angels and men, being created by the most good God, there should, by him, be
placed in them a power to will evilly. Cap. 2, 3 Pursuing the same Querie
still, Unde Malum? yet, * his faith of Christ to be our Lord and Savior,
remaining in him firm and unshaken. Cap. 4, 5 And* the lying divinations of
Astrologers, foretelling from the stars future events, no way credited by him.
Cap. 6 Prosecuting the same Querie, Unde Malum? Cap. 7 Upon recommendation, he
falls to reading the books of the Platonists, and discovers in them much
concerning the Divinity of the Eternal Word, but nothing of the Humility of his
Incarnation. Cap. 9 He now more clearly discovers divine matters: That
something might have a being, and this not corporeal, or extended in place.
Cap. 10 That the Creatures may be said, in some sense, to have; in another, not
to have, a Being. Cap. 11 That all natures, even the corruptible, are good,
though not the supreme Good. Cap. 12 That there can be nothing in the world
simply, but only relatively, evil. Cap. 13 That Sin is no substance, but the
perversity of an irregular will declining from its Maker. Cap. 16 That he began
now to have a right opinion of God. Cap. 17 But had not yet a right opinion of
the Incarnation of the Lord Jesus, the only way to salvation. Cap. 18 Though
from the Platonic writings he became assured of many divine Truths, yet, these
books breeding pride in him, and not humility, Cap. 20 He lastly betakes
himself to reading of the Scriptures, especially those of S. Paul, where he
finds the advancement of Gods Grace, and salvation through Jesus Christ, to the
penitent and humble. Cap. 21
LIB. VIII.
HE goes to consult Simplicianus (an holy man, and the spiritual Father of S.
Ambrose) about the future ordering of his life, remaining still passionately
bent on marriage. Cap. 1 Upon mention of Victorinus (a famous Roman
Rhetorician) Simplicianus relates the story of Victorinus his conversion to
Christianity. Cap. 2 Why more joy for men converted, than, had they been
always Professors. Cap. 3 Why more joy in the conversion of men eminent, or
noble. Cap. 4 What operation the story of Victorinus had upon him; and his
great captivity under former ill customs. Cap. 5 After this, Pontitianus an
African, and an Officer in the Court, giving him and Alipius a visit,
occasionally relates the story of S. Anthony; and how two of his
fellow-Courtiers, upon the reading thereof, in the same moment renounced the
world (though both engaged to Mistrisses) and betook themselves to a solitary
life. Cap. 6 The tumults of his spirit upon Pontitian's discourse. Cap. 7 In
this anguish of soul his retiring into a garden, Alipius following him. Cap. 8
The fierce combat there between the flesh and the spirit, and his sad complaint
of the gaeot difficulty the Will has to command it self, when it so easily
commands the other members. Cap. 9, 10, 11 His total Conversion, by reading
(upon the hearing a voice from heaven) a passage of S. Paul, where the book
first opened. Cap. 12
LIB. IX.
DOxology and Thanksgivings for this his freedom from his former lusts, and the
great joy and content he presently received therein. Cap. 1 His purpose to
relinquish his profession of teaching Rhetoric, but the thing deferred till
the Vintage-vacation. Cap. 2 Verecundus, a Citizen of Millain, offers his
Country House for iheir retirement. The death of Verecundus and of Nebridius,
not long after S. Austin's conversion: being both first made Christians. Cap. 3
His retiring, in the vacation (after his School dissolved) to the Country house
of Verecundus. His meditations on the fourth Psalm, and his several writings
there; and the miraculous cure of his violent toothache, after he was rendered
thereby speechless. Cap. 4 His acquainting S. Ambrose, by letters, with his
former errors, and present resolutions, desiring his advice what part of
Scripture chiefly he should read, who directs him to Isaiah. Cap. 5 His
return to Millain the Easter following to receive Baptism from Bishop Ambrose,
together with his Son Adeodate, and Alipius, who traveled thither barefoot. S.
Austin's ravishment and melting into tears upon hearing the Church Service and
music. Cap. 6 The Original of singing the Church-Psalmes and Hymns at
Millain, after the manner of the Eastern Churches. The bodies of the Martyrs
Gervasius and Protasius discovered to S. Ambrose by divine revelation. Found
uncorrupted. Many miracles done by them; whereby the fury of the Arrian
Emperess toward S. Ambrose, and the Catholics, was much lenified. Cap. 7 S.
Austin's return by Rome for Africa. The death of his Mother in Italy at Ostia.
A description of her pious education and life. Cap. 8 Her dutiful deportment
toward, and; at last, conversion of, her Husband Patricius to profess the
Christian faith. Cap. 9 The discourses between him and his Mother at Ostia,
some few days before her sickness, concerning the felicities of the next life.
Her desire of death. Cap. 10 Her Sickness; Death: careless of her Funeral; only
desiring from them a remembrance of her at the Altar of the Lord. Cap. 11 S.
Austin refraining from weeping, though suffering much inward grief; to which,
after her burial, he indulgeth some tears. Cap. 12 His Prayer for his deceased,
Mother, Monica, and Father, Patricius. Cap. 13
LIB. X.
IN this Book S. Austin makes confession of the several lapses and infirmities
of his present condition, since his regeneration by Baptism. Cap. 1 The end
and fruit of confessing his present condition, mentally to God. Cap. 2 The end
and fruit of his confessing his present condition publicly before men. Cap. 3
Yet not able to see or confess all of himself which God sees in him. Cap. 5
Description of his present condition in the state of Grace. That he now truly
loves God. Concerning whom he proceeds to examine what it is he loves, when
he says, that he loves God. That it is * no object of sense; * no part of the
visible world abroad; * no part or faculty within himself. Cap. 6 Neither the
Vegetative, nor yet the Sensitive, Cap. 7 Nor yet the more interior, and most
admirabl^ faculty of the Memory. The many wonders of which (to the great glory
of the maker thereof) he most subtly discourses unto the 26th Chapter. Cap.
8, etc. That God (whom he loves) is* something within; but yet above, his soul:
* not confined by place, omnipresent, etc. Cap. 26 That though he now truly
loves God, abstracted from, and far above, all other creatures, and also above
himself, Cap. 27 Yet he enjoys not as yet a perfect union unto him; but has
a perpetual combat with many other false joys, and griefs, and fears; Cap. 28
Not having yet a perfect continency, in respect of all other objects besides
God; but extending some undue attention and affection unto them. Cap. 29 He
examineth himself, and confesses his present infirmities in the several
branches of Concupiscence (1 John 2.16.) 1. The lust of the flesh. 2. The lust
of the eyes. 3. The pride of life. And here he confesses, 1. His remaining
infirmities concerning the temptations of the lust of the flesh. And amongst
these, 1. Concerning the temptations of the Touch relating to carnal
concubinage. Cap. 30 2. Concerning the temptations of the taste, in eating and
drinking Cap. 31 3. Concerning the temptations of the smell in sweet odours and
perfumes. Cap. 32 4. Concerning the temptations of the ears in Music. Where
whether Music be useful in Churches. Cap. 33 5. Concerning the temptations of
the eyes in splendid, fair and well proportioned, objects. Cap. 34 2. His
remaining infirmities concerning the temptations of the lust of the eyes; or,
curiosity of vain science. Cap. 35 3. His remaining infirmities concerning the
temptations of the pride of life. The great danger of vain-glorying, incurred
from the approbation and praise of men. Cap. 36 Which is not avoidable, to
well-doing. Cap. 37 Incurred also from the contemning of Praise, as this also
being a thing praiseworthy. Cap. 38 Incurred also from self-love and
self-conceit without regard to praise of others. Cap. 39
A recapitulation of the things formerly spoken in this Book^ S. Austin's,
sometimes, extraordinary transportments in the contemplation and love of God.
Cap. 40, 41 His recourse, for a remedy to all these his maladies, not * to evil
Angels or Demons (with the Platonists, or others, practicing evil Arts) as
Mediators between God and man, because sinners like men, spirits like God.
Cap. 42 But * to Christ, who is the only true Mediator; mortal like man;
righteous like God; through whom, (else desperate,) he confidently hopes a
perfect cure of all his diseases. Cap. 43 The end and purpose of these his
Confessions. Cap. 44
THE CONFESSIONS OF S. Augustine, DECLARING The Story of his Life.
LIB. I.
CHAP. I.
Chapters following.

GReat art thou O Lord, and exceedingly to be praised; Psalm. 145.3. and 147.5.
great is thy power, and thy wisdom is infinite. And yet man presumes to praise
thee, being a piece of thy Creation; poor man, that bears about him (now)
Mortality; that bears about this sad Remembrancer of his sin, and this inherent
witness: that thou O God resistest the proud. Jam. 4.6.
Yet man desires to praise thee, as a piece of thy Creation. And this his
delight to praise thee also flows from thee: because Thou made him for
thee, and his heart is restless, until it repose in Thee.

Teach me therefore now O Lord this my duty toward Thee: And which ought to
precede, That, to call upon Thee; or that, to give praise unto Thee. And again;
which is first; To know thee; or, to call upon Thee. -- But, who is he, that
calls upon Thee, and does not first know thee? for so he may address his
prayers to something else instead of thee -- And yet, call we not also upon
thee, that thou would vouchsafe to let us know thee? Romans 10.14. Psalm.
22.26. Mat. 7.7.
-- But again it is said. How shall they call on him, on whom they have not
believed? And how shall they believe without a Preacher? And: They shall praise
the Lord, that [first] seek after him. For they that seek, shall find him. And
they that find, shall praise, Him. -- Let me then first seek thee O Lord, by
calling upon thee; and call upon thee from believing in thee, because unto us
also have thou been preached. My faith therefore now calls upon Thee O Lord:
thy gift which thou have inspired into me, by the great mystery of the
Incarnation of thy Son, and by the ministry of thy Preachers of it.

CHAP. II.
YEt how may I call upon, or invoke, my God; my God, and my Lord? Since to
invoke him, is to call him into me. And what Mansion within me, where my God
may reside? God within me, that made Heaven and Earth? Is there then, O Lord my
God, any room so spacious in me, that can receive thee? Nay: can the vast Globe
of Heaven and Earth, things that thou have made, and me a small point within
their womb, can these, in any wise, receive thee? -- Or is it so, that since
nothing that is, could Be, without thee; therefore whatever is, must needs
receive thee? Since then I also am in Being; what need I entreat thy access
into me, who therefore am, because thou art in me? Who am not yet a thing so
low and remote as Hell, or the Grave; and yet thou art present there. For If I
go down into Hell, Thou art there also. Psalm. 139.7.
Therefore I should not be, O my God, not be at all: but only by thy being in
me. Or rather, I should not be, but by being in thee; of whom, and by whom, and
in whom, Romans 11.36.
all things be. It Is so, Lord; even so. Whether then may I invoke thee, seeing
I am already in thee? Or, from whence thou draw-near unto me? For whither can I
retire, beyond the utmost limit of Heaven and Earth, to invite from thence my
God into me? Who has said: I fill the Heaven and the Earth. Jer. 23.24.


CHAP. III.
BUt do the Heavens and Earth, thus filled by thee, therefore contain thee? Or
do thou replenish these, and yet overflow; because they cannot wholly receive
thee? And where then do thou effund (these vessels running over) the
remainder of thy self? -- Or have thou no need of any thing at all to contain
thee; who, thy self, conteinest all things? For, in thy filling them, thou do
also contain them; and they are full of Thee by being received into thee. For,
the vessels, that are replenished with thee, add to thy fluxure no consistency;
because thou art not shed at all, when they are broken: and, when thou art
powered out upon us, thou art not spilled, Act. 2.18.
but we are conserved; nor thou dissipated, but we, by thee, recollected, and
kept from effusion.

But thou, who thus fillest all things, fillest thou each with all thy self?
Or, they not capable of thee wholly, do they only receive some part? and then,
do they all receive the same, or several parts of thee? The greater taking
more, the lesser a less? And is there then, some part of thee greater, and
some less, Or, Art thou every where totally, yet, no where totally, received.

CHAP. IV.
O What art thou therefore, my God? What (can I say) art thou, but the Lord
God? For who is God, Ps. 18.31.
but the Lord? or who is God, save our God? O Thou, most highest, most good;
most potent, most omnipotent; most merciful, and most just; most present, and
most retired; the fairest, and the strongest; stable, and yet not
comprehensible; unchangeable, and yet all-changing; never new, nor never old;
and all-renewing; only withering and bringing to nothing, the proud and
gallant, before they are aware. Always in action; and always in repose; still
gathering, and nothing lacking; supporting, filling, and over-spreading all
things; their Father, nurse, and accomplisher; still in chase of what is
possessed. A lover, without affection; jealous, without fearing a rival;
repenting thee, without any sorrow; angry, yet still most calmly serene;
changing often thy works, never thy design; finding, and receiving again, what
was never lost; never needy, yet fond of gain; not covering, yet exacting use;
men supererogate unto thee, that thou becomest their debtor, and yet who has
any thing not thine? Thou payest debts, yet owe nothing; forgivest them, and
losest nothing.

And what is all this that I say O my God; my life; my sacred, sweet-delight?
or what amounts it unto, that any one says, when he assayes to speak of thee?
and yet woe to them, who, in thy praise, are silent; though, in it, they are no
more then mute, who are most eloquent. Or; Whereln the very dumb say something,
and such as say most, say nothing.


CHAP. V.
O What shall I do, that I may for ever repose and acquiesce in thee? What
shall I do, to have my soul wholly-possest with, and inebriated by, thee, so to
enjoy an eternal oblivion of all past evils, and the perpetual embraces of
thee (my only Good)? And, in this so much, on both sides, longed-for union,
what good art thou to me? (let thy mercies indulge me to speak unto thee:) Or,
what good am I to thee? That thou exactest of me, that I should love thee; and,
if I do it not, art highly displeased, and threatnest to bring on me the
greatest misery; (is this then so small a misery, for me not to love thee?) Ah!
By thy mercies tell me (O Lord my God) what is that great thing that thou art
unto me? Say unto my soul I am thy salvation. Psalm. 35.3. Exo. 33.20. Or; with
longing to see it.
But say it so, as it may hear thee say it. Behold the ears of my heart are
before thee, open them; and say unto my soul, there, I am thy salvation. Then
will I hasten after thy alluring voice, and catch fast hold on thee. O hide not
thou thy face from me. Let me see it though I dye; lest otherwise I dye so, as
never to see it.

The Mansion of my soul is too narrow: to entertain thee, O let it be enlarged
by thee. It Is very ruinous, be thou pleased to repair it. The sordid furniture
thereof must be very offensive to thy holy eyes, (I know and confess it;) but
who can purge and cleanse it, besides thee? Psalm. 19.12. Psalm. 116.10. Psalm.
32.6. Psalm. 26.12. vulg.
or to what other (besides thee) shall I cry? Cleanse me, O Lord, from my
secret sins, and from my presumptuous wickednesses deliver thy Servant. I
believe thou have and wilt forgive them, and therefore do I speak and confess
them; O Lord, thou know. Have not I Confessed against me my sins unto thee O
my God: I hope thou have forgiven the wickedness of my sin? I do not contend in
judgment with thee, for thou art the truth: nor will I be deceived in harkening
to excuses, whilst, perhaps, mine iniquity tells lies unto me. Therefore do I
not contend in judgment with thee; For, if thou Lord should mark
iniquities, Psalm. 130.3.
O Lord who shall abide it.

CHAP VI.
An Account* of St. Austins Infancy nourished and sustained by the divine
providence.

YEt suffer me, thy justice laid aside, to speak unto thy mercy; Genesis 18.27.
me dust and ashes; yet suffer me to speak, being it is unto the mercies of my
God I speak, and not to Man, so apt to scoff at me (and perhaps thou also for
the present l^^^liest at me, Psalm. 25.16.
but in good time thou will return and pity me) And what is it, I would first
utter unto thee O Lord my God; but that my silliness cannot tell how, or whence
I first came hither; into this dying life, shall I call it? or living death? I
cannot tell. And behold then, immediately the comforts of thy compassionating
mercies * attended me (as I have been told by the Parents of my flesh, out of
whose substance thou fashionedst me in thy good appointed time, long before the
dawning of this my memory) and * cherished that my helpless age with the soft
nourishment of a Woman's milk. Neither was it the Providence of my Mother or
Nurses; that stored their swelling breasts therewith, but thou it was, that, in
those Cisterns, preparedst an agreeable food for that my tender age, according
to thin^ ordinance, and the riches of thy bounty, descending to the meanest
Original of things. And thou gave also * to me, to desire that only, which
thou then gave me; and also * to those who nursed me as willingly to bestow
on me, what thou did first bestow on them. For they, by a heavenly-guided
affection, took a delight to impart unto me, what they abounded with from thee;
and it was also good for them, that I received this good from them: which
indeed was not from, but by, them only: for from thee, O God, are all good
things, Psalm. 62.1.
and from my God comes my universal salvation; as I have well-learned since,
by the multiplied expressions of so many blessings heaped upon me, internal and
external, all confessing thee their Author. For, then, I had only the skill,
how to suck; to be still, when my flesh was satisfied; and to cry, when it was
offended; and nothing more than this. But afterward came-on smiles and
laughter, first when I was asleep, then when awake: (for this has been told me
of my self; and I likewise discover it in the infancy of others, though I
remember it not in mine own).

Hence by gentle degrees I advanced, to perceive and discern where I was; and
to have a desire to make known my desires, to those that might content them:
But this in vain at first; these longings of mine being * shut up within me,
and they * without me; unable, with the eye of sense, to pierce so deep into my
soul. Therefore next, I labored to produce and expose my meaning by several
motions of my fluttering limbs, and ejaculations of broken words, * some few,
such as I could articulate, and bearing * little resemblance to my mental
conceits* And, when I was not presently obeyed, eith^r for that my desires were
hurtful, or not intelligible, I would fall into a ridiculous rage against my
Elders, not under my power, and my betters, not owing me service, I would take
revenge on them with crying. Such have I heard other In ants to be, and such my
Nurses and Tenders report me to have been, by those dark conjectures they could
make of my infantine inclinations.

And now, behold, mine infancy is deceased long ago: and, notwithstanding, I
still alive. But tell me, O Lord, thou who live all ages, yet without the
defluxe of any (because, before the first dawn of time, and before all that can
be said to be, before, Thou art; and art the God and Lord of all, which thy
self has created; and before thy eye do stand ever-fixed the causes of all the
heremost-fleeting events; and remain unchangeable, the Ideas and patterns of
all things here most floating; and before thee live eternal the reasons of all
things temporal, which, so often, to us, seem unreasonable.) Tell unto me (O
God) thy poor suppliant; thou, that art merciful, unto me, who am miserable;
tell me, whether this my infancy succeeded not also a younger age of mine,
expired before it; that life perchance, the revolution of which I passed, yet
being a prisoner within my Mothers womb (for of my abode there also I have
understood, and seen many Women bear about the like burdens.)

And, what before that life again (O my God, my sweetest dear delight)? Was I
yet then also any where? Or any thing? Which none can tell me, neither Father,
nor Mother, that begot me; neither others experience, nor my own memory. And
do not thou now deride this my curiousity, demanding thee such questions? Who
only requirest my lauding of thee, and confessing unto thee, concerning things
within the circle of my knowledge.

I confess therefore unto thee, Lord of Heaven and Earth, and give thee prai^e
for that my first conception, and that my newborn infancy, in which things,
though beyond our remembrance, thou have given unto us a conjecture of our
selves from our experience of others, and from the authority of those who then
attended us. Then had I being, and life, and cogitation, and (toward the wane
of my infancy) invention of expressive signs to make my meanings known to
others.

And whence such a, vital, sensitive, piece of matter, as I was then, but from
thee O Lord? Can any be his own Creator? Or can there be derived from any other
sourse the smallest vein, Psalm. 100.2.
that may stream essence and life into us, but only from thee, who, thus, have
made us? In whom Being and Living are not a several thing, but thou art one and
the same highest supremity of both. For, Ps. 83.18. Psalm. 102.26.
thou art the most-high, and thou art not changed. Neither does Today ever
passe-away in thee; and yet in thee it is that it passes away; for even these
transitories are not, but, as in thee. Nor have they any way of passing away,
but as conveyed through thee; and yet mean while, Psalm. 102.26.
because thy years fail not, therefore thy years are but a continued today.
And how many days of ours, and of our forefathers, have flowed away through
this thy one ever-fixed day, and, from it, received the mould and fashion of
their being! And how many more yet shall flow, and shall so receive the measure
of their being! Whilst thou art still the same: and all the things of
tomorrow, Psalm. 102.26.
and what ever is beyond it, and all the things of yesterday, and whatever is
behind it, in this thy day, thou shall make, and in this thy day, thou have
made, them. What does it import me, if any understands not this? Let such a one
praise thee, in saying; what means this high mystery? Even so, let him praise
thee; and rather choose, in not apprehending, to conceive nothing but right of
thee, That is; that thou art incomprehensible.
than, in apprehending amiss, to conceive something below thee.

CHAP VII
-- And* of its sins; And his praising God for its good endowments.

HEar, O God: woe, woe, unto the sins of Men; and Man confessing this, thou
take compassion of him; because thou have made him, but yet made not sin in
him. O who can recount unto me the concealed sins of my unknown Infancy? from
which none is pure in thy sight O Lord, not the child that is a day old. Job.
25.
Who then can represent those my remote sins unto me? May not every other such
little one serve for this purpose, in whom I may easily read the faults I know
not of my self? What then, in that first bud of my age, was my guilt? Was it
crying so vehemently after the pap; and hanging so greedily upon the flowing
breasts? which should I now in like manner do, after my food, I should become
both culpable, and ridiculous. Therefore then also I was so; but whilst yet I
understood not reproof, neither reason nor custom suffered me to receive it.
But yet more-grown, we weed out and cast away such humors; now, none do
cleanse a vessel of that which is good. And, in that little age, were these also
commendable qualities? * to beg with tears what would have been, hurtfully,
granted: * to rage and swell against People unobliged to it, its Elders, its
betters; and even those, who first gave it life? to strive, with, strengthless,
but malicious, blows, to wound those, that were far wiser than it self, for not
obeying its commands, which could not be, but to its harm, observed? So that it
is the debility of infants limbs, and not the mind of Infants, that is
innocent. My self have seen and had experience of such a little one already
possessed with jealousy; it had not learned to speak, and yet then would it
cast a pale and envious aspect upon its indigent fellow-suckling. (A fault well
known, and by the Mothers or Nurses expiated usually with I know not what
remedies) unless I ought to call that, innocence; for one most rich in a
fountain of milk, unexhausted and overflowing, not so much as to endure another
to partake a little with him, that is not able to make provision for it self,
and that can sustain life only with this food. But such things are (then)
indulgently tolerated, not because they are none, or no great, faults, but
faults, that diminish, as years increase; which (though, then, we allow them)
yet are they censured and detested, when they are discovered in a riper age.

Thou therefore (O Lord my God) who have given life to this my infancy, and a
body, which thou have carefully fenced-about with subtle sense, strongly
builded-up with pliant limbs, beautified with a comely feature, and implanted
in it all vital functions, for its universal preservation and safety, (so as
we see it) Thou now do command me, in, and for, all these, to celebrate thee,
and to confess unto thee, and to sing unto thy name, O thou-most highest. Psalm.
192.1.
Because thou art the God all-powerfull and all-good, and ever to be praised,
though this only had been all that thou had done to me, this, which none else
can do, besides thee; out of whose rich unity proceed all the several shapes
and fashions of being; who out of thy own fairness beautifiest all things, and
according to thy most righteous rule orderest all things.

This time of my life then, in which I do not remember so much as that I lived,
known only by hearsay, and conjectured, from other infants, that I also once
passed through it (though this a conjecture much assured) this time, I say, I
am loath to account to the rest of the days which I live in this World; it
being, in respect of the darkness of my oblivion, much like to that obscure
part I passed, before it, in my Mothers womb. But if I was thus conceived in
sin, and my Mother brought me forth in iniquity, where, I beseech thee, O my
God, where, Psalm. 51.5.
Lord, was I thy Servant? where, or when, innocent? But, behold, I pass over
that time; for why should I stay longer upon it, which passed so swiftly by me,
without leaving in me of it the least impression?

CHAP. VIII.
An Account of his childhood, and his learning to speak.

ANd thus growing on, and passing from Infancy, I came into my childhood, or
rather it came into me, and here succeeded Infancy; nor did that meanwhile
depart, for whither went it? and yet it was now no more; for I was now no more
a speechless babe, but a prattling child. And this I can remember, and have
since observed, how I learned to speak; which was, not * by being taught by
art, as afterward I was forreign-language, by having the words ordered in a
certain form and method of learning, but only * by the single use of my memory,
and the natural apprehension which thou my God gave unto me: For, after I had
first, by fits of crying, broken accents, and various motions of my skrewed
limbs, attempted to expound my thoughts to those that might assist my desires,
and yet was not able to explain my self in all things which, and to whom I had
a mind; I recorded it first in my yet unwritten memory, when I heard them name
any, thing; and, when they moved their body toward the thing named, I observed
it; and collected that, that which they pronounced, was that thing which they
showed. And that they meant this thing I was assured by certain motions of the
parts of their body, the common and natural language (as it were) of all
nations, uttered in the habit of the countenance, glances of the eye, postures
of the members, accents of the voice, which paint and express the inward
passion of the soul, in her desiring, fruition, hatred, or pursuance, of
things: so grew I shortly acquainted with many words (whilst they were in
several sentences placed in the same fashion, and often again repeated) what
particular things they did design; and having by degrees tamed and broken my
unacquainted mouth to a smooth, and ready articulation of them, by these notes
I brought forth the long-suppressed conceptions of my soul. And, thus I began
to enterchange these current signs of our conceits with the people amongst
whom I lived, and so launched still farther out into the tempestuous society of
humane life, being as yet wholly dependent on my parents pleasure, and the beck
of my superiors.

CHAP. IX.
Of his * going to School.

O God, my God; what miseries did I now encounter, and what impostures? When
the way of right living, that was then proposed to me a child, was, to be
obedient to those, who instructed me, how to become glorious in this world; and
how to excel in those verbose Arts, which guide the way to humane honors, and
false-named wealth. And so, I was put to school, to get these Arts, and when,
poor boy, I knew no profit of them, yet, was I miserably beaten, if I profited
not in them: And this hard usage was allowed of by my sage superiors; and
many, that had trod that life before us, had chalked out unto us these wearisome
and craggy paths, through which we were constrained to follow them, with great
pain and sorrow thus endlessely multiplied to the sons of Adam.

We little ones meanwhile observed, that men prayed unto thee; and we learnt of
them to do the same; conceiving thee (as far as we could apprehend) to be some
great one, who, not appearing to our senses, could, notwithstanding, hear and
relieve our necessities. I began therefore, when yet a child, to pray unto
thee (my aid and refuge) and then first inured my unskilled tongue to the
invocating of thy holy name, and begged of thee (though a little one, with no
little passion) that thou would save me from whipping at School. And, not
only, thou did not hear me, in that which was inflicted on me for my good,
but my elders also, and even my parents (far from wishing me any harm) made a
jest of those my stripes, my then grievous and remediless evil. Is there O
Lord, amongst thine, any so great a soul, and with so strong a passion adhering
to thee? Is there any, I say, who becomes (not out of a senseless stupidity,
but) by an inseparable union to thee, so transported in his mind, as that he
can sport at racks, and hooks, and a thousand such tortures (which all the
world, with so much fear deprecates of thee) laughing at those, who tremble at
these; in such a manner, as our parents mocked at those torments, which we
children then suffered from our severe Masters? For, neither had we less
horror of these, than others of greater torments, nor importuned we thee less
to escape them: Though meanwhile we were peccant in writing, or reading, or
conning our lessons, less, than was exacted of us.

Nor was this peccancy in us, O Lord, from want of memory, or wit (such as thou
bestowest on that age) but, from an importunate lusting which we had after
play; and they revenged this fault in us, who committed much what the same
themselves. But our Superiors equal toys are named business; and when
boys-play is even the like, yet these are seourged for it by their overpowring
Master; and in this miscarriage, of things, no body pitties the poor Children,
or them, or both. For, who is he that, weighing things well, can justify my
being beaten, when I was a boy, for playing at ball; when, by such play, I was
only hindered from a speedier attaining those vain arts, in which I should play
far more unbeseemingly, when I was Flder. Nor did he, by whom I was corrected,
meanwhile do any thing better himself; who, if worsted, in any mean criticisme,
by his fellow-teacher, was far more racked with choler and envy, then I was
with the same, when mastered in a match at ball by my Companions.

CHAP. X.
And* love of Play, with an aversion from his Book.

ANd yet I sinned (O Lord God, thou Ordainer and Creator of all things of
nature, and only not the Ordainer of sin) O Lord my God I was too blame, in
doing then contrary to the will of my Parents, and of those my Preceptors; for
I might have put that learning to good use, to which they bred me with another
purpose. But my undutifulnesse arose not out of choice of something better, but
merely out of a lust to play; proudly aspiring to be a victor in my sports,
over those that played with me, and to have my ears tickled with false
applause, that they might itch more hotly after it; the same, still-more and
more perilous curiosity now beginning to sparkle through my wanton eyes toward
the shows and plays of the more aged. The Donors of which flourish afterward
in so grand a reputation; that almost all the spectators fore-wish the same
honor (one day) to their little ones. And yet they are well content, they
should be whipped, if, by such shows, they are seduced from their study, by which
studies they desire their sons may one day arrive to present such shows. Look
upon these things, O Lord, with thy pity; and deliver us, who now call upon
thee: and deliver them also, who do not yet call upon thee; that they also may
call upon thee, and thou may deliver them.

CHAP. XI.
Of his * sickness, and, in it, * his desiring Baptism; for what reason, upon
hopes of his recovery, deferred by his Mother.

FOr I had heard somewhat, yet a child, of life eternal, that was promised
unto us by the humility of thy Son, our Lord God, descending hither because of
our pride; and I was already signed with the sign of his Cross, and was
seasoned with his A custom in primitive times, to put salt into the mouths of
the Catechumeni, intimating a spiritual pre-seasoning of them for the reception
of the grace of Baptism (see 3. l. Con. Carthag. 5. can.) and being a symbol
of incorruption. See Ezekiel. 16.4, 5. Mark 9.49. in latter times this ceremony
was used to the newly baptized.
salt, even from my mothers womb, a woman, who put much hope in thee.

And thou saw, O Lord, I happening then to be pained at my stomach, and
suddenly seized with a violent Calenture near unto death, thou saw O my God,
(for even then wast thou my Guardian) with what passion of mind, and with what
faith, I importuned the piety of my own mother, and of our common mother, thy
Church, for the Baptism of thy Christ, my Lord and God. And this much-perplexed
mother of my flesh (who now travailed far more dearly, in the womb of her chaste
heart, of the second birth of my eternal salvation, by her faith in thee, than
before she had done of my temporal) was taking care, that, with all speed, I
should be initiated and purged with the salutary Eucharist, as well as Baptism,
in those days given to Infants.
Sacraments, confessing thee, O Lord Jesus, for remission of sins; But that I
had a sudden recovery; upon which, this my cleansing was, for that time,
deferred; although it could not be avoided, but that, if I lived longer, I
should be yet more defiled, and so the guilt contracted from the renewed
pollutions of sins, after that holy lavatory, would have become greater far,
and far more dangerous.

Thus, then, I believed in thee, and she, and the whole family excepting my
Father, who yet could not oversway in me the just power of my mothers piety, to
make me not believe in Christ, as he at that time believed not in him. For, it
was her holy endeavor, that thou, my God, should be my Father, more than
He: and thou assistedst her herein to overcome her husband. To whom, in other
things, she, though much better, yielded all obedience; because she was to
yield all obedience to thee, and this obedience to her husband was commanded by
thee. Men baptized in their sickness were by the Canon prohibited sacred
Orders, because their Baptism seemed necessitated.
For what reason, O my God, I would fain know, was this my Baptism at that time
delayed? and whether for any my greater good, were the reins of my sinning
longer left loose upon me? For if they were not then left loose, whence is it
that on every side we do still hear it said of such and such: Let him alone,
let him do what he will, for he is not yet baptized? and yet, concerning
corporal sanity, we say not, Let him yet receive more wounds, for he is not yet
cured of the former? How much better had it been for me, to have been so early
healed! and that, with my own, and my friends strict care, the health of my
soul, thus restored, might have been ever after kept entire, by thy preserving
what thou had restored? This, surely, had been much the better. But that my
good Mother, already foreseeing, how many, and how great, billows of
temptations, after my childhood spent, were ready to assault, and to ore-set my
more unbridled youth, chose rather to expose to their blows, me now before
baptism, as yet a lump of rude clay, which, by it, afterward might be new
molded, than me, when by the Sacraments, thy new-formed image, which so
perchance might happen to be defaced.

CHAP. XII.
Of his sins and errors at School, and of their's that instructed him.

YEt in this my childhood (far less feared for miscarriage, than more
headstrong youth) I hated study; and, yet more, to be pressed to it; and yet I
was forced to it; and well that I was so; but in that forced studying I did not
well; who learned only from constraint; for none does well, what he does
unwillingly; though it be well, what he does. (But neither did those, that
urged me so in it, do well; but it was thou only, O my God, in it, that did
well unto me) for they, who so earnestly urged me unto it, saw not to what good
use I might employ it, save only to go about to satisfy the unsatiable desires
of wealthy poverty, and ignominious glory.

Mat. 10, 3.
But thou, by whom the very hairs of our head are all numbered, meanwhile did
make good use of all our errors, of their error, in forcing me, * to my
profit; and of mine, in being averse from it, * to my punishment; which I well
deserved, being so little a child, and so great a sinner. So thou did well
unto me, by those, who did not well: and did as justly take revenge on me, in
that very thing wherein I did amiss. For thou have appointed, and so it is;
that every inordinate affection should be to it self, its own torment.

CHAP XIII.
Of his hating Greek, and other necessary learning, and affection to Poetry and
fables.

BUt why at that time I should so much hate Greek, I do not yet well
understand; for Latin I liked very well, I mean not, that which our first
Masters spell unto us, but that which the Grammarians teach; for that first
learning, to Read, and Write, and cast up an Account, I thought as afflicting
and vexatious as the Greek? And whence this also, but from sin, and the vanity
of this life? Because I was flesh, and a wind that passes away and comes not
again. Psalm. 78.39.
For that first learning was for the better, because truer, and more certain
(which enriched me with a faculty necessary, and as easily retained, whereby I
both read now what I find written, and write, my self, what I have a mind)
than this other, in which I learnt, and was enjoined, to remember, the errors
and wanderings of, I know not what, Aeneas, forgetful of my own errors; and shed
tears for the death of one Dido, who killed herself for love, when meanwhile I
beheld my self, in these amorous toys, perishing from thee (O God my life)
with dry eyes: miserable, Creature, as I then was; for what is more miserable
than one that is in misery, and yet has no commiseration of himself? sadly
bewailing wanton Dido's death, caused by excess of love to Aeneas, and never
deploring his own death, caused by want of love to thee?

O God the glorious light of my heart, and delicate food of the inner mouth of
my soul, and celestial power, that now espouseth my mind, possessing the
bosom of my thoughts, I did not then love thee, and went a whoreing from thee,
and to this my fornication it was ecchoed on every side, Euge, Euge, well-done,
well-done, for the friendship of this world is fornication against thee. Jam.
4.4.
And they cry, well-well-done; that a shame to-be-ashamed-of may possess him,
who is not such a one, as they commend. And these things I lamented not, but
lamented despairing perishing- Dido, Didonem extinctam, ferroque extrema
secutam. Aeneid. 6. lib.


My self following the same extremities, even the lowest of thy creatures and
forsaking thee; earth tending toward earth; and when I was forbiden to read
these things, I was grieved, because I read not, what might make me grieve. And
yet such foolery as this was accounted by me far more gentile and polite
Science, ^han that whereby I learnt to write and read.

But now let my God say unto my soul, and let thy truth tell me, it is
otherwise; and the former learning is far the better of the two; for I shall
sooner, and had rather, forget, Aeneas his travells, and all such like toys,
than to write and read.

I therefore when a boy did sin, in preferring, in my fond affection, these
empty things before those useful; or rather in hating the one, whilst I doted
on the other. For then, One and one makes two; two and two four, was an odious
repetition to me; Whilst, the wooden Horse lined with armed men, and the
flaming funerals of Troy, and lost Creusa's ghost were most ravishing Idols of
my vanity.

CHAP. XIIII.
WHy then hated I the Greek tongue, presenting me with the like fictions? for
learned Homer, has likewise curiously woven such like pleasant-tales, and is,
in his poems, wost sweetly-vain, but yet was very bitter to me when a school
boy, and so is Virgil, I believe, to the youth of Greece, when forced to learn
him with so much difficulty, as I did the other. For the hardness of attaining
a forreign-tongue did, as it were, oresprinkle with gall all the sweets of such
fabulous stories. For I knew not the words of that language, and meanwhile was
frighted with cruel terrors and tortures to learn to know them. It Is true
also, that once (in my Infancy) I understood no Latin: But this tongue I
easily learned by observation only, without fear or stripes, amidst the
flatterings of my nurses, and the chat of my play-fellows. And so I learned
that tongue without the penal task of constraint, my surcharged heart
sufficiently pressing me to a speedy delivery of its conceptions in the like
expressions, which I learned not from those that taught, but that talked with,
me; in whose ears I did also bring-forth, whatever my mind preconceived. Whence
it appears, that such things are better learnt from a free unspurred curiosity,
than from a timorous necessity. But yet the one well qualifies and bridles the
over-loosness of the other, in the wise restraint of thy good laws, O God, upon
us; which from the Masters ferula, to the trials of Martyrs, do intermix and
infuse those wholesome bitternesses, which may reduce us still unto thee, from
the infectious sweets, that allure us to depart from thee.

CHAP. XV.
His offering up to God the fruits of his learning.

O Lord hear my prayer; let my soul never faint under thy discipline; nor
grow-weary in confessing thy mercies unto thee; by which thou have drawn me out
of all my wicked ways; that thou thy self might become delicious unto me,
above all those charming seducements which I have heretofore pursued; and that
I might love thee entirely, and kiss thy delivering hand with all the bowels of
my affection, that thou may yet rescue me out of all temptation, even to the
end.

For behold (O Lord my King) may it now be for thy service, whatever useful
thing my childhood has learnt! may it be for thy service, that I speak --
write -- read -- account! Because; in my learning vain things, thou did not
cease to discipline me; and, after my delighting in those vanities, thou have
forgiven me my sin. For I leanrt in them many useful words, but these also may
be as well learnt, in things not vain, and that a far safer way, wherein to
guide the unwary steps of yet-unseasoned youth.

CHAP. XVI.
Inveighing-against*lascivious Fables.

BUt woe unto thee, precipitous torrent of humane custom! who shall stop thy
heady course? how long ere thy pernicious streams be dried up? How long shall
these carry down the sons of Eve into that huge, and dreadful Ocean, over
which, those that are best embarked, are with hazard transported? Have I not
read in thee, both of a thundering, and of an adulterating, Jove? Not, that
these two were ever really coincident to the same God; but thus feigned, that
man might have some authority, to imitate the true adultery, being countenanced
by that fabulous thunder... These poetical fictions, transferring humane
passions to the Gods, or, (to say more truly) making gods of most flagitious
men, that such crimes might no more be esteemed crimes; and men committing them
might be said to imitate, not the most debauched of men, but the most supreme
of Deities.

And yet, O thou infernal stream, the children of men are daily thrown into
thee, with great rewards to their Teachers, for compassing such learning; they
receiving, beyond private wages, also public salaries: whilst meanwhile,
horrid gulf, thou beatest thy rocks, and make a roaring noise, saying; here
is pure language learned; here eloquence; so necessary for maintaining your own
opinions, or oreswaying other men's. Should we never then have known these
elegant words, Imbrem aureum, and Gremium, and fucum, and templa coeli, and the
like, unless Terence had introduced a lascivious youth, proposing to himself
Jove for a pattern of whoring; whilst in surveying a t^blet on the wall, he
found therein this lascivious picture. How (they say) Jupiter upon a time once
showred into Danae's lap a golden rain, and so deceived the gold-enamoured
maid: and thence see how he heightens his lust, from that divine copy of it as
it were. And what God was it (says he) that did this rape? was it not he that
makes the arched Temples of heaven tremble with his ecchoing thunder? and may
not I then, a frail tempted mortal, do the same? yes sure, I did it, and that
well-pleased. Nor happens it, from this unclean discourse, that those words are
any whit better learned; but by these words (conveying it) such uncleanness is
more impudently attempted. Not that I blame, * the words, being, as it were,
choice and precious vessels, but * the wine of error, which is ministered in
them unto us children, by our fore-intoxicated Masters; of which if we refuse
to drink, we are beaten, and have no sober Judge, to whom we may appeal. But I,
O my God, (in whose presence my remembrance of these things is now fear-less
and secure) I poor wretch then swallowed those potions most willingly, and with
great delight; and for this was called a hopeful boy.

CHAP. XVII.
-- And * the mis-use of his wit;

PErmit me also, O my God, to say something of my wit, thy gift, on what
foolish labors it was then employed; for then was set me a task (very
vexatious to my spirit) upon the price of applause, or shame, and fear of
whipping, to render raging Juno's speech, when she so dolefully lamented Non
posse Italia Teucrorum avertere Regem. that she could not from Italy divert the
Trojan Prince: (which words I had heard that Juno never uttered; but we,
tracing error, were forced to follow the footsteps of such poetic fictions)
and to vary into prose, what he expressed in verse: and he did it with best
applause, who (retaining the dignity of the person represented) could reach to
an higher strain of the like passion, of anger, and sorrow, with an agreeable
sense handsomely dressed in an apt expression.

And what happiness was it to me (O thou my true life, my God) that my Exercise
should be pre-applauded beyond many my coequals? Behold, are not all such
things fume and vanity? And was there then no other better thing, wherein to
have exercised our wit and eloquence? Even thy praises, O Lord, thy praises in
thy more holy writings, these might have been a divine subject for the tender
branch of my spreading fancy to have clasped about, and depended upon, without,
* being trailed on the ground amongst such empty trifles, and * having its
fruit made a filthy prey to those ravenous spiritual fowls of the air. For many
ways there are, whereby the precious fruits of our youth become a sacrifice to
those unclean spirits.

CHAP. XVIII.
Misguided by vicious example, and more ashamed of the breach of Grammar-rules,
than of Gods Law.

BUt, what wonder was it, if I was thus carried away through vanities, and went
out from thy presence, Genesis 4.16
O my God; when such men only were proposed to my imitation, who, if they
should relate any of their actions (though not ill) with any barbarism or
solecisme, being censured for it, were abashed and confounded; but, if they
should, in a round and well-cohering style, fluently and neatly express,
though one of their culpable lusts, being applauded for this, became exalted
with pride. This thou see, O Lord, and hold thy peace, long-suffering, and
abundant in goodness and truth. And will thou always hold thy peace? No; but
thou drawest out of this swallowing deep, the soul that seeks after thee, and
thirsts after thy chaster delights, and whose heart says unto thee, I have
sought thy face, and (Lord) thy face will I seek. But, Ps. 27.9. Vulg. Romans
1.21.
I then was departed far away from the light of thy countenance in my own
darkened affections. For it is not by motion, or measuring of place, that we
recede from thee, or return to thee. For, that thy prodigal younger son in the
Gospel, did he procure himself either horses, or chariots, Luke 15.
or ships? winged he himself, to fly, or girded he up his loins, to run, into a
far country, there lavishly to wast the portion, thou gave him at his
setting-forth? (a kind Father, that sentest him forth so rich, and yet far more
kind, when he returned to thee so poor.) No: but his departure from thee was,
in his erring mind, and his coursing after strange-lusts; by which the soul
becomes darkened and benighted; and this darkness is caused by going-far-off
from the light of thy countenance, O Lord.

Behold then O Lord, and with patient eyes, as thou art wont, behold, how
scrupulously the sons of men do observe the laws even of letters and syllables,
received from those that, before them, have so accented and pronounced them;
and yet so carelessly neglect the eternal laws of their everlasting health,
received from thee; so that a Professor or a Scholar of the former traditions
of pronuntiation, if, contrary to the law of Grammar, he should but, without an
aspirate, speak this word [Ominem] that signifies a man, he should more
displease men, than if, contrary to thy law, he hate a man (when himself is
one): as though he ought to think a man that is his enemy a more harmful thing
to him, than his own hatred is, by which he is incensed against him; or, as
though he did more mischief unto another man by persecuting him, than he does
to his own soul, by hating him; certainly that science of letters is not more
innate, than this law inscribed in our conscience, Not to do, to any other,
what, from another, we are loath to suffer.

O how secret, and undiscovered thou art, dwelling on high, in silence (God
only great) and from thence, with an unwearied hand, sprinkling, here, penal
cecity upon lawless lust. For, one ambitious to be counted eloquent, when he
stands before a mortal Judge, surrounded with a crowd of mortals, and there
with implacable wrath declaims-against his enemy, takes extreme care, lest, by
an error of his tongue, he chance to say [inter hominibus] to signify amongst
men; but takes no heed, standing also, at the same time, before thee, lest, by
a worse fault of his furious passion, he happen to destroy a man from amongst
men.

CHAP. XIX.
Of his lies to his Governors; thefts from his Parents; cheating of his
play-fellows.

IN the road of these customs lay I, wretched Boy; and upon this stage of
vanity I played such prizes; where I far more feared to let-fall a solecisme,
than (when I committed any) to envy him, that made none. I declare now, and
confess these faults unto thee, O my God; for the which they commended me,
whom I thought it all virtue to please. For, I discerned not that gulf of
filthiness, wherein I then lay, cast out of the sight of thine eyes; for to
those holy pure eyes what could appear more loathsome than I, who became so
displeasing also to others; whilst, with innumerable lies, I deceived both my
Schoolmasters and Parents, out of love to play; desire to see, and inquietude
to imitate, toys.

Thefts also I committed, out of my Fathers Cellars, and from his Table, either
to content my intemperance, or, to have something to give to other boys, that
cunningly sold that play to me, with which they were no less delighted, than my
self. In which gaming also I often sought victory, even by foul-play; being my
self miserably overcome with a vain desire of overcoming others: and what did I
more unwillingly suffer, or more freely taxed, when ere I discovered it in
others, than that, which I used my self to others? and if I were reprehended,
when caught doing the same, I thought it far more gallant in such a case, to
quarrel, than confess.

Is this that childrens-innocency? It is not, O Lord; O Lord, it is not. I
implore thy mercy, O my God; For these are the very same faults that are acted
over and over again, from our being first in subjection to pedagogues and
Schoolmasters, and our winning, of balls, and nuts, and sparrows; to that our
subjection afterward, to Magistrates and Princes, and our gaining of gold, and
mannours, and slaves; and these smaller vanities do magnify only by the
progress of age into greater toys; as our ferula, then, is after followed
with greater punishments. Thou therefore, O our King, Matthew. 19.14.
did only recommend the emblem of humility, in the little and low stature,
not in the virtue, of this age, when thou said; of such is the kingdom of
heaven.

CHAP. XX.
His praising God for the many good endowments of his childhood.

ANd yet, O Lord, thanks be to thee, the most excellent builder, and great
commander, of all this Universe, our God, although thou had only preferred me
to this perfection of a child. For, then I had a Being, had life, had sense,
and an innate providence for the general safety of this my individual, being a
copy of that most secret unity of thine, from which I had my being; then I kept
a guard also, upon the acts of my outward, with my more inward, senses; and
then, in the smallest objects, and my sensations of them, I delighted in truth,
and hated to be deceived. Then was I enriched with a potent memory, to retain
things, and speech to deliver them, and sociablenesse, to converse; avoided
grief, and baseness, and ignorance. and what was there in such a wisely-built
creature, as this, not adm rabble and amiable?

But all those things are the gifts of my God, I bestowed them not upon my
self; and good they are, and they are my self. Good is he therefore that so
made me, and he is my goodness, and to him I rejoyc't in all those good
things, by which I was made even so worthy a creature, as a Child is. Whose sin
only was, that I sought my self, and these other delights, sublimities, and
truths, not in Him, but in his creatures; and so, in my unhappy quest after
them, in lieu of them, light upon sorrow, and shame, and error. Meanwhile,
thanks be unto thee, my sweet-delight, and my glory, and my confidence, my God,
Thanks be unto thee for those thy good gifts; but do thou keep them for me; for
so shall thou keep me also, and these things shall still increase and grow to
perfection, which thou have given me; and so shall I also be in thy custody,
because even my being is one gift, which I have received from thee.

LIB. II.
CHAP. I.
An Account of his Youth.

I Will now call to mind the many impurities of my former life* and carnal
corruptions of my soul; not, that I now love them any more, but, that I may the
more love thee, O my God: Out of love of thy love do I this, and review those
my most Wicked ways in the bitterness of my remembrance* to make Thee grow
more Sweet unto me; Who art a sweetness not falsified, ever blissful, and
secure, and recollecting me from that dispersion, into which my distracting
lusts had spread me; whilst, turned from thee, the one only good, I vanished,
and lost my self, in the multiplicity of thy creatures.

For, then was the time, when I raged, to be once satiated in the things below,
in that wild season of my youth, and strove to spread, and branch out, like a
Forest, into many various and ore-growing loves. And my beauty consumed away,
and I became filthy and loathsome before thine eyes; the whilst I was very
lovely unto my self, and desirous to please the eyes of men.

CHAP. II.
And of the Unruly lusts thereof, in the Sixteenth Year of his Age.

ANd, what was it then, wherein I delighted, but only to love, and to be loved?
But, in this love, a true measure was not observed of one souls chaste amity to
another, so far, as the bond of friendship is clear and faultless: but that
also some foggy vapors were exhaled, from the muddy concupiscence of the
flesh, and from the corrupt source of that prurient age, which so overspread
and beclouded my hear^, that therein the serenity of a chaste love was mingled
with the ^^sts of impure lust; and both together raised strange tempests within
me, and, hurrying away that unstayed age through the precipices of unlawful
desires, plunged it in the gulf of many enormous actions. O Lord, thy heavy
wrath had overtaken me, and I knew it not; and being deafned with the noise of
the chain of my mortality (the punishment of the pride of my soul) I wandered
still farther from thee, and thou let me alone. I rolled, and tossed, and
spumed, and boiled ore in my fornications, and thou heldest thy peace, O thou
my so lately-arrived joy; Thou at that time heldest thy peace, and I departed
far far from thee, in a constant pursuance of more and more barren, and
fruitless seeds of sorrows, with an aspiring downfall, and an untired
weariness.

O where were any then that might at least have moderated that my misery unto
me, and converted the fleeting beauties of these lowest things, at least to my
honest use; and set some lawful bounds unto their sweet temptations! That so
those tempestuous spring-tides of my youth might at least, have broken
themselves upon the shore of a conjugall life, and, if they could no other way
have been becalmed, might at least have been terminated with the legitimate
design of propagation of posterity, as thy law prescibes unto them, O Lord who
framest this supply of our mortality, and moderatest with a gentle hand, the
pricklings of these 2 Cor. 12. etc. Concupiscence.
thorns, which were not suffered to grow in thy Paradise: because thy
all-working power is not then far from us, even when we are far from thee.

Or, I my self ought more vigilantly to have attended unto the voice of thy
clouds sounding to me from above; such shall have trouble in the flesh; but I
spare you. 1 Cor. cap. 7.
And It is good for a Man, not to touch a Woman. And again: He that is
unmarried cares for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the
Lord; but he that is married cares for the things that are of the World, how
he may please his Wife. I ought therefore more vigilantly, * to have observed
these words, and so, making my self an Eunuch for the Kingdom of Heaven, more
happily* to have waited for thy own ever-blissfull embraces. But I, poor wretch
wrought like a troubled sea, following the course of that violent tide, and
having forsaken thee: and I overflowed all the lawful bounds of thy
prescriptions, and meanwhile escaped not thy heavy scourges (for who amongst
mortals can do this?) For thou were always upon my back, mercifully severe,
besprinkling with most bitter disgusts, all those my unlawful pleasures; that
so, at last, I might seek out for a pleasure void of any disgust, and might
discover nothing wherein I might have it, Psalm. 93.20. Vulg. T.
besides thee, O Lord; besides thee who prescribest these pangs unto us, by thy
most wise decree, and woundest, that thou may heal us; and killest us, lest
we should perish from thee.

Where was I then, and how far exiled from the delights of thy house, in that
Sixteenth year of the age of my flesh, when the rage of lust had received the
scepter in me, and when I had abandoned my self wholly unto it, being licenced
thereto indeed by humane shameless practice, but prohibited always, by thy
holy laws? Meanwhile my friends took no care to tie me, from this ruin, with
the bonds of marriage; but very careful they were to provide, that I should
learn to make a good speech, and to become a powerful Orator.

CHAP. III
Advanced by his living idly at home; by the ill example of his Companions; and
by his Parents neglect to marry him: though his Mother much dehorting him from
fornica ion, and more especially from Adultery.

NOw, for that year, were my studies intermitted; and I was called-home from
M^dauris, a neighbor City, whither, for the better learning of Grammar and
Oratory, I had been already sent abroad, whilst the expenses of a longer
journey, as far as Carthage, were providing, more out of a strong resolution,
than a sufficient estate of my Father, a very mean Townsman of Thagaste. To
whom tell I this? Not to thee, (O my God) but, before thee, to those of the
same humane condition with my self, how small a part soever of them shall
happen to light on these my writings: And to what purpose to them? Namely, that
both I and those, who read this, may consider, out of what profound depths here
we must still be crying to thee, (there thou still hearing at hand, where there
is a confessing heart, and a life of faith.) For who did not then highly
commend my Father, who, beyond the power of his mean estate, would allow his
Son whatever was necessary to his travels abroad, for advancement of his
studies? (whilst many Citizens far more wealthy did no such thing for their
Children.) When as meanwhile the same my father took no thought, what a one I
might grow toward thee, or how chaste my life were; so that only I proved
eloquent and disert, or rather deserted of thy culture O God; who art the one
only, true, and good, owner and cultivater of this my heart, thy field.

But, in that sixteenth year of my mine age (whilst domestic necessities
caused a vacation from school, and I lived idle at home with my parents) how
did the briars of lusts grow even ore mine head, Psalm. 37.5. Vulg.
and there was not found any hand to destroy them.

Nay; but when also that my father spyed me, in the Bath, now growing toward
man, and troubled with the unquiet motions of youth, ravished with the hopes of
seeing shortly more posterity, he rejoicing, presently told it to my Mother;
rejoicing; out of that general intoxicating humor, whereby this world, having
forgotten thee its Creator, is become enamoured of thy creature instead of
thee, from the fumes of that invisible wine of their perverted will, stooping
and debasing it self to these lowest of things. But in my mothers chaste breast
thou had already begun, thy Temple, and the foundation of thy holy
habitation, (for he was yet but a Catechumen newly converted); She therefore
(upon hearing it) was seized with as much fear and trembling; being afflicted
for me although I was yet Many, in those days, whose practices were not yet
sufficiently reformed, for a long time deferred Baptism: reserving it as a
sovereign remedy at last for cleansing them at once from all their fore-pa^t
sins.
no Christian professed, nor baptized, lest I should stray in those common
crooked by-ways, in which others walk, who turn not their face, but back, upon
thee.

Woe is me; and dare I yet say, that thou heldest thy peace, the while I wandered
thus still farther from thee? And whose then, but thine, was that sweet counsel
by my Mother, thy Disciple, which thou sungest in mine ears, but nothing
whereof descended into my heart to perform it? For She requested, and in secret
(I remember) with great solicitude admonished me, to keep my self pure from
women, especially from defiling any ones Wife. Which seemed to me but womanish
advice, and which men should be ashamed to obey: and it was thine; and I knew
it not, supposing thee to be silent, and her to speak it, who, by her, wast not
silent unto me; and, in her, wast also despised by me; by me, her son, the son
of thine handmaid, Psalm. 116.16.
and thy Subject. But I knew it not, and rushed still headlong with so much
precipitancy and blindness, that amongst my equals I was ashamed of any less
filthiness, than what I heard them boast of; and they boasted every one so much
more, by how much more beastly they were; and I rejoiced to do the like as they
did, not only for the pleasure, but praise, of the Fact.

What is there reproachful, but only vice? And I, to avoid reproach, still
became more vicious: and, when there happened nothing, by acting whereof I might
equal others guilt, I feigned, I did, what I did not, lest I should seem more
contemptible, by how much I was more innocent: and lest I should feem more
vile, by how much I was more chaste. Behold, with what companions I traveled in
those streets of Babylon; and wallowed in the mire thereof, as in a bed of
spices and precious odours; while the invisible enemy trampled upon me, and
seduced me, because I my self was prone also to be so seduced. Neither had that
Mother of my flesh (already escaped out of the midst of Babylon, but in the
skirts thereof, yet slow-paced) though she had counseled me chastity, so taken
care to restrain that lust (which her husband had discovered to her in me, and
which she knew, for the present, so infectious, and, for the future, so
pernicious to me) within the bounds of a conjugal affection, if it were found
to be otherwise incurable. She had not taken due care of this, because afraid,
lest all my hopes should be spoiled by the fetters of a Wife; my hopes; not
such a hope, as my Mother had in thee, of the next happy world to come, but the
hope of my learning forsooth; in which both my parents were too too desirous of
my proficiency; He, because he thought but little on thee, and many vain things
of me; She, because She supposed those usual prosecutions of science would be
no hindrance, but some help, toward the knowledge of thee. (For such, I
conjecture, were the inclinations of my parents.) Then also were the reins,
beyond all the temper of due severity, let loose unto me, of spending my time
in idle sports and recreations, to my growing still more dissolute, in various
lusts: and a mist in every thing was before my eyes, intercepting from me (O
God) the serenity of thy truth: Ps. 72.7. Vulg. T.
And iniquity grew up in me, as in a fertile soil.

CHAP. IV.
Of his Theft, * done only out of wantonness.

THeft is a thing that is punished by thy law (O Lord) and also by the law
written in the hearts of men; which law wickedness it self never utterly
cancels in us: for, what thief does easily endure a thief? or, who, in plenty,
endures another stealing for necessity? Yet I also, lusted to steal, and
executed it, not forced thereto by want or need; but out of a loathing of
honesty, and longing to sin. For I stole that, of which I had, my self, great
plenty, and much better; neither delighted I in the fruition of the thing
stolen, but only in the sin of the theft.

Near a vineyard of ours, there was a tree well-loaden with apples, not much
tempting either sight or taste: a company of wicked boys of us went late at
night to rob it; having till then (according to a loose custom) drawn out our
sports in the streets: And thence we carried great loads, not for our own
eating, but even to be cast to the hogs, after we had first only-tasted them,
and delighted our selves in the doing of, what we pleased, not what we ought.

Lo: my heart (O my God) lo, my heart (whereof thou had pity, in the bottom
of this hell) let it now tell thee, what it was, that it then affected? Even,
that I might be wicked gratis, and have no provocation to ill, but the evil it
self. I was enamoured of this, I only loved to perish; I loved to be faulty;
not that thing in the which I was faulty, but the very faultiness I loved.
Unclean and filthy soul, starting from thy stable firmament, toward all
extremes; not, by disgrace, prosecuting something else, but only the disgrace.

CHAP. V.
-- And * void of excuse; when -- as most sins pretend some good to the sinner.

THere is a tempting appearance in all fair and glittering bodies, in gold, and
in silver, and the rest: also in carnal touches, there is a sympathy that
transports us; and in the rest of our senses, there is a contemperature of
other bodies exactly tuned to the complacency of each of them. Even temporal
honor, and the power of conquering, and mastery, has its splendour and
ornament, whence springs so strong an appetite of revenge (yet therefore may
not we, for gain of these, O Lord, depart from thee, nor turn aside from thy
law). The mortal life also, which we live here, has its blandishments, from a
certain kind of symmetry, and proportion that it has to all the rest of these
lower beauties. And, in it, the friendship also of men is, in a ravishing
manner, sweet from a combined union of many hearts.

And, upon occasion of all these, and the like, much sin is committed: whilst,
by an immoderate propension to these, the last of goods, those best and highest
are deserted, even Thou, O Lord our God, and thy truth, and thy law. For these
things below have also their delights, but not like my God, Psalm. 32.1.
by whom all they were made, because in him does the righteous delight, and he
is the joy of the upright in heart.

Therefore, when we question, for what cause any crime is done; it is presumed to
proceed, either from a desire of acquiring, or a fear of losing, some of these
the meanest of goods: because they also are some way lovely and pretty, though
in comparison of those superior treasures, and beatifical riches, contemptible
and base.

One man has murdered another; what moved him to it? he loved his wife, or his
land, or would rob him for his own livelihood, or from the other feared some
such loss; or, first insured, thirsted for revenge. Would he commit a murder
upon no cause? taken only with the murder? who can imagine this? for, as for
that furious and cruel Catiline
man, that was said to be gratuito malus atque crudelis; spontaneously wicked,
and blood-thirsty gratis; yet is there a cause assigned, ne per otium, etc.
l^st his mind or hand, through idleness, should grow useless. And why indeed
was he such? but, * that, the City being surprised by his mischievous
practices, he might possess the honor, wealth, command thereof; * that, in so
necessitous a fortune, so guilty a conscience, he might be free from fear, of
laws, and of want. Therefore was not Catiline himself in love with his own
villainies, but with something else, for which sake he did them.

CHAP. VI.
BUt, O my Theft, that wicked night-exploit of my sixteen years age, what was
it then, that wretched I so much loved in thee? For nothing fair thou were,
because thou were Theft, or indeed, were thou at all any thing, that thus I
speak unto thee? Indeed the fruit we robbed was fair, because it was thy
Creature, thou fairest of all, Creator of all, my good God, God my true and my
supreme good; fair was the fruit, but that was not it, after which my miserable
soul lusted, having thereof far better, in great plenty, of our own. But the
other rather I liked, because so I might steal it; which being once gathered,
as having now sufficiently satisfied my appetite, I threw it away; enjoying
thereof only the pleasure of the sin: or if I chanced to taste any of the fruit,
that, which sweetened it unto me, was the offense.

And now, O Lord my God, fain would I know, what it was, in this fault, that so
much delighted me: and behold I cannot find the least allurance of any beauty
in it. I do not mean such beauty as is seen in the divine habits of Justice and
Prudence; or, as in the highest faculties of understanding and memory; or, as
in the subtility of the senses; or yet in the vigours of Vegetation: nor yet
(inferior to these) as the stars are glorious and orderly in their Orbs; or,
as the Earth and Sea are beautiful in their kind; being always laden with
breed; a new growth of which, in their unexhausted womb, still succeeds a
former departed. But I mean such a gloss at least, as there is (a faint and
painted one) in many a deluding vice. For, both * the sin of pride (to be some
way like unto thee) emulates highness, when as thou art only, above all, the
most high God. And * Ambition aims at glory and honor; when as thou alone art
honorable supreamly, and eternally glorious. And * the cruelty of the great
ones desires so to become reverenced and feared; and who is to be feared, but
God alone? from whose power what, Psalm. 76.7.
or when, or where, or how, or by whom, can ever any thing, by force or fraud,
be subducted? And * the caresses of the lascivious seek to be loved: when as
neither is any thing so dearly sweet as thy Love, nor so savingly enamouring,
as thy above-all-beautifull and enlightening Truth. And * Curiosity makes
semblance of a desire of knowledge, when, as it is Thou, that perfectly
understandest all things. Also, even * ignorance and folly, clothes it self
with the name of simplicity and innocence; because not any thing is found like
simple as thy self, and what is there innocent like thee, whose works are
harmfull only to the sinner. And * sloth affects, as it were, quiet; but what
repose certain, besides the Lord? * Luxury desires to be called satiety and
plenty, yet thou art the only fullness, and never-failing abundance of
uncorrupting dainties. * Lavishing hides it self under the shadow of
liberality; but the most royally overflowing doner of all good things is thy
self. * Avarice would have much to be in its fruition; and it is Thou that
possessest all things. * Envy contends for pre-eminence; and what is so
pre-excellent, as thy self?* Anger pretends just vengeance; and who executes it
righteously like thee? * Fear abhorrs things, unusual, surprising, and Enemies
to what she loves; whilst she is always precautelous of her safety; now to
thee only it is, that nothing comes unacquainted or sudden; and who can part
what thou love from thee? and where, but with thee, ever dwells unshaken
security? * Sorrow pines for those things lost, in whose enjoyment she
delighted, because she desires, that nothing may be taken away from her; as
nothing can, from thee. After these the soul goes a whoring, when she is
departed from thee; and seeks, besides thee, what she never finds pure and
clear, but when returned unto thee. And yet all they (in a wrong way) imitate,
and seek likeness unto, thee, who render themselves far from thee, and who
pride themselves most against thee. And, in this their imitating and resembling
thee, show thee to be the Creator of all nature, and that, in it, they cannot
any-whither recede from thee. What therefore in that Theft was it, that I
loved? and in what here (though viciously and perversely) have I also imitated
my Lord? Was it, that I had a desire, to act against the law, by sleight, where
I could not, by power; and, though restrained by it, yet would imitate a lame
kind of liberty, in doing, free from punishment, what I could not, free from
guilt, out of a fond resemblance of thy omnipotency.

CHAP VII.
He laments his offenses: and praises God, for the Remission thereof by
Baptism.

SEe, if this were a good Servant; thus flying from his Lord, and embracing a
shadow of him. O corruption, monstrosity of life, profoundness of death, could
I then lust after what was unlawful, for no other reason, but because
unlawful? Psalm. 116.12.
What shall I render unto the Lord, that, whilst my memory now recalls these
things, my soul does not dread them? I will love thee O Lord my God, and give
thanks unto thee, and confess unto thy name, because thou have forgiven my, so
great iniquities, and detestable deeds. To thy grace I depute it, Psalm. 9.2.
and to thy mercy, that those sins, I committed, are now dissolved like ice;
and to thy grace I depute it also, whatsoever other sins I have not committed:
for what one crime would I not have acted, who loved such an act for its being
criminous? Therefore, * of all these sins Being sins committed before his
Baptism.
I confess my self released by thee; not only * of those, by my own wilfulness
effected, but * of those, by thy guidance avoided.

And who is he, that, well-weighing his frailty, dares to attribute his
chastity, or his innocence, to his own ability: that so he should less love
thee, as less obliged to that thy mercy, by which thou remittest sins to those,
who return unto thee? And whoever he be, that, called by he, has straight
followed thy voice, and has happily escaped, what he here reads by me sadly
confessed; hence let him not scorn me, because, being sick I received my cure,
from that Physician; from whom, himself also received a preservative, that he
was not sick, or rather, that he was not so sick. But, for this, let him as
much, nay more, love thee; because, by what hand he sees me from these
languishments of sin, recovered, by the same he sees himself, from the
languishings of sin, preserved.

CHAP. VIII.
Yet, that he should not have done that theft without company.

WHat fruit had I then, poor soul, Romans 6.21.
in those things whereof my remembrance now is ashamed? Especially in that act,
wherein I loved nothing, save only the very Theft; and it also was, really,
nothing; See L. 3. C. 7. L. 7. C. 12.
and therefore more wretched still I in loving it? Yet (being alone) I had not
committed it; so I call to mind my self then, that I should not at all have
done it, being alone. Therefore in it, I loved also the association of others,
with whom I did it; and so loved something besides the Theft; though this
something also is nothing.

Psalm. 1.8.28. Psalm. 13.9.23.
For, in reality, what is it? (who can instruct me, but he that enlightens my
heart, and discovers all the shadie corners thereof?) what is this, that here
comes anew to be enquired and examined? for if then, I had loved only the
stolen fruit, or coveted only the possession of it, I might alone have
executed the sin, which would have compassed my content; and not have enflamed
the itch of my desires by the mutual rubbings of other conscious parties. But,
as my delight was not in the fruit, but the action; so, the delight of the
action arose out of the concurrence of others, consenting to be co-peccants
with me.

CHAP. IX.
WHat was this humor then in me? Too too bad I confess, and great woe was to me
by it. But yet what was it? Psalm. 19.12.
and who can understand his faults? Why, it made us laugh, and tickled us with
joy, that we cosened those; by whom any such thing of us was little imagined,
and less wished. Why then was I so pleased, not to do it alone? Because none,
hardly, laughs by himself; though laughter sometimes also may overcome us all
alone; when something very ridiculous presents it self, to our sight, or to our
fancy: but, as for me, alone I should never have done this. See, O my God, the
fresh remembrance of my then-inclinations set before thee; that that theft had
never been done by me, alone; wherein, that which I stole pleased me not, but
that I stole it; and this to me alone would have yielded no delight. O Enemy
friendship, powerful inveigler of the soul: to an unaccountable greediness of
mischief, even out of jest and merriment, and to an appetite of another loss,
without any lust of my own gain, or without any lust of revenge! but only,
because it is said; Let Us go; let us do it: and then we are ashamed, not to be
shameless.

CHAP.X.
WHo can perfectly unfold this so involved and entangled a knot? so foul a
business, I can intend it no more, no more reflect upon it. But thee will I
contemplate, O righteousness and innocence, * beautiful and comely to all chaste
eyes, and * of a satiety never 2satisfying. With thee are the riches of true
repose, and life void of perturbation. Who so enters into thee, Mat. 5^ 21.
enters into the joy of his Lord. And he shall have nothing more, whereof to be
afraid, but in the most happiest, ever be most happy. From thy stability was I
dispersed, from thee I went astray, O my God, too much astray, in that my
Youth, and so became to my self a barren Land.

LIB. III.
CHAP. I.
Of his journey to Carthage, to finish his studies; and his Amorous passions
there.

TO Carthage now I came; and there on every side sounded in my ears the hot
reports of unchaste Loves. And I, though not yet in Love, yet then loved to be
in love; and, in this want of something to be loved by me, I, out of a more
secret want, hated my self because I wanted less; and I earnestly sought about
for something which I might love, in love with being in love. And I loathed
easy security; and a way without snares. And all, because there was a famine
within me of that spiritual food (thy self my God). And yet being thus sterved,
I was not an hungered; but void of appetite to that incorruptible sustenance;
not because I was full thereof, but because the more empty I was of it, the
more fastidious. And for this reason my soul was sickly, and being full of
itchy ulcers, miserably broke out, seeking to be scratched and rubbed with the
touch of sensitive and corporeal things; yet these corporeals would not at all
be so affected, if they were destitute of a soul; yet to love, and to be loved
of, those souls, so became far more sweet unto me, if the body also of what I
loved were enjoyed by me.

And thus I defiled the chaste source of a pure amity with the dirt of unclean
concupiscence; and from the hell of lust below beclouded its brightness; and
when I was so nasty and filthy, yet I fancied my self fine and courtly, out of
a strange excess of vanity.

And at length I fell into the toils of love, in which I desired so much to be
entangled. My God, my mercy, with how much gall (and yet with how much
compassion) did thou besprinkle those sweets unto me? For then I happened
also to be re-beloved; and so was in secret admitted also into the bond of
fruition, and most joyfully was fettered in those disasterous chains, that I
might be scourged sufficiently afterward with the glowing iron-rods of
Jealousies, and suspicions, and Fears, and Wraths, and quarrels.

CHAP II.
Of Stage Plays much affected by him, and, of the faulty passions they caused
in him.

ABout this time also I was mainly carried away with Stage Plays and
interludes, which were replenished with * the images of my own miseries, and *
the fuel of my fires. And here what means it, that a man desires to grieve in
beholding these mournful and tragical sights, which things himself would by no
means suffer? and yet from them he suffers sorrow, when a spectator; and this
sorrow is his delight. What means this, but a wretched madness in men? For so
much more is any affected by them, by how much himself is less free from the
like passions. Though when himself suffers such things, it is misery; when he
compassionates others, it is styled Pity. But what kind of pity that, in these
(only feigned and scenical) disasters? For there the Auditor is not solicited
to succor, but invited to deplore; and he applauds the Actors of those
representations the more, the more they make him grieve. And if perhaps the
calamities of such persons, whether historical, or feigned, be so coldly acted,
as not to contristate the spectator, be speedily departs full of anger and
disdain; but, if it be otherwise, stays attentive, and sheds joyful tears.
Love we sorrows then, and tears? Surely every one desires joy rather. Or, is
it, that, when as we desire, that none should be miserable, yet we are pleased,
that our selves should be pitiful, and this pity not being at all without some
grief, therefore becomes grief it self also affected? And all this proceeds from
a certain vein and source of friendship in us.

But whither goes that source? Whither runs it? Wherefore falls it at length
into that torrent of boiling pitch, those vast whirlpools of stinking lusts,
into which it becomes wilfully changed and transformed, being precipitated and
degraded from its own celestial purity? Must all affection and pity then be
abandoned? by no means; and hence sometimes grief also may be loved. But beware
of any uncleaness in these, O my soul, under the tuition of my God, the God of
our Fathers, and through all ages to be praised and superexalted, beware of any
uncleanesse in them. For now also am I not void of compassion and pity: But
whereas then in those theaters I co-rejoyced with lovers, when enjoying their
unchaste desires (though these imaginary only, in the play) and, out of pity to
them, grew as sad, when they lost one another; and yet both these passions
afforded me delight; I now (contrary) more pity one, when triumphing in his
obtained wickedness, than when despairing in the missing of that pernicious
pleasure, and in the loss of that miserable felicity.

This certainly is the truer compassion: but in it the heart is not joyed. For
though he is commended for doing an office of charity, that condoles another
misery; yet had he always rather, that thing had not been, which he condoles,
whosoever is truly compassionate. For if goodwill could be thus ill-wishing
(which cannot be) then he, that truly and sincerely pities, might desire
another should be miserable, to the end that himself so might be merciful. Some
grief then is to be approved, none to be loved (yet is it sometimes too
approved: for this belongs to thee only, Lord God, that whilst thou love
souls far more purely then we, and more incorruptibly have pity toward them,
yet no manner of sorrow for them can wound thee. And who is sufficient for such
things besides thee?) But I then poor wretch Loved to grieve; and searched what
might cause it; when, in another man's, and this only a personated, disaster,
that action of the player delighted more, and stronglier bewitched me, that
drew tears from me. And what marvel was it, that I an unfortunate sheep,
strayed from thy flock, and impatient of thy discipline, should be overspread
with such a nasty scab? And hence was that affection to sorrow, not such, as
pierced me inwardly (for neither did I love to suffer, what I loved to see);
but such, as, being related only, and feigned, but razed as it were the skin of
my soul, yet, like the scratching of an envenomed nail, an enflamed tumor and
impostumation and putrefaction followed upon it. Such was the life I led: But
indeed was that then to be called a life, O my God.

CHAP. III.
His Concupiscence in the Church; the Ambition of his studies; and conversation
amongst the jeering and abusive Wits.

ANd, then, thy mercy (ever faithful to me) hovered still afar off over me.
Whilst I was dissolved into all impiety, pursuing a sacrilegious curiosity,
which brought me, having forsaking thee, to low and treacherous vanities, and
to the circumventing service of maligning Devils, to whom I sacrificed my
villainies; though in them all I was still scourged by thee. Then I dared even
in the celebration of thy solemn feasts, within the walls of thy sanctuary, to
exercise my concupiscence, and to drive the trade of procuring the fruits of
death: for which thou scourgedst me with grievous pains, but nothing comparable
to my crimes, O thou my exceeding great mercy, my God, thou, who were also my
refuge from those terrible mischievous The Eversores.
persons, amongst whom I gadded here and there with an outstretched neck, a
runaway from thee, loving my own ways and not thine, and loving that my
fugitive Liberty.

Those studies, which were counted of great repute, had a strong influence upon
me (as, fitting us for pleading in the public Courts of Justice) and I, had an
ambition to be excellent in them; thus to become so much the famouser, how much
by my eloquence more deceiving: so great is the blindness of Men, glorying also
in their blindness. And, by this time I was grown a head-Scholler in the
Rhetorick-school, pleased with self-conceit, and swollen with pride; though
much more modest, O Lord, thou know, than some others were; and far removed
from those Eversions, the The bafling Wits of the school
Eversores made (for this cruel and diabolical name is, as it were, a badge of
their witty urbanity). Amongst these I lived with a shameless bashfulness,
because my self was not the like; and with these I conversed; being taken with
their society, whose actions I ever abhorred; I mean those eversions of theirs,
with which they wantonly persecuted the modesty of new-comers gratis and
unprovoked, abusing and disgracing them, and therewith feeding their malicious
mirth: An act so like to those of Devils, that what could they be more truly
called, than Eversores? being everted first and perverted themselves, by those
maligning Spirits, who first deceive and deride them in this very thing, that
they delight to deride and to deceive others.

CHAP. IV.
In the nineteenth year of his age, his reading of Cicero's Hortensius invites
him, from affectation of Eloquence, to the search of Wisdom.

AMongst this company (then a youth) I learned books of Eloquence; in which I
desired to be eminent; but out of a faulty and ambitious end, and a fond
affectation of humane vanities; and, in the usual course of study, I then was
to read a certain book of one Cicero, whose tongue almost all Men admire, not
so his heart. Which Treatise of his contained an exhortation to Philosophy,
called Hortensius: And this book it was, that first altered my affections, and
turned my addresses unto thee, (O Lord) and rendered my purposes and desires
clean of another mould, than formerly. Suddenly all other vain aspirings were
slighted by me, and with incredible ardency I lusted after the immortality of
wisdom; and began already to rise up, that I might again return unto thee. Now,
not to sharpen my tongue (which thing I came thither to purchase with the
exhibition my Mother then allowed me, I being now nineteen years old, and my
Father deceased two years before) no more now (...) my tongue made I use of
that book; nor did the how, but what, was said, in it, affect me.

Now how did I burn, O my God, how did I burn to re-mount up from things
terrene toward thee (not then knowing, what thou would act with me)? For with
thee only is wisdom; and the love of wisdom (called Philosophy) was it, with
which those writings so enflamed me. There are those that seduce through
Philosophy; with this smooth and noble and virtuous name palliating and
coloring ore their errors; and almost all, who in those, or in former, times,
were such, are in that book noted and set down. And there likewise was
expressed that salvifical admonition of thy spirit by thy pious and devout
Servant. Col. 2.8.
Beware lest any Man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the
tradition of Men, after the rudiments of the World, and not after Christ, for
in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

And I (for thou O Light of my soul know, that the Apostolical advice was
then unknown to me) was much pleased with this in that exhortation of Cicero's;
that it excited, and kindled, and enflamed, me not to this or that sect, but to
the affecting and pursuance, and apprehending of wisdom it self (whatever it
were). And, in this great ardency of mine, this one thing only cooled me, that
the name of Christ was not there. Because this name, according to thy mercy, O
Lord, this name of my Savior thy Son, my tender heart, with my very Mothers
milk, had piously imbibed, and deeply apprehended; and whatsoever wanted this
name, though never so learned, polite, or veritable, yet did not wholly sway me.

CHAP. V.
Not finding our Savior in Philosophy he turns to the Scriptures: Whose humble
style, in comparison of Tullie's, gives him distaste.

THerefore now I designed my studies to the holy scripture, to see what a
writing it was. And behold I find it, not intelligible to the proud, nor yet
discovered and naked to Children; but in its style lowly; lofty in its sense,
and veiled with mysteries. Nor was I such as could enter into it, or stoop my
neck unto its humble pace: for not as I judge now, so fancied I then, when I
first looked upon that sacred book. But to me altogether unworthy it seemed to
be once compared to Tully's lofty style; for my swollen tumor abhorred its
sober temper, and my sight pierced not the inside thereof. Yet such it was, as
would still have grown up higher together with those who were little ones, as
they should grow higher; but such a little one I scorned to be; and swelled
with pride, me thought I was some great one,

CHAP. VI.
In quest of wisdom, he falls into the society and errors of the Manichees,
absurd, pernicious.

ANd even therefore I fell among the proudly doting, The Manichees.
and too too carnal, and yet great Talkers; in whose mouths were laid the
snares of Satan, and a catching birdlime, compounded of the commixture of the
syllables of Thy name, and also of that of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the
Comforter the Holy Spirit. In their mouth were all these very rife; but in the
sound only and noise of the tongue, with a heart void of truth. And they spoke
of Truth and Truth, and many they were that named it unto me; and no where was
it in them; but false things they spoke, not of thee only, who art the true
Truth, but also of those elements of the World, thy Creatures. Of which I found
the Philosophers speaking truth (yet those also I ought to have passed by for
the (transcending) love of thee, my Father, the highest good, and the beauty of
all that is beauteous.)

O Truth Truth, how intimately then did the very marrow of my soul suspire
toward thee, when they noised thy name unto me often and variously, but in
words only, and in many and voluminous writings

Note; that all that which follows, thus marked, the Reader, if he please, may
omit, as less pertinent to the Story.
[And those were their dishes, wherein to me, hungring after thee, were served
up, instead of thee, the Sun and the Moon, splendid works of thine, but thy
works though, and not thee; nor those the primest of them: for thy spiritual
works precede those corporeal, though glorious and celestial. But, neither was
it those thy primest Creatures, but thy self (Thou O Truth, Jam. 1.17*
in whom is no change, neither shadow of turning) whom I hungered and thirsted
after. In stead of whom those tables presented me yet with other glittering
phantasmes, when far worthier had it been, to have pitched my admiration upon
the sun, to my eyes a real thing, then on those other falsities, wherein my
mind through my eyes was deceived. And yet taking them to be thee, I fed upon
them; not so greedily indeed; for what relish had these like unto thee with
which I then was fed, or emptied rather? Meat in a dream, though not feeding
us, resembles that, which we feed on, waking; but, that food did not the least
resemble thee, as thy sweetness has now appeared unto me: for they were but
corporeal phantasmes, the counterfeits of bodies; more real than which, are
those true ones, which with our fleshly sight, we contemplate, whether Heaven
or Earthly. We together with the beasts and fouls gaze on these; more real
therefore they are, than those we only imagine; yet again more reasonably do we
imagine those, than conjecture and derive again from them yet more vast and
infinit-nothings: With which emptinesses I was then fed, or rather was not fed
at all.

But thou (O my Love) into whose arms I faint, that I might there gain
strength, art neither those bodies above, which we see, though from Heaven thou
come, nor art thou those we there see not, for all them have thou framed;
neither countest thou them the chiefest of thy works How much more remote then
art thou from being those my phantasms, the fantasies of bodies which are not;
more real than which are the images of those bodies that are, and yet the
bodies themselves more certain, than these; which real bodies yet thou art not.
Neither yet art thou the soul, which is the life of these bodies; and this life
of bodies is better, stabler, than the bodies, but thou art the life of the
souls, the life of these lives, living always from thy self and never
varying.] O thou life of my soul. Where were thou at that time, and at how
great a distance? And I sojourned far from thee, being deprived even of the
husks of those swine, whom I then fed with husks. For how much better were the
fables of the Grammarians and the Poets, than these cheats. [For making a
verse, and a sonnet, and a Medea flying in the air, etc. were more to purpose,
than five Elements colourably diversified to suit the five caves of darkness;
which are mere nothing in themselves, yet mortal to those who believe them. But
my verses and my poetry I exercise on the Elements, that truly are so. And for
Medea's flying, I neither believe it sung, nor sing it to be believed; but the
other I believed.]

Alas! alas! by what stairs was I conveyed into the depths of hell? Prove. 9.18.
For, toiling and sweating in quest of still-wanted truth, whilst I sought thee
O my God (for to thee it is I now confess my faults, who had pity on me,
before I confessed them unto thee) whilst I sought thee, not according to the
higher reason of my understanding, in which thou had pleased to advance me
above beasts, but according to the exterior sense of my carnality, (when as
thou meanwhile wast more interior, to me than what of me was most intimate, and
more superior then what was my highest) I lighted upon that shameless, Prove.
9.16.17.
witless woman (Salomons Emblem of error) sitting at the door of her house,
and saying: Come eat ye secretly of my pleasant bread, and steal ye a draught
of my sweet waters. Who easily seduced me, because she found my soul inhabiting
abroad in the eye of my flesh, and chewing its cud upon such food, as it had,
before, received and swallowed by the senses.

CHAP. VII.
Their questions that stumbled him; and the solutions of them: in the three
Chapters following.

FOr meanwhile, that which was true in thy word was not truly understood by me;
and their seeming acuteness moved me to assent to those silly deceivers, when
they put such questions unto me; Whence came Evil? Supposed Ten en^ of
Christianity. See Genesis 1.26, 27. Genesis 16.2 Genesis 22.10.


Again; I knew not God to be a Spirit, and not such a thing, whose parts were
extended in length and breadth,

And again; I knew not, that true and interior justice, not judging out of
customs, but out of the perfect Law of meanwhile, in all times, and all places,
remains but one; not, at any time diverse, or any where otherwise: According
to which, Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and Moses, and David, were righteous,
and commended by God, though deemed ungodly by silly men, judging according to
their own short day, and measuring, by a little span of their own fashions, 1
Cor. 4.3.
the universal customs of all mankind; As if one in an Armory, not knowing
what suited to every member, would cover his head with Greaves, and his feet
with an Helmet, and then murmur at his ill accoutrement: Or, when traffic is
forbidden for an afternoon, a shopkeeper should rage, that he was not
permitted to sell his wares, because he might only do this in the morning: Or,
a Servant in a house, seeing another take something in hand, which perchance
the cup bearer was forbid to meddle with, or something done behind the stables,
not sufferable in the Dining Room, should chafe, that in one dwelling, and one
family, the same thing, to every one, in every place was not allowed. Even such
are they, who strange at it, when they hear; that righteous men in one age
might do something, which in another, righteous men might not; and that God had
commanded one thing to these, to those another, for reasons temporal, whilst
still the same eternal justice is obeyed by both: when as yet in one man, and
on one day, and in one family, they see several things suit to the several
members; something formerly lawful, after an hour not so: some thing in one
corner permitted, or also commanded, that is in another forbidden and punished.
Does the rule of justice then swerve sometimes and vary from it self? No. But
the times, over which it presides, run not constant, and even, for they are
(fleeting) times. But men, whose days are few upon the earth, being, by their
short sense, unable to connex and reconcile the causes unexperienced of past
ages, and foreign Nations, with those of their own tried by them, and yet well
discerning in one body, or day, or house, what members, what minutes, what
rooms and persons every thing becomes, are offended in those, in these well
satisfied.

These things then I knew not, observed not; on every side they beat upon my
sight, I regarded them not. And I knew when I composed Sonnets I might not
place every foot every where, but in several kinds of verse, in a diverse
manner; and, in any one verse, not in all places the same foot; yet the art, by
which I composed, in its capacity comprehended all these varieties at once. And
I did not behold, that that justice which good and holy men obeyed, did far
more excellently and more sublimely together at once in fold all those things,
which it had severally commanded, and was in no part varied, and yet through so
varying times did distribute and enjoin, not all at once, but to each their
proprieties. And thus (Blind-man) I censured those holy Patriarchs, not only
managing the present affairs, as God commanded and inspired them; but also
thereby, foreshewing the future, as he revealed these unto them. Alluding to
the Israelites sacrificing of Beasts, and Abraham his Son, and other
ceremonies, that were typical.


CHAP. VIII.
BUt now, since some Constitutions are changeable, according to places and
times, becomes it then at any time, or in any place, unjust; To love God with
all ones heart, with all his soul, and with all his mind, and his neighbor as
himself? No. Those infamous crimes, which Flagitia.
are against nature it self, are, in every time, in every place, to be
abhorred, to be detested; such as those of the Sodomites were, which-like
should any other Nation at any time commit, they should incur the same guilt by
the divine Laws, which made not men so, as to use themselves in such manner.
For, by this is violated that society which we ought to have with God, when the
nature, whereof he is author, is polluted by the perversion of lust, contrary
to the Authors design. Likewise those infamous crimes, which are against the
civil society of men, (according to the diversity of their several usages and
practice) are to be avoided and forborne: As a covenant, which is ratified by a
custom or law made amongst those of any City or Nation, may not, at any
Native's or Forreigner's pleasure, be violated: for that is a deformed and
shapelesse part, that is not suting with its whole. But when God, against any
such Constitution or custom, commands a thing, though it (there) never was
done, yet now is it to be done; or, if intermitted, to be reinforced; or, if
not formerly instituted, it is then to be enacted. For if a Prince in the City,
for which he governs, may command something now, which neither any before him,
nor himself, before, had ere enjoined joined; and, without any detriment to the
common weal of that City, is obeyed (nay it were contrary to the weal, should
he be disobeyed, this being a principal ground of humane society, to obey their
Prince) how much more is God, the Governor of all his creatures, in whatever
he commands, to be observed? For, as, amongst humane authorities, for our
obedience, the greater is still preferred before the less, so* must God before
all.

And, what is said of the perpetual unlawfulness of infamous crimes, must be
said also of malicious practices Facinora.
toward our neighbor, wheresoever there is a licentious desire of hurting
another, Facinora.
whether it be by a contumely, or by an injury: and these, whether done * for
revenge, as an enemy toward his enemy; or * for some profit, as the robber to
the traveller; or, * for avoiding evil to our-selves, as we do to one we fear;
or, * out of envying another good; as the afflicted does, one more prosperous;
or one in prosperity another whom he fears should grow to be, or grieves, that
he already is equal unto him; or, * for the pleasure afforded us from another
pain; as the spectators of fightings, or the deriders and scoffers of other
men.

All these are several Heads of iniquity springing out of the pride of life,
the vanity of the eyes, and the lust of the flesh; 1 Jo. 2.1.
out of some one or two of these, or out of all three together; and who so, in
any time or nation, lives wickedly in these, trespasseth against the two Tables
of the three and seven Commandments, the instrument of Ten strings thy
Decalogue, O my most high and most dear God.

But what infamous crimes can be committed against thee, who art not at all
prostituted or defiled by them? or what injurious practices are against thee,
who can not at all be hurt by them? But that, which thou revengest is, what
men commit against themselves, for, their sinning against thee, Psalm. 26.12.
Vulg.
is the trespassing against their own souls; and iniquity still does the wrong
and the cozenage to it self; either when men licentiously corrupt and pervert
their own nature (which thou have created and regulated) by immoderate use of
things allowed, or by the burning (in things not allowed) after such an use of
them, as is against nature; or when they revolt against thy power in a
perverse-mind and blasphemous speeches, and kick against the pricks that wound
them. Or when they break down the pale of civil society by their audacious
combinations for lust or rapines, as any thing is delightful, or offensive, to
them.

And such things are done by us, when thou art deserted the Fountain of life,
who art the one and the true Creator and Rector of the Universe, and, by a
foolish and particular pride, some one thing, in some corner of it, that is
false, is loved before thee. And from this pride, it must be an humble piety
that reduces any unto thee: and then thou cleansest them from these evil
habits, and art merciful to the sins of such as confess them, and hear the
groanings of those in their fetters, and loosest the chains, with which we have
shackled our selves: so that, we do not again advance the proud horns of a
false liberty against thee, and through covetousness of enjoying something
more, suffer the loss of all; by loving a private, good of our own, more than
thee, the Universal good of all.

CHHP. IX.
AMongst these infamous crimes, and malicious practices, and so many sorts of
iniquities, are to be mentioned also the faults and deficiencies of those who
are proficients in piety. Which deficiencies by sincere judgments are both
disallowed, according to the rule of perfection, and yet the persons are
encouraged from the hope of a future improvement; as the green blade is
cherished, that after may be corn.

But there are some things again resembling heinous crimes or malicious deeds,
yet which are no faults at all, because they neither offend thee our Lord and
God, nor humane society: As when some things are procured, for the services of
life, suitable to the exigences of the time; although to others it is uncertain,
whether this procurement not mixed with some inordinate lust of having; or when
some-things are inflicted by a lawfully constituted power, with a charitable
mind of correcting, although to others it is uncertain, whether not mixed with
some malice of hurting. Therefore many deeds which might seem to men to be
disallowed, by thy testimony are approved; and as many, commended by men, are
by thy wisdom condemned. There being often a large difference between the
appearance of the act, and the intention of the actor, together with the
exigency of the secret circumstance of time wherein it is acted.

When therefore thou suddenly command some unusual and unexpected thing,
and which had formerly been by thee prohibited although the cause of such thy
command should, for that time, be occult, and though the thing repugnant,
perhaps, to the ratified league of some humane society, yet doubts any one,
that it is instantly to be obeyed, since that society of Men only truly
observes the rule of Justice, that obeys and serves thee? and happy they,
that know these thy commands. For the extraordinary things done by them that
obey thee, are either to exhibit something requisite for the present, or to
fore-signifie something in the future to be accomplished.

CHAP. X.
The Manichees opinion of the parts of God emprisoned in the Creature.

THese things I not knowing, derided those thy holy servants and Prophets. And
what was I, in deriding of them, but meanwhile derided by thee? being drawn by
small and insensible degrees, to such foolery, that I believed, when a fig was
gathered, that both it, and the tree its Mother shed milken tears for such a
violence. Which fig, notwithstanding, if some Manichean-Saint should eat (after
first plucked forsooth by some other's, and not his crime) his bowels enclosed,
and his breath at every belch or every sigh in his prayers, from them exhaled,
Angels, nay some particles of the Deity it self: which pieces of the high and
true God were captived in that fruit, until the teeth, and digestion, of some
Elect-Saint restored their liberty. And wretchedly I thought more mercy due to
these fruits of the Earth, then to the men, for whom they grew; for of these
fruits should any one a hungered, that was no Manichean, have begged a piece,
that morsel seemed to me, as it were, condemned to a capital punishment, if
given unto him.

CHAP XI.
His weeping Mother comforted, * by a vision, concerning his Conversion.

ANd thou sentest thine hand from above, and drewest my soul out of this
profound darkness, whilst my Mother, being one of thy All, and only the
Baptized were called Fideles.
Faithful, wept for me unto thee far more bitterly, than other mothers bewail
any corporeal funerals. For well discerned she that my far worser death, by the
Faith, and the Spirit, which she had from thee. And Thou hearkenedst unto her;
thou hearkenedst unto her, nor despisedst thou her tears, when streaming from
her they watered the ground in every place of her devotions, and thou
hearkenedst unto her. For whence else-came-that Dream wherewith thou
comfortedst her, so far as to persuade her that I should live with her again,
and sit at the same table in the house again with her (a thing she had begun to
be averse from, avoiding and detesting the horrid blasphemies of those my
errors). For she saw (in her sleep) her self standing upon a certain straight
wooden Rule, and coming toward her a beautiful young man, cheerful, and smiling
upon her, as she was weeping, and spent with grief; who asking the cause of
that her sorrow and daily tears (with intention to instruct, not to learn of,
her) and she answering that it was my perdition she so bewailed, he bade her be
secure; and wished her to look about, and she should see, that, where she was,
I was also: who, when she looked aside, saw me close by her standing upon the
same Rule. And from whence all this, but from thy attentive ears formerly bowed
to her praying heart?

O Thou Good Omnipotent, so caring for every one of us, as if thou caredst for
him only; yet so caring for all, as for any one: Whence again was that also?
that she relating to me her Vision, and I interpreting it thus, that she rather
should not despair of being one day what I was: suddenly without any
hesitation, No, said she; for it was not said to me; where he, there also you;
But: where you, there also he. I confess unto thee, O Lord, as much as I
remember (and I have often spoke of it) that this answer of thine given me by
my mother, when she was now awake (that she, not at all perplexed with that
false but indeed very colorable interpretation of mine, so quickly saw that,
which also my self, before she spoke it, had not observed) struck me even at
that time far more, than her dream; in which this pious woman had her joy to
come so long after foretold her, for the solace of her present grief, so long
before.

For there succeeded yet almost nine years, in which I (endeavoring often to
arise, and by this still plunged so much the deeper) lay wallowing in the mire
of that pit, and darkness of error, the while that chaste, devout, sober Widow
(such as thou love) already much chearfuller in her hopes, but no whit
slacker in her weeping, and laments, never ceased, at all the hours of her
devotions, to bewail my condition unto thee. And her prayers found admittance
into thy presence; and notwithstanding thou let'st me go on to be involved, and
reinvolved more and more in that cloud of darkness.

CHAP. XII.
And * by the answer of a Bishop; who (notwithstanding) refused to reason with
him as yet too-self-conceited.

ANd in this interim Thou gave her yet another answer, which now I call to
mind. For many things I omit (hasting to those which more urge my confession
unto thee) and many things I have forgot. Thou gave therefore yet another
answer by thy Priest, a certain Bishop, one nursed within the bosom of thy
Church, and well-experienced in thy Books. Whom that woman soliciting, that he
would vouchsafe a Conference with me, to refute my errors, and to unteach me
ill, and to instruct me good things, (for this he did, where happily he found
persons capable) he refused: (and that very prudently; as I perceived since)
answering her, that I was as yet indocile, being swollen, and puffed up with the
novelty of that heresy; For already I had netled diverse unexpert men with some
trifling questions, as she also had declared unto him. But, Let him alone (said
he) where he is: only pray to our Lord for him; In reading he will at length
discover, what that error is, and how great its impiety.

He told also, that he, when a little one, was, by his seduced Mother,
committed to the Manichees institution; and had not only read, but also copied
out almost all their books; and that himself discerned (unopposed or convinced
by any) how much to be abhorred that impious sect was; and that so he forsook
it. This said; and she nevertheless not satisfied, but persisting (with much
entreating, and weeping much) that he would see me, would discourse with me,
now a little disgusted with this her importunity; Go your way (said he) and may
you live happy; for it cannot be, that the child of those tears should
miscarry. Which speech she received in such manner (as she has since many
times told me) as if an oracle from heaven had sounded it unto her.

LIB. IV.
CHAP. I.
From the Nineteenth, to his twenty eighth, year continuing addicted to the
Manichees.

FOr this space of Nine years (from the Nineteenth of my age to the
Twenty-eighth) we lived in various lusts; seduced, and seducing; deceived and
deceiving, openly, by the Sciences, which they call Liberal; secretly, with a
false-named Religion; here arrogant, there superstitious, every where vain, and
zealous of the emptiness of popular praise, in Theatrical applause; and playing
public prizes of wit; and in contentions for crowns of Hay, and the fooleries
of shows, and the excess of Lusts. From which uncleanness otherwhiles
desiring expiation in the company of those who are called the Elect, and the
Saints, we The Manichees Sacrament.
carried provision, which in the forge of their stomachs was to be molded into
Angels and Gods, by whom we were to be cleansed. Such things I followed, and
such things I practiced; I, and my friends, seduced both with, and by, me.

Let the arrogant deride me, and those not yet savingly cast down and broken by
thee (O my God): but let me continue to confess unto thee my disgrace to thy
praise. Permit I pray thee, and grant unto me, with a present memory, to repass
through all those past circles of my error, and from thence to offer unto thee
the sacrifice of joy. For what am I to my self, at any time, without thee, but
an infant sucking thy milk, and feeding on thee, the meat not perishing? Nay
what is any man, that man is? Let them laugh at us then, the strong and mighty,
whilst we, the infirm and poor, confess unto thee.

CHAP. II.
Of his teaching Rhetoric in Thagaste, the City where he was borne: his having
a Concubine, yet true to her bed; his playing a prize of poetry on the Theater,
yet refusing the assistance of the Art of a Magician.

IN those years I taught the Art of Rhetoric; and a victorious loquacity I
sold, my self overcome by lusts. Yet then (O Lord thou know) I rather wished
to have honest and virtuous Scholars (such as are so called) and to them I
taught deceits without deceit: yet not those deceits, whereby the life of an
innocent should be endangered, but whereby sometime the life of the guilty
might be preserved, And thou O God beheldest then afarr off some little
fidelity in me (though staggering in a slippery station, and only sparkling a
little as it were through a cloud of smoke) which in that School-mastership I
exhibited toward those who loved vanity and sought after leasing, Psalm. 4.2.
my self also, in the same, being their companion.

In those years also I had a woman not joined unto me by that which is called
legitimate wedlock, but chosen by the wandering ardor of my imprudent
affection. Yet one only it was, and my bed constantly true to her: In whom I
might, in my own particular, try the difference between a Matrimonial
condition, confederated for the desire of issue; and the contract of a
libidinous love; where children are born undesired; yet, born once, cannot but
be loved.

I remember also; * that I, having undertaken upon the Theater to try a prize
of Poetry, was sent-to by a Magician, to know what reward I would give him, to
make me the Victor; and * that I, abominating and detesting such odious
mysteries, answered, that, were the crown of immortal Gold, I would not permit
a fly to perish for the conquest. For in his Art he was to sacrifice some
live-creatures for me, and by those religious honors to attract unto me some
suffragating Demons. But this wickedness was repulsed by me, not out of my
chastity toward thee O God of my soul: Osee. 12.1 Vulgar Ephraim pascit ventum
and sequitur ^stum
for I had not yet known how to love thee, who mistook only certain corporeal
splendors for thee. And a soul languishing after such figments, is it not gone
a whoring from thee, and trusts in vanities and feeds the winds? and yet
unwilling forsooth I was, the devils should be sacrificed to, for my sake, to
whom I my self in that superstition of mine, did sacrifice my self: and what
other thing is it to feed the winds, than to feed and be a prey to those
fiends; that is by error, to become their scorn and laughter.

CHAP. III.
Yet addicted to Astrology, and by a learned Physician dissuaded from it.

BUt on the other side those Planet-gazers, whom they style Mathematicians,
were freely and unscrupulously consulted by me; because, in their divination
forsooth no sacrifice, no prayers, were made to any spirit; which art
(notwithstanding) Christian and true piety, by consequence renounces and
condemns. For, since it is a good thing to confess unto thee O Lord; and to
say; Psalm. 41.^
Have mercy upon me, and heal my soul for I have sinned against thee, And then
to take heed of not abusing the indulgency of thy forgiveness to a further
license of sinning; but to remember the saying of our Lord; Behold thou art
made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto thee. Jo. 5.14.
The whole life of this salutary advice they seek to destroy; when they say;
The cause of thy sinning is from heaven, and inevitable, upon thee: And; this
thing Venus caused; or Saturn; or Mars; That man (forsooth) might be without
fault; Man, flesh and blood, and proud putrefaction; and blameable the Creator,
and wise disposer of the heavens and of the Stars And who is this but our God;
but the sweetness, and the fountain of all Justice? by whom shall be rendered to
every man a^cording to his work; yet an humble and contrite heart, with him,
Mat. 16. Psalm. 51.
shall not be despised.

There was at that time a sharp-witted man, very expert in the Art of Physic,
and one of the noblest of that profession; who, being then Proconsul, with his
own hand set the Agonistical Garland upon my sick head; but not as its
Physician. For that disease which it then had, it is thou only that curest;
thou; who resistest the proud, and give thy grace unto the humble. Yet also
by this old Man thou were not altogether deficient unto me; nor did forbear
to administer Physic unto my soul. For, afterward grown well-acquainted with
him, and daily affectionately frequenting his discourse (which was grave and
delightsome for vivacity of the sense, though without much ornament of words)
when he had perceived by my talk, that I was much addicted to the books of
Nativity-casters, he kindly and fatherly advised me, to throw them away, and
not idly to bestow my care and pains, useful for more necessary studies, upon
those fruitless vanities. Telling me, that himself in his younger years had so
studied them, that he intended wholly to have owed his maintenance to that
profession; and that he, who well understood Hippocrates, surely was not
incapable of that kind of learning; yet that afterward, quitting it, he had
betaken himself to Physic, only out of a discovery of the falsity thereof; and
so, an unwillingness to sustain himself by deceits and cheating: But you, said
he, have the profession of Rhetoric, whereby to subsist; and do pursue this
fallacious study, not out of necessity, but choice; by how much the more you
ought in this point to give me credit; who endeavored to attain perfection in
it, with design to get my living by it.

Of whom I demanded what then was the reason, that so many things by this art
were so truly foretold? He answered as he could, being no Christian, that this
was done by the power of a sovereign chance, every where diffused through the
whole body of nature. For if out of a page of a poet dipt-into at hap-hazard, a
verse often appears strangly consonant to our present business; whereas the
poets device and intention was far different, it is less to be admired (said
he) if out of the soul of a man, from a superior instinct (it self being
nothing conscious thereof) by hap, not art, something is delivered which
closely suits to the condition and affairs of the enquirer. -- And so much that
man, or thou by his instrumency, conveyedst unto me; and registredst in my
memory what I should afterward by my self further examine. But as then, neither
he, nor my dearest Nebridius (a youth excellently good, and singularly
cautious, deriding all this kind of Divination) could persuade me to desert
these studies; swayed as yet more by those Authors, than by these men's,
authority; and discovering no demonstration certain (such as I sought for)
whereby it might, without all ambiguity, appear to me, that the things that
were by these men (when consulted) truly foretold, were answered by hap-hazard
and chance, and not by the art of the Astrologer.

CHAP. IV.
His Anxieties for the death of his dearest friend, by him entangled in the
same errors, but, before his death, baptized.

IN those years likewise, when first I began to teach in the Town where I was
born. I had a friend, grown, by the society of our studies, too too dear unto
me, my co-a^^anean, and co-flourishing with me in the fresh blossom of youth.
With me he had sprung up from a child; and we had been always school-fellows
and play-fellows together. Yet was he not then by me so accounted a friend, as
afterward; nor indeed was he so afterward, according to the rule of true
friendship; because that only is true amity which thou joynest betwixt such
parties, as first co-here in thee by the glue of that love which is shed abroad
in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, Romans 5.5
which is given unto us. But yet too too sweet was that our amity, being long
backed and concocted by the equal hear of the same studies pursued by us both.
For I had also already bended him from the true faith (which his youth had not
so strongly and deeply comprehended) to those fables, so superstitious and
pernicious, for which my poor Mother deplored me: And now that man strayed in
his judgment together with me; nor could my soul mind ought without him. And
Lo, Thou pursuing close upon the backs of us thy fugitives, God of revenges,
and at the same time, fountain of mercies, who re-convertest unto thee by
wonderful ways, Lo thou tookest away that man out of this World, when he had
scarce completed a year in that my friendship, so sweet unto me beyond all the
sweetnesses of that my life.

Who can enumerate thy praises? Who, those which he has experienced in himself
alone? What was it thou did at that time O my God? And how uninvestigable is
the Abyss of thy judgments? For falling sick of a burning-fever, he happened to
lie long time in a mortal sweat without all sense. And his recovery then
despaired-of, he was, unknowing it, baptized, whilst I much mattered it not,
and presumed that he would sooner retain those signatures I had imprinted on
his soul, than those which (he inscient) were received upon his body. When far
otherwise it proved: for he was suddenly refreshed upon it, and made Or
recovered of that fit.
whole. And I presently, as soon as I could speak with him (which was so soon
as he could answer me, for I departed not from him, who too intimately depended
on each other) began to scoff to him, as to one likewise that would deride with
me, the baptism, which he had received, when he was so much absented, at that
instant, both in understanding and senses; though he had been acquainted after,
that he had received it. But he looked upon me with the same horror, as it had
been on an enemy; and, with a wonderful, and suddenly-assumed, freedom, advised
me, that if I meant to continue a friend, I should desist to speak to him on
that manner. And I, though perplexed and amazed thereat, yet deferred my
passion till his recovery; and till the strength of his health were capable of
my agitating with him what I thought fit. But he, ravished from my folly, that
with Thee he might be preserved for my consolation, after a few days, in my
absence, was re-seized by his Fever, and died.

With what agony was then my heart darkened? And whatever I looked on had the
face of death upon it; Even my Country was a banishment to me; and my Fathers
house a wonderful affliction: And what ever sweet thoughts I had communicated
with him, turned now unto me, being without him, into a most bitter torment.
Mine eyes every where sought him, and he was not restored unto me; and all
places were hated by me, because they had him not. Neither could they now
answer me, Behold he will come shortly, as it was before in his life time,
Psalm. 42.11.
when he was absent. And I became unto my self a great astonishment, and I
asked of my soul; Why she was so sad, why so disquieted within me? Nor knew she
what to answer me. And if I said, Trust in God; she, most justly, did not obey
me: Because a far truer and better thing that man was, whom, so dear to her,
she had lost, than that phantasm of God, on which she was bidden, yet, to
repose her hope. Of all things weeping only was left pleasant to me; and this
alone had succeeded my Friend in the dearest place of my affection.

CHAP. V.
Why Mourning so pleasant to the afflicted.

ANd now O Lord those storms are long since blow over, and time has healed up
that wound. O might I learn from thee who art the truth, and, thy mouth applied
to the ear of my heart, would thou tell me; why are tears so sweet to the
afflicted? art thou, who art every where present, yet as it were then retired
from our miseries? dwelling always in thy contented self, whilst we are varied
in much woeful experience; in which yet if we might not bemoan our selves in
those thy passion-less ears, the lost spark of our hope would be extinguished.
From whence then is so lushious a fruit cropped out of the very bitterness of
life, as that of groaning, and weeping, sighing and bemoaning our selves, is? *
Is that the sweetness of it, that we hope thou hear it? It Is so (truly) in
our prayers; for that they have an earnest desire of access unto thee. But may
it be so said too, concerning that grief and mourning for a thing utterly lost,
wherewith I was then overwhelmed? For neither conceived I any hopes to revive
him; nor petitioned I this with my tears; but only wept and lamented my loss,
as desolate and bereft of all my joys. Or, * is weeping it self indeed a
bitter thing; and only, in a fastidiousness of things before enjoyed, whilst we
abhor all those former sweets, this bitterness delights us?

CHAP. VI.
His wounded soul for his deceased Friend, not finding any consolation.

BUt why do I speak of these things? For this is not a time now of questioning,
but of confessing unto thee. Miserable then I was, and miserable is every soul
fettered with the love of mortal things; and racked asunder it is, when it
loses them: and then resents the infelicity, by which it was equally
miserable, before it lost them. So was I at that time, and mourned most
bitterly; and in that bitterness placed my repose. Such a wretch I was, and I
accounted dearer to me even than that my Friend, this my so wretched life. For
although fain I would have changed it, yet was I unwilling to have lost it, any
more than him, and I know not whether unwilling to have lost it, even for him.
As it is storied of Orestes and Pylades (if it be not a fiction) that they
strove to dye * for each other; or, at least, * together; to whom not to live
together, was a thing worse than death. But there ruled in me, I know not what,
passion, quite contrary to this: Both the tediousness of living was most
afflicting to me, and the fear of death. I think because the more I loved him,
the more I abhorred and dreaded (that my cruellest Enemy) Death, that bereaved
me of him; fancying it a monster, that would soon devour the rest of men,
because it could destroy him. Even thus, I well remember, stood I then affected.

(Behold my heart O my God; Behold and see into me, how I remember this very
well, O thou my hope, that now cleansest me from the impurity of such passions;
guiding my eyes unto thy beauties, and plucking my feet out of these snares.)
For I wondered much, that the rest of mortals, could any longer live, when he,
whom I loved as a thing immortal, was now dead. And yet more wondered, that my
self, being only another He, could live, when he was gone. Well said one of his
friends Animae dimidium mea. -- Half of my soul -- for I deemed his and mine,
to be but one soul, as it were, in different bodies. And therefore my life was
an horror to me, who would not live thus, an Half; and death yet a greater
affright to me, lest he should perish all, whom I so passionately loved. S.
Austin reviewing this work, in his Retractations 2. l. 6. c. censures this
expression -- quasi declamatio levis, potius quam gravis confessio.


CHAP. VII.
He forsakes the place of their acquaintance, and goes to Carthage.

O Fond madness, that knows not how to love men, men-like. O sottish man, so
impatiently taking to heart accidents, only humane; such as poor I then was.
Therefore I stormed, and sighed, and wept, and was distracted; bereft both of
content and counsel. For I carried about a soul all lacerated and gored in
blood; and impatient longer to be carried by me; and where, to repose it I
found not. Not in delightsome groves, nor in plays and music, not in fragant
odors, nor in exquisit banquets, not in the pleasures of the chamber, or of the
bed, not in books or poesy took it any rest. All things looked ghastly, even
the day: And whatever it was, that was not He, importune it was, and loathsome,
except mourning and tears, and in these only it found some small content.

And when at any time I retired my soul from these, I was re-surcharged with
the grievous burden of my misery, which was only to be lightened by thee O
Lord; only by thee to be removed. And I knew this, but yet was so much the
less, either willing, or able, to find remedy; because thou then to me wast no
solid or stable thing, when my despairing thoughts fled for support unto thee.
For it was not thou, but an empty Phantasm, and my own error, that was my God,
whereon assaying ^o place my soul, that it might find some stay, through this
inanity it still relapsed, and again came rouling back upon me. And my self
remained the alone unhappy place to my self; where I could neither be, nor be
from thence. For whether could my heart from my heart fly away? where could I
avoid my self? and where would not my self follow me? And yet far from my
Country I fled; for my eyes less missed him, where they were not used to see
him. And thus forsaking Tagaste, I went to Carthage.

CHAP. VIII.
His wound eured by time; and new Friendships.

TImes do not lose time, nor idly roll away by these our senses, but in the
mind produce strange operations. Behold, they came and went day by day, and in
coming, and passing they insinuated into me other images, and other
remembrances; and, by degrees repaired me with my formerly known delights, to
which that my grief at length gave place. But there succeeded, though no new
sorrows, yet the causes, (only) of more sorrows. For, whence did that my last
grief so easily and so deeply wound me, but, because I had spilt my soul upon a
bed of sand, and loved a mortal, as if he could not die? And that which
recovered and repaired me of this, were but like solaces of other mortal
friends, with whom I loved something, which was not loved for thee, even those
fabulous delusions, Manicheisme.
and long-spun lies, by the adulterous touches whereof, our lascivient minds,
through our itching ears, became still more defiled. (Nor did these delusions
perish to me, when my friends did.) Besides which there were also many other
things cementing together our affections: To chat and laugh together; civil
obsequiousness, and mutual compliance; together to read merry books; to jest
together, and together be solemn; to dissent from one another sometimes without
offense, and as a Man would do from himself, and, by this disagreeing in some
very few things, to season and relish the more our consentments in the rest;
to teach one another somewhat, or somewhat to learn; to expect those absent
with impatience, embrace their returns with joy. It being usual, by these and
the like expresses and emanations from hearts continually reflecting
interchanged loves, through the countenance, through the tongue, through the
eyes, and through a thousand other charming motions, as it were by so much
fuel heaped on these fires, to melt down souls, and to cast many of them into
one.

CHAP. IX.
Yet these too failing him.

ANd this is it that is loved in a friend; and so loved, that the conscience is
self-accused in any, who continues not to love him, who loves him again; or who
loves not that man again, who loves him first; requiring nothing from his body,
but only demonstrations of his affection. And for this are those mournings, if
one dies, and nights of sorrows, and a languishing heart having all its sweets
converted into bitterness, and, from the dear loss of the life of those who are
dead, even the death of those alive. But alway-blessed he, who loves, * thee
and in thee, * his friend; and for thee, * his Eenmy. For he alone loses
nothing dear, to whom all are dear only in him, whom he never loses. And who
is this neverlost, but our God, the God that made, and fills, Heaven and
Earth; Jer. 23.24. Ps. 119.142. Jo. 17.71.
and that even by filling them, made them: Thee none loses, but who leaves;
and who so leaves thee, whither goes he, or whither does he fly, but from
thee gracious, back again to thee offended? For in what place finds he not the
presence of thy law in his punishment? And thy law is truth: and Truth is thy
self.

CHAP. X.
All things loved besides God, pass away, and leave the lover to embrace
sorrows.

Ps. 80.19.
TVrn us unto thee O God of power, show us the beauty of thy countenance, and
we shall be whole. For which way soever the soul of man turns it self, it is
consigned unto sorrows; unless only, toward thee; yea though it seize upon all
those other beauties, that are out of it self, and out of thee: (which yet
could be none at all unless they were from thee). All which have their rise and
their setting; their spring and their fall; and in their springing they begin
(as it were) to be, and then grow on to attain perfection; perfected, straight
they decrease again and wither: for all of them have their decadency, and fade
they do all. Therefore also when they spring and blossom toward a being, look
how much more speedily they advance, to be, the more precipitancy again they
make, not to be. Such their condition; and such a lot have thou bequeathed
them; because they are parcels of things which are not consistent all together;
but which, by some still retiring, and others coming on, all of them
successively build up that fleeting Universe, of which they are parcels. In the
same manner, as our speech is composed of many significant sounds, and cannot
be perfected, unless each word thereof give way and vanish, when it has
sounded its part, that another may succeed it.

From all these Creatures O God let my soul raise praises unto thee the Creator
of them all; but never let my corporeal senses fasten me unto them with the
glue of love. For they go, whither they always did go, hastily toward a
not-being; and then wound and rack the soul with most pestilent longings:
because she would fain be nothing, but what they are; and loves to set up her
final rest in the thing she loves, and in them there is no place of repose; for
they stay not, but pass away: And who can, with the senses of this flesh,
either pursue them, when gone; or comprehend them, when at hand? For the
fleshly sense is slow-paced, because it is but the sense of flesh, and this is
the condition of it. And sufficient it is for those ends, for which it was
made; but for this, it serves not, to detain and stay things, here, running
their prescribed race, and hasting from their beginning appointed to their
appointed period. For in thy word, by which they were created, there they all
hear their sentence; Hinc, and huc usque: Hence and hitherto.

CHAP. XI.
The transition of its parts, is necessary to make this Universe complete.

BE no more so vain O my soul, nor suffer the tumultuous noise of thy busy
vanity to deafen the ear of thy heart. Hearken thou also unto the word, for it
speaks unto thee, to return back from these, unto it; and that there is the
seat of un-molested quiet, where thy love shall never, if it forsake not, be
forsaken. Behold those other things are always departing, that other things yet
may succeed; and this lower fleeting globe be completed with all its parts.
But do I any where depart? says the word of God. Isa. 40.8.
There then fix thine abode; thither devote all that thou have from thence
received O my soul; at least now; after thou have been out-wearied with
impostures. Recommend over unto truth, what has been imparted to thee from
her; and thou shall so not suffer loss; yea thy decays shall enjoy a fresh
spring, and thy languors be restored; the continual flux of thy materials,
shall be renovated, and re-fashioned, and made permanent with thee; nor shall
they sway thee down also whether they now descend, but stand with thee and
abide for ever before God, who abides and stands fast for ever.

To what end therefore do thou so erroneously pursue the inclinations of thy
perverting flesh? Rather now let it (converted) follow after thee. For whatever
thou discernest by it, is only a part of the successive Universe; and the whole
is yet unknown by thee, whereof these are parts; and yet so little a part of it
delights thee. But had thy carnal sense any capacity of comprehending the
whole, and had it not (for thy punishment) by reason of its mortality, been
confined to the prospect only of a small part thereof, thou would have wished
a speedy transition of these parts, which for the present exist; that from the
whole perfected, thou might have received a supreme content. For by the same
carnal sense also thou hear what we speak; yet would thou not have one
syllable still to sound before thee, but sly away by thee, and others come,
till thou may hear the whole. Even so are some of them ever in being, which
make up one whole; yet are they never all together, of which that whole is
made. And these would please more all together, than the several pieces, could
they be all at once surveyed by thee. Yet far better than all these summed
together is he, who made them all; and this is our God; and he has no
transition, because he has no succession. If bodies therefore attract thy
affection, let thy praises, from them, ascend unto God, and thy love wheel
about unto their Maker; lest in those things which please thee, thou displease
him.

CHAP. XII.
To rest our love upon God, and to love other things only for, and in, him.

OR if souls delight thee; in God let these be loved; because these also,
subject to mutability, from him only have their stability; else Alioquin irent,
and perirent.
pass-on they would, and at last pass-away. In him therefore let these also be
loved. And entice with thee to him as many of them as thou can; and say unto
them; him let us love, him let us love: He made these things, and he is not
far off. For he made them not, and so left them; but, being of him, they are
in him too. Lo where he is! Where truth is rellished well! He is in the heart;
but, alas! that heart has strayed from him. Isa. 46.8. Vulg.
Return O prevaricators unto your heart again, and be united unto him that made
you. Stand with him, and ye shall stand fast: rest in him, and ye shall be at
rest. Whither go ye into precipices? Whither go ye? The Good ye court and woo,
is from Him: and so much as it is, it is in your tending toward him good and
delicious to you. But justly then embittered to us, when it is once unjustly
loved, with the desertion of him, from whom it is.

To what purpose still and still tread ye those difficult and toilsome paths?
Rest is not there, where ye seek it; seek freely what ye do seek; but there it
is not, where you are seeking it. A blessed life ye seek in the region of
death, and it is not there. How, life happy there, where neither life? But life
it self descended hither, and underwent our death, and, out of the
super-abundance of its life, slew it: And then with a voice of thunder called
out unto us, that we should hence return unto him into that secret place, from
whence he came forth unto us, coming into that first pure Virgins womb, where
he espoused this humane creature of our mortal flesh; Ps. 19.5.
that it might not be ever mortal; and thence like a Bridegroom going forth of
his chamber, he rejoiced as a Giant to run his course; But did run all the way,
here staid not; calling out unto us, by his words, by his deeds, by his death,
by his life, by his descension, by his Ascension, calling out unto us, to
return unto him: and then presently vanished from our eyes, that we might
return into our heart, Isa. 46.8.
and might there find Him.

For he so withdrew himself, as that here he is still: he would not stay long
with us, and yet he has not left us. As also thither he departed, whence he
never parted. Because the World was made by him: and in this World he was; and
yet came into this World to save sinners; To whom my soul now also confesses,
that he may heal it, for it has sinned. O ye Sons of men, Ps. 4.4.
how long so heavy hearted? And is it possible, after this descent of life it
self to you, that ye will not ascend to it, and live? But whither, ascend ye
then, when ye set up your selves on high, and turn your face against Heaven?
first descend, that so ye may ascend; and ascend to God; who fell (before) by
ascending against Him. These things tell the souls thou love, that they may
deplore their misery in this valley of tears; and be carried up with thee
toward God: for it is from his Spirit also, that thou tellest them this; if thou
say it from a heart enflamed with the fire of true charity.

CHAP. XIII.
Much exercised in Love, he writes a book, De Pulchro and Apto.

THese things (then) I knew not; and I was enamoured of these lower beauties;
sinking still deeper in the pit, and saying to my Friends; Love we any thing
but what is fair? What is that which is fair then? And what is the fairness of
it? What is that inveigles us so, and chains our affections to the things we
love? For unless there were gracefulness and beauty there, they could by no
means thus attract us. And I marked narrowly, and perceived, that in the bodies
themselves the whole feature as it were of them was one thing, from which they
were called fair, and another thing their decency and fitness; namely as they
were aptly suting to some other thing; as a part of the body is to the whole;
or a shoe to the foot; and the like. And, these speculations springing still
more in my mind from the multiplicity of thoughts, I composed certain books, De
pulchro and apto; Of Fair and Fit; as I remember two or three (God thou know
for I have forgot) For I have them not by me, but they are straggled abroad, I
know not whither.

CHAP. XIV.
Dedicated, to Hierius a Roman Rhetorician, much admired by him, only upon
report.

BUt what was it, that moved me O Lord my God, to address these Books to
Hierius a Rhetorician in Rome, not known to me by face, and yet loved by me for
the same of his learning, which was very eminent. And some speeches of his
likewise I had heard, and they had pleased me: but pleased me far the more,
because they pleased others, who much admired, and magnified the man; that he,
a Syrian by Nation, first trained up in the Grecian Eloquence, had become so
admirable a Master also in the Latin, and so knowing in Philosophy. A man is,
* praised, and presently upon it, though never seen, * loved. Enters this love
then into the heart of the hearer, from the mouth of the commender? Nothing so.
But from one lover another is incensed to love. For hence is he loved that is
commended, when he that praises, is supposed to extol him with an
undissembling heart; (that is,) when one, that loves, commends, him. For so I
then loved men, according to the estimation of men; and not thine, O my God,
Which is never deceived. [But yet why loved I him, not as I did some others (a
famous Chariotier, or Huntsman, etc.) that are much extolled by popular
applause, but with a far different and more serious affection, and so, as my
self also desired the same commendation.

For neither could I endure that my self should be so commended, or loved, as
Stage Players are; whom yet I both commended and loved: yet would I choose my
self rather to be obscure, than, in such a manner noted; and even rather to be
hated, than, in such a manner, loved. Where are the plummets, that give motion
to so many heterogeneous and diverse loves disposed-of in one soul? What is it,
that I love in another man? Which same thing again unless I hated I should not
loath it in my self, and repel it from me, though, in a like condition, both
of us are men. Indeed a good horse is loved by one, who yet would not be the
thing he loves; but we cannot say so of an Actor, communicating with us in
nature, Can I then love in a man something I would not be, though I am a man?
Man himself is a great deep: The very hairs of whose head are all numbered by
thee O Lord, nor is any of them wanting unto thee: and yet those hairs can more
easily be numbered, than can his affections, and the motions of his heart.

But this Rhetorician was of those, whom I so loved, as that I wished also the
like; who strayed thus, Ephesians. 4.14.
swollen with ambition, and whirled about wi^h every wind, yet all the while was
steered by thee, though extreme secretly.] And whence know I this, and whence
so confidently confess I unto thee, that I loved him more from the love of
those who commended him, than from the things, for which he was commended? From
hence: Because had the same men disparaged him to me, and related the same
things they commended in Him, with contempt and scorn, I had not been so taken
with Him. Yet certainly those things had neither been another man's nor the man
another from himself; but only another, the affec^ion of the Relaters. See in
what a condition lies the feeble soul, that is not yet fixed upon the Basis of
Truth. As the unconstant Gales of tongues blow from the breasts of the
opinative, so is she carried and turned, driven forward, and driven back again,
and her eyes are beclouded and the truth not discerned: And yet behold it
stands before us. And it seemed to me a matter of great importance, if my
style and my studies might be known to such a man. Which, if by him they were
approved, I should have been still more enflamed; if dis-esteemed, my heart had
been grievously wounded, being altogether void and empty of thy solidity, Yet
that Pulchrum and Aptum, of which I writ to him, was not conceived by me
without much delight, and the subtilties of those contemplations I my self
admired, before they had another to praise them.

CHAP. XV.
His late imaginations concerning these things, being not yet enlightened by the
Scriptures.

BUt the causes and hinges of such a weighty business I had not as yet studied
in that thy sacred science (O thou omnipotent, Psalm. 136.4.
who alone workest all these wonders) and my mind ranged through corporeal
forms: and Fair I defined (and with corporeal instances illustrated) * that
which is so, absolutely, of it self: Fit; * that which is decent and graceful
from application to another. [And I cast my thoughts also upon the nature of
the mind and there the false opinion, that I entertained of things spiritual,
permitted me not to discern truth: And there was still flashing in my eyes the
very power of truth; and yet I averted my timorous mind, from the cogitation of
any thing incorporeal, to lineaments, and colors, and swelling magnitudes. And
when I could not see these in my mind, I thought that neither could I see or
discern my mind: And whereas I loved the harmony that is in virtue, and loathed
the discord of vice, I noted an unity in the one, and in the other a kind of
division. And I conceived the rational soul, and the nature of truth, and of
the Summum Bonum, the Chiefest Good, to consist in this unity. But in that
division I sillily supposed that there was I know not what substance of an
irrational vitality, and the nature of summum malum, which was not only a
substance, but also animate, and yet was not at all from thee (O my God) from
whom are all things. And the one I styled a Monade or Unity, as if it were a
soul void of all sex; the other a Dyade or Duality; namely the faculty, *
irascible, in all malicious actions; * concupiscible and lusting, in all impure
affections; Not knowing what I said.

For I neither knew then, nor had learnt; that no substance at all was evil;
nor that our very soul was not the supreme and incommutable good. The Manichean
opinion; that souls are particles of the Divine nature, or of God. Psalm. 18.28.
Joh. 1.9, 16. Jac. 1.17.
For as our actions are Facinorous, if that faculty of the soul, which commands
our force, be vicious, and behave it self insolently and unruly: and again
Flagitious, if that affection of the soul, wherewith carnal pleasures are
entertained, become intemperate; so errors and false opinions are likewise a
contamination of our life, if so be the rational soul it self be any way
vitiated: As it was then in me, not knowing, that it was to be illuminated with
another ray, than its own, to partake of Truth, for that it self was not the
very nature of Truth. Because It Is thou that shall light this my candle O Lord
my God, thou shall enlighten my darkness. And of thy fullness have we all
received; For thou art the true light that enlightneth every man that comes
into the World: for that in thee there is no variableness, nor returning
shadow. But I aspired toward thee, and was repelled from thee, and confined
unto the shadow of death; Because the proud are always resisted by thee.

And what thing prouder than I, who by a strange madness maintained, that my
self was naturally, what thou art? For when I was a thing mutable, (which was
from this apparent to me, that I, in coveting wisdom, sought, from something
worse, to become something better) yet I had rather conjecture thee mutable
also, than my self not to be the same, which thou were. Therefore was I
repelled by thee, and thou did resist my stiff-swoln neck; and I somniated
corporeal forms, and being flesh I notwithstanding accused the flesh, Psalm.
78.39.
and being a wind that paseth, I returned not unto thee, but passing I passed
unto those things, which have no being, nether in thee, nor in me, nor in any
body else. Neither were they created for me by thy truth, but by my vanity
devised, out of a body; And I said to the little ones thy faithful, my now
fellow-Citizens, from whom then I lived an exile; I said to them, as arrogant,
as silly, Why therefore er^s that soul which God had made? Yet could I not
endure it should be said to me again, Why then errs [the soul being] God? And I
rather contended, that thy immutable substance was necessitated to err, than
confessed that mine, so mutable, was, spontaneously, either erring, or in
danger of error.]

And I was of the age of six or seven and twenty, when I penned those Volumes,
revolving within my self those corporeal fancies, that continually buzzed about
the ears of my heart; which ears of mine were intent (O thou sweetest Verity)
unto that interior melody of thine, all the while I meditated on this Fair, and
Decorous subject; longing indeed to stand qui^t, and hear thee, and with joy to
rejoice at the voice of the Bridegroom, Jo. 3.29.
and I could not; because by the call of my error I was withdrawn from thee,
and with the weights of my pride sunk down into the dungeon. Psalm. 51.8.
Nor did thou then give to this my harkening, joy and gladness; nor did the
bones exult, which had not yet been humbled.

CHAP. XVI.
Of his strange acuteness of Wit, acquiring all the Liberal Sciences without a
Teacher, and yet so grossly erring in Religion.

ANd, what did it profit me, that being scarce twenty years old, I read and
understood alone a work of Aristotle's, that fell into my hands, called the Ten
Categories? which my Master, (a Rhetorician of Carthage, and others accounted
learned, had commented on, to other scholars, with checks even bursting with
pride, and I also had with much admiration longed after, as I know not what,
profound and divine piece). And I afterward conferring with others, (who
professed that they had much ado to comprehend these things, though instructed
by most learned Tutors not only expounding, but in Sand-Tables demonstrating
them) they could add nothing to my former self-acquired knowledge.

[] What did this profit me? Nay did it not harm me? When likewise thou, O my
God, so wonderful simple and un-accidental (whilst I thought whatever was, was
comprehended in these Ten Praedicaments) Thou also were so conceived by me, as
if thou also were the subject to thy greatness, or to thy beauty; and that they
inhered in thee, as they do in bodies. When as thy greatness and thy beauty are
thy self: but body is not, by that, great or fair, by which it is a body: For
were it less great or less fair, nevertheless a body it were. For a falsity it
was which I imagined of thee, and not truth; and those were figments of my
wretchedness, not the firmaments and stabilities of thy blessedness. For thou
commandedst and so it came to pass unto me, Genesis 3.18.
that this my Earth should bring forth thorns and briars unto me, and with
labor I should earn my bread.

And again what profited it me, that all the books I could procure of the Arts,
called Liberal (my self meanwhile being a slave to Lust) were read over by me
and by my self alone thoroughly understood? (And I took great delight in them
for the Truth and certainty I found there; yet knew not whence it was: For I
had my back upon the light, and my face upon the things enlightened; whence my
face that beheld the things illustrated, it self was not illuminated at all.)
And whatsoever was said in them concerning the Art of speaking, or of
reasoning; whatsoever of the Measures of figures; of notes Musical, or of
numbers, without much difficulty I understood; and without any Teacher, as thou
know O Lord my God; For both quickness of apprehension, and subtility of
reasoning is thy gift; though I did not sacrifice my due acknowledgments
thereof unto thee; therefore served it, not for my use, but my perdition
rather; Luke 15.12.
because I desired to have that so liberal a part of my portion in my own
hands; and did not preserve my strength for thy service, but went far from
thee, into a remote Country; that I might wast it upon meretricious delights.
For, what profited it me, so good a thing, not rightly employed? For I
perceived not, that th^^^ arts, ^ven by the studious and ingenious, were so
difficultly u^^erstood, till afterward I went about to teach these unto them,
when he was accounted most excellent amongst them, that was lesse-slowly
capable of those my expositions

But yet, what did this profit me, meanwhile imagining that thou, O Lord my
God, who art the truth, were only a lucid and immense body; and that my self
was a piece of that lump? Perverseness too great; but so it was with me. Nor
will I now blush, to confess unto thee my God, thy mercies toward me, and to
call upon thee, who then blushed not, to profess to men my blasphemies and to
bark against Thee.

What then profited me, * that my wit, in all those sciences, so nimble; and *
so many knotty books, without any humane assistance, so easily unfolded by me,
when I so foully and sacrilegiously erred in the doctrine of piety? Or what
hindrance was a far slower capacity to those thy little ones, that never
strayed far from thee; but within the nest of thy Church securely feathered
themselves; and had the wings of their charity nourished with an Orthodox faith?

O Lord our God, let us ever trust in the overspreading of thy wings; cover
thou us with them, and bear thou us upon them. Isa. 46.3, 4.
Bear us, both when thy young ones; and when never so aged; carry us on them
still Because our infirmity, when thou art with it, is strength; and our
strength, when it is only our own, is infirmity. And all our good lives always
only with thee; and, because we turned away from thee, we lost it. Let us now
return unto thee O Lord, that we may repossess it. For with thee lives our good
still, without any decay thereof: For thou thy self art it. And we need not
fear, lest, at our return, our former habitation should be ruined and
demolished; For we indeed, in departing from thence, fall and come to ruin;
but our house, (in this our absence) which is thy Eternity, can never fall.

LIB. V.
CHAP. I.
Oblation of his Confessions to God: their end being to set forth his praise.

ACcept (O Lord) the sacrifice of these my Confessions offered unto thee from
the hand of my tongue; Psalm. 35.10.
made and moved by thee to confess unto thy name: And heal Thou all my bones,
that they may say; O Lord who is like unto thee? It is not at all to teach thee
that which is done within him, when any one confesses it unto thee; for the
closeness of the heart excludes not thy eye, nor the hardness of it repels thy
hand, but that Thou do (often in pity, and otherwile also in vengeance) melt
and dissolve it at pleasu^^; And there is nothing hid from thy heat. Psa. 19.6.
But yet, let my soul be still praising, and speaking good of Thee, that for
this it may love Thee; and let it be confessing thy mercies unto Thee, that for
them it may praise Thee.

The whole Creation cease not, nor rests, from praising Thee; both every
spirit by their own mouths turned immediately upon Thee; and all corporeals also
(living or inanimate) by the mouth of those, who in them contemplate thy
wisdom; That so our wearied and sick soul may thus erect it self, and move
toward Thee, and leaning on the things which Thou have made may by them be
conducted unto Thee, who made them all so admirably, and there find refection
and true strength.

CHAP. II.
Invitation of all other strayed sinners to return to the Omnipotent God by
Confession.

THe wicked, discontented, and restless, may depart and fly from thee, but
still thou see them, and dividest the darkness, Genesis 1.4.31.
and behold all things round about them are still fair and lovely in thy sight,
only themselves deformed. For alas, in thus abandoning thee, how have they hurt
or frustrated Thee at all? Or any way discomposed thy absolute empire; from the
highest heaven to the lowest abyss, just and entire? For whither fled they
when they fled from before thy face? Or where are they not discovered by Thee?
They fled only, Genesis 4.16.
* that themselves might not see thee, when seeing them; and might yet
(blindfold) still run against Thee; who never departest from any of the things
made by Thee: * that they being unjust, might run against Thee, and so be
justly hurt by Thee; withdrawing from thy lenity and softness, and so dashing
against thy uprightness, and falling upon thy sharpness* ignorant, that Thou,
who art circumscribed by no place, are yet in every place, and the only He,
that art present to those, who are far from Thee.

Let them then return, and let them seek thee, because though they have left
Thee their Creator, yet have not Thou left thy creature. Let them then return
only, and seek Thee; and lo Thou art present in their hearts; in the heart of
all those who make Confession unto Thee, and cast themselves upon Thee, and in
Thy bosom deplore their former vexatious deviations. And then how will Thou,
indulgent, wipe off again such tears from their eyes; and this wiping also
provoke more tears, and make them to joy in these sorrowings, because Thou, O
Lord, and not man, (flesh and blood) but thou, O Lord, that createdst them,
do thus recreate and comfort them. Where was I, then, when I sought for Thee?
For Thou wast just before me: but I was strayed from my self, and not able to
find my self, much less could I find Thee.

CHAP. III.
The passages of the 29th. year of his age. The coming of Faustus, an eloquent
Manichean Bishop to Carthage; The Philosophers tenants in the sciences found
much more probable, than the Manicheans.

I Will now recount before my God the story of the tweny-ninth year of my age
there was then come to Car^ha^e a Mani h^an Bishop called Faustus, a great
snare of the Devil's, and many were caught by the sweet bait of his smooth
tongue, which, though I also much rellished in him, yet could I well
distinguish it from the verity of the things, which I desired to learn of him;
examining only what nourishing provision of science he set before me, and not
in how rich a dish of language he served it up. For fame had before reported
him most knowing in all excellent learning, and exquisitly skilled in the
liberal Arts. And I, having read formerly and still retaining in memory, much
of the Philosophers tenants, began to compare those with these long fables of
the Manichees; and indeed found the other of the two much more probable: By
whom in some measure the course of nature was rightly weighed, though the Lord
thereof undiscovered by them. Ps. 138.6.
Because Great art thou O Lord and thou regardest the lowly, but the proud thou
know a far off, neither do thou approach save to the contrite in heart;
neither art thou discovered by the high-minded; though their curious search
numbereth the stars of the Heaven, and the sands of the Earth; and though they
quarter out all the celestial regions, and describe the various courses of the
planets. For indeed by the light of understanding they do find out all these
things; and by the wit which thou have given them, they have many years before
both discovered, and foretold the eclipses of the great lights, the Sun and the
Moon, in what day, what hour, and in how many digits they should happen: and
their calculation has not faild, but the event punctually answered their
prescription; And by the rules, which they have delivered, men still
prognosticate in what year, month, day, hour, and in what portion of its light
the Sun or Moon shall be darkened, and what is said, is done. And these things
the ignorant admire and stand amazed at; the knowing exult in and glory of; and
yet being, by their wicked pride, put in this opposition to thee their Sun, and
ecclipsed of thy light, they, that do so long before discover the Sun or Moons
defects, cannot, though present, discern their own?

For they do not religiously search in the first place, from whence they have
that wit, by which they search out other things; and again, when finding that
thou art he that made them, they do not restore themselves unto thee, that
thou may keep that in them, which thou have made; Nor slaughter and sacrifice
unto thee that which they have made themselves, and offer up unto thee their
exalted and soaring imaginations, as the fouls of the Heavens; their diving
curiosities with which they walk through the paths of the deep, as the fishes
of the Sea, and their sensual luxuries, as the beasts of the field; that thou
O God, as a purging fire, may consume in them there their former dead cares,
and recreate them anew into immortality.

[But these poor souls knew not the way (unto thee) namely; Thy word; by which
were made all those things they number, and themselves also, that number them;
and the reason, by which they know how to number, of which, thy wisdom there is
no number. Ps. 147.5. 1 Cor. 1.30.
Which only-begotten of thine was made unto us Wisdom and Righteousness and
Sanctification, and descended so low as to be numbered amongst us, and, amongst
us, to pay Caesar's tribute. This humble way they knew not, Mat. 17.27.
by which they should descend first from themselves unto Him, that afterward,
by the same, they might ascend unto him. This way they knew not: and fancying
themselves as illustrious and exalted amongst the stars which they numbered,
Rev. 12.4 Romans 1.21.
behold they fell upon the Earth and their foolish heart became darkened, And
many truths indeed concerning the Creature are vented by them; and yet the
Truth, that formed these Creatures, remains to them undiscovered, because not
piously by them inquired of; or if found, yet knowing God, they do not own him
as God; neither are thankful; but become vain in their imaginations, and say
they are wise. Romans 1.21. etc.
Thus attributing to themselves what is only thine, and, attributing to thee
(by a most obstinate cecity) what is theirs; namely, forging lies of thee, who
art truth, and changing the glory of an incorruptible God into an image made
like to corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts and creeping
things, they do also convert thy truth into a lie, and worship, and serve the
Creature before the Creator.]

Yet many truths, learned from the Creature, I received from these men: and saw
some reason thereof from calculations, and the successions of times, and the
visible revolutions of the stars: and these I conferred with the dotages of
Manicheus, who had written much foolish stuff of the same subjects; and
therein I could discover no reason, neither of the solstices, and
aequinoctialls, nor of the ecclipses, nor of any other part of secular
knowledge. Only there I was required to believe things contrary to my experience.

CHAP. IIII.
Sciences not beatifying,

ANd now is he such a one (O Lord the God of truth) as knows all these things,
therefore a favorite to thee? Surely, unhappy man he who knows all these, and
knows not thee, and blessed the man, who knows thee, though none of these; and
who so knows both them and thee, happy he is not for them, but for thee; if
knowing thee, he, as God glorify thee, and be thankful unto thee, and become
not vain in his own imaginations.

For as he is in a far better case, that has the possession of a tree, and
for the fruits thereof gives thee praise, though he knows not how tall the
trunk thereof is, or how many the branches, than another who has exactly
measured it, and counted every sprig; but neither owes it, nor knows, nor loves
its maker: even so the faithful, (whose the whole World is, and who, as having
nothing, yet possesses all things by inhering in thee, 2 Cor. 6.10.
who owe all things) though he knows not so much as the short revolution of
Charles Wain, yet it were silly to doubt that he were not a much better person
than the surveyer of the Heavens, and the calculat^r of the stars, and the
poiser of the Elements, and meanwhile one careless of thee, who art he that
ordered all those things in their exact, number, and weight, and measure.

CHAP. V.
Yet the Manichees ignorant also in them.

BUT yet what needed (I know not what) Manicheus to trouble himself to write so
much on these subjects; without the science of which true piety might well be
learnt? And thou have said: that piety and the fear of Thee, Job 28.28.
this is wisdom; of which he might possibly be ignorant still, though perfectly
knowing all those things; but, in this most impudent presumption of his to
teach such things, when he knew them not, must needs be ignorant of it. For
it is but a vanity to make much show and profession of such secular things when
never so well known by us: and piety, to be making our humble confessions unto
thee. But he, very deficient in this, therefore by thy just permission spent
much discourse on the other, that so discovering his errors in things so well
known, men might hence judge, how to value his opinions in things more hidden
and obscure. []

CHAP. VI.
Faustus naturally eloquent, but very ignorant in those Arts, wherein he was
reputed to excel.

THerefore, for almost all those nine years in which with an unsatisfied
opinion, I had been a Disciple to those Doctors, I impatiently expected the
long longed-for coming of this same Faustus. For the rest I had met with,
unable to solve my doubts, still promised him to me; a little of whose
conference should easily clear to me not only those, but any harder, queries.
When he came therefore I found him a person indeed of very agreeable and
compleasant discourse, and much more charmingly delivering the same things
which they had said before. But what was my thirst relieved by having so decent
a minister of such precious, but empty, cups. My cars had been long since
cloyed with such dainties; nor did any thing seem better to me, because better
said: nor therefore any thing true, because elegant: nor the soul wiser for a
comely mine and a graceful utterance. Neither were those who promised him to me
good weighers of such things; to whom he seemed prudent in his judgment,
because pleasing in his words. Whereas I have also found others of a contrary
humor, that suspect truth it self, and suspend their assent to it, so often as
presented in count and elegant expressions. But Thou had then already taught
me, O my God, by ways secret and admirable, for I presume, that it was Thou
that taughtest it me; because I now know it to be true; and there is no other
Doctor of truth besides thee, where or howsoever it shines forth unto us; then
had I already learnt from Thee both these; that neither any thing should
therefore seem spoken truly, because eloquently; nor therefore falsely, because
the signification thereof from the lips is somewhat inharmonious; Nor again
therefore a thing be true, because plainly and nakedly spoken; nor therefore
false, because much painted and adorned; but the truth and falsehood, wisdom and
folly, are like wholesome and hurtful meats; both of which may be served up,
either in rich or mean language, as these may in courtly or country dishes. []

CHAP. VII.
S. Austins affection to the Manichean Doctrines much abated upon discovery of
Faustus his ignorance; whom he instructs in the Art of Rhetoric.

WHen therefore he also, (after much trial made of him) appeared sufficiently
ignorant of those arts, in which I presumed him excellent, I despaired of
receiving from him any solution of those doubts, which so much perplexed me.
Though yet, in the ignorance of those arts, I grant he might have retained
still the truths of piety, supposing he had not been a Manichean. For their
books are full of tedious fables, of the Heaven, and the Stars, and the Sun,
and the Moon, which now I had no longer a conceit that he could evidence unto
me, by showing out of the Manichean writings, reasons better, or at least equal
to those I had formerly read. Which reasons when I proposed to be examined, and
discussed, he (modestly) durst not undertake the controversy; and, well knowing
his ignorance, neither was he ashamed to acknowledge it: not like to those I
before met with, who undertook to teach me, and said nothing. But he had a
soul, though not upright toward thee, yet not also treacherous to himself: not
altogether ignorant was he of his ignorance; and not willing in a rash dispute,
to run himself into those straits, out of which he could neither find an issue,
nor a fair retreat. And herein his carriage much took me; the modesty of his
soul, in confessing its defects, having much more beauty and worth in it, then
his science could have had, in solving my doubts. And in all difficulter and
subtler questions which I proposed, on this manner I found him.

My affection therefore which I formerly had to the Manichean opinions was now
much abated, and despairing of their other Doctors skill, after the trial of
one so much famed, I began a new conversation with him in those studies of
Rhetoric, which he much affected, and I then taught at Carthage; reading with
him such books as he desired, or I thought suitable for such a wit, and to such
a purpose. But all design of further advancing my self in that Sect, after his
acquaintance, now fell to the ground; only I continued to be what by chance I
then was, until I should discover something more eligible.

Thus this Faustus, to so many the fetters of death, became the first looser of
my chains, and that neither witting, nor willing it, himself. For thy hand (O
my God) out of the secret of thy providence never let go my soul. whilst my
Mother did sacrifice even her hearts blood unto thee, by her continual tears
day and night, in my behalf, and thou proceededst with me all this while by
ways very wonderful and secret and undiscoverable. 'Twas thou did this O my
God, For man's steps are directed by the Lord and he it is that disposes his
way. Psalm. 37.^3.
And what efficient of safety can there be save thy hand, which only can repair
what it at first builded?

CHAP. VIII.
Much offended with the unrulinesse of his Scholars in Carthage he removes
from thence beyond Sea to Rome, to profess Rhetoric there, extremely against
his Mothers will.

THerefore, by the conduct of thy providence, it was now so brought about, that
I should be persuaded rather to go to Rome, and to teach there, what I did at
Carthage. And here, how I became so resolved, I will not omit to confess unto
thee, because also in these things thy most secret workings, and always most
present mercies toward us, ought ever to be considered, and professed. My
intent for Rome was not so much for greater profit or honor, though both these
were promised by my friends, and then not a little swayed my inclinations, but
the chief and almost the only reason thereof was because youth was, there said
to be more orderly in the School, and quiet, and under stricter discipline, the
Scholars of one School* not without leave rushing in and disturbing the
Government of another; contrary to the wicked and licentious custom of those of
Carthage, who impudently without leave of the Master, and to the disturbance of
the Scholars, rush into his School, whom they do not learn of, and there
commit such outrages as are punishable by the laws, were they not, against
these, patronized by custom: yet in this they so much the more unhappy, that
they do as a thing lawful, what thy eternal commands have prohibited; and
that they conceit they do it with all impunity, to whom the cecity, by which
they do it, is a great punishment, and the mischief which they suffer
themselves, incomparably worse, then that they act on others. Therefore, those
wicked fashions, which I hated my self to do, when I was a student, being now
forced to suffer, when a Master, from others, I resolved rather to remove to a
place, Ps. 142.5.
where I was told were no such insolences. But thou (O my hope and my portion
in the land of the living) to make me change my station for the changing of my
life, and for the safety of my soul, both administredst discouragements at
Carthage to chase me thence; and proposedst allurements at Rome to draw me
thither; and this thou did unto me, * by vain men, only taken with the things
of this dying life, by some on one side doing mad, things; and some on the
other side promising vain -- * and thus, to reform my present ill courses, thou
secretly made use of both their, and my own, faulty inclinations. For both
those who thus disturbed my quiet, were blinded with a sottish madness; and
those who invited my removal, favored only Earthly advantages; and my self,
who loathed my present misery, yet courted elsewhere but a false felicity.

But another end, why I should leave this place, and go to that, thou then well
know (my God) neither shewedst thou it to me, nor to my mother; who
miserably lamented my departure, and followed me to the Seaside; that either
she might yet reduce, or else her self also accompany, me. And I feigned, that
my design was only to accompany a friend, till he had a favorable wind for his
embarquement, and should put to Sea: and thus I lied to my mother, and to such
a mother, and got away from her. Nevertheless thou, in thy great mercy, did
not instantly revenge this fault upon me: but savedst me from the waters of the
Sea a soul so stained with execrable filthiness, unto the baptismall waters of
thy grace, with which I being once washed and made clean those rivers also of
my mothers eyes might be dried up, which, from her sad face, daily watered the
ground under her feet, poured out unto thee in my behalf. There she refusing
upon any terms to return back without me, I with much ado persuaded her for
that night to take some rest, in a place that was very near to our ship, being
An Oratory dedicated to S. Cyprian where were conserved some of his Relics.
a memorial of St. Cyprian's, but that same night I stole away to sea, and she
was left there, praying and weeping. And what was it that with so many tears
she begged of thee? but, that thou would put a let to that voyage; but thou,
deep in thy counsels, and yielding then also unto her, in the sum of her
desires, regardedst her not, in the particular she then requested of thee, that
so, in an higher manner, thou might accomplish it in the main thing for
which she always petitioned thee.

The wind blew fair and swelled our sails; and the shore withdrew it self from
our sight; whither my Mother, being returned next morning to seek me, was now
overwhelmed with grief and filled thine ears with groans and complaints; thine
ears that despised her moan; whilst, by the the means of my lusts, thou
hurriedst me away, to put an end to those very lusts; and chastisedst this her
too carnal affection to me with a just scourge of sorrow. For she as other
Mothers do, but much more than many do, loved and desired my corporal presence
with her; and knew not how much joy thou were preparing for her out of that my
absence. She knew it not then, and therefore mourned and wept, and showed the
Relics of Eve in her, seeking thus with sorrow, what with sorrow she had
brought forth. At last, after a sad accusation of that my cosenage and cruel
behavior toward a Mother, returning again to her prayers to deprecate Thee for
that my fault, she went about her accustomed affairs, and I toward Rome.

CHAP. IX.
Coming to Rome he is stricken with a dangerous fever, the recovery from which
he imputes to his Mothers prayers.

ANd lo there, presently, I am smitten with a rod of corporal sickness, and now
am going post to the place below carrying with me all those evils I had
committed against, Thee, and my self, and others, many and grievous; besides
the chain of Original guilt, by which we all dye in Adam. For as yet Thou had
remitted nothing unto me in Christ; nor had he yet slain that enmity by his
Cross, which by my sins, I had incurred with thee. For how could he take them
away by that only-phantastical Cross of his, which I believed. How false
therefore at that time the death of his flesh seemed to me; so true was the
death of my soul; and how true the death of his flesh was indeed, so false was
the life of my soul, which then did not credit it. And thus my fever much
increasing I now approached to the very point of dying; and of dying eternally.
For whither had I gone, if I had dyed then, but into flames and torments
suitable to my deeds, according to the settled truth of thy ordinance concerning
us. And my po^r mother knew nothing of this; yet did I (absent) enjoy her
prayers; and Thou (omnipresent) where she was gave ear unto her; and where I
was had pity on me, in restoring me again to the health of my body, though
still sick and much distempered in a sacrilegious mind. For neither did I so
much as desire thy baptism, in that my great peril; and much better affected I
was, when I was yet a child, and earnestly requested it of my mothers piety, as
I have before recited, and confessed.

But as I grew bigger, so I grew worse; and madly derided the prescription of
this thy medicine; who yet permittedst me not, when in such a case, so to dye a
double death. Which had it happened, my mothers heart also would have received
a wound incurable. For I cannot express the great affection she bare me; nor
with how much more sorrow and pain she travelled-again of me, to bring me forth
* in the spirit, then she had formerly done at her childbearing, * in the
flesh. I see not therefore how ever she should have been cured, if these bowels
of her love had been once pierced with such a sad end of my life. And then what
would have become of so many, and so passionate prayers without intermission
[Nusquam insi;] the same as, [nusqua^ non] see M. Wats his annotations.
in all places made by her unto thee? Could thou (a God of mercies) despise
the contrite and humble heart of a desolate widow, so chaste and so sober, so
abounding in almsdeeds, so dutiful and officious to thy saints; no day
omitting her oblation at thine Altar; twice in the day, Morning and Evening,
without intermission coming to thy Church, not for vain chat and idle tales,
but that she might hear Thee in thy words, and thou her in her prayers? by thee
then could the tears of such a one, wherewith she begged of thee neither
silver, nor gold, nor any mutable or fading good, but only the safety of the
soul of her poor son, could the tears of such, a one by thee, who made her
such, be neglected, and contemned, and fail of thy help?

No Lord, yea thou were present, and heardst, and did, her requests,
according to the order of thy own predesignments of them to be done. Far was
it from thee that thou should deceive her in those visions of hers, or
answers of thine, some already related, some omitted, by me: which
pre-engagements from thee she treasured up in a believing heart; and always in
her prayers presented and pressed, as thy own handwriting before thee. For thou
art pleased, because everlasting are thy mercies, not only to remit unto us all
our debts; but often with thy promises, to become our debtor?

CHAP. X.
Recovered he still consorts with the Manichees, retaining many of their errors
(the chief of which was his imagining God a corporeal substance) but with much
more remisseness, then formerly.

THus thou recoveredst me from that sickness, and healedst the Son of thy
handmaid, first, in body, that afterward thou might conferr upon him a more
excellent and permanent Sanity of his soul too. And here also at Rome I usually
conversed with the same sect of those deceived, and deceiving, saints: not only
with their Auditors, as they are called (in the house of one of whom I had this
sickness and recovery) but also with those whom (for their holiness) they call
the Elect. With whom I also entertained the same conceit; that it was not I,
that sinned, but I know not what other foreign nature that was in me; and my
pride was much pleased, thus to be faultless. And, when I committed any sin, I
was ready, not to make confession thereof; that thou might heal my soul,
because I had sinned against thee; but, to excuse my soul, and lay the fault
upon something else besides me; which I granted indeed was joined, with me, but
was not Me. Yet alas the whole was nothing, but me: and my impiety only it was,
that had thus divided me, against my self: and this any sin was the more
incurable, because I conceited my self no sinner: and much more execrable this
my iniquity; in that I blasphemously had rather, that thou (O omnipotent God)
should be overcome by I know not what [contrary principle] in me, to my
destruction; than that I should humble my self, a sinner, to be conquered by
thee and thy grace, to my salvation.

Ps. 39.1.2, 3, and Ps. 141.3.4. see the Vulgar.
For, thou had not as yet set a watch before my mouth, and a door of caution
about my lips, that my heart might not decline to wicked speeches, to excuse
the excuses made for sins, with the men that work iniquity: and therefore I
retained still a close combination with these Elect: yet so, as that I
despaired of any further progress in that false doctrine; and was very remiss
in my present opinions, resolving to keep them only if no better could be
found. [and often reflecting on the prudence of those Philosophers, who, in all
things recommended doubting, and contended that nothing could be known
certainly. But from the great acquaintance contracted with this sect (of whom
Rome, privately, shelters not a few) I was rendered somewhat lasier to seek
truth elsewhere; and l^st of all imagined, that within thy Church (O Lord of
Heaven and Earth, and Creator of all visibles and invisibles) could be found
that truth, from the which they had long averted me. For it seemed to me a
thing too gross and unseemly, to imagine thee to have (as they had informed me
that thy Church did teach) the shape of our humane flesh, and to be confined
and girt up with the narrow lineaments of our members. And indeed this very
thing, that, when I went to form to my self an Idea, of my Lord God, I could
fancy nothing but a certain corporeal substance and bulk (for I supposed
besides this nothing in nature, and that what had no body, had no being) this,
I say, was the greatest and almost the only cause of that my, (hence
inevitable) error.

For from this I imagined a certain substance of evil to be the like, and to
have a corporeal bulk, malignant and hideous: and this either more gross,
which they call Earth; or more tenuous and subtle, (as the body of the air is)
which they imagine to be a malign mind or soul, gliding every where through the
other more Earthly matter. And because the less piety, I then had, forced me to
believe, that the good God created no nature evil, therefore I made two
corporeal masses opposite to one another; both infinite, but the evil much
straiter, the good much (...)

And from this pestilentiall source issued all the rest of my sacrilegious
opinions. And when at any time I would have made a retreat to the Catholic
faith, I was repulsed by this fancy, (because indeed that was not the Faith
Catholic, which I thought to be so) for I supposed it a much more reverend
piety to imagine thee (my God, to whom thy mercies wrought in me do now confess
it) infinite on many sides, though on one bounded with a contrary mass of evil,
than to be on every side confined and compassed-in by the form and lineaments
of an humane body, such as was supposed by me to be the faith of thy Church.
Again; I thought it more honorable to believe, that thou createdst not evil,
supposing it a substance corporeal (for I acknowledged no entity but such, and
even mentals to be more tenuous bodies) than to think it, (such a nature) to
flow from thee. Aga n; for thy only begotten Son our Savior, (whom I fancied
to be streamed forth from the lucid part of thy mass for our salvation) I
supposed, that such a nature could not be born of the Virgin Mary without being
coagulated with flesh; and that, in such a mixture (flesh being a part of the
substance of evil as I imagined) such sovereign purity could not but be
contaminated and stained: and therefore I feared to believe him born in the
flesh, lest I should make him defiled by the flesh. Thy spiritual ones will
gently smile at this my folly when they shall read these my confessions. Yet,
true it is, that such a one, then I was.

CHAP. XI.
Especially finding the Manichees not clearly to answer to the objections of
Catholics made out of the Scriptures.

YEt for all this, though that which these objected against thy scriptures, I
thought could no way be defended, I had a desire, to conferr every particular
with some person more excellently skilled in those holy books, and to know the
uttermost of the churches opinions. And this the rather, because one Helpidius,
disputing in public with the Manichees at Carthage, had not a little moved me,
in pressing many things out of the scriptures, against which (me seemed) little
could be said. And that answer of theirs seemed very weak, (which they did not
so frequently give in public, as privately to us) namely, that the Scriptures
of the new Testament were much falsified by some (I know not who) that intended
to insert the Jewish law into the Christian faith. Yet themselves produced no
other copies thereof which were unsophisticated. But all this while that which
chiefly oppressed and suffocated me was the conceit I had only of corporeal
bulkes and magnitudes of all things, under which mass I lay gasping after the
free air of thy truth, but could not as yet breath in the purity and simplicity
thereof.]

CHAP. XII.
Having set up a Rhetorick-School at Rome, his Scholars there defraud him of
their stipends.

NOw therefore I began diligently to put in practice that for which I came to
Rome, the teaching of Rhetoric, and first to gather some to my lodging; by
whose means I had begun to be made known abroad. And now I am acquainted, that
some other unworthy tricks were played at Rome, which I suffered not at
Carthage. For it was assured to me indeed that there were not here such
insolences and tumults of unruly youth as there; But (say they) a many of
them, to avoid the payment of their stipends will of a sudden conspire
together before the time they are due, and depart to another master: desertors
of their faith; and vilifying honesty for the love of money. Ps. 139.22.
And these also my soul hated though not with a perfect and upright hatred. For
I hated them (perhaps) more for the damage I should suffer, than for the evil
they committed.

Ps. 73.27.
And surely very guilty such persons are, who do go a whoring from thee,
enamoured of these volatile trifles, of temporal goods, and of dirty Lucre
which fowls the hands that touch it; hugging this World that flies from them:
and slighting thee, that stayest for them, and call after them, and
pardonest every meretricious soul amongst them, that returns unto thee. And
now these I hate, as wicked and crooked, but so, as I also love them corrigible
and amendable, by a preferring learning before silver, and again a preferring
above their learning Thee, (O God,) the truth, and the fullness of all assured
good, and our most chaste and delicious peace. But, at that time, I rather could
not endure them evil for my own sake, than wished them good for thine.

CHAP. XIII.
Recommended by Symmachus, he removes from Rome to teach Rhetoric at Millain,
where he is favorably received by St. Ambrose their Bishop, whose Sermons he
frequents only for the fame of his eloquence:

IT happened afterward, that an order was sent from Millain The Emperor
residing much there.
to the Prefect of Rome to provide a Rhetoric Professor for that City, and to
send him thither upon the publ^ck charge. Therefore I made suit by the same
persons, such who were intoxicated with the Manichean fables (from which that I
might now be delivered, thou orderedst this journey, but little did we know it)
That Symmachus the then Prefect (upon trial of my ability on some subject of
Oratory) would be pleased to send me thither. And thus I came to Millain, and
there had access to the Bishop Ambrose, famous all the World over amongst good
men, and thy most devout Servant; whose most eloquent Sermons undauntedly
ministered the pure flower of thy wheat, and the celestial gladness of thy
oil, and the sober inebriation of thy spiritual wine unto thy People, in that
place. Thus to him was I brought by thee, knowing nothing, that by him I might
be brought unto thee, not without my knowledge; And that man of God, in a
paternall way, received me, and with an Episcopal charity entertained this my
peregrination.

And I began much to love him, not at first as a teacher of truth (by me
despaired-of to be found within thy Church) but as one kind, toward me. And I
diligently heard him, (preaching to the people) not out of any right intention
at all, but as it were for the trying of his eloquence; whether it were
answerable to the great fame thereof; and whether it flowed higher, or meaner,
than reported; and there I stood, very intent upon his expressions, but
in-observant of his matter: and was much taken with the elegancy of his
language, though more learned, yet not so cheerful and pleasing, as Faustus
his was, but for the matter there was no comparison; the one vainly expatiating
through Manichean delusions, the other profitably teaching salvation But
salvation is far from the ungodly, such as I then stood before him; Ps.
119.155.
yet I drew nearer and nearer to it, by gentle degrees, and knew it not.

CHAP. XIIII.
And is by little and little taken with his doctrine, whereupon he resolves,
abandoning the Manichean sect, to remain a Catechumenus in the Church
Catholic, till some further discovery of truth.

FOr when as I minded not to learn, what he said, but only how he said it (for
this vain care now only remained in me, despairing of any further guidance
there to the knowing of thee) there descended into my soul with the language
which I affected, the matter also which I slighted; not possible to be severed
by me; and whilst I opened my heart to entertain the eloquence of his sayings,
together with it entered in the truth of them: Yet this by slow and gentle
degrees. For first there seemed to me, that some plea might be made for the
Catholic faith: and that, for which I formerly supposed nothing (substantial)
against the Manichees objections could be said, I thought now capable of some
modest defense. Especially, after I had heard, one, or two, or more Enigma's,
and obscure places of the old Testament, well resolved and cleared; which
whilst before I understood literally, by them I was slain spiritually.

Very many places of those books being thus explained; then I began to blame my
despair; yet thus far only; that I should think impossible any probable reply,
to those who opposed and derided the law and the prophets. Yet neither did I
therefore see reason, that the Catholic way should be taken, because it had
also such patrons and abettors, as were able, without absurdity, to repel
objections; nor yet, that what I held on the contrary should be condemned,
because both were defensible. For the Catholic cause seemed to me to be so not
conquered, as also not to have obtained the victory. And now I began more
courageously to consider, if by any means I might, upon any certain grounds,
convince the Manichees of falsehood. And could I but once have imagined a
substance spiritual, I had quickly demolished and cast away all their
structures out of my soul; but such a substance I could not fancy.

Yet, concerning, the corporeal substance of this elementary World, and all
the pieces of nature occurring to sense, I, (more and more considering and
comparing things) judged the Philosopher to have much better dogmatiz'd, than
the Manichee. Therefore like the Academicks (as they are reported) doubting of
all things and fluctuating between all sides, yet I resolved presently to
abandon the Manichean profession; enduring no more (though in this su^pense of
my opinion) to be numbered of that sect, before which I preferred the
Philosopher. Yet neither could Philosophy satisfy Men, nor durst I commit the
cure of my sick and languishing soul, to an order void of the saving name of
Christ; and therefore I resolved to continue a Catechumenus in the Church
Catholic, (which religion remained from both my Parents recommended unto me)
till some thing of certainty should appear, to which I might steer my course.

LIB. VI.
CHAP. I.
His Mother Monica passing many dangers at Sea, comes to him to Millain. Her
vision at sea.

O Thou my hope from my youth, where was it thou then, and whither had thou
retired thy self? Was it not thou, that had made me, and distinguished me
from the beasts of the field, and from the fowls of the air? For thou had
made me wiser than these; and lo I walked through dark, and slippery, paths,
and sought thee abroad, in things without me; and so I found not the God of my
soul, and was now at last sunk into the bottom of the deep, disconsolate, and
despairing, of ever finding truth. And now was my good Mother come unto me;
courageous through piety, and both over land and Sea, following after me, in
all her perils secure of thy help. For also, when they were in great danger at
Sea, She comforted the mariners themselves, by whom the unexperienced
passengers of the deep rather use to be comforted, and assured them of a safe
arrival, because thou had before, by vision, assured this to her.

And here she found me languishing, all in despair of discovery of truth. And
when I told her, that now, though I was no Catholic, yet I was no Manichee,
she expressed no extraordinary joy, as at a thing unexpected; (although by this
she remained now secured concerning one great part of my misery; wherein she, *
had long deplored me as dead, but so dead, as capable of a resuscitation unto
thee, and * had offered me, carried forth upon the Bi^re of her thoughts, unto
thee, that thou touched with companion would be pleased to say unto the Son
of this widow; Luke 7.12.
Y^ung man, I say unto thee Arise; and so her Son might revive, and might begin
to speak, and thou might deliver him to his Mother). With no such
extraordinary exultation (I say) was her heart transported at all, in hearing,
that the business was so far done (for which she had daily wept before thee)
in that I was already, though not confirmed in truth, yet removed from error;
But, as being ascertained, that in due time, thou would give the rest, who
had promised her the whole, she calmly, and with a breast full of confidence,
answered me; that she fully believed in Christ, before she died, she should see
me also a perfect Catholic

And this to me: Bu^ to thee (Fountain of mercies) she redoubled her requests
and tears, that thou would, hasten thine aid, and enlighten my darkness;
more zealously she ran to the Church, and to that Fountain of living water,
springing up unto life eternal; and hung upon the sweet lips of thy Servant
Ambrose. For, she loved and reverenced that man as an Angel of God, because she
knew, that by his means I was reduced to this fluctuating and aguish condition,
and she certainly presumed that my disease being now brought to a Crisis, as
Physicians speak, I should after the access of a sharp fit, be advanced to a
perfect health.

CHAP. II.
Her great piety, sobriety, obedience to Bishop Ambrose prohibiting
charity-feastings at the tombs of Martyrs, then an usual custom in Africa.

THerefore when, according to the custom in Africa, she had brought with her to
the Oratories of the Saints, bread, wine, and Pultes.
other edible provisions, and, by the Sextons of such Sanctuaries, was
forbidden it, so soon as ever she understood, that it was the Bishops
Countermand, she so piously and obediently conformed to i^, that I much
admired, she could so suddenly become rather an accuser of her former
practice, than a disputer of the present prohibition. For her spirit was free
from all inclinations to intemperance; and the love of wine did not provoke her
to the hate of truth, as it does many of both sexes; whose excess makes them
nauseat a lesson of sobriety, like a cup of small water. But she carrying
thither her basket furnished with the accustomed provisions only to be tasted
of, and so distributed to others, never presented but one little cup of wine*
much d luted and mixed, for her sober palate, to take a little taste thereof. And
if there were more Memorialls than one so to be honored, Such provision was
carried a^ an off^^ing in honor of the Martyr, to be distributed to those who
were present and especially to the poor.
the same small cup served her for them all; which not only much watery, but
also by carriage very hot and unrefreshing, was by small sippings divided
between her and her companions in the devotion, as who in such places sought
not sensuality, but piety.

She therefore perceiving that this pious Prelat and famous Preacher had
commanded no such thing to be practiced though by the sober, * least so any
occasion of gluttony should be given to the intemperat; and also * because such
parentalia, as it were, and festival ceremonies at the tombs of the deceased,
very much resembled Pagan superstition, she did most willingly acquiesce
thereto: and in stead of a basket (formerly) full of the fruits of the Earth,
she learnt to carry to these Sanctuaries a heart full of more purified vows,
both to give to the poor what she could spare, and there to celebrate the
communion of the Lords body, in the imitation of whose passion was the
immolation and coronation of those Martyrs.

Yet my mind persuades me, that my Mother would not so easily have yielded to
the reversing of this her custom, had another person, than Ambrose prohibited
it; whom she dearly loved for his advancing my salvation, and he her, for her
religious conversation, so fervent in Spirit, and good works, so frequent at
Church; so that he, espying me there at his sermons, would often to me break
forth in her praise, much joying me of such a Mother; not knowing, that she had
such a Son, who was yet in all matters a Sceptick, and thought the true way of
life utterly undiscoverable.

CHAP. III.
S. Ambrose his employments. S. Austin finds no opportunity of p ivate
discourse with him; yet learns from his Sermons, that Catholics held not the
Doctrines charged on them by the Manichees.

NEither was my soul now mourning in prayers to procure thy deliverance, but
intent to make queries, and restless to dispute. As for Ambrose, I took him to
be a man only secularly happy, being so much reverenced by so, many, and great
Per^onages; (saying that his Celibacy seemed to me somewhat troublesome to be
undergone). But what lively hope he had of future, to counterpoise the
temptations and vanities of present, eminency, what conflict or solace he felt
in adversities, When he was in di^g^ace, and p^ secuted ^y the Empress Justina.
what sav^ury joys the hidden mouth of his heart tasted in ruminating upon thy
delicious food, these I could not conjecture, nor had experienced. Nor on the
other side knew he the anxieties of my spirit, nor the depth of my danger. For
I could not confer with him what, and how much, I pleased; being secluded from
his speech, by the many businesses of others, whos^ infirmities he served: and
the rest of his time not spent on them (which was but little) was taken up,
either in the necessary refection of his body with su^^erance, or of his mind
with reading. But in this reading also, his eye only run ore the page, and his
mind gathered the sense, whilst his voice and tongue were silent. And often we
were there present (for none were hindered entrance, nor was it the custom to
give him notice of any man's coming to him), and always saw him reading to
himself, and never aloud, and so sitting down, after a long silence we departed
again (for who durst disturb one so intentive?) conjecturing that, in that
small time, which he redeemed, from the noise of other businesses, for the
repairing of his mind, he was loath to be diverted; and perchance therefore did
not read aloud, lest his Audiditor, where the Author seemed obscure, should
desire his exposition; or, where questions difficult, his determination; and so
the time allotted his studies should not suffice for the perusal of so many
volumes as he desired. Although the chiefest cause might be the sparing of his
voice, which was very soon flatted and dulled. But the intention of that man,
(whatever), doubtless was good.

But, certainly, I had no opportunity of consulting, about things I much
desired, that Oracle of thine, the breast of this good man, unless it had been
something proposable very briefly: and my perpexities required one perfectly
vacant, to whom they might be clearly unfolded, and at so much leisure I never
found him; 2 Timothy 2.15.
only standing amongst the people, I heard him every Lords day rightly dividing
the word of truth; and was more and more by him confirmed, that all those
artificial knots of subtle calumnies, which my deceivers had so fast tied in
prejudice of those divine books, might possibly be dissolved.

And when I also came to dis^over; that man's being made by thee after thine own
image was not by those ^y spiritual children (whom by grace thou have begotten
again of their Catholic Mother) so understood at all, as if they believed or
imagined thee to be bound up or limited within the shape of an humane body,
although on the other side what a spiritual substance could mean I could not in
the least manner apprehend), I mingled joy and blushes, and was ashamed, that I
had now for so many years been a barking and railing, not against the Catholic
faith, but only against the fictions of my carnal conceits. For so temerarious
and impious was I, that, those things which I ought first to have learned from
thee by inquiry, I first charged upon them by accusation; readier to impose
falsehoods, than to be informed of truths. For thou, (O most High, and yet most
near; most unseen, and yet most present) since thou art not composed of
several, (some greater and some smaller) members or parts, but art All of thee
in every place, and yet within no place at all, art no such corporeal form thy
self; and yet made thou man truly after thine own image; and lo He, so
composed of members from head to Foot, is in Place. When therefore I did not
conceive, how such a one thus made could be the image of thee, I should humbly
have inquired, how this thing was to be believed or understood; and not
insultingly have opposed it, as if so understood, as I imagined. And so much
more solicitude now I had, what thing, I could hereafter pitch upon as certain,
from the shame I suffered, in that I being so long deluded and deceived by the
Manichees with the promise of all certainties in their school, had, with a
childish ignorance and stubbornness prated so many now discoursed uncertainties
for things most certain; for, that the things, I then maintained, were utterly
false, I fully discerned not till afterward: But already certain I was, that
they were uncertain, and that by me formerly they were taken for certain, when
I so blindly accused thy Catholic Church, now sufficiently cleared to me,
though not * that she taught the truth, yet, *that she taught not the opinions,
I so vehemently persecuted.

CHAP. IV.
Confuted, he blames his former, too much caution and jealousy, * in assenting
to the Ca^holick tenants:

THus I was confounded, and converted, and much joyed (O my God) to find, that
thy only Church, the body of thy only son, in which my insancy had received the
name of Christ, entertained no such childish conceits, nor containd any such
fancy in her most pure and sound doctrine as should crowd up thee, the Creator
of all things, within a circle of place, though never so high and large, yet on
every side terminated and surrounded, and thee also, there clothed with an
humane form.

And I rejoiced also, that those old writings of the Law and the prophets were
now proposed to me to be perused with another eye, than that with which, read
formerly, they seemed absurd, when thy Saints were accused by me of
understanding them otherwise, than really they did. And I was glad also, to
hear thy servant Ambrose in his sermons often repeating this rule, as if he
would most diligently recommend it, Litera occ^idit, spiritus autem viv^ficat,
the letter kills, but the spirit gives life. Where, whilst he drew aside the
mystical veil, and opened the spiritual sense of many things; which according
to the letter seem to teach something unsound, he said such things, * as then
gave me no offense, though not, *as then convinced me of their truth. For
warily I guarded my soul from all assentment; and whilst I feared a precipice,
was meanwhile ruined by my too much suspense; whilst of things not subjected to
sense, I required the same certainty, as I had of such an account, as this,
that 7. and 3. make 10. For I was not so senseless then, as to think, that
neither this could certainly be known; but even so demonstrable as this, I
desired to have all things else, whither corporeal, such as were not obvious to
my sense; or spiritual, of which I had only a corporeal conceit. And in this
thing believing would easily have cured me, that the better-cleared eyesight of
my mind might in some manner have speculated thy truth, for ever permanent, and
in nothing deficient. But as the infirm who have fallen into the hands of an
unskilful Physician, afterward fear to commit themselves to the good, such was
this malady of my soul; which without believing could not be healed, and
refused also to be so cured, for ^^ar it should believe again something that
was fall e, not smi^ring thy hand upon me, who have compounded this medici^e of
faith, and applied it to the di eases of all the World, and given unto it such
power and efficacy to cure them.

CHAP. V.
And * in acknowledging the divine authority of the Scriptures, as they are
delivered by the Church.

ANd in this thing also I could not but prefer the Catholic doctrine; where,
with more modesty, and no fal^e dealing, I was pl inly required to believe,
what was not demonstrated (whither the thing were demonstrable, though all not
capable thereof, or whither it were not) before the Manichean proceedings,
where first, with a temerarious promising of certain science, such credulity
was derided: and next, so many fables and absurdities, which could never be
demonstrated, were imposed to be believed. But afterward by little and little
thou (O Lord) with a gentle and merciful hand touching my sores and composing
my soul, did thoroughly persuade me in this matter: after that I had well
considered, how many things I, not seeing and far absent when they were acted,
yet firmly believed; As, so many things in secular histories; so many things of
Countries and Cities never viewed by me; so many things heard from my friends,
from my Physician, from many others, which if not credited, an end must be put
to all humane soci ty and commerce. Lastly, when I ^s^^er^d, how firmly I
believed, that I was born of such parents, a thing not known to me but by
crediting another relation: Thou at last perswad dst me, I say, That not so
much those who believed thy books, which with so gr^^t authority, thou had
established alm^st thr^ ^ll Nations, as those who believed them not were
blameworthy.

Nor were any such to be hearkened, to, who should say: How know thou, that
these books were, by the Holy Spirit of the true, and truth-communicating, God,
delivered to mankind? For this point of all the (...) is most rationally
credible. For first no sophistry nor ^^villing questions, that I had read in
the contradicting Philosophers, could ever stagger this faith in me, That thou
art, (though I were ignorant what thou art;) and that the Government of humane
affairs belongs unto thee. Though I confess, this faith in me was sometimes
stronger, sometimes weaker, yet always I believed, that thou were; and that we
also were a care unto thee; though I knew not what to think of thy substance,
nor of the way of thy guiding and reducing man unto thee. Again since our too
great weakness, to find out clear and evident truth, had need also of the
revelation of some divine writings, I began now to believe; that thy care over
us, would never suffer such a swaying authority throughout all the World to be
given to these writings, unless it had also been thy good pleasure, that
acccording to them, we should believe in thee, according to them, seek thee.

For now the seeming absurdities which offended me in thy Scripture, after a
many of them so probably expounded, were imputed by me to the altitude of its
mysteries: and the authority thereof seemed to me so much the more venerable
and worthy of a religious credit, in that it yielded it self to be read by all
in an humble style, and yet preserved the honor of its secrets in a more
profound meaning: stooping to every one in the plainness of its words, and
lowness of its phrase, and yet exercising the best observance of those who are
not light of heart; that it might, with a displayed bosom, receive all, though,
through its narrow passages, it transmits but few unto thee; yet many more
transmitted thus, than if it either had not reached so high in the top of its
mysterious authority, or not invited such multitudes into the lap of its
venerable humility.

CHAP. VI.
His ambition, and the cares attending it. His great solicitude being to speak
a Panegyric before the Emperor; much envying the secure mirth of a poor
beggar seen in the street.

THese things I mused, and thou wast with me; I sighed unto thee, and thou
heardest me: I waved to and fro, and yet thou did steer me, I walked in the
broad and trodden way of this World, yet thou did not desert me. I pursued
after Honors, Wealth, Marriage, and thou smiledst at me. And I underwent, in
these my lusts, most bitter crosses, and thou wast the more kind to me, the
more unsweet thou made all that to me, which was not thee. See my heart (O
Lord) thou whose pleasure it is, I should now recollect the^e things, and
confess them before thee, and let my soul now adhere unto thee, after it has
been, from that tenacious birdlime of death, so rescued by thee. In what a
miserable condition was it at that time, and thou continuedst to prick and
chafe the sensibleness of its wound, that, leaving all things, it might return
unto thee, who art above all things, and without whom all things would be
nothing at all; that it might return, and so be healed. How miserable was I
then! and how did thou advance the sense of that my misery, upon a time,
when, (preparing in praise of the Emperor a Panegyric full of lies, and yet
applauded by those, who knew them to be so, my heart trembling with restless
care, and burning in a fever of consuming thoughts) as I passed through a
certain street of Millain, I happened to cast my eye upon a poor beggar, with
his belly well filled, (as I suppose) who was very jocund and full of mirth:
Whom seeing, I fetched a great sigh and began to discourse with my friends,
then with me, the many sorrows and sufferings of our vain follies; For we
sought no more with all our labors (such as that I then travailed with,
whilst, pricked forward by the goad of my ambibitions, I drew after me a heavy
load of my own infelicity, and in drawing it on still augmented it) we sought I
say no more, than to arrive at a secure mirth, void of care: * in which that
poor beggar had already prevented us, and * to which perhaps we should never
attain. For what he had already gained with a few pence, and those got by
begging, that was I still toiling for, through so many winding and difficult
paths, namely, the pleasure of a temporal felicity.

It is granted, that this was no true pleasure which he had, but yet I, in my
ambitions, pursued a much falser. And, surely, merry he was, whilst I
perplexed; he in security, whilst I in fear: and the question being asked;
which were the better; mirth, or fear; I should have answered, mirth doubtless.
Yet being demanded again; which I would rather choose, his, or my own condition;
I should have elected my own, laden with cares and fears as it was, but this
only out of a perverseness; for, was there any true reason for it? For neither
was I at all, in this my choice, to be preferred, because the more learned;
since I joyed, not in it, but in pleasing men with it: and not in teaching them
also with it, but only in pleasing them; and therefore (meanwhile) thou did
most justly, thus break my bones with the s^affe of thy severe discipline.

Away with those therefore from my soul, who say unto it, That there is great
difference, what thing it is, that one (secularly) joys in. Drink was the
cause of the beggars mirth; Glory was the object of mine. And what a glory is
it O Lord, that is not in thee? For as his was no true joy, so neither was mine
true glory: and much more did my glory overturn my reason, than his drink did
his, and he that very night should d^gest his distemper, but I had long time
slept and rose again with mine, and so was to do (thou, God, know) for how
many days. Some difference therefore indeed there is, upon what grounds a man
rejoices; and, no doubt, a Christians hope in thee incomparably excells that
vanity of his; but the advantage in this point between us was on his side, and
he was much the happier of the two; not only, because his heart was swelled with
mirth, when mine was shrunk with cares, but, that he with his praying for
people had got some good wine, I, by lying to them, sought for empty glory.

I said many things to this purpose to those my intimates, and often on these
occasions observed how my pulse beat; and I found, things were not well with
me; and I sorrowed, and, by it, doubled my evil. And if I sometimes light on
some pro^perous occurrent that pleased me, I was almost loath to entertain or
solace my self in it, because, when hardly yet seized on, it flew away again
from me.

CHAP. VII.
Of his friend Alipius, his Scholar at Carthage, whom he there reclaimed from
the vain sports of the Circus, but infected him with Manicheisme.

THese things were much bemoaned, amongst a company of us, that lived friendly
together, though I communicated my thoughts more familiarly with Alipius and
Nebridius. Alipius was born in the same town where I was, and his Parents of
the best rank there; younger then I, and, before time, my scholar; both when I
first set up school ^n my own Town, and afterward at Carthage: and he loved me
dearly for my seeming, piety, and learning; and I him again, for his great
inclinations to virtue: which in so slender an age were very eminent. Yet had
the stream of the licentious customs of Carthage (extremely given to those
vain sports) carried him away to an immoderate affection to the sh^ws of the
Circus. Which were chiefly all manner of ra^es.
I then professed Rhetoric at Carthage, and kept a public School. But, by
reason of some unkindness risen between his Father and me, he at that time was
none of my Auditors. And I knew well, that he was miserably bewitched with the
Circus; and was much afflicted, that so great a hopefulness would be, or rather
was already, lost: but, in this coniuncture found no means either of
admonishing, or of restraining him, from the good will of a friend, or from the
authority of a Master: For I imagined he had the same opinion of me with his
Father; though it was much otherwise; and he, neglecting his Fathers quarrel,
began kindly to salute me, coming many times into my Auditory, hearing some
part of my Lecture and so erelong departing; whence I still forgot to negotiate
with him, that he would not suffer a blind and precipitate affection to such
vain sports to ruin so good a wit. But thou (O Lord) who sit at the helm
and steerest the course of all things which thou have created, thou did not
then forget him, that, one day, he should be numbered amongst thy Children, and
be a Bishop, and dispenser of thy Holy Sacrament. And, that his reformation in
this matter might be clearly attributed to thee, thou effectedst it by me
indeed, but unknown to me. For, one day I being in the wonted place, and my
Scholars about me, he came in, saluted me, sat down, attended to my Lecture,
whilst, for the illustrating the subject in hand to ^ender it both more
pleasant and more plain, I borrowed a very apt similitude (as I thought) from
the Cir^ensian shows, not without a tart derision of such, as were fondly
captivated with such a madness, (thou know O our God) without any thought at
that time of conferring any thing to the cure of Alipius his malady. But he
presently applied it to himself, and thought it was aimed at him; and, whence
another would have taken occasion to have been angry with me, that good youth
did * to be angry with himself, and, for it, yet more dearly * to love me. For
thou have said it long ago. Pro. 9.8.
Rebuke the wise and he will love thee. Yet I then intended no rebuke toward
him, but thou employest us, knowing and not knowing, in thy designs, according
to the order thou have appointed; and that order is always most just. Thus
from my heart and tongue thou applyedst burning coals whereby thou might
scorch and awaken the stupefied soul of that hopeful disposition, and so
might heal it. Let him conceal thy praises, who weighs not thy mercies,
which from the bottom of my soul are confessed unto thee. For Alipius presently
upon those words recovered himself out of that deep ditch, wherein he was
willingly sunk, and blinded with a miserable pleasure: and he shook his mind
with a resolute forbearance; and all the Circensian filth, he had contracted,
dropped off from it, and he returned thither no more. And after this he prevailed
with his unwilling Father to become my Scholar again, and, beginning to be my
Auditor, became likewi^e involved in the same superstitions with me, and, much
taken with the Manicheans, extolled continency; which he supposed to be sincere
and true, but it was indeed sophisticate and inveigling, catching precious
souls, who as yet knew not how to reach to the height of true sanctity, and
therefore were easily deceived by the resemblance of a shadowed, and
counterfeit virtue.

CHAP. VIII.
Alipius, before him, a Student of the law at Rome, how seduced there (though
very averse) to behold, and there to delight in, the bloody shows of the
Gladiators.

HE, pursuing the secular course of life which was pressed upon him by his
parents, was gone to Rome before me, to study the laws there. And, (there) was
again carried away to the Gladiatory shows, with an incredible passion, and
after as incredible a manner. For, he being much averse from, and detesting,
such sports, some friends and fellow-students, meeting him in the streets after
dinner, with a familiar violence, would needs hurry him along with them (though
making much resistance and many excuses) to the Amphitheater, upon a day when
those cruel and mortal sports were there exhibited. He saying to them: If ye
do hale my body thither, and fix it there, yet can ye force me to lend my mind
or my eyes at least to such a loathed spectacle? Therefore in my corporal
presence there I will be absent, and so triumph over both you, and it.

They, hearing this, notwithstanding had him along, perhaps to try whether he
had power to do, as he said: whither so soon as they came, and had gotten
places, presently these horrid sports began.

But Alipius shutting the doors of his eyes, barred up also his soul from
going forth to such mischeivous objects; and would to God he had as well bolted
his ears too! For, upon a certain accident in the fight, a great shout being
raised by the people, he, out of curiosity, and prepared, whatever it might be,
though seeing, to despise, it, opened his eyes; and hence was presently struck
with a greater wound in his soul, than the Gladiator, (beheld by him) was in
his body; and fell himself far more miserably, than he at whose fall this
clamor was made; which entered through his ears, and unlocked his eyes,
through which a mortal blow was given to his soul, yet more confident, than
confirmed; and for this also the weaker, that it presumed to have from it self,
what it could owe to thee alone. For no sooner had he seen that stream of
blood, but he also drunk down the cruelty and savageness thereof, with eyes no
more averted, but fixed upon it: and he sucked in those furies, and knew not,
and became delighted with the crime of the combat, and inebriated with those
bloody pleasures. And no more was he the man he came, but now one of the
multitude amongst whom he sat, and their true Associate, with whom he came.
What shall I more say? He beheld, he shouted, he grew hot upon the sport, he
carried away a longing madness to return, not only with his former seducers,
but before them, and without them, and seducing others. And yet from hence
also, with a most strong and merciful hand, thou savedst him; and by this also
learned him, that he could have nothing from himself, but all from thee. But
this was long afterward.

CHAP. IX.
Of his being apprehended, when S. Austin's Scholar, at Carthage, for a Thief.
His going to S. Austin to Millain, where he practices in the Law.

ANd this his fall was laid up in his memory for a caution for the future. As
also was that which happened to him at Carthage, when my Scholar; where,
walk^ng at midday in the Forum, meditating an exercise that he was afterward
to recite, he was apprehended by the Officers of the Forum for a Thief; which I
suppose (O our God) thou permittedst for no other reason, than that he, so
great a man that was to be, might learn by this, how wary one should be, in
hearing causes, of hastily condemning any upon a slight credulity. For as he
was then walking alone, with his table book and style in his hand, before the
Tribunal, another of the Scholars, a true Thief, carrying secretly a hatchet,
undiscovered by him, had got into the leads, that covered the Silver-smiths
shops, and there fell on cutting them. The Silver-smiths underneath hearing the
sound of the hatchet, send some to apprehend any they should find there; and
the youth overhearing their murmurings, as quickly left his instrument, for
fear he should be taken with it, and got away. And Alipius, who saw him, though
not at his going in, yet coming forth, and making such have away, desirous to
know the cause, went into the place, and taking up the hatchet, stood wondering,
what he had been doing with it; when they that were sent come in, and find him
with the hatchet in his hand: they lay hold on him, draw him along, and,
calling the Shopkeepers of the Forum together, rejoice, as if they had taken
the true Thief in the very act; and so he was to be carried before the Judge.
And thus far thy Servant was to be instructed. But thou (O Lord) presently
relievedst that his innocence, of which thou wast a sole witness. For as he was
led, either to prison, or to punishment, there met him the Architect, that had
the chief oversight of those public buildings; And glad the Officers were that
they met him, especially (who was apt to suspect some of them for the thefts
done there) that he might now at length see, who had done all those robberies.
But so it happened, that this man had often seen Alipius in a Senators house,
which he frequented: and, knowing him, took him by the hand aside, and was
informed by him, how all things had passed: and so entreating the people, who
made a great tumult, and used many threats, to go along with him, he came to
the house of the young man who had done the fact, where, stood at the door the
Gentleman's boy, who had attended on him in the Forum, so little a one, as that
he might tell all the matter, without having suspicion therefrom of any hurt to
his Master. Alipius, knowing him again, straight intimated so much to the
Artificer, and he* presently showing the hatchet to the boy, asked if he knew
whose it might be? who quickly answered, it is our hatchet; then, further
examined, told all the rest. So the crime was devolved on another, and the
insulting multitude ashamed; and He that was to be a Dispenser of thy Word, and
an Examiner of many Causes in thy Church, became more experienced and
instructed for his Office.

CHAP. X.
A memorable example of Alipius his Integrity. Concerning his other Friend
Nebridius, deserting his country for St. Austin's society, and the study of
wisdom.

HIm therefore I found at Rome, and he there adhered to me with a most strong
bond of friendship, and went also with me to Millain; both for the enjoyment of
my society, and for following the practice of the Laws there, which he had
studied more from his Parents, than his own, affection thereto. In which
employment he had been already an Assessor See their Office in Pandect. 1. T.
12. l.
of Justice; much admired by the rest of his profession for his integrity and
incorruptness; and he as much wondering at them for their valuing gold above
virtue. And his inclinations also had been strongly, but in vain, assaulted,
not only with the bait of covetousness, but the spurr of fear. For at Rome, he
being an Assessor in Court to the Lord Treasurer of the Italian contribution,
there was a Roman Senator of great authority, to whose favors many were
obliged, and to whose terror many obnoxious, who would needs have, I know not
what, usurpation allowed to his power, which was prohibited by the Laws.
Alipius withstood him in it: he was promised a reward, he rejected it with
scorn: was assaulted with threats, slighted them also; whilst all admired such
an extraordinary spirit, that neither wished a man, so great and renowned, for
the many ways he had of doing courtesies and displeasures, his friend; nor
feared him, his enemy. And the Judge himself, whose Assessor and Counselor he
was, though he had rather the Senators suit should not have been granted, yet
did not openly declare himself against it, but casting the blame upon Alipius,
said, that he would not consent thereto. For indeed had he passed it, the other
would have gone off the Bench. With one desire (and that was in the way of his
studies) was Alipius almost overswayed; and that was to get himself a Library
of Books taken up at the Praetors price. But consulting justice in this, he
rectified his purpose, esteeming equity more gainful to him, by which he was
prohibited this privilege, than his power could be, by which he might have
used it.

Luke 16.10.
What I have said of him is in no great matter, But he that is faithful in that
which is least, is faithful also in much: nor can that possibly be spoken to no
purpose, which came from the mouth of thy Truth, If ye have not been faithful
in the unrighteous Mammon, who will commit to your trust true riches? and if ye
have not been faithful in that which is another man's, who shall give you that
which is your own? He then, (such a man as I have described) adjoined himself
to me, and with me labored in the same uncertainty of what course of life were
fittest to be prosecuted by us.

Nebridius likewise leaving, * his own Country not far from the principal
City, Carthage, and * Carthage also it self, where his residence most usually
was, leaving his Fathers Lands, and his House, an excellent seat, and his
Mother desolate (who would not follow his travels, as mine did), He also came
to Millain, for no other cause, but to live and join with me in the same
zealous quest after Verity and Wisdom* and such likewise was his suspiring,
such his fluctuation; an ardent Inquisitor after a beatifical life; and an
acute Discusser of the most difficult questions. And here now were the famished
mouths of three necessitous persons, breathing their spiritual poverty and
wants one to another, gasping toward, and waiting on thee, until thou
should give them their meat in due season. Psalm. 145.15.
And, in that bitterness and anguish of spirit, which, (by thy great mercy),
followed our secular employments, when we examined the end, why we should
suffer such ungrateful labors, we discovered nothing but darkness; and we
turned away our faces with grief, and said: How long will this be? and this we
often said; yet, saying so, did not leave such things, because there appeared
elsewhere nothing certain, to which, these forsaken, we might confidently
adhere.

CHAP. XI.
S. Austin's reasoning with himself concerning his past and present condition,
and the disposal of his future life; the misery he apprehended to be in a
single life.

AND I wondered extremely, when I considered what a long time it was since the
nineteenth year of my age; when I began first to be enflamed with the pursuit
of Wisdom; resolving, upon discovery thereof, to quit all other empty hopes,
and deceiving frenzies of vanishing desires: and now behold me thirty years
old, still sticking in the same mire, covetous after the fruition of things, *
present, * drawing me hither and thither, and * then flying from me; whilst I
said to my self; To morrow I shall find it out; it will clearly discover it
self, and I shall embrace it: and; Behold, Faustus will come, and will expound
all to me. O wise Academicks (then said I) in whose opinion, there is nothing
certainly knowable for the regulating of humane life Nay; (said I then) But let
us not despair, but more diligently search on: Behold there are not those
absurdities in the Ecclesiastical Books that we imagined, but they may be
otherwise, and rationally, interpreted. Finally, let me remain in those notions
of Religion, wherein my childhood was instructed by my parents, till clear
truth be found out. But where, or when, shall we seek it? Ambrose is not at
leisure; nor have we the leisure to read books. Where shall we seek these
books? with what, or, in what time, procure them? upon whose recommendations
take them? -- Nay; but let us set some times apart; let us contribute some
certain hours for the salvation of our soul: Great hope appears; the Church
Catholic teaches not, what we thought, and whereof vainly we accused her. Her
learned condemn it as blasphemous, to think God terminated with an humane
shape, and doubt we to knock, that the rest may be opened? My Scholars employ
my forenoon hours; for the rest of my time what do I; why not do this? But
when then visit our greater friends, whose favors we must use? when prepare
the matter we sell to our Scholars? and when repair our spirits, in relaxing
our mind from this intention of cares? -- Perish all; and let these vain and
empty solicitudes be dismissed; and let us now set our selves only to this
inquisition of truth. The life we live is wretched; death uncertain; if it
should suddenly seize on us, in what a case go we hence? and where ever shall
we learn, what here neglect? or more; shall not this our neglect, then, be
punished? But yet, what if death deprive the soul of all its sense, and its
cares, together? Then is this also worthy to be sought out. But God forbid, it
should be so. Sure, it is no vain, no empty matter, that the authority of the
Christian faith should thus over spread all the world with so great
pre-eminence and renown; and, surely, the divine hand would not have operated
so great things for us, if, together with the death of the body, were also
wasted and extinguished the life of the soul?? Why delay we then, the hopes of
the present age forsaken, to give up our selves wholly to the search of God and
happiness.

But defer a while: these things are also pleasant, and have in them no
little sweetness. Let us not call off our intentions from them too hastily,
because, after this done, it will be dishonorable to return to them; see how
little we want of acquiring some place of honor in the world, and this
obtained, we may then set up our rest. Great store of friends we have, very
potent; if nothing else be got, and our have will not stay for a better place,
yet we may soon attain a Presidentship: And then a Wife also must be gotten
with a reasonable dowry, that she may not be a charge. And here shall my
secular desires take up. Many great and imitable persons have bestowed
themselves in the study of wisdom, being married.

Whilst I discoursed such things, and these contrary winds drove my heart to
and fro, the times ran on; and I foreslowed to be converted to the Lord God;
and deferred from day to day to live in thee, though I deferred not daily, more
and more to die, in my self. In love with a beatifical life, yet I feared to
find it where it was, and sought after it, by flying from it. For I thought I
should be in too wretched a condition, if deprived of the embraces of a woman;
and I imagined not the medicines of thy mercy to cure this infirmity, because I
had not tried them, and supposed continency an effect of our own ability, in
which I found mine too weak. For I was so uninstructed, that I knew it not to
be written, Wisd. 8.21. vulg.
That none is continent, but from thy gift; But that thou would give it, if
I did with hearty sighs and groans knock at thy ears, and with a solid faith
cast upon thee my cares.

CHAP. XII.
The disputes between Him and Alipius (most chastely disposed) concerning
marriage and single life.

INdeed Alipius much dissuaded me from marrying, alleging, we could no way
with any secure leisure attend upon our long purposed search of Wisdom, if I
ran this course. For himself was in those years chaste even to a wonder. For
that which the beginnings of his youth had unhappily tasted, he longed not
after it any more, but rather ^amented it, and despised it, and lived most
continently ever after. And I opposed against him examples, of those, who in
matrimony had studied wisdom, acceptably-served God, and faithfully observed
and loved their friends. Notwithstanding; of which men's greatness of spirit I
indeed came far short, and being delighted with that disease of my flesh, and
with those deadly suavities, drew my chain still after me, fearing to be loosed
from it, and, as it were, with a shrugging of my sore, repelling the words of
him so well advising me, as the hand of one, that would unchain me.

Moreover the Serpent also, by me, tempted and spoke to Alipius, and by my
tongue wove and spread most pleasing nets in his way, to entangle those
virtuous and right treading feet. For when as he much wondered at me (of whom
he had no small esteem) that I should stick, so fast, in the bird-lime of that
pleasure, as that, so often as he spoke to me of this subject, I affirmed I
could not possibly pass my life in Celibacy, and defended my self against his
admiration with saying, that there was a vast difference between his
transitory, stolen pleasure, long since forgotten, and therefore easily
contemned, and my well-experienced and accustomed delights; which being also by
marriage once rendered honest, that then he could have no reason at all to
blame my choice of such a life. Upon this, I say, he also began to desire a
married condition, not overcome with the lust,* of such a pleasure, out * of
curiosity; for he said, he longed much to know, what those delights were,
without which this my life, so pleasant to him, seemed not a life, but a pain
unto me. For that soul, free from such yoke, became astonished at my thraldom,
and from this astonishment, proceeded to a desire of trying it, from that
desire ready to advance to the experiment it self, and from thence, perhaps,
Isa. 28.15 Wisd. 1.16.
to fall into that thraldom he so much wondered at, because he was so bold to
make a Treaty and Covenant with Death; and because, he that loves danger,
shall fall into it. For neither of us, if there be any conjugal honor, in the
office of ruling a family, and of educating children, were moved with that,
unless very slightly. But it was the custom of satisfying unsatiable lust,
that, for the greatest part, and with the most vehemence, agitated me already
enslaved; and it was the admiration at me, that led-on him to become enslaved.
And in this deplorable case we were, until thou, the most High, not deserting
that our lowness, but commiserating that our misery, did by thy wonderful and
secret ways contrive our relief.

CHAP. XIII.
S. Austin Suitor to a young Maid, with whom marriage is intended (but she as
yet two years too young) His Mother seeks, but cannot obtain any revelation
from God concerning this marriage.

UPon this, great endeavor there was, that I should shortly be married.
Already there was one that I made suit to; already she was promised to me;
chiefly by my Mothers soliciting, that so, my unlawful lusts being reformed by
marriage, I might be washed from all my former uncleanness by purifying
Baptism, for which she perceived me to be daily better and better disposed, and
her prayers and thy promises to be fulfilled in my profession of the Faith. Yet
when, both from my entreaty and her own inclination, she with strong affection
of heart importuned thee daily, to show to her by vision something concerning
my future marriage, thou never vouchsafedst it; only some vain fantastical
imaginations she saw, proceeding from the vehemence of her spirit, intent only
on that subject: which she related also to me, but with a careless sleighting
of them, and not with that confidence she used in things which thou had
manifested to her. For she said, she well discerned by (I know not what) secret
taste and relish, which she could not express, the difference between thy
Revelations and her own Dreams. Yet very earnest she continued in this
business; and a Maid was sued to, and gained; not yet marriageable by two
years; nevertheless, because I had a good liking to her, I was content to stay
so long for her.

CHAP. XIV.
Their living, a many, together, and having all things common, in a married
condition, designed; but soon laid aside.

ANd a many friends of us together, had long considered, and, (in often
discoursing one to another, and detesting, the vexatious tumults of a worldly
life,) had almost resolved, remote from the crowd thereof, to spend ours in
quiet and vacancy from secular affairs. Having so designed this retirement,
that every one should bring in what he had, and one common stock be made of
all; where nothing should belong to this or that person, but all to every one,
and every thing to all; There were about some ten of us ready to have joined in
this society; and some of them of great estates; especially one Romanianus See
more concerning the maintenance, etc St. Austin had from him. Contra Academic.
l. 2. c. 2. which books he dedicates to him.
my fellow-townsman, and familiar acquaintance from our youth (whom many
important and perplexed affairs had brought to the Court) The Emperor
Valentinian the Second, and the Empress Justina his Mother, their Court was
then at Millain.
and he was the most earnest upon this business, and having a much better estate
than any of the rest, had most power to persuade it. And we had agreed, that
two of us yearly, as it were Governors, should be chosen to take care of all
necessaries, whilst the rest remained in repose, and without trouble. But when
we took into consideration how the Wives would like this (which many of us had,
and the rest would have) this whole plot, so well-moulded, fell in pieces, and
was broken, and cast aside. Whence we returned again to our former sighs and
complaints, and our steps to tread the broad and beaten paths of this world.
Because Psalm. 33.111.
many cogitations are in man's heart, but it is the Counsel of the Lord, that
endures for ever. From which Counsel of thine, thou did then deride our
projects, and did make way for thy own; ready to Psalm. 145.16
give us food in due season, and to open thy hand, and to fill our souls with
thy Benediction.

CHAP. XV.
His former Concubine (of whom see lib. 4. cap. 2.) being removed (as an
impediment to his marriage) and leaving with him the Son he had by her, returns
into Africa; vows continency; in stead of whom he privately takes another.

MEanwhile mine iniquities were still multiplied; and; she being removed from
my side, (as an impediment to my marriage), whom I formerly companied with, my
heart, which clave unto her, being now, as it were, torn from her, became
wounded, and bleeding. And away she departed into Africa; vowing unto thee
never to know any other man, and leaving with me the Son I had by her. But
unhappy I, not able to imitate a woman, impatient of the two years delay, (in
which time I might not enjoy her I made suit to) and being not so much a lover
of marriage, as a slave of lust, got me another, though no Wife, that so, by
the continuance of the same custom with her, I might sustain and preserve in
its vigor, or also augment, that disease of my soul, till it might arrive to
the kingdom of marriage. And thus was the wound, that was made in me by the
cutting off of my former Concubine, not now cured at all, but, after most acute
and burning torments, grown more putrified and corrupt, and, under a colder,
and less violent pain, a more desperate sore.

CHAP. XVI.
Yet his lusts somewhat restrained, from the fear he had * of death, and * of
the souls immortality, and * of future judgments.

TO thee be praise; To thee be glory; (Fountain of mercies): thou came still
more near, as I became more wretched: And even very now was thy right hand
ready, when I was quite sunk, to pull me out of this mire, and to wash me
clean; and I knew nothing thereof. Nor was there any thing that stayed me from
yet-a-deeper stream of carnal voluptuousness, save the fear of, death, and thy
judgment to come: which terror, by all my various opinions, could never be
quite defaced in my soul. And often I reasoned with my friends, Alipius, and
Nebridius, * of the ends of good, and wicked, persons; and * that Epicurus
above all men with me should carry away the prize, but that I believed, the
soul, after death, still lived, and was treated, according to its merit^; a
thing which Epicurus credited not.

And I asked, whether if so be we might be immortal, and might live in the
perpetuated pleasures of the body, without any fear at all of losing them any
more, whether (I say) this were not enough to be happy? or whether some thing
else were desirable to it? not knowing that this also was a great part of my
misery, that so deeply plunged and blinded I could not cast my thoughts upon
the fair light of virtue and honesty, and that sovereign beauty, interiorly by
the soul discerned, though not by the eye of flesh, which is embraced gratis,
and without any bodily pleasure issuing from it.

Neither considered I, so wretched, from what Principle it came, that this was
to me a great pleasure, sweetly to confer with my friends, even concerning
these filthy pleasures; and that without friends also, I could not be happy,
(according to my then opinion) though in never so much affluence of those
carnal delights; Yet which friends I loved gratis, without any interest of my
corporal pleasure, and so perceived my self gratis also of them beloved.

O crooked paths! Woe to the audacious soul, that departing from thee foolishly
hopes, elsewhere, to find something better; and, when she has turned and
returned her self, on back, and sides, and belly, she finds all things hard,
and uneasy, and thee only, Rest. And yet behold thou patiently stayest by us,
and freest us from these our miserable wanderings, and put us into thy way,
and encouragest us, and say: Run; and I will sustain you, and I will conduct
you through, whither you desire to go; and at your journeys end also, I will
sustain you.

LIB. VII.
CHAP. I.
His entrance now, being thirty years old, into man's estate. His apprehension
of God, as inviolable, incorruptible, immutable, every way infinite, but yet
corporeal.

* DEceased now was my youth, so evil and so profane, and I, * entered into the
state of manhood; advancing in vanity, as in age; and imagining no substance,
but only such as with these our eyes we usually behold. I indeed never thought
thee, O God, to bear an humane shape; since the time I had heard any thing of
wisdom, I always avoided so gross a conceit: and was much joyed, when I found
the same also to be the faith of our spiritual Mother thy Catholic Church; but
what other thing I should think thee to be was not easily resolved. And I, a
man and such a man, yet endeavored to know, and apprehend thee, the supreme,
and the only, and the true God: and, from the bottom of my soul, I believed
thee to be incorruptible, and inviolable, and immutable; because (how, and
whence, I know not, but) I plainly saw and was assured, Ex l. 7. c. 4.
that that which cannot be corrupted, nor injured, and hurt, nor changed, was,
doubtless, more perfect, and more excellent, than what is capable of
corruption, or violation, or mutation. And then again; that no soul ever was,
or shall be, able to imagine any thing, which should be something better than
thee, who art the very best and chiefest Good. But, since the incorruptible is,
most truly and certainly, preferrable before the corruptible, I could, with my
thought, have ascended unto something, that would have been better than my God,
unless thou were incorruptible. [ ] But still I was forced to imagine thee,
though not figured like a man, yet as something corporeal; having a certain
space of being, either infused into, and through all the world, or also
diffused infinitely beyond it; because what I abstracted from being in such
space, seemed to me, not to be at all. [ ] I therefore conceived thy greatness
(O Life of my life) to be such, as to penetrate (by an extension through an
infinite space), on every side the whole mass of the world, and to flow to all
immensity beyond it, without any limit; so that thee, the earth had, the
heavens had thee, all things had thee, and they were bounded in thee, but thou
no where. And as this body of air, which floats above the earth, hinders not
the darting of a sunbeam through it, which beam penetrates it, not by cutting
or breaking the parts, but by filling the whole; in such manner I conceived the
bodies, not only of the heavens, or of the air, or water, but of the thicker
earth also, transpassable by thee, and in all her least, as well as greatest,
parts, pierceable, to receive every where thy presence, thus with thy secret
inspiration, both intrinsecally and extrinsecally actuating and managing all
those things which thou have created. So I conceited, not able to think of any
other way; Though this was false; For thus a greater part of earth would
receive a greater part of thy essence, and a lesser, a less; And, in such a
sense would all things be full of thee, that the body of an Elephant would
contain a greater quantity of thee, than that of a Sparrow, by how much it is
bigger and possessing a greater space, and so thou should apply thy presence
to the parts of the world by parcels; a greater part of thee to the large, and
a lesser to the small. But thou art nothing so. Notwithstanding as yet thou
had not so far enlightened my darkness.

CHAP. II.
[ ]

CHAP. III.
Still unsatisfied concerning the cause of evil, and why Angels and Men being
created by the most good God, there should, by him, be placed in them a power
to will evilly.

BUt although I thus granted thee uncontaminable and unalterable, or liable to
misery in any part, or member of thee, from the (Manichean-feigned) opposition
of (I know not what) Gens tenebrarum or adverse malignant powers, arising out
of another lump of matter, contrary to that which thou had made: which could
it any way have hurt thee, thou must then (the very name of which all abhor)
have been supposed both violable and corruptible; (as was well pressed by
Nebridius long since at Carthage, and had then much startled us, that heard
it.) And although I also firmly acknowledged thee, our Lord, the true God, that
made not only our souls, Whereas the Manichees supposed the body produced by
another evil principle.
but bodies, but all, * of us, and * of all things, notwithstanding as yet I
apprehended not, clearly, and free from scruples, the cause of Evil. Yet
whatever it were, such I saw it must necessarily be, as might no way oblige me
to believe, * thee, the immutable God, to be subject to change; nor * thy
substance to suffer evil, rather than ours to do any evil; lest so my self
should become, that I sought for. And I strained hard to see and discern (what
I had heard,) that our own free will, was the cause, that we did evil; and thy
righteous judgments, that we suffered it. But I was not yet able to behold
this clearly; But as I endeavored to raise up the eye of my soul above these
deep waters, I presently sunk again, and, often endeavoring it, I sunk down
again, and again.

On the one side, this elevated and buoyed me up toward thy light, that already
I knew as well, my self, to have a will, as to live. Therefore, in willing, or
nilling, any thing, I was most certain no other thing but me to will and nill
it; and I quickly observed also, that the cause of my sin was there. Again:
whatever I did unwillingly and with regret, I saw my self to suffer rather such
evil, than to do it: and judged it to be not my fault, but punishment; which
also I, apprehending thee as just, soon confessed, not to be unjustly inflicted.

But then I argued; And who made me? Did not my God, not only good, but,
goodness it self? from whom have I then, to will evilly, and to nill well; that
so there might be that, for what I might be justly punished? Who put this thing
into me? who planted in me this root of bitterness, All of me being made by the
most sweet Creator? If the Devil the author of it, whence then the Devil? But
if he also, by a perverse will, of a good Angel became a Devil, whence came in
him this evil will, by which he became such, since he totally was made, by the
best God, a good Angel? And by these thoughts was I plunged again, and
suffocated, yet not so low as that infernal error, to believe; That thou rather
did (forcedly) suffer, than man do, evil.

CHAP. IV.
[ ]

CHAP. V.
Pursuing the same query still; Unde malum? Yet, * his faith of Christ to be
our Lord and Savior, remaining in Him firm and unshaken.

ANd I sought from whence Evil might come, and I sought evilly; yet saw not
this evil in my inquisition: And my spirit placed before it the whole Universe,
both of visibles; as the Earth, Sea, Air, Stars, Plants, Animals, etc. and of
invisibles; as the Firmament of Heaven, and all the Angels and spiritual
Inhabitants thereof. [ ]. After this, I considered thee my God, as every way
infinite and boundless, environing, and entirely penetrating this mass, as a
shoarless sea would fill a sponge of a great, but finite, magnitude, placed
within it: so conceived I the finite Creature filled with thee the infinite
God: and I said within my self: Behold, God: and behold, all the things God
has created. O how good is he; and most perfectly and incomparably more
excellent and better, than they! yet, being good, he created these good; and
behold, how he (outwardly) encircleth and (within) replenisheth all his
Creation. Where then is Evil? or, whence, or what way, has it stolen in hither?
what is the root, and what the seed of it? Or indeed is it at all? Why fear we
then, and why avoid we, that which is not? Or, if we vainly fear, surely this
fear it self is an evil, by which our soul is needlessly pricked and tortured.
Therefore, either there is an evil which we fear; or this, that we should so
fear, is an evil. Whence is it then? because God made all these things: the
good God, all things good: He, the greater, and the supreme good, made these,
the lesser; but yet both the creating and the created, all are good. From
whence then is Evil? or out of what did God make these things? Was there some
preexistent matter which was bad, and he formed and rectified this; but so,
that he left something in it not converted into good? But why this then? Was he
impotent to change it all, that so no more evil should remain in it, who yet is
omnipotent? Lastly: why would he make any thing at all of it, and not rather by
the same omnipotence annihilate it? [ ] and prepare another matter totally
good, out of which he might produce all things? for he were not omnipotent, if
he could not make any good, unless he were first furnished with some matter,
which himself had not made.

Such things I agitated in my perplexed breast, loaded with corroding cares
from fear of death. And not finding out the truth, yet the faith concerning
Christ, both our Lord, and our Savior, retained in the Church Catholic, was
irremovably fixed in my heart; in many things indeed yet unformed, and floating
besides the rule of sound doctrine; But my mind did never forsake it; yea,
daily more and more sought to embrace it.

CHAP. VI.
And * the lying divinations of Astrologers foretelling, from the stars,
future events, no way credited by him.

ALready also I had cast off the lying divinations and impious dotages of the
Astrologers. Psalm. 106.8. vulg.
And for this also let me confess unto thee, from the bottom of my soul, thy
compassions (O my God). For it was thou, thou alone; (for who else recals us
from the death of any error, but the life never dying, and the wisdom,
illuminating our needy minds, needing no illumination it self, by which the
whole world is orderly administered, even to the wind-scattered leaves of
trees.) It was thou, that procuredst for the remedying of my obstinacy ( See l.
4. c. 3.
which opposed both Vendicianus an acute old man and Nebridius, a youth of an
excellent spirit; the one vehemently affirming; the other, somewhat doubtfully,
yet often, repeating; That there was no Art at all of foreseeing or divining
things future: but that men's conjectures had many times a luckiness in them;
and that, in their speaking many things that should, were spoken some things
which did, after come to pass; not foreknown by those who said them, but
happened on, by their not saying nothing). Thou procuredst (I say) a friend of
mine, a curious consulter of Astrologers, though himself not much seen in it,
who related to me something from his father, which (though he made little
reflection thereupon) served very much for the overthrow of the vain esteem of
that Science. This man therefore (by name Firminus) ingenuously educated, and
well studied in eloquence, consulting me, as one very dear to him, what I
collected from his Constellations (as he called them) concerning some important
affair of his, to which his secular hopes aspired; and I (who was now somewhat
inclined to Nebridius his opinion) conjecturing, and divining thereupon, what
my doubting mind met-with in the Art, but withal superadding, that I was
almost persuaded, all those things were ridiculous and vain; he proceeded to
tell me, how his father was a most curious student of such books, and had also
a friend alike-affected; who, with emulating studies, and comparing of their
observations, were so far enflamed toward those toys, as that, when any mute
Animals of their own brought forth young, they marked the moment of their
birth, and set down the positions of the Heavens in them, from whence they
might gather some experiments of this Art. And he said, he had heard from his
father, that when his mother was great with child of the said Firminus, a
certain maidservant of his friends happened to be big with child at the same
time, not unremarked by her Master, (who observed with most exact diligence
even the puppyings of his dogs); and that so it happened, that, they with most
wary observation accounting, one the day, hour, minute, of his wifes, the
other, of his maids, being brought to bed, both were delivered at the same
instant, so that they were forced to set down the same calculation, to a
minute, of the Nativity, one of his son, the other of his servant: For, as soon
as the women fell in labor, they gave mutual notice, and had one ready to
send to each other, so soon as the child was born, and those sent, met so
justly in the midway, that neither of them was permitted to observe any
position of the stars, or particle of time different from the other. And yet
Firminus, as honorably descended, ran the more happy courses of this world,
increased in wealth, was advanced in dignities. But the servant, having the
yoke of his condition no way eased, waited on a Master, as he told me, who
very well knevv him.

Hearing therefore and believing these things from so creditable an Author, all
my former reluctance presently melted: and first I endeavored to reduce
Firminus from this curiosity; saying; That, from the inspection of his
Constellations, to tell him the truth of what should succeed, I was in them to
discern, that his parents were of better quality, his family noble of the City,
where they lived, his extraction, and his education honorable, his studies
ingenuous. But, if afterward the servant out of these Constellations (for he
had the same) consulted me, to tell him the truth also, I must in them behold
his fortune, a most abject family, a condition servile, and all other things,
far differing, and much contrary to the former. Whence it would follow, that,
on the same aspects, I was to read contrary fortunes, if I foretold the truth;
or, if I read the same fortune, must say what was false. And hence I gathered,
that what is spoken true from consideration of such Constellations, is said,
not by Art, but by guess; and what is spoken false, is not from any
unskilfulness of Art, but from the error of guessing.

From this entrance, upon a further consideration of these things; lest any,
who lived by this trade, (whom I much desired to confute and render ridiculous)
should reply, that Firminus to me, or his father at least to him, had told an
untruth, I reflected my thoughts on those who are born twins, who ordinarily
are excluded into the world so hastily one after the other, that the small
interval of time, whatever operation they may pretend it to have in nature, yet
cannot be collected by humane observation, nor expressed in the composition of
any figure, out of which the Astrologer is to make his prognostication. His
predictions therefore either cannot be true, if from perusing the same figure
he should say the same things (for example, of Esau and Jacob, when as the same
things happened not to them both): Or, if true, he must not say the same of
them, whereas yet his inspection was utterly the same. Therefore, not from Art,
but chance, it is, that he speaks truth. For thou, O Lord, the most just
Moderator of the Universe, whilst the consulters and the consulted know not any
thing, by a secret instinct orderest, what is fit, both that the one should
say, and the other hear, according to the hidden merits of souls, and the abyss
of thy just judgment: E^clus. 35.17.
To whom let none say: What is this? wherefore is that? let him not say, let
him not say it: for he is but a man.

CHAP. VII.
Pr^secu^ing the same query Unde Malum?

THus loosed from these bonds by thee my Helper, yet I was still in a labyrinth
concerning the query; From whence Evil; and could find no way out. Yet thou
did not suffer me, by any ways of those my cogitations, to be carried away
from the right faith, by which I believed; both that thou were, and that thy
substance was immutable, and that thou did take a care of, and did justice
amongst, men: and that, in Christ thy Son our Lord, and in the holy Scriptures,
which the authority of thy Catholic Church recommended unto me, thou had
appointed a way of man's salvation in reference to that life, which, after this
present death, shall be enjoyed. These points therefore being safe and
well-quieted in my mind, I still hotly enquired, from whence should come Evil.

And what pangs were those of my heart in travel, what groans, O my God? And,
there, were thine ears receiving them, and I knew it not; and whilst in
silence I importunatly sought, the tacit contritions of my soul were powerful
clamours to thy mercy. Psalm. 38.9, 10. Vulgar. Ante te omne desiderium meum --
and lumen oculorum meorum non est mecum.
[ ] And my desire was before thee: and the true light of mine eyes, was not
with me; For it was within; and I was abroad: Neither possessed it any place:
But my fancy was intent only upon things circumscribed by place; and amongst
them I found no place of rest: and neither did they so well entertain me that I
could say: I am well: this is enough. Nor yet did they quite release me to
return, where it might be well enough with me. For I was much superior to
them, as inferior to thee. And thou would be true joy and satisfaction to
me so long as remaining thy subject, and also had subjected unto me these
things which thou had created below me.

And this was the right temper and the middle region of my felicity and safety,
* to remain (as I was created) according to this thy Image, and serving thee, *
to rule o^re these bodies. But when I would by my pride rise up against thee,
and with the buckler of a stiff neck make head against my Lord and Master,
even these lower things were made above me, and pressed me down, and there was
no relaxation, no taking breath, under them; but, when I offered to return into
my self, and unto thee, the bodies themselves, rushing by troops unto my eyes,
and the images of bodies unto my fancy, on every side waylaid and opposed me:
as if they had said: Whither go thou, so unworthy; so filthy? To this height
were my wounds increased, and the tumor of my spirit kept me at distance from
thee, and my pride-swoln face closed-up my eyes.

CHAP. VIII.
BUt thou (O Lord) who abidest for ever, yet art not angry with us for ever;
but have compassion on this suddenly-perishing dust and ashes; and it seemed
good in thy sight to reform all those my deformities, and, with Internal and
secret goads, thou renderedst me still impatient, until, by a more inward sight
diverted from corporeal phantasmes, I came to have a true discovery of thee. [ ]

CHAP. IX.
Upon recommendation, he falls to reading the books of the Platonists, and d
scovers in them much concerning the Divinity of the Eternal Word, but nothing
of the Humility of his Incarnation.

ANd first to show me, * how thou resistest the proud, and give Grace to the
humble; And * how great a mercy of thine it was, that the way of humility was
demonstrated unto man in thy Son's, being made flesh and dwelling amongst men,
thou procuredst me, by a man much swollen with humane Science, some books of the
Platonists translated out of Greek into Latin. And in these I read, not in the
same words indeed, but the very same thing, and that confirmed with great
variety of reasons; Joh. 1.1.
* That in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word
was God; the same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him,
and without him was not any thing made that was made. In him was life, and the
life was the light of men. And the light shined in darkness, and the darkness
comprehended it not; And: * that the soul of man, though it bear witness of
that light, yet is not it self the very light, but the Word of God is It. For
God is, the true light, that enlightneth every man coming into this world, And:
that he was in this world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew
him not -- But: That he came unto his own, and his own received him not; But as
many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to
them that believe on his name; this, there, I read not. -- Again I read there:
that God the Word was born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of
the will of man, but of God. But then, That this Word was made flesh, and dwelt
amongst us: This I read not there. For in those books I found frequently said,
and diverse ways expressed; That the Son is in the form of the Father, Phil.
2.6.
and thinks it not robbery to be equal with God, because really he is the same
thing with him. But then; That he emptied himself, and took upon him the form
of a servant; and was made in the likeness of men: and, being found in fashion
as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the death of
the cross: wherefore God also has highly exalted him from the dead, and given
him a name which is above every name, That at the name of Jesus every knee
should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the
earth, and that every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord in the
Glory of the Father: This those books contain not. For indeed, that He, before
and above all times, remains unchangeably thy Son only begotten, and coeternal
unto thee: and that souls are made * happy, only from the effusions they
receive from his fullness; and * wise, as they are renewed by the participation
of that self-subsisting wisdom; is to be found there. Romans 5.6. Romans 8.32. Mat.
11.25. Mat. 11.28. Psalm. 25.9.
But, that He in the fullness of time died also for the ungodly, and that thou
sparedst not thine only Son, but gave him up for us all; is not to be found
there. For thou did hide these things from the wise, and revealedst them unto
babes, that there should come unto him those who labored and were heavy laden,
and he might give them rest; because he is meek and lowly in heart; and the
meek does he guide in judgment, and the humble he teaches his ways; Looking
upon our lowness and our travel, and forgiving all our sins. But those, who are
raised up aloft on the buskins of a seeming-more-sublime Science, do not hear
Him saying: Learn of me meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto
your souls; Romans 1.21.
and although they know God, yet they glorify him not as God, nor are
thankful, but vanish away in their imaginations, and their foolish heart is
darkened: and, professing themselves to be wise, they are made fools. And
therefore I read there also, The glory of thy incorruptibleness changed into
Idols and diverse Images, made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and
four-footed beasts, and creeping things; Egyptian food, which I found also in
those books, and was not tempted with it: [ ] But I took what was good and
precious, as thou causedst thy people to carry gold out of Egypt it self,
because thine it was, wherever it was. Acts 17.28.
And also thou saidest to the Athenians by thy Apostle; [That in thee we live,
and move, and have our being,] as some also of their own had already said it
from thee before; From the same fountain therefore came, doubtless, what was
good and true in these books.

CHAP. X.
He now more clearly discovers divine matters: That something might have a
being, and this not corporeal, or extended in place.

HAving therefore out of these books extracted some wholesome advice to reflect
and return into my self, I entered into the innermost recesses of my soul to
seek thee. I entered, and beheld, with the eye of my soul, such as then it was,
far above the same eye, and above my soul, the immutable light of the Lord:
being not any greater degree of this vulgar light conspicuous to al flesh, but
far far different from it. Nor beheld I it above my soul, as oil is above
water, or the heavens over the earth, but thus superior, as being it that made
me, and I inferior, as made by it. He, that knows truth, knows this light; and
he that knows it, knows eternity; and Love knows it. O eternal Truth, and true
Love, and loving Eternity! Thou art my God; For thee I sigh day and night. And
when I first began to know thee thou elevatedst me, that I might see, that
there was something which I might see, but that I was not yet such, as could
see it. For thy beams streaming vehemently upon me, reverberated my weak
sight, and I stood trembling with love and fear; And I found my self to be very
remote from thee, hearing thy voice, as it were, a far off, from on high; I
am the Meat of the strong; Grow and thou shall feed on me; not, that thou shall
convert me into thee, (as fleshly food) but that thou shall be converted into
me. And I knew that, with rebuke thou correctest man for iniquity, Psalm. 39.11.
and made my soul to consume away like a moth. And I said: is the Truth then
nothing? because it has no extension (finite or infinite) in place? And thou
criedst out unto me, as it were, from a very far off. Yes surely; and I am
He, that only am. And I heard thee, as men hear in the heart; and it caused to
cease in me all further doubt; and I should rather question that I live, than
that there is not the Truth; Which is clearly seen, being understood by the
things which are made,

CHAP. XI.
That the Creatures may be said, in some sense to have, in another, not to
have, a Being.

ANd I beheld those things below thee: and I saw, them neither altogether truly
to be, nor altogether not to be. To be indeed, because they are from thee; and
yet not to be, because, that which thou art, they be not; Psalm. 73.28.
and that only truly is, which without change abides so. To me therefore it is
good to adhere to God; because, if I shall not abide in thee; neither can I, in
my self. But thou, Psalm. 15.2. vulg.
abiding in thy self, make all things anew; and art my Lord, who have no need
of me, or my Good things.

CHAP. XII.
That all natures, even the corruptible, are good, though not the supreme Good.

ANd it became clear to me, that those things also are good, which are subject
to corruption: which things neither could be corrupted, if they were the
supreme Good; nor again could be corrupted, unless they were good: for * if
they were the supreme good, they would be incorruptible; * if not good at all,
there would be nothing in them corruptible. For corruption does some hurt unto
them; and if it diminish no good in them, it hurts them not. Either therefore
corruption hurts them not at all, (which cannot be said); or things corrupted
are deprived of some good (which is most certain) But if they are deprived of
all good, they will no longer be at all. For if they be still; then, when no
further deprivable of good, nor capable of further corruption, something better
they must be, than before so corrupted; because now they will subsist
incorruptibly. And what more monstrous and absurd, than to say, that things
become better by the loss of all in them that is good? Therefore, what is
deprived of all good, absolutely cease to be. It follows then, as long as
they are, that they are good; and therefore whatever things are, are good. And
consequently that evil which I so long sought whence it was, is no substance;
for were it a substance it would be good, and not evil; good, either
incorruptible, and so an excellent good: or corruptible, and so good, because
it may be corrupted. Thus I saw, and it was most manifest to me, that thou
made all things good; and that there were no substances at all, which thou
made not And because thou have not made all things equal, therefore all
things, taken ^everally, are good; but all things, together, very good; because
thou, Genesis 1.31.
our God; have made all things, in their conjunction, very good.

CHAP: XIII.
That there can be nothing in the world simply, but only relatively, evil.

ANd to Thee there is nothing evil in any case; neither to thy self, nor yet to
thy Creature universally considered. Because there is not any thing, without
thee, and it; that can break in, and corrupt the order thou have placed in it.
But indeed in the parts thereof, some things, to othersome, because
disconvenient, are counted evil; and yet are those same, both agreeable, (and
^o, good), to some others, and also good in themselves; And all these things,
so opposite among themselves, are most agreeing to this lower part of Nature,
which we call [earth] to which its cloudy and stormy heaven is very congruous
and highly advantageous.

And although, when considering these lower corporeals apart, or as the only
things in being, I could have fancied and desired (perhaps) some things better
and more excellent than they; yet far be it from me to desire that these
things should not be; since, were these alone in being, much praise, for them,
were due unto thee: Because these also show thy praise.

So: Psalm. 148.7, etc.
Praise the Lord from the earth the dragons and all deeps; fire and hail; snow,
and vapor, and stormy wind, fulfilling his word, mountains and all hills,
fruit-bearing trees, and all cedars: beasts and all cattle; creeping things and
flying fowls: Kings of the earth and all people, Princes and all Judges of the
earth; young men and maidens, old men and children, let them praise thy name.
-- But when as, from the heavens, other things also do praise thee; For these
do praise thee (O our God) in the Highest, Psalm. 148.1, 2, etc.
all thy Angels, all thy H sts, Sun and Moon, all the Stars, and Light, the
Heavens of Heavens, and the Waters that are above the Heavens, let them praise
thy name; Now my desires could aspire to no things better, than they, when my
thoughts comprehended all. And with a more sound judgment I now apprehended,
as, the things higher to be much better than the things below, so all together
to be much better, than the higer only.

CHAP. XIV.
BUt no sound reason or judgment is there in those, who are displeased with
any thing of thy Creation; as in me there was not; whom many things offended,
which thou had made; and because my soul did not dare to be displeased also
with my God, therefore she would by no means have it thy work, whatever
displeased her. And hence she run into the opinion of two substances. [ ] But,
after thou had cured my sick head and removed this my frenzy, I awakened to
behold thee, but not with my former eye of sense, and I saw thee infinite in a
much other manner, than formerly I imagined thee.

CHAP. XV.
ANd I cast back my eye on other things, and saw them to owe unto thee their
being, and to be in thee finite and bounded, yet not as circumscribed by place,
but as all supported by the hand of thy reality and verity. And I saw, that
they had a verity in them all, because they had a Being: and that falsity was
nothing at all else, but, when that is thought to be, which has no being. And
I saw, * them every one suitable and agreeing, not only with places, but times.
And, * that thou, who alone art eternal, did not begin to work after infinite
times and ages were run out, because all those times and ages which have
already, or shall hereafter, pass, could neither go, nor come, but by thy
working first their set courses and revolutions, whilst thy self abides
unmovable.

CHAP. XVI.
That Sin is no substance, but the perversity of an irregular will declining
from its Maker.

ANd I perceived by experience, that it was no strange thing, that bread was an
affliction to a diseased palate, which was sweet to a sound; and light grievous
to weak eyes, which was amiable to the clear. And thy justice it self offends
the wicked, how much more may a Viper or a Worm? which, notwithstanding, thou
have made good, and befitting their rank and station in the lowest region of
thy creatures; the which region also the wicked themselves are most fit for, as
they are unliker unto thee; and fit again for a superior region, as they shall
be made liker unto thee.

And I sought, what this Evil and wickedness was. And I found it not a
substance, but only a perversion and declination of a distorted will, from the
sovereign substance, of thee, O God, toward the lowest of things,, forsaking
and rejecting what is most precious and intimate unto it; and swelling toward
vanities abroad. See this more copiously handled in his first book De libero
Arbitrio; or, Unde sit malum; written at Rome in his return to Africa. See
Confess. l. 3. c. 7.


CHAP. XVII.
That he began now to have a right opinion of God.

ANd I wondered, that now indeed I began to love thee, and no more a phantasme
instead of thee.

[But I stayed not in this fruition of my God: But was, now, wrapped toward Thee
by thy beauty, and straight parted from thee, again, by my own weight, falling
down upon the things below thee, not without sighing: And this weight that
pressed me down were my former carnal customs. But I retained still a
remembrance of Thee: Nor could I now doubt at all; that there was such a thing
as was all-worthy to be possessed and adhered-to, but, that I as yet was not
such a one, as could adhear to it. For the corruptible body presses down the
soul, Wisd. 9.15.
and the earthly tabernacle weighs down the mind, that museth on many things.
And I was now most certain; Romans 1.20.
That thy invisible things from the Creation of the world are clearly seen and
understood, by the things that are made, even thy eternal Power and Godhead.
For I, searching from what principle it should be, that I so approved the
Beauty of Bodies, celestial or terrestrial, and what was present to my mind,
when it passed its free judgment upon mutables, and said: This ought to be
thus, and that must not be so; Searching therefore, from what it was, that I
judged, when I judged so, I had already found, that there was an unchangeable
Eternity of truth superior to this changeable mind of mine; Whilst I ascended
in this my quest by these degrees; from bodies first, * to the soul as
outwardly sensitive by the body; then * to the inner powers thereof, which
those outward corporeal senses inform concerning external objects, whitherto
reaches the knowledge of Beasts; Then * to the reasoning Faculty, to which the
things received from the external senses are presented, to be considered and
judged-of. Which rational faculty, well perceiving it self also to be in me a
thing mutable, ascended yet higher, * to a more pure intelligence, such as
abstracts from accustomed objects, and removes from the troops of several
contradicting phantasms, that so it might find out what light that is, with
which it is informed, when without any hesitancy, it cries out; That the
unchangeable is to be prefer^ed before the changeable, and so might come to
know this unchangeable Essence; which had it not already known in some measure,
it could not have so certainly preferred it before things mutable; and thus I
might arrive at last to that, which is discerned only in a twinkling glance of
a trembling sight.]

And thus I had now a glimpse of thy invisible things, being understood by
those things which do appear. But I could not yet steadily fix mine eye upon
them, nor stand still any while to enjoy my God. But my weakness straight being
dazzled and beaten back, and relapsing to accustomed objects, I carried away
with me only a loving ^^^embrance of thee, and a longing after things which I
(...), as it were, already, but I was not, yet, able to feed upon.

CHAP. XVIII.
But had not yet a right opinion of the Incarnation of the Lord Jesus, the only
way to salvation.

ANd I sought after some way of acquiring so much strength as might enable me
to enjoy thee. Nor found I any, 1 Timothy 2.5. Romans 9.5. John 14.6.
* till I came to embrace the M diator between God and man, the Man Christ
Jesus (who is above all, God blessed for ever) calling unto me and saying: I am
the Way, the Truth, and the Life; and * till I met with that food (which
otherwise, I was unable to receive), mingling it self with our flesh. For The
Word was made Flesh, That so thy Wisdom might nurse and give suck to our
Infancy, which before gave a being to our nature. For I did not then as yet
embrace my Lord Jesus Christ so as I ought; (that is) my humility embrace his
humility: Nor knew I what lesson that his infirmity read me. Who, being thy
Word, the eternal Truth, supereminent to the most eminent part of thy Creation,
yet, in the lowest regions thereof, builded himself an humble Cottage of our
mud; that he might depress and cast down such, as would become his subjects,
from themselves, and then raise them unto himself: healing their pride, and
nourishing their love, to the end, they might proceed no further in their
haughty self-confidence, but rather * might become conscious of their own
infirmity, in beholding before their feet an infirm Divinity from the
participation of our leathern mortal covering; and so in their feebleness and
lattitude * might deject and prostrate themselves upon it, that it, rising
again, may also raise and exalt them with it.

CHAP. XIX.
BUt I, as then, imagined quite another thing; and had an estimation * of my
Lord Christ, only, as of a man admirably wise and no way to be equalled: and *
that he being so miraculously born of a Virgin, and giving us such an example
of contemning temporal things for attaining immortality (by the divine care
over us) seemed well to deserve that sovereign authority to be the Master of
the world. But concerning what mystery [Th^ Word made Flesh] contained in it, I
had not then the least consideration, only I kn^w, from what was storied of
him, concerning his eating, drinking, sleeping, rejoicing, sorrowing,
discoursing, etc that * humane flesh was not united unto thy Word alone: (which
was the Apollinarian error), but, together with it, * an humane, both
sensitive, and rational, soul. And I hold that he was to be preferred before
all others, not * as being the very Person of the Truth, but * from a certain
very great excellency of his humane nature, and from his more perfect
participation of the divine Wisdom.

But Alipius imagined the Catholics to believe God clothed with Flesh in such
a manner, as that, besides the Deity and the flesh of man, there were in Christ
no soul or mind of a man; and because he held it for certain, that the things
recorded of him, could not be performed but by a Creature both vital and
rational, therefore he made somewhat a slower progress toward the Christian
Faith. But afterward knowing this to be the Heresy of the Apollinarists, he
much congratulated, and readily entertained the Catholic belief.

And for my self, I confess, I learnt not till afterward, how, in the manner
of the Words being made Flesh, and in the mystery of the Incarnation, the
Catholic Truth was distinguished from the Photinian error. For the opposition
and contest of Heretics more illustrates the sound doctrine of the Church: And
there must be also Heresies, 1 Cor. 11 19.
that they which are approved may be made manifest amongst the weak and infirm.

CHAP. XX.
Though from the Platonic writings he became assured of many divine Truths,
yet these books breeding pride in him, and not humility.

UPon reading these writings of the Platonists, being already instructed to
seek after a verity incorporeal and disengaged of Bodies, I beheld thy
invisible things, understood by the things which are made; and being repulsed
had a glimpse only of that, which, by reason of the darkness of my soul, I
could not more fully contemplate, being thus far assured, that thou art; and
art infinite; yet without any diffusion of thee either through finite, or
infinite, space; and that thou only have true being; and always the same
being; in no part of thee, by any motion, mutable; and that all others, in that
they are, are from thee. These things I was then assured of concerning thee:
but yet far too infirm to enjoy thee. And I * talked, as one that had
knowledge, when as had I not fought out the way to thee in Christ our Savior,
I had been eternally lost; and * began to affect the seeming wise, being full
of my punishment, and I deplored not this my misery; but was also puffed up and
exalted with my Science. 1 Cor. 8.1.
But where was that charity, edifying on the foundation of humility, which is
Christ Jesus? Or when could these books have learned me that? To which
writings, I suppose, thou guidedst me before any studying of thy Scriptures;
that my memory might afterward reflect on the affections they caused in me; and
that, when I should be assuaged and humbled afterward in perusing thy book, and
my sores had been dressed by thy all-healing hands, I might discern and
distinguish between blind presumption and humble confession; between those, who
saw to what place they should go, but saw not what way, and those who enjoyed
the Way it self leading into that beatifical Country, not to be seen only by
them, but inhabited. For had I been first instituted in thy holy books; and
thou, in their familiar entertainment, had there grown sweet and dear unto
me; and then afterward I had happened on these volumes, perhaps either their
novelty (last looked on) might have removed me in something from the foundation
of piety; Or, in my retaining steadfast still the saving principles and
affections I had imbibed from thence; yet I might have thought, that those
other books, though alone studied, might have produced the like.

CHAP. XXI.
He lastly betakes himself to reading of the Scriptures, especially those of S.
Paul; where he finds the advancement of Gods Grace, and salvation through Jesus
Christ, to the penitent and humble.

AFter these therefore, with an extraordinary ardour, I betook my self to the
venerable style of thy Spirit, and above the rest of the Apostles to the
writings of S. Paul. And those scruples presently vanished, wherein his
discourse had sometimes seemed to me contradictory to it self, and also not
agreeing with the testimonies of the Law and the Prophets. And now it appeared
one uniform piece of chaste and pure doctrine; and I learned to rejoice in them
with reverence and trembling. And I attempted them, and found what truths I had
read in the other books to be said here also, but with great recommendation,
and advancing, of thy Grace; * that he who sees, should not boast, as though he
had not received, both, that which he sees, and that he sees it: 1 Cor. 4.7.
(For what thing has any which he has not received?) and, * that he must by
thee, who art always the same, not only be admonished and instructed, that he
may see, but, also his infirmity be healed, that he may possess: And * that he
who being yet afar off cannot see, yet ought to walk in the way, whereby he
may come, to approach nearer, and to see, and possess: Romans 7.
Because indeed though a man delight in the Law of God after the inward man,
yet what shall he do concerning the other law in his members, war^ing against
the law of his mind, and bringing him into captivity to the law of sin, which
is in his members? because that thou ar^ just, Dan. 9.5.
(O Lord) and we have sinned, Dan. 9.5.
and done wickedly, and behaved our selves impiously, and therefore thy hand is
heavy upon us, and we are justly delivered over to that old sinner, Heb. 2.14.
the President, and Prince of death; because he persuaded unto our will a
conformity unto his will, which remained not steadfast in thy Truth. And now
wretched man that he is, what shall he do? For who shall deliver him from the
body of this death, but thy grace through Jesus Christ our Lord? Prove. 8.22.
John 14, 30. Col. 2.14.
whom thou have begotten coeternal with thy self, and have possessed in the
beginning of thy ways. In whom the Prince of this world found nothing worthy
of death, and yet sl^w him; by whose death for us, was cancelled the
handwriting which was against us. Those other learnings contain none of these
matters. Those pages present no such Scene of piety as this; viz. the tea^s of
confession; thy acceptable sac^ifice an afflicted spirit; an humble and
c^n^^i^e heart, the salvation of mankind; the cel^st^al bridal-City; the
present earnest of the Spirit; the precious cup of our redemption. No ravished
spirit, there, breaks out into such a song. Truly my soul waits upon God:
Psalm. 62.1.
For from him comes my salvation. He only is my rock and my salvation: he is
my undertaker, no more shall I be moved. No distressed soul, there, hears him
calling; Come unto me ye l^^^u^ing and heavy-laden. And those knowing men
disdain to learn of him, because he is meek and lowly in heart. For thou have
hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes.
And it is one thing, from the top of a thick and woody forest, to behold only
afar off the happy Country of peace; but not find at all any way made to it,
and to toil in vain toward it, through places desert and unpassable, being on
every side besieged and laid wait for; by those fugitives of heaven and
desertors of this Country under the conduct of their Prince, the Lion and the
Dragon: And another thing, to possess and hold the true way The holy
Scriptures.
conducting thither, and this way safe-guarded, by the special care of the
Emperor of heaven, Upon which they do not rob, nor spoil, who have forsaken
the Celestial Camp: for they dread and avoid it, as their punishment. These
things were deeply engraven in my soul by wonderful ways, whilst I read those
writings of the least of thine Apostles, and considered those thy works, and
was afraid. 1 Cor. 15 9.


LIB. VIII.
CHAP. I.
He goes to consult Simplicianus (an holy man and the spiritual father of S.
Ambrose) about the future ordering of his life, remaining still passionately
bent on marriage.

O My God, let me remember, Psalm. 35.10.
with thanksgiving unto thee, and confess thy mercies upon me: Let all my bones
be pierced with thy love, and let them say; O Lord, who is like unto thee?
Psalm. 116.16, 17.
Thou have broken my bonds insunder: I will sacrifice unto thee the sacrifice
of praise; and how thou breakest them, I will now relate: and all those, who
worship thee, when they hear these things, shall say: Blessed be the Lord in
heaven and in earth; great and wonderful is his name. Thy words stuck fast in
my breast, and thou did compass me on every side. Of thy life eternal I was
now well assured, though yet discerning it but enigmatically and through a
glass. Yet was all doubt, concerning thy incorruptible substance, 1 Cor. 13 12.
from which all other substance whatever must have its being, removed from me;
now wishing, not to be more certain of thee, but more established in thee. But
then, concerning my own life temporal, all things were much discomposed; and my
heart as yet to be purified and cleansed of its old leaven; and the way (being
our Savior himself) well-pleased me, but the straitness thereof yet much
disheartened me.

And thou put into my mind, and it seemed good in my sight, to go to
Simplicianus, whom I took to be a good servant of thine, and thy Grace to shine
very eminently in him, and of whom I had heard, that he had lived from his
youth, in great devotions, unto thee. And now was he grown very aged; and, by
reason of so long time spent in thy service, it seemed to me that he should be
much experienced and well seen in thy way; and indeed so he was. Whereupon
acquainting him with my griefs, I requested he would direct me, what course of
life were fittest, for one, so affected, as I then was, to walk in thy way.

For I saw the Church full, and in it some following one course of life, some
another. And it much displeased me to continue any longer in a secular
condition; and a great burden to me it was, now no more enflamed with my former
lusts of pursuing honor and wealth, to tolerate any longer that so grievous a
servitude. For now these things yielded me no more delight, in comparison of
thy sweetness, Ps. 26.8.
and the honor of thy house which I loved. But still I remained fast engaged
in respect of women. Neither did the Apostle prohibit me marriage, though he
exhorted me to something better, much wishing that all men were even as he
himself. 1 Cor. 7.
But I, as weaker, chose a more indulgent condition; and, by reason of this one
impediment, proceeded in other things more faintly; wearied with many consuming
cares, and forced in those things, which I was most unwilling to suffer, to
conform to a conjugal life, to which I had so violent inclinations. I had heard
indeed from the mouth of Truth, Mat. 19.12.
That there were Eunuchs, who had made themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of
heaven: But then he said: He that can receive it, let him receive it.

Wis. 13.1
Certainly those men are strangely vain, who have not the knowledge of God in
them, nor can, from these things which are seen so good, find out the sovereign
Being. But this vanity I had already escaped and overpassed, and by the witness
of all thy Creation had found out thee our Creator, and thy Word, that was God
with thee, and one God with thee and the Holy Ghost, by which Word thou have
created all things. Another sort of impious there are, who know God indeed, but
have not glorified him as God, neither been thankful: And I had fallen into
this infelicity also, but thy right hand (O God) laid hold on me and took me
from thence, and set me in an estate of recovery. For thou have said to man:
Job 28.28. Mat. 13.45.
Behold: the Fear of the Lord is the only wisdom: and, Do not thou desire to
seem wise; because, professing themselves to be wise they became fools. And I
had now found the Pearl of great price; and, with selling all that I had, it
was to be purchased; and I doubted and demurred upon this.

CHAP. II.
Upon mention of Victorinus (a famous Roman Rhetorician) Simplicianus relates
the Story of his Conversion to Christianity.

ON then I went to Simplicianus the spiritual father in receiving thy grace In
his baptism: This Simplicianus was sent by Damasus Bishop of Rome to Millain,
to be an instructor, and Director of S. Ambrose then a young Bishop, and
afterward succeeded him in his Bishopri^k. See Aug. Retract. l. 2. c. 1.
to Ambrose then Bishop, and, as a father, honored by him. To him I revealed
all the circuits and windings of my errors; and when I told him that I had
read also some books of the Platonists (translated into latin by one
Victorinus formerly a famous Rhetorick-Professor in Rome, who, I had heard,
died a Christian) he congratulated me much, that I light not on the writings of
any other Philosophers, full of fallacies and lies according to the Elements
(and corporeal principles) of this world, but rather on these which after many
several ways, insinuated God and his eternal Word: And then, to exhort me to
the humility of Christ, hidden from the wise, and revealed to babes, he took
occasion to speak of the same Victorinus, with whom (when at Rome) he had had
very intimate acquaintance; and told me something of him, which I think not fit
to be concealed, containing great matter of praise and glory to thy Grace,
which ought to be re-acknowledged unto thee.

He related, therefore, after what manner that most learned old man and most
expert in all the Liberal sciences, who had read, digested and explained the
works of so many Philosophers; the Tutor to so many noble Senators: (that for a
monument of his excellencies, had erected his statue in the Forum Romanum,
which among the Citizens of this World is accounted a great honor) having
been, even to that age, a worshipper of Idols, and a partaker of those
Sacrilegious devotions, to which most of the Roman Nobility were so zealously
addicted, that they now worshipped and numbered amongst their G^ds Barking An
Egyptian God worshipped in the shape of a Dog.
Anubis, and those other monstrous blood of Deities, which once were enemies to
the Roman State, and which took up arms against Neptune and Venus and Minerva
her Protectors, Rome now supplicating and serving those deities also, whom she
had conquered; (of all which aged Victorinus had, for so many years, been a
most powerfully eloquent patron and defender) he related I say, in what manner,
after all this, that old man was not ashamed to become a Child of thy Christ,
and an Infant at thy Font; submitting his neck to the yoke of thy humility, and
forcing his proud forehead to the reproach of the cross.

Psalm. 18.9
O Lord, Lord, who bowest the Heavens and come down, who touchest the
Mountains and they smoke, with what sweet and secret attractions did thou
insinuate thy self into that breast, and becamest Master of it? He attentively
read (as Simplicianus said) the holy Scripture; and all the Christians writings
he carefully sought out, and examined; and then said to Simplicianus not
publicly but secretly, as to a friend; Know, that I am now a Christian. And he
replied; I will not believe it, nor repure you such, until I shall see you
within the Church of Christ. And the other in derision answered him again; And
is it walls, then, that make Christians? And often he said this, that already
he was a Christian; and S^mpli^ianus, often iterated the same reply: and as
often was the jest of the walls returned by him. For he was afraid, to
displease his great friends, those proud worshippers of Devils; from the high
top of who^e Babilon^sh power; Psalm. 29.5
as from Cedars of Libanus, whom the Lord had not yet broken, he foresaw great
storms of wrath would fall upon him.

But afterward, by continual reading and meditating, he gathered more
firmness, and fearing to be denied by Christ before his holy Angels, if he
feared to confess him before men: Mat. 10.33.
and appearing to himself guilty of a grievous crime, if he should be ashamed
of the Sacraments of the humility of thy eternal Word, and not ashamed of that
sacrilegious worship of those proud devils, (of whom being first a proud
imitater, he became also a worshipper) he began to be shame-free for abandoning
such vanity, and to blush for not professing the Truth; and, all on a sudden
and unexpectedly, said to Simplicianus; (as he told me): Let us go to Church,
there I will be made a Christian. And so he, transported with joy, immediately
accompanied him thither; where, when he had been Admitted a Catechumenus.
initiated in the first Sacraments of instructions, he not long after gave in
his name, to receive regeneration by Baptism; Rome wondering, the Church
exulting* The proud saw it and were grieved, they gnashed with their teeth, and
consumed away. Psalm. 112 10. Psalm. 31.6
As for thy servant (O Lord) God was his hope, and he no more regarded lying
vanities.

Lastly, when the time came of professing his faith, which profession at Rome,
by those who are about to receive thy grace in Baptism, is wont to be made, in
a set form of words learnt by heart, from a higher place, before all the
Faithful, he said, it was offered by the priests to Victorinus that he should
perform it, if he pleased, in private as the custom was to indulge this to
some, whose bashfulnesse in public was apt to be timo^ous. But, that he chose
rather to profess the matter of his salvation in the presence of all the holy
congregation; For that there was no matter of salvation in the Rhetoric he had
taught, and yet he had professed that publicly Why therefore should not he
less fear thy meek and humble flock in pronouncing thy word; than he had
feared formerly, in delivering his own words, a more rude and censorious
multitude.

As soon then as he ascended publicly to repeat it; every one, as they knew
him, whispered his name to others with much congratulation, and who was there;
almost, that knew him not? And every ones joyful mouth in a low murmur sounded;
Victorinus, Victorinus. Such noise they suddenly made in exultation to see him;
and as soon were they silent again out of attention to hear him. And so he
pronounced the orthodox faith with a wonderful confidence, whilst every one
strove, with the arms of his love and joy, to embrace and to seat him in the
chiefest place of his heart and affections.

CHAP. III.
Why more joy for men converted, than had they been always Professors.

[ A digression till the 5. Chapter. Luke 15.7
GOod God, how comes it to pass in man, that he rejoices much more in the
safety of a soul despaired of, or delivered out of some extreme peril, than,
where his hopes of him were always great or the danger escaped, but little? And
so thou also (Father of mercies) rejoycest more over one penitent, than over
ninety nine just persons, who need no repentance. And with much consolation we
hear it, when we hear in thy word, how the over-joyed shepherd brought home on
his own shoulders the strayed sheep: And how the lost groat was brought back
into thy treasures with the great joy, * of the woman that found it, and also *
of her neighbors. And the solemn gladness of thy whole house has forced tears
from us, when in thy Church it is read, concerning thy younger son: that he had
been dead, and was alive again; had been lost, and was found. But this thy
extraordinary rejoicing is properly in us only, and in thy Angels, satisfied
with holy charity; whilst thou art always the same; who know all those
things, always, after the same manner, which neither abide always, nor on the
same manner.

How then comes it to pass, in a soul, that it is more delighted in things
found again, or restored, than in those always possessed? For many other things
witness this, and all places are full of testimonies, that so it is. The
conquering Emperor solemnizeth a triumph, but first undergoes a battle, and
how much his peril is greater in the fight, so much is his joy in the triumph.
A tempest arises at sea and threatens shipwreck: all grow pale with the fright
of approaehing death. The heaven and sea become serene and calm; and their joy
is now excessive, because, before, their fear was so. A dear friend falls sick,
and his pulse indicates some danger? all, that long for his recovery, become
sick in mind, as he in body: he becomes somewhat better and walks a little
about, yet not restored to his former strength: and there is already such mirth
upon this, as was not before, when he went about, healthful and lusty. And so
all the pleasures of this humane life arise from some precedence of pain, and
that not only casual and undesired, but many times purposely and industriously
procured. Eating and drinking are no delight without the foregoing molestation
of hung^r and thirst. And drunkards by eating salt things provoke that biting
heat, which drinking may afterward, with the more pleasure, quench and allay.
And between contracts and nuptials, it is ordered, some time should intercede,
lest, when once married, he should less value her being possessed, whom he
first longed not for being, after espousals, deferred. This holds in wicked and
profane, this in lawful and allowed, joys; this in the sincerest love and
friendship; this in him, who had been dead and was alive, had perished and was
recovered. Every where greater joy is preceded with greater anxiety.

What is this (O Lord my God), that, whenas thou art an eternal joy to thy
self, and when as some-things also, that are from thee, rejoice perpetually
about thee, How is it, that this inferior part of thy creature so alternately
ebbs and flows, is grieved and contented, displeased and reconciled? Is this
the limited measure of their being? and the set proportion thou would allot
to them, when, from the highest heaven to the lowest parts of earth, from the
beginning to the end of times, from the Angel to the Worm, from the first
motion to the last, the several sorts of thy good creatures were placed by thee
every one in their proper seats, and all thy just and upright works were acted
by thee, every one in their proper seasons? Woe is me; How high art thou in the
highest, and how profound art thou in the lowest of them? never departing from
us, and yet we hardly attaining unto thee.

CHAP. IV.
Why more joy in the conversion of men eminent, or noble.

INspire (O Lord,) and operate; excite and restrain; inflame and elevate, us;
breath forth thy fragrant odor, and lustill thy delicate taste; make us in love
with thee, and let us run after thee. How many are there, who do, out of a more
profound hell of darkness, than Victorinus, return toward thee and come to
thee, and are illuminated by thee, and receive that thy light, John 1.12.
which who so receive, have power also given them to become thy sons? But yet,
as such happen to be less known abroad, so even those, who know them, joy less
for them. For, where more men rejoice, there every one has more joy, because
they hear, and are enflamed from, one another. Again those Converts, known by
more, are guides to more in the way to salvation, and go before many others,
that will follow; and therefore men rejoice also more for these that go before,
because they rejoice not for them single. Otherwise far be it, that in thy
tabernacle the persons of the rich should be accepted before the poor; or the
noble before the ignoble; when as rather; 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 1 Cor. 15 9. Acts
13.9.
Thou have chosen the weak things of the world to confound the mighty, and base
things of the world, and things that are despised have thou chosen, yea, and
things which are not, that thou might bring to naught things that are. And
yet the same least of thine Apostles, by whose tongue thou spakest these words,
when as the Proconful Paul, being conquered of his pride and greatness by his
arms, and being brought under the gentle yoke of thy Christ, became now a
Subject of the great King, he himself, from his former name, Saul, delighted to
be called Paul, in memory of so great a Victory. For the enemy is much more
conquered in such a one, whom he more possesses, and by whom he possesses
more; and the proud are by him more possessed, from the title of their nobility
and by them many more others, from the name of their authority. By how much
higher, therefore, * the breast of Victorinus was esteemed, in which the Devil
had held and fortified himself, as an impregnable fort, and * the tongue of
Victorinus, with which great and keen weapon so many souls had been slain; so
much greater must needs be the exultation of thy children, Mat. 12.29. 2 Timothy
2.21.
when our King had thus bound the strong man, and when they saw his vessels,
taken from his service, and made clean and fitted for thy honor, and
serviceable unto to the Lord for every good work.]

CHAP. V.
What operation the story of Victorinus had upon him; and his great captivity
under former ill Customs.

WHilst Simplicianus thy servant told these things of Victorinus, I was
enflamed to imitate them; which was his design also in telling them. And when
he had added also, that, in those days of Julian the Emperor, a Law was
enacted, prohibiting all Christians to teach any humane literature, and
particularly Oratory; which Law Victorinus most welcomly entertaining, chose
rather to forsake his own l^quacious school, than thy word, which makes even
the tongues of Infants eloquent, Psalm. 8.2.
he seemed to me in this not more valiant, than happy, in gaining so an
occasion of a total vacancy and attendance on thee. Which thing I also
aspired-to and sigh'd-after; but was fast bound not with another irons, but
those of my own, hard and iron, will.

The enemy possessed my perverse desires, and of them had made a chain and
fast-tied me with it. For of a perverse will there was made lust; and, in
serving that lust, there was made custom; and, not resisting that custom, it
became necessity, with which, as with certain links fastened one within
another, this cruel servitude held me close shackled. And the new Will but now
beginning to grow in me, by which I desired (disengaged of all other loves)
freely to serve thee: and by which I wished to enjoy thee (O my God, the only
certain pleasure), was not yet able to master the former will strengthened with
age. So these two wills of mine, the one old, the other new; one carnal, the
other spiritual, combated one another, and, in their disagreeance, rent and
divided my soul.

Thus I understood, my self being the experiment, that, which I had read; How
the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the spirit against the flesh: and it
was I, that was in them both: but more I, in that, which in me I now all^wed,
than in that, Romans 7.20.
which in me I disallowed For in this it was more, not I; because, in a great
part, I rather suffered it against my mind, than willingly acted it. But yet
this custom, now so eagerly warring against me, was contracted by me; and
willingly it was that I came thither, whither now, I willed, that I had never
come. And who could justly reprehend this tyranny, when, as a just punishment,
it followed my former fault? And now there remained no more that excuse, in
which I formerly pleased my self; that therefore I yet forsook not the world to
serve thee, because clear truth was not yet discovered unto me. For now was it
also made clear enough; and yet I, (still fettered,) refused to f^ght under thy
colors; and so much feared to be freed from my impediments as, to have such
impediments, ought to be feared. The burden of secular affections, as the
pressure of sleep, sweetly kept me down; and the thoughts, wherein I meditated
on thee; were like the s^^uglings of one that would fain awaken himself, yet is
still surprised with his drowsiness, and relapseth into his former slumbers.
And as though none would wish always to sleep, but all of any sound judgment,
do much prefer vigilance, yet many times, from a benumbed laziness in his
h^^bs, one deferrs to shake it off, and still more l^stingly entertaineth what
already displeases him, when it is high time for him to get up; So was I
satisfied, that it was better to ^es^g^ my self to thy love, than thus to yield
to my own lust; But, as the one I approved, and was convinced by it, so the
other I affected, and was captivated by it. For nothing had I then to reply
unto thee, when thou said unto me: A^ise, Ephesians. 5.14.
thou that sleep, and stand up from amongst the dead, and Christ shall
illuminate thee: and, when thou on every side shewedest me that thou spakest
truth, I had nothing to answer, now convinced with truth, but some sleepy and
drowsy words: Presently; by and by; suffer me but a little while; But,
presently; presently, were far from being presently; and suffer me a little
while, lasted a long time. In vain did I delight in the Law of God, after the
inward man, when another law in my members thus warred against the law of my
mind, and brought me into captivity to the law of sin, which is in my members.
For that law of sin is the violence of custom, which now hales and forces
along the mind, unwilling indeed, but from its own desert; because (before) the
mind willingly fell into it. Wretched man therefore I, who could deliver me
from the body of this death, but thy Grace, through Jesus Christ our Lord?

CHAP. VI.
After this, Pontitianus an African, and an Officer in the Court, giving him
and Alipius a visit, occasionally relates the story of S. Antony; and how two
of his fellow-Courtiers upon the reading thereof, in the same moment renoun^ed
the world (though has engaged to Mistresses) and betook themselves to a
solitary life.

ANd now I will declare and confess to thy name (O Lord my Helper and my
Redeemer) how thy goodness freed me, from that bond of the desire of a woman
which tied me very straight, as likewise, from the hinderance and servitude of
secular affairs. I performed my former wonted employments with a
continually-growing anxiety, and sighed daily after thee: I frequented thy
Church, as often as there was any vacancy from those affairs, under the
pressure of which I then lived. There was Alipius with me, now, after the third
Sessions, having a vacation from his Law-employments, and expecting to whom he
might sell his advice; as I also sold eloquence, and the faculty of pleading,
so far as Art may conferr it. As for Nebridius; he had condescended, to the
importunity of our common friendship, to teach under Verecundus a most intimate
acquaintance to us all, a Citizen, and a Grammarian of Millain, who much wanted
help, and earnestly begged it from some one of our society. It was no desire of
gain that drew Nebridius to this employment, who could have had much higher
from his learning, but only a loving respect unto us, whose request so sweet
and compliant a disposition could not deny. And very prudently was it
undertaken by him, who purposely shunned to be known to persons, according to
this world, great, that he might so avoid all inquietude of mind; which he
desired to have free, and (as often as might be) vacant, for to meditate, or
read, or hear, something concerning wisdom,

Now on a certain day; (when Nebridius was absent, I remember not on what
occasion) there came to our house, to me and Alipius, one Pontitianus our
Countryman an African, who served in honorable place in the Emperors Court. I
know not what his business was, but we sat down to entertain some discourse;
and, by chance casting his eye on a book that lay on a billyard-table which
stood before us, he took it up, opened it, and found it to be the Epistles of
the Apostle Paul, much contrary to his expectation; for he imagined it some
book belonging to that Profession, which then spent most of my time. But then,
smiling, and, after a glad and gratulatory manner, looking upon me, he
expressed his wonder, that he thus found those, and only those, writings before
me. For a Christian he was, and a baptized Professor of the Faith, and who
often prostrated himself before thee our God in the Church, with frequent and
long-continued prayers. To whom when I had replied, that now my greatest study
was of those writings, he began some speech of one Antonius an Egyptian Monk;
whose name was very famous amongst thy Servants, but to that hour unknown to
us; which he perceiving, staid longer on that discourse; informing, and
wondering at, our ignorance concerning so eminent a person.

And much were we astonished, when we heard those so strongly-witnessed wonders
of thine in the true Faith and in the Catholic Church, to be done so lately,
and almost in our own days. All of us wondered: we, that they were so great;
and he, that they were so unknown to us. Thence, he enlarged his discourse
concerning, * the multitudes of Religious in Monasteries there, * their holy
customs and manner of their life of a sweet smelling savor unto thee, and *
the fruitful breasts of those barren deserts; of all which we had heard
nothing. And there was also a Monastery at Millain without the City-walls full
of Good Friars under the maintenance and government of Ambrose; and we were
ignorant of it also.

And he, continuing his discourse, and we attentively silent, further told us:
That, when the Court was at Triers, one afternoon, when the Emperor was
entertained with some public sports in the Circus, he and three others of his
companions went a walking into some Gardens not far from the City-walls, and
there casually walking two and two together, one with him went one way, and the
other two another; and that those other, as they wandered up and down, light
upon a little House, where dwelt some Servants of thine, Mat. 5.3.
poor in spirit, of whom is the kingdom of heaven; and that they found there a
book, in which was written the life of this Antonius Which life one of them
began to read, and then to admire, and then to be enflamed, and, even whilst
reading it, to meditate of, instantly taking up the same life, and of forsaking
his se^ular service, to entertain thine. (He was one of those whom they call
Agentes in rebus, Agents in the Prince's affairs Their office, to gather the
Emperors Tributes, apprehend Delinquents, make provisions for the Court, etc.
). Then suddenly, filled with a holy zeal, and a sober shame, and anger at
himself, he cast his eyes upon his friend, and said to him: Tell me, I pray,
with all these our labors and pains, what does our ambition reach at? what
seek we? what is it we serve for in this our employment: Can we have any
greater hopes in the Court, than to arrive to be Favorites to the Emperor? and
in being so, what is there in that condition not brittle, and full of perils?
and through how many dangers ascend we to this much greater danger? and how
long will it last? and how long ere we attain to it? But the Friend and
Favorite of God I am, if I please, now presently, and so for ever.

Thus he said; and, laboring in the birth-throws of a new life, cast his eyes
again upon the paper, and read, and became changed within, where thou saw;
and his mind emptied and stripped of the World; as soon appeared: for whilst he
reads, and suffers a tempest in his fluctuating breast, and now and then casts
out some sighs, and groans, at last he concluded, and resolved, upon those
better things: and, now wholly thine, said to his Friend: I have now bidden a
final adieu to that our former hope, and am fully purposed for the service of
God: And this, from this hour, in this place, I will begin to put in practice.
But you, if you do not like to imitate this my retreat, do not oppose it. Then
answered the other: that he would always adhere to the companion of so noble a
warfare, and so high a reward. And thus, now both thine, having first cast up
the charges, they built that Tower of * their leaving all that they had, Luke
14.28.
and following thee.

By this time Pontitianus, and the other that walked with him, through another
quarter of the Garden, were arrived at the same place, and, having found them,
minded them of returning homeward, because it grew late. But they acquainting
them with, their holy purpose, and the manner, how such inclination was raised
and confirmed in them, requested, that, if they pleased not to join with them
in the same resolution, they would give no disturbance to it. Hereupon, they
being nothing altered from their former selves, yet lamented (as he said) their
own worldly condition, and congratulated the others piety, and recommended
themselves to their prayers, and so, with a heart pointing downward toward the
earth, returned into the Palace, and the other with a heart erected to heaven,
continued in that little habitation. And both of them had their Spouses, to
whom they were contracted, who so soon as they heard of it, in imitation of
them, consecrated likewise their virginity unto thee. These things Pontitianus
related to us.

CHAP. VII.
The tumults of his spirit upon Pontitian's discourse.

BUt thou, O Lord, amidst his discourse, did turn me about toward my self;
and tookest me from behind my back, where I had placed me, whilst I had no mind
to observe my self; and set me before my face, that I might see how
crooked, how ugly, and deformed a thing I was, covered over with scabs and
ulcers; and I beheld and abhorred, and no way there was to fly or run away from
my self; and if I endeavored to turn away my sight from so loathed a
spectacle, still as he proceeded in his story, thou did again bring me before
my self, and thrust me before my eyes, that so I might discover mine iniquity
and hate it. Not that I had not known it before; but I dissembled it, and
connived at it, and forgot it. And now the more ardently I loved these persons,
who so piously and absolutely resigned themselves into thy hands, to receive
their total cure from thee, the more detestably hated I my self, when compared
with them. Because a many years were now run out with me (about some twelve
years) since (in the nineteenth year of my age) the reading of Cicero's
Hortensius had excited me to the study of wisdom; and I had thus long deferred,
by the contempt of earthly felicities, to set my self at liberty for the search
of it; whereof not the finding, but the very search, was far to be preferred
before all the found treasures and Crowns of the World, and before all the
freely-flowing pleasures of the body.

But I, then a wretched, very wretched, young man, had also, in the first
dawning of that my youth, begged of thee chastity: and had said: [Give me
chastity and continency, but, yet a while, do not give me it.] For I feared
that thou should hear me too soon, and should presently heal me of that
disease of concupiscence, which, I wished rather, might be satiated, than
extinguished. And I had taken very wicked courses in a sacrilegious
superstition, not as fully assured in it, but yet as preferring it before some
other things taught in thy Church, which were not by me reverently examined,
but prejudicately opposed, And I had also with pre^ences cosened my self, that
therefore I deferred the contemning and renouncing of secular hopes, to follow
thee alone, because as yet there appeared not to me any certain truth to which
I might steer my course. And now was the day come, in which I was laid naked to
my self; and my conscience began thus to reproach me. Where art thou, Tongue?
thou, that only professedst this, that thou would not lay aside thy pack of
vanity, for truth, or happiness, whilst yet uncertain: Lo, now, certain it is
and assured unto thee; and yet thy burden still presses thee; whilst those,
with lightened shoulders, take wings, and soar upwards, who have not tired
themselves, (as thou), in the search of it, nor, for ten years and more,
meditated such things.

Thus was I inwardly corroded, and extremely confounded with an horrible shame,
all the while Pontitianus was telling these stories. And so, his talk being
ended, and the business for which he came, away he went. And I, being returned
to my self, what did not I now say against my self? with what spurring and
lashing words did not I whip forward my soul, that it might readily follow me
striving to go after thee? and it still hung back and refused; and refused now,
without excuse. All its arguments and reasons were spent and confuted. Only
there remained a mute and speechless cowardice and trembling; whilst it feared,
like death, to be bound from that flux of former custom which wasted it unto
the death.

CHAP. VIII.
In this anguish of soul his retiring into a garden, Alipius following him.

AMidst this great controversy within, which I hotly disputed with my soul in
the closet of my heart, troubled as well in countenance, as in mind, I turn to
Alipius, and exclaim: [What is this we suffer? what is it, you have heard? The
unlearned start up, and take heaven by force, whilst we with all our Science,
cowardly, and heartless, (see) how we wallow still in flesh and blood. What?
because they have out-stript, and are gone before, us, are we ashamed to
follow? and are we not more ashamed at least not so much as to follow them?]
Some such thing said; and straight my rage flung away from him; who stood
silent, and beheld me with much amazement. For neither did I speak language
usual; and besides, my eyes, forehead, cheeks, color, the accent of my voice,
more spoke my passion, than my words did.

There was a little garden belonging to our lodging, which we had use of (as of
the whole house) our hospitable friend, the Master thereof, dwelling elsewhere.
Thither this tumult in my breast carried me away, where none might hinder the
hot contention which I had engaged with my self, until it concluded in that
issue, which thou already knew, but not yet I. Only I was, in a sober rage,
and suffering a death that would beget life: well knowing, what evil I then
was; not knowing what good, within a little while, I was to be. Thus away I
went into the garden, and Alipius followed close after me: for I counted my
privacy not the less for his presence; nor indeed would he forsake me, whom he
saw in such disorder.

We sat us down as remote as might be from the houses. I fretred in my spirit,
and raged with most implacable indignation, that I did not go into a strict
league and covenant with thee (O my God,) whilst all my bones cried out, that I
should enter into it, and extolled it to the heavens unto me. And thither I
needed not go, either in Ships, or in Coaches, or on my feet: no, not so far
as I went from the house to this seat in the garden. For not only to go, but to
come to the end of such a journey, was nothing else, but only to consent and to
be willing to go; that is, to be resolutely and entirely willing; and not to
turn and toss a will, maimed one half of it, sometimes on one side, and
sometimes on another, in one part raising it self up, and struggling with
another part that hangs down: And yet how many things (in these conflicts of my
lingering will) did I effect, as I pleased, in my body, (which yet those who
would, always cannot, do; as if perchance they have not such members, or the^e
be tied with bands, or dissolved with sickness, or, some other way,
restrained.) For example: if then I tare off my hair; or smote my forehead; or
clasped my hands about my knee, as soon as I pleased, presently I did it. Yet
was it possible, in all these, to have willed them, and not have done them; if
the unpliantness of my joints could not serve my purpose. So many things
therefore did I then, where to will them only, was not to do them: and yet did
I not that, which incomparably more contented me; and which, as soon as I
would. I might, do, because as soon as I would I might will it; for here the
ability was the same that the will; and to will only, was to do, it: and yet it
was not done; and the body yielded a more easy obedience to the smallest
willing of the soul, to bend its limbs according to the others beck, than the
soul it self did to it self, and that for its greatest joy and pleasure; and
this to be perfected and accomplished only by willing it.

CHAP. IX.
The fierce combat there between the Flesh and the Spirit: and his sad
complaint of the great difficulty the will has to command it self, when it so
easily commands the other members.

FRom whence such a monster? and how can this be? let thy mercy enlighten me,
and let me enquire, (if perhaps, in these great secrecies of men's punishments
for sin, and the most obscure judgments of the sons of Adam, any thing may
appear that may afford me some answer;) whence such a monster? and how can this
be? The mind commands the body, and is presently obeyed; the mind commands it
self, and is opposed; the mind commands the motion of the hand, and so speedily
is it executed, as the obedience is scarce distinguishable from the command;
and yet the mind is a spirit, and the hand a body: the same mind commands the
mind to will a thing, the very same essence with it, and yet it does it not.
Whence such a monster? and how can this be? It commands (I say) that it should
will a thing, which could not command it unless it willed it, first; and yet
that is not done, which it commands.

Indeed it is not wholly willing, therefore neither does it wholly command; for
only so far it commands, as it wills: and so far what it commands is not
done, as it wills not, that it should be done. Because the will commands, that
there should be a willing, and nothing else commands this, but only it self
upon it self, therefore it does not wholly command it: and therefore that which
it commands that it may be, is such a thing, as is not already; for if the will
were already wholly inclined to such a thing, it would not command, that such
inclination should be, because it was already. Both to will, and yet to nill in
part, therefore, is no monster; But a sickness and infirmity of the mind, which
cannot entirely arise, when lifted up by the truth, because it is counterpoised
by vicious custom. And, therefore only, there are two willings, because one of
them is not total; and so what is wanting to the one, makes up and fortifieth
the other.

CHAP. X.
LEt them perish from before thy face, (O God), as the speakers of lies, and
imposters do perish, who when they observe in our deliberating two wills, do
affirm two distinct minds in us of a different nature, the one good and the
other bad. [ ] For when I thus deliberated, at last to enter upon the service
of my Lord God, as I had long designed, i^ was I that willed, and I also that
nilled, it. It was the ^^me I, who as yet neither fully willed, nor fully
nilled it; and therefore, was in contention with my self, and divided and rent
from my self; and this rent in me indeed was made against my will; yet it
signified not in me, the inhabitancy of some foreign mind, but the punishment
of my own: and therefore it was no more I, that wrought this distraction, but
sin that dwelled in me, from the punishment of that first more freely-committed
offense; inasmuch as I am a son of Adam.

And, certainly, if there were so many contrary natures in us, as there are in
us contrary desires, there will not be two principles only: one of our good
inclinations, the other of our bad; But must be many also of the bad, and many
of the good. Since we have many wills and desires opposing and hindering one
another, and yet all of them bad; and many repugning also, one to another, yet
all which are good; the acting of all which may concur upon the same point of
time, and all may be equally affected, but cannot be all at once effected. [ ]
Which, therefore struggle amongst themselves until some one thing be chosen, to
which may be totally carried that one will, which before was divided toward
many. So when Eternity delights us above, and the pleasure of a temporal good
re-tempts us here below, it is the same soul, not with a full will, willing the
one, or the other; and therefore it remains suspended with a tormenting
distraction, whilst from the Truth it preferrs one, and from its acquaintance
cannot quit the other.

CHAP. XI.
THus sick of mind, and thus tormented I was, accusing my self much more
severely than formerly, and tumbling, and winding to and fro in my chain, till
I had wholly broken it off; a small piece only of which now held me, yet held
me still. And thou, O Lord, pressedst sore upon me in my inner parts, with a
severe mercy; redoubling the lashes of fear and shame, * that I might not give
over stretching, and * lest I should not break off that thin piece which only
remained, and it should grow again upon me, and bind me faster, than ever.

For now I said within to my self; [Come, let it be done presently, just now
let it be done:] and already in word I began a league with thee: and already I
almost did it: but quite did it not. Neither relapsed I again into former
wonts, but stood and took breath, being very near it, and then set on again,
and was arrived almost at it; and almost, now, and now, touched, and laid hold
on it; and yet I was not quite there, nor, yet, touched, nor held, it;
demurring a while, to die unto death, and to live unto life; and the worse,
long used, being far more prevalent in me, than the better, untried: And the
point of time, in which I was to become another man, how much it approached
nearer, struck in me so much more horror. Yet did it not make me to reconcile,
or quite turn away, but only to stand in a suspense.

There hung still upon me those trifles of trifles, and vanities of vanities,
my old Mistresses; and plucking me by the vesture of the flesh, softly
whispered unto me. [Will you then thus forsake us? and, from this moment no
more, for ever, shall we accompany you? and from this moment shall not this,
nor that, be lawful for you to do, any more, for ever?] And what things were
they, that these suggested unto me under the words which I call This and That?
What kind of things were they, that these promoted to me, O my God? Let thy
mercy ever avert the remembrance of them from the soul of thy Servant. What
filthiness, what infamies did they suggest? and I heard them (now, much more
than half, none of theirs) not as boldly affronting me, or freely contradicting
me to my face, but as lowly muttering behind me, and secretly pulling me (when
going away), only to look once more back upon them. Yet they somewhat retarded
me, that I made not due speed to catch away my self and shake them off, and to
spring from them whither thy Grace called me, whilst a strong custom of them
said unto me, Think thou, that thou can, for ever henceforth, live without
such things?

But now it said this but very faintly. For there appeared unto me on that
part, where I had already turned my face, but whither I yet trembled to pass,
Continency, with a maiestick modesty, serene, and un-dissolutely cheerful; and
honestly tempting me to come forward, and to fear nothing: and extending,
toward the receiving and the embracing of me, those charitable arms of hers,
so full of societies, of good examples. There were entertained so many
children, boys and girls, so much flourishing youth, and all other ages, grave
widows, and aged virgins: And, in all these, Continency, not barren, but a
fruitful mother of children, namely of celestial joys begotten by thee, O
Lord, her most dear Husband. And she, with a persuading derision, laughed at
me, as if she had said; And art not thou able to do, what those youths and
those maidens are? Or are those and those able in themselves? and not in the
Lord their God? the Lord their God gave me unto them. Why stand thou upon
thy self, and therefore do not stand? throw thy self upon him, and fear
nothing, he will not withdraw himself, to let thee fall: Cast thy self upon him
securely, for he will catch and will save thee. And I blushed exceedingly, that
I yet continued to hear the former whisperings of those Toys, and to hang in
suspense. And, again, she seemed to say to me; Col. 3.5.
Stop thine ears against those thy unclean members which are on the earth,
that they may be mortified. They tell thee of some certain delights, but not of
such as the Law of the Lord thy God proposes. Such was the contest acted
within in my heart only between me and my self, whilst Alipius, who sat close
by me, silent expected the event of such an unusal commotion.

CHAP. XII.
His total Conversion by reading (upon hearing a voice from Heaven) a passage
of S. Paul, where the book first opened.

BUt as soon as more profound meditation had drawn out, from the very bottom of
this sink, and laid on an heap, all my misery before the view of my soul, there
arose in me a mighty tempest, bringing with it great showers of tears. Which
that I might more freely pour forth with their proper words and expressions, I
rose from Alipius, conceiving solitude more suitable to a business of weeping,
and removed so far off, as where neither his presence might be burdensome unto
me. Thus it was with me; and he perceiving something (I know not what) from my
words when I arose, in which the change of my voice showed me big with tears,
stayed still where he sat, much amazed.

I, under a certain fig tree, threw down my self I know not how, and gave
liberty to my tears; and the rivers of my eyes ran apace, being an acceptable
sacrifice unto thee. And, not indeed in these words, but, to this purpose, I
said many things unto thee. And thou, O Lord, how long? Psalm. 79.5.8.
how long will thou be angry, for ever? Remember not our former iniquities. For
I well perceived I was still possessed and withheld by them, and therefore call
out such miserable complaints. How long; how long? to morrow and to morrow? Why
not presently, why not, this very hour, an end to my filthiness?

These things I uttered, as I wept, with a most bitter contrition of spirit:
And behold I heard a voice, as from a neighboring house, as of a Boy or Girl,
I know not whether, in a singing note: saying, and often repeating: Toll,
Lege; Toll, Lege; Take up and read. And presently my countenance being
altered, I began with much intention to consider, whether Children were wont,
in any kind of play, to sing any such words: nor could I call to mind, that I
had any where heard the like. Whereupon, suppressing the course of my tears, I
rose up, interpreting it to be nothing else but a divine Admonition, that I
should open the book; and read the place I first light upon. For I had heard of
Antonius, * that entering by chance into a Church, when the Gospel was reading,
he took himself to be admonished, as if that was particularly addressed to him,
what was then read: Mat. 19.21.
[Go and sell that thou have and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure
in heaven, and come and follow me]: and * that by this Oracle he was out of
hand converted unto thee.

So getting up hastily, I returned to the place where Alipius was sitting, for
there, when I arose, I had left the Apostles book: I catched it up, opened it,
read, in silence, the piece of the Chapter, on which I first cast mine eyes.
Not in rioting and drunkenness; Romans 13.13,
not in chambering and wantonness; not in strife and envying: but put ye on the
Lord Jesus Christ; and make not provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts
thereof. I would read no further, nor was there need: For at the end of these
lines, as it were with a new light of confidence and security streaming into my
soul, the darkness of all former doubting and hesitancy was dispelled. Then
putting my finger, or I know not what other mark, between, I shut the book, and
now with a serene and untroubled countenance related all to Alipius. Who also
thus discovered, what should be done likewise in him, which I observed not. He
requested to see, what I had read: I showed him the place; then He looking
attentively further than I had read, who knew not what followed, there found
these, the next words. Him that is weak in the faith receive ye. Which words he
applied to himself, and so showed them to me. But this very admonition
sufficiently confirmed him, and straight, without any afflicting delays, did
he join himself to me in this good and holy resolution, so pleasing and
agreeable to his former manners, in the virtuous inclinations of which he
always aforetime had far surpassed me.

Thence we go in to my Mother. We relate our resolution to her; she rejoices;
we tell her all the circumstances thereof, she exults and triumphs, and fell a
blessing thee, who art able to do above that which we ask or think; because she
saw so much more granted her by thee concerning me, than ever she had
petitioned thee for, with all those her miserable and lamentable groans. For in
such a full manner did thou convert me unto thee, that I sought now no more
after wife, nor after any other hope of this world, standing now with her upon
that rule of faith, See 3. l. 11. c.
as thou had in a vision represented me unto her so many years before. Psalm.
30.11.
And thus thou turnedst her mourning into gladness; into a gladness much more
plentiful, than that she had aspired to, and much more precious and chaste, than
that she had promised her self from her grandchildren of my body.

LIB. IX.
CHAP. I.
Doxology and Thanksgiving for this his freedom from his former lusts; aad the
great joy and content he presently received therein.

Psalm. 116.16.
O My Lord, I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son of thine handmaid,
thou have broken my bonds insunder. I will offer to thee the sacrifice of
praise. Let my heart, and let my tongue, praise thee, Psalm. 35.10.3.
and let all my bones say: O Lord, who is like unto thee? Let them say this,
and do thou answer me, and say thou again unto my soul; I am thy Salvation.
Alas! who, and what a one was I? What evil was not I? evil, either my deeds,
or, if not deeds, my words; or, if not words, my will? But Thou (O Lord) were
good and merciful, and thy right hand sounded the profundity of that my death:
and drew, out of the bottom of my heart, that abyss of corruption, summed up
in this: To nill all that thou would; and to will all that thou would not.

But where was all this while, during so many years, and out of what low and
deep retreat of my soul did thou thus in a moment call forth, that my (now
indeed) Free Will, wherewith I should submit my neck unto thy easy yoke, and
my shoulders unto thy light burden, (O Jesus Christ my helper and my Redeemer?)
How sweet, on a sudden, became it now unto me to want the sweets of those
toys! and what before it was my fear to lose, how was it now my joy, to
dismiss! For thou, the true and the supreme sweetness, did expel them from
me: Thou expelledst them, and thy self enteredst into me instead of them: more
delicious than all delights, but not to flesh and blood; more bright and
glorious than all light, but to the inward hidden man: exalted above the
heights of all honor, but not to those, who exalt themselves. Now was my mind
freed from those consuming-cares of seeking honor, and of getting wealth, and
of weltring in pleasure, and scratching the tickling and itchy scabs of my
lusts. And now my infant-tongue began to converse with thee, my ambition, and
my riches, and my salvation, my Lord God.

CHAP. II.
His purpose to relinquish his profession of teaching Rhetoric, but the thing
deferred till the Vintage-vacation.

ANd it seemed good to me before thee, not tumultuously to break off, but yet
gently to withdraw any further service of my tongue in those Faires of
loquacity, that the young men, who meditated not thy Law, not thy Peace, but
lying fooleries and forensick wars, might no longer buy from my mouth arms
for their madness. And now there remained but a few days to the vacation of
the vintage; which I resolved patiently to endure, that I might relinquish my
School at an accustomed season; and, being now purchased by thee, might return
no more to be thus exposed to sale. This was then my purpose, agreed on before
thee, and amongst our selves; but not thought fit to be divulged to others
abroad.

Although thou had given unto us, ascending from the valley of tears, and
singing unto thee in this our ascent a song of degrees and of joy, Psalm. 120.3,
4.
sharp arrows and hot burning coals against the deceitful tongue, which under
pretense of advising our good, averts us from it, and (as it uses its meat) in
loving, consumes us. But thou had shot through our hearts with the love of
thee, and we carried the arrows of thy words sticking in our entrals, And the
examples of others thy servants, as hot burning coals (whom thou had made, of
once black and dead, now lively and lucid), being thrown into the bosom of our
serious cogitations, fired and consumed our former heavy stupidities, that our
motion, like that of fire, should point no more downward to low things: which
examples had kindled such a flame in us, that all the blasts of contradiction
from a deceitful tongue could only more increase, but not extinguish, it.
Nevertheless, because that, by reason of thy name, now so glorified through the
world, such our purpose and vow must needs find many commenders, it seemed, *
that it might appear to have some relish of vainglory in me not to have
patience till a vacation so near, but to desert a Profession so public, and
eyed by all, before it; and * that the mouths of all men reflecting on this my
act, and how near a breaking-up school I would yet prevent, might say many
things, as if I affected to magnify my self and seem some great one; and yet
what mattered it to me, that men should divine and dispute my intentions; Romans
14.16.
or that our good should be thus evil-spoken of?

But, besides the opportunity of the Vintage-vacation, so it was, that, in the
heat of Summer, my lungs began, * to fail, under the too much toil of my
School, difficultly * to fetch breath, and by the pains of my breast to
signify their hurt, and now * to refuse any very loud or long speaking; which
thing, at the first, had much troubled me, because it would force me, either
they being incurable, upon necessity to give over so burdensome a profession:
or, if curable, yet to intermit it. But after that a resolute will to attend
only on thee, and to see, how that thou art the Lord, was raised and confirmed
in me; thou know (O my God, my joy) that I had this also, no false, excuse,
to sweeten the discontent of those men, who, for their childrens benefit envied
my liberty.

Full of such joy, I patiently therefore endured that interval of time, till it
should be run out. I know not, whither they were about some twenty days, but
they were endured not without some patience, for I was already rid of those
ambitions, which formerly helped me to bear that heavy burden, with which now,
therefore, I should have been overlaid, had not patience took their place. Some
of thy Servants, my brethren, may blame me for this, that, having a heart now
fully resigned to thy service, I should any longer, (though but for an hour),
sit down in the chair of lies. And for my part I do not oppose them. But thou,
O Lord, so full of mercy, have thou not pardoned and remitted this sin also
unto me, amongst many others so horrible and deadly, in the holy water of my
Baptism?

CHAP. III.
Verecundus, a Citizen of Millain, offers his country house for their
retirement. The death of Verecundus and of Nebridius not long after S. Austin's
conversion: being both first made Christians.

See l. 8. cap. 6.
VErecundus was much afflicted concerning this our purpose, because thus he saw
himself, by reason of the many bonds wherewith he was most straightly tied,
deprived of our society: Himself not yet a Christian, though his wife a
baptized Professor of the faith; and yet was he *retarded by her, as one of his
straightest fetters, from following our intended course; * and did deny to
become a Christian upon any other terms, than these he could not perform.
Truly he very courteously offered and lent us, for the time of our abode in
that place, the use of his country house. Thou, O Lord, shall recompense him at
the resurrection of the righteous, since the lot of the righteous is already
happened to him. Who, (though in our absence, after we had removed to Rome)*
being seized by a corporal sickness, was, in it, made a Christian, and a
Fidelis, and so departed this life. In which thing thou had mercy, not only
on him, but on us, lest considering the great courtesies of this friend toward
us, and not able to number him amongst thy flock, we should have been tormented
with too disconsolate a sorrow. Thanks be to thee, our God; thy care we are
all; thy exhortations and thy consolations sufficiently show it, faithful in
all thy promises: Thou shall return to Verecundus, for that his house at
Cassiacum (where from the tumults of the world we quietly reposed in thee)
Psalm. 68.15, 16. Vulg. in in monte incascato, monte tuo, monte ube. i.
the amenity of thy eternally-green and flourishing Paradise (because thou have
remitted unto him his sins here on earth) in the mountain of fat pastures, the
Hill of God, that fruitful Hill.

Thus was Verecundus afflicted, but Nebridius, as much joyed: for although he,
not as yet a Christian, had formerly fallen into the pit of that most
pernicious error, to believe the flesh of thy Son only an empty apparition,
yet now, reclaimed from it, he was a most earnest inq isitor of truth; though
not as yet initiated in any Sacraments of thy Church. Whom, becoming also, not
long after our conversion and regeneration by thy baptism, a faithful
Catholic, and serving thee in all continency and chastity amongst his Kindred
in Afri k, and having converted all his family to Christianity, thou have
loosed from the flesh, and now he lives unto thee in Abraham's bosom.

Whatever it is, that is signified by that bosom there my Nebridius lives, my
sweet friend, and thy adopted Son; there he lives. For what other place can
receive such a soul? In that place he lives, concerning which he asked of me, a
poor unexperienced man, so many questions. He now lays his ear no more to my
mouth, but his spiritual mouth to thy fountain, and there drinks wisdom to his
fill, endlesly happy. Yet cannot I imagine him so inebriated therewith, that he
forgets me, since thou also, O Lord, whom he drinks, art mindful of me.

Thus therefore it was with us at that time; we comforting Verecundus, much
grieved (yet without diminution of friendship) for such our conversion; and *
exhorting him to a profession of the faith suting with his condition, namely
with a married life; And, * attending for Nebridius, when he would run the same
course of life with us, which he might presently, and was upon the point to do
it, every moment, when, behold, those days were at last run out, which seemed,
so long, and many, from the affection I had of a vacant liberty, That I might
sing from the innermost marrow of my soul. Tibi dixit cor meum. Psalm. 27.2.
My heart has said unto thee: I have sought thy face: and thy face, O Lord,
will I seek.

CHAP. IV.
His retiring, in the Vacation, (after his School dissolved) to the
country house of Verecundus: His meditations on the fourth Psalm, and his
several writings there: and the miraculous cure of his violent toothache, after
he was rendered thereby speechless.

ANd now was the day come, wherein I should actually be released from my
Professorship in Rhetoric, from which I was released before in affection: And
it was done; and thou now freedst my tongue, from what thou had before freed
my heart: And I blessed thee with much rejoicing, and so retired to the Country
Villa At Cassiacum.
with all my nearest friends. Where * what I did in my writings, (now indeed
dedicated to thy service, but yet as it were panting after, and somewhat
relishing of, the School of pride so lately left) is witnessed by my books, His
books written there are
reasoned partly with those who were present before me, and partly with my self
alone before thee; and Contra Academicos. Lib. 3. De vita beata. l. 1. De
Ordine. l. 2. Soliloquiorum. l. 2.
what I acted with absent Nebridius, is testified by my Epistles.

O! when shall I find sufficient time for commemoration of those thy so many
and so great benefits toward us in that time; especially I hastening to yet
greater matters? For my remembrance calls me back to those times; and it is a
sweet thing to me (O Lord) to confess now unto thee, * with what inward rods
thou then tamedst me, and * in what manner thou levelledst and plainedst me;
humbling the mountains and banks of my vain and towering thoughts, straightening
my crookedness, and smoothing my roughness: and also * in what manner, thou
subduedst Alipius, the brother of my soul, to that blessed name of thy only
begott n Son Jesus Christ our Lord: Which name at first he disdained to have
inserted in our writings, which he desired might rather relish of the lofty
Cedars of the Philosophy-school, Psa. 29.5.
which the Lord has broken, than of the humble and low medicinal herbs of
ecclesiastical knowledge, salutary for nourishment, preservative against
poisons.

O! what passionate voices sent I up onto thee then, when I read the Psalms of
David, those faithful Hymns, and those Aires of piety, not to be sung by any
swollen spirit, then, when I was but yet a novice in the School of thy Love, and
only Catechumenus, solacing my self in that Villa, in the society of Alipius, a
Catechumenus also; my Mother still adhering to us, in a female habit, but with,
a manly faith, the security of old age, the affection of a Mother, the piety of
a Christian. O what passionate expressions (I say) made I unto thee, in the
reading of those Psalms! and how much was I enflamed toward thee by them! and
how was I incensed to have sung and proclaimed them (if I could) all the world
over, to the confusion of the swelling and pride of men. Though verily all the
world over are they sung, and there is none, that can hide himself from thy
heat. With what bitter indignation and grief did I storm against the
Manichees? Psa. 19.6.
and then again pitied them, that they were * ignorant of those Sacraments, of
those Medicines, and * mad also against the Antidote from which they might have
received the cure of their madness. How did I wish that they had been
somewhere near me, and might (I ignorant of their presence or harkening) have *
observed my countenance; and * heard my ejaculations, when I read the fourth
Psalm; and * seen, what things, in that my retirement were wrought on me by
this Psalm, [Cum invocarem -- When I called upon thee thou heardest me O God
of my righteousness in my distress thou have enlarged me. Have mercy upon me O
Lord and hear my prayer.] That (I say) they might have heard (without my
knowledge that they heard, lest they might think that for them I said so) what
things I uttered on those words, for indeed neither should I say the same
things, nor in such manner say them, supposing them to have seen or overheard
me; nor if I should have said the same, would they have so entertained them, as
when I said them only with, and to, my self before thee, in the familiar and
native affections and expressions of my mind.

How did I now tremble with fear, now again burn with hope, and with exultation
in thy mercy (O Father) and how did these issue forth by my eyes, and voice, my
tears, and sighs, when thy good spirit, turning unto us, says in the words
following: O ye sons of men, how long dull of heart? Psalm. 4.3. Vulgar Filii
hominum, usque quo gravi cord? -- Scirote, quoniam mirificavit Dominus Sanctum
suum.
How long will ye love vanity and seek after a lie? Know ye that the Lord has
magnified his holy one. -- For I had loved vanity and sought a lie. And thou,
Lord, had already long since magnified thy Holy one; raising him from the
dead, and setting him at thy right hand. Whence also he should send from on
high his promised Comforter, the Spirit of truth. And he had also sent him
already, but I knew it not. He had sent him already, because he was already
magnified rising from the dead and ascending into heaven ( Joh. 7.39.
For till then the H. Ghost was not given, because Jesus was not yet
glorified.) And for these things it is, that the Prophet cries out: How long
dull of heart? How long love ye vanity and seek a lie? And know ye that the
Lord has glorified his holy One? He cries out How long? He cri s out: Know ye?
And I so long, not knowing, had loved vanity and sought after a lie; and
therefore I heard and stood in awe; because this was spoken to such as (I
remembered) I had been. For, in those phantasmes, which I had held for Truth,
there was vanity and a lie. And I burst forth into many serious and vehement
expressions, in the bitterness of my remembrance. Which I wish they might have
heard, who, even until now, love that vanity, and seek after that lie. Perhaps
they would have been pained and have emptied themselves of that poison, Ver. 4.
and so thou would hear them, when they cried unto thee. For, not in a vain
and lying appearance, but by a true death of his flesh, he died for us, who now
intercedes and cries unto thee for us, and thou hear him.

I further read there: Ver 5. Irascimini and nolite peccare. Rom 2.5
Be angry and sin not? And how was I moved therewith, O my God! Who had already
learnt to be angry with my self for my past sin, that I might for the future
forbear sinning: and with good reason angry; because, it was not any other
nature of the Nation of darkness that sinned in me; as they say; who therefore
are not angry with themselves for it; and so treasure up anger against the day
of anger, and of the revelation of thy just judgment.

Neither were now my Allusion to verse 6. Quis ostendet nobis bona?
good things (as theirs) placed abroad, and without me, nor sought with my
carnal eyes by the light of that Sun; For those who seek their joy in something
abroad, do easily become vain, and are spilt upon those things which are seen,
and which are temporal; and with hunger-sterved cogitations continue still
licking the images thereof. And Oh, that they might once grow weary of, and
loath, such an hunger, and say: quis ostendet nobis bona? Who will show us any
better good? And that we might answer again, and they might hearken unto it.
Ver 6.7. Signatu^ est super nos lumen vultus tui Domine.
[Signatum est, etc. The light of thy countenance must be lifted up upon us.]
For we our selves are not the light, which enlightneth every man, but we are
enlightened from thee; that, Ephesians. 5.8
who were sometimes darkness, may be light in thee. Oh, that they might see
that eternal light internal, unto us. Which I (now when I had tasted it,) much
greived, that I could not Ver. 6.
show to them, when they bring unto me their heart in their eyes, wandering
without and abroad, from the place where thou art, and then say; who will show
us any good? For there, there it was, that Ver. 4.
I had been angry at my self; namely within Vulgar ver. in cubilibus vestris
compungimini sacrificate sacrificiu^ justitiae, and sperate in Domino. Ver. 5.
Ver. ^. Dedisti haeritiam in cord meo.
in the private bedchamber of my heart, there had I been compunct and pricked;
there sacrificed my old life now slain, and the inchoated meditations of a new
putting my trust in thee. There it was, That thou had now begun to grow sweet
and delicious unto me; And had put joy into my heart. And I was transported
into an exclamation, what I read here without, experiencing it within. Neither
desired I any longer to be multiplied and divided toward any terrene goods:
wasting time; whenas I might enjoy another corn and wine and Oil, Ver. 7.
in an eternal simplicity, instead of such a temporal multiplicity.

Vulgar ver. 9. In pace, in idipsum, dormiam and requiescam. 1 Cor. 15 54.
Vulgar ver. 10. Quoniam tu Domine singulariter in spe constituisti me.
And then I cried out in the following verse, with the loud clamor of my heart.
O, in pace, O, in idipsum; O in peace; O in possession of that very thing; O
what is it that he says? Obdormiam and somnum capiam, In that peace and in
that fruition I shall lay me down and sleep: because who shall any ways
disturb us, when is come to pass the saying, that is written Death is
swallowed up in Victory? And it is thou O Lord that art that idipsum [the very
same] indeed, who art never changed; and in thee is this resting; eternally
forgetting all labors, because there is none other thing labour-worth besides
thee; and to what purpose is it to get many other things, which are not thee?
Therefore thou O Lord have established me in the sole hope of thee.

I read; and I was all on fire; and yet I found not what to do to those deaf,
and dead; of whom my self was once a pestilent member, and a bawler (full of
bitterness and blindness) against those writings, * all sweet from the
hony-dew of heaven, and * all-lightsom from thy light. And now I pined away as
much because of those their Scriptures which were penned in opposition to these.

How shall I call to mind all the passages of that our country-retirement? --
But, amongst them, I forget not, nor will I conceal, the severity of thy rod
upon me in that place, as likewise the celerity of thy mercy. Thou did then
greatly torment me with the toothache: and when it had increased to such an
excess, as that now I was no more able to speak, it came into my mind to
request all my friends then present to go to their prayers for me to thee, the
God of all manner of health. This I writ in a waxen Tablet and gave it to them
to read; and no sooner were we fallen upon our knees to our devotions but that
pain vanished. But how great a pain? And how strangely ceased? I was much
afraid and amazed at it, I confess (O my Lord, my God): For from my youth
never had I experienced the like; and the great power of thy beck in our
profoundest misery, was, thus, showed unto me; and, rejoicing in faith, I
praised thy name. But the same faith suffered me not to rest in quiet
concerning my former sins, not yet remitted unto me by thy baptism.

CHAP. V.
His acquainting S. Ambrose by Letters, with his former errors and present
resolutions, desiring his advice what part of Scriptures chiefly he should
read, who directs him to Esaias.

THe Vintage-vacation being ended, I gave notice to the Millanois to provide
for the Scholars another Merchant of Language: both because I had designed,
for the future to dedicate my self to thy service; and because by reason of the
difficulty of breathing and pain of my breast, I was no longer fit for that
profession. And I signified by letters to thy Prelate that H. man Ambrose my
former errors, and my present resolutions and desires: Of Baptism.
equesting also that he would instruct me, which of thy books especially I
should read, to be the better prepared and fitted for so great a grace. And he
recommended to me the Prophet Esaias: I suppose, because he above the rest was a
clearer forshewer of the Gospel, and of the calling of the Gentiles. But I not
understanding the very first Chapter of him, and imagining all the rest
suitable, laid it aside, to be re-sum'd when I was more expert in the
Gospel-writings.

CHAP VI.
His return to Millain the Easter following to receive Baptism from Bishop
Ambrose together with his Son Adeodat, and Alipius, who traveled thither
barefoot. S. Austins ravishment and melting into tears upon hearing the
Church Service and -- Music.

FRom the foresaid Villa, when the time was come for giving in our names [as
Candidates of Baptism] leaving the country we returned to Millain. And it
seemed good to Alipius to be my associate in the same regeneration in thee; he
having already put on an humility suitable to thy Sacraments, and being a most
valiant subduer and tamer of the body, even to travel on the cold and frozen
ground of Italy barefoot, no usual attempt. We joined with us also the boy
Adeodate; carnally begotten in my sin; but excellently made by thee. He was
then about fifteen years of age, surpassing in wit many grave and learned men.
They are thy gifts, that I here confess unto thee O Lord my God, Creator of
all things, and potent to reform our deformities and amend our defects. As for
my self, I own nothing in that child besides my sin; For if we took some care
to nurture him in thy discipline, it was thou and none else that did inspire
this into us. Thy gifts then they are, that I confess unto thee.

There is a book of mine composed by way of Dialogue, entitled, De Magistro;
where we two are made discoursing together; thou know that all those things,
introduced in the person of him my co-dialogist, were his own conceits, when
but sixteen years old. I discovered in him many other things yet more
admirable. That wit of his was an astonishment and a prodigy unto me, and who
besides thee could be the work-master of such an admirable piece?

Very soon did thou take away his life from the earth, and I, with the more
security, remember him; not dreading any further thing now, for his childhood,
nor his youth, nor for his mans-estate. Him we associated to be made coetaneous
with us in thy Grace, and educated him in thy discipline. And we were all
baptized together, and the solicitude and anguish for our former ill-led life
now vanished from us. Nor was I satiated in those days with the wonderful
sweetness I enjoyed in contemplating the height of thy Counsels for the
salvation of man. How much did I weep in the singing of thy Psalms and Hymns,
being passionately moved by the melodious voices of thy Church? Those voices
flowed in at my ears, and thy truth distilled into my heart, and there the
affection of piety boiled over, and thence flowed down tears, and much solace
found I in them.

CHAP. VII.
The original of singing the Church-Psalmes and Hymns at Millain after the
manner of the Eastern Churches. The bodies of the Martyrs, Gervasius and
Protasius, discovered to S. Ambrose by divine revelation, found un-corrupted.
Many miracles done by them; whereby the fury of the Arrian Empress, toward S.
Ambrose, and the Catholics, was much lenified.

THe Church of Millain had, not long before, begun to practice this way of
mutual consolation and exhortation, zealously performed by the Brethren, with a
joint harmony of voices, and hearts. A year it was then, or not much more,
since Justina, the Mother of Valentinian the Emperor then a child, persecuted
thy holy man Ambrose in favor of her heresy, whereto the Arrians had seduced
her. The devout people watched night and day in the Church, ready to die with
their Bishop, thy Servant; and there thy handmaid, my Mother, also, bearing a
chief part in the troubles and vigils, lived upon her prayers; we, hitherto
cold and unquickened by the heat of thy Spirit, yet were not a little roused up
by the amazement and perturbation of the whole City. And at this time it was
first ordered, that Hymns and Psalms should be sung after the manner of the
Eastern parts, that the people might not languish and pine away with a tedious
sorrow. And from that time to this present is it retained there, very many (and
almost all) thy Congregations in other parts of the world, imitating it.

Then it was, that thou, by a vision, shewedst unto thy forenamed Prelate,
where the bodies of the Martyrs, Gervasius and Protasius, lay, which thou had
so long preserved uncorrupted in thy secret treasury, opportunely now to bring
them forth, for the suppressing of a woman's, yet a Prince's, rage.

For when these, discovered and taken up from the place where they lay, were
with beseeming reverence translated to Ambrose's Basilica; not only those vexed
with unclean spirits, after the Devils own confessions of these Martyrs, were
dispossessed of them: But also a certain Citizen, for many years blind, and
very well known in the Town, when he had enquired the cause of such a confused
joy of such a number of people, leaped up and desired his Guide to conduct him
thitherward: where arrived, he procured admission, that he might touch with his
handkerchief the ^ier of these thy dead Saints, Psalm. 116.15.
precious in thy sight; which having done, and wiped his eyes therewith, they
were presently opened. Thence the same thereof is spread abroad: thence thy
praises zealously celebrated: thence the mind of that wrathful Woman, though it
was not advanced to the soundness of believing, yet was it withheld from the
fury of persecuting. Thanks to thee (O my God); from whence and whitherto have
thou guided my remembrance, that I might also confess these things unto thee,
which, being so considerable, yet I had omitted and forgotten before. And yet
even then, when the savor of thy good ointments poured forth was so fragrant
abroad, we did not run after thee. Cant. 1.2, 3.
And for this reason I lamented so much the more in the singing of those thine
Hymns; of a long time before sighing after thee, and at last breathing in
thee, as far as there can be any free breathing in this narrow cottage of
flesh raised up of a few turfes of Grass. 1 Pet. 1.24.


CHAP. VIII.
S. Austin's return by Rome for Africa. The death of his Mother in Italy at
Ostia. A description of her pious education and life.

Psalm. 68.6. vulg.
THou who make men live together unanimously in one house, did add to our
society Evodius also a young man of the same town with me. Who being of the
number of those Officers in the Court, whom they call Agents in the Emperors
affairs, was before us both converted unto thee and baptized, and relinquishing
the secular, now embraced thy, service. All together we lived, Here at Millain
S. Austin writ;
together, (resolved to continue in this holy devotement), we sought a place
most convenient for this our design of thy service. Together we returned for
Africa: and, when we came to Ostia Tiberina, my Mother died. De immortalitate
Animae, 1. l. (belonging to his Soliloquies, written before in that Country.)
De Grammatica; and some of the other Liberal Sciences.


Much I omit, because I much hasten In his passage from Millain to Ostia, he
staid some time at Rome; where he writ,
. Do thou receive my confessions and thanksgivings, in privacy and silence, for
innumerable favors here omitted. But I will not omit, what my soul swells and
labors with concerning that thy handmaid, who conceived and labored of me
both De Moribus Ecclesiae Catholicae, and De moribus Manichaeorum. 2. lib.
in her womb, that I might be born into this temporal light, and De quantitate
animae, to show it had no corporeal quantity.
in her heart likewise, that I might be born again into the eternal. Nor will I
here celebrate her gifts, but thine in her. For it was not she, that gave such
birth, or such education; to herself; but it was thou that createdst her;
neither did her parents know what a one she should be extracted from them. And
it was the rod of thy Christ, and the discipline of thine only begotten Son,
that educated her in thy fear, in a believeing family, and in a well governed
portion of thy Church.

The first book De libero arbitrio: or, Unde sit malum.
And, for this her good education, she was wont to extol not so much the care
of her mother, as of a certain decrepit maidservant, one that had carried her
Father, when an infant, on her back, as bigger girls use to carry little
children. For which reason, as likewise for her great age, and virtuous
qualities, she received, in this Christian family, much respect from the
Governors thereof. Therefore was the charge over her Masters daughters
committed to her, and as carefully discharged by her; one, of a sober prudence
in directing them, and of an holy severity (when need was,) in restraining
them. For, excepting the set hours of a slender repast, which they took at
their parents table, sh permitted them not, though never so dry and thirsty, to
drink so much as a little water; preventing an evil custom, and adding a good
advice. Ye drink water now, because wine is not in your power; but when ye come
to get husbands, and are made mistresses of closets and cellars; Water will
grow contemptible to you, but the custom of drinking will stick by you.

With such prudence of instructing, and authority of commanding, she easily
suppressed the lustings of that yet tender age, and molded their very thirst
into such a regular habit; that it was no more affected by them, what was not
meet for them; and what was not decent, now was not grateful.

Yet notwithstanding this, there afterward stole upon her (as this thy
handmaid told me her son) by little and little there stole upon her, an
affection to wine. For she, as a sober Maid, being usually sent by her parents
into the Cellar to fetch wine, in taking it with a little scale out of the
vessel, before she poured it into the flagon, used to put her lips to it, and
sip but a very little, for she could do no more by the reluctance of her palate.
For this was not, then at first done by her, out of any lust to wine, but out
of the overflowing excesses of that age, which boil up to many wanton tricks
and experiments, where they are not allayed in youth, by the presence and
gravity of the aged. Therefore to this little she by adding daily more littles
(for whoever contemns small things, Ecclus. 19.1.
shall fall by little and by little) at length contracted such a custom, that
now she would greedily drink off almost a whole one of those little dishes.

Where now was that discreet old servant? and those her zealous admonitions?
could they have had any virtue upon this concealed disease, unless thy cure, O
Lord, also watched over us? At a time when her Father and Mother, and other
Overseers were all absent, thou who art always present; who createst, who
convertest us, who also procurest, for the salvation of souls, some good even
from those who are evil, what did thou at that time for her, O my God? how
did thou heal her? how did thou draw out a rude and sharp taunt from the
breast of another, as it were a medicinal launcet out of thy hidden store,
and, with one cut thereof, let out all this corruption? For another
maidservant that usually went with her to the cellar, on a time quarrelling
with her young Mistress (as it often happens) when they two were alone,
objected this thing to her; with a most bitter insulting, calling her
Wine-bibber. With which reproach she being notably stung, reflected on the
foulness of her fault, condemned, forsook, it. As flattering friends pervert,
so quarrellous enemies many times amend, us. Yet will thou repay them not
according to thine, by them, but according to their own, purposes. For this
angry servant intended only her reproach, not cure; and did this secretly, only
because the time and place of their brabbling happened to be such; or else,
lest, speaking it openly, she should happen also to be chid for not disclosing
such a thing sooner. But thou, O Lord, the Guide of all Creatures in Heaven and
in Earth, who turnest the streams of the strongest torrents to thy uses, and
disposest the turbulent flux of sins to thy designs, by the madness of one
soul, soberedst another: That none well considering this, may attribute it to
his own power, even when, by his words, such a one is amended, whose amendment
he designed.

CHAP. IX.
Her dutiful deportment, toward, and, at last, conversion, of, her Husband
Patricius.

THe, thus chastely and soberly educated, and rather by thee rendered dutiful to
her parents, than by them made so to thee, When by her years she was now
completely marriageable, being matched to an husband, served him as a master:
endeavoring to gain him to thy service, and continually preaching thee to him
in her excellent conditions, wherein thou made her very beautiful; and
reverently amiable and admirable, to her Husband. As for the misbehaviours and
violations of the marriage bed, she so patiently endured them, as that she
never had any controversy with her Husband about such matter. For she still
expected the descent of thy mercy upon him, that, being once made thy Convert,
he would also become continent.

Besides this; he was, as very amorous in his affection, so very hot and hasty
in his anger. But well she knew to make no resistance to him when in his
passion; not only in deed, but neither in word. Only when he was re-calm'd and
quiet, upon an opportunity offered, she gave him an account of her action, if
happily he had been without reason incensed. And, when as there were some other
principal Dames who, though matched to much gentler Husbands, than hers, yet
carried about sometimes upon their very disfigured faces the marks of their
Husbands fury; and they, (in their familiar discourse together) would
ordinarily blame the naughtiness of their Husbands, she blamed that of their
own tongues; as it were in jest, soberly remembering them, * that, from the time
they had first heard their matrimonial Contracts recited, they were to account
them as Indentures, whereby they were made servants; and so, mindful of such
their condition, * that they ought not to grow haughty against their Masters.
And when they, knowing what a choleri k Husband she endured, wondered, that it
was never heard, or any other way appeared, that Patricius had beaten his Wife,
or that any other domestical dissensions, even for one day, had happened
between them; and familiarly enquired the reason thereof; she acquainted them
with her rule and practice set down above. And those amongst them, who observed
the same, upon their own experience returned many thanks; those who observed it
not, kept still in slavery, suffered much misery.

Her Mother in law also, by the tales and whispers of malicious and naughty
maidservants, becoming at their first living together much incensed against
her, she so overcame her by her observance, and her perseverance in all
long-suffering and meekness, that of her own accord she disclosed to her Son
whose intermedling tongues they were, whereby the peace of the house between
her and her daughter-in-law had been so disturbed; and desired, he would punish
them. And thus after he, both in obedience to his Mother, and care of the
discipline of the family, and of the amity of the members thereof, had
corrected those complained-of, as she desired, and she also had promised the
like reward to whoever should hereafter, as to please her, speak evil of her
daughter in law, none thenceforward daring to do it; Very memorable was the
sweetness of that perfect amity they ever after enjoyed.

Thou had also conferred this excellent gift on that thy good Servant, in
whose womb thou wast pleased to form me (O my God, my Mercy) that between
dis-agreeing and dissenting parties (in all things she could) she rendered
herself such a peacemaker, that when hearing mutually from both of them many
bitter reproachings of one another (such as a swelling and undigested choler
uses to belch up, when the crudities of hatred are exhaled, and breathed forth
in a sour discourse to some one present, whom they affect, concerning another
absent, whom they disrelish) yet she never disclosed any thing of the one to
the other, but only what tended to their reconcilement.

A small virtue in her would this have seemed to me, but that by sad experience
I find innumerable multitudes (I know not from what horrid contagion of sin)
very zealous, not only * to disclose to enemies when in anger, what is said by
their enemies, in their ang r: but also, themselves * to superadd things which
were not said by such enemies Whereas, for a mind endued with any humanity it
is too small a kindness not to divulge, and exagitate others quarrellings and
reproaches, or not to augment them also with their own speaking evil, unless
they do endeavor likewise, by their own well-speaking, to abate and extinguish
them. And such a one was she, being taught by thee her interior Master in the
school of her heart.

Lastly: she being such gained also her husband unto thee in the latter end of
his temporal life: and now at length no more lamented those disorders in him a
Christian professor, which she had so long patiently tolerated in him before
it.

She was also a servant of all those who were thy Servants: and there was none
of them that knew her, but that much praised thee and honored thee, and loved
thee in her: because they discovered thy presence in her heart, 1 Timothy 5.4, 9,
10.
by the testimony of the fruits of an holy conversation. For she had been the
Wife of one man; had requited her parents; had piously governed her own house;
was well reported of for good works: had brought up Children; so often
laboring again in a new birth of them, as she perceived them to stray from
thee. Lastly, for all us O Lord thy Servants, (since thou permittest us to call
our selves what thou have made us) who, a little before her end, lived now
together, associated and co-united in thee after our receipt of the grace of thy
baptism, such care took she of us, as if she had been the Mother to us all;
such services did she for us, as if she had been the daughter to us all.

CHAP. X
The discourses between Him and his Mother at Ostia, some few days before her
sickness, concerning the felicities of the next life. Her desire of Death.

ANd now the day near approaching, that she was to depart out of this life
(which day Thou knew, though we were not aware of it) it came to pass (Thou
through thy secret providence so ordering it) that she and I stood alone
leaning on a window, that looked forth into the Garden of the house, * where we
lodged in that town of Ostia upon Tiber; and * where, retired from company and
noise, after the hard travel of a long journey we were repairing our Spirits
for a Sea-voyage. There we were discoursing together, we two alone, very
sweetly; and forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto
those things which are before, we were enquiring between our selves in the
presence of the Truth, (which thy self art O Lord) What thing the eternal life
of the blessed hereafter shall be; 1 Cor. 2.9.
Which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of
man; But yet we gasped with the mouth of our heart directed toward the
celestial streams of thy Fountain, that Fountain of life, which is with thee,
that, watered from thence according to our present capacity, we might in some
measure contemplate so high a matter.

And after our discourse had f rst concluded thus much; that there was no
delectation of the senses of our Flesh, (what, or in how great corporeal
beauty, and splendor soever it might be,) that seemed worthy, I say not to be
compared, but at all to be mentioned in regard of the pleasure of that life to
come; elevating our selves yet higher than these, with an ardent pursuit
thereof, we made a perambulation, by several ascents, through all corporeals,
and through heaven it self, from whence the Sun and moon and Stars illuminate
the earth. And leaving th^se, we yet ascended more interiourly, in the sweet
contemplation and speech of thee, and admiration of thy works, and came to
consider these souls of ours; and we mounted above and transcended these also,
that so possibly we might at length arrive at that Country of never failing
fertility, where thou feedest Israel for ever with the food of Truth, and where
the Life is that Wisdom, by which are made all those things both that have been
and that shall be; but it self is not made; but so is, as heretofore it was,
and so shall be ever; (though indeed to have been heretofore, or hereafter to
be, agree not to it, but to Be only, because it is eternal: For to have been,
or hereafter to be is not eternal.) And behold, whilst we, thus, talk and
yearne after it, we got some touch of it, in a little measure, with one whole
spring and beat of the heart. And we sighed! See l. 7. c. 17.
and left there the first fruits of the Spirit still fixed unto it, and so our
feebleness relapsed again to our former discourse, and the exterior noise of
our mouth; where the Woe d has its beginning, and has its ending; and what is
there in it, that bears any resemblance to thy Word; which perpetually endures
in it self without ever becoming old, and by which all things are renewed. And
we said thus to one another. If any soul could be stripped and exempt from the
impressions, and enjoy a perfect, * silence, of the tumults, of the flesh;
could enjoy * the silence of the images and appearances of all things of the
earth and of the water and of the air * the silence of the heavens, and * the
silence of the soul it self to it self, so that it could pass by it self
without any thought of it self; could enjoy the silence of dreams, and all
imaginary fancies, the silence of every language, and sign, and of whatever
has its total being only by a passing away of its parts (if perhaps any soul
can enjoy an Universal silence of them; See l. 4. c. 10, 11.
because if any one will hearken to them, in their passing by, and away, they
all speak this to him: We our selves have not made us, but he made us, who
passes not away but eternally remains.) But, having only said this, if now
they become silent to us, having directed our ears toward him that made them;
and so he alone should speak to us not by them but by himself; that so we
should hear his word, not by a tongue of flesh, nor by the voice of an Angel,
nor by the thunder of a cloud, nor by the Aenigma of a similitude, but should
hear, * his own self, the person whom we love in all these other things, * his
own self without these (as but now for a start we enlarged our selves, and with
a swift thought touched that eternal wisdom, above all, permanent for ever) if
such a thing, I say, were continued unto us, and all other sights so far
unlike and inferior to it were quite removed, and this one should totally
ravish and ingulf, and overwhelme the beholder with those interior joys, that
so our life for ever should be such, as that moment of intelligence was, after
which we so much languished and sighed, would not this happily be that thing in
the Gospel: Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord? Mat. 25.23. 1 Cor. 15 51.
And when shall this be? shall it be, when we all shall rise again? But shall
not we, then, be also all changed?

Such things at that time we discoursed together: and if not altogether in this
manner and in such words; yet Lord thou know, that upon that day we argued
such like things; and, whilst, amidst our talk, this World with all the
allurements and delights thereof appeared unto us vile and contemptible, then
she said unto me: Son: For my part I am no more taken at all with any thing in
this life: What I should more do here, or why I am here, I know not, all my
hopes in this world being now ended. One thing there was for which sake I was
earnest to stay a little longer in it; that I might see you a Catholic
Christian before I died; and my God much more abundantly has performed this
unto me in that I see you also, (this worlds felicity despised) his all-devoted
Servant. What make I here any longer?

CHAP. XI.
Her sickness; Death; careless of her funeral; only desiring from them a
remembrance of her at the Altar of the Lord.

TO this what I answered her, I do not well remember; But scarce five days or
little more had passed, when she fell into a Fever; and one day, being very
sick, swooned away, when her company was removed a little space from her: who
running to her, she soon after recovered her senses, and looking up upon me and
my brother Navigius. See his book De vita beata.
standing by her, said to us, as one ignorant. Where have I been? Then
beholding us all-amazed with grief, she said: Here ye shall interr your Mother.
I held my peace and refrained weeping; But my brother let fall some word,
wherein he wished, as a thing more happy, that she might not die abroad, but in
her own Country: which she hearing, and with an offended countenance checking
him with her eyes, that he should yet relish such things, then looking on me
she said, hear you what he says? and then, to us both: Lay this body any
where; let the care thereof nothing trouble you. Only this I beg of you, that
ye make remembrance of me at the Lords Altar, wheresoever ye be. And when she
had expressed to us this her mind with ^uch words as she could, she said no
more, now struggling with the pains of her disease.

And I fell into a deep meditation on thy gifts (O my God so invisible) which
thou sowest in the hearts of thy faithful, and which bring forth such
admirable fruits: and much, rejoiced, and gave thanks unto thee, calling to
mind, what I knew formerly, with what great care she had always been perplexed
concerning her place of burial, which she had provided and prepared for her
self near the body of her husband* For, because they had ever lived very
peaceably together, she desired also (as humane affections are less capable of
Divine matters) that this might be accumulated to their former felicity, and
might be commemorated by posterity, that it was granted her, after her crossing
the sea, and so long foreign travells, to have the same tomb and earth to
cover the united ashes of her and her husband.

And at what time that vanity, out of the replenishing of thy goodness, ceased
to be in her heart I know not; but I rejoiced and wondered at this new
inclination, which she now discovered: Although by that discourse we formerly
had at the window, when she said; What make I here any longer? there appeared
no desire in her to die in her own Country. And I heard afterward that at
Ostia, in my absence, my mother had with much confidence discoursed with some
friends of mine, concerning, the contempt of this life, and benefit of death.
And they admiring such courage in a woman, which thou had bestowed on her,
and asking whether she feared not to leave her body so far from her own City.
Nothing (said she) is far off from God; neither need I fear, that he should
not know, in the end of the world, where to find that, from whence to raise me
again. And so the ninth day of her sickness, the fifty sixth year of her age,
and the thirty third of mine, that religious and pious soul was dissolved from
the body.

CHAP. XII.
S. Austin refraining from weeping, though suffering much inward grief; to
which, after her burial, he indulgeth some tears.

I Closed her eyes; and great grief presently seized my heart, and thence
overflowed into tears: but at the same time I forced my eyes, by the overruling
power of my soul to drink up again this their fountain even unto dryness,
whilst this inward combat was no small pain unto me. When also, at her last
breath, my boy Adeodat burst out on crying, we all chiding him for it, he
forbear, (in the same manner, as also omething childish in me tended to
weeping, but, checked by a more manly voice of my heart was stilled again) For
we did not think it decent to celebrate that funeral with lamentations and
complaints; because these (for the most part) are used to deplore some misery
of the dead, or rather their extinction. But neither miserably did she die, nor
die at all: This was assured unto us both from the purity of her manners, from
the sincerity of her faith, and from other reasons indubitable.

What was it therefore, that within, so much pained me, but a fresh wound given
me from the custom of our conversation together (so sweet and so dear to me)
now suddenly broken off? I confess I took some solace in that testimony of
hers in her last sickness, when speaking-fair my then-services toward her,
she called me her Dutiful Son, and related, with much tenderness of
affection, that She never once heard fall from my lips, a harsh or contumelious
speech toward her. But alas (O my God who made us both) what comparison could
there be between such honor from me given to her, and her great services done
to me? And therefore now, left destitute of her so great a solace, my soul was
deeply wounded, and that life rent asunder, which was now made up all one of
mine and hers.

The boy stilled from crying, Euodius took up a Psalter and began to sing the
Psalm. Psalm. 101.
Misericordiam and judicium cantabo tibi Domine, the Responses being made by
all us of the family. And many Christian brethren and religious women out of
the town hearing what the matter was, came to us, and, whilst those, whose
office it was, after the usual manner took care of the corpse and funeral, I,
going aside, in a place where most conveniently I might, discoursed to those,
who thought it not fit to leave me then alone, such things as were suitable to
the occasion; and with that balm of thy truth sought to mitigate my grievous
pain well known to thee, but hid from them; who diligently hearkened to what I
said, and thought me to be without sense of sorrow. Whilst I O Lord, meanwhile
in thy ears, where none of them could hear me, much chid the softness of my
affection, and forced back the flux of my grief: and sometimes it yielded to me
for a little, and then again with great violence reflowed upon me; yet not so
far, as to the bursting out of tears or changing my countenance. But very
sensible I was of this pressure I suffered within. And then again, because this
extremely displeased me, that humane things should have such power upon me,
which, according to the lot of our mutable condition, and the appointed method
of their succession, must needs fall out, with yet another sorrow I lamented
this my sorrow; and so became afflicted with a double grief.

When also the Body was carried to burial, I went, I returned, without tears;
Neither in those prayers we poured forth unto thee when the sacrifice of our
ransom was offered unto thee for Her, the body being set down by the grave
side, before the interrment thereof (as the custom there is) neither in those
prayers (I say) shed I any tears. But all the whole day was I notwithstanding,
in secret, grievously sad, and with a troubled spirit, begged of thee to heal
my sorrow; and thou would not do it. I suppose to show me, even by this one
experiment, the strong bond of any thing we are long accustomed to, even
against all the force of a mind, which now was no more fed with any of these
deceiving consolations.

It then also seemed good unto me to go the Bath and wash my self; having heard
that this name (...) was given it by the Greeks, from its helping to drive away
the anxieties of Spirit; yet I confess unto thee (Father of Orphans) such was
I, when washed, as before; neither had the sweat of my body carried away with
it the grief of my mind.

After this I slept, and awaked, and found now my sorrows not a little
mitigated; and, as I was alone in bed I called to mind those most true verses
of thy servant Ambrose, Tu es enim --
Deus, Creator omnium
Polique Rector; vestiens
Diem decoro lumine;
Noctem soporis gratia;
Artus solutos ut quies
Reddat laboris usui:
Mentesque fessas allevet
Luctusque solvat anxios.
O God, the great world's Architect;
Who do Heavens rolling Orbs direct;
Clothing the day with beauteous light;
And with sweet slumbers silent night;
When stretched forth limbs new vigor gain
From rest, new labors to sustain.
When anxious minds dismiss their care,
And gnawing griefs forgotten are.


But by and by the former remembrance returned afresh into my mind, * of this
thy handmaid and * of all her conversation, so religious and holy toward thee,
so affectionate and observant toward us, of which I was now all on a sudden
destitute. And I had a mind now to weep in thy sight, concerning her and for
her; and concerning my self and for my self; and I gave a free course to the
tears which I had suppressed, to run out as much as they pleased, bathing my
heart with them; and solacing my self in them, because thou only heardest, and
not man, who might perhaps proudly mis-interpret those my laments.

And now (O Lord) I confess these things unto thee in writing; Read them that
will, and interpret them as he pleases. And if such shall discover it a fault
in me, that I thus wept for my Mother, some small part of an hour; for my
Mother lately dead from my sight, who wept for me so many years, that I might
live in thy sight; let him not deride me for it: but rather, if he abound in
charity, assist me himself with his tears, for this my sin, unto thee the
common Father of us all Brethren in thy Christ.

CHAP. XIII.
His Prayer for his deceased, Mother Monica, and Father Patricius.

ANd now, O our God, I, with a heart perfectly healed of that wound, in which a
carnal affection perhaps might seem too much engaged, do power out before thee,
in behalf of that thy servant another sort of tears, flowing out of a troubled
spirit, from the consideration of the perils of every soul, dying in Adam:
although she, revived in Christ, even before her releasement from this sinful
flesh, had so lived, as that thy name was much praised both in her faith and
virtues. Yet dare I not affirm, from the time that thou did regenerate her by
baptism, that no word fell from her mouth contrary to thy Commands: and I find
it pronounced by the Truth thy Son, If any one shall say unto his Brother,
Fool, he shall be in danger of hellfire; Mat. 5.22
and woe be even to the praisable life of men, if thou should examine it,
with mercy laid aside.

But because thou make not strict enquiry after sin, therefore we have a
confident hope to find some place of indulgence with thee. And, on the other
side: whosoever he be, that can reckon up his true merits unto thee, what
accounts he unto thee but thy own gifts? Oh then, that men would know
themselves; 1 Cor. 1.31.
and that he that glories, would glory in the Lord!

I therefore (O Thou my Praise and my Life, God of my heart) setting aside here
her good deeds, for which, with much rejoicing, I render thee thanks, now
become a petitioner to thee for the sins of that my Mother Hear thou me (I
beseech thee), by that cure of our wounds that hung upon the Cross, and that,
now sitting at thy right hand, intercedeth unto thee for us. I know that she
dealt mercifully, and from her heart forgave to her debtors their trespasses;
do thou likewise remit her debts to her; if she has also contracted some, in
those many years, which she lived after baptism, Forgive them, O Lord, forgive
them I beseech thee. Enter not with her into judgment. Jam. 2.13. Mat 5.7.
Romans 9.15.
But let thy mercy rejoice against judgment; because thy words are true, and
thou have promised mercy to the merciful: and yet, that such were merciful,
thou gave it unto them; who have mercy on whom thou will have mercy, and
show compassion, on whom thou will show compassion. And I believe, Psalm. 119
108.
thou have already done this, which I beg of thee. But let these
freewill-offerings of my mouth (O Lord) be acceptable unto thee, Because, when
the time of her dissolution drew near, she had no regard of her body, to be
sumptuously in^erred, or richly embalmed, or desired some choice Monument, or
was solicitous for a Sepulcher in her own Country. None of these things
recommended she to us: but only desired us to make remembrance of her at thy
Altar; thy Altar: at which, without any one days intermission, she constantly
attended; From whence she knew was dispensed the Holy Victime; Col. 2.14
by which was cancelled the handwriting which was contrary unto us: by which
was triumphed over that enemy, who casts up our faults, and seeks for what he
may lay to our charge, and finds nothing due, through Him, in whom we conquer.

For who shall refund unto him that innocent and precious blood? who repay him
the price, wherewith he bought us, that so he may redeem us from him? To the
Sacr meant of which price, thy Handmaid bound-fast her soul with the line of
her Faith. O let none ever break off, or ^^ver, her from thy protection. Let
not that Lion and Dragon, either by strength, or subtilty, interpose himself.
Because she will not plead, that she owes thee nothing, lest so she should be
convicted and seized-on by her cunning accuser; but she will plead, that her
debts are discharged by Him, to whom none can repay that sum, which he, owing
nothing for himself, was pleased to lay down for us. Rest she therefore in
peace together with her Husband; before whom, and after whom, none enjoyed her,
and whom she dutifully served; bringing forth fruit unto thee with much
patience toward him, that she might also gain him unto thee. And do thou
inspire, O Lord my God, do thou inspire thy Servants, my Brethren, thy
Children, my Masters, whom I serve both with my heart, and my voice, and my
pen, that as many of them, as shall read these things, may remember at thine
Altar. Monica thine Handmaid, and Patricius her Husband, from whose bodies
thou broughtest me into this life, after what manner I know not: let them
remember, with a charitable devotion, these my Parents in this secular
vanishing life, * my Brethren under thee our Father in our Catholic Mother, *
my fellow-Citizens in the Eternal Jerusalem (which place the pilgrimage of thy
people so much sigheth after, from their departure thence till their return
thither) that so what my Mother made her last request to me, may be more
plentifully performed to her, by the prayers of many, procured by these
confessions, and prayers, of mine.

LIB. X.
CHAP. I.
In this Book S. Austin makes confession of the several lapses and infirmities
of his present condition since his regeneration by Baptism.

1 Cor. 13 12.
LET me know thee O Lord, perfect knower of me; let me know thee, as also I am
known by thee. Virtue of my soul, enter thou into it and prepare it also for
thee; that thou may inhabit and possess it pure, without spot and wrinckle.
This is my hope at last. and hither tends my speech; and in this hope is all my
joy, when I joy rightly: As for other things of this life usually joyed or
greived, for, they are the more to be lamented, by how much men lament less in,
or for, them, and again less to be lamented, by how much men do more lament for
them. Behold, thou have loved truth, John 3.21.
and he that does the truth, comes willingly to the light; I will perform the
truth in this my Confession, both private in my heart before thee, and public
in this my writing before many other witnesses.

CHAP. II.
The end and fruit of confessing his present condition, mentally, to God.

ANd first to thee O Lord, before whose eyes the dark abyss of man's conscience
lies naked, what then can there be concealed in me, though I refused to
confess it? for so I should only hide, not Me from Thee, but Thee from Me; but
now by these my groans in confession testifying, how much I dislike and loath
my self thou thereby becomest so much the more splendent and beauteous and
amiable unto me; so much the more loved, and longed for, by me; that so I may
be ashamed of my self, and throw away my self and make choice of thee, and seek
neither to please thee, nor my self for mine, but only for thy sake.

Therefore O Lord, though always manifest and disclosed to thee I am, whatever
I am: yet not without fruit do I confess unto thee, as is showed before; which
confession of mine to thee is acted not with the words of my flesh and outward
sounds, but with the words of my soul and the loud cry of my thoughts, which
thy ear only discerns: where, in what thing I am evil, my confession to thee
is * nothing else, than to disallow and condemn my self; in what thing pious, *
nothing else, than not to attribute and ascribe such thing to my self; because
as thou O Lord approvest the just, so thou first justifiest him wicked. And
such my Confession O my God, is made before thee in some sort in, in some sort
not in, silence: being, silent in respect of external noise, but very clamorous
in respect of internal affection. And nothing that is good do I say here before
men, which thou Lord have not first in secret heard from me; nor do thou hear
any such thing from me, but that thou also first have said it unto me.

CHAP. III.
The end and fruit of his confessing his present condition publicly before men.

BUt then what matters it, that men should hear my Confessions, as if they were
to heal all my infirmities? A race curious to pry into other men's lives,
careless to amend their own? Why seek they to hear from me what a one I am,
who will not hear from thee, what a thing themselves are? And whence know they,
receiving only a relation from my self concerning my self, whether I deliver
truth; seeing none knows what is in man, but the spirit of man, which is in
him? But, 1 Cor. 2.11.
when they hear from thee concerning themselves, they cannot say: the Lord
lies. For what is it, from thee to hear of themselves, but to know themselves?
And none that knows the truth of himself, can say it is false; unless he lie
unto himself. -- But yet, because charity believes all things, namely amongst
those, whom by a mutual connection it makes all one, therefore I so confess to
thee (O Lord) that men also may hear me, though I cannot demonstrate to them,
that I confess truth because they will believe me nevertheless, whose ears
charity has set open unto me.

But yet, thou, intimate Physician of my soul, show me what fruit of this
confession, of my present condition, I am now going about For the confessions
indeed (made heretofore) of my forepast sins (which thou have remitted and
covered, that thou might make me happy in thee, changing this my soul by
faith and by thy Sacraments) which read or heard, do excite the heart of those
who are such like not to sleep on in despair saying: I cannot; but to awaken
themselves through a sense, of the love of thy mercy, and of the sweetness of
thy grace (by which whoever is weak becomes strong, so soon as first by it he
is made conscious to himself of his own weakness) And again good men, who are
not suchlike, are also delighted to hear of the forepast ills of those, who
are now freed from them: are delighted: not because such evils were, but
because they have been only, and now are not.

But now what fruit may there be (O Lord my God, to whom my conscience makes
confession daily, much more secure in the hope of thy mercy, than in the
confidence of its own innocence); What fruit, I pray thee, of this my
confession also before men in this my writing, what a one for the present I am,
not what a one in time past I have been? For some fruit of that, I have
discovered and related. But this also, what a one I am now at this instant of
my writing these my confessions, many are desirous to know, both of those who
have been acquainted, and who have not been acquainted, with me; of those who
have heard any thing from, or concerning, me, but yet their ear cannot be laid
to my heart, where I am what ever I am, and therefore they desire to hear my
outward confession, of what I am within, where neither their eye, nor ear, nor
soul, can penetrate: And this they desire, as ready to believe, where they
cannot know; because that charity, whereby themselves are honest, persuades
them, also, that I am no deceiver in these things I speak of my self, and this
charity in them, gives credit to me.

CHAP. IV.
BUt yet what fruit still of this their desires? Is it, because they would, *
congratulate me, when they shall hear, how far I proceed toward thee, by thy
Gift? And again, * pray for me, when they shall hear, how much still I am
retarded in this journey, by my own weight? Surely to such will I freely reveal
my self. For this is no small fruit (O Lord my God), that thanks be given to
thee by many cotcerning us; and that prayer be made unto thee by many for us.
Let such a brotherly affection (freely) * love in me whatever, thou instructest
it, ought to be loved; and again * deplore in me what thou instructest it, is
to be deplored. But let the mind of a brother do this, not of a forreigner: not
that of strange children, whose mouth is talking of vanity, Psalm. 144.8.
and whose right hand is a right hand of iniquity: but that of a brother;
which, where it approves me, joys concerning me, and where it dislikes,
grieves for me; because such, whether in approving, or in disallowing,
continues to love me. Willingly to such will I reveal my self. Let them utter
praise, in my good things; sighs, in my evils. My good things are thy commands
and thy gifts; my evil things are my faults, and thy judgments. In those let
them rejoice; and let them mourn in these: and let such Hymns and Elegies
ascend up into thy sight from the censers of the hearts of those my brethren.
And thou (O Lord), well-pleased with this Incense out of those thy holy
Temples, have mercy on me according to thy great mercy, and for thy names sake,
and, not forsaking what thou have begun, consummate in me what is yet
imperfect. This fruit then there is of the confessions not of my past but
present condition, which moves me to confess the various things of it, not only
* before thee, in a secret exultation with fear; and again in a secret mourning
with hope; but also * in the ears of believing sons of men, companions of my
joy; copartners of my mortality; my fellow-Citizens and my fellow-pilgrims;
who happen to go before, or to come behind, or to pace along with me, in the
road of this life.

These are thy Servants my Brethren, whom thou would have to be thy Sons, and
therefore to be my Masters, whom thou have charged me to serve in what I am
able, if I would live with, and on, thee. Nor had the command of thy Word to me
been sufficient, had it by speaking only directed me; and not also, by doing,
it self, gone before me. And now I also endeavor the same service, both by my
deeds and by my words. I endeavor this under the shelter of thy wings in too
much extremity of peril, were it not that I am sheltered under thy wings. My
soul hangs upon thee, and my weakness is known unto thee. I am but yet a
little child, but my Father now and always lives, and my Governor is
all-sufficient for me; for it is the same, who before begat me, and who now
governs me: and it is Thou thy self, O Lord, that art all my good; thou the
Omnipotent, who were with me also, before I was with thee. I will therefore
now declare to those, to whom thou command this my service in all things,
not what I have been only, but what I now am, and what only, yet, I am.

CHAP. V.
Yet not able to see or confess all of himself which God sees in him.

YEt do I not here undertake to judge aright concerning my self: For thou, O
Lord, art he, that judges me; For although no man knows the things of a man,
but the spirit of man which is in him; 1 Cor. 4.3
yet something of a man there is, which neither that spirit of man, which is
within him, knows. But thou know the total of him, thou who made him.
And I also, though I abhor my self before thy presence, and consider my self
but dust and ashes, yet may say, that I know concerning thee something, Job.
42.6
which yet, concerning my self, I am ignorant of. For notwithstanding I see
thee yet as through a glass, darkly, not face to face, and, so long as I
sojourn here so far from thee, 1 Cor. 13 12.
I am more present to my self than to thee; yet well know I concerning thee,
that thou can by no means, nor from no agent, receive any hurt: but, for my
self, what temptations and assaults from abroad I am able, or not able, to
resist, I know not. But my hope is, that thou art faithful, and wilt not suffer
us to be tempted above that we are able; but wilt with the tempation also make
a way to escape, that we may sustain it. Let me confess therefore, both what of
my self I know, and what things they are I yet know nor of my self; because
both what, concerning my self, I know, I know from thy illumination, and what I
know not, I shall so long be still ignorant of, till my darkness be made
noonday from the light of thy countenance.

CHAP. VI.
Description of his present condition in the state of Grace, That he now truly
loves God. Concerning whom he proceeds to examine what it is he loves when he
says that he loves God. That it is * no object of sense; * no part of the
visible world abroad; no part, or faculty within himself;

ANd first, not with a doubting, but a certain, conscience, I may confess, (O
Lord) that I do love thee. Thou have wounded my heart with thy Word, and it is
enamoured upon thee. Yet also, besides my heart, the Heavens, and the Earth,
and all the things which are in them, on every side cry out unto me, that I
should love thee; neither cease they to say the same to all, that they may
remain without excuse. But yet, in a higher way of revelation, thou have mercy
on whom thou will have m rcy, and show compassion on whom thou will show
compassion; otherwise these Heavens and Earth do speak thy praises only to the
deaf.

And what is it I love now, in loving thee? certainly not the beauty of bodies,
nor the decent order of times; not the splendor of light, so gladsom to this
corporal sight; not the melody of all sorts of song and music; not the fragant
sents of flowers, oils and spices; not delicious Manna ard honey; not fair
limbs alluring to carnal embraces. None of these things love I now, when I love
my God: And yet I confess I love also a certain light, and melody, and
fragrancy, and deliciousness, and embraces, when I love my God; who is, the
light, melody, fragrancy, grateful sustenance, and amorous embracements, of my
inward man; where to my ravished soul shines, what is not terminable by place,
and sounds, what is not measurable by time; and smells, what is not dissipable
by expiring; and tastes, what no edacity diminishes; and is embraced, what no
satiety separateth. Such thing is it, I love, when I love my God.

And what thing is this? I demanded it of the Earth; and it said: I am not it.
And, all things in the same, they confessed likewise the same. I asked the Sea,
and the Abysses, and the living movables therein, and they answered; We are not
thy God. Seek thou higher than us. I asked the fleeting air above: and its vast
region, with all the guests thereof, replied, Anaximenes is mistaken: I am not
God. I enquired of the heavens, the Sun, the Moon and the Stars; neither are
we (said they) God, whom thou seek.

Then I said unto all these things encamping round about my senses, (the doors
of my flesh): Ye have said unto me of my God, ye are not He^. Tell me at lest
some tidings of him. And they all cried out with a loud voice. It is He, that
made us. My asking was my observing of them, and their answer was, what I
discovered in them.

At last I reflected my eye upon my self and said to my self; And what art
thou? And I answered; a Man. And in this compound, there presented themselves
unto me, a body, and a soul: the one more exterior, the other more retired.
And which of these should it rather be, where I ought to seek my God? Whom I
had searched already through bodies, from the earth even to heaven, so far as
the rays of my eyes, (my spies abroad), could make any discovery? Certainly of
the two, Much the better part of man is that, which is more interior. For all
those corporeal Nuncio's returned their intelligence to this, sitting on the
tribunal, and judging of all those answers from Heaven, and Earth, and from all
things in them, whilst they said: We are not God but He it is, that made us.
It Is only the Inner man, that knows these things, by the Ministry and service
of the Outer. It Is I within only that understand these things; I the Mind, by
the senses of my Body. [ ] Therefore thou art much my better part O my Soul,
who do also Vegetate the lump of thy Body, and who give it life, which no
one body can conferr on another. But yet thy God is also the Life of this thy
life unto thee.

CHAP. VII.
Neither the Vegetative, nor yet the Sensitive.

[ -- WHat therefore love I, when I love God? What is he; who is advanced so
high, over the Head of my Soul? By my soul it self will I ascend and climb up
unto Him. And here I will pass beyond that Power, by which I adhere to this
Body and vitally replenish the model thereof. For by this power I find not my
God. Else a Horse and a Mule, which have no understanding, would also find him;
since, by the same virtue, their Bodies also live. Psalm 32.9


A second power there is in me, giveing not life, but sense, unto my flesh,
which the Lord has variously organized for me; commanding the eye not to
meddle with hearing, nor the ear with seeing, but ordering the one only to see
by, the other only to hear with, and so assigning their properties distinctly
to the rest of my senses in their own seats and Offices: which, being very
diverse, are all acted in them by me, one Soul. But this power also I will
dismiss; for this also the Horse and Mule have; being sensitive Creatures no
less than my self.

CHAP. VIII.
Nor yet the more interior, and most admirable faculty of the memory. The many
wonders of which (to the glory of the Maker thereof) he most subtly
discourses unto the 26. Chapter.

I Will pass over this Power also of my nature, ascending by degrees to him
that made, it, and me, and, next I come into the large fields and palaces of
my memory: the Treasury of numberless forms and images conveied thither from
such things as are perceived by sense; as also the repository, * of all our own
cogitations and fancies which augment, or diminish, or, any other way, vary the
discoveries of sense; and * of what ever thing, besides these, enters in
thither, which is not as yet swallowed up, and buried, in oblivion. And, when I
have recourse thither, I command to be produced whatever I please. And some
things appear presently others are searched for longer, and as it were, fetched
out from some more abstruse and remote corner: some boult out of themselves,
and when another thing is searched and looked for start forth unto us, as it
were saying: is it us perhaps you demand? And these I put by, with the hand of
my soul, from before the face of my remembrance, until that which I desire be
unclouded and come forth into my sight out of those dark and misty Cells. Other
things are suggested as they are demanded in a facile and undisturbed order;
what goes before still giving place to what follows, and being reposed again
as it thus gives place, to be forthcomming another time, when called for, at my
pleasure; which is usually done, when I repeat a thing by heart.

And there are all these things laid up distinctly, and by their several kinds;
entering also in thither every one by their proper gate. Lights and colors and
forms of bodies, through the glass of the eyes: and, through the vaults of the
ears, all kinds of sound; all smells, by the pipe of the nostrils; and all
savours by the door of the mouth; and by the sense of feeling (spread through
the whole body,) all that whatever is extrinsecally or intrinsecally perceived,
hard, or soft, hot or cold, rough or smooth, heavy or light, All these are
taken (to be perused and reviewed when occasion is) into that vast storehouse
of the memory, and into, I know not what, secret and unexpressable folds
thereof; and, every one entering in at their several ports, are piled up, and
reposited in it. Yet enter there not the things themselves, but the images of
them are there ready at hand to our thought when it will remind them. [ ] *
There are the Heaven, and the Earth and the sea, presented to me, with all
those things in them which I have ever perceived by sense, excepting such only,
as I have forgotten. * There also I do meet-with, and do re-view, my self;
when, and where and what, I have done, and how affected, when I did it. * There
are all things formerly experienced by me, or related by others, so far as I
remember them; and from the same store still other and other varyed
resemblances of my said experiences, or my deductions from them, are added by
me to the former; and from these I conceit future actions, and events, and
hopes: and on all these I meditate as if present; I will do this, or that, (say
I within my self, in this great Gallery of my mind full of the images of so
many and so great things) and this, or that, will follow upon it; Oh, that this
or such thing might be! And God avert this or that. Such things I say with my
self, and, when I say so, the images of all these are before me, out of the
formentioned treasury of my Memory, neither could I have named any such things,
if they had been awanting-

Great is that power of the memory, excessive great: the folds and storehouses
thereof vast and infinite, who can sound the bottom thereof? And yet this is a
faculty of my soul, and belonging to my nature; neither am I able to comprehend
all, that my self am. Therefore is the soul too narrow to receive and contain
it self; so that where it is, and what it is, it comprehends not. Is it
without it self? or not in it self? Why then does it not comprehend it self?
Great admiration and astonishment arises in me concerning this matter. And men
go to admire the altitude of mountains, the swelling billows of the sea, the
long courses of Rivers, the vastness of the Ocean, the large circles of the
Stars, and leave themselves unadmired. And yet now, when I named all these
things, I saw them not with my eyes; yet should I not have named them, unless
I had seen them in my Memory; and there too, with such great spaces as if seen
abroad, both Mountains, and Waves, and Rivers, and Stars, which I have seen,
and the Ocean, which I believe. Yet did I not, in seeing, draw-in any of them;
neither are themselves with me, but their images; and I know through what sense
I received their several impressions.

CHAP. IX.
BUt, not these things alone are lodged in the great capacities of my memory.
Here are laid up also all those rules of the liberal sciences, which are not
forgotten, or as it were removed into some further corner thereof; of all which
I carry about me not the images, but the things themselves: and, at what gate
they entered into my memory, I know not,

CHAP. X.
FOR when I learnt them I Creditted not another judgment, but ackowledged them
in my own. --

CHAP. XII.
HEre also are laid up the innumerable forms and rules of Mathematical figures
and numbers; none of which entered by sense, being things much diverse from the
sound of the words by which they are signified from the lines drawn by
artificers though never so small; and from all those sensible things, which by
these numbers we number.

CHAP. XIII.
ALL these things I retein in memory; and retein in memory the manner how I
learnt them. And many false arguings against them have I heard, and retein also
in memory; which although false, yet is there no error in my remembering of
those errors. And my distinguishing between those truths, and these falsities
which are said against them, this I also remember: and I remember also how
often I have compared, and considered them; and I repose in memory my present
consideration of them, that I may hereafter remember it. Therefore I remember
also, that I have remembered them; and if hereafter I shall call to mind, that I
cannot remember them, it is by the same faculty of memory, I do it. The same
Memory also conteins the passions of my soul; but not in the same manner as the
soul has them, when she is affected with them, but after a proper way of its
own, much different. For I both remember my former joy, not rejoicing; and call
to mind forepast griefs, without sorrowing. My former fears I reflect on
without any fear; and am mindful of my former desirings, without any desire.
Nay sometimes, on the contrary, I remember now past sadnesses with joy, and
with sadness my now past joys.

CHAP. XVI.
WHat, when I name oblivion, and know what I name, whence knew I it, unless I
remembered it? I mean not here the sound of the word, but the thing it
signifies; which thing had I forgotten, I could not apprehend, what that sound
meant. Therefore when I remember [Memory] the Memory is by it self present to
it self. But when I remember at once both [Oblivion] and [Memory] (as I can
remember both these) Oblivion also is present there too; [Memory] by which I
remember, and [Oblivion] by which I do not remember; yet what is Oblivion but
the privation of Memory? How then must it be present, that I may remember it,
which when present, I cannot remember? Is therefore Oblivion (when we remember
it) in the memory not by it self, but by its image? Because, if it were present
there by it self, it would make us, not to remember, but forget? And who can
find this out? Who can comprehend, how it is? Here (O Lord) I am at a great
loss concerning my self, and am made unto My self a soil of hard labor and
much sweat. Neither am I now quartering out the regions of the heavens, Genesis 3.
nor measuring the distances of Stars, nor diving into the foundations and
poise of the Earth, but about my veriest self; for it is I that remember, I the
soul. It were not so strange, if it be never so far off from my apprehension
whatever I am not: but what is nearer, than my self. to me? And behold the
power of my Memory is not comprehended by Me; (whenas I cannot so much as name
[my self] without it) for what shall I say, when certain, that I do remember
Forgetting? Shall I say that thing is not in My Memory, which I remember? Or
shall I say that this forgetting is in My Memory, that I may not forget it?
Both are most absurd. [ ]

CHAP. XVII.
GReat is the power of memory, I know not what, vast, astonishable, thing (O my
God;) a profound, and infinite multiplicity; and this is my soul; and this is I
my self. What a thing therefore is my self? What a nature am I? A various and
multiforme life, and exceedingly immense in the extent of its power. And,
behold, through these innumerable fields and caves, and sellars, of My memory
innumerably, full of innumerable sorts of things, by so many several ways,
conveyed in thither, through all those things, I fly, I run, I dive, this
way, and that way, as far as I am able; and nowhere can I find an end. So
great is the power of Memory; so great the power of this life in man, even
whilst he is yet mortal.

What shall I do then (O thou my true life, My God)? I will also pass beyond
this power of mine called Memory, that I may arrive yet closer unto thee, that
sweet light after which I seek. Lo; I, ascending by this my soul unto thee, who
remainest unto me elevated above it, I will pass beyond that My faculty called
Memory (desirous to attain thee so far as thou art attainable, and to inhere
in thee, so far as I am capable of union to thee.) For a Memory I find also in
the Beasts, and Fouls; Otherwise neither their former Dens, nor Nests could be
repaired to; nor many other things done, wherein we discover their constant
customs: but nothing is accustomed to without Memory. I will therefore pass
over this memory, that so I may arrive at him, who has made me otherwise then
the fourfootedbeast, and wiser than the winged foul. I will leave the Memory:
but then where shall I find thee, O true Good and secure pleasure, but then
where shall I find thee?

CHAP. XVIII.
For if I find thee besides, or out of, My Memory, I must have forgotten thee:
and how then shall I find thee, if I have no remembrance of thee? When the
woman had lost her groat and sought it with a candle; if she had not remembered
it, how could she have found it; for when she had found it, how could she know,
whether that was it, of which she had no remembrance. [ ]

CHAP. XXIV.
Far have I traveled in memory seeking thee O Lord; and I have not found the
at all out of it. For since I first learned thee, thou abidest in my Memory:
and there I find thee, whenever I recall thee to mind, and enjoy delight in
thee. In this place are those my holy pleasures which thy charity, and thy
mercy has bestowed upon me, taking pity upon my poverty.

CHAP. XXV.
BUt where art thou resident in my Memory, Thou, the Lord? What lodging have
thou made, there, for thee? What Sanctuary have thou built? I passed by the
lower parts thereof common with beasts; because in My remembering thee, I found
thee not there, amongst the images of corporeal things. And I came to the parts
thereof, where are stored the affections of my soul; neither yet there found I
thee: and I have entered into the very seat and lodging of my mind it self,
which seat also is there, in my Memory, because the mind remembers also its
self; and neither wast thou there. For as thou art no image of a body, nor no
affection of the Mind, so neither art thou the mind, or soul, it self; but the
Lord God of this soul Thou art. And all these things are subject to change, but
thou remainest for ever unchangeable, high above all things. And yet have thou
vouchsafed to dwell in My Memory, since the time I have learned thee.

CHAP. XXVI.
That God (whom he loves) is * something within, but yet above, his Soul; * not
confind by place, omnipresent, etc.

BUt then where found I thee that I might learn thee? For neither wast thou
already in my Memory, before I learned thee.] Where then found I thee O my Lord
that I might learn thee, but in thy self above me? Yet nowhere having any
place, or space between us and thee; And we go far from thee, and come near
unto thee; and yet no where have thou any place. But thou the Truth, art, in
every place, present, and giving audience to all consulting thee; and, at the
same time, thou give answer unto all, consulting thee things never so many,
or diverse. And clearly thou answerest unto all, but all do not clearly hear
thee. All consult thee about what they please; but not always hear from thee
what pleases them. And amongst them he is thy best servant, who desires not so
much to hear from thee what shall be conformable to his will, but rather to
conform his Will, to whatever he shall hear from thee.

CHAP. XXVII.
That though he now truly loves God abstracted from, and far above, all
other creatures, and olso above Himself,

TOO too late have I found and begun to love thee, O beauty so ancient and yet
so new, too too late begun I to love thee! And behold, thou wast within me, and
I abroad: and there I sought thee, and, so deformed a wretch, hotly courted
those beauties which thou have made. Thou wast with me; but I was not with
thee. And even those things kept me a great distance from thee, which have no
being, but that they have in thee.

But thou have called, Thou have cried out, and peirced my deafness. Thou have
lightened, thou have streamed forth and dispelled my blindness. Thou have sent
forth thy fragrant perfumes, and I have scented thy odours, and do pant after
thee. I have tasted thy sweets, and do hunger and thirst after them. Thou have
touched me, and I am all-inflamed after thy fruition.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Yet he enjoys not as yet a perfect union unto him; but has a perpetual
combat with many other false joys, and griefs, and fears:

WHen once I shall be united to thee and inhere in thee with all my self, then
shall I no more suffer any sort of these greifs and labors; and then my life
shall be truly alive, when totally full of thee. But now; since all that are
filled with thee are also elevated by thee, therefore am I still such a burden
to my self, because I am not yet full of thee. My vain joys, to be deplored,
contend still, in me, with my wholesome sorrows to be much joyed in: and to
what side the victory inclines, I know not. Woe is me! My Lord Have thou pity
on me. -- Again, my evil sorrows contend, within me, with my holy joys; Job
7.1. old Vulgar.
and to which side the victory inclines, yet I know not. Woe is me my Lord, have
thou pity on me Woe is me! Behold I conceal not my wounds from thee. Thou art a
Phisician, I am sick: Thou art full of mercy, I of misery; is not man's life
upon the earth a continual temptation? And who is there that can be in love
with such troubles, and difficulties? Thou command, that they should be
suffered, but not, that they should be loved. No Man loves what he suffers,
though he loves to suffer. For though he joys that he can tolerate and suffer
it, yet he would choose, there were no such thing for him to suffer.

In adversities I long for prosperity; in prosperities I apprehend and dread
adversity. And what middle station can there be found between these two, where
this Life may not be a Temptation to us? There is a Woe to the prosperities of
this World; once and again, 1. For the many fears, in them, of adversity. 2.
And, for the many miscarriages and misbehaviours in them, of our joys. -- And
there is a Woe to the adversities of this World once; again; and a third time.
1. From the impatient longing we have in them after missed prosperity. 2. From
the pain, and sufferings of the adversity it self. 3. And from the frequent
shipwreck (therein) of patience. Is not man's life therefore, upon Earth, a
continual Temptation without any remission?

CHAP. XXIX.
Not having yet a perfect continency in respect of all other objects besides
God; but extending some undue attention and affection unto them.

ANd now is all my hope no where, but in thy very great mercy, (O Lord God).
Give me but grace to do what thou command; and command what thou will. Tho
command; me continency, Wisd. 8 21. Vulg
And I know (says one) that no man can be continent, unless God gives it;
and this is also a point of Wisdom to know whose gift it is. For by this
continency we are united and recollected unto that one thing [truly amiable]
from which we have faultily dissipated, and spilt, our selves upon many things.
For less does he love thee, who loves any thing else with thee, which he
loves not for thee. O thou Love, that always flamest, and that art never
extinguished! Charity, My God, fire me also with thy flames. Thou command
continency and recollection toward thee. Give what thou command, and
command what thou will.

CHAP. XXX.
He examineth himself, and confesses his present infirmities in the several
branches of Concupiscence (1 John 2.16.) 1. The lust of the flesh. 2. The lust
of the eyes. 3. The pride of life. And here he confesses, 1. His remaining
infirmities concerning the temptations of the lust of the flesh. And amongst
these, 1. His infirmities concerning the temptations of the Touch relating to
carnal concubinage.

THou command me Continency, Both from the Lust of the flesh, and from the
lust of the eyes, and from the ambition of this life.

And first thou have commanded me Continency from illicit carnal copulation
(and also, concerning Wedlock it self thou have counseled something better,
than that which thou have indulged) and because thou gave, that thy Command
has been observed by me even before I I was made Priest, and a dispenser of
thy Sacrament. But yet there live still in my memory (of which I have spoken so
much) the former images of such things, which my long evil custom of them has
fixed there; and these haunt me still: when I am awake, they void of strength;
but, in sleep, prevailing not only even to delectation, but also even to
consentment, and to fact very like unto them. And so much power has the
delusion of this image, in that inferior part of my soul, and in my flesh,
that those false visions persuade me when a sleep, to what true sights, when
awake, can no way entice me. And is it not then also the same I, (O Lord my
God)? And yet so much difference there is between my self, and my self, in such
a moment of time, when resigned up to sleep, and when returned to Vigilance.
Where, then, is my reason, by which, when awake, my mind resists any such
suggestions? And, though the things themselves present themselves before me,
remains unshaken? is it (then) clasped up with my eyes? is it lulled asleep
with my corporeal senses? And whence then, in our sleep also, do we many times
resist, and remembering our former resolution, and, chastely persevering therein,
yield no assent to such lustful allurements? And yet when in sleep it happens
otherwise, this difference there is of it from the acts of reason, that awaking
we return to the peace of conscience, and, by the distance of parties, discover
that we have not really done, what we lament to have been, after some sort,
done in us.

Is not thy hand powerful, O God Omnipotent, to heal also these yet remaining
langours of my soul? And, with a more abundant measure of thy grace, to
extinguish also these lascivious motions of my sleep? And thou I trust O Lord,
wilt increase in me more and more thy Gifts; that my soul, utterly disingaged
of the birdlime of concupiscence, may obediently follow me toward thee; that
it may no more be such a Rebel against it self; and that, in sleep also, it
shall be freed not only from acting such impurities and filthinesses (provoked
by seducing phancies) even in the flux of the flesh, but also from yielding any
consent unto them. For that no listening, or inclination toward them, not so
much as that which the least check can master, shall harbor any more in the
chaste affections of me refreshing my self with sleep, not only in some time of
this present life, but in this yet vigorous age, is no great matter to thee the
Almighty, who art able to do above all that we ask or think. But here I have
related to my good Lord, what a one as yet I am in this sort of my evil:
rejoicing with fear, for that, which herein thou have given, and mourning, for
that wherein I am yet imperfect, with hope, that thou will consummate in me thy
mercies until the time of that full harmony and peace, which both my interior
and exterior then shall enjoy with thee, when death shall be swallowed up in
Victory.

CHAP. XXXI.
2. His remaining infirmities concerning the temptations of the Taste in eating
and drinking.

THere is another evil of the day; Besides the former night evil. Mat. 6.34 1
Cor. 6.13. 1 Cor. 15 53. 1 Cor. 9.27.
and I wish the day were sufficient for it. For here, we must, by eating and
drinking, repair the daily ruins of the Body: until the time thou shall
destroy both the meats and the belly, and shall slay this my indigency with a
miraculous satiety, and shall cloth this corruptible with an eternal
incorruption. But now this my necessity is very pleasant and sweet unto me; and
against this sweetness I now fight, that I may not be inveigled with it: and I
wage a daily war against it, bringing my body into subjection by freequent
fastings: and behold these pains are removed with pleasure. For hunger and
thirst are pains, and they burn up and kill, like a fever, unless cured with
the physic of our nourishment. Which cure because it is still ready at hand
(from the abounding Comforts of thy Gifts with which both the land and the
Water, and the air serve our infirmities) these our calamities are called by
the name of dainties.

Now thou have taught me, that I should come to receive this my food, as I do
physic. But whilst I am passing from the trouble of emptiness to the rest of
fullness, my concupisence lays a snare for me. For this passage it self is a
pleasure, nor is there any other way to pass to it but this, to which
necessity forces me. And thus, whereas health only is the true cause of eating
and drinking yet there accompanies it, as its handmaid, a perilous jucundity
and gust, which most what endeavors also to step before it; that for its sake
I should do, what I pretend or also desire, to do, only for healths sake. Nor
are both of these content with the same allowance; That, which is sufficient
for health, being too little for delight and many times it becomes uncertain,
whether it is the necessary care of my body, that requires such a supply; or
the voluptuous deceit of my lust, that procures such a maintenance from me, and
the unhappy soul grows glad in such an uncertainty, and thence prepares the
protection of an excuse: rejoicing, that it appears not what is an exact
proportion for the welfare of the body, that under the cloak of health it may
disguise the matter of delight.

These enticements, daily, I endeavor to resist, and do invoke thy right hand
to save me, and to thee do relate these my anxitties, for I am to seek for
Counsel in this matter. I hear the voice of my Lord commanding. Let not your
hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness. Luke 21.34.
As for drunkenness, it is hitherto far from me: show thou mercy, that it may
never approach me. But immoderate eating does sometimes steal upon thy servant,
show thou mercy, that it may be put far from me: For none can be continent,
unless thou give it. Many things thou bestowest unto our prayers, and,
whatever good also we receive before we pray for it, from thee we receive it;
and the knowledge also, that from thee we receive it, we receive from thee. I
was never a drunkard, but drunkards have I known made afterward sober men by
thee. Therefore from the same thee it is, that they should not be so, who never
were such; * from whom it was, that they should not always be so, who sometimes
had been such; * from whom also it was, that both these should know, from whom
it was. I heard also another voice of thine. Eccle. 16 30. 1 Cor. 8.8.
Go not after thine own lusts, and turn away thy face from thy own pleasure. --
I have heard also that speech from thy bounty (with which I am much taken). --
Neither if we eat shall we abound, neither if we eat not shall we lack. (That
is) neither will the one render me plentiful, nor the other deficient. --
Another voice I have heard- For I have learned in whatsoever state I am
therewith to be content. Phil. 4.11
I know both how to abound and how to suffer need: through Christ that
strengthens me, I can do all things. Psalm. 103.14. Genesis 3. Luke 15.32.
See here a Soldier of the Celestial Host, and not such earth and dust as we
are. But remember thou, O Lord, that we are but dust, and that of the dust thon
made Man: and he was lost, but is found. Neither was this Man able of himself
to do such things, because he was the same dust, whom, by thy inspiration,
saying such things, I do so dearly affect: but I (says he) can do all things
through him who strengthen^h me. Strengthen thou me also, that I may be able
Give what thou command, and command what thou please. He also confessed, 1
Cor. 4.^ 1 Cor. 1 31. Eccles. 23 5, 6.
that he had received it; and what he glorifieth o^ ^e glorifieth of in the
Lord. -- Another I have heard asking of thee, that he might receive. Take thou
from me (says h^) the greediness of the belly: whence it appears, my holy
God, that thou give, when it is done, what thou command to be done. --
Thou have taught Me also, Romans 14.20. 1 Timothy 4.4. 1 Cor. 8.8 Col. 2.16 Romans
14.3.
Good ^a^her -- Unto the pure, that all things are pure; but that it is evil
to the man who eats, with offense. -- And -- That every creature of thine is
good and nothing to be refused, which is received with thanks giving. -- And --
That meat commends us not to God. -- And -- That no man may judge us in meat
or in drink -- And -- That He which eats, let him not despise him that eats
not; and let no^ him that eats not, judge him that eats. -- These things I
have learnt: Thanks be to thee; praises to thee, My God My Master, knocking-at
mine ears, enlightening My heart. Deliver thou Me from all temptations. The
uncleanesse of the Meat I do not dread, but the uncleanesse of lusting. I know,
that Noah was permitted all manner of flesh good for food: Genesis 9.3. 1 Kin.
17.6. Mat. 3.4. Genesis 25. 1 Chro 11 Mat. 4.3. Number. 11.4.
That Elias hungring in the desert was fed with flesh-meat. That John the
Baptist, a man endued with a miraculous abstinence, received no pollution from
living creatures, (1.) Locusts, made his food; And on the otherside; I know,
that Esau was deceived by the lust of a few lentiles: and David censured by
himself for the desire of a draught of water; and that our King was tempted not
in a matter of flesh, but of bread only; and therefore also the people in the
Wilderness, not simply because they desired flesh, but because, in the desire
thereof, they murmured against the Lord, deserved to be rejected. I therefore,
placed amongst the same temptations, am striving every day against this
concupisence in eating and in drinking For it is no such thing, which I can
resolve to cut off at once, and touch no more as I could do concerning
concubinage. Therefore are the reins of the throat to be held with a moderate
hand, between relaxation and restraint. And who is he O Lord, who is not
sometimes transported beyond the lists of necessity? Whoever he be, a great one
he is, * let him magnify thy name. But such a one I am not, for I am a Sinful
man. But I am one also, that Magnify thy name: and * let him intercede unto
thee for these My sins, who has so perfectly overcome the World, reckoning Me
also amongst the weaker Members of the same body, ^sal. 136.6.
because thy eyes also regard this my imperfect substance, and in thy book
shall all thine be written.

CHAP. XXXII.
3. Concerning the temptations of the smell in sweet odours and perfumes.

FRom the allurements of sweet smells I suffer no great trouble, when absent, I
do not miss them; when present, not refuse them, and am willing, for ever to
be without them, Thus I appear to my self, but perhaps mistaken. For much to be
lamented is the darkness, wherein my very abilities and faculties, which are
within me, lie obscured and hidden from me. So that my own mind, when
questioning it self concerning its own strength, knows not well how to believe
it self; because much within it lies secret and concealed from it, till
experience discovers it: ^ob. 8.1. Vulgar.
and no man may be secure in this life, (which is wholly called a temptation)
that as he might have been made of worse, better, so he may not become, from
better worse, the only hope, the only confidence, the only secure promise, to
rely on, is thy mercy, O Lord.

CHAP. XXXIII.
4. -- His remaining infirmities concerning the temptations of the ears in
Music. Where, whether Music be useful in Churches.

THe pleasures of the ear had more strongly ensnared, and captived me: but thou
have dissolved these bonds, and have set Me at Liberty. I confess, I do now
still a little repose and acquiesse in the melody of those sounds, which are
animated with thy sacred himnes, when these are sung with a sweet and skilful
voice; yet not so adhereing to them, but that I can disingage my self at
pleasure. Yet these airs, by reason of the divine matter which ushers them in,
and procures their admittance, do seek some respectful entertainments also in
My soul; and I find some difficulty to give them one, exactly suitable. For I
seem to My self sometimes, to allow them more honor, than is meet, upon
experience, * that our souls become more religiously and fervently raised into
a flame of devotion with those holy oracles, when sung in such a manner, than
when not sung at all; and * that all the affections of our spirit, according to
their manifold variety, do find answerable notes in Music, with a secret
harmony and acquaintance of which they are much excited. But yet the delight of
My flesh, (to which we ought not to yield-over the soul to be effeminated) does
often deceive Me; whilst my sense does not so wait upon reason, as patiently to
follow it, for whose benefit only it is made use of, but, in seeking its own
contentment, strives to run before, and to lead, it. Thus in these things I
offend, yet do not then, but afterward, discover my fault.

And sometimes again, immoderately aware of this fallacy, I err on the
otherside, in too much severity (but this very seldom) so that, *I would have
all the melody of those sweet Tunes, in which David's Pralter is usually su^g,
banished from my ears, and also from the Churches too; and *that course seems
to me the more safe which I have often heard told of Athanasius Bishop of
Alexandria, who caused the Reader to speak the Psalms with so small a
variation of tone, that it might seem nearer to pronouncing, than singing. Yet
again, when I call to mind, those tears, I shed in the singing of the
Church-hymnes at the first beginning of My conversion to the faith, and now
also * my being much more moved, not with the singing, but the things sung,
when tuned with a clear voice and a most convenient note, I again acknowledge
great benefit of such institution.

Thus I float between the peril of being pleased, and the experiment of being
profited: and am rather inclined (yet not with an irrevocable judgment) to
approve the custom of singing in the Church; that, by the delight of the ear, a
weaker soul may raise it self into an affection of piety. Yet whenever so it
happens, that the singing it self more moves Me, than the Matter sung, I
confess I sin penally; and then had I rather hear no singing at all. Behold the
present condition I am in. Weep ye with Me, and for Me weep, ye who within your
selves have the like good purposes with Me (from which purposing flows
well-doing) as for you, who have none, such things as these trouble not you;
and thou, O Lord, my God, look back upon Me, and hear, and see, and pity, and
heal me; in whose sight, I am thus become a question, and a doubt unto My self;
and this is My present Malady.

CHAP. XXXIV.
5. -- His remaining infirmities, concerning the temptations of the eyes in
splendid, fair, and well-proportioned objects.

THere remains yet the pleasure of these eyes of my flesh of which I will now
make my confessions, to be heard by the pious ears of My brethren, thy Temple,
that so we may conclude the temptations of the lust of the flesh, which as yet
assault Me groaning earnestly, and desiring to be clothed upon with My house
from heaven. My eyes yet love fair and varied figures, bright and clear
colors; (Oh let not them possess my soul! but let God possess it, who made
them very good indeed, but yet is he, my good, and not they). Genesis 1.31
And these things accost me when awake all the day long, neither do I find any
respit from them as I do from Musical, and sometimes from all other, sounds, as
it happens in a perfect silence. For the very light it self, the Queen of
colors, in its overspreading all things which we behold, pleasantly, with a
various influxe, flatters and inveigles Me even when doing something else, and
not observing it: and so strongly does it insinuate it self, that, if suddenly
withdrawn, it is straight impatiently desired, and if long missed, it
contristates My spirit.

But O that light, * which Toby beheld, when, with his eyes closed, Tob. 4.
he directs his son the way to life, and himself walked before him with the
feet of charity, which swerved not at all from the right way! Or, * which Isaac
beheld, Genesis 27.
when, his carnal sight being closed with old age, he blessed not his sons by
knowing them, but, by blessing, came to know them! Genesis 49.
Or, * which Jacob beheld, when he also, by great age having lost his sight,
with an illuminated soul viewed and foresignified the conditions of the several
peoples descending from his sons; And when he imposed his hands, Genesis 48.
mistically crossed, upon Joseph's children, not as their Father outwardly
directed, but as he inwardly discerned: That is the true light, and one it is,
and unchangeable it is, and one also are all they, who see, and who love, it.
But that other corporeal light (of which I have been speaking) seasoneth and
relisheth this present life, to its blind lovers, with a most ensnaring, and
perilous sweetness. But those who know also how from it to give thee glory, O
God All-Creator, spend it in thy Hymns, and prevent it in their vigilance, and
such I desire to be.

These seducements of My eyes I now fight against, lest My feet, wherewith I
walk in thy way should happen any way to be ensnared; and to thee I lift up My
invisible eyes that thou would pull My feet out of the snares; and thou art
ever and anon loosing them, for often are they fettered, these nets being
spread for Me on every side, but thou delayest not to pluck them out again, who
art the keeper of Israel, that never slumberest nor sleep. For what
innumerable inventions, by diverse arts and Manufactures, in attires, utensiles,
furnitures, buildings, and in pictures also, and several sorts of statues and
images, (those surpassing all necessary or moderate use, these, any pious
significatson) have Men accumulated to the former temptations of the eye?
Abroad doting on what they have made; within, deserting him, by whom they were
made; and defacing that which they were made.

But I, O My God and My Glory, concerning all these, do now sing an hymn and
do sacrifice praise to thee, My sanctifier. For all these beautiful pieces of
art, which are transferred, first from an idea in the soul, into the work of a
skilful hand, are derived originally from that beauty, * which is above the
soul, and *after which my soul languisheth day and night. And the drawers and
admirers of these exterior beauties do learn from the first beauty a worthy
estimation of them, but learn not from it a right use of them. And there also
the true beauty is, and they see it not; that they should seek no further,
Psalm. 58.10. Vulg.
but should preserve the flower of their strength for thee, and not shed it
abroad on such tiring pleasures. And behold I, even whilst I discourse of, and
estimate, these beauties, do a little entangle My steps in them: but thou
pluckest them out O Lord, thou loosest them again; because thy mercy is before
My eyes. I fall into these snares through my misery and thou liftest me out
again through thy Mercy, sometimes without My perceiving it, when I step only
upon them, sometimes with My pain, when I stick fast in them

CHAP. XXXV.
2. His remaining infirmities, concerning the temptations of the lust of the
eyes; or, curiosity of vain science.

TO this first is joined a second sort of temptation more variously perilous.
For besides the lust of the flesh, which lies in the delectation, *of all the
senses, Psalm. 73.27.
and * of those pleasures, after which they go a whoring, who are far from
thee, there dwells in the soul a certain vain and curious desire, not of
delighting her self in the flesh, but of making vain experiments by the flesh
through the means of the same corporeal senses, masked under the name of
learning and science; which being seated in the appetite of knowing, and,
amongst the senses, the eyes being the principal instruments of knowledge, is
in scripture-expressions called the lust of the eyes. For though properly,
seeing belongs only to the eyes, yet we apply this word also to the other
senses, when we employ them in searching after knowledge. [ ] So we say not
only; See how it shines, but see, how it sounds; how it smells, or
tastes, or how hard it is And therefore the general experience of all the
senses is called, the lust of the eyes.

Now what is done by our senses for pleasure, and what for curiosity, is thus
evidently discerned; in that their pleasure seeks after objects, beautiful,
melodious, fragrant, sweet to taste, gentle and soft to touch: but their
curiosity often tries the contraries, not for the sufferance from things so
offensive, but for the lust of experiencing and knowing them. For what pleasure
is there to behold, in some mangled corpse, that which strikes us only with
horror and trembling? And yet if such a spectacle lies any wh r^, people flock
to see it, till even they grow sad, and look pale; and straight become afraid,
that they shall see it again in their sleep; as if some body had forced, or any
report of its beauty had invited, them, before, to look upon it when awake. --
And the like it is in the other senses, too long to instance in.

From this disease of curiosity it is, that strange and wonderful sights are
presented to us in public shows and theaters. Hence men proceed to search the
concealed things of nature which she has wrought not for us, and the knowledge
of which no way profits us, nor is there other design in our search, save only
the knowing them. Hence come those inspections into arts Magical only for a
culpable science sake: and hence, in true religion it self, is God often
tempted, when signs and miracles are begged of him, where, not our health, or
our benefit, but only the experiment, is the end of our desires.

In this so vast a wood full of snares and dangers behold O Lord how many I
have already cut and shaken off from My soul, even as thou have enabled Me to
do this (O God of My salvation). Yet when dare I at any time say (so many
things of this kind, on every side, daily importuning this present life) when
dare I say, that no such thing at all makes me intent and earnest, * to behold
it; or also, with a vain study, * to consider it. Indeed now, the theaters draw
Me not unto them: I care not to know the courses of the Stars; my soul has
never sought after intelligence with ghosts, and all sacrilegious sacraments
and compacts I detest. But O Lord My God, to whom I owe all humble and
single-hearted homage, with how many devised suggestions does the enemy deal
with me, that I would seek a sign from thee. But by our King Jesus, I beseech
thee, and by our Country Jerusalem, so pure, so chaste, that, as yet the consent
to any such Desiring out of mere curiosity to see some miracle done
thing is far from me, so it may always be further and further. For, when I do
petition thee for any ones health or safety, I have a much different intention
from this, and whilst thou do what thou will in it, thou give (and I hope
will ever give) unto me, most willingly to acquiesce, in what thou do.

Nevertheless, in how many petty and contemptible things is our curiosity
daily tempted? And who can recount how often we fall; How often, when people
are talking of vain discourse, at first do we tolerate them as it were so to
give no offense to the weak, and then afterward, by little and little, yield a
willing ear unto them? I do not now go to see a dog's coursing a hare when
showed in the Circus; bur yet in the field, as I casually pa^s by, such a
course presented perhaps averts me from some thought of great moment, and
converts me toward it, not making Me turn aside with the body of My horse,
but with the inclinations of My soul. And unless thou be pleased, by showing
presently My infirmity, to admonish me either to ascend unto thee, by some
meditation upon such a sight, or totally to contemn and neglect it, I stupidly
confirm in such a diversion. What, when, at home sitting in my chamber, a
Stellio catching of flies, or a spider f^t^^ring them fallen into her nets,
sixeth My intention upon them. Is not the same curiosity acted, because these
animals are small? I proceed indeed from thence to the praising of thee, the
wonderful creator and disposer of all, but my first observing of them had no
such design, and it is one thing to rise up quickly, and another thing not to
fall at all. And of such falls, as these, My life is full, and My only hope in
thy exceeding great mercy. For, since our heart is the continual receipt of
such things as these, and bears within it whole armies of such copious
vanities, hence are our very prayers also often interrupted and disturbed; and,
even before thy face, and whilst the voice of our hearts is presented unto thy
ears, so important an affair is suddenly broken off by the rushing in (I know
not from whence) of such nugatory cogitations. Have I accounted this sort of
temptation a contemptible matter? Or is there any thing, that, amongst such
infirmities, ^evives my hope, save wholly thy mercy, because thou have already
begun to effect a change in me?

CHAP. XXXVI.
3. His remaining infi^mities concerning the temptations of the pride of life,
The great danger of vain-glorying, incurred from the approbation and praise of
men;

ANd thou know in how great a part thou have reformed me, who [to come now
to the third sort of temptation, the pride of life] have long since healed me
from the lust of revenging my self, or of vindicating my reputation and
integrity. That so thou might forgive all the rest of mine iniquities, Psalm.
103.3, 4, 5.
and might heal all my diseases; and might redeem my life from
corruption; and crown me with loving kindness and tender mercies, and satisfy
my mouth with good things, When thou had crushed my pride with thy fear, and
tamed my neck to thy yoke. And now I bear it, and it is light unto me, because
so thou have promised, and so thou have made it; and indeed so it was always,
but I Knew it not, when I was so much afraid to undergo it.

But yet (O thou Lord, who alone do Lord it without all pride, because thou
only art the Lord who has no other Lord) has this sort of temptation wholly
ceased from me, or can it cease at all in this life? namely, to desire to be
reverenced, and to be loved, by men, not for any other end save only that we
may rejoice our selves in it? Where is no cause of joy; but such a life is
truly miserable, and this boasting full of shame. For from this thing chiefly
arises their not entirely loving thee, and their not chastly-fearing thee.
Jam. 4.6.
Therefore do thou resist such proud, but give grace unto the humble, and
thou thunderest over the heads of the ambitious of this world, and make the
foundations of these mountains to tremble. Yet here because, for the better
performing several duties of humane society, it is necessary both to be loved
and feared of men, the adversary of our happiness presses sore upon us in this
matter, strowing on every side, upon his snares, Euge, Euge, that, greedily
gathering up this, we may be unawares caught by the other, and may lay aside
our joy in the truth of thee, that we may place it in the falsehood of men; and
may covet to be loved and feared of men, not for thy sake, but in thy stead;
and so being made like unto him, he may also link us with him, not in the union
of love, Esas. 14.13.
but in the fellowship of punishment, who strives to exalt his throne in the
sides of the north, that; he imitating thee in an opposite way, his vassalls,
contrary to the light and heat of love which thine enjoy, may serve in cold,
and darkness. But we O Lord, behold we are thy little flock; keep thou still
the possession of us. Stretch forth thy wings over us, and let us fly under
them. Be thou all our glory, let us love, and be loved, only for thy sake, and
let thy word only be feared in us. He that longs to be commended by men, when
thou disapprovest him, shall not be justified by men, when thou judge him,
nor rescued by men, when thou condemnest him, and when, Psalm. 9.29 Vulg.
not he that is a sinner, is blessed in his wickedness which he has done, but
a man is commended for some good, which thou have given him, and yet that man
rejoices more within himself that he is commended, than that he has from thee
that gift for which he is so praised, he also is commended, whilst thou
disallowest. And the better Man is he, that praises, than he who is praised;
for the gift of God in man pleases the one; but the gift of man (namely
praise) delights the other, more than that of God.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Which is not avoidable, to well-doing.

ASsaulted with these temptations we are daily, O Lord; Prove. 27.21.
without ceasing we are assaulted. A daily furnace to try us, is Man's tongue
applauding us. And thou command us, also in this matter, continency. Give
what thou command, and command what thou will. Thou know, what groans my
heart, and what floods my eyes, concerning this thing, power forth unto thee.
For it is no easy thing to me to know, how much less or more pure I am from
this plague, and I dread my inward and secret errings, which thine eye beholds,
but mine do not. Psalm. 19.12.
For, in other kinds of temptations, I have some way of trying my self, but in
this almost none at all. For both in the pleasures of the sense and curiosity
of science, I perceive how much I have my mind wained from them, whenas I
happen to be without such things; whether voluntarily, when they are absent, or
upon necessity, when they are also wanting. For, at such times I ask my self,
how much greater or less trouble I have, than formerly, to be without them. And
so for riches (which are coveted to this end, that we may by them serve some
one of the forementioned lusts, or also two, or all, of them,) if my mind
cannot, Namely those 1 Jo 2.16. lust of the flesh, lust of the eyes, pride of
life.
in the possession of them, thoroughly discover, whether it contemns them, more
fully to try it self, it may dismiss them. But to rid our selves of all
praise, and so in this matter experience our ability to forego it, may we take
the course of living so ill and ignominiously, that all who know, may abhor,
us? what madder design, ^an such, can be named or imagined? But if praise both
uses, and ought to be the companion of a good life and of good works, no more
is it, than a good life, avoideable; and yet I cannot judge what thing,
contentedly, or impatienly, I forego, save when I do not enjoy it.

What shall I therefore confess unto thee in this kind of temptation O Lord?
What? But that I am pleased with the praise, but more with the truth than with
it. For should it be proposed to Me, whether I had rather, being mad, or
ignorant in all things, be commended, or being wise and most confirmed in the
truth, be decryed, by all, I easily see, what I would make choice of; but yet I
wish something further than this; viz. that no joy concerning any good of mine
might be the least increased in Me, from another approbation of it. But I
confess, such joy is not only increased in me by their praise, but also
diminished in Me by their disparagement. And, when I am troubled at this My
misery, I presently meet with an excuse for it; whether a just one thou know
O Lord, for I do suspect it. For because that thou, * have commanded us not
only continency, that is, from what things we are to withdraw our love; but
also justice, that is, where we are to place it; and * willest, that not only
thy self, but also our neighbor be loved by us, I often seem to My self * to
be pleased with his proficiency or with the good hopes I have thereof, when I
am delighted with the commendations of one understanding things a right; and
again * to be grieved in his behalf, when I hear one blaming, what he is
ignoraat of; or what is praise worthy. For indeed I find my self afflicted also
with my own praises, when either such things are commended in Me, wherein I
displease my self; or when small or light good things in Me are more valued,
than they ought: But yet; on the other side, how know I, whether I am not thus
affected, for that I would not have another entertain an opinion concering me,
or concerning any thing mine, different from My own; and this, not because his
good or benefit moves me thereto, but because those good things in me, which
please me, please me much more, when they also please another? For in some
sort, it is not I that am commended, when my judgment also concerning my self
is not commended, as, when those things in me are commended, which dislike me,
or those things more commended which less like me. Am I not therefore, in this,
ignorant of my self? In thee, O Truth, I see and learn, that, not for my own
sake, but for my neighbors good, I ought to take content in my praises; But,
whether indeed it be so, I am ignorant; and less do I know of my self than of
thee in this matter; therefore I beseech thee O my God, reveal thou my self
unto me, that I may confess my discovered wounds unto my brethren, who may
pray to thee for me.

Let Me yet more diligently question my self in this matter. If it be in
respect of my neighbors benefit only, that I am so touched with my own
praises; why than am I less moved in the injurious disparagement of another,
than if it were, of my self? And why am I much more netled with a contumely
thrown upon My self, than when it is so upon another, in my presence, with the
same injustice? Psalm. 141.5.
Can I also plead my ignorance and uncertainty for this? Or shall I endeavor
here also to delude my self, and nor confess the truth before thee both in
heart and tongue? Lord, such a folly put thou far from me, and let not mine
own mouth go about to anoint and perfume my head with the flattering Oil of
sinners. I am poor and needy, and the best, when with secret laments
displeasing my self, and invocating thy mercy, until these my deficiencies be
repaired, and perfected into a full repose and peace, a peace hidden from the
eyes of the arrogant, and self-conceited.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Incurred also from the contemning of Praise, as this also being a thing
praiseworthy.

CHiefly, speech that is eloquent, and good actions that are public and
eminent, cause in us a most perilous temptation from this our love of praise;
which subtility assayes to procure the applause of others to the advancing of
my own private excellency, even then also, when such love of praise in me is
censured by me; and for that very reason, because it is so censured; and often
does a man more vainly glory, of the very contempt of vainglory; and therefore
now in truth the contempt of vainglory is not gloryed-of by him; For he
utterly contemns it not, so long as within himself he reteins still some
glorying.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Incurred also from self-love and self-conceit without regard to praise from
others.

THere is yet within us another disease in the same kind of temptation, namely
a vanity, in men, of self loving and plea^^ng themselves in themselves,*
whether it happen that they please, or that they displease, abroad; and*
wherein they affect not the pleasing of others. But these men, whilst thus
pleasing themselves, much do they displease thee, not only in glorying in some
things not good, as in good; but also in thy, good things, as if in their own;
or also in glorying in them as thine, but as conferred on them for some merits
of their own; or also as in thine without any their meriting, but yet not
sociably joying in them, but as envying the same graces of thine to others. In
all these and the like perils and travels, thou see the fears and tremblings
of my heart; and I rather perceive such wounds to be by thee continually cured
within me, than not to be at all received.

CHAP. XL.
A recapitulation of the things formerly spoken in this Book. S. Austin's,
sometimes, extraordinary transportments in the contemplation and love of God.

O Truth, where have not thou walked along with me, and been instructing me,
what I should avoid and what affect, when I recounted unto thee my mental
discoveries, (such as I was able to make) and consulted thee concerning them? I
surveighed the world abroad with the senses serving me for that purpose; and
after this, I reflected, * upon the vegetable life of my own body, and * upon
those my senses. From hence I entered further into the inner chambers of my
memory, those manifold capacities filled with an innumerable store of wonderful
things. I considered them, and remained amazed at them: and none of them could
I discern without thee, and yet I found none of them to be thee. Neither yet
were Thou Me, the discoverer himself, (who traveled over all these, and
endeavored to distinguish and value each one according to their several
dignity, * receiving some from the messages of my senses; * questioning about
others, more intimate and not ushered in by them, whence they were; and *
numbering the several messengers, whence I received them; and then, after thus
having displayed in my memory all its treasure, * handling and examining some
part, * laying-up-again others examined, and * drawing-out others to be
perused;) Neither (I say) was I my self, who wrought all this, (that is) my
faculty by which I wrought it, neither was this, Thou, my Lord: For Thou art a
light always permanent, and immutable, which light I still consulted concerning
all these, whether, and what, and of what worth, they were. And I listened unto
its instructing me, and commanding me; and this I still continue to consult.
This is my great delight; and, so often as I can be released from other
necessary affairs I repair to this pleasure. Neither find I, in all these
things which I run through, and wherein I consult thee, any place of settlement
for my soul, save only in thee, whither all my dissipations finally may be
recollected, and from whence nothing of me may eyer again be strayed. And
sometimes thou do admit me * into an affection, very unusual, within the
innermost part of my soul, and * to I know not what sweetness, which were it
once perfected in me, I know not what bliss that is, which such a life would
not enjoy. But then, with certain cumbersome weights hanging upon me, I
presently am pressed down again to these things below, and am re-ingulfed, and
detained, by former custom; and much I bewail my self; and yet much still I am
detained; so greatly has the burden of a bad custom overloaded me. And in
this estate I can abide still, but would not; and in the other I would
willingly abide, but cannot; both ways very miserable.

CHAP. XLI.
ANd in this condition I proceeded to consider the remaining languors of my
sins in a threefold concupiscence; and have invoked the help of thy right hand
to deliver me. For I beheld thy brightness with a sick and wounded spirit; and,
beaten back, and dazzled by it, I said: who can ever attain thither? I am
utterly cast away from the sight of thine eyes. Thou art the truth, who
presidest above all things; And I, out of my covetousness, was not willing to
loose thee, but yet greedily desired also to possess what was a lie together
with thee; as no man desires so to speak lies, as to be ignorant what is
truth; and therefore I lost thee, because thou vouchsafest not to be enjoyed
together with a lie.

CHAP. XLII.
His recourse for a remedy to all these his maladies not * to evil Angels or
Demons (with the Platonists, or others, practicing evil Arts) as Mediators
between God and man, because sinners like men, spirits like God.

ANd now whom could I find, who might reconcile and reduce me unto thee? Was
that office to be undertaken by some Angel for me? upon what devotions? upon
what sacraments performed unto him? Many endeavoring to return unto thee, and
of themselves unable, as I hear, have attempted such ways, and fallen into the
desire of curious visions, and so deserved to be exposed to many delusions.
For, being high-minded, they sought thee with the pride of learning, exalting
rather than beating their swollen breasts, and so have allured unto rhem, from
the likeness of their affections, spirits associated with them in pride, Ephesians.
2, 2.
the powers of this air; by whom, through magical operations, they might be
deceived, whilst they were seeking a Mediator, by whom they might be purged.
But it was none such they light on, 2 Cor. 11 14
but the Devil it was, transforming himself as an Angel of light. And this much
allured proud flesh to repair unto him, because he had no body of flesh. For
they were mortals and sinners; and thou, O Lord, with whom they sought
reconciliation, were sinless and immmortal. Now the mediating Person between
God, and men, it was meet, he should have something like to God, something like
to men, lest, in both like to men, he should be at too great a distance from
God, or, in both like to God, he should stand too remote from men. Therefore
also this conterfeit Mediator (by whom, according to thy secret judgment, our
pride deserves to be deluded) had one thing common with men, that is, sin; and
would seem to have the other thing common with God, whilst, not clothed with
the mortality of flesh, he vaunts himself as immortal. Romans 6.23.
But since the certain wages of sin is death, and this sin he has common with
man, he has, also, that common with man, to be sentenced unto death.

CHAP. XLIII.
But * to Christ, who is the only true Mediator; mortal like man; righteous
like God; through whom, (else desperate,) he confidently hopes a perfect cure
of all his diseases.

BUt the true Mediator, whom in thy secret mercy thou have manifested to the
humble; (and have also sent him amongst them, 1. Tim. 2.5.
that they might by his example learn humility) that Mediator of God and men,
the man Christ Jesus, between these mortal sinners, and the immortal righteous
one, has appeared, mortal together with men, righteous together with God;
that, because the wages of righteousness is life and peace, he by his
righteousness, which was allied to God, might evacuate death, to justified
sinners, which death he was pleased to have common with men. And this true
Mediator was also made known to the Saints of old; that they, by the faith of
his passion to come, as we by the faith of it past, might attain salvation. And
it was, as he was man, that he was Mediator; but as he was the Word, so he was
no midling person; because equal to God, and God with God, and, Phil. 2.6.
Joh. 1.1.
together with the Holy Spirit, one God.

How far have thou loved us (O thou good Father) who sparedst not thine only
Son, but deliveredst him up for us ungodly? How far have thou loved us? for
whom he, Romans 8.52. Phil. 2.6, 8.
who thought it no robbery to be equal to thee, was made subject even to death,
even to the death of the cross: only he, free amongst the dead, having power to
lay down his life, John 10.18.
and power likewise to take it up again; becoming unto thee, for us, both a
Victor and a Victim, and therefore a Victor, because he had been a Victim;
becoming unto thee, for us, both the Priest and the Sacrifice, and therefore
the Priest, because a Sacrifice; making us unto thee, of Servants, Sons, by
being born thy Son, and becoming our Servant. And therefore do I justly repose
strong hope in him, that thou will heal all my diseases, by him, who sits at
thy right hand, and intercedeth unto thee for us. Else should I despair; for
many and great are these my diseases; many and great they are, but greater is
the cure, which thou have provided. And well might we have imagined thy Word to
have been too remote from having any alliance with us, and so have despaired of
our selves, had it not thus been made flesh and dwelt amongst us. Affrighted
with these my sins, and with the load of my misery, I had once a thought and a
design of retiring my self into some desert solitude; but thou did prohibit
it unto me, and confirmedst me, saying; That therefore Christ died for all, 2
Cor. 5.15.
that they who live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him
who died for them.

Behold, O Lord, I cast all my care upon thee: let me live, and I will consider
the wonderful things of thy law. Psalm. 119.18.
Thou know my ignorance, my infirmities; Teach me; Heal me: He, thy only
One, in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, redeemed me
with his own blood. Let not the proud [my spiritual enemies] falsely accuse me;
For I meditate on this my ransom, Col. 2.3.
and I eat it, and drink it, and communicate it to others, and being poor I
desire to be satisfied therewith amongst those who eat and are satisfied; and
they shall praise the Lord, that seek him.

CHAP. XLIV.
The end and purpose of these his Confessions.

O Lord, since thou art eternally, art thou ignorant o these things I now say
unto thee? or see thou no till a certain time, what is done in time? Why then
have I ordered a narration of so many several matters unto thee? Surely, not
that thou should learn such things from me, but only that I might the more
excite my affection, and love, toward thee, and theirs also, who rea^ these
things; that we may all say together; Magnus Dominus and lau^abilis valde.
Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised. I have already said it, and let
me say it again Out of my love of thy love to me it is, that I do this. As also
we continue to pray; nevertheless, that the truth has said. Your heavenly
Father knows what things y^ have need of before ye ask him. Mat. 6.8.
We only publish the affections we have toward thee, while we confess to the^
our miseries, and thy mercies, that thou may complea^ our freedom, (as thou
have already begun it) and that a length we may perfectly cease to be miserable
in our selves, and may arrive to beatitude in thee; because tho^ have
graciously called us, that we should be poor in spirit and meek; and mournful;
and hungry and thirsty after righteousness; and merciful; and pure in heart;
and peace makers. See; I have rehearsed before thee a many things, such as I
had ability, and such as I had also a will, to relate, because thou, first,
had so willed, that I should confess unto thee, Psalm. 118.1.
the Lord my God, Because that Thou ar^ good, and thy mercy endures for ever.

FINIS

