CHRIST THE Riches of the GOSPEL, AND THE Hope of CHRISTIANS A SERMON Preached
at the Funeral of Mr William Spurstow the only Child of Dr Spurstow at
Hackney near London, Mar. 10.

By SIMEON ASH Preacher of the Gospel, and Lecturer there.

PHIL. 3. 23, 21. I have a desire to depart to be with Christ which is far
better.

For me to live is Christ, and to die is Gain.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for G. Sawbridge at the Sign of the Bible on
Ludgate Hill, 1654.

To My much Esteemed Good Friends, Dr Spurstow, Pastor of the Church at
Hackney, and to Mrs Sarah Spurstow his Virtuous Wife.
WHen I prepared this Sermon for the Pulpit, and preached it at the Funeral of
your much endeared Son and only child, there was not one thought in my mind
that it should be brought to the Press; but as it served your desires with
reference to the Congregations profit there, so upon the same account (through
the importunity of many others also) it now comes abroad enlarged with respect
unto more public service: The reading of it may probably renew your sorrow by
occasioning the remembrance of your loss (for the wound not thoroughly healed
will smart and bleed again upon every gentle touch) but I hope that influences
from Christ (the subject of the Sermon) will drop like healing oil, with
sweetness upon your spirits. Summer-fruit does soonest fall from the tree out
of which it grew: The early buddings both of ingenuity and piety, in your
hopeful child, caused some of your friends to suspect that God would gather
him unto himself before he became a man. Would not you both (if God had
lengthened his life on earth) have been content to have wanted his society for
a time, upon well-grounded confidence of a comfortable meeting, and that your
parting would be for his preferment and your mutual profit? I shall not need to
make the application: He was the heir of a full estate, with which Gods bounty
has blessed you, but the hand of Providence has put him into the possession
of a far more rich Inheritance; You had hopes that he might have been the
staff of your age, but though that support is sunk and shrunk from you, yet
you are not left comfortless, for the precious promises of Gospel Grace are
continued (...) to uphold both your hopes and hearts for ever. Cheer up (...)
hearts (my dear Friends) both in hope of his happy change and your spiritual
advantage by the sanctification of this your loss. Bless God who bestowed so
good a child upon you, suffered you to enjoy him so long, and gave you (with
hearts to educate him religiously) to see the success of your endeavors in
those timely blossoms which appeared upon upon him; And as for your selves, do
ye not find (through the operation of Gods peculiar grace) that upon your
souls which may encourage the application of David's support and consolation? He
has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure; for
this is all my salvation and all 2 Samuel 23. 5.
my desire, although he make not my house to grow. In this Covenant there is
nothing defective, which any Christian, in any condition, can either desire or
want. And amongst other rich promises which are thereto annexed, this is one;
(which may be seasonably releeving unto you) to give a better name then of Sons
and Daughters: Upon all these considerations Isa. 56. 5.
(unto which your knowledge in the mysteries of the Gospel can add many more)
you should rather express the joys of faith then feed upon your sorrows, to
your own prejudice and the trouble of your Christian friends: And seeing the
Lord has to your sense written vanity upon the choicest of your
creaturecontents, how should your souls be now elevated above all things
sublunary and changeable! His hand of providence has eased you of all further
cares for him, whom you intended to leave well furnished with all accomodations
for comfort and service in this world; therefore now what have you so much to
mind here as to improve time, talents, estate, interests, yea, your All, for
your own mutual advantage in Christ, and the glory of God, who has done so
much for your selves and yours? This improvement of your affliction (wherein my
experience has wrought sympathies) I can and shall heartily request in your
behalf through Jesus Christ, in whom I am,

Your assured Friend, if his own, SIMEON ASH.
June 20. 1654.
To my much Honored and Worthy Friends, Dr William Spurstow and Mrs Sarah
Spurstow his Wife, upon the Death of their hopeful Son and only Child, Mr
William Spurstow.
Carmen (...).
LEt hopeless Heathens grieve, and let them shed
From drowned eyes vain offerings to the dead;
Let their remorselesse hands their bosoms rend,
'Cause Death their comforts and their hopes do end:
Let weeping Niobe congeal to stone,
And kill her self with grief and fruitless moan.
But you (Dear Friends) do mourn in hope, and weep,
Believing your blessed child in Christ does sleep.
Harbor we mutinous thoughts against his will,
Whose works are just, whose ways are holy still?
Oh let his mercy and his goodness charm
All discontent; He Will never do you harm,
Nor can he do you wrong, because he is just,
Willingly then submit, or else you must.
Banish sad thoughts which do without relief
Torment you with reiterated grief;
Suppose you saw your Son equalling those
Bright morning Stars the Sons of God; Suppose
You saw his soul enthroned in bliss with them,
Who Cit'zens are of New Jerusalem:
Suppose you heard his own delightful voice
Thus speak (Dear Parents) weep not but rejoice
For me, for now I am perfectly free
From sorrow, sin, Death, and mortality;
Surely you do not doubt my happiness
(For you often say I Am gone to heaven) much less
Can loving Parents envy it, then cease
To interrupt my joy and your own peace.
Happy those Parents who their Children teach
Gods fear, whilst young, and whilst within the reach
Of Prayers and counsels; so shall not death prevent
Their diligence, and they too late repent.
How early saving light did dawn and break
In him who learnt to pray as soon as speak,
And minding Sermons then knew good from ill,
When those of's age have not learnt to sit still;
Nay more, so young, and yet complained, that he
Could not rule's thoughts when most think thoughts are free.
Then 'twas the devil who did first invent
That cursed profane Proverb, A young Saint
An old Devil; no no, many through Gods grace
Set out betimes, and hold out all the race,
And many Timothy's have Mnasons proved,
Who have Gods Word in childehood learnt and loved.
Such was his pregnant parts and piety,
His youth it was a full maturity.
A Child that did per saltum commence man,
His years spoke morning, his parts Meridian:
Harvest in the Spring, a blossom fairly blown,
Knit, and at once fruit to perfection grown.
Haec moerens posuit Gulielmus Tailor A. M. apud Londinenses Pastor (...).

Upon the much lamented Death of the truly Pious Youth Mr William Spurstow, who
deceased Anno Dom. 1633/4 March Aetatis 9.
Blessed Soul, thy Parents only Son! Thou wast
Nipt in the bud, and into deaths Den cast
In Spring time both of age and year. Thy Sun
Is soon gone down, soon is thy short race run;
True, an Apprentiship thou have served on earth
Of nine years, but the tenth thou paist to Death
As her due Tithe; She will not be denied,
Young, old, rich, poor, are carried down this Tide.
Thou liv'st, though dead in th'memory of those
Who knew thy life and saw its holy close;
The honor thou did to thy Parents bear,
Thy humble carriage, witty words, indear
Thee unto all; Those sparks of Piety
Kindled wiihin thy Soul by the Almighty
Dazzled the eyes of men; Thine exc'llent parts
Admired were by all; Thou wonst all hearts.
But stay, needs he Encomiums? Reader, know,
He joys above while we him wail below.
E. C. Student in Syd. Coll. Came.

Upon his Funeral Text, Col. 1. 27. Christ in you the hope of glory. With
which he was much affected in his life time, and of which he did often speak.
THis Text did much refresh this Saint, now dead;
Christ was his Hope, his Glory, Crown, and Head:
Whilst here on earth Christ dwelt in him by grace,
But now he dwells with Christ and sees his face.
His Body though in grave, to Christ is knit,
His Soul with Christ, in Christ's own Throne does sit.
Christ was his hope on earth; but now he is,
His Heaven, his All, his, his, for ever his.
E. C. Student in Syd. Coll. Came.

Upon the Death of M. william Spurstow.
YE Muses Helicon what can you lie
Thus mantled in a stupid Lethargy?
Breathe out your souls with sighs, melt into tears,
And let your griefs be equal to your fears,
For him poor soul whose Fate it was we see,
To bid adieu in its minority:
Mourn that gloomy day on which it took its rise,
To seek a mansion in heavens Paradise.
What was his worth, what Friends loss, in verse
Were but lost pains in both for to rehearse;
His purer mettal'd Soul needs no Praise
Or Art to'dulterate, all this cannot raise
The price of such a Pearl, that had alone
What bounteous Art or Nature made her own:
And boldly this I Will speak unto his praise,
His holy Life does much exceed his days:
O pray that such blessed hopes may longer live
Examples to such youth as cannot give.
W. H.

The Text.
COL. 1. 27. Which is Christ in you the hope of Glory.
THe Subject matter of this Text is Jesus Christ, and therefore seasonably
suitable to the expectation of this Assembly, which is to hear a Funeral
Sermon; For whereas wine is to be given unto those that be of heavy hearts,
what Prove. 31. 6.
Cordial is comparable with Jesus Christ who is called and deserves to be
accounted, The Consolation of Luke 2. 25.
Israel?

In the Text Christ is tendered or rather commended to the consideration of
these Christian Colossians under a threefold notion.

1. As containing the riches of all Evangelicall mysteries; (...) non ad (...),
sed ad (...) refer oportet. Dav. in Text.
The Relative ( which) must necessarily be referred unto the word Riches, in
the foregoing part of this verse, as is manifest from the Original in our
Greek Copies. Although the vulgar applies the Relative ( which) unto mystery,
and I acknowledge Christ to be a mystery as the holy Ghost does Ephesians. 3. 3, 4.
often suggest in the holy Scriptures; And indeed his conception and his
hypostaticall Union, etc. give us just occasion to call him wonderful, Isa. 9.
6. yet in this place I humbly conceive that he is held forth to our view, as
the Riches of the glorious mystery of the Gospel.

2. As being the groundwork and the foundation of every good Christians good
hope of happiness; Christ the hope of glory. I have heard of Ships laden with
rich commodities, from which their owners expect great advantage, called The
Hope, or The good Hope: Under this Name may believers, real Saints, well own
the Lord Jesus, The Hope of glory.

3. As inhabiting, dwelling in believing Christians, for this end, that by his
abiding and operating in them he might be unto them the hope of glory; Christ
in you the hope of glory: (...). Erasmus notat ccdices quosdam sic habere (...)
inter vos, ut legit etiam Syrus interpres. Beza in Text.
Some Translators render the words, Christ among you; but I rather cleave unto
our English Translators, both old and new, which do answer our Greek Copies,
and accord with the most learned, judicious Interpreters, Christ in you the
hope of glory.

Having thus briefly given in the division of the Text, with the Interpretation
of the words both together, I proceed to the handling of the Points of Doctrine
hence considerable for our Instruction.

The first Truth observable is this,

That Jesus Christ is the riches of all Gospel-glorious Mysteries.

The Apostle Paul acknowledging much glory in the Administrations of Moses
(wherein there was much Gospel, though veiled and shadowed under Types and
Ceremonies) yet tells us, That Evangelicall ministrations do exceed in glory,
and that the former had no glory in respect of this latter, 2 Cor. 3. 9, 10, 11.
which excels, and is much more glorious. Now the riches of all this glory
are in Christ; Concerning which the expression of the same Apostle is
observable, The unsearchable riches of Christ. The riches of this Gospel-glory
in Christ Ephesians. 3. 8.
may be discovered with reference 1. both to God, 2. and to Ex part Dei, and
ex part nostri.
godly Christians.

First, In regard of God; All the revenues of glory which come unto his Majesty
from the Gospel, are most eminently in Jesus Christ; And therefore at his birth
the Angels sing, Glory to God on high. 1. In him are all the treasures Luke 2.
14. Col. 2 3. 1 Cor. 2. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 24. Ephesians. 3. 18, 19. Ephesians. 2. 7. Ephesians. 1. 6.
of wisdom; Here is wisdom in a mystery. 2. And Christ is (as the wisdom so)
the Power of God; Divine Omnipotency is no way so fully discovered as in
Christ. 3. In him is divine love which passes knowledge, which is beyond all
dimensions. 4. And as for mercy, how full is the language of the Apostle; The
exceeding riches of his grace in his kindeness through Christ Jesus; And
speaking elsewhere of Gospel-incoms he adds, To the praise of the glory of
his grace; Here might be added the unspotted holiness and untainted justice of
God, more glorified in the unexpressible humiliation of Jesus Christ then in
any other way whatsoever. And who knows not how the honor of Gods Truth is
triumphantly glorious in Christ, because all things foretold of him both
substantial and circumstantiall were exactly fullfilled in him: The Law was
given by Moses but grace and truth came by Ioh. 1. 14.
Jesus Christ; These things I only touch upon without enlargement.

Secondly, In relation to his people, Christ is the riches of Christus est
nobis thesaurus spiritualium divitiarum. Day. in Text. 1 Cor. 2. 7.
the Gospels glory. The blessed Apostle is very open in his expression to this
purpose, We speak the hidden wisdom of God which God ordained unto our glory;
Many rich and glorious are the true Christians advantages from Jesus Christ: I
shall briefly point at four which St Paul has recorded together in Ephesians. 1.

And before I mention the particulars, the general which he premiseth (being
very comprehensive) is worthy consideration; Blessed be the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Ephesians. 1. 3. (...).
Christ who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenlies in
Christ. The Original neither restrains the word Heavenly to places or
things; but the holy Ghost hinteth thus much; That whatsoever spiritual
blessings (which are incomparably the best) any Saints receive from the Lord,
either here upon earth or hereafter in heaven, all are derived through Christ.
The particulars follow.

1. Electing love is in Christ; He has chosen us in him before ver. 4.
the foundation of the world.

2. Adoption into the right and privileges of Gods children is by Christ;
Having predestined us unto the Adoption ver. 5.
of Children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his
will.

3. Fatherly acceptance with God, pardoning all sins, is upon the account of
Jesus Christ. He has made us accepted ver. 6, 7.
in the beloved, in whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness
of sins, according to the riches of his grace.

4. And the possession of our rich Inheritance is by reason of our co-heirship
with Christ Jesus; In whom also we have ver. 11, 12. Neque solum gratiam omnem
inherentem habemus a Christo derivatam, sed gratiam acceptationis divinae ad
vitam aeternam habemus. Dav. in Text. Use 1.
obtained an Inheritance, etc. that we should be unto the praise of his glory
who first trusted in Christ.

These short touches may be sufficient to clear the truth of the doctrine, I
proceed to the Application.

Ministers therefore should in this regard the more abundantly preach Christ:
Our Apostle having in the Text told the Colossians that Christ is the riches of
the glorious Gospel, he adds immediately in the verse following, whom we
preach; yea, this is considerable, that when Paul was a prisoner for such
preaching, he makes this the greatest boon to be begged of God in his behalf,
that he might have liberty with ability to declare such things unto them in his
Ministry. Continue in prayer, withal praying for us, that God Col. 4. 2, 3, 4.
would open unto us a door of utterance to speak the Mystery of Christ, for
which I am also in bonds that I may make it manifest. The like request he
makes unto the Ephesians; Pray Ephesians. 6. 18, 19, 20.
always in the Spirit, etc. And for me that utterance may be given unto me,
that I may open my mouth boldly to make known the mystery of the Gospel, for
which I am an Ambassador in bonds; And he greatly glories in this as a
transcendent honor, That he was made a Minister of the Gosple to preach the
unsearchable riches of Christ, and to make all men see Ephesians. 3. 7, 8, 9.
what is the fellowship of the mystery, etc. And this practice may prevalently
be persuaded by the consideration of

1. The Ministers Office. 2. The Peoples need.
First, By Office, We are Stewards of the Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4. 1. 2.
and it is required in Stewards that a man be found faithful. In this respect
we must produce for the honor of our Master and the use of his Family such
Treasures with which he has been pleased to entrust us. As Abraham's servant
Genesis 24. 53.
brought forth Jewels of silver and Jewels of gold to win the heart of Rebecca
to Isaac, so should we spread before our people the unvaluable riches of
Christ, that we might work out their hearts unto him.

Secondly, As our Office, so the Peoples necessities do call for our help
herein, for there are hidden things herein (as the word mystery intimates, 1
Cor. 2. 7.) which very few understand, in comparison of the multitudes who are
palpably ignorant hereof; This our Savior suggests, who having by the Parable
of the Sower, taught, that not above one part of four receive saving profit by
the Gospel preached among them, he said unto his Disciples; Unto you it is
given to know Luke 8. 10.
the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, but unto others in Parables, that seeing
they might not see, and hearing they might not understand.

And nothing that can possibly be taught is more useful Vt sciant, nih^ do^^ri
posse absolutius. Call. in ver. 28.
and advantageous. Hereby the proud heart is most kindly humbled, and the
humbled heart most sweetly comforted: This knowledge will enrich the poor in
Spirit and keep them lowly who are rich in grace: It will increase the hatred
of sin, the contempt of the world, faith in the promises, love to God,
Christian courage, zeal, patience, together with humble boldness in addresses
unto God, upon all occasions: It is the one thing necessary. By means hereof
(as the Luke 10. 42.
Apostle hints in the verse following the Text) Ministers may hope to present
their people perfect in Jesus Christ; But these things I do only name without
enlargement, yet before I dismiss this Use, I desire leave to entreat my
Brethren in the Ministry to mind the counsel and practice of this our
Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. 23. 18, 19.
viz. to study familiar plainness in unfolding these rich mysteries of
glorious Gospel grace which are treasured up in Jesus Christ.

My second Use must be directed both unto Ministers and Let the word of Christ
dwell richly in you in Col. 3. 16. Prove. 2.
all wisdom; How unweariedly labourious are men in digging into the bowels of
the earth to find and to fetch out the riches there; Now of how little worth
is all the worlds wealth being compared with Christ! The Gospel is the treasure
Mat. 13. 44, 46
in the Field (of which the Parable speaks) and Christ is that one Pearl of
great price, which is of more worth then any man's All. Therefore the Scriptures
should be searched (as Joh. 5. 31. (...)
men search for treasures) to make further and fuller discoveries of Christ,
because in him eternal life and all things conducible thereunto are to be
enjoyed. Saint Paul who by experience knew the worth of humane learning, even
amongst the rich-gifted Corinthians, determined not to know 1 Cor. 2. 2.
any thing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified; And himself elsewhere gives a
rational, a satisfying account of this his resolution, viz. because of the
superlative both excellency and utility of this knowledge. Doubtless I count
all things Phil. 3. 8, 10.
but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; That I
may know him and the power of his resurrection, etc. Who can tell how many
rarities lie hid in Christ, or how great gain may be got by the knowledge of
him? 1. This is the way to procure justification by him, By his knowledge shall
my righteous Servant justify many. 2. Hereby Isa. 53.
the growth of all graces both in kinds and degrees, is much promoted; We all
with open face beholding as in a glass the Joh. 4. 10. 2 Cor. 4. 18.
glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even
as by the Spirit of the Lord. 3. And hence issues glory: The Text tells you,
that in him is the hope of glory; This is life eternal that they may know thee
the only true God, Joh. 17. 3.
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. If all this be not sufficient to quicken
diligence in seeking out after the knowledge of Christ, let me add a double
consideration from the practice of the holy Angels (though they be not so much
concerned in and advantaged by Christ as our selves) 1. They did desire to pry
and peep into those Typical and Prophetical 1 Pet. 1. 12. (...).
discoveries of him which were obscure before his Incarnation. 2. And now they
are content to come (as it were to our Schools where we are taught) unto our
Congregations for clearer instruction in this mystery according to Gods mind;
Unto the Principalities and Powers in heavenly places might be Ephesians. 3. 10.
Sacro-sanctum and vivificum mysterium. Aug Est quidem fructuosum, honorificum,
and gloriosum hoc Evangelij mysterium. Dav. in Text.
known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God. These things speak cogent
arguments to them who are Christianly ingenuous, to move more and more
industrious endeavors, to dive further and further into these rich divine
mysteries, whereof Gods Worthies have given many high commendations, calling it
an holy, glorious, fruitful, quickening, happy-making mystery; What
commendation can be higher then that of our Apostle, 1 Timothy 3. 16. Without
controversy great is the mystery of godliness, God manifest in the flesh,
justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed
on in the world, received up into glory; Herein is contained the marrow of
Christianity: And doubtless every Christian who minds the power of
godliness, either in reference unto Gods honor or self-welfare, will by these
Meditations be prevailed with to seek acquaintance with this rich mystery. I
shall speak no more unto this first Point, viz. That Christ is the riches of
Gospel-glorious Mysteries; but I proceed unto the second.

That real Saints, believing Christians have (even while hope of glory.

Such were these Colossians to whom these words were spoken, The Saints and
faithful brethren in Christ; Not only Saints ver. 2.
titularly but in reality, whose Saintship and faith was witnessed by their
brotherly disposition toward one another, and their faithful walking in the
world: these, these were they who had hope of future glory. The like expression
has the same Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans; Being justified by faith we
have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Romans 5. 1, 2.
Christ, and we rejoice in hope of the glory of God. This Doctrine I shall not
much dilate upon but only give one touch or two by way of application.

Hence we are informed that the gain of godliness, and The world knows us
not, and it does not yet appear what we shall 1 Ioh. 3. 1, 2. Eccl. 9. 1.
be: No man knows love or hatred by all that is before them; And therefore in
the estimation of those who judge according to the sight of the eye, If in this
life only we have hope 1 Cor. 15. 19.
in Christ, we are of all men most miserable. Though in very truth Christians
who live by faith, and walk holily with the Lord, have cordials in secret which
the world knows not of, viz. peace which passes all understanding, and joys
most unspeakable Phil. 4. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 8. 2 Cor. 1. 5.
and full of glory (which do wonderfully exceed and admirably sweeten all their
sufferings) yet the best is behind, these are only the tastes of that full
glory reserved for them in heaven. Thus the Prophet Malachy confuteth the
carnal crew in his days, who said it was a vain thing to serve God; He first
tells them of a book of Remembrance written before the Lord, recording all
the serviceablenesse of Saints in evil times, and then refers them to the
last day, when God shall make up his jewels, adding these words, Then Mal. 3.
17, 18.
shall ye return and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him
that serves God and him that serves him not. Would you give a right estimate
of the precious incoms by godliness, do not so much view their present outward
wants and pressures, but rather hearken to the language of their hopes. When
Christ who is our life shall appear, then we also Col. 3. 4. 1 Ioh. 3. 2.
shall appear with him in glory; And we shall be like him, for we shall see him
as he is.

Ezekiel. 3. 6. Heb. 6. 11.
grounds, make out our hopes of glory; As Ministers must beware of flattering
people with vain hopes, so the Apostle Paul persuades every one of us to show
diligence for the attaining the full assurance of hope, yea, the same diligence
1 Pet. 3. 15.
which we use in reference to any act of obedience: And Saint Peter would have
all Christians ready to give a reason of the hope which is in them. The
necessity of this trial may be manifested by these following considerations.

1. The worth of the thing hoped for, viz. glory, which is in value
transcendently better then all things under the Sun; Herein consists
everlasting heavenly happiness. The phrase whereby the holy Scripture does
express it is very full; a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory;
The 2 Cor. 4. 17. (...).
value of any commodity causes cautiousnesse to prevent cheating: Wisdom
therefore will make wary, that hopes hereof may not be built upon sandy bottoms.

2. The usefulness of hope, being as an Helmet to secure 1 These. 5. 8. Heb. 6.
19.
from capital dangers in warlike encounters, and as an Anchor to prevent
shipwreck upon a stormy Sea: in which cases men are careful to make such
provision, that the Headpiece and Anchor may not be brittle and easily broken.

3. The hopes of multitudes will be lamentably frustrated; Our Savior brings
in many pleading with confidence at the last day for life, who shall be
rejected with miserable disappointment, Many shall say to me at that day Lord,
Lord, etc. Mat. 7. 22, 23.
and I will profess unto them, I never knew you (q. d. I never approved you)
depart from me.

4. We know not how soon our hopes may be assaulted by others, and shaken by
the recoylings of our own consciences. As good Job had his hopes questioned by
his Friends, Is this thy confidence and thy hope? So the Church Job 4. 6. Lam
3. 18.
in an afflicted condition does this dolefully bewail her self; I said, My hope
is perished from the Lord.

Now if upon these meditations helps for hopes-discovery shall be enquired
after, I shall briefly hint 1. whose hopes will fail. 2. Whose hopes will hold
in the time of trial; As for the former the holy Ghost tells us plainly, that
their hopes are perishing, who are 1. either wicked, 2. or hypocrites. Pro. 11.
7. Job 8. 13.
When the wicked man dies his expectation shall perish, and the hypocrites
hope shall perish. Here though I may not be large in characterizing the wicked
man or in uncasing the Hypocrite; yet take these short touches and enlarge them
with application in your own thoughts:

First, A wicked man is 1. A sin-lover; The wicked and him Psa. 11. 5.
who loves iniquity does Gods soul hate, says the Psalmist* And men's love of
sin is manifested by their unwillingness to have it spoken against; As David
would have Absalom gently 2 Samuel 18. 5. Psalm. 50. 16.
dealt with. 2. And a man who lives in sin upon choice and deliberation; Like
as the fish lives in water, He is as a Tradesman, a Practitioner in sin, a
Sin-maker, a worker of 1 Ioh. 3. 8. (...). Mat. 7. 23.
iniquity, as the Scripture expresses it; Therefore lay your hands upon your
hearts, and observe whether they breathe loving allowance of sin, and
deliberate resolutions to drive a trade in ways of known transgressions,
though both God and your own consciences condemn them.

Secondly, An hypocrite may be described; An outside, Mat. 15. 8, 9. and 23.
25. and 23. 5.
self-seeking, man-pleasing man. Thus our Lord does stigmatize them; Ye
hypocrites, well did Isaiah prophecy of you, saying, This people draws nigh
unto me with their mouth, and honors me with their lips, but their heart is
far from me; Ye make clean the outside, and all their works they do to be
seen of men: When they either fast, or feast religiously, it is to themselves;
Hereby a plain-dealing self-reflecting Christian Zech. 7. 5, 6.
may give a good guess at his own estate, viz. whether upright or an
hypocrite, and consequently whether his hope will be holding or perishing: And
I wish people to consider these hints for trial the rather because the hopes
of these persons will fall and fail them at death, if not sooner; What is the
hope of the Hypocrite though he has gained when God Job 27. 8.
takes away his soul?

As for the latter viz whose hopes will hold, attend the expressions of the
Apostle Peter, Blessed be the God and Father of 1. Pet. 1. 3.
our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy has begotten us
again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Christ from the dead, to an
inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
heaven for you. Hence two things are notable for our purpose to discover good
hope. 1. The Regeneration of the person hoping. 2. The activity of the hope it
self. 1. The persons are begotten again, 2. Their hope is lively. That both
these particulars may be practically applied for trial, I will for brevity
sake suggest that the spiritual birth, and hopes vivacity, may be evidenced by
effectual vocation; Hence it is that God in the Ephesians. 1. 18. and 4. 4.
Scripture speaks once and again of the hope of his calling. Now our
effectual calling does discover it self, 1. Partly by our coming off from sin
with detestation, and this is the effect of good hope, Every man that has this
hope in him, purifieth 1 Ioh. 3, 3.
himself as he is pure. 2. And partly by our coming up unto God in an
obedientiall submission unto his government, in a studious conformity to his
laws. These are conjoined in the experience and practice of Gods people, viz.
hope and holiness: As of David, Lord I have hoped for thy salvation and Psa.
116. 166.
done thy Commandments; And of Paul, After the way which Act. 24. 14. 15, 16.
they call Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things
which are written in the Law and the Prophets, and have hope toward God; And
herein do I exercise my self, to have always a conscience void of offense
toward God and toward men: Therefore conscientious endeavors against all
sinful pollutions both of heart and life, together with care fully to answer
the mind of the Lord in a religious conversation, notwithstanding hardships
and reproaches in the world, will give good testimony unto the truth of our
hopes of eternal glory; whereas looseness of life and heart, in ways of
carnal self-seeking and man-pleasing, following the multitude, and swimming
down the stream of declining times, may administer just occasion of doubting,
that man's expectations of eternal glory will be disappointed.

To persuade all them who have hitherto flattered themselves use diligence to
attain the full assurance of hope. Heb. 6. 11.


And 1. Because you have heard, that it is attainable, therefore you should
take encouragement to seek it.

2. Add to the possibility of getting assured hope, the necessity thereof,
that you may be prevailed with to look after it. You heard before that hope is
that unto a Christian in his passage unto heaven which an Helmet is to a
Soldier, and 1 These. 5. 8. Heb. 6. 19.
an Anchor is to the Mariner. Therefore let this consideration move us to make
out for the Helmet and Anchor of good hope. And I would entreat you the rather
to mind this my earnest exhortation, because of the rocks of dissoluteness
and destruction upon which you will be in danger to be driven, when Satan and
your own consciences shall discover the sandinesse of all your former hopes.
Noteable for the proof hereof is that passage in the prophecy of Jeremiah,
where the people being persuaded to repentance, return this answer: There is no
hope, we will walk after our own devices, Ier. 18. 11, 12.
and we will every one do the imagination of his evil heart; Or if the razing
of hopes foundations does not produce such wretched wicked resolutions, with
what sinkings and doleful despondency will the awakened Soul be overwhelmed?
Our Proverb says, Was it not for hope the heart would break; Therefore slight
not mine advice, neither delay the use of Gods means to gain a well-grounded
hope Isa. 38. 18.
of your eternal salvation: your life is both short and uncertain; And they who
go down into the pit cannot hope for Gods truth. Now for your help herein, I
shall in my next doctrine lead you to Christ who is the true Christians hope
of glory.

That Christ is unto faithful Christians the hope of glory.

As my Text speaks this truth in open words, so elsewhere our Apostle thus
expresses himself; The Lord Jesus Christ 1 Timothy 1. 1. Luke 2. 28, 29, 30.
which is our hope: And here Simeon anchored his hope of heaven, for he taking
Christ in his arms, said, Now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, for
mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

For the clearing of this Point there are two things enquirable.

1. What is meant by Hope of glory.

2. How Christ is to be accounted the Christians Hope of glory.

First, The hope of glory.

1. Either signifies the glory hoped for, as it is taken in many other
Scriptures; The hope laid up for you in heaven; ver. 5. Tit. 2. 13.
Looking for that blessed hope and the glorious appearing of the great God and
our Savior Jesus Christ.

2. Or the glorious hope; the grace of hope whereby the Soul desirously
expects future everlasting glory; according to the words of this our Apostle;
I know that this shall tend to my salvation, according to my earnest
expectation and Phil. 1. 19, 20.
hope.

Secondly, Christ may truly be called the hope of glory in both these senses.

1. Being the glory of his people Israel, viz. the matter, the Luke 2. 32.
Gloriam quam speramus Christus est gloria, and quam habemus, and quam habituri
simus. Rolloc. in Text Ioh. 1. 16. 2 Cor. 3. 18.
object of their chiefest glory both here and hereafter. He is the Christians
All both upon earth and in heaven, Christ is the glory of heaven, the very
heaven of heaven.

2. And being the root from whence holy hope and all other graces do spring:
From his fullness we all receive grace for grace; And whom we beholding as in a
glass, we all are changed from glory to glory; Grace is glory begun, and glory
is grace perfited, and both these we have from Jesus Christ.

For the further opening and evidencing of this Doctrine, viz. That Christ is
the hope of glory, Consider, that a Christians hope is attributed: 1.
Efficiently, to God the Father working it by the holy Ghost; The God of hope
cause you to abound in hope, through the power of the holy Ghost. 2.
Instrumentally Romans 15. 13.
to the word of God, which is the word of his grace. Whatsoever things were
written aforetime, were written, that Romans 15. 4.
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. 3.
Evidentially to the work of saving grace in the soul, manifesting it self by
its operations there; God gives good 2 The. 2. 16.
hope through grace, whether faith, Romans 15. 13. or love, 1 John 3. 14. or any
other sanctifying frame of heart. 4. And yet in a way of peculiarity Christ is
the Christians hope, which our Apostle intends in this Text, wherein there is
some Emphasis; The hope, that hope, He is singularly, eminently the hope (...).
1 These. 1. 3.
of glory; Fundamentally our hope of heaven is built upon him: Hope in the Lord
Jesus Christ, says the Apostle.

Now the true Christians hope of glory is raised out of Christ.

1. Upon that federall transaction which passed betwixt God the Father and
Christ his Son; The Apostle speaking of the Covenant, thus expresses
himself, To Abraham Gal. 3. 16.
and his Seed were the Promises made, He says not, And to his Seeds, as of
many, but as of one And to thy Seed, which is Christ: And hither (as I humbly
conceive) we may refer that passage in our Saviors Prayer unto his Father,
relating to himself, Thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should
Ioh. 17. 2.
give eternal life to as many as thou have given him. Upon this account the
Apostle seems to encourage hope; In hope of Tit. 1. 2.
eternal life, which God that cannot lie promised before the world began: For
unto whom besides Christ could the Almighty then, viz. before the world began,
be engaged by any promise? Prove. 8. 22, 32, 33.
Solomon does suggest transactions betwixt God and Christ his essential
wisdom, before the Creation, concerning the welfare of man, amongst which
transactions, doubtless this was one, that through him believers should have
hope of glory.

2. Because of his satisfactory Passion; For whereas sin committed against
God, and Gods wrath kindled against man, Heb. 3. 17, 18.
are the only hindrances of entrance into glory. Against them who sinned God
swear in his wrath that they should not enter into his rest. The Lord Jesus by
his sufferings did break into pieces those bars, and made way for Christians
admission into Heb. 9. 26. 1 These. 1. 10.
glory; For he took away sin by the Sacrifice of himself; and Jesus delivered
us from the wrath to come; As he removes guilt by satisfying divine justice,
so he quenched the flames of Gods anger, by the shedding of his blood; And
hereupon follows hope of glory.

3. By virtue of his meritorious purchase; The Apostle Ephesians. 1. 14.
calls a glorified estate in heaven, The purchased possession, received by
Redemption: whereas man had made forfeiture of his happiness (which consisted
in communion with God) and was altogether unable to ransom it, the Lord Jesus
bought it back again by his perfect obedience, which was esteemed of valuable
consideration for so great a purchase, because of the infinite excellency of
his person, being both Heb. 10. 7, 9, 44.
God and man; Though man through the worthlesnesse of his person and weaknesses
of his best performances cannot deserve the least accommodation from the Lord,
yet man's hope of glory is upheld by the deserts of Emmanuell, of Romans 8. 3, 4.
Christ, God with us.

4. Through the effectual prevalency of his prayer; Christ said with
confidence unto his Father, I know that thou hear me always; And this was
one great Request which Ioh. 11. 42.
he made, Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me
where I am, that they may behold my glory, Ioh. 17. 24.
which thou have given me, for thou have loved me before the Foundation of the
world; This Petition is a good prop to support hope of glory in a gracious
heart.

5. From the end of his Ascension; We all do believe, that Christ is received
up into glory. And himself before his 1 Timothy 3. 16.
departure from earth, said, I go to prepare a place for you, and if I go to
prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive Ioh. 14. 2, 3.
you unto my self, that where I am there ye may be also. Here is good
Anchor-hold for hope, which enters into that within the veil, whither the
forerunner is for us entered. Christ Heb. 6. 19, 20.
is gone into Heaven as our Harbinger to provide glorious mansions for us, and
to take possession in our behalf. And the Apostle Peter writes thus unto the
scattered Christian Jews, God raised Christ from the dead, and gave him glory,
that your faith and hope might be in God. From all these considerations jointly
considered this conclusion is confirmed by Scripture-strength and evidence;
That Christ is unto believing Christians the hope of glory. The application
follows.

1 Pet. 1. 21. Extra Christum non gloria, sed ignominia expectanda est. Hun. in
Text. Ephesians. 2. 12. Job 21. 7, 13. Psa. 73. 7, Job 7. 6.
expectation of future glory: As this smart inference follows undeniably from
the Text under hand, so the same Apostle is open and express for this truth
elsewhere; Suggesting to the Ephesians their sad condition in an unchristian
estate, he connecteth these two particulars, viz. ye were without Christ,
having no hope. Although profane godless and Christlesse men may have their
expectations of outward comforts accomplished, and possess more then heart
could wish, yet in regard of spirituals and eternals we may be confident, that
they spend their days without hope. In which respect they should rather be
looked upon as objects of pity then of envy, when they are in their greatest
jollity and prosperity, because being Christlesse they are poor, hopeless
creatures. Take man in his best estate imaginable out of Christ, and upon the
serious Survey of himself he shall have cause to say, What is my strength that
I should hope? Job 6. 11.
And as Paul said in reference to himself and them who sailed with him in a sad
Sea-voyage, that when neither Sun, nor Stars in many days appeared, and no
small tempest lay on Act. 17. 20.
us, all hope that we should be saved was then taken away. So let the chiefest
Sons of men with their highest parts be laid under the storms of divine
displeasure, without Gospellight discovering Christ, and all hope of salvation
will be quite removed.

Hence fair occasion is offered to discover their dangerous Ave-Maries call
Spes nostra.
the Virgin the mother of Christ's humanity Our Hope, who also trust unto their
works as meritorious causes of Salvation: So others also who imagine happiness
attainable from the right improvement of Natures abilities, without the
meritorious satisfaction of Jesus Christ: whereas the Scripture does not only
assert, that there is not salvation in Act. 4. 12. Gal. 5. 4. Sclus Christus,
is est, per quem vitam aeternam expect are licet. Piscat. in Text.
any other besides Christ, but does also affirm that Christ is become of no
effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the Law; Oh that this short,
sharp expression from an Apostolical pen might warn the wanton wits of these
unwary times to take heed of crying up Nature and moral abilities, with the
neglect of Jesus Christ, who alone is the foundation hope of future glory.

Romans 6. 23. (...) Donum gratis datum.
Eternal life is the gift of Gods grace through Jesus Christ; Although I
touched upon this before, yet I take it up again upon a double account; partly
because the Apostle in this Text intends a check unto them who mixed their own
righteousness with Christ, and partly because many in these days, not only
Papists, but other proud Opinionists, do derogate from Gospel-mercy by
ascribing too much unto man's natural strength, morally improved, whereby Gods
design in making man happy by Christ, is directly crossed and disappointed. Let
the words of the Apostle Paul* be seriously considered, Ye are in Christ Jesus,
who of God is made unto 1 Cor. 1. 29, 30, 31.
us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, that no
flesh should glory in his presence, that according as it is written, He that
glories let him glory in the Lord: Our All in tendency unto peace, comfort and
glory, is therefore from Christ, according to divine project and purpose, that
man when at the highest might be abased in himself, being necessitated to
acknowledge that all his advantageous incomes, both in regard of glory begun on
earth, and completed in heaven, are from Christ.

Now that I may more clearly advance Gods rich grace and free mercy in bringing
believers to glory by Christ; I heartily desire that these three things may be
observed, viz.

1. That Christ himself was the gift of God; Unto us a Isa. 9. 6.
Son is given, says the Gospel-Prophet; And our Savior himself in his
conference with the woman of Samaria, calls himself That gift of God, by way
of superlative eminency Ioh. 4. 10.
being the richest and freest gift that ever God bestowed upon the children of
men.

2. That the grace of faith whereby the Soul receives Christ and happiness by
him, is the free gift of God likewise. To you (says Saint Paul to the
Philippians) it is given to believe; Phil. 1. 29. (...). Act. 18. 27.
The Original suggests, that it was given of grace, which our Translation does
elsewhere express: Apollo is said to help them much who had believed through
grace; And this our Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans, affirming that our
Justification is from mercy, not merit, adds these words, Therefore it is of
faith, that it might be of grace. Romans 4. 16.


4. That all our spiritual privileges received from Christ himself, are from
him upon terms of mercy and grace. Forgiveness Ephesians. 1. 7. Tit. 3. 7. Ephesians. 1.
6. Joh. 17. 22. Jude 21.
of sin is according to the riches of his grace; We are justified by his grace;
We are accepted in the beloved, to the praise of the glory of his grace. And
himself in his prayer to the Father says, The glory which thou gave me I
have given them: Answerable hereunto is the advice of Saint Jude, Keep your
selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto
eternal life. It Is mere mercy, not merit, that holds up the heart in
expectation of Heaven. All these particulars being put together will undenably
evidence the strength of this my Inference, viz. That Because the Christians
hope of glory is rooted in Christ, therefore Heavens glory with all the
requisites belonging thereto are from grace and mercy. And this will make way
for the Use following.

To persuade Christians, the heirs of glory, to praise God Simeon expecting
salvation by Christ, blessed God; All Luke 2. 28.
our hearts should breathe forth Saint Peter's doxology; Blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who 1. Pet. 1. 3, 4.
according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by
the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an Inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for
you: Hence I might note to quicken gratitude, 1. The admirable worth of the
inheritance in glory which hope expects, viz* an Inheritance incorruptible,
undefiled, that fades not away. 2. The means whereby this hope is begotten in
us, viz. the death and resurrection of Christ. 3. And the motive moving the
Lord in this way to give us ground of hope, viz. His abundant mercy. In all
which regards it may well become us to join with our souls in Zacharies Song,
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he Luke 1. 68, 69.
has visited and redeemed his people, and has raised up an horn of salvation
for us in the house of his servant David. This thankfulness may be persuaded
by a double consideration, the one more general and the other more particular.
In general, because this ground of hope is revealed to us Gentiles, and that
upon no other account but Gods good pleasure; ^his is M. Bains his Observation
from the words before the Text: God makes known what is the riches of the
glory of this mystery among the Gentiles; This was an high privilege peculiar
to the Jews, that to them were committed the Romans 3. 1. Ephesians. 1. 9.
Oracles of God; but how much greater is our preferment in these times, God
having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good
pleasure which he purposed in himself! And the Apostle elsewhere discoursing of
some differences betwixt Old Testament and New Testament dispensations, tells
us, that the Gospel brings in a better hope by which we draw nigh to God.
More particularly in Heb. 7. 19.
reference to our own persons take notice of these things.

1. That the revelation of this should reach our understandings, when
multitudes of more pregnant capacities Mat. 11. 25, 26
continue ignorant hereof; I thank thee O Father (said Christ) Lord of Heaven
and Earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and
have revealed them unto Babes, Evenso Father, for it seems good in thy sight.

2. That we do not only perceive, but also participate personally in this hope
through Jesus Christ; whereas there are millions whose heads are full of this
light, and yet their hearts are empty of this lively hope of glory by Christ.
And if I by grace be a partaker (says Saint Paul) I give God 1 Cor. 10. 30.
thanks.

3. That the riches of the glory of this Inheritance hoped for by the Saints is
unexpressible. And that we may be abundantly Ephesians. 1. 18.
thankful for this hope in Christ, as we should pray for a more clear
apprehension thereof, so should we endeavor to know assuredly our peculiar
interest therein, by finding the Lord Jesus dwelling in our hearts by his
Spirit: Because my Text tells us, That Christ in us is the hope of glory, which
is the next and last Doctrine here considerable.

That Christ by being in believers, is unto them the hope of glory. The
existency of Christ in believing Christians gives existency to their hopes of
glory. This connection of Christ in them and of their glory through him, is
considerable in his most heavenly Prayer, in which having spoken of the glory
given unto them, with the same breath (as it were) he suggests Joh. 17. 22, 23.
Vnde colligimus, nos unum cum Christo esse, non quia suam in nos substantiam
transfundat, sed quia Spiritus sui virtute nobiscum vitam suam, and quicquid
accepit a Patre bonorum communicet. Calvin in Joh. 17. 22. Act. 20. 28. 2 Cor.
5. 19.
his being in them, The glory which thou gave me I have given them, that they
may be one even as we are one, I in them, etc. Before I proceed in the further
handling of this doctrine; These words which speak the in-being of Christ in
Christians, do call for some explication: Therefore let us enquire 1. Both what
the phrase does not, 2. And what it does hold forth to our consideration.

First, It does not intimate such a being of Christ in any Christian, as of the
Godhead in Christ, by reason whereof Godhead and Manhood in Christ made one
person; in regard whereof he was from his conception absolutely free from the
least tincture of sin, and was made able to complete the work of
Mediatorship, both by bearing up under the infinite weight of Gods displeasure
without sinking, and also to give sufficient virtue and value unto his
obedience active and passive, that it might be satisfactory and meritorious.
Gal. 4. 6. Ephesians. 2. 22. ^ Joh. 1. 12.
But it does suggest Christ's peculiar abode in believers by his Spirit being
received by faith, whereby he dwells and operateth spiritually in their
hearts, Naturae nomen, hic non substantiam, sed qualitatem designat. Naturae
divinae mundi corruptionem opponit; Vt si^us unum cum Deo, quantum modulus
noster f^ret. Calvio in 2 Pet. 1. 4.
which union betwixt him and them does in some measure by way of similitude,
though not fully in way of parity, represent the union betwixt his father and
himself. And whereas the Apostle Peter speaks of our being made partakers of
the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. which words are much abused. There are two
things notable from that Scripture to manifest the difference betwixt Christ
and Christians in that participation. 1. The words are not, we are made
partakers of the Godhead, but of the divine nature, viz. of the qualities of
God, according to our capacity, whereby we escape that corruption which is in
the world through lust, and do in holy dispositions resemble God so far as such
creatures can: As David speaks of showing the kindness of God unto
Jonathans posterity, 2 Samuel 20. 15. whereas Godhead it self was in such sort
in Christ, 1 Timothy 3. 16. that he was God blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5. coequall
with God the Father, Phil. 2. 6. 2. The Apostle Peter is open and express that
Christians are partakers of the divine nature (in the sense aforesaid) by means
of the exceeding great and precious promises of Gods grace; whereas Christ was
God by an eternal, natural, unexpressible generation.

Having thus briefly explicated the expression in the Text, and the like used
by our Savior, I proceed to the handling of the point of doctrine here
propounded: And because the doctrine has two branches, the one necessarily
implied, the other openly expressed, I shall distinctly speak unto them both.

The truth implied in the first branch of the doctrine is 1. Branch of
Doctrine. Joh. 1. 12. Ephesians. 3. 17.
this, viz. that Christ is in Believers; As believers do receive him, so he
dwells in their hearts by faith. And therefore it is noteable, that the
Apostle having moved the Corinthians to prove themselves whether in the faith,
he adds, Know 2 Cor. 13. 5.
ye not that Jesus Christ is in you? This in-being of Christ in believers is to
be understood, not of an abode in them (or any where else on earth) corporally,
for in that sense the Heavens must receive him until the time of the
restitution of Act. 3. 21.
all things; but of an habitation spiritual, according to the testimony of the
Apostle; Because ye are Sons, God has Gal. 4. 6.
sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts; Thereby intending to
teach us, that Christ is in believing Christians spiritually.

And this truth is by various metaphors suggested in the holy Scriptures. 1. By
being compared unto showrs which descending from heaven, do sink and soak into
the bowels of the earth, He shall come down like rain. 2. And his Name Psa. 72.
6. Cant. 1. 3. Psa. 109. 18.
is like unto ointment poured forth, which works it self into the bones, not
staying upon the outside of the person receiving it. 3. He is meat and drink
indeed unto the soul, from Joh. 6. 55, 56.
whence he himself concludes my doctrine, He that eats my flesh and drinks
my blood, dwells in me and I in him: 4. Hereto might be added that he is the
soul of our souls, whereby we live spiritually; Christ is our Life. And man's
life Col. 3. 4. Dan. 7. 15.
is said to be in him, 2 Samuel 1. 9. The body is called the sheath of the Soul,
which expression hinteth, that the soul is in the body, as the sword in the
scabbard: In like manner Christ who is the Christians life is in all them whom
he enliveneth.

Having thus cleared the truth, that Christ is in believing

First, For Instruction in four particulars, 1. Hence the Godhead of Jesus
Christ may be concluded undeniably; for this spiritual ubiquity of Christ in
the souls of all real Saints in all the places of the world, cannot belong
unto any mere creature whatsoever. This argument Saint Paul produced Act. 17.
23, 24, 27, 28.
to distinguish the true God from all Idol-gods, He is not far from every one
of us. Omnipresence proves Deity. And the conclusion follows with like
strength, when believers assert this truth, He is in every one of us.

2. This discovers the unparellel'd condescentions of Jesus Jesus Christ,
being willing to abase himself thus low as to be within poor sinful creatures.
This was a matter of admiration 1 King. 8. 27. Mat. 8. 8.
unto Solomon, But will God indeed dwell on earth? The good Centurion said,
Lord, I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof; And the Psalmist
with much affection calls upon all the servants of the Lord to praise him and
Psa. 113. 1, 3, 5, 6.
praise him again upon this account; Who is like unto the Lord God? who
dwells on high, who humbles himself to behold the things that are in heaven
and in the earth! Did God humble himself in looking out of himself, off from
his own infinite beauties and perfections, to view either men on earth or
Angels and Saints in heaven? How much greater is this condescension in Christ
to make his abode in the souls of sinners? Let me here dart only two thoughts
into your minds. 1. That Christ came out of his Fathers bosom where he Joh.
1. 18. Prove. 8. 30.
was daily his delight rejoicing always before him. 2. That the hearts of the
best, upon earth wherein he inhabits, are like dark dungeons, in regard of the
clouds of ignorance not dispersed, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Isa. 64. 6.
and like unsavory dunghils in respect of many noisome lusts not fully
subdued; Therefore guess with gratitude how low our blessed Lord does stoop in
being content to dwell in us, even in us every way so vile and so unworthy.

3. This gives us to understand the dignity of all true believers; As they are
precious, excellent, more excellent then Isa. 43. 4. Psa. 16. 2. Prove. 12. 26.
others in many other respects (which I now have not occasion to mention) so
upon this account that the Lord Jesus Christ is in them. Moses the man of God
judges Israel in this regard, in a condition far better then any other
people; For what Nation has God so nigh unto them? And how Deuteronomy. 4. 7.
much was Zacheus affected with the apprehension of this favor, this honor,
when Christ promised to abide at his house? When he had climed into a tree to
take a view of Luke 19. 5.
Christ, and Christ tells him that he should not only have a transient sight
of him, but also enjoy him as his guest, oh how was Zacheus (think you)
elevated by this entertainment! Now such (and greater) honor have all his
Saints: Psa. 149. 9.
It was no doubt a very great honor put upon the blessed Virgin Mary, both in
her own account, and in the judgment Luke 1. 42, 43, 48, 49.
of all Christians, that she did bear the holy body of Christ in her womb for a
time, He that is mighty has magnified me, and certainly the inhabitation of
Christ by his Spirit in the souls of his servants, is not a privilege
inferior.

4. This whispereth the madness and misery of all such who do dare to make
opposition against believers, for seeing Christ is in them, therefore in so
doing they seek (as it were) to pluck down Christ his house upon his head. I
shall not enlarge this Use 1. Either by showing the various ways whereby wrong
is done unto the servants of the Most High, viz. by secret plots and open
persecutions, either by abating their comforts, or increasing their sufferings,
either by corrupting their judgments, or drawing them to sin. 2. Or by
manifesting Christ's knowledge and sensiblenesse of these their injuries,
together with his severity against their enemies, witnessed both by judgments
threatened in his Word, and executed in the world from generation to generation:
But I only wish those who are herein guilty, to mind the Item given by the
Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Corinthians, If any man defile the Temple of
God, him will God destroy, 1 Cor. 3. 17.
for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are.

The second Use is for the comfort of all true believers, Paul, that the sight
of some Christian Act. 28. 15.
brethren cheared him after a sad shipwreck whom when Paul saw he took courage;
And Caesar cheared the drooping Mariners in a storm by minding them of his
presence, How much more should the in-being of Christ solace the believing
soul? 1. Because of his authority and power to order all casualties and
concernments according to his pleasure, whereas many times the best of
creature-friends can do no more then pity and pray: Thus our Lord cheared his
Apostles, All power is given unto me, and lo I am with Mat. 28. 18, 20
you always even unto the end of the world. And it was a cordial to the
Disciples in a storm that Christ was with them, whom the winds and waves must
obey. 2. Because this a Mat. 8. 26, 27 Psa. 132. 14.
bode of Christ speaks his complacency; This is Mr Bayns his Note upon the
Text. A man cannot properly be said to dwell in a prison in which he takes no
delight: And this answers a Scripture-expression elsewhere, Here I will dwell
for I have desired it, (says God of Sion) Though many times drooping
Christians, viewing their own beggarlinesse and vileness, judge themselves
worthy to be detested and deserted, and would relinquish themselves if they
could, yet Christ looks to the poor and contrite soul as a meet habitation
Isa. 66. 1, 2^
for himself. 3. Because he does graciously communicate himself unto the soul
where he resideth, according to the necessities thereof; I dwell with him that
is of a contrite Isa. 57. 15.
and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the
contrite ones. When you read this promise, remember his ability and fidelity
in these and all other kinds, to accommodate those whom he inhabits to their
completing in the accomplishment of his Mediatorship; Therefore doubtless
there cannot possibly be either any creature-want or danger, wherein the
improvement of this in-dwelling of Christ may not refresh the believing
Christian. 4. Because Nunquam minus solus quam cum solus maxim. Genesis 39. Psalm.
63. Act. 23. 10, 11
this will be constantly and abundantly relieving in times of the greatest
solitariness, though in banishment, or the closest imprisonment, and at the
greatest distance from the dearest friends: Joseph in Egypt, David in the
wilderness, and Paul prisoner in the Castle, were admirably cheared by this
company; And Christ is now and will be evermore the self-same in his servants
for their consolation.

The third Use is for Exhortation, to persuade Believers

1. To purge all discovered pollution out of themselves, because of Christ's
special residence in them. This Use the Apostle Paul makes of this doctrine,
for having said to the 2 Cor. 6. 16. and 7. 1.
Corinthians, Ye are the Temple of the living God, as God has said, I will
dwell in them and walk in them, he adds, Having therefore these Promises,
Dearly Beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit; This was one charge which God gave unto old Israel, in a military
condition, that all bodily filth should be buried under ground, and this is
rendered as the reason, For the Lord thy God walks in the midst Deu. 23. 13, 14
of thee, therefore shall thy Camp be holy, that he see no unclean thing in
thee; Oh that Christians would in this respect oppose inward defilements, and
not outward pollutions only. How careful are we to sweep and wash away
whatsoever might be offensive unto our Friends in the rooms where we lodge
them? And what guest can so well deserve welcome as Jesus Christ, unto whom all
sin is abominable, he being Prove. 8. 7.
the holy One of God? Be not satisfied therefore with fair faces and white
hands, but labor to make and to keep the inside clean also.

2. To prepare for Christ's contentfull entertainment in their bosoms; Who is
not willing to be at cost in providing Luke 5. 29.
both food and furniture fitting for the welcoming of worthy friends? It Is
said, Levi made Christ a great Feast in his own house; yea, Solomon brings in
the whorish woman, reporting Prove. 7. 16, 17.
her provisions made for the young man whom she solicited to lewdness, I have
decked my bed with coverings of Tapestry, with carved works, and fine linen of
Egypt; I have perfumed my bed with Myrrh, Aloes and Cinnamon. And should not a
principle of pure love to Christ prevail with Christians to do more then sordid
lusts do with the brutish children of men? If you demand what is the provision
to be laid in for Christ his welcome; The Apostle tells you, it is perfecting
holiness in the fear of God, which practice also, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
he moves by the argument underhand (as was hinted in the former branch of
the Exhortation.) By the increasing and acting of all the graces of the holy
Ghost, Christ will be abundantly contented. This is intended by these
metaphorical expressions of the Spouse unto Christ, At our Cant. 7. 13.
gates are all manner of pleasant fruits, new and old, which I have laid up for
thee O my Beloved; I would cause thee to drink Cant. 8. 2.
of spiced wine, of the juice of my Pomegranate. And take this encouragement
all you drooping souls, who are low and little in your own eyes, judging
nothing of your graces worthy Christ's acceptance, or meet for his
entertainment, that his Loves will take in good part, that which with sincere
good will you shall provide and make tender of with respect unto his content. I
will sup with you (says he to the Rev. 3. ^0.
Church.) And upon the invitation of the Spouse, thus expressed, Let my Beloved
come into his garden and eat his pleafant Cant. 4. 16.
fruit, This answer speaking good acceptance is returned, I am come into my
garden, my Sister, my Spouse, I have gathered Cont. 5. 1.
my Myrrh with my Spice, I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey, I have drunk
my wine with my milk: Oh how ready with cheerfulness is the Lord Jesus to own
and accept all graces, notwithstanding their defects and mixtures in the
bosoms of them whom he does inhabit! This therefore should both quicken and
embolden poor believing souls to lay in and lay out for his satisfaction who is
pleased to abide in them.

I proceed to the second branch of the Doctrine, which is 2. Branch of Doctrine.
the truth openly expressed, viz. That the existency of Christ in Believers,
gives existence unto their hopes of glory.

If the reasons hereof be demanded, I answer,

Because Christ his spiritual presence in us, is Gods earnest of glory. The
Apostle is express for this: Having In arrahbone, ut pignus. Dickson on the
Text. 2 Cor. 5. 5.
mentioned the longings of Saints to be swallowed up of life, he adds, Now he
that has wrought us for the self same thing is God, who also has given unto
us the earnest of the Spirit. Therefore if Gods own earnest may give good hope,
then Christ in believing Christians gives good hope of glory, especially
because the earnest it self is of so great value, the receiving whereof is
happiness begun upon earth.

2. Because of that near relation and close union which is betwixt Christ and
them, whom he inhabiteth, They are not only related unto him, as servants unto
their Master, though that would give ground of good hope. Seeing he himself who
is taken up into glory, has said, Where I am, there shall my servant be.
Neither are they only one with him, Ioh. 12. 26. Joh. 15 5. Col. 1. 18. Ephesians.
1. 23.
He in them, and they in him, as the branches in the Vine. But he is united
unto believers as the head unto the body, which is called his fulness.
Therefore if there be hope that Christ will have a complete body without the
defect of any member in heaven, or that every individual member of Christ his
mystical body shall be glorified, then Christ in believers is the infallible
hope of glory.

3. Because Christ by abiding in Believers does prepare them for participation
in glory. The Apostle Paul is clear in his expressions to this purpose. Ye are
not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in
you, and if Christ be in you the body is dead because of sin, but the Spirit is
life Romans 8. 9, 10, 11.
because of righteousness; But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from
the dead, dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also
quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwells in you. Wheresoever
Christ dwells spiritually, his Spirit operateth effectually for the subduing of
sinful principles, and for the advancing of the power of sanctification; And
thus he preparing the vessels of mercy for glory, and making them meet to be
made pantakers of the inheritance of Romans 8. 23. Col. 1. 12.
Saints in light, he gives them sure hope of glory.

This by way of application may serve as a good touchstone we read, nor Christ
in the Sacrament which we receive will administer ground of hope of future
glory. Though Christ be in our heads by high notions, and in our mouths by
frequent, glorious expressions, yet if he be not in our bosoms by spiritual
inhabitation, he is not unto us the hope of glory: It is said of hypocrites,
that God is near in their mouths Jer. 12. 2. Mat. 15. 8.
but far from their reins. And that with their lips they honor him, but
their heart is far from him. At the last day many shall plead their
profession of Christ, calling him Lord, Lord, and talking of great works done
in his Name, who yet shall shall be rejected with doleful disappointments, I
will profess unto them (says Christ) I never knew you, depart from Mat. 7. 23.
me; Here then the question will be, how may Christ his being in us be
discovered? I answer briefly. 1. By the grace of Per fidem habitans, and
virtute sua agens. Hunnius in Text. Joh. 1. 12.
faith whereby he is received. 2. By the room into which he is welcomed. 3. And
by the effects of his entertainment. First, Whereas true Believers are the only
receivers of Jesus Christ. This faith will evidence it self, partly by the
incomparable value which it puts upon Christ. To you who believe (says the
Apostle Peter) he is precious, and partly by opposing 1 Pet. 2. 7.
and purging out sinful pollution, that Christ may not be annoyed by it: The
heart is purified by faith, Therefore ask your Act. 15. 9.
selves, as in Gods presence, whether there be any thing in the world which you
prize more then Christ, or so much as Christ, and whether you do indulge any
wickedness within your bosoms, without bitter complaints and vigorous
opposition.

Secondly, Christ dwells in the heart by faith. The Spouse Ephesians. 3. 17. Can.
1. 13.
says, He shall lie as a bundle of Myrrh betwixt my breasts. Therefore
consider, into what place Christ is welcomed. Do you admit him into some
out-house only? As at his birth, he was laid in a manger, because there was no
room for him in Luke 2. 7.
the Inn; Or do you put him into a cock-loft only? I mean, Do you only fill
your fancies with notions, and tip your tongues with talk of Christ, or is he
indeed received with warm welcome into your hearts, by longings, loves and
rejoycings?

Thirdly, Whereas Christ is influentially operative in the soul where he
resideth, as the soul in the body where it is. Christ is our life (says Paul)
and I am crucified with Christ, Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ
lives in me. Enquire Col. 3. 4 Gal. 2. 20.
therefore exactly whether by such spiritual breathings, sense and motions, as
were in Jesus Christ, whilst upon earth, you can make out your union and
communion with him. He 1 John 2. 6.
that says, he abides in him, ought himself also so to walk, even as he
walked; what gaspings are in you after conformity to Gods will and the glory of
his Name! what sighs under sin with the expressions of divine displeasure! what
complacency in Gods service, and the smiles of his face, in the use of holy
Ordinances! what motions, what progress do you endeavor to make, from sin,
toward God, in the mortifying of inward lusts, and the advancing of the power
of godliness in your conversations? Sincere answers returned unto such like
demands, will suggest whether Christ be efficaciously present in you.

This truth administreth matter of much comfort unto all Zacheus heard that
Christ would abide Luke 19. 6.
in his house, he received him joyfully. Greater cause of joy have they who
have already lodged him in their hearts. Now to quicken the belevevers joy upon
that account, viz. that Christ in them is the hope of glory, these comfortable
consequences may be considered.

1. Hence they may assuredly expect the supply of all outward wants, whether
they look upon themselves, as possessed of Christ, or entitled by him unto
glory. The holy Scripture holds forth this inference as deducible from both
these grounds. Christ is the owner, the heir of all things, and therefore if
God has given us his Son, how shall he not with him freely give us all
things? And if the Lord by the right Romans 8. 32.
of Christ has been pleased to give interest in heavens glory, he will
certainly vouchsafe all earthly needful accommodations; This conclusion Christ
himself gathers from the premises. Fear not little Flock, for it is your
Fathers good pleasure Luke 12. 32.
to give you the Kingdom. And the Apostle does from the same Argument assert
the ministration of Angels for their advantage. Are they not all ministering
Spirits sent forth to Heb. 1. 15.
minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation? Therefore assurance of
provision and protection is hence clearly deducible.

2. Upon the same account they may be confident of their final perseverance.
The Apostle Peter having asserted the hope which the Regenerate have of this
glorious Inheritance referved in heaven for them, he adds Gods care to
preserve them unto the possession thereof; who are kept 1 Pet. 1. 4, 5, 13.
(says he) by the power of God through faith unto salvation: and from hence
encourages this confidence; Wherefore gird up the loins of your minds, and
hope to the end, for the grace that is to be brought unto you, at the
revelation of Jesus Christ. There are but two things (as I conceive) which can
possibly endanger their falling short of hoped-for glory, viz. either their own
corruptions within, or their oppositions from without. Now Christ being in
them, and taking the care of them, does secure their souls from both, as is
manifest from his own words, I give them eternal life, and they shall never
perish, Joh. 10. 28.
neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. The gloss which reverend
holy Mr Dod gave of this Scripture, was this; Whereas Sheep are endangered
either from somewhat within them, viz. by the rot, or some disease to which
subject, or from somewhat without them, viz. by dogs and beasts of prey: Our
Savior promises, that the Sheep of his fold shall not miscarry finally from
either of these dangers. And Christ annexeth an argument which holds invincible
against all adverse power whatsoever, whether within or without, whether on
earth or in hell; My Father which gave them me, ve. 29. Romans 8. 35, 37.
is greater then All; Upon this bottom Saint Paul builds his triumph; Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Nay, in all these
things we are more then conquerors through him that loved us.

3. Therefore nothing which is consistible with Christ's residence in a
Christians bosom should shake his hope of glory. Neither weakness of graces,
nor strength of lusts, neither the assaults of Satan, how horrid, violent,
frequent soever, nor imperfections in holy performances, how many, or constant
soever, which militate against the believers assurance, should sink either hope
or heart, except Christ's utter absence from the soul could from thence be
undeniably concluded. The Apostle Paul having mentioned his constant conflict
and his frequent foyls in the 7. of the Romans, yet adds in the end of the
Chapter, his joy in Christ, I thank God through Jesus Christ; and asserts in
the beginning of the Chapter following; There is no condemnation unto them who
are in Christ Jesus. Augustine while Christ was in his Desperare non audeo. Per
quem gloriam vitae aeternae expectare debetis. Vatab. in Text.
eye, said, I dare not despond. And Christians should both with respect unto
Christ's honor and their own comfort, make conscience, not to yield to
dejecting doubts, or perplexing fears, in reference to their glory in heaven,
while the matter of their complaints is no more then may possibly be found in
the soul where Christ dwells. Certainly if doubting Christians would
carefully hold unto this direction, maintaining and bottoming their hopes in
Christ, multitudes of scruples might easily be answered, and their evidences
for heaven would be better preserved, and their constant comfort well secured.
This anchor of hope thus cast out Heb. 6. 19.
and fastening upon Christ, would be admirably useful, when billows of
temptations (as in a tempest) beat upon the believing soul; And the Helmet of
this hope thus used would keep 1 These, 5. 8.
off many blows, whereby the comforts of distrustful spirits are sadly
battered.

4. This may be a precious cordial to the believer upon his deathbed; It was
reviving unto old Simeon, being ready to leave the word, Then he took Christ in
his Arms, and blessed Luke 2. 28, 29, 30.
God, and said, Now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, for mine eyes
have seen thy salvation. How many and how sweet soever our contentments are
upon earth, of which Gaudium in spe magnum in replenum, Aug. Phil. 1. 21. 23.
death will deprive us, yet Christ being in us the hope of glory, to die will
be gain, and to be with Christ will be far better. And who is not cheerfully
willing in a way of selflove, to part with that which is worse for what is much
better?

The doctrine may be improved by exhortation. 1. To

First, Those who possess Christ and hope of glory through him, are to be
persuaded

1. To contentment with their present condition upon earth, though it be mean
and low. The heirs of vaste estates in the world can the better bear hardship,
during their nonage, though their diet be scanty, their lodging hard, and their
clothing course, because they hope that ere long all will be better. Who
knows not the poverty of Jesus Christ? The Foxes have holes, and the birds of
the air have their nests, Mat. 2. 20.
but the Son of man has not where to lay his head. And yet he is comfortably
contented, as in respect of his present enjoyment of God as his portion, so in
reference to his expectation of future glory; The Lord is the Pertion of mine
Inheritance: Psa. 16. 5, 6, 11
The lines are* allen unto me in pleasant places; In thy presence is fullness
of joy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. The Apostle
Paul seeks by this argument to raise the Christian Colossians above
sublunaries. When Christ Col. 3. 4.
who is our life shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory. Oh
how admirably would such meditations elevate the discontented Christian with
calmnesse and complacency, if they were set on by faiths activity!

2. To patience in bearing reproaches, with all other crosses for Christ, in a
Christian course, keeping in their mind this hoped-for glory. This Doctrine
Christ himself both preached and practiced; Blessed are you when men shall
revile Mar. 5. 11, 12.
you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely
for my sake, Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven;
This was one passage in his Sermon, and truly by this he was supported under
his sufferings, For the joy that was set before him he endured the Heb. 12. 2.
Cross, despising the shame. Having propounded Christ's practice, it may be
judged needless to mention the example of Moses, who chose rather to suffer
affliction with the people of Heb. 11. 25, 26
God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, Esteeming the reproach
of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt, for he had respect unto
the recompense of reward: But (...) you eye in Christ what is equitable and
imitable, then consider in Moses what is attainable by the industrious actings
of faith and meditation. And yet to prevail further upon your spirits in
promoting your magnanimity and patience, by minding your hope of glory in
Christ, I wish you to compare your present sufferings on earth with your future
glory hoped for in heaven, both in regard of their quality and continuance, for
the one are both light and short, whereas the other is both weighty and
eternal. The experience of Gods servants has often put a Probatum est unto
this direction. 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18.
For this cause we faint not, for our light affliction which is but for a
moment works for us, a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory,
while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not
seen, for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not
seen are eternal.

Secondly, Those who have not as yet received Christ to dwell in them, are to
be moved as they desire heavens glory hereafter, and the comfortable hopes of
it here upon earth, to give entertainment unto Jesus Chaist. Zacheus upon an
hint given of Christ's willingness to come into his house, comes down out of
the Sycamore-Tree quickly, and receives him joyfully. Now do you with
seriousness consider Luke 19. 4.
with what 1. importunity, 2. patience, 3. and promises, the Lord Jesus calls
upon you for entertainment. Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man
hear my voice, and Romans 3. 20.
open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.

1. There is the use both of a voice and knocking, therefore importunity. He
speaks by his word, and knocks by his Spirit, with some recoylings of an
awakned conscience.

2. This importunity is not only once, it is not a knock, or a word and away,
but he stands, he staieth, and waits for admission; This speaks much
patience.

3. This patient importunity is backed with promises of communion upon
willingness to take him in, I will sup with him and he with me, (as if he had
said) I will feast his soul, and I will accept of his provisions for my welcome.

Now if by these motives (to which many more might be added) you be disposed to
enquire what you should do that may come into you, and be in you, the hope of
glory; I would refer you to the counsel given by the Psalmist (which is
doubled, because weighty and necessary) Lift up your heads O ye gates, and be
lift up ye everlasting doors, and the Psa. 24. 7. 9.
King of glory shall come in. Hence two directions may be gathered. 1. That our
souls (which in regard of their immortality are called everlasting doors) must
willingly receive him. He is a great King, and will not take up with an
out-house for his lodging, for the place of his gracious abode; Ephesians. 3. 17.
He dwells in the heart; Either there or not at all. Therefore by meditating
upon the forementioned particulars, suggesting Christ his deservings, and the
incomparable benefits to be received by him, seek to prevail with your selves
that your warmest loves, strongest longings, and highest joys may be laid forth
upon him. 2. That he must be received as Lord and King, with free contentment
to submit unto his Scepter and Regal Authority. In houses where Kings were
wont to be entertained, Rex was usually written upon the door, all the rooms
were to be disposed of for his use. In like manner must they commit the Keys of
government into the hands of Christ, with willingness to be ruled by him in
all things, who would receive him, and through him the hope of glory. 3. Hereto
may be added heart-humiliation; For whereas high stately Palaces are esteemed
the fittest houses for the entertainment of earthly Princes, Jesus Christ the
King of glory makes choice of lowly hearts for his habitation: For thus says
the high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy, I dwell
Isa. 55. 15.
in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble
spirit: Therefore level your mountains of selfconceit, lay your selves in the
dust upon the serious review of the evil both of your lives and natures,
together with the deserved misery, which you be neither able to resist nor
undergo, and make an unfeigned self-resignation unto the Lord, to be always,
in all things governed by him, so may you expect the coming of Christ into your
souls, and the comfort of good hope of glory through him.

This one thing I earnestly move as a matter necessary to salvation by Jesus
Christ, viz. self-denial, with submission to Christ, as tendered in the Gospel,
upon terms of freegrace. The Apostle Paul looks upon the Jews as not in the
state of salvation, Because they going about to establish Rom 10. 1, 3.
their own righteousness submitted not themselves unto the righteousness of
God. Their privileges were high, and their costly Sacrifices many, and
therefore they hoping without Christ then preached to work out their own
welfare, fell short of blessedness. The same Spirit of pride and
self-dependance is in all our natures, which is extremely mischievous,
obstructing the way unto Christ's welcome into the soul: therefore I entreat and
beseech Christians again and again herein to be exceeding careful. Neither let
those who are most rich in parts, duties, enjoyments, rely thereupon, with
disrespect of Christ; Nor yet let Poor souls, burdened with guilt, beggarly in
abilities, most vile and unworthy in their own account, keep off from Christ
through distrustful discouragements; For as all good hope of glory is raised
from Christ heartily entertained, so no one who humbly, obedientially stoopeth
under his government Joh. 6. 37.
shall be rejected.

In the last place, The Doctrine administreth much comfort I would not have you
ignorant Brethren concerning 1 These. 4. 13, 14, 18.
them who are asleep, that ye sorrow not even as others which have no hope; For
we believe that those who sleep in Jesus, God will bring with him, and so shall
we ever be with the Lord; Wherefore comfort one another with these words. In
this regard regular love to our deceased Christian Friends, would turn our
water into wine, our tears into joys. If ye loved me (said Christ to his
dejected Apostles) ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father. And
this was ethe rason (as some Divines do conjecture) wherefore David who mourned
excessively upon Absaloms death, was more comfortable when he heard that his
young child was dead, Now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? 2 Samuel 1^. 23.
I shall go to him: God gave into his heart assurance of his childs happiness
in heaven; whereas the wickedness wherein Absalom lived and died did suggest
rather doubts concerning his future condition.

This Use puts a fair opportunity into my hand to reach forth a Cordial unto
the Father, Mother, Grandmother, and other Relations of the ingenuous,
gracious Child, whose Funeral has occasioned this Assembly, and whose
affectionate minding of this Text (upon which I have discoursed) was the
Argument which induced me to undertake it, at this time. He was but nine years
old and a half when God translated him, and above five years since this Text,
Christ in you the hope of glory, took such hold upon his heart, that he
frequently spoke of it, and often entreated his Father to preach of it. And
doubtless it is not a thing usual for a child so young to be thus affected
with thoughts of Christ, and glory to be hoped for through him.

Some few things more I will add,

1. To relieve the sad hearts of his nearest friends.

2. To move them, with others, unto thankfulness to the Lord for that which
his Spirit had wrought in this hopeful child.

3. As also to quicken young ones unto the imitation of his virtues.

First, His loving honorable respect to his dear Parents, and dutiful
observance of them, was very great, which was evidenced by these particulars.

1. Having quick parts and an aptness to learning, he was willing to apply
himself unto any thing wherein they judged it meet to have him instructed.

2. As he himself was afraid to offend his Parents, so ^e was careful to
prevent amongst Servants that which ^ight trouble them, and to keep from their
knowledge whatsoever he thought would be grievous unto their spirits.

3. When under griping pains by reason of the winde-Colick, he would labor to
forbear groans and outcries, lest they should be overmuch afflicted with his
Lamentations.

4. Being asked, whether he desired prayers for the lengthening of his life,
his answer was, I would live, that I might glorify God, and be a comfort to my
Father and mother.

And all these expressions of his tender love toward his Parents, are the more
considerable, because there was reason to hope that they were increased in him
by their care of his Religious Education; In all these particulars he was a
rare example (especially if his childehood be remembered) of Childrens obedience
to their Parents.

Secondly, He was like young Timothy, knowing the holy Scriptures in his
Childehood. Though his bodily distempers did often take him off from Reading in
the Bible, yet he had read it twice throughout, and was the third time gotten
into the New Testament, before his last Sickness. He was able also to give a
good account both of the Chapters which he read, and of the Sermons which he
heard.

And I will here mention three Passages which manifest that he minded and was
affected with the Word of God.

1. Having been taught a short Prayer by his Parents, his manner was, to add
thereto Scripture-sentences from time to time; Two I shall report. The one from
Psalm. 119. 68. Thou art good, and do good, Teach me thy Statutes: The other
from Psa. 120. 2. Deliver my Soul, O Lord, from lying lips, and from a
deceitful tongue. Were not these his desires of knowledge and of preservation
from lying (a sin to which Children are subject) very commendable.

2. Hearing of the misery of wicked ones, and Hypocrites, laid open in a Sermon
on the Sabbath-morning, he durst not go to his diner till he had gone aside to
prayer; whereas thousands of riper age have no obedientiall bents wrought by
divine threatenings.

3. And being once reproached (some years since) because the hair of his head
was short, he readily returned this Answer, That Gods Word speaks against
long hair, remembering those words of the Apostle, Does not even Nature it self
teach you, that if a man have long hair it is a shame unto him? 1 Cor. 11. 14.
May not this give a check unto many, both Ministers and others, whose
Ruffian-like locks are very offensive unto multitudes who fear the Lord?

Thirdly, As he was a Child of many Prayers, not only being much prayed for by
his Parents and their Godly Friends, but also because he himself did pray
daily, seeming also to make conscience of this duty. And here I shall relate
some things which I account considerable.

1. Sundry years since he made this as a matter of complaint, that he could not
order his thoughts while he was at prayer; How may this shame multitudes of
people much elder, to whom roving thoughts in prayer were never troublesome?

2. Not long before his death, staying at home on the Sabbath-morning with a
Maidservant, he desired (as he had done formerly) that they might sing a Psalm
and go to prayer; And in his prayer he made this Petition, Lord, grant that we
may leave our sins, not as people do their old clothes with purpose to put
them on again, but that we may forsake our sins as rags, with resolution to
wear them no more.

Many times when sick and in pain, he would use these words, Lord help me; He
was thankful to my self as to others for our prayers; and that night before
his death, having been once prayed for by them who watched with him (who
discerned the approach of his change) he himself of his own accord entreated
them to pray with him and for him again: Do not these things speak his sensible
apprehensions of dependence upon God, with expectations of favor from him by
means of prayer?

Fourthly, This must not be forgotten, That for diverse years before his death
he would express much estimation of those Texts of Scripture which speak of
heavens glory, the glory provided for Gods Servants for ever. He would often
commend the grace of contentment, saying, that it was better then riches, and
that man's life consisted not in abundance. If unto all these things we add
(that with which I did begin) viz. the words of my Text, which did run much in
his mind, Christ in you the hope of glory; we may thence charitably and
probably conjecture, that notwithstanding his religious education, and the many
things praiseworthy in his life, yet he grounded his hope of glory alone upon
the Lord Jesus.

These particulars I have judged meet to mention (as I before hinted) with
respect to Gods honor, the comfort of his mourning friends, and the
edification both of children and their Parents, who may be herewith acquainted.

Now the practical improvement both of my Sermon and this Narration, I humbly
commend unto the blessing of God through Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

