AURORA: OR, A DAWNE TO DAYLIGHT.

Post tenebras lucem. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1648.

AVRORA: OR, A Dawne to Daylight.
THe night now begins to draw up her fable Sails, and lets down to us a
springing Twilight; which though faint and thin, yet after so thick a darkness
(as of late years has Curtain'd over this Island) brings much comfort with it.
The Morn (like a recovering sick man) looks yet pallid and puling; and though
it be nothing comparable to that light the eye is capable of, (nor its fullest
receipt but the satisfying the fifth part of a sensible Creature:) yet it seems
dressed in a fuller Clarity, because it appears after so black a storm. This
dubious duskishnesse presents our present Actions confused, like their stories
if woven in Arras, when we look upon the knotted outside: or as if an ancient
Eye should go about to read them in a small print. Here we may perceive men
walk like trees, but Affairs being managed beyond the level of the Eye; we
cannot reach to a perfect discovery. And yet methinks this enlarging Dawne
promises a Birth that shall terminate our adversities, and grow to a strength
able to discloud our long night: That these new-borne-rayes will gild our
sadned hearts, and burnish over our duller Hopes. If then hitherto we have been
wilfully blind, let not our eyes prove enemies to us still; but let us rather
tear out that thick filme to make use of this beneficial Prospect: And
perhaps if this Daybreak lend us but so much light as to lead us into a path,
our going forward may happily bring us to our own doors. To the attaining of
which wonted blessing, this early light promises fair, and seems to degree
it self by the more noble surprisall, because so unexpectedly let in upon us.
For seeing it enables us already to distinguish the benefit of our appearing
comforts from the misery of past misfortunes, let us make use of it to further
the one, though we cannot remedy the other, and by detesting the authors of our
woes, make way to recrowne the finisher of our happiness. In expectance of
which future good, let us create to our selves this present benefit, to summon
all our powers and faculties into our Eyes, (calling them there to council)
and then they will the better satisfy our judgment: though on the sudden our
thoughts are ravell'd into disorder, because burdened with hopes, fears,
doubts, desires, suspicions, and amazements; like waters forsaking that
by-ditch which the unskilful Drayners of these times, drew them into, and are
trying several Channels to return to their right stream. This glimmering
light thus hopefully assuring us the restoration of a Day, we may be all
partakers of the beneficial happiness thereof if we please. But how welcome
to the Royal party, (whose tedious habitation in such an imprisoned shade
have often forced them to sigh out that complaint of good old Tobie, Quale
gaudium est mihi quia in tenebris sedeo?) None can more truly know, save those
whose desperate and weighty miseries, have made them more capable of the worth
of so large a blessing. The expectation whereof is pleasant, but our fruition
more pleasant; what now nourishes our springing hopes, shall then crown our
full grown enjoyment. In the mean time let us (like the pleased birds) forsake
these long confined nests, to prune our dull and unrefreshed thoughts, and with
our cheerfullest notes thank Heaven for this Daybreak.

And that we may set a greater value upon the promised day, let us reflect a
little upon our past night; where we may see our Sun totally swallowed up by
darkness, and our Moon wading through an envious Eclipse; Stars of the first
magnitude maskt over with clouds, and thousands of our fixed lamps become
wandering Planets: our chiefest Tapers puffed or snuft out, or else lanthorn'd in
an imprisoned dungeon. In fine, (to our discomfort) we may behold our Glories
blurred, and all our comforts Tarnished. But happy we, if this Twilight usher
us the way to view a glimpse of our former condition, perhaps it may lead us to
a fuller prospect, where we may see the Glory of this Nation grown up to the
top of the spire, and Happiness dressed in her fullest flourish, where pleasures
were presented with a towering delight, and our Gardens wanted no beautiful
trimming. Who grew waspish when any questioned our Title of prescription for
Prosperity, and thought Heaven did us much injury to sue forth a Writ De
executione Decretis for the possession of that we had enjoyed Time out of mind?
But alas! pernicious weeds grew up with these flowers, Omne in praecipiti
vitium stetit. We (quam Jocus circumvolat) were too happy and proud, which made
us wanton, and lo! in an instant wilful Resolution drawing the Curtain, the
flowers of our felicity were straight forgot, and nunc non erat his locus: Such
fruit as our industrious Summer nourisht, our destroying Winter has utterly
perished: and yet we do not feelingly deplore our unhappiness, as the depth of
it exacts. And though an eternal and never-fading youth seemed to be conferred
upon us, as the Gods did upon Prometheus offspring, yet we (like them)
foolishly entrusted this bounteous gift to the silly Ass, who for a draught of
water sold it to Serpents. Nor staid we here at this loss, for our further
improvidence gained us the title of adoption to Epimetheus, when we so greedily
accepted of Pandora's prostituted Box, which (having as rashly opened) let out
all misfortunes upon us; (only we had so much discretion to retain Hope in
the bottom.) For at the first view of these late Troubles, how false did our
humorous and purblind eyes see? and yet renouncing them, what deceitful and
perverse spectacles have we ever since trusted? How did we suffer our
mischiefs to steal in upon us like an Hectic Fever (that in the beginning
was difficult to be discovered, and easy to be avoided, but at length became
more easily known, and harder to be cured:) and which, sicut unda sequitur
undam, like water in the sea, one thronged into the neck of another. At what a
rate did we hire a War, and how many vast sums did we bring in to throw away?

-- neque enim loculis comitantibus itur
Ad casum Tabulae, posita sed luditur arca.
How rashly did we mow down our well-grown happiness? and how have ly did we
obnubulate our ful-spread glories? How did we spurn at that precious jewel,
Peace? and digging its Grave, bury all that we could call comfort, in it? How
did we chase our selves into destruction with a sharpened ^^ur, (hac Tuba rixa)
never seeking to check the rains till we fell our selves over head and ears
beyond recovery? and then struggling against the tide striving to break those
threatening waves) into how great dangers has it entitled us? How did we
burry our Sun into the West being offended with the glory of too bright a Ray?
How did we court a rising and prodigious Moon, whose borrowed light only ^^d
us to an unwearied destruction? Fools that we were! to rush into a Quarrel in
the Dark, when our ignorant-dealt blows wounded friends as well as foes: Had
our Swords been deliberately unsheathed, (and in the Day) they might have
discerned the true opposite or known the way to their peaceful Scabbards. Sed
jam Serpentum major concordia: whilst contesting for Trifles, and rushing into
the fray unadvisedly, in how many sad and destructive Dilemma's have our
astonished thoughts been bound? What perilous and unknown Coasts, Rocks, Flaws,
Sands, and Shallowes, in this troubled Ocean, has this darkened tempest driven
us upon? so that indeed we seemed lost to all felicity; yet verily we have seen
the wonders of the Lord in this great deep. And truly our disasters may not
unfitly be paralleld with the raging Seas, who are running and roaring with
unresistable force, and which every Minute threatens inevitable ruin; but
thanks be to that protecting hand which has supported many of our unweildy
barks, making the fidelity of that Element fully manifest in their
preservation, and safely conveyed them to a promising-secure- Harbor.

The confessed truth is, our prosperity was great, and we so fully possessed of
it, that (had we been as circumspect as careless) we might imagine adversity
could not be far off; which when it came (and coming so unexpectedly) did more
roughly dispossess us of the blessings we enjoyed; then if we had met it with
a prepared bosom.

But our night it approached, and like that of Penelope's has ravel'd and
undone all that our day did weave; a night! (though nights be common and
darkness familiar to us yet this we may well bestow a wonder upon) which
overwhelmed us in such solid darkness, darkness so collected, that indeed it
was felt; because the shaded mantle was folded so many double.

These thick shades made us languish even to the utmost gasp, during which, if
we saw any light at all, 'twas terible as lightning, and fatal as a comet;
never appearing, but attended with destructive thunder: which left nothing
behind but a feeble blew, dull and heavy as a melancholy snuff expiring in a
socket. It Is true, that now and then, though our clouds were loaded with such
contracted shade, yet they afforded a few seeming benefits, and opened the way
to some flaming Meteors appearance; but immediately skrein'd them again, (and
therein became friendly to us) lest our over-eager belief (giving to these
false fires and credit of morning stars, should lend us, hopes of an
approaching twylight, which yet they were not pleased to disco^^ nor unlock
those early doors, for our long imprisoned Sun to show himself.

During these weighty afflictions, nothing seemed to prognosticate our ruin so
much as the despairing hearts we carried about us; because fortune continued so
constant to her frowns; yet alas! that only was in regard she had a long
while used us to them. But the same skill that satisfied us how our prosperity
was maintained, might have foretold us of the approaching danger; Nay, yet we
may thereby foresee our deliverance if we will not live in resolved blindness.
And time it is, since it is our selves that ruin our selves, we can charge none
else with the guilt. All our glory, wealth, prosperity, happiness, comforts,
and felicities, nay the choice of blessings, Peace! have been buried in a grave
of our own digging: and upon which no other monument must be erected, then the
broken and scattered pyles of our own ruins. Our former days were the white
paper, and our five years night, the Acts of our sad Tragedies, written
thereon not in Ink, but in Blood; making up the Volume of our past and present
age: in which (without Spectacles) we may read the saddest losses ever came to
a people. Never was Age so thick sown with the venomous spawne of Civil
discention, which (like Cadmus Teeth) immediately produced whole troops of Felo
de se's: who (had they been wise) should rather have employed their Tongues in
licking, then their Teeth in biting such deep wounds. And for sacrilegious
Imps, nature, nor liberty ever yet produced their equal. How many houses of
God have they destroyed in the Land! nay; what Church is it that has escaped
plundering? Surely they that violate the place of Gods dwelling can never truly
honor him. And as the Temples of God, so the Temples of the Holy Ghost (laid
up there in a safe repose) have suffered pillaging. Having not spared to strip
the (...) of such robes, as pious hands had dressed them in, to let Posterity
know them by their Monuments; nor forborne to ransack them of their meanest
clothes, their bare Coffins; leaving no Epitaph but (what they could not take
away) the bloody Veins in the remaining Marble.

Monuments were erected to preserve and perpetuate the memories and noble
actions of such as have lived honorably, and died virtuously, and no less
then a condemnation to the Galleys, or grinding at the Mill did our prudent
Ancestors impose upon the Violators thereof, because the offense was reputed a
crime infamous, and equal to Perjury; and the Offendour guilty both of Theft
and Sacrilege: But I leave these deeds of darkness, to be punished by the
Prince of darkness, and proceed.

We have now at length by woeful and dear-bought experience found, what private
Machivilian power it was gave Law to Justice, and what clandestine projects
(like the primum mobile) gave motion to these multitudes of mischief. As for
our Laws, like those whereof Tacitus complains, invalido legum auxilio, quae
vi, ambitu, postremo pecunia turbabantur, they afford no security, being swayed
hither and thither by might, ambition, and corruption. All that is now left us,
is, to sit down, and number up our former blessings: A poor comfort! to look
back upon these, and forward upon approaching miseries: so that we may
inforcedly cry out in that patheticall exclamation, o ubi estes fontes
lacrimarum! what is become of you ye fountains of tears! are you dried up by
the preaching of hardened hearts? or converted into blood, by the cracking of
the eye-strings? but our hopes, are, that our sorrows and pressures are skru'd
up to their highest pitch, and itching fingers being unwilling to leave them at
that stay, the other wind may perchance break the string; and so give freedom
to an escape, from a supposed-inevitable-ruine.

And then (as want shows the true valuation of that thing, our unexamined
enjoyment made too cheap) when we are afforded so much light to see what we
have so long lost, sure we shall more esteem its return then when we possessed
it; and probably improve it to a better advantage; For, Dulce est nomen pacis
and res ipsa perquam salutares, sweet is the name and healthful the nature of
blessed Peace. But it will never appear in our Horizon, till our Kingly Sun
arise again, upon whose Glory it waits as a near attendant which will not be
long now: for this Nation when shufled out of a regular course by any former
distempers, like the wandering needle never left trembling, till it had settled
it self upon the point of Monarchy, to which it naturally owes affection. Yet
to such who murmer at the Snales pace, observed, in the carriage on of such a
design as the restoration of a Crown; and who impatiently study to add
wings to dispatch, or lead on these affairs in a more direct path; let them
know, nihil dictu facilius, Men may sooner project then execute; nor may every
projection be attempted, or every attempt, pursued. That time is fittest which
Heaven appoints, and business is then ripe, when the decree is ready to go
forth. Nay, if we rightly consider, we may highly prize the slow progress this
dawning makes; and think our happiness the more surely founded, when the day
breaks on us Gradatim. Sudden flashes affright with horror, and portend short
glories, when as a Twilight that has a degreeing appearance promises a serene
and quiet Day. Should a Meridian luster now rash in upon us, it might dazzle us
with an ore-powerfull brightness; and tempt us beside our trusty path, for
sensibile forte destruit sensum, too strong an object vanquisheth the sight,
and may perhaps chase us into a deluded precipitation. We have an old Adage,
(and they seldom fail of verity) that (many times) the farthest way about, is
the nearest way home: Councels managed by a leisurely progression (if
concealed) thrive best; though I confess execution and dispatch should be
driven on with a nimble hand. Let us not then afflict our hopes, by fearing
they are over-lingered, but wait with a patient expectation of fruition in its
ripest season. What obstructions have interveen'd, we are beholding to London
for, who might long ere this (had they been composed of any thing but
dis-loyall earth and perfidious baseness) have put fair for the re-instating
of His Majesty, and set a happy period, to ours, and their own long
misfortunes. But that City must smart, yet, again, and a third time; that
proud City! which being seated under the Aequinoctiall, and favored (above
all) with a constant perpendicular ray; was never contented, till it had picked
a quarrel with a Crime of too much summer, and forced the Sun more Northward
from it; but it is no matter, its ingratitude has since been frost-nipt with a
multitude of coldest miseries: and sensibly felt the smart of a perishing
winter. For, how many of its Inhabitants like Fishes, left on a dry shore, have
perished? when His Majesty (like a wave) removed, and how many fair-spred
flowers in that royal Garden, (like the Helitropian) shrunk in their leaves
when He departed? 'Twas apparent by the courses of those ruinous Tenants, that
they took to themselves Leases for many Lives without impeachment of wast, but
they will prove but Tenants at will: and now their Landlords are about to out
them, it is to no purpose to keep a forcible Deteynor. No, notwithstanding their
combination and league with that horrid darkness which has blasted the face
of this Kingdom; and by which united closeness they became a Cloister for
crimes, and a shade to cover Sin.

-- maneant qui nigrum in candida vertunt,
Queis facile est aedem conducere, flumina, portus.
Machivilians! whose clandestine contrivements have rocked us into a lethargy,
and led us into those bloudy-blind Paths; which had we had our eyes open, no
stratagem (how plausible soever) could ever have drawn us within its nosse.
Ambitious spirits! whose end was their own oppulency and greatness, and our
indigence and vassalage. Pilates, and Herod's! (for magna inter molles
concordia) whose bloody confederacy, crucified Christ afresh in his Members.
Owls! what will now blush and vanish to behold the light, which must betray
their baseness; but indeed these sons of Terviah were too hard for us, yet the
justice of Heaven is most remarkable; for though through their dark practices,
our glorious Sun became Eclipsed, yet have they suffered for want of his
influence: Though the Culminating bold-fac'd Moon has usurped the regal
house ever since, yet how sharply the reins of her Government has curbed
them, all yet miserably feel. Culpam poena premit Comes.

And now if ever they mean to be saved, the chief Article of their Creed must
be in their Suns ascension into Glory; and the next in their Moons descension
into Hell: Their only hope must rest in this, that when this worlds bright Eye
appears again, he will look upon them, with his wonted compassion; to thaw the
icy cold that has benumbed them into a senseless stupidity, and stifned them
into Rebellion; and to disperce amongst them his usual nourishing influence.
But the truth is, they have little deserved so large a blessing as his return,
who have so long while unmasked his favors, and put on a vizard; and in stead
of rendering a pleased countenance, returned an ungrateful menace. However I
cannot altogether blame the Generality, though Omnes errorem bibunt, nor too
sharply censure the face of things, when presented to many through a false
Glass. It Is charity makes me so tender herein, and withal I cannot but
remember that of Ovid: Parcite paucorum diffundere crimen in omnes.

I know, and confess, Disparagements are quickly proclaimed, but not so easily
retriv'd: that affection and dislike are like the two ends of a Prospective
glass, where the one lessons, and the other multiplies. Silly Souls! their
deluded understanding and gross ignorance, made many of them censorious; but
such as thought by detraction to be esteemed wise discovered themselves the
most malicious fools. What dark insinuations were skr^'d into execution, to
dismount that awe and reverence His Majesty justly held over His Subjects
hearts? How many base conceptions were hiv'd in waspish minds? their baser
Tongues usurping the Bedles lash; such were the venom of blasphemous mouths,
and the undutifulnesse of rebellious prompters, but it is natural for Dogs to
bark against the Moon; and those discreet judgments that had taken a Pill for
this contagion, were not to be accounted unhappy: for my self (as Horace in
another case) Quodcunque ostendit mihi sic incredulus odi.

I have much wondered whence these detractions should spring? unless from the
receipt of too large favors: and indeed when men become Bankrupts, their
gratitude oft-times converts to discourtesies. But it is more wonderful to
consider how so many quivers of scandalous arrows have been emptied out against
His Majesty, who yet standing like the unpierc'd marble, has shattered them
all: which to mention is not so fit as to rake together and burn; lest their
splinters should wrancle posterity, who perhaps may want the ages salve, viz. a
full and visible confutation: should any of us endure so narrow an inquisition
into our actions, I fear we should be found guilty of corrupt tinctures, our
baser metals are too full of dross, but his Gold has returned out of the
crucible without wast. And yet (o incomparable magnanimity!) though so
abusively detracted, does offer to make himself altogether incapable of future
revenge, and what wounds these multiplied injuries have seemed to make; his not
taking notice has fully cured; or else his forgiveness shall wear out the
scar.

I can parallel His unfortunate Majesty to none more fitly, then to that
resolute and courageous Athenian Soldier; who being vanquished in a navall
fight, laid hold of one of his Enemies Ships, and when his right hand was cut
off held fast by the left, and when that was chopped off, maintained his hold
with his Teeth. So His Majesty, losing His own Army, betook His trust to the
outside-Scot, that trustlesse and hypocritical refuge; where losing (as it
were, His right hand) He held up His interest with the Independent, who as
perfideously lopt off the left also; and left (to every judgment) no appearance
of saving relief, and yet we see He still preserves His life and integrity with
His last reserve: a constant resolution, which sinewing with unweakned nerves,
he holds them tugging, unwearied, and unremov'd: sharpning the one to what His
abilities for all Opposers, and sweetning the other to oppose what His sad fate
has too prodigally furnished Him with. Unkind fortune! why have thou dealt so
unkindly with Him in dealing His Cards? that if discreet and wary resolution
had not made Him a good Gamester, the Set had been irrecoverably lost. But His
God is the same He was at the beginning, and now (as then) has brought light
out of darkness. His Majesty is become happy merely by His unhappiness: and
they are His misfortunes that have proclaimed His heroic worth. Perchance we
had never taken notice of the luster of His wisdom, but through this black
Eclipse: nor of His even carriage in His sinking adversities, but by the rough
capering of the surly waves. His silent patience discovered His injuries more
fully, then perhaps His public complaints would, and so just a temper in all
accidents did never appear in any breast. His mildness still met them as
yiedling wool does the stroke of iron; which is a more noble victory then that
gained by opposition: Nay, of all victories, His, must needs be the greatest,
for He has conquered His patience, and having laid a foundation upon so firm
a virtue, His greatness reared thereon cannot fall, especially having the
support of many other. But now to consider with what admirable constancy He
has weathered out this time of durance, tiring his adversaries with complying
sufferance, (making his sweet returns surer then golden baits to catch them
with) lest earnest contestation might strike their sharpened hook the deeper
into his sides. All the provocations he has been continually assaulted (which
to a slacking fury would have proved like bellows) could never transport him
in his lowest estate, nor quicken him into any sharp returns: and when new
tortures were found out for his patience, they proved but as fresh invitements,
to contract and knit it more firm and stronger; and this 'twas made his
resolution more solid and compact. Briefly, like a wise Physician, he converted
all their poisonous drugs into a medicinable quality. And therefore the
greatest crime for which his preciser Adversaries scoft at him, was, for being
(like that ancient Grecian Patriarch) singly so good and pious, in so bad and
impious times: when turn-coat vices were so universally in fashion. But these
His Princely virtues of justice, wisdom, clemency, courage, and devotion, have
proved all assistants to strengthen him in the bustle of these contestations,
and most sure clues to lead him out of so difficult Maze^. Nay! his undaunted
resolutions, like the Eagle, feared not to encounter the loud- tongued Thunder,
and confronted that quarter of Heaven, where lightning and tempest most raged:
witness those many spurns of Fortune he has received, and those many shocks of
envy he has endured, and yet continues safe and whole. His wisdom has been
so great that the subtle Serpent cannot outstrip, and his innocence so
spotless, that the Doves is not more. In the generality of his actions he has
appeared above the ordinary level of Princes, like a most noble scutcheon,
upon which only the Almighty has blazoned all the bearings of virtue and
honor. He has manifested himself a Piece of that seasoned worth, that the
pens of this Age cannot sufficiently describe, for if they should attempt it,
his virtues would press in so thick together, that they would choke the current
of the ablest fancy; being (indeed) not fit to be delivered with the ordinary
liberty of speech, but rather by the wel-ordered and majestic delivery of an
Angel; But however, Illum aget penna metuente solvi
Fama superstes.


In fine, no Prince ere shrin'd up so many virtues, or was more pious, or
unfortunate, -- cui Pudor, and Justitiae soror,
Incorrupta Fides; nudaque Veritas,
Quando ullum invenient parem?


Yet when he was removed from his Throne, they (perforce) left him the greatest
dignity, for nobilitas sola est atque unica, virtus; and when he was dispossessed
of three Kingdoms, yet still he enjoyed a larger seignory, for virtus est optima
possessio, but what would have been the issue of his imprisonment, Heavens
all-discerning eye only saw, Prona est Timori semper in pejus fides. In such
dubious cases give us leave to fear the worst. I believe they strove to make
him happy, but I as verily believe it must have been verified in the
Philosophers sense, foelix ante obitum nemo. And Carisbrook-Castle I am as
fully satisfied, was prepared with the same intention the murdering-Shirt was
for Agamemnon; out of which it was impossible for him to escape. Ungrateful
Ocean! who after this Suns long days driving his troublesome chariot, courting
him into her bosom, to quench the thirst of his Steeds, and to refresh
himself, turned to a bottomless deep, and betrayed him into an insatiable
Gulf, where he (o complementall treachery!) had been irrecoverably drowned,
but for those loyal and unexpected hands, that are now boying him up again:
And thanks be unto God for this timely appearing deliverance, and opening unto
him a passage by so unexpected a door. During this time of durance, what
happiness was it for a King to own the latitude of three Kingdoms, who was
thus confined to as few rooms; where he had little or no recreation, but what
he received by that reflex of his many misfortunes, which by him were never
merited, nor by us can be sufficiently lamented. Here His patience endured the
strictest touch, for the Ministers of Satan were set upon every side to buffet
him; and his lowest Vassals that sought to undermine him, when they could not
do it, raised themselves high to crush him with their power. And now it was
they acted all below-board, having their times and seasons as dark, as the
wishes of such light haters could possibly lim out; showing him less mercy
then his relation required, and more tyranny then his faults could deserve:
which exceedingly strengthened this suspicion that that Sword might securely cut
off, which so privately fetched its blow: the fear whereof to the souls of his
loyal Subjects was really, absinthio amarius.

These, and many more his misfortunes were to be lamented, because they were
his, and the rather beause (to the narrowest observer) they seemed ordained, to
run parallel with his life; during which, like the noble Roman in his rolling
Tu^ of nails, which way soever he turns, must needs feel something that
continually galls him: insomuch, that many thought the best blessing they could
desire for him ( death seeming to them his faithful friend) was to wish Heaven
would send a writ of ease to his restless labors, and so release him from his
growing sorrows. 'Twas this very consideration that purchased him some
affections among those narrow- eyed attendants of his. Multis ille bonis
flebilis occidit: and diverse of their own party could not but look upon his
afflictions with a pitiful dislike: Nay! his bitter Enemies began to lament his
distressed condition; his imprisonment alone, freeing him from the further
strokes of malice.

And what true English heart is it, that can hear the particulars of his rough
usage and transcendent misery, without affording a noble compassion? really
none; unless such as are hardened into a stif-neck'd insensiblenesse. But I
hope some grateful Historian when he shall record the Annals of his
misfortunes, will not let these pass, without being margin'd with a texted
Ecce, the rather, because it has been the nature of the English to behold
distresses with a tender eye, and melting heart; conceiving it ever more noble
to raise him up that is thrown down; then to support those whom they have
raised. For though Fortune (that Tyrant to humane estate) has exercised her
rigorous power too much and long, yet now since she begins to abate some of her
cruelty, we may be invited (as by a good Omen) to assist his re-establishment,
her wheel is ever in a perpetual motion, and it is probable His Majesty is now
past the Nadir, and upon the ascending side, -- quis neget arduis
Pronos relabi posse rivos
Montibus, and Tiberim reverti.


And now to behold happiness to approach when envy and malice had weaved such
strong webs, that it lay not within the compass of any Allye to break; to see
deliverance at hand when he was thrown beyond the hand of hope or help, no
possibility showing it self to re-instate him into his past honors; is like a
glory in the middle of an Eclipse. But the passage through which Gods
providence wanders, is always miraculous: through how many several Meanders
and unseen ways, does it begin to steal us: perhaps 'twill prove well for us,
though 'twas bad for him, that he has been thus long laid aside; his virtues
like a lusty painting never appeared fair and lively but at this remove. His
absence has given our thoughts time to chew the cudd, through which relish we
may strengthen the opinion of his unvaluable worth; and in his worthy thoughts
render our selves clea^ beast. And though his enemies malice has shrub'd him
into Underwood, and great Oaks seldom grow to perfect Timber after once lopt;
yet his humble patience will make him capable of spreading, specially being
beset with so many interposing skreens which curb the imperious winds, and
preserve him from their blasting power, and happily then shall we live under
his protecting shelter. It Is true, the intermitting harsh noates of the Times
has discomposed many instruments: yet his disposition continues set to his
wonted sweetness, and like the Sun, is, Idem per diversa. Nor need we doubt
that the course of affairs can be otherwise then happily steered, when we
shall behold so able and honest a Pilot sit at the stern again, whose manifest
skill, the cross tides (raised by these late storms) has justly commended.

To Conclude, though the passages wherein we walk, seem (at present) obscure,
and uncertain; yet doubtless they will assuredly lead our hopes to their
expected end, what we cannot yet clearly see, we must strive to scent out, and
he that is content leisurely to clime a hill, shall a great deal better his
prospect. If I may judge of the ensuing day without erecting a figure, (and
many times some general judgments may be gathered from lesser exactnes, as
plain Countrymen (though illiterate) can guess at ensuing weather by
observing the color of the Moon) I should be very forward to assure this
Nation of a clear Horizon, wherein we shall restore Phoebus in his wonted
splendor, and our selves capable of receiving the benefit of his healing
influence, which whilst any fatal or envious interposition lasts, cannot
descend upon us, nor our eyes be comforted with a beam naturally powerful.
But it is almost impossible (according to natural causes) but that London (in
the generality) must naturally affect Monarchy if Gemini be its Ascendant, that
affectionate constellation beholds Leo with a Sextile, which is counted the
Regal Sign, and the Aspect an aspect of love and friendship: Nor will this
Kingdom (if under Aries) come behind, or ever endure any Government but what is
Monarchical, for Aries is of the same nature and triplicity with Leo, and
casts to it a friendly Trine, (which is esteemed the most perfect and friendly
Aspect) nor can the Kingly Lion but cordially affect both those signs, whom he
so amicably beholds. So that notwithstanding other malevolent Planets (either
by unhappy position, or hateful aspect) have for some years impoyson'd their
nature; thrusting the Sun out of his exaltation, and converting the quality of
Mercury to ill, by some malicious and prevalent ray; yet surely such will not
always prove stationary, but shortly remove: that the natural force of these
signs may show their mutual affection; And if either Kingdom or City will
taste the benefit of the Suns re-vivifying influence, now is the time to receive
it; For in this years revolution the Kingly sign culminates, and Sun Almuten
thereof posited in Aries the Kingdoms sign and his own exaltation, from
whence he beholds Gemini with a loving Sextile, and (receives Mercury) Lord
thereof into his exaltation; whose power, position, and aspect, (together with
many agreeing Testimonies in that promising scheame) are all assurances of His
Majesty's recruiting his honor, and strong presumptions of mutual concord and
agreement, between the King, Kingdom, and City.

That no more obstacles then may run between us and our happiness, let us
discover his safe and honorable entertainment by our free and hearty
invitations, lest he be stolen again into a cloud; and this City suffer the
ruin it is now ready to fall into: for by this and no other way can we recover
our lost renown; which when we once again enjoy, let us learn to be so prudent
as to preserve it.

Nullum numen habes, si sit prudentia.
FINIS.

