GOOD COVRAGE DISCOVERED, AND ENCOVRAGED: IN A SERMON preached before the
Commanders of the Military Forces, of the Renowned City of London.

In the Parish Church of Great St. Helens. May the 17. 1642.

By SIMEON ASH, Preacher in London.

DEVT. 20. 2, 3, 4. And it shall be, when ye are come nigh unto the Battle
that the Priest shall approach, and speak unto the people.

And shall say unto them, Hear O Israel, you approach this day unto Battle
against your Enemies: Let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not
tremble, neither be ye terrified because of them.

For the Lord your God is he that goes with you, to fight for you against your
enemies to save you.

LONDON, Printed by John Dawson for John Barroughes, and are to be sold at his
shop at the golden Dragon near the Inner Temple-gate in Fleet Street. 1642.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, the Aldermen, and Commoners, unto whom the Militia
of the City of London is committed, the Sergeant Major General, the Colonels,
the Lieutenant Colonels, Ser^eant Majors, Captains, and other officers of the
trained Bands of the said City.
Right Worshipful,
Cornelius, Centurion of the Italian Band is thus commended by the Holy Ghost,
that he was a devout man, and one that feared God. And I may report thus much
to your h^nour and to move others to make imitation; that you have begun, and
hitherto carr^ed on your Martial affairs relig^ously. For having put the City
into a posture of defense; before the execution of the Militia; you jointly
sought God by Prayer for good success. The Lord heard your Prayers, for you
went forth, and returned home, without the least touch of danger to your
selves, or your Companies. This remarkable Providence called you again
together, to praise the God of salvations, the God of your mercies.

Hereupon you were pleased to appoint me (very unworthy) to assist you in the
service of Thankesgiving: A service not unseemly for the Host of Heaven.

This Sermon, which upon that occasion I preached, through the Constructions of
your Love found such acceptance, that you commanded it to come abroad to do
you further service.

And seeing you gave it good entertainment, as it was first presented, it makes
bold to wa^te upon you without change of habit, expecting your Protection.

Although I somewhat suspect that sundry amplifications in the Sermon which
affected the Auditors, may not be so pleasing to the Judicious Reader, yet your
desires to have it prin^ed, as it was preached, makes me to run that adventure.

The Lord of Hosts guide, guard, and encourage you in all your good
undertakings for peace and truth, and make you careful to put Christian
references upon all your services, for the honor and safety of our King, the
welfare of his Kingdoms, and the continued Prosperity of this famous City.
This your prudent and pious perseverance in the work so well begun, will draw
forth many praises to God, many prayers for you, and much rejoicing in the
hearts of all them, who sincerely affect you; of which number, I beseech you
account him one who is

Your Servant, in, and for Christ, SIMEON ASH.

GOOD COURAGE DISCOVERED, AND INCOVRAGED.
PSALM. 31. 24. Be of good Courage.
RIght worshipful, and worthy Gentlemen, (whose desires, and whose service of
thanksgiving, I am now attending,) I hope you are come hither with an intention;

First, to honor God for preservation enjoyed, through his providence, to whom
you prayed. My Text looks back unto such a business; The Lord preserves the
faithful; therefore let Verse 23.
the faithful upon such experiences in way of praise, in way of requital
learn to be of good courage.

Secondly, I believe you are come together in expectation for the future, to
receive further favors from the God of your present praises; and my Text
looks forward to that, Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine
heart, and wait I say on the Lord.

My Text is short, the words in our translation are not many, in the original,
there is but one word, (...), The Septuagint renders the Hebrew word, (...),
Quit your selves like men; Viriliter agite, play the men, Rob^ramini, be ye
strong.

The Counsel here given is for all Christians, at all times needful, but for
you, and at this time, most seasonable.

Be ye courageous. First, The Counselor was, a Worthy, a Soldier, a
Warrior, a Commander, a King: David, as the title tells you, He calls for
courage.

Secondly, The Persons counseled, they are Saints, faithful ones: O ye
Saints love him, his manner is by his special providence to preserve you;
Therefore be ye of good courage. The point lies fair, which I conceive
pertinent, and now purpose to prosecute.

Gods people must be of good courage.
D^ctr.
I shall briefly suggest the Scriptures proof, in a threefold gradation,
wherein good courage is called for:

First, Saint Paul an Apostle with Apostolical authority, persuades to it; 2
Cor. 16. 13. Quit ye like men.

Secondly, Iehosaphat a King, with regal authority commands it, 2 Chronicles. 19.
ult. Deal courageously.

Thirdly, The great God of Heaven and Earth, putting himself under a warlike
notion, as the Lord General of all the forces in the World, the Lord of Hosts.
He peremptorily presses it; Haggie. 2. 4. Now be strong o Zorobabel says the
Lord and be strong o Joshua, the Son of Iozedek the High Priest, and be
strong the people of the Land says the Lord, and work, for I am with you
says the Lord of Hosts.

Three things there be, that I shall speak to, in the prosecution of this
point.

First, The explication of the virtue, the grace called for, wherein I will
endeavor to discover what this courage is.

Secondly, The confirmation of this truth by reasons, from which this Doctrine
may undeniably be concluded, and by which you may all be fully convinced,
that there is abundant cause, why all Gods people should be courageous.

Thirdly, The application of all, by way of use, that my Sermon may be the more
serviceable.

Christian courage may thus be described, It is the undaunted A Description of
good Courage.
audacity of a sanctified heart in adventuring upon difficulties, and
undergoing hardships for a good cause upon the call of God.

There are six things considerable in the description that I have given, which
I will particularly point at, and prove.

First, the Genus, the common nature of it: it is an undaunted audacity. This
Animosity (as some phrase it,) it is common both unto men, and to some bruits.
The Lion, Prove. 30. 30. is said, to be the strongest among beasts, that
turns not away from any.

And there is an elegant description of the war horse, in regard of
boldness, Job 39. 19. etc. Have thou given the horse strength? have thou
clothed his neck with thunder* Can thou make him afraid as a gras-hopper?
the glory of his nostrils is terrible, he paweth in the valley, and rejoyeth
in his strength, he goes out to meet the armed men. He mocketh at fear,
and is not affrighted, neither turns he back from the sword. The Quiver
ratleth against him, the glittering spear and the shield, he swallows the
ground with fierceness and rage, neither believes he, that it is the sound
of the Trumpet.

And this boldness that is in bruits, it is spoken of, as a piece of this same
courage that God is pleased to give to men; Ezekiel. 3. 9. this is the Lords
promise. As an Adamant, harder then the flint, have I made thy forehead.

The word Harder, is the same in the Hebrew, that is here in my Text, Fortiorem
petra; The Rock, that is not afraid of any weather, Summer, or Winter, Sun,
and Showers, Heat, and Cold, Frost, and Snow, it blusheth not, shrinketh not,
it changes not it is complexion, it is still the same; Such alike thing is
courage, in the common nature of it.

Secondly, Consider the subject, it is the Heart, the Castle where Courage
commands, and exercises Military Discipline; (shall I so say) its within the
bosom, it is the Soul of a valiant Soldier.

Some conceive, our English word Courage, to be derived from Cordis actio, the
very acting of the heart.

A valiant man is described, 2 Samuel 17. 10. for to be a man; whose heart, is as
the heart of a Lion. And sometime, the original translated, Courageous, as
Amos 2. 16. may most properly be rendered, a Man of heart.

Beloved, valor does not consist in a piercing eye, in a terrible look, in
big words, but it consists in the metal, the vigor that is within the
bosom. Sometimes, a Coward may dwell at the sign of a roaring voice, and of a
stern countenance: whereas true fortitude may be found within his breast,
whose outward deportment promises little, or nothing in that kind.

Thirdly, Note the qualfication of this same subject; I said a sanctified
heart: for I am not now speaking of fortitude, as a moral virtue, whereof
Heathens, that have not God, are capable; and for which many among them, that
are not Christians, have been worthily commended.

But I am now discoursing of Courage, as a virtue Theological, as a gracious
qualification, put upon the people of God by special covenant. And there are
three things that do characterize it, and which do distinguish it from the
moral virtue of fortitude.

The Root, whence it arises; The Rule, whereby it is directed; The End, to
which it is referred,
The Root, whence it rises, is love to God; All the Saints of God that love
the Lord, be of good Courage. The love of Christ constrains me to make
these bold, and brave adventures, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 14.

The Rule whereby it is directed, is the word of God: what the Lord has
pleased to leave on record for a Christians guidance in holy pages, 1 Chronicles.
22. 12. 13. The Lord give thee wisdom and understanding, that thou may
keep the law. If thou take heed to the statutes, and judgments, which the
Lord charged Moses with concerning Israel: be strong and of good courage, dread
not, nor be dismayed. Be a man of metal, but let thy metal be according
to my mind, according to this rule.

And the End, to which it referres, is God. For every sanctified man, being a
selfe-denying, and a God-advancing man; his God is his Center, wherein his
actings, his undertakings rest, and his Soul is not, yea it cannot be
satisfied but in God.

The fourth thing considerable in the Description is, the natural, the
formal, the immediate operations, that do flow from this gracious, audacious
frame of heart, they are two:

There is an adventuring upon difficulties, And there is an undergoing of
hardships.
First, There is an adventuring upon hard services, It is said, 1 Samuel 31. 12.
The valiant men rose and went all night, and took the body of Saul, and the
bodies of his Sons from the wale of Bethshan, and came to Gabesh, and burnt
them there. When the Philistines had taken their bodies and were gone away
Conquerours, and fastened them there, as Ensigns of victory, brave blades,
well mettalled men, went by night, and fetched them back again: an hard, and a
brave service.

And by reason hereof there is an enduring of hardships: Those Worthies of whom
the world was not worthy, who are said to be men valiant in fight, Heb. 11. 34.
This, testimony is given of them, that They endured torturings, the trial of
mockings* or cruel mockings, of scourgings, of bonds, and imprisonment, of
stoning, of being sawne asunder, of being slain with the sword, of wandering up
and down in sheeps skins, and goats skins, being men destitute, afflicted, and
tormented.

Fifthly, in my description, I cast in the cause, which true courage undertakes
to do, and suffer for, the object it works upon, the prize it adventures for,
it is a good cause, Matters of faith, stand ye fast in the faith, quit ye like
men. It is 1 Cor. 16. 13
a Gospel piece for which I am to jeopard a joint, to hazard alimbe, to
adventure life, 1 Cor. 6. 13. or matters of fact: I must be of good courage for
my conscience, that I may maintain an evennesse of spirit in reference to my
rule, in relation to my God, 1 Pet. 3. 14. If ye suffer for righteousness
sake happy are ye, be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled. It is
a noble, a Christian resolution in any man, if he thus determine, rather then
I will make a wound upon my conscience, a breach between God and my soul;
rather then I will violate asacred vow, and transgress the command of my God,
I will run the greatest hazards in outward regards that can be imagined.

The goodness of the cause (Divines say) for which a man suffers, makes the
Martyr: In like manner, it is the warrantablenesse of the work, wherein the
soldier, the man of metal appears, that gives him the credit, the honor of
this title, to be accounted a valiant man.

Sixthly and lastly, I added that good courage makes the Ios. 1. 9.
foresaid adventures upon the call of God. Have not I commanded thee, be strong
and of a good courage: If the Lord please to beat up the Drum; If the Lord
please to bid them arm, and come abroad, his call is sufficient, Now God calls
either by his precept, or by his providence. Either God calls his Champions for
to undertake dangers, or he commands dangers to over-take them; and hereupon
being led forth by the Lord of hoasts, they express their valor: For this
they know, that whether it be estate, or peace, or life, or liberty, or
Religion, or whatsoever else they hope to defend, they are all tallants that
God has entrusted them with, and that therefore only upon his Commission
signed, and sealed by his own hand they may come forth, and must come forth
bravely, and show themselves courageous in reference thereto.

Now for a man in an impetuous, giddy, neady way, to break himself unwisely
in his reputation, liberty, estate, and himself knows no other reason: but
because his spirit moves him, and his humors stir in him, or some passionat
inconsiderate persons provoke him, this (my beloved) is not to be courageous.
We read in the Gospel, of a man possessed with an evil spirit, that did often
cast himself into the water, and into the fire to destroy himself. And truly it
nearely concerns many men of daring spirits, to consider Mark 9. 22*
seriously what spirit it is that acts in them: These things we must mark,
that the true nature of courage may be understood.

This description of good courage I judged meet to premise and to explain
briefly, that we may understand the duty in the text, the duty, the seasonable
duty, which God calls for, and I plead for.

Be of good Courage.
The second thing I propounded in the prosecution of this point, is the reasons
wherefore a Christian should be courageous: And my doctrine is built upon a
fourefold ground.

First, Gods people should be of good courage, in reference unto the condition,
unto which God has called them. God has appointed all Christians to be
soldiers. A Sacrament is a soldiers oath, when we were baptized we took
press money, and vowed to serve under the colors of Christ, and as manfull
soldiers to fight against the world, the flesh, and the Devil: and as often as
we have been at the Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord, we have
renewed our solemn, and sacred obligation in that kind, in reference to
Christ, who is called The Captain of the Lords host, Jos. 5. 16. and the
Captain of our salvation Heb. 2. 10. Inaure hardness (says the Apostle) as a
good culd^er of Christ, 2 Timothy 2. 4, Epaphroditus my fellow soldier, Phil. 2.
25. Beloved, wisdom is not more necessary for a Counselor, nor eloquence for
an Orator, then courage for a soldier. Soldiers we are, we must therefore,
Be of good courage.

Secondly, the weighty services wherein the Lord of Hosts is pleased to employ
us. Men employed in peculiar services are commanded to put on fortitude: As
Joshua who was a Commander to guide, and govern the host, the armies of the
Israelites in their passage to Canaan, Be thou strong and very courageous,
that thou may observe to Josh. 1. 7.
do according to all the Law, which Moses my servant commanded thee, turn not
from it, to the right hand or to the left. And Ezra, in regard of his office,
is thus spoken unto: Arise, for the matter belongs unto thee, be of good
courage, and do it: and common Christians, in respect of services required of
them, are to be courageous in their places, Ios. 23. 6. Be ye therefore very
courageous to keep, and to do all that is written in the book of the law of
Moses, that you turn not aside therefrom, to the right hand or to the left.

Shall I hint some services that are charged upon all our consciences

The work of mortification, to pick out our eyes, to chop off our hands, to
cut off our feet; do you think that a milk sop, a man that is not a man of a
stout spirit will do this. Now to massacre fleshly lusts, is (as it were)
for a man to mangle, and dismember his own body, it is a work painful and
grievous, as for a man to cut off his own feet, to chop off his ownehands, and
to pick out his own eyes, as Christ and the Apostle Paul do express it.

Besides this, there are in Christians bosoms, strong holds to be battered,
fortifications to be demolished: there are high hills and mountains, that must
be levelled with the ground there are trenches to be made, valleys to be filled.
O beloved, I may not mention the hills that lie before us in heaven way, which
we must climb up; and craggy rocks that we must get over: and without courage
certainly the service put upon our hands will not be discharged.

There are also the walls of Irusalem to be repaired, and the Temple to be
reedefied: If Nehemiah had not been a a man of a brave spirit, he would never
have gone through stitch with that Church work, those weighty services which
he did undertake. How this is appliable to us for the present time, the time
of our begun reformation, I speak not; but rather do refer it to your
considerations; I beseech you to read Neh. 4 17, 18. They which builded on the
wall, and they that did bear burdens, with those that laded: Every one with
one of his hands wrought in the work, and with the other hand held a weapon.
For the Builders every one had a sword girded by his side, and so builded, and
he that sounded the Trumpet was by us. While they were at work they were all
ready for war.

Thirdly, Christians must be courageous, in reference to the 3. huge Armies,
with which they are assaulted.

There are armies Of Devils. Of Lusts. Of men and women in the world, that do
wage war with every Christian, that in good earnest makes out after his God
in heaven way.

For the Devils, it is the argument of the Apostle, and from thence I took it,
Ephesians. 6. 10. Brethren, be strong (says he,) for we wrestle not against
flesh, and blood, but against principalities, and powers, against the Rulers of
the darkness of this World, against Spiritual wickednesses in the heights.
Mark for the number they are many, Our name is legion, for we are many: How
many thousands, neither you nor I know. There is strength in them, they are
Powers, Principalities, and they are Rulers, they have very great authority in
the Darkness of the World; in Midnight men, Dark men, Men who love not
Sunshine light, but rather delight to lie in holes and caves.

I mean, in regard of the Darkness of their minds, and their wilful
ignorance of the things of God. And they are in the height; they fight with
much advantage (as some observe,) being over our heads. And they are Spirits,
they work invisibly, and they fight against our Souls, they labor to keep
our hearts in thraldom, they seek to beggar and to undo us in regard of our
grace, and Spiritual joys.

The Holy Apostle Peter says, The Devil your adversary, goes about like a
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. An Adversary, and a Devil, and a
strong one, as a Lion roaring, and then he is active, he walks about, and
he is full of malice, ready to devour: These things touched upon, do tell
us, that we, who are always surrounded, besieged by such enemies, have need
of courage.

There are armies of lusts, I know not how many. The 1 Pet. 2. 11.
Apostle says, Fleshly lusts that fight against the Soul. These soes lie
within us, and they strike at the head, and the heart, endeavoring to let out
the precious life of our immortal souls.

As the Captains of the King of Syria, had a command 1 King 22. 31.
to fight against, neither small nor great, but the King of Israel. And the
Apostle says, that lusts in his bosom were such enemies, as still carried him
captive, and haled him as a prisoner. (You know the expression, Romans 7. 2^.)
Beloved, does not experience oftentimes prove thus much, that pride, passions,
unbelief, hypocrisy, earthly mindedness, creature confidence, sensuality,
do take up arms against our precious Souls. Alas! alas! lusts, deceitful
lusts, many deceitful lusts, are still, still tyrannizing in our bosoms,
which of us has not cause to complain with the Apostle, when I would do
good, they are at hand present with me: strong in me, ever stabbing, and
striking, and poisoning, and wounding; if I would but pray, or weep, or amend.
These Rebels raise their strengths, and combine their forces to hinder me: and
no sooner can Satan hold up finger, and temptation show it self; But they are
ready furiously to march out against Christ, his government, graces, glory.
Beloved, I appeal to your consciences, whether in regard of this black guard,
maintained within us, we have not need to be of good courage.

Thirdly, the armies of people: The Apostle Paul says, he fought with men who
were as beasts, Beasts after the manner of men, 1 Cor. 15. 32. David tells you
they were Dogs, and they were Tigers, and Wolves, and Bears, and Bulls, and
Lions, so in the Psalms he phraseth them. I promise you, a man that is so
beset, thus assaulted, if he be not a man of courage what will become of him?
There are Sanballets and Tobiah's, men of malignant, mischievous Spirits, to
do us mischief in Heaven way. had we not need in that regard to be
courageous? And truly, women if they cannot use weapons, they will cast, and
fling stones, shoot their arrows even bitter words. David met with opposition
in that kind, from one that was near, and should have been better. Michol
she jeared him in his righteous, and holy zeal, in reference to God; you know
the story, and therefore I report it not. And doubtless, had not he been a
man of an Heroic Spirit, he might have been dashed out of countenance and
baffled and cooled in his zeal, because of her reproachful language.

There are those that are ready to perform ill offices, Sheba* like, to blow a
Trumpet of sedition, of contention, to cast coals, and kindle strife between
the head and the members, the King, and his Subjects; to set all on a ^i^me in
the Kingdom. In this regard, we had need to be steel to the back, that we
be not disheartened. From all these three particuiars, I might apply that
passage, 2 Samuel 10. 9. 12. When Ioah saw the front of the battle against him
before and behind; he said he of good courage, and let us play the men: His
speeches did sparkle Spirits, he herein proved himself a man meet to be a
warlike Commander, for danger and difficulties did add heart and heat.

My Masters, you see our case, let us play the men for our people, and for the
Cities of our God. Beloved, you perceive by that which I have pointed at, that
our enemies are more and worse, we are beset before, and behind, above, and
below, without and within; not only our Cities, but our Souls are opposed,
endangered. Hell and Earth, Men and Devils, yea and our selves are Adversaries
to our selves. Therefore there is good reason, why we should put on Courage.

Fourthly and lastly, We have need of Courage, because of the various
afflictions to be expected. For ought we know, heavy things may befall us,
and must be borne by head, and shoulders by us, before we get to our Castle,
our place of refuge, our rest in Heaven; how stony, how thorny, how deep, and
how dangerous our ways may prove, before we get to our journeyes end, we
cannot tell. It may be, we must travail through blood, through our own
blood, and therefore we need Courage.

After our Savior had suggested to his Disciples, Mat. 10. 21. Brother shall
deliver brother to death; the Father the Child, and the Child shall raise
against the Parents, and cause them to be pat to death, and you shall be hated
of all men for my names sake; Hereupon he adds, verse 26. Fear not, 32. Fear
not. Beloved, we know not what may be our portion here on earth, before we come
perfectly to enjoy God our portion, and be happy in enjoying of him for ever.
We may live to see the City fired, our estates wasted, our wives abused, our
children torn in pieces lin be-meale, peice-meale before our eyes: believe me
without courage, these sights will be hard and heavy to be beheld, such like
sights will cause us to fownd away, to sinck into the dust, if we provide not
courage. Thus have I run over my reasons, and now I request you all, seriously
to consider, whether in all the forementioned regards, we have not abundant
cause to endeavor, to get the grace the text commends, and to do the duty
that in the text God calls for, Be of good courage.

I come now to the application of all that has been delivered by way of use.
The uses of this point that I shall speak to, they are but two.

The first Reproof, The second Exhortation.
For Reproof, hence I have occasion for to blame both unworthy cowardlinesse
in some, and wicked audaciousnesse in others: both vices contrary to this
virtue, both extremes, opposed by this practice of Christian fortitude, which
my text persuades.

First I must check an unworthy dastardlinesse, which discovers it self three
ways in the bosoms of men.

First, when men by reason of pusi^animity, and lowness of spirit, dare not
appear in the cause that they are convinced, to be the cause of God. There
were some, Ioh. 12. 43. who, though they believed on Christ, yet they durst not
profess him for fear of the Pharisees, lest they should be excommunicated.
The consciences of many tell them, that such a way is the way of God,
doubtless this is heaven road; surely these are the courses to be taken to
enjoy God, and communion with him, and yet for fear of I know not what,
scorns, mocks, loss of friends, or the like; they dare not be seen. It may
be they will go to Christ with Nichodemus in the night, for fear too many
eyes observe them, and take notice of them in such unwounted paths, exercises
which seem to proclaim strictness and preciseness. You see I am in haste,
and therefore cannot instance in particulars.

Secondly, others by reason of cowardlinesse soon grow discouraged in sad and
weighty undertakings, because they find the way to heaven craggy, the duties
difficult, the services something hard; and because they have not expected
success on a sudden; here upon their spirits shrink up; I have reference in
this expression to the original word used to this very purpose, in Number. 21. 4.
And the soul of the people was much discouraged, because of the way. Their
spirits were shortened (as it is in the Hebrew) they run up by reason of
distress, and al vigor gave in. As a Cravant begins to look pale through
fear; his spirits fly to the heart, you shall see no blood in his face: O did
he think to be mocked, and to be pursevanted? and did he expect to be
imprisoned? and did he conceive to be put on such a dead task, and to work
himself down in his strength, respects amongst men, and other outward
comforts, and reap nothing but the wind. Much has been done, and much has
been endured, many weeks, months, years, are run up, since he expected a
good crop, of increase and comfort: but hopes being frustrated, and
expectations disappoynted; he sits down dejected: Because Reformation is
driven on heavily, things stick in the birth, therefore many are disheartened.

Thirdly, those that under dark clouds and showers of sufferings lie
grovelling on the ground, through disconsolatenesse: He that faints in the
evil day, his strength is small, Prove. 24. 10. There is mention of some, Ios.
2. 11. when the wind and tide went against them; when the victory was carried
on the other side, it is said, their hearts melted, there was no more courage
in them: The melting of the wax is the severing of part from part: The
confirming of the parts together, is the strength of it, the loosening of the
parts weakens it: a man's soul runs out through fainting fears, as water;
whereas it should be confirmed, as a piece of steel. Christians should be
magnanimous, and Fortitude will fortify, and corroborate the soul. As the
original word suggests thus much, so the conjunction of strength, and valor
in the holy Scriptures does import it: Be strong and of good courage. Think of
this, and take heed I pray you of dastardly dejectedness, and dismaying
fears, in sad, suffering times, because thereby both soul and body are much
feebled, and much prejudiced.

The second thing reproved, is wicked audaciousnesse: This branch of the
reprehension is needful, for certainly, there is in some men a kind of fire,
that rises out of hell, or rather some metal, which is dug out of the
bottomless pit, which is called Courage, and so accouted in the world. My
meaning is, that there is a devilish, wretched resolutenesse in the bosoms of
some to hold on in sin; notwithstanding divine reprehensions, convictions,
threatenings, and executions; which is as much opposite to true courage, as the
greatest cowardliness in the world. I told you before, that true courage is for
good, upon a Command from God. The Apostle checks the Corinthians, because they
had so much boldness, as that they did dare to do that which was offensive,
viz. to go to law one with another, and that before Infidels, you dare do it
says he, you have so much boldness, 1 Cor. 6. and the Apostle Peter checks
men, They are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities. Psalm. 12. 4.
The Psalmist brings in bad men thus resolving, Our tongues are our own, and we
will speak, and who is Lord over us.

Some there be, who though the Minister flash the very fire of hell in their
faces, discovering the danger of their evil courses; yet like unto the
warre-horse, they will adventure further, let the consequence prove what it
may: yea, although God be on them in ways of heavy affliction, with one rod
after another, and one blow bigger then another, though his providence pinch
them in their persons, impoverish them in their estates, crush them in their
credit; and it may be they suffer much in their yoak-fellowes, Children and
near allies; yea, though the often recoyling of their consciences, cause
earthquakes in their own bosoms, yet on they will still to do wickedly.
These are the men of whom the Prophet complains, Who make their faces harder
then the Rock, and refuse to return. Ier. 5. 3.
Men of this make are common in every place, and their way of living is much to
be bewailed: and now I am necessitated to speak unto them* because their
sturdinesse in refusing to stoop unto God in reformation, is reputed courage.

To crush these wretched conceits, I heartily wish that the Scriptures may be
perused; where you shall find, that those who are commended for the most
valiant Champions, and the stoutest soldiers in the Camp of Christ, that they
were the most ti^orous in matter of sin, and most cautious in references to
God, that they might not in any kind offend His Majesty. David, that durst take
a Lion by the beard, and durst adventure upon a Duel, a single combat with
Goliath, yet thus he expresses himself to God, My flesh trembles for fear
of thee, and I am afraid of thy Psalm. 119. 120.
judgments. And Nehomiah, who had many ways worthily expressed his
magnanimity for God and his cause, yet no man was ever more awed with the fear
of God. He persuaded himself, and others thereunto. Ought not we to walk in
the fear of God? And again complaining of Neh. 5 9. 15.
the governors, who were his Predecestors, that they were usurious, and very
injurious in their places; he adds but so, Did not I (I durst not) because
of the fear of the Lord my God. I am confident, that this position is full of
truth, you may trust to it, as sound and orthodox: That there is no more
Christian courage, then there is Christian fear in our hearts. There is no
more true valor in Gods account, in conflicting with difficulties, and stout
standing under heavy pressures, then there is a cautious, and timorous
circumspection, lest sin of any kind should be committed to the dishonor,
and provocation of God. Shall I think that a man that will swear, and roar,
and curse, and pox, and plague (I should not have defiled my mouth with these
words) shall I think that this man of Beliall has Christian courage? He may
have moral magnanimity, as an heathen, as a Roman, but he wants the courage
of a Saint, that courage which my Text calls for. Beloved, I pray you believe
it, (I speak as a Scripture man; and I speak to men that must labor to be
men valiant, as becomes Saints) he that rules his own spirit, Prove. 16. 32.
does more then he that overcomes a City. That man who takes down his
untamed lusts; and that man who bridles the unruly member the tongue He who
conquers the rebellious mutinies in his own bosom, and who notwithstanding
all avocasions, is careful still to keep close to God, this is the valiant
man indeed, God himself, by Solomon's pen, gives such a one his Letters
testimonial to be magnanimous. And for my part I will adventer that which is
dearest unto my self in this world, in the hands of this man, if in the hand
of any, in regard of valor, and holy, hearty, heroic resolution. But I put
off from this reproof, wherein my zeal has made me bold, to speak my mind:
For I had rather counsel then reprehend: and before I go forward, I wish that
my checks lighting on ungracious hearts may make kindly and deep impressions
on them, for their amendment. And God grant that you that come to praise God,
as becomes Saints this day, may learn also hereafter to be valiant as it
becomes Saints, according to the directions of sac^ed Scripture.

The last use, is an use of exhortation; (I fear, I have more to say then my
time, and your occasions will suffer me to deliver.) It is only this, to
persuade you all (my beloved,) I say all, without exception, Colonels,
Captains, other Officers, Soldiers, yea all the Servants of the Lord, to
yield to the word of exhortation, and in your places to endeavor Christian
courage; This use most useful my heart desires to enlarge, wherein I feign
would,

1. By Arguments persuade it, 2. By Directions help you in it.
I have Arguments of two kinds, God grant they may come with some strength upon
your hearts, to move you to endeavor to be truly valorous.

First, From the consideration of the rich commodities, that are the undoubted
consequences of Religious fortitude. O the booties, o the boones, o the
benefits, that Christians may enjoy in the way of Christian valor. I will
point at 6. and I shall do little more then point at them.

First, It will wind, and work you into the bosom, and favor of God; Be of
good Courage, and he shall strengthen thy heart. Put thou thy self forth in a
way of bold adventure for him, and his providence shall be sweetly exercised
for thy good. A worthy Commander how careful is he of a brave blade, a man
that will fight at a Cannons mouth. Does he hear from him, that a bone is
broken? Send for the Bone-setter. Is he like to bleed to death? call for the
Surgeon, let him post away to prevent that peril; Does he grow weaker and
weaker? Is there any thing in the Camp, that may restore his Spirits, withhold
nothing; nothing is too good, too costly, would he eat gold, he should have
it.

Thus it is with God, O what letters of commendation does he give in
manifestation of his own love to them in Pergamus, upon this very ground:
Thou, says the Lord, Rev. 2. 13.
thou have held forth my name, and not denied it even in those days, when
Antipas my faithful Martyr was slain, even where Satan dwells. Thou did
fight for CHRIST in the Cave, where the Devil commanded, thou did stand and
appear for him, when other men did lose life, and blood. Here is a man that
God will own, such a one, shall have Gods heart and hand to do him honor, to
yield him comfort. And therefore I appeal to your consciences, is not this
Courage worth the having? worth the seeking?

Secondly, Your Courage will hearten you in the weightiest and difficultest
adventures, which the cause and glory of God, the welfaire of his Church, the
honor of the King, the peace and prosperity of the Kingdom may put you upon.
Hester was a woman, yet valiant. Must I to the King for my people; If I perish,
I perish. I will take my life in my hand and adventure: Nehemi^h had a hard
task to undertake, truly a dead piece of service to set upon, yet
notwithstanding being a courageous man, he will hazard his All, to obey the
command of his God, and to serve the necessities of his brethren. This is
recorded for the everlasting credit of some of the Servants of God, the
Priests, 2 ^hron. 26. 17. 18. And Azariah the Priest went in after him and with
him 4. score Priests of the Lord that were valiant men; and they withstood
Vzziah the King, and said unto him, it pertains not unto thee Vzziah to burn
incense to the Lord.

Men of brave Noble Spirits will speak, whatsoever it cost them, upon a call
from God, men of valor will appear according to Gods command in services sad,
and heavy. We say, that a well metled horse, will take forward, and draw at a
standing tree, but that I shall speak of in the next.

Thirdly, It will make us unwearied in our works, though desired, and expected
success be denied. You see it some time; (My similitude is a plain one, but
beloved, it fully evidenceth the thing I speak to,) A Carre-horse of good
metal, will pluck, and fall on his knees, and up, and take forty pluckes at
a sticking load, whereas a Jade, if it come not at the first twitch, goes back,
back, and you cannot get him forward. Just thus is it with a Coward, if he
have not victory at the first skirmish, he will hardly make a second assault;
if he be knocked down, once, twice, or thrice, he gives up all as lost, and
is ready to run away; but a man of a stout Spirit in such a case, will plucked
up heart, fight again, so long as he can either stand or stir. Thus Moses
he goes, the first, and second, and third, and tenth time to Pharaoh,
notwithstanding brow-beatings, repulses, threatenings. Thus says the Lord, let
my people go. That was his message, either it must be granted, or he will
not cease his importunity. Israel he comes for, and Israel he will have with
him, or else, he will not leave Egypt.

My beloved, let us bring this down to our selves: Many prayers we have made,
and many fasts we have kept for Sion: and before our deliverance be complete,
we know not, how many plucks we must yet have, and how many shall we take to
repair the walls, and to reedifie the House of God, in case, God give us this
metal, which I am commending.

Fourthly, Courage will be a means to keep us from conscience-wasting, and
scandalous miscarriages. What had become (think you) of Shidrack Mesheck, and
Ab^dnego? or what had become of Daniel, if they had not been men of undaunted
hearts? The one had given off doing his duty, presenting his indebted homage to
his God, he must not pray for the space of thirty days to his God. The other
three must bow down in way of Idolatry to an Idol. But mark the Sparkling of
their Spirits; Be it known unto thee o King, we know God can deliver us, but
if he will not, we will not fall down, nor worship that Image which thou
have set up. They were by Courage kept out of the briers, and off the Rock,
which might otherwise have torn and broken them woefully. And Daniel was
preserved from the neglect of his devotion to his God, by the same means.

Fifthly, Believe it, that our Courage will daunt our Adversaries, and drive
them away; The Captain of that black guard, (the Devil I mean) will give
back, if stoutly withstood: Resist him, and he will flee* stand to it and he
will run Iam. 4. 7.
away. In like manner, will those, who march under his colors against Gods
people. It is said expressly 1 Samuel 4. 5. 7. when the Philistines heard the
Israelites shout, O say they their God is among them, woe unto us. Without
doubt, the very valor of Protestants will be the daunting of the Papists. Let
those who appear for Reformation, maintain their ground, and the enemies
thereof, will be discouraged, vanquished.

Lastly, I might add, that our Courage will encourage, I know not how many,
One bold leader, will hearten hundreds. O says Paul, my bonds, and sufferings
are famous, they are manifest in all the palace, and in all other places; and
many of the Brethren by reason of my bonds Wax bold, and speak the word
without fear, Phil. 1. 12. 13. 14. If you would know what word? It was the
word of CHRIST, who was denied, derided. Now to speak for a Christ when Paul
is in prison, and in bolts, and fetters for the word of CHRIST, was an act of
Manhood. And Paul's valor made them thus bold. The Cities Courage will make the
Country courageous.

This true valor that I speak for, may have influence I know not how far,
through the Kingdom in way of benefit, and advantage. Therefore look you to
it, Quit your selves like men, Be of good Courage.

The second motive, is taken from the consideration of the sad consequences of
cowardlinesse.

First, A man's personal discredit, call a Soldier a cravant, and how do you
disgrace him? They would feign, (says Nehemiah,) Put me in fear, that they
might have had somewhat to reproach me; Nehem. 6. 13. A Captain, and a
Coward, what a shame is it? If you desire to maintain your honor and
reputation, in City and Country, hold up your hearts, Be men of valor.

Secondly, This is another a sad consequence of cowardlinesse, it may tend to
make us unprofitable, and unserviceable in our places; I was afraid, and hid my
talant, for I Matthew. 25. 25
thought, thou wast a hard master. You know whose speech it was. When a man
has both oportunities and a^ilities to do, God and the King, the Parliament
and Kingdom, good service. God has bestowed a good headpiece, much wisdom,
an able body and healthful, a strong arm, a vast estate, a great command; and
yet notwithstanding, when the welfare of Church and Commonwealth, call him to
make appearance, he draws back, dares not be seen, all his talents are tied
in a napkin, there is nothing traded for God, because he is a Coward, and
dares not look out of doors. There will be a heavy reckoning for that man,
Take him, bind him hand and foot. Cowardlinesse makes men, though able, yet
unprofitable, therefore take heed of it.

Thirdly, The good causes, which men own and favor, may receive a great deal
of damage, and prejudice by the pusillanimity, the poorness of the Spirits
of them, that appear therein. There was a notable piece of policy, in the
endeavor of the railing wretch Rabshecah, to affright the ^ouldiers of
Hezeki^h, 2 Chr. 32. 18. This they did, that they might make us afraid and take
our City. Cowardlinesse ties a man's hands behind him, that he can do nothing
in the World, he cannot keep his rank, and place, he neither knows when to
charge, or discharge; his hands quake, his eyes cannot see, he cries where am
I? and what must I do? Thus all is lost, because of cowardlinesse, it is a
mighty disadvantage to be a dastard. Certainly, a man under the power of
dismaying, in fears is ^^arse a man in the use of his intellectuals.

Fourthly, What sad breaches cowardlinesse, may make upon us, both in regard of
sin, and judgments. I know not. The sad example of Saint Peter is here
considerable, O what a wound did he receive, by reason of his unworthy
fearfulness; It cost him dear before the cut was cured. You know his
threefold denial of his Master, with the black aggravations thereof; O I know
him not, I am not any of them, you are mistaken in me, etc. But before that
breach was, made up, it cost him hot water, H^e wept bitterly.

Beloved, beloved, consider what I say, many a man does that under the command
of cowardlinesse, which is pain and anguish in his heart to his dying day. God
is wonderfully incensed, when men shrink from him, because of difficulties and
dangers, Fear not least I slay thee. Be not dismayed at their faces (says
God to Jeremiah,) lest I confound thee before them, Ier. 1. 17. When God calls
often, and calls loud upon men to take part with him, and yet they shrink and
draw back, believe it, the danger is not little. You know whose speech it is;
If you will deny me Mark 8. 38.
before men, I will deny you before my Father, which is in heaven.

A valiant Captain, when the field is fought, and the victory is got, bids,
bring in that cravant, that milke-sop, who did run away: Hiss him, turn him
out of doors, as the shame of his Country; when Christ shall come and call,
and say to some White-livered men, you were ashamed to appear for the strict
observation of the Lordsday, and you would not be seen to favor the
Reformation, which by Englands Parliament, at such a time was endeavored, and
you would not labor to have the sanctuary swept from all pollutions, and you
would be at no cost, to have Christs-coine, bear his stamp alone, to have his
ordinances pure without mixtures, but you would rather Issachar-like, lie under
burdens, then struggle for deliverance. You were afraid what might be the
issue of your boldness in such businesses, if the times should turn, and the
tide run another way, and matters change in such and such a manner. And
hereupon you sneakingly left me, and my cause and glory in the open fields.
Beloved, this will be an heavy hearing to the cowardly Apostate at the last
day, when the fearful, and the unbeleeving must be sent into the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone. Therefore I entreat you again, and again, to
consider Revel. 2. 8.
well of this matter.

Lastly, how far cowardlinesse may tend to discourage others: I wish you to
consider: I here remember, that when Israel of old, was to go forth unto
battle, God commanded the officers to speak thus unto the people, What man
is th^re, that is fearful, and faint hearted, let him go and return unto
his house, lest his brethrens hearts faint (or melt) as well as his heart.

Gentlemen, God forbid that you who are come hither to day, to acknowledge your
selves bound to God for your estates, lives, and liberties, and to have the
word of truth, preached and pressed upon you for your souls good. God forbid
(I say) that you who give good examples in many other kinds, should do any
thing which may tend to weaken the spirits, and to dampe the courage of any,
who shall enquire, what do they in London?

Having thus far persuaded you, to pluck up your hearts, as it becomes
Saints: I now entreat you, to give me leave to counsel you, what course to
take, that you may be courageous, and I promise to do it, as with sincere
reference to God, whose servant I am, so with unfeigned faithfulness to you
whom I now serve.

What shall we do, that we may be courageous?

My directions are in number ten, I will not be long in any one of them,
because I would not be tedious, I humbly beg your best attention, desiring to
speak to your souls, and I beseech the Lord to speak to my heart, and yours.

The first help to Christian courage (which makes way for all the rest) is
this: Labor clearly from Scripture grounds to evidence your propriety in God.

When David was utterly undone in outward appearance at Ziklag, being stripped of
all outward comforts, and expected that his brains should be beaten out with
stones, ( They talked of stoning him) David encouraged himself (he confirmed
1 Samuel 30. 6.
and strengthened his heart) as the original expresses it, in the Lord his
God: Is there not more in God, My beloved, I pray you put this question upon
serious debate in your own bosoms, my God to hearten me, then in mine
enemies my greatest, my worst enemies to dismay me? Take the improvement of
this point in two particulars.

1 Gods omnipotency? 2 Gods Omnipresence.
Is there not more ability in God, then power in all the world, if combined
together. Be strong, and courageous, 2 Chro. 32. 8*
(says Hezekiah) Be not afraid, nor dismayed, for the King of Assyria, nor for
all the multitude, that is with him, for there be more with us, then with him:
with him is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God to help us, and
to fight our battles, And the people rested themselves upon the words of
Hezekiah, King of Judah. At this time Senacherib had raised a very great Army,
as holy History reports: And railing Rabshekah was confident, that Isreal's God
could not deliver; yet you see, that this thought. The Lord our God to help
us, did steel and strengthen their hearts.

The knowledge of Dietie, and Propriety, will increase magnanimity in a
fearful heart, what are huge armies, strong fortifications weapons of war,
the strength, stoutnesse, skill, or experience of common soldiers, or warlike
Commanders against the Lord Almighty? look back to the history last mentioned,
where we read, that one angel in one night killed five thousand men in the host
of the King of Assyri^. By this example, guess at the ability of your Isa. 37.
36.
God, having made sure your interest in him; and from thence gather courage.

2 As the ability, so the presence of God by the efficacy Josh 1. 9.
of his all-ordering providence, may hearten all them, whose God he is by
special Covenant; Have not I commanded thee, be strong, and of a good courage,
be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed, for the Lord thy God is with thee
whither soever thou go. The Lord is with us, by the presence of his special
favor, in all our good undertakings whethersoever we go. The Christian
carries his commander, his refuge, his Castle, his God along with him, whether
he keep in the City, or go forth into the country; whether he serve by
land, or by sea, his God is still at hand. Assurance therefore, that the
all-sufficient, al-prepresent God is ours, will lay a good foundation for good
courage: Those who adventure upon any service without God going along with
them, may expect defeats; notwithstanding all means of defense: and therefore
no m^rvell, if they tremble: But God taking part with his people, they may
confidently from his presence expect deliverance. If it had not been the Lord
who was on our side, they had swallowed us up quick etc. but blessed be the
Lord, Psalm. 1. 6.
who has not given us, as a prey to their teeth. God and his people make one
side; and because their help stands in the name of the Lord, who made heaven
and earth; therefore they have abundant cause to be o^ good courage.

Secondly, make sure, that the cause you appear in, is the cause of God. If a
man marching to look his enemies in the face, and being about to begin the
battail^, should feel the earth to shake under him, and the ground to sink,
every foot he set forward: O how would this daunt him, and how would his heart
recoyle, and give in within him? O beloved, I beseech you, be you well
confirmed in your own hearts, that you do serve for God. It is that which was
added to give Courage to them in Iehosaphats time, when they were surrounded,
with Ammon, and Moab, and Mount Seir, as if we should say, with Denmark and
France, and Papists at home. Well, says the man of God, Hearken ye all Judah,
and ye Inhabitants of 2 Chronicles. 20. 15. etc.
Jerusalem, and thou King Iehosaphat; Thus says the Lord unto you: Be not
afraid nor d^sma^d, by reason of the great multitude for the battle is not
yours but Gods.

Beloved, he that has a ^ad conscience, and a bad cause, ever fights as a
Coward, and is ready at every stroke to lay down his weapons and run away. A
true man will stand to it, come who may come, for his cause is justifiable, and
he may with boldness own it; but theives, if they hear any noise, any
whispering, they cry one to another, let us have and be gone, for they know,
their adventure's unwarrantable. When a man thus thinks with himself, being
beset with dangers and difficulties, what if I should dye in this business?
could I with confidence own it, at the Bar of JESUS CHRIST? The
encouragement of his own conscience, will much embolden him. But if a man's
own heart tell him; that adventuring and dying in a such cause, e shall sinck
into Hell, because he opposes the Commands and Government of JESUS CHRIST; the
liberties, the comforts, the prayers of Gods people, how is it possible, that
he should play the man, and be truly courageous?

Thirdly, Consider seriously, the many weighty consequences of the good cause,
which from good grounds, you undertake to maintain. Sit down and sadly think
what will the issue be, if you desert your Protestation, whereby you bound
your selves, to stand for the true Protestant Religion, the honor of our King,
the Privileges of Parliament, the Laws of the Land, and welfare of the
Kingdom. Here it is notable, how the Philistines heartened one another, in the
day of their deep danger, 1 Samuel 4. 9. Be strong, quit your selves like men o
Philistines that you be not Servants to the Hebrews; Quit your selves like men
and sight; Either pluck up your hearts, and fight now, or be slaves for ever;
that is the argument.

And I pray you, observe how Ioab pleads, When he saw the battle before and
behind. 2 Samuel 10. 12. Be of good Courage, and let us play the men for our
people, and for the Cities of our God. And that passage, Nehem. 4. 14. It is
considerable, as either of the former; Be not afraid remember the Lord which
is great and terrible, and fight for your Breth^^n, for your Sons, for your
Daughters, for your Wives, and for your Houses.

Mark it, my beloved, and make application, what if the Papists should get the
upper hand? What if the Parliament should be dissolved? What if the malignant
party should effect their mischievous desires? Oh how dark and doleful, how
black and bloody, would our times prove, we are all, many ways obliged to
stand for the government and worship of the Lord Christ: for the safety, and
honor of our King, for the welfare of his three Kingdoms, for the Privileges
of our Parliament, and for our rights by Law; All these are to be prized at an
exceeding high rate: our happiness will be great in the enjoying of them, and
our misery not small, in the want of them. Every man according to his Relations
and engagements, should reason the case with himself. What adventures should I
make, and what hazard should I run, that my self may not be enslaved, that
my Wife may not be abused, my Children massacred, and (which is above all,)
that Christ's holy Religion may not be corrupted, and that Popery may not be
introduced and established in England. Thus meditation upon the worth of the
things to be maintained, will be a special means to quicken and to augment
Courage.

Fourthly, Keep Christ your Captain in your eye. For true valor, there never
was, nor ever shall be any like unto him. Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, o
most mighty, with thy glory and Majesty; and in thy Majesty ride prosperously,
and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things; Psalm 45. 3 4 How valiant
a Champion was the Lord JESUS! Heb. 12. 2.
He endured the Cross, and despised the shame; He went on, though dogs did
bark, and Lions did roar, though men reproachfully reviled him, and the
Devils endeavored to devour him; though the earth (as it were) did shake
under his feet, and the Heavens were black and thundering over his head.
Although when his professed enemies had conspired his death, Judas did betray
him, and his other Disciples did forsake him, yea although his God and Father
did hide his face from him, when he answered Divine Justice for our sins,
yet he shrunk not, he drew not back, from the glorious work undertaken.
When outward dangers encompassed him, and the sorrows of Hell took hold upon
his Soul, though he was apprehensive, and sensible of all, unto the utmost,
and therefore both complained and prayed to his Father, yet was he not
discouraged. He did not sound, when he saw his own blood, yea although his
body was wet all over with a bloody sweat, but he worthily did wade through the
flood of his appointed passions.

Consider him, consider him, (beloved,) that you may not faint in your minds;
when a soldier sees his Captain content to take up with poor provisions and
undaunted, though he meet with hard services, harsh usages, sore affronts, he
thereupon grows the more resolute. For thus be reasons within himself. My
worthy Commander, for his diet, takes up with a crust of course bread and a
little water, he has not been in bed these many nights, but still, either
watches, or else, he lies upon the ground, the cold ground no ways, no
weather discourages him, Winter, Summer, wet, or dry, scorching heat, the
pinching frost, are alike unto him: Bullets, blows wounds, bruises, broken
bones, do not cause him to sound a retreat, to give back, and shall I shrink?
Beloved, if Christ had shrunk when Heaven frowned, and men deserted, and
Devils opposed him, what had become of you, and me? Is this Christ my
Captain? and has he Captaine-like, Champion-like for me both done and
suffered thus worthily, thus incomparably, and shall not I put on Courage, and
show my self a man, a valiant man for him? I beseech you, consider this
frequently and affectionately.

Fifthly, I commend unto you, mutual Christian communion, as a special means
of Christian Courage. In the Prophet Malachy his times, when wickedness was
Mal. 3. 16.
grown to a great head, and the power of godliness was discountenanced in
them, then those that feared God, spoke often one to another.

When Paul after shiprack, saw the brethren, who came Act. 28. 15.
to meet him, he took Courage. And also, upon a strong Act. 18. 5.
dispute with some who opposed Christ, when Silas and Timotheus were come, Paul
was pressed in Spirit. God be thanked for that unity and love which is amongst
you, amongst you, the Aldermen and Commons of this City, unto whom the Militia
is committed; God continue it, God knit your hearts together more fast, and
firm from day to day: God give you when you meet to consider seriously what
may heat, and hearten your Spirits in the way of Christian valor, according to
that which this day I have preached, and according to that, which this day we
all need.

We read in Isay 41. 6. of a Company of Idolaters, animating each other, in
promoting Idol worship. They helped every one his Neighbor, and every one
said to his brother, Be of good Courage. So the Carpenter encouraged the Gold
smith, and he that smootheth with the hammer, him that smites with the
anvill, etc.

Doubtless, at this day, those who envy our hopes, and oppose our peace, do
meet and hearten one another, both by words and actions. God forbid therefore,
that we should be more regardlesse of one another, having a better cause, and
more encouragements.

Sixthly, set faith on work in the promises of the Gospel. The worthies in the
primitive times, waxed valiant by means of faith; Hebr. 11. 34. You may do
well to inform your selves, what the Lord is pleased to speak in the word of
truth for your comfort. By the bond of his own rich unchangeable grace, he is
become your debtour to do more then I can possibly express. Three things I
thought to have spoken unto, under this direction.

First, The promise of Gods assistance, Be of good Courage, and he will
strengthen thine heart. The sweet Psalmist saw much sweetness in this, and
therefore does mention it, once and again when the Soul says, I am ready to
Psalm. 27. 14.
fall down, yet taking courage, to march forward, it shall renew strength, it
shall receive an addition of new strength, Esa 40. 31. And that speech of
Solomon, Prove. 10. 29. is very remarkable. The way of the Lord is strength to
the upright. They go on and gather strength in going, they walk from strength
to strength, Psalm. 84. 7. Truly this is an heartening consideration.

Secondly, The promise of good success. Beloved, Christians maintaining the
cause and minding the glory of God, are as sure of victory as if now they were
singing the triumph, and going away as Conquerours. This is most certain, for
truth it self has spoken it; In the World Ioh. 16. 33.
ye shall have affliction, be of good cheer, or be bold, I have overcome
the World. The Devil has his deaths wound, Corruption has (as it were) the
knife at the heart of it and the power of wicked men is broken, they are but
sprunting and striving for life.

By this argument, the Lord heartened his servant Joshua; Be strong and of a
good Courage, for unto this people shall thou divide for an inheritance, the
land which I swear unto their Fathers to give them; Josh. 1. 6 As though the
Lord had thus spoken; although thou may fight many battles, receive many
foyles, loose many of thy soldiers, yet be not dismayed, for certainly as a
Conqueror, thou shall bring the people to Canaan.

Thirdly, Then the recompense assured upon all them, who stoutly stand to the
cause of God, is more rich and large, then I can relate. To him that
overcommeth, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne. And from this
assurance, Rev. 3. 21.
the Apostle Paul incourageth the Corinthians. Therefore my beloved Brethren,
Be ye steadfast, and unmovable always abounding in the work of the Lord,
for as much, as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. God 1
Cor. 15 58.
will requite all pains taken, all sorrows suffered, and you that have lost
houses, or land, or father, or mother, or wife, or Ma^h. 19. 29.
children, for Christ, and his cause, besides that inward peace, and
tranquillity and joy, which an hundred fold exceed all sublunary contents, to
be enjoyed here, you shall inherit hereafter everlasting life. And again,
fear none of those things which thou shall suffer. Behold the Devil shall
cast some of you into prison, etc. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will
give thee a Crown of life. Feed on these promises, for Cordials flow from them
to cheer your drooping hearts, and to strengthen courage.

Seventhly in large your love. If those hearts which now do but drop love,
might flow forth streams of love upon Gods cause, our Kings honor, and the
Kingdoms welfare how wonderfully would our courage be increased. Both reason
and religion, will give in manifold strong arguments to augment our love to our
Prince, our Parliament, our peace, our privileges, our posterity: and
doubtless our love and valor, will grow together.

Love will adventure far: Women are the more feeble, the more fearful Sex,
and yet love in a tender mother will produce bold adventures to save the babe
of her womb. The timorous mother, who is wont to tremble at the report of a
Musket, will almost come to a Cannons mouth to save her Child from being broken
in pieces: Love does it.

Have you not in the country sometimes seen an Ewe, in defense of her lamb,
to turn head upon a mastive dog, and to stamp, although at other times, the
barking of a little whelpe, will make a whole flock of them to run away. O,
love does it. And the poor Hen, she will fly at the Kite to save her brood;
Love does it. O that you and I had this Love; Love to Zion, to the Gospel of
peace, Love to Christ, and the pure ordinances of grace: Love will make brave
and bold adventures.

And as it will adventure far, so it will endure much, and long. The Apostle
says, Charity bears all things, endures all things, Jacob though he had
tedious days, and 1 Cor. 13. 7.
weary nights, a fore service under a sour Uncle, a churlish Master, yet he
served seven years for Rachell, and they seemed unto him, but a few days, for
the love he had to her Genesis 29. 20.
Love is strong as death, many waters cannot quen^h love, neither can the
floods drown it; if a man would give all the substance of his house for love,
it would utterly be contemned. Cant. 8. 6. 7.
What ^f one should come to a woman, and make this motion, be content that your
child be torn in pieces, and here is a thousand pounds for you. Her answer
would be ready. Not for a thousand worlds: yea, she would almost spit in his
face, who should press such a proposition, what rend my child in pieces? There
is nothing can conquer love: so it would be with us, in reference to Gods
commandments, the liberty of Gospel ordinances: No promises, no threats, no
means, fair, or foul would take us off from appearing in the defense of them,
if our hearts were more enflamed with love.

Eighthly, Walk exactly, keep your consciences clear.

Notable is that direction of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 13. 8. Ye shall keep all the
commandments which I command you this day, that you may be strong: Suppose a
man, who has a wound, or an impostu mated swelling on his body, should go
into the Camp, if any touch him, he skritcheth, and he cries, come not near
me, you know the reason, and the application is familiar and easy to the point
in hand, wounds in our consciences, will make us timorous and cowardly; but The
Righteous is as bold as a lion: He that walks uprightly, Pro. 28. 1.
walks boldly: Take a man who has no brokennesse, no boyles, no ^lanes, no
bruises, handle him, shake him, crush him, crowde him, thrust him, cast him:
notwithstanding he can better bear all this rugged usage, then another can a
fillip with the finger. I beseech you mind the application of this, for the
Lords sake take heed, make not inroads, and breaches upon your consciences, go
not against your light, for guilt will make you cowardly. Adam as soon as he
had sinned he runs and puts his head in a bush, what was the matter? he heard
a whistling wind, and he runs away: What have thou sinned, faith God? I, that
is the matter. For if Adam had kept his heart sound, if he had not sinned, he
would with boldness have encountered with any approaches, either of the
creatures, or his Creator.

Ninthly, Improve your experiences. It would be of singular use to us, to
bestow many hours, both together, and asunder, in recounting the many great
things which the Lord has done for us, both in former times, and of later; we
have national deliverances City deliverances, Family mercies and personal
mercies to improve providence: Give me leave to call to mind two most seasonable
now to be remembered, considering the end of our assembling at this time: I am
credibly informed that your selves who are here to honor God for your health
continued, peace maintained, lives lengthened, had that day when you were
abroad, two notable experiences of Gods providence for your preservation; 1.
There were muskets broken in the field; and yet neither the Musketeers, nor
any near them received the least harm, although the throng of people was very
great. Might not some men's eyes, limbs, or lives have been lost, by such
accidents; if the all-ordering hand of the Almighty had not prevented such like
dangers. The other passage of divine providence is more remarkable.

2 Gods hand turned aside graciously, and strangely, a kindled match which was
cast toward a basket full of Gunpowder, which stood in the field for that
days service. From what malicious heart, and by what mischievous hand this
match was cast, the Lord he knows, whom we this day magnify, as the God of
our salvations.

Beloved, the remembrance of such like providence, should encourage our
adventures for the Lord, whose hand has diverted many unseen, and unexpected
dangers. But I had almost forgot to give in my proof, that the improvement of
experiences, increases courage. I pray you observe it in Ios. 10. 25. And I
shua said unto them fear not, nor be dismayed, be strong and of good courage;
for thus shall the Lord do to all your enemies, against whom ye sight.

Our God has many times disappointed the designs of our enemies: many of them
who hated us, and endeavored our undoing, and desolation, have been
discovered and brought to shame, the Lord has trampled upon them gloriously.
These meditations enlarged by particular pregnant instances, I commend unto
you, as means to increase your courage.

Lastly, when ever you have occasion to show your courage, go out self
denyingly in the strength of your God, Be strong in the Lord, and in the power
of his might. Ephesians 6. 10. Through God we shall do valiant y. Psalm. 60 12.
David was a man, as in other kinds, so in this imitable; when he came against
Goliath (who threatened to pluck him in pieces, as a Faulkoner does a bird) his
words are very observable. 1 Samuel 17. 45.
Thou come to me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a shield but I
come to thee in the name of the Lord of host^, the God of the Armies of Israel,
whom thou have defied. Let these be the breathing of your seules. Some trust in
Chariots, and some in horses, but we will remember the name of the Lord our
God. They are brought down and fallen, but near risen an stand upright. Save
Lord, let the King hear us when we c^ll.

Thus be careful to make addition of prayer, unto all the other means of
Christian courage. Pray heartily, selfedenyingly, and believingly. Advance God,
and plead his promise; and expect assistance according to his promise. B^ of
good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord.

FINIS.
It is ordered by the Committee, of the House of Commons in Parliament
concerning printing, that this Book entitled, Good Courage discovered, and
incourared, be printed.

John White.
26. May, 1642.

