RELIGIOUS COVENANTING DIRECTED, AND Covenant-keeping persuaded: PRESENTED, In
a SERMON preached before the Right Honorable Thomas Adams Lord Major, and the
Right Worshipful the Sheriffs, and Aldermen his brethren, and the rest of the
Common Counsel of the famous City of LONDON, January, 14. 1645.

Upon which day the solemn League and Covenant was renewed by them and their
Officers, with Prayer and Fasting, at Michael Basing-shaw, London.

By Simeon Ash Minister of the Gospel.

When thou shall vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not slack to pay
it, for the Lord thy God will require it of thee, and it would be sin in thee.
Deuteronomy. 23. 21. I will bring the sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel
of my Covenant. Lev. 26. 25. LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Tho. Underhill at the
sign of the Bible in Wood-street. M. DC. XLVI.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS ADAMS Lord Major, AND THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL The
Sheriffs and Aldermen his Brethren, and to the rest of the Honorable Court of
Common Council of the City of LONDON.
THis plain Sermon which attended your service of Covenant-renewing from the
Pulpit, comes now from the Press, in obedience to your command, to do you and
the public some further service. If upon the perusal of that which you heard
preached, it may please the Lord to quicken your zeal in Covenantkeeping, I
shall have occasion to bless his Name with a joyful heart.

The zeal of the Common Council of London, in renewing their solemn League
and Covenant, rings through the several Counties of the Kingdom of England: and
I am confident, that the sound thereof has been heard in many other Kingdoms:
And doubtless there are often enquiries, and earnest expectations to hear what
London now does in the pursuance of their Covenant heretofore taken, and now
again solemnly renewed with holy fasting and prayer. A City set upon an hill
cannot be hid; your practices have had, and will have strong influences into
the several parts of this Land, and into other Nations: You have formerly and
lately done well and worthily in respect to your Covenant: I pray God, that
your continued holy zeal may affect and fire many in other Countries in
faithful Covenant-keeping. God forbid, that you should ever deserve thus to be
stigmatized, either by God or men; Their heart was not right with God, neither
were they steadfast in their Covenant, Psalm. 78. 37.

I shall not need to tell you, that our solemn League and Covenant is
despised, divided, aspersed and opposed by too many: for that which you may
read in Pamphlets, and hear from some Pulpits and other places, does make you
both eyewitnesses and ear-witnesses of this evil, which should be greatly
bewailed. This contradiction, this opposition should increase your gracious
heat for your God. Fire gives out the most scorching heat in the coldest
weather. It is time for thee, Lord, to work ( says David) for they have made
void thy Law. Therefore I love thy Commandments above gold, yea above fine
gold. Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right,
and I hate every false way, Psalm. 119. 126, 127, 128.

My soul desires, that according to the guidance of that wisdom which is from
above, you all may make the like gracious improvement of the checks and
affronts which you meet with, in your Covenant-keeping. By how much the more,
any others do plot and practice to hinder the glorious work of
Church-reformation, by so much the more do you consult and act, to expedite and
perfect it. By how much the more any others strive and study to maintain
Popery, Prelacie, Schism, Heresy. by so much the more, do you set your selves
against such matters, as being destructive to the welfare both of Church and
state. By how much the more others design and endeavor to break the brotherly
union between England and Scotland, by so much the more do you lay forth your
selves to maintain it. And that your zeal in these kinds may appear to your
selves and others to be pure and sincere, let it be your chief and constant
care, to reform your selves and all yours, in every thing, according to the
will of God: That you all may in these particulars and in all things else,
approve yaur selves faithful both to God and man, in holy Covenant-keeping,
shall be the prayer of him, who is

Your servant, in, and for Jesus Christ, SIM: ASH.
Feb. 24th
RELIGIOUS COVENANTING DIRECTED.
PSALM. 76. II. Vow and pay unto the Lord your God.
THis Text persuades a double duty. 1. To make vows. 2. To pay vows unto the
Lord our God. From whence two truths, seasonable for the service of the day,
fall naturally, and easily, without forcing, into our consideration.

That Gods people must make religious vows, as his hand of providence does lead
them forth thereunto.

That such vows being made, must be paid unto the Lord our God.

In the handling of the former of these propositions, I shall briefly give you,
1. The explication; 2. The application thereof.

The explication of the point I shall dispatch under these three heads. 1. The
Act required, vow. 2. The Agents, or persons upon whom this duty is pressed:
This the following words express. All those that be round about him. 3. The
providence, whereby God calls forth to this practice of making vows.

First, Holy vows are the solemn engagements of the soul unto the Lord,
according to his will: If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath, to
bind his soul with a bond, Numb. 30. 2. To vow, to swear, and to covenant, are
in Scripture phrase equivalent, importing the same thing, Jonathan made a
Covenant with David, And Jonathan caused David to swear again, 1 Samuel 29. 16,
17. Here I may not spend time, in discoursing concerning the several sorts of
vows, which might be spoken to, under these, or such like heads. 1. They are
either made to God, or man. 2. Of things necessary, or arbitrary. 3. Explicit,
or implicit, mental, or vocal. 4. Assertory, or promissory. But let it be
sufficient, that I now suggest thus much: That the Text is to be understood of
such vows, as are promissory obligations unto the Lord. And from hence I shall
persuade and direct the managing of such vows unto God, as are necessary and
openly unfolded to every ordinary understanding, in the solemn League and
Covenant this day to be renewed.

Secondly, the Actors in this duty are described to be such, as are round about
the Lord. The Psalmist has reference to Numb. 2. 2. where Israel was commanded
to pitch their Tents round about the Tabernacle, which was a sign of Gods
special presence. And this phrase (as I conceive) describes Gods people by a
double character. 1. Their special attendance upon God, their readiness to
receive and obey his commands: As the four and twenty Elders, are said, Rev. 4.
4. to be round about the Throne, as pres'd to praise the Lord. 2. Gods special
presence in the midst of them, to hear prayers, and to perform promises, for
their preservation and welfare in every kind; who has God so nigh unto them,
as the Lord our God, in all things, that we call upon him for? Deu. 4. 7.

Thirdly, the call unto this employment I shall note under a five fold
providence from the Lord.

1. Sinful defections from God, that by means of religious vowing, his
backsliding people might be recovered: Our fathers have trespassed and done
that which is evil in the eyes of the Lord our God, and have forsaken him, and
have turned away their face from the habitation of the Lord, and turned their
backs. Also they have shut up the doors of the porch, and put out the lamps,
and have not burnt incense, nor offered burnt offerings, in the holy place unto
the God of Israel. Now it is in my heart (says Hezekiah) to make a Covenant
with the Lord God of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 29. 6, 7, 10. Thus likewise the people of
God resolved in the days of Ezra: We have trespassed against our God, etc. Now
therefore, let us make a Covenant with our God, Ezra 10. 2, 3.

2. Sad discoveries of divine displeasure, that by holy covenanting present
judgments might be removed, and future evils prevented: The wrath of the Lord
was upon Judah and Jerusalem; and he has delivered them to trouble, to
astonishment and to hissing, as ye see with your eyes. For lo our fathers have
fallen by the sword, and our sons, and our daughters, and our wives are in
captivity for this. Now it is in mine heart (says Hezekiah) to make a covenant
with the Lord God of Israel, that his fierce wrath may turn away from us, 2 Chronicles. 29. 8, 9, 10.

3. Famous experiences of Gods goodness, that by the right use of religions
vows his Majesty may be praised, and his providence improved. The exhortation
in the Text was grounded upon some such occasion, as many verses in the Psalm
declare: The stout-hearted are spoiled, they have slept their sleep, and none
of the men of might have found their hands, ver. 5. At thy rebuke, O God of
Jacob, both the chariot and horse are cast into a deadsleep, ver. 6. When God
arose in judgment to save all the meek of the earth, ver. 8. Hence follows,
vow and pay, etc. Interpreters judge, that this Psalm was penned, upon Ashurs
overthrow, whereupon many brought gifts unto the Lord unto Jerusalam, 2 Chronicles.
32. 23. according to the advice given in the words immediately following the
Text, Bring presents unto him that ought to be feared.

4. Defective improvements (if any improvements at all) of Gods favorable
administrations, that by foederall engagements his people might be bettered:
These are the words of the covenant which the Lord commanded Moses etc. Ye have
seen all that the Lord did before your eyes, even in the land of Egypt, etc.
The great temptations, and those great miracles: yet the Lord has not given
you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this day,
Deuteronomy. 29. 1, 2, 3, 4. This is propounded as one ground of the Covenant renewed,
whereof we read in the following verses.

5. Apparent danger of seduction and departure from God. In this regard Gods
servants have afresh obliged themselves to his Majesty, for their own
establishment and preservation: Ye stand this day before the Lord, to enter
into covenant with the Lord thy God, lest there should be amongst you any,
whose heart turns away from the Lord, Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 12, 18.

covenant-renewing, the intended service of this day. For give me leave to
appeal unto your consciences, Right Honorable, right Worshipful, and much
respected Citizens, whether all the five forementioned particulars, do not
fully reach you and take hold upon you, both in respect of Gods dealings with
you, and your miscarriages toward him, since you at first took the solemn
League and Covenant. And here I shall make bold to propound unto you some short
interrogatories, under the five forementioned heads, to which I wish your
hearts may return answers, as in the presence of the Allknowing God.

First, Are you not guilty of sinful declinings in a great degree from your
former engagements unto the Lord? Have you not lost your first love? Have not
the matters of Gods house been much slighted and neglected? Has not your care
to preserve the truth of Religion from corruption been much abated? Have you
not connived at the spreading of pernicious errors in this City? Has not your
zeal against schism and sinful separations from our Church Assemblies been
very much cooled? Is not your love toward our Brethren of Scotland in a great
measure lessened? Have not your vigorous endeavors to promote the settling of
Christ's government in our Congregations been woefully diminished? And have you
not been lamentably wanting in laboring the through reformation of your selves
and families? Which of you, has striven to exceed, to excel others, in
advancing the power of godliness in your conversation? Doubtless these and
such like backslidings from former engagements, may well warrant your
Covenant-renewing with your God.

Secondly, None of you can be ignorant of the manifold, manifest discoveries of
Gods heavy displeasure against this poor trembling Kingdom. Has not the Lord
delivered us up unto trouble and astonishment, by his severe administrations?
How many thousands have fallen by the sword of cruel war? What woeful
desolations are made in many Towns, yea Counties in this Kingdom, by the
prevailing pitilesse enemies? And should not we read Gods wrath against our
selves, in the abundance of blood which has been shed, and the unhappy spoils
which have been made in Scotland and Ireland? Besides all this, I pray you
consider whether these things do not proclaim and speak alowd Gods anger? Our
long looked for reformation in matters of Religion, is still deferred: our
hopes of the much-needed and much-desired Discipline of Jesus Christ, are still
disappointed: the miserable rents and divisions in families, Congregations,
Cities and Counties, by reason of different, yea contrary opinions and
practices, in ways of Religion, are wonderfully increased. And have we not in
these regards reason to renew our Covenant, that the wrath of the Lord may be
turned from us?

Thirdly, God has often remembered us in our low estate, because his mercy
endures for ever. Who can recount Gods many mavelous works for our safety
and comfort? Have not our deliverances been wonderful, and many of our
victories little less then miraculous? How often has the subtiil enemy been
infatuated, the strong enemy weakened, and great Armies broken by a little
strength? I shall not need here to mind you of the many wonders which Gods
Almighty hand has wrought for us, both in the Northern and Western parts.
And as for this City, how admirably and unexpectedly has it been preserved and
provided for, in every kind by the Lord? How many oppressions are we freed
from, by Parliamentary authority, through the goodness of our God? Therefore
besides other presents of praise which God deserves at our hands, we have just
occasion to present our selves unto his Highness by Covenant-renewing.

Fourthly, Notwithstanding our various and glorious experiences of Gods
patience and goodness; Have we not too much cause thus to complain, that to
this day we want hearts to husband Gods remarkable providence, to his honor
and our own advantage? Who loves God more, or who serves him better, because of
the great things he has done for us? Is our faith in Gods promises stronger?
Is our fear of Gods displeasure greater? Are we more zealous for the Lord of
Hosts, or more courageous for his truth, against error? Dare we say that we do
our utmost for the speeding of Church-reformation, that we may not be overrun
and undone by Sects, Schisms and confusions? Therefore certainly, we have a
call to renew our Covenant, to quicken our improvement of Gods gracious
providence, both to his praise, others profit, and our own further comfort in
Christ.

Fifthly and lastly, That we may not fall from our steadfastness, we have need
to bind our selves yet further unto our God by solemn Covenant. Men are wont
(as I have heard) to hoop their vessels with iron bonds, in which they carry
their stronger liquors beyond seas, that by the tossings in the ship and the
liquors working, the vessels may not be broken into pieces, and the liquor
lost. And have not we more need to add the bond of a solemn Covenant to the
bond of Gods sacred commands, that we may not be broken from one another, nor
divided from God in his truths and holy worships, in these broken, erroneons,
stormy, tempestuous times?

For 1. Emulation, variance, strife, seditions, heresies, are reckoned Gal. 5.
up, by the Apostle, amongst the works of the flesh, unto which our corrupt
natures do strongly dispose us.

2. There are more then a good many of subtle, busy factours in this City, to
promote errors, schisms and factions of several sorts, to draw disciples
after them, and to spread their infection amongst people of all ranks and
qualities.

3. It is apparent, by too many instances, that diverse persons both wise and
godly, have been deceived and drawn aside from the ways of truth, into the
bypath of error and schism, and into practices of bitterness (I will not
say of how many kinds) against their brethren. Therefore in this respect, as
in those before mentioned, you have just cause to say one to another; Come, let
us join our selves unto the Lord in a Covenant, never to be forgotten.

ought to be feared, as our translation renders the words following the Text:
or, He is fear, as the Original has it. In which phrase we have Nomen
affectus, pro objecto. God is a dreadful and terrible Majesty. And this
doubtless is added, to awe men's hearts, in the undertaking of such like
services. The advice of Solomon upon this ground is more open, Eccles. 5. 2. Be
not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing
before God, for God is in Heaven, and thou upon earth. In which counsel, the
wise man has special reference unto vowing, as the following words declare.

Now for your guidance in this great service, I will give you briefly some
plain and necessary rules.

1. You must Covenant knowingly. It is thus openly expressed, of them who
covenanted in the days of Nehemiah, Every one having knowledge, and having
understanding, they clave to their brethren, they entered into an oath to walk
in Gods Law, Neh. 10. 29. Ignorance does nothing well: the light of knowledge
must guide our whole course. And in this business of a sacred vow, it is
necessary that men know, both the nature of the duty, and the matter of the
federall engagement. No man should be moved by an implicit faith, but every
one should be fully persuaded in his own mind. For as in other cases, so in
this, whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

2. Repentance for former offenses must precede, and prepare for
Covenant-renewing. Thus it was with those, who sealed and subscribed the
solemn Covenant in the time of Nehemiah, for they assembled themselves to keep
a religious Fast (as we do this day) before they entered into the Covenant,
Neh. 9. 1. In which exercise deep sorrow for sin was expressed, their
particular evils were aggravated and largely confessed, themselves were judged,
and God was justified in his severe administrations: All these expressions of
repentance, are manifest in that 9th Chapter of Nehemiah, which then was the
introduction to the Covenant. And doubtless if we do not penitently bewail our
former violations of Gods commands and our own vows, we cannot with acceptance
to God, or with comfort in our own hearts renew our Covenant with him this day.

3. Your hearts must go along with your vows. It is said, ^* Chron* 15* 15*
That all Judah did swear with all their hearts* And God will not take up with
less at our hands this day. It is no better then hypocrisy, to lift up hands
before God, when the heart is far from him. We must in our judgments approve
and resolve upon the payment of our vows, and all our affections, both
concupiscible and irascible, must be upon the wing, according to the various
particularities expressed in the Covenant. The soul should with love, joy and
longings, work toward the speedy settling of Church-governement according to
the word of God, and toward the maintaining of brotherly union between the two
Kingdoms of England and Scotland, together with the more full reformation of
our selves and families. And O how should your souls now rise, in holy dislike,
in the hatred of, and in indignation against Popery, and all profaneness,
against Heresies, Schism, detestable Neutrality, and whatsoever else it is,
which is against God and the welfare of these Kingdoms!

4. Our Covenanting must be accompanied with humility. 1. From the sense of our
own weaknesses to keep touch with God, in coming up fully to the Covenant; we
should lean to his promise, and take hold on his strength: Say, as the Church,
Through God we shall do valiantly, Psalm. 60. 11. And as the blessed Apostle
did; Phil. 4. 13. I can do all things through Jesus Christ strengthening me.

2. And being apprehensive of our own unworthiness, to receive any ability
from the Lord, seeing by our sins, we have enfeebled our own spirits, therefore
we should humbly petition for divine assistance. Herein imitate David, who
having thus in resolution and promise expressed himself before God, I will keep
thy statutes, he immediately adds, O forsake me not utterly, Psalm. 119. 8. The
more of the spirit of self-denial and prayer is in your hearts, when you take
the Covenant, the more hope there will be of your keeping it afterward.

5. Come to the Covenant conscientiously. Be not acted only by the
appointments, expectations or practices of men in this particular: Let not this
be the alone motive upon your spirits; Covenant-renewing is ordered by the
Court of Common Counsel: But rather reason thus; The manifold providence of
God before specified, do call unto this service, and therefore we will
undertake it. If you respect not God in the work, you shall lose both accept ^

6. Covenant fiducially: If your spirits act sincerely, according to the
forenamed directions, then be you confident that the consequence of this days
service will be comfortable. Although your weaknesses are many and great, yet
if your hearts be herein found upright with God, you may hopefully persuade
your selves that the Lord will so far regard his own ordinance, and have
respect unto the mediation of Christ ( the Messenger, the Mediator of the
New Covenant) that your work shall be crowned with good success. You heard
before, that Enemy-conquering providence made way unto the exhortation in the
Text, Vow and pay unto the Lord your God. And I conceive that the verse
following is considerable, being the language of faith; He shall cut off the
spirit of Princes, he is terrible to the Kings of the earth: The most potent
adversaries of the Church shall be brought down, by holy Covenant-making and
Covenant-keeping with God.

Now this lets me into the consideration of my next Doctrine;

That vows made, must be paid unto the Lord our God.

Although a vow must not be made a bond of iniquity, and therefore unlawful
vows rather call for repentance then performance, (as David's rash revengefull
resolution against churlish Nabal.)

Yet such Covenants as we make according to Gods will, we must make good, in
conscience to his commandment: Pay that which thou have vowed (says Solomon,)
Better it is that thou should not vow, then that thou should vow and not
pay it. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, Eccles. 5. 4, 5. The
Scribes and Pharisees were but sleighty superficial Expositours of Gods Law,
yet they were wont thus to publish Gods command: Thou shall not forswear thy
self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine oaths, Mat. 5. 33.

In the prosecution of this plain, profitable, seasonable and necessary point,
I shall faithfully endeavor three things. 1. To persuade this duty by
arguments. 2. To guide this practice by rules. 3. To promote your obedience
herein, by some short directions.

The motives whereby we may be induced to make good our honest and holy vows,
shall be cast under several heads, that my Motives.
progress in them, may be the more easy and edifying.

1. From the nature of a vow in general, and from sundry circumstances
considerable in our Covenant particularly.

In general; 1. All vows are sacred obligations upon our consciences: If any
(says Moses) vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath, to bind his soul with
a bond, Numb. 30. 2. etc. In this respect the holy Psalmist resolved upon this
duty, Psalm. 56. 12. Thy vows are upon me, O Lord, I will render praises: And
doubtless every gracious heart will be sensible of this great spiritual
engagement. 2. By means of vows we become Gods debtors: Hence it is, that the
Text calls for payment, Vow and pay. I here remember the speech of the Prophet
unto the poor widow, 2 King. 4. 7. Go sell thine oil, and pay the debt. And the
Holy Ghost gives in this, as a note of a wicked man, Psalm. 37. 21. He
borrows, and pays not again. You Merchants, who have great dealings in the
world, would you not be ashamed to appear upon the Exchange, if you were not
careful to pay your debts unto men? Therefore, vow and pay unto the Lord your
God.

More particularly, there are sundry weighty circumstances considerable, in
regard of our solemn League and Covenant, which may work our hearts unto
serious resolutions to keep it.

1. The materials of our Covenant are lawful and justifiable; we vow to
endeavor the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, schism,
profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found to be contrary to sound doctrine
and the power of godliness. And have we not good reason thus to do? For have
not these things much endangered the welfare both of this Church and
Commonwealth already? and will not the indulging of such matters, prove
destructive both to our public hopes and comforts? We vow sincerely, really,
constantly, through the grace of God, to endeavor the reformation of Religion,
in Doctrine, worship, Discipline and Government, according to the word of God,
and the example of the best Reformed Churches. I shall not need to specify our
engagements, to defend the Kings person and authority in the preservation of
the true Religion, to preserve the privileges of Parliament, as also to
continue a firm peace and union between the Kingdoms of England and Scotland.
These and other things expressed in the Covenant, are by you Covenanters
accounted just and equal. I remember David's resolution, Psalm. 119. 106. I have
sworn and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments. And if
we judge the materials of our Covenant righteous, we should in that regard lay
the greater charge upon our consciences to keep it.

2. Our vows are deliberate. The nature of this ordinance has been unfolded,
the several Articles in the Covenant have been considered of, and therefore
the rather to be observed. Rash vows bind conscience, if the keeping of them
prove only in inexpediencies prejudicial to our selves, and contradict not any
of Gods everbinding laws. Therefore Solomon calling for the payment of vows,
tells people, that they must not think to put off that obligation, by saying,
It was an error, Eccl. 5. an inconsiderate oversight. And we all know, that
when Israel was bound to the Gibeonites by an oath, through a mistake, being
overreached by a cheat, All the Princes said to all the Congregation, We have
sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel, now therefore we may not touch them,
Josh. 9. 19. How then shall we be excused, if our premiditated vows be not
performed?

3. We have vowed before many witnesses. Men who stand much upon their credit
and reputation in the world, will be taken with this argument. When King Herod
was caught in a snare, by his heady vow, and being troubled, because the
dancing Damsel demanded the head of John the Baptist, it is said,
Nevertheless for the oath sake, and them which sat with him at meat, he
commanded it to be given her, Mat. 14. 9. Consider how many have seen you lift
up your hands unto the most High possessour of Heaven and earth, in holy
Covenanting: Remember how many thousands know that the vows of God are upon
you, and be you hereby prevailed with to keep touch with him.

4. Hereto I might add the consideration, both of the multitude of all ranks,
qualities, callings in this Kingdom, in Scotland, Parliament Men, Soldiers,
Citizens, Divines, etc. who are herein mutually engaged with us. I might also
mind you of the often reiterations and renewings of your vows and Covenants:
Doubtless these things will not be slighted by them who are ingenuous; but I
may not insist upon them, having diverse other heads of arguments to speak unto.

The second sort of arguments to persuade Covenant-keeping, shall be taken from
our God, the only true and blessed God, unto whom our vows oblige us. And under
this head these particulars are considerable: 1. His Majesty takes exact notice
of all such engagements, together with all the circumstances of time, place,
companies, occasions, etc. which belong thereto: O God thou have heard my vows,
says David, Psalm 61. 5.

2. His Highness well remembers these obligations: The Lord rounds Jacob in
the ear with this Memento, I am the God of Bethel, where thou anointest the
pillar, and where thou vowest a vow unto me, Genesis 31. 13.

3. He calls for payment, he will not be taken off from demanding his debt in
this kind: When thou shall vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not be
slack to pay it, for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee, Deuteronomy. 23.
21.

4. He is the most High possessour and commander of Heaven and earth. The
Psalmist lays strength upon this consideration, Psalm. 50. 14. Pay thy vows
unto the most High. And this thought was prevailing upon the hearts of Jephihah
and his daughter, in a case very difficult in a course very cross to the
stream and strength of natural affection: you all know his vow, therefore I
shall not need to name it, but mark I pray you the expressions, both of the
father and of his child, Judge. 11. 35, 36. I have opened my mouth (says
Jephthah) unto Jehovah, and I cannot go back. And she said to him, My father,
if thou have opened thy mouth unto Jehovah, do to me according to that which
has proceeded out of thy mouth.

5. He is a most faithful Covenant-keeping God: He is God, the faithful God,
which keeps Covenant and mercy, Deuteronomy. 7. 9. Although mere mercy move his
Majesty to make Covenant, yet will he make it good: How much more should we
keep our holy Covenants, which both duty and necessity call us to renew.

6. Although our well-doing, does not, cannot reach the Lord with advantage,
yet his Highness will account himself honored by our faithfulness in
Covenant: Hence it is, that these two duties are conjoined in the Scripture;
Offer to God thankesgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most High, Psalm. 50. 14.
And Psalm. 65. 1. Praise waits for thee O God in Sion, and unto thee shall the
vow be performed. Consider I pray you, Do we not owe God praise? Do we not
pray, Hallowed be thy Name? Will it not be our Honors to set the Crown on his
head? Therefore let us all resolve to perform our vows unto the Lord our God.

The third head of arguments follows to be considered, and it is drawn from the
various precious benefits to be received, by conscientious Motive 3.
Covenant-keeping with the Lord our God. 1. Care in this kind will evidence
our effectual conversion to God. The Prophet Isaiah foretelling the calling of
the Gentiles, speaks thus, The Lord shall be known to Egypt, and the
Egyptians shall know the Lord in that day, and shall do sacrifice and oblation,
yea they shall vow a vow unto the Lord, and perform it, Isa. 19. 21.

2. Good Covenant-keepers lie very near unto the Lords warm heart, he loves
them dearly: If ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye
shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people, Exodus 19. 5.
Covenant-keepers are Gods jewels, and all other persons are accounted as the
lumber of the world, in comparison of them. Men will adventure much to
ingratiate themselves with great ones; and shall not we pay our vows, that we
may enjoy the favor, the estimation of God, whose loving kindness is better
then life?

3. Hence issues hope to prevail with the Lord by our prayers: The Psalmist
having said, Psalm. 65. 1. Unto thee O God shall the vow be performed; he adds
immediately, O thou that hear prayers. And so soon as this counsel was
given, Psalm 50. 14. Pay thy vows unto the most High, in the next verse, this
follows by way of connection, And call upon me in the day of trouble, I will
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. As you desire the audience of your
prayers, make you conscience to pay your vows.

4. The sanctification of all our concernments, is a rich privilege
appertaining unto honest Covenant-keepers: All the paths of the Lord are mercy
and truth, unto them who keep his Covenant, Psalm. 25. 10. Gods sweet mercy, in
the performance of his promises, runs throug the veins of all his providence
for the good of them, who in reference to Covenant, keep touch with him: And
who knows fully the worth of this one prerogative; therefore as you desire a
share herein, make conscience to pay your vows unto the Lord your God.

5. What need I descend unto any more particulars, seeing all the precious
promises of the Covenant of Gospel Grace, are assured upon them, who are
faithful in Covenant with God. The Psalmist having moved this question, Psalm.
24. 3. Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord, and who shall stand in his
holy place? part of his answer is this; He that has not sworn deceitfully, he
shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of
his salvation: Therefore be prevailed with through holy self-love and desires
of blessedness, to pay your vows unto the Lord your God.

6. And yet once more give me leave to press this argument ab utili, upon the
hearts of you who are affectionate parents: I know your bowels earn toward
your children, and you desire their good, as your own comfort; now be you well
assured, that you can take no course, which will be more probable to entaile
Gods blessing upon your posterity, then this of conscientious Covenantkeeping
with God. How admirable and desirable is that promise in Psalm. 103. 17, 18. The
mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting, upon them that fear him,
and his righteousness unto childrens children, to such as keep his covenant?

These benefits of Covenant-keeping I leave in your bosoms, desiring that
through the blessing of God, they may do you good.

I might here mention a further motive, to persuade the payment Motive 4.
of vows, from the sad consequences of falsenesse and unfaithfullnesse in this
kind. 1. The Psalmist gives in this as a character of a wicked man, Psalm. 55.
20. He has broken (or profaned) his Covenant. 2. All the sins of men are
greatly aggravated by this circumstance, that they are not only transgressions
of Gods Law, but violations of their own vows. Thus Solomon brands the
adulterous woman, Prove. 2. 17, She forgets the Covenant of her God. 3.
Breach of Covenant brings Gods burning displeasure upon people: This thought
did awe Israel, in reference to their rash League made with the Gibeonites,
Josh. 9. 20. We will let them live, lest wrath be upon us, because of the oath
which we swear unto them.

4. Gods anger in this kind kindled, may bring a consumption upon our hopes
and comforts. That Item which the Wise man gives in this case should be
seriously minded, Eccl. 5. 5, 6. Better it is that thou should not vow, then
that thou should vow and not pay; wherefore should God be angry at thy
voice, and destroy the work of thine hands? Never were greater works under
hand for Church and Commonwealth, in our days, or the days of our
forefathers, then are in agitation amongst us at this day; therefore let us
take heed, lest our unfaithfullnesse in our Covenant provoke the Lord to dash
all our endeavors into pieces, with the disappointment of all our golden
hopes. Gods curse is annexed unto his Covenant, to enforce the keeping of it.
It is said, Neh. 10. 29. They entered into a curse, and into an oath to walk
in the Law of God. And the sword of cruel war is drawn by the hand of Divine
justice, to avenge the quarrel of the Covenant, Lev. 26. 25. This sword of
Civil war is eating man's flesh, and drinking man's blood in this Kingdom at this
day; and how can we expect that the Almighty should command it to return into
its scabbard, and to be quiet, if we continue careless in keeping Covenant? I
profess (beloved) that I have often trembled to think upon that discovery of
Gods severity, in punishing Israel with three years famine in David's time,
because Saul had broken the rash vow, 2 Samuel 2 1.
which the Elders of Israel had made long before with the Gibeonites. For thus
I reason, If the violation of an unadvised oath with subtle sinful men, by
the posterity of them who made it, did bring a sore national judgment; what
then may we expect from the hand of God, for contradicting both by words and
deeds, both by opinions and practices, the solemn sacred League and Covenant
which our selves have upon deliberation, both made and renewed with man and
God? These are weighty considerations, and worthy your often and serious
thoughts, unto which many more might be added; but I forbear the enlarging of
this subject, because you have so fully been acquainted with this matter, by my
Reverend brother, M. Calamy.
who has largely to satisfaction set forth the exceeding great danger of
truce-breaking, from 2 Timothy 3. 1. Covenant Breaking makes the times perilous:
unfaithfullnesse in Covenant is a Landdestroying, a Kingdom-devouring sin.

Now (my beloved) to sum up all my arguments: If there be in your hearts, 1.
Either respect unto the sacred obligation of a solemn vow, 2. Or unto the most
High possessour of Heaven and earth. 3. If you either prize the promises of his
grace, and desire to be partakers thereof through Christ; 4. Or dread the
discoveries of the wrath of the Almighty, and would preserve your selves and
your posterity, your selves and the Kingdom from breaking blows of vengeance,
pay your vows unto the Lord your God.

These arguments I hope will not be slighted by you: God forbid, that matters
of so great, so public concernment, should be disregarded by them, who
profess so much zeal and respect to God and to his cause, unto the prosperity
of this famous City, and the welfare both of Church and Commonwealth, as you
worthy Citizens have done, and persevere to do: Therefore I proceed in this
service, to set down some Scripture-rules to guide you in the Faithful payment
of your vows unto the Lord your God.

Pay your good vows universally: Pay thy vows, says the Psalmist, Rule 1.
Psalm. 50. 14. All thy vows, none excepted; whatsoever you have vowed according
to his word, you must make good according to his command: Thus much is open in
the text, vow and pay unto the Lord your God. Take good King Josiah for a
president for your pattern in this particular, of whom it is thus said, upon
his covenanting with God, 2 Chronicles. 34. 33. And Josiah took away all the
abominations, out of all the countries which pertained to the children of
Israel, and made all that were present in Israel to swear, even to serve the
Lord their God. You see that he spares nothing, no where within the reach of
his authority, which might be displeasing unto his God, or destructive to his
people. I pray you peruse the particulars to be opposed by virtue of your
Covenant, Popery, Prelacy, Profaneness, Schism, Heresy; and do not dare to
indulge any abomination, which you have vowed to oppose: Take heed that no
sinful biasse of near relations, or any self-advantages, take you off from
your faithfulness in this kind. The Holy Ghost makes this a character of an
heir of Heaven, Psalm. 15. 4. He swears and keeps it, though to his own
hinderance: Therefore let not fear of losing a customer, a friend, an office, a
good bargain, or any other outward advantage, hinder you in keeping your
Covenant. I will not further enlarge this head, which I leave to your thoughts,
but will conclude the rule, with reading the practice of King Asa in the
pursuance of his Covenant, 2 Chronicles. 15. 16. And also concerning Maachah the
mother of Asa the King, he removed her from being Queen, because she had made
an Idol in a grove; And Asa cut down her Idol, and stamped it, and burnt it at
the brook Kidron. There are Idols of men's heads; and of men's hands, there are
Idol-opinions and Idol-practices to be opposed by virtue of our Covenant, and
you must beware lest through respect of persons, you prove partial and
unfaithful.

When thou shall vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not be slack to
pay it, Deuteronomy. 23. 21. And, thou shall not defer to Rule 2.
pay it, Eccles. 5. 4. I might here speak much to persuade the speedy payment
of our vows; hereby your comfort will be increased, and the public work of
reformation quickened and expedited, your acts will be exemplary and of common
influence both through the City and the whole Kingdom. How many thousands
enquire, what is done in London against Popery, Profaneness, Schism and
Heresy, in the pursuance of their solemn League and Covenant? The
seasonablenesse of an action betters it, doubles it: Bis dat qui cito dat: and
I may truly say in the case under hand, Bis facit qui cito facit: ply the work
of reformation now it is upon the wheels, and you may do much work in a little
time: principium est dimidium totius; gainsay growing evils, tread upon the
Cockatrice in the shell, oppose those opinions and practices in the bud, in the
birth, which if suffered to grow, to live longer, will threaten the peace both
of Church and state; by delays your own guilt will be multiplied and
greatened, your hopes of reformation will be enfeebled, and the whole Kingdom
endangered: Businesses of necessity call for quick dispatch? and is there any
work of greater concernment, then the work of your God, in endeavoring your
own reformation, and the reformation of his Church according to his word, which
is the matter of your Covenant? I remember the words of Moses to Aaron, Go
quickly to the Congregation, for there is wrath gone out from the Lord, the
plague is begun, Number. 16. 46. And it is said that Aaron did run. Blame me not,
but bear with me, I beseech you, if I appear warm, in persuading your speed in
acting according to your Covenant, for I speak for the safety of a sinking
Kingdom. Are we not all on a flame? which way can you cast your eyes, but you
shall see the sparks of unbrotherly contentions, rising as out of a furnace?
Alas, alas, we shall burn into ashes, and from confusions fall into a ruinous
heap, if through Gods blessing upon Covenant-keeping-endeavours, our misery be
not prevented.

Pay your vows boldly, with so much opennesse, that the witness of your bonds
may be witnesses likewise of your faithfulness Rule 3.
in discharging them: The resolution of David is herein imitable, which he
expresses once and again in the same Psalm, I will pay my vows unto the Lord
in the presence of all his people, in the presence of all his people, yea in
the midst of thee, O Jerusalem, Psalm. 116. 14, 18, 19. Is it any shame for a
man to be honest, and to pay his debts? Wherefore then should men be loath to
appear in the pursuance of their Covenants? Act so publicly, so courageously
for a full reformation according to the word of God, and against Malignancy,
Sedition, Heresy, together with all other things destructive to the welfare of
the three Kingdoms, that both City and Country may understand your undaunted
resolutions to keep Covenant with your God: And if in this way of zeal and
faithfulness, you should meet with checks and affronts, make ye that answer
unto your opposers, which brave-spirited David made unto mocking Michal, If
this be to be vile, I will yet be more vile, 2 Samuel 6.

Keep Covenant with the Lord conscientiously: Have respect unto God in paying
as in making vows: My text holds forth this Rule 4.
openly, as many other parallel Scriptures, which I have formerly made use of.
Whatsoever we do, which is materially comprehended in our Covenant, we should
do it, because of the oath of God, Eccles. 8. 2. Do not only intend
man-pleasing, or selfe-seeking in the pursuance of your Covenant; be not
popular and vainglorious, but sincere and single-hearted in this service. As
in other acts of obedience, so in this of Covenant-keeping, have an eye unto
your heavenly father who sees in secreet, and he will reward you openly. God
forbid, God forbid that any one of you should act against your brethren with an
envious or malicious spirit, under pretense of making good your Covenant. O
take heed unto your selves, that you disgrace not this holy ordinance, nor open
the mouths of them, who malign our Covenant, and would upon such like
observations, reproachfully asperse both you and it. I will conclude this rule,
with the caution given by worthy Nehemiah: Ought ye not to walk in the fear of
our God, because of the reproach of our enemies? Neh. 5. 9.

Be vigorous in the payment of your vows: The command of Rule 5.
God given unto Moses for the guiding of this business, is here very
considerable, Le^ 22. 21. Whosoever offers a sacrifice to accomplish his vow,
it shall be perfect to be accepted, there shall be no blemish in it. When you
pay your debts to God, bring your best coin; put not off your light gold to
God; employ and improve your very best for your God; give him the flower of
your wisdom, strength, authority and interests; sit down and consider where
your chiefest ability lies, and resolve with that to pay your vows. Say thus
unto your own souls seriously in secret; I will beat mine own brains by study,
I will stir up my best friends by importunity, and I will industriously take
all courses within the compass of my general and particular calling, that my
self and my family, that this Church and Commonwealth may be reformed, and
that unity betwixt England and Scotland, may be preserved according to the
solemn League and Covenant: to quicken your care in this kind, remember those
smart words, Mal. 1. 14. Cursed be the deceiver, who has a male in his flock,
and voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing: for I am a great
King, says the Lord of hosts, and my Name is dreadful among the heathen. Look
to it therefore, I beseech you, think not to put God off, with supine,
superficial sleightnesse in Covenant-keeping: If you have male-consolations,
male-affections, male-endeavours, male-adventures for other things, God will
not accept your female, your cold, faint, feeble actings for him, in the
payment of your vows: Therefore if you have any talent better then ordinary,
trade that for your God, in the pursuance of your Covenant.

Keep Covenant with the Lord constantly: I will sing praises Rule 6.
to thy Name for ever (says David,) that I may daily perform my vows, Psalm
61. 8. you must not be like those Tenants, who bring in their rents readily,
and miss not a day for the first year, but grow careless afterward, in making
payment according to their compacts and agreements. The same heat which is in
your hearts to day ( this day of your Covenant-renewing,) for reformation
according to Gods word, and against the hindrances and hinderers thereof, must
be kept burning in your bosoms so long as you shall live. It is to be bewailed
with tears of blood, that the tract of time takes off the fervency of men's
spirits for God in the work of vowed-reformation. How have we lost our first
love? How is our zeal for good, and against evil of late abated? The time was,
when our Covenant was much in our thoughts, much in our mouths, when we moved
others, and provoked our selves to make conscience to keep it: but now ( I am
ashamed to speak it,) our Covenant is forgotten, our Covenant is laid aside;
yea (O that I had not occasion to add) many repent their taking of the
Covenant, and some are not afraid to plead against it: I heartily wish, that
the true causes of this great change were well enquired after. My beloved, Is
Church-reformation according to Scripture grown less desirable? Are pure
ordinances less lovely in our eyes? Is there now less danger of our undoing
by malignancy, popery, divisions and heresy, then heretofore? Remember, I pray
you, from whence you are fallen, and do your first works, in reference to your
Covenant, the obligation whereof continues upon your consciences. Our God keeps
Covenant to a thousand generations, Deuteronomy. 7. 9. Let his example in this
particular persuade your constancy. Be not weary of well doing; be not
discouraged by disappointments* be not beaten off by difficulties, delays,
oppositions; but proceed according to your callings and conditions, to promote
that blessed reformation which is under hand: In due time you shall reap, if
you faint not; Finis coronat opus; Be you faithful in your Covenant unto
death, and you shall receive the crown of life.

I have done with my Rules; now give me leave to give in some few helps that
you may act accordingly, and I will conclude all.

That you may be able to keep touch with God in point of Covenant, take these
very short directions.

1. Work well into your hearts the knowledge of all the forementioned
Directions.
particulars produced to persuade Covenant-keeping: A wise man (says Solomon)
is strong, yea, a man of knowledge increases strength (or strengthens
might,) Prove. 24. 5. Scripture-truths clearly understood, convey according to
Gods Ordinance, spiritual abilities into the souls of men to act accordingly;
As the warm beams of the summer sun administer vivacity to the creatures, both
vegetative and sensitive: Therefore I humbly advise you, to put your selves
often under the power of those truths, which may convince you of the necessity
and equity of paying your vows unto the Lord your God; and I doubt not, but by
means of serious meditation, you shall find more activity herein to do your
duty: While I was musing (says David) the fire burned, Psalm. 39. 3. The
bellows of meditation will produce the flame of zeal, out of the small heat of
holy desires to keep Covenant with God.

2. Act conscientiously, according to that measure of strength which you have
received. We all know by experience, that exercise increases bodily strength,
and questionless Christians find the truth hereof in their souls. Solomon
assures us, Prove. 10. 29. The way of the Lord is strength to the upright: The
further we walk on in the ways of faithfulness with God, and for God, the
more able we shall be to make good our foederall engagements unto his Majesty.
Do you not all remember that famous story of the well-minded widow, lamenting
her inability to pay her debts, whose little stock of oil was multiplied by
pouring forth, 2 King. 4. I beseech you make a spiritual improvement of this
experiment; give out those gifts, graces, which you have received in the
payment of your vows, and be you confident of increase: In this sense habenti
dabitur; trade your two talents, or your five for your Masters use, and they
shall be doubled, arise and be doing, and the Lord will be with you. Many of
you know to your comfort, that a small stock traded, is grown up to a great
estate; I pray you make practical application.

3. Mind your selves, and mind one another often of your solemn Covenant:
This was Gods own direction in this case, 2 King. 17. 39, The Covenant which I
have made with you, ye shall not forget. Among men, many promises are not
performed, because they are not remembered: And so it is likewise in many of our
obligations unto God, forgetfullnesse is sometimes one cause of some
unfaithfullnesse. The Psalmists connection, Psalm. 103. 18. is considerable;
Those that keep his Covenant, and those who remember his Commandments to do
them. There is an Order of Parliament, requiring Ministers to read the solemn
League and Covenant in the Congregation, upon our Monthly Fast days; And I
humbly move, that there may be an Order of the Common Counsel of this famous
City, that the Covenant which you this day renew, may once at least in every
quarter of the year be read amongst you; by means hereof, you would be quickened
to appear both jointly and severally, in courses to promote both private and
public reformation according to your Covenant.

4. Seek strength from Heaven, by faith and prayer: The holy Apostle, holding
up to Jesus Christ by humble confidence, could say, I can do all through Christ
strengthening me, Phil. 4. 13. And the Psalmist makes this report of the
success of his prayer; In the day when I cried, thou answeredst me, and
strengthenedst me with strength in my soul, Psalm. 138. 3. Your selves best
know, wherein Covenant-keeping sticks most with your selves, you are acquainted
with your own remoraes, your own difficulties in this service. Consider that
your help lies in the Lord your God, therefore fetch it thence by fervent
believing prayers; plead the promises of Gods Covenant with you through Christ,
that you through him may be able to deal faithfully, to do worthily; and be you
confident that the Lord will never be wanting unto the soul which seeks him in
truth, He has not said to the house of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain.

FINIS.

