THUNDER From HEAVEN Against the BACK-SLIDERS and APOSTATES Of the TIMES. In
some Meditations on the 24 Chapter of Isaiah.

By W. A.

Amos. 3. 8. The Lion has roared, who will not fear? The Lord has spoken,
who can but Prophecy? Jer. 23. 8. Then I said, I wi^^ (...) ^ake mention of
him, nor speak any more in his nam^ (...) word was in mine heart as a burning
fire shut up (...); and I was weary with forbearing, and I could (...) LONDON,
Printed for Livewell Chapman, and are to be sold at the Crown in
Popes-head-alley, 1655,

THE AUTHOR TO THE Reader.
THE words of Jehovah are pure words, as silver tried in a furnace of earth,
purified seven times, Psalm. 12. 6. They are also precious, and more to be
desired then gold, yea then much fine gold, Psalm. 19. 10. And as it is with
purified silver or gold, each grain is precious, and has its weight: so is it
with the word of God. Each word, syllable, and letter, yea each vowel and
accent has its worth and weight; as in part I have showed, in a little brief
explication of the seventh of Daniel. Which poor labor has received some
squint blows, that are not worthy the answer; in as much as they contain more
words then weight, and leave too much upon humane authority (though none of
them would be thought so to do) and without which, their strength would fail;
as hereafter I may possibly manifest in some meditations upon the eighth of
Daniel, a place very much mistaken by some good men, for want of due attendance
to Scripture Language. And now I do here present thee with some meditations
upon the twenty fourth of Isaiah; in which Chapter are contained many sad
predictions of sore calamities to befall a Land, to which the Prophet gives no
name. Wherefore I have took occasion, at vacant hours, to weigh the words and
circumstances in the text, for my own private help, to understand the Counsel
of God therein. And perceiving many things therein (if duly attended) might be
both publicly and privately useful; I durst not conceal it within my own
breast, lest I should incur the guilt of unfaithfulness, if having but one poor
Talent, I should go and hide it in a napkin. And though the Prophet apply it
not to any particular Land by name, neither dare I presume to make particular
application thereof (wanting a clear word for my warrant) yet forasmuch as
Scriptures may be Analogically applied, and so become useful to all succeeding
times, nations, and persons; I thought it would not be unuseful to explicate
the words of this Prophecy, according to the property of the language wherein
they are written, as Master Ainsworth has done upon the books of Moses and
other Scriptures. That so every one that reads may consider how far they are,
or may be concerned therein, and make a profitable use thereof for themselves.
For this let me say to thee, whosoever thou art, If thou fall under the guilt
of these sins of Apostasy, hypocrisy, and Covenant Breaking, etc. mentioned in
this Chapter; be assured, God has reserved FEAR, or a PIT, or a SNARE for
thee, to wit, variety of punishments of such a nature, to humble thee withal.
But beware of making mis-applications of what the Prophet speaks, and is here
briefly unfolded, lest these evils be thy portion. And though many who mind
not the things of God and his threatenings, will much less mind any thing I
have said in this little Treatise; yet the poor flock of Christ (for whose sake
I have chiefly penned it) will incline their ears and listen: and if they
perceive the voice of Christ breathing therein, they will soon discern it, from
the voice of a stranger. When they hear the Lion of the tribe of Judah roar,
they will tremble: and when he invites them with an amiable compellation (as
indeed he does, Isa. 26. 10.) Come my people, they will attend his voice, and
enter into their chambers, and draw near to God, and wrestle with him as Jacob
did, for mercy in behalf of themselves, and of the land wherein they live, that
the anger of the Lord may be turned away from them. Read therefore and
consider, and let not the obscurity and tenuity of the Author make thee to
slight it, but consider the Majesty and Authority of the word of the Lord, and
receive that, and nothing but what agrees thereunto. As touching the particular
time and season, when the words of this prophecy are to be accomplished, the
text does not speak to it, nor dare I; only this is evident, that all these
sad predictions shall receive their accomplishment, at or a little before the
glorious reign of Christ Jesus, before his ancient people the Jews. Which, as I
have elsewhere observed, will not be above nineteen years yet to come: I mean,
the first beginning of the Jews return. Wait therefore and stand, having your
loins girt. For he that will come, will come, and will not tarry.

Prae-monitus prae-munitus.
A Premonition of sundry sad Calamities yet to come.
Grounded upon an Explication of the 24 Chapter of Isaiah.
1 BEhold, Jehovah makes the land empty, and makes it waste, and perverteth
the face thereof and scatters abroad the inhabitants thereof.

2 And it shall be, as with the people, so with the Priest, as with the
servant, so with his master, as with the handmaid so with her mistress: as
with the buyer so with the seller, as with the lender so with the borrower, as
with the taker upon usury, so with the lender upon usury.

3 The land shall be utterly emptied, and shall be utterly spoiled: for Jehovah
has spoken this word.

4 The land mourns fades, the world languisheth fades: the HIGH ONE of the
people of the land do languish.

5 The land is defiled under the inhabitants thereof: for they have
transgressed the Law, changed the Statute, and broken the everlasting Covenant.

6 Therefore the curse has consumed the land, and they that dwell therein are
guilty: therefore the inhabitants of the land are enraged, and the poor little
man left.

7 The new wine mourns, the vine languisheth: all the merry hearted do sigh.

8 The mirth of tabrets cease, the noise of them that rejoice is left off,
the joy of the harp cease.

9 They shall not drink wine with a song: strong wine shall be bitters to the
drinkers thereof.

10 The City Tohu is broken: every house is shut up from going in.

11 There is crying for wine in the streets: all joy is darkened, the mirth of
the land is gone.

12 In this city is left astonishment, and the gate is smitten with
destruction.

13 When thus it shall be in the midst of this land, among the people: as it
were the shaking of an Olive tree, as the gleaning of grapes when the vintage
is done.

14 These shall lift up their voice, they shall sing in the majesty of Jehovah,
they shall shout aloud for joy from the sea.

15 Wherefore with VRIM glorify ye Jehovah in the Isles of the sea: the name
of Jehovah the God of Israel.

16 From the wing of this land we have heard songs, glory to the righteous, but
I said, my leanness, my leanness, woe unto me: the treacherous dealers have
dealt treacherously, yea the treacherous dealers have dealt very treacherously.

17 FEAR, and the PIT, and she SNARE: upon thee, O inhabitants of that land.

18 And it shall come to pass, he that flies from the noise of the FEAR, shall
fall into the PIT, and he that ascends out of the midst of the PIT, shall be
taken in the SNARE: for the windows from the MOST HIGH are opened, and the
foundations of the land do shake.

19 The land is sore bruised: the land is utterly broken, the land is quite
displaced.

20 The land shall reel to and fro like a drunkard, and shall be removed like a
cottage: for the transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it, and it shall
fall, and never rise any more.

21 And it shall come to pass in that very day, Jehovah will punish the Militia
of that HIGH ONE, with that HIGH ONE, and the Kings of the earth, upon the
earth.

22 And they shall be gathered together with a gathering, a prisoner for the
dungeon: and very many days shall they be punished.

23 Then the Moon shall be confounded, and the Sun ashamed: for the LORD OF
HOSTS shall reign in mount Zyon, and in Jerusalem, and before his Ancients
gloriously.

THis Chapter, and the three subsequent Chapters, are exactly calcualted for
this very Age wherein we live, as in the ensuing Discourse will more fully
appear. But this 24 chapter does in a special manner contain the sad and
inex^^icable calamities that will befall the unbeleeving world, toward the end
of their worldly governments, a little before the glorious coming of the
kingdom of our Lord Jesus, which in the later end of the fourth Monarchy will
be slighted, and yet dreaded; insomuch that men will be troubled to hear of it,
as sometime Herod was, and the carnal Church also, when it was reported that
this King Jesus was born, Mat. 2. 3. But let men of earthly spirits (who mind
more the Mammon of this world, and the dignities thereof, then the coming of
Christ's kingdom, which he taught his disciples to pray for, (...).
Mat. 6. 10) I say, let them deem as they please, and make a scoff at it, as
Peter tells us they will, 2 Pet. 3. 3. in the later end of dayss, saying, Where
is the promise of his coming? (which is spoken of this very age wherein we live)
yet let such know, that for all this God will bring them to judgment, Eccles.
11. 9. And the day of Christ's coming (which now they slight) will be to them as
a thief in the night, 2 Thessalonians. 5. 2. And these mockers, of what rank soever,
shall cry to the mountains and to the rocks, to fall upon them, and cover them
from the wrath of the Lamb, and him that sits upon the Throne (whom now they
persecute in his poor members) Rev. 6. from v. 12. to the end of the chapter.
Therefore be wise O ye Kings, be instructed O ye Judges of the earth, serve
the Lord with fear and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son lest he be angry,
and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little.

Now ere I come to the words of the explication of this Prophecy, let me
premise these three things to be considered.

1. That there is no prediction of judgment, nor promise of mercy in
Scripture, but it relates to some particular thing, person, nation or time; or
else generally to all things, persons, nations, and times, under the same or
the like condition.

2. That whatsoever is particularly applied to some particular thing, person,
nation, or time, may be applied Analogically and by way of proportion, unto any
other things, persons, nations and times, upon the same or the like terms.

3. That particular judgments threatened in case of repentance, may be
obviated, and prevented in whole or in part: and so also mercies in case of
apostasy and backsliding.

These things premised, I shall briefly come to a particular disquisition of
this Prophecy, which names no particular person, nation, or time, and
explicate as I go along, what is most obstruce, without just offense to any;
submitting what I shall hold forth to the judgment of those who are able to
judge of spiritual things, and willing to weigh all things in the balance of
the Sanctuary.

In this Prophecy of Isaiah, as in other of the Prophets, you may observe
particular Prophesies against particular countries. As against Babylon in the
13, 14. 21. and 47. chapters; Against Moab in the 15, and 16. chapters; against
Damascus in the 17. chapter; against Ethiopia in the 18 chapter, against Egypt
in the 19 chapter, and against both of them in the 20 chapter; against Edom and
Arabia in the 21 chapter; against Ephraim in the 28 chap. against Judah and
Jerusalem, in the 29 and 30 and 31 chapters; against the Idols of Babell
chapter 46. All which may be applied by way of proportion against any other
Idols, Persons, Nations, and Places in any other age, upon the same, or the
like terms.

This 24 chapter is a Prophecy against a particular Land or Nation (as
hereafter will more clearly appear) but gives no name to it. And probably it
may be thought that the Land whereof he speaks, was not at that time peopled,
nor subjected to Government, and therefore not named. If any should suppose it
to relate to Tyrus, of which mention is made in the chapter foregoing; I
conceive it cannot be so for these Reasons.

1. The Prophet in the close of the foregoing chapter foretells the
restoration and flourishing state of Tyrus after her visitation, and therefore
what he speaks of this Land, cannot well be understood of Tire. 2ly. The Land
here spoken of is an Island or Islands environed with Sea, as appears from the
14 and 15 verses: whereas Tyrus is an haven town upon the main Continent. 3ly.
The judgment denounced against Tyrus was long since executed, whereas the
judgments here threatened to befall this Land, shall be in the latter days not
long before the Conversion of the Jews, and the coming of the glorious
Kingdom of our Lord Jesus: wherefore I take it to be a Prophecy of, or
concerning some particular Land or Islands in these latter times.

But ere I come to a particular examination of the words in their order, I
shall give you this brief Analysis of the Prophets method in this chapter.
First he shows the various changes and alterations of Government in that Land,
in the sour first verses. 2ly. The ground and cause thereof, to wit, their
hypocrisy and apostacy, in the 5 verse. 3ly. The sad consequents both of
their sin and of those alterations, from the 5 verse to the end of the 12. 4ly.
Gods reservation of a remnant which shall glorify him in those Islands, ver.
13, 14, 15, and part of the 16. 5ly. The treachery of the instrumens who were
bestrusted by the Nation, and were active in all these changes, verse 16, 17,
18. 6ly. The dissolution of their several forms of Government, verse 19, 20.
7ly. The punishment of the Instruments, verse 21. together with the punishment
of the Kings of the neighboring Nations, verse 21, 22. And lastly the
principal Efficient of all these mutations, Jehovah the Lord of Hosts; and the
end he aimed at, to wit, the setting up of his Sons Kingdom in all the
Nations, but more especially amongst his Ancient people, verse 23.

Ver. 1. Behold.] This word of attention is prefixed to quicken (...)
up the hearts of Gods people to a serious attention of what the Prophet is
about to deliver, and to a deligent search after the mind and counsel of God
therein. And it implies, that there is something more then ordinary to be
treated of, some remarkable occurrence of Providence, not elsewhere touched by
him. Wherefore the Prophecy being for a long time then to come, and veiled
with many Metaphors, and the name of the Land or Islands concealed; the Spirit
of God thought it meet to give this note of attention, least otherwise his
Council therein should not be perceived.

Ver. 1. Jehovah emptieth the Land.] The word which is translated emptieth, and
the other word translated makes it waste, (...)
are both Participles of the present tense, as if he should say, the Lord is
emptying and making it waste. Which holds forth to us two preparatory Acts of
God, making way for the ensuing changes of Government in that Land, or in those
Islands. And when the Prophet says Jehovah did empty the Land etc. It implies
Gods approbation of it, and that he had a design of his own in hand whilst he
is about this work, and what that design was, will be spoken of hereafter.
Emptieth.] (...)
The word properly signifies such an emptying, as when one emptieth a narrow
mouthed bottle, which they call Bakbuk, from the bubling noise it makes in
emptying. So that the word imports some murmr of the people, when God thus
begins to empty the Representative of the Land; some approving, some
disapproving the Action. The Land.] The (...)
word signifies Earth or Land; And sometimes is put for the whole dry land or
habitable part of the world, as Genesis 1. 10. (...)
and so it may be derived from a word that signifies, to run up and down about
their occasions and negotiations. Or else it is put for some particular Region
or Country and the Jurisdiction thereof, as its most usual, and so it may be
derived of a word that signifies a voluntary choice, because men voluntarily
(...)
subject themselves to such a Government. And in that sense I take it here in
this Prophecy: Understanding the Representative of the land to be put
Synechdochically for the whole land. Now for as much as the Prophet has given
no name to this land, neither shall I apply it to any one land or other
peculiarly, saving only by way of proportion in the close of this discourse.

Yet for the better opening and applying of this Prophecy let me add these
few considerations more touching this land. First that it cannot principally be
meant of any land or country upon the main Continent, because it is called
Islands of the Sea, ver. 15. And Islands of the Sea are distinguished from
inland Countries, Isa. 11. 11. Such as were Assyria, Egypt, Pathrosh, Gush,
Elam, Shinar, and Hamath. All which Countries in Scripture phrase are called
Islands, as Isa. 20. 6. But then they are called Islands simply, as in the
place next forementioned, or else Islands of the Gentiles, as Genesis 10. 5. Zeph.
2. 11. Not Islands of the Sea, as in this place. Secondly, It is spoken of such
a land Government as extends it self to more Islands then one, as will be
showed more at large in the 15 ver. of this chapter. Thirdly, It is such a land
as abounds with much Heavenly light, as will be showed upon the 15 ver.
aforementioned. Fourthly, It is such a Country as passes under various and
sudden changes of Government, expressed by sundry Metaphorical phrases, as
will be opened, ver. 17. And lastly it is such a Land as has one most
High-one, who has the Command of the Militia, and is instrumenticall in those
alterations of Government: which may suffice to give some light what the
Prophet means by this land, so far as the circumstances in the text do lead us.

And makes it waste.] The word (...) Significat dissipare et effiingere
quodclausum et munitam erat, ut omnium injuriis patet. Merc. (...) Significat
(...) Buxtorf.
here used imports such an act as breaks down or infringeth the privileges
and immunities of the peoples Representative, and thereby exposes them to
injury and waste: as will appear in the two ensuing Acts, which I call
perfecting Acts. He perverteth the face thereof.] The word translated
perverteth (...)
does signify to wind and turn a thing about secretly, but strongly. Which
argues that the liberties being once infringed there will be some instrument or
other which will by power and policy turn about the face of the Government. Or
to speak in soldiers language, will make them face about: and having thus
done, he does at length Scatter them abroad: which is the fourth Act; and these
two last Acts are put forth by a power Paramount to the Representative of the
land. These I call perinfecting acts, because the power that formerly was
resident the Representative of the land, upon their dissollution and
scattering, devolves into the hand of that power that dissolved them

Hitherto God owns the actions as approvable in his sight, sobeit the power
spoken of, and the instruments improved by him, do with simplicity and
integrity carry on Gods design for setting up the kingdom of his Son in that
land, seeking the public peace and tranquillity of the State, without any
squint looks or secret designs to advance their own private interests. For now
the nation stands in such a posture as renders it capable of new forming, and
settling upon a firm Basis, under the subjection and protection of that blessed
and only Potentate the Lord Jesus, 1 Timothy 6. 15. which would have been the
happiness of that nation. But here alas begins the woe and misery of that poor
land (through the treachery of the instruments) which the Prophet so sadly
laments in the 16 verse of this chapter: For they having broken the everlasting
covenant of professed subjection to the Lord Jesus only, he now subjects the
nation unto that most High One of the people, spoken of in the 4. verse; and so
they are taken in the same snare from which they fled under the terror of
tyranny of the first Government, and might have been safe under the second form
of Government, of which more will we spoken hereafter in its proper place.

Verse. 2. In this verse follows a perfect and real levelling of all ranks and
estates unto the power of that High One of the people. Wherefore the Prophet
says, It shall be, as with the people, so with the Priest, as with the servant,
so with his master, etc. God will level the Clergy, (as they are called) and
the L^ity, and all ranks and qualities of men (not in their estates and
proprieties) but he will level them to judgment, none of them shall escape it;
but as they have been all sharers in sin, and have all broken the everlasting
covenant, so they shall all be sharers in the punishment thereof: For that is
the true meaning of the phrase, Like People, like Priest, as appears in Hos. 4.
9. where the like expressions are used.

Ver. 3. Things thus standing in that land, it seems there will be an assembly
of a second Representative by that most High one of the people, but of short
continuance; and therefore he says, in emptying they shall be emptied,] or as
our translation renders it (and not unfitly) the land shall be utterly emptied,
and suddenly, all at once, not by degrees and steps, as the former was, but
there shall be a speedy dispatch of this; (...)
yet with a bubling noise and murmr of the people, as the word imports: some
saying it is well done, others otherwise: This breach, or dissolution, will be
worse resented then the former, wherewith men seemed contented, or at least
showed no discontent. And thus you have a short end of the second
Representative, after which follows a third; of which it is said, it shall be
utterly spoiled.] The word here used may be (...)
derived either from a word (...)
that signifies to abase and render a thing contemptible, or it may be derived
from another word that signifies to make a prey (...)
or spoil of them, as soldiers do in war: and if you take it in this latter
sense, it argues the exercise of a Military power to overcome them, and bind
them to conditions, unsuitable to their former ancient customs, which renders
them despicable and abaseth them, according to the former derivation of the
word; For these two Roots have a near affinity one with the other. Thus have
you a metaphorical representation of the various changes of the Government in
that land. And the certainty of all those events is expressed in the next
words, For Jehovah has spoken this word.] God that cannot lie, and God that
gives Being to all things has spoken it: it is an irrevocable word. But as
touching the consequences of all these mutations and alterations mentioned from
the sixth verse and so forward, God has not affixed this word of ratification
thereunto, but leaves a room for repentance, that the judgments may be removed,
either in whole, or in part, whereof more will be said in the close of this
Discourse.

Verse 4. The land mourns fades.] By land, as I said before, I understand
the Representative of the land, part being put for the whole by a Synechdoche.
It mourns fades. The word translated (...)
fades, does signify such a fading as happens to leaves or flowers, or fruits
when they have lost their moisture, and begin to wither, and at length fall
from their trees. Which does imply the drying up of the power of the lands
Representative, which kept them fresh and flourishing; and their mourning
expresses their unwillingness thus to be bereaved of their ancient liberties.
So unpleasing a thing will it be to this land here spoken of, to part with their
old earthly forms of Government, and to become subject to the kingdom and
government of Jesus Christ alone: They look at them as their birthright, and
mourn as a man would do for loss thereof; and whilst thus they are mourning
over their loss, they wither and fade, the source and spring being now dried up
which formerly kept them fresh and green. (...)
After which it is said, the whole World languisheth fades, that is, the rest
of the Nations fall into a languishing consumption, as the word signifies, and
grow sick of their forms of government, being sensible of their tyranny and
oppression, and they also fade away like a leaf and wither, and at last do fall
as leaves in Autumn, which argues the removal of those earthly forms of
government, both in that land, and in all the rest of the Nations and Countries
adjacent. And this is the accomplishment of that word, Heb. 12. 26, 27. Yet
once more I shake not the earth only, but also heaven. And this, yet once more,
signifies the removing of those things that are (or may be) shaken, as of
things that are made, that those things which cannot be shaken may remain. Thus
you see the dying state of earthly governments throughout the world, and
especially in that land spoken of. It now remains to show you, what will be the
condition of that High One of the people, of whom it is said, The most High One
of the people do languish. The (...)
word translated Most High One, does properly signify height in the abstract,
but is usually put for the superlative degree of the concrete, as Psalm. 56. 2.
And it signifies an exaltation, or lifting up in height above the rest of the
people. Concerning which High one, it is said they do languish, in the plural
number. Which (...)
implies, that this High one and those that have advanced him to that height,
shall all of them fall into a consumption, and languish. And this holds forth a
decay and abatement of strength by degrees, which will come upon them as it is
usual with men in a ling ring disease.

Thus you have a brief description of the manifold mutations and changes that
will happen to that land inparticular, and to the whole world in general, and
lastly to this High one of the people, and his advancers. In the next verse
follows the ground and cause of all these evils, to wit, their hypocrisy and
apostacy.

Ver. 5. The land also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof.] The (...)
word translated defiled, * does properly signify, to dissemble and play the
hypocrite, to sin fraudulently, secretly, maliciously; and by a Metaphor, to
defile: The meaning thereof is, that the whole land in general have played the
Hypocrites and dealt falsely and fraudulently with God, and defiled themselves
with apostacy, as the Prophet proves afterward in sundry particulars. The
universality of this Hypocrisy and apostasy, seems to extend unto all that
inhabit the land: The people, the High one of the people, and the
Representative of the people; They are all guilty; and this the Prophet proves
in three particulars. For first, They have transgressed the Law,] to wit, the
moral Law. They neither give God his due, nor man his due, which is the sum of
the whole law. They can be zealous when their own interests are concerned, but
where is their zeal against open Blasphemies, common swearing, gross
adulteries, notorious whoredoms, horrible oppressions, and exactions, and all
manner of profanenes? And is not that a strong conviction of their Hypocrisy
and Apostacy? 2ly. They have changed the Statute.] The word translated (...)
changed, signifiea such a change as does substitute one thing in the room or
steed of another. The word (...) Buxtorf.
Statute or Ordinance, signifies such Statutes and Ordinances as God has
imposed: And sometimes it is put for Ecclesiastical impositions and Statutes,
such as concern the affairs of the Church, as the Ceremonies of old did;
sometimes it is put for Civil impositions and Statutes, which relate to Civil
things; and such were the Judicials. Now says the Prophet, in stead of the
Statutes and Ordinances which God has imposed, they have substituted
Ordinances and impositions of their own invention and framing, both in
Spirituals and Temporals. This is the changing of the Statute here spoken of,
and it is a real demonstration of their Hypocrisy and Apostacy, wherewith he
charged them in the first words of the verse. And 3ly. They have broken the
everlasting covenant.] This implies an entrance into such a solemn Covenant (at
least by the Trustees of the land) which is here called the everlasting
Covenant, and by the people of God in every age of the world has or ought to
have been made. Now what is this everlasting Covenant? doubtless it is to
accept Christ upon his own terms, to rule over us as our King: according as
Isaiah (prophesying also of this very age and season) says, Jehovah is our
Judge, Jehovah is our Statute maker (or Legislator,) Jehovah is our King, he
will save us, Isa. 33. 22. This is their solemn Covenant, profession, and
protestation, if God will but bath his sword in the blood of their enemies,
according as it is said it shall be, in the fifth verse of the next chapter,
where he speaks of this very age. Now the Prophet charge this land to have
broken this Covenant. The word [translated (...)
broken,] signifies, to break or make it void, by presuming it to be a
Conditional covenant: The meaning is, they do evade this Covenant with
distinctions and qualifications, (...) Buxtorf.
and conditions, and so break the Covenant which is indeed an everlasting
Covenant and not avoidable by any pretenses whatsoever, without guilt of
Hypocrisy and Apostacy. And therefore when they absolutely profess and vow
and Covenant that they will take Christ on his own terms, and that they will
have no King but him, no laws but his laws, and afterward come to distinguish
upon the meaning, and make the covenant only a stalking-horse to attain
their own ends; the Prophet tells them plainly, this is Hypocrisy, it is
apostacy, yea such as defiles the whole land. Thus the Prophet deciphers out
the sad changes that shall come upon that land, and the causes thereof. The
doleful consequences follow in the seven next ensuing verses.

Ver. 6. Therefore has the curse devoured the land, etc.] These words are an
inference upon the former, and show the bitter fruit of their hypocrisy,
apostasy, and covenant breaking. The curse eats up the land, and as it is
said, Deuteronomy. 28. 16, etc. Cursed in City, cursed in field, cursed in basket and
store, etc. but the curse here spoken of, is a curse with an oath, because of
their (...)
perjuries in breach of covenant: for covenants are usually made with an oath,
or curse, or solemn vow in the presence of God, equivalent to an oath, the Lord
himself being witness of it, and a dreadful avenger of the breach thereof, and
God will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain, Exodus 20. 7. Were
it but an oath and covenant with men, even such who have advanced us to power,
that were broken, God would recompense it, as you may read, Ezekiel. 17. 16. As I
live (says the Lord Jehovih) speaking of Christ; for so the name Jehovih is
always taken) Surely in the place of that King that kinged him, whose oath he
despised, and whose covenant he brake: with him in the midst of Babylon he
shall die. Neither shall Pharaoh with his mighty Army and great Company make
for him in the war, by raising up mounts and building forts to cut off many
souls: seeing he despised the oath [or curse] (when lo he had given his hand)
and has done all these things, he shall not escape. Therefore thus says the
Lord JEHOVIH, As I live, surely mine oath which he has despised, and my
covenant which he has broken, even it will I recompense upon his own head. And
I will spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare, and I will
bring him to Babylon, and will make him suffer punishment there for his This
prevarication is when a man makes semblance to do one thing, and does the
quite contrary.
prevarication wherewith he has preevaricated against me. And all his
fugitives, with all his troops, shall fall by the sword, and they that remain
shall be scattered toward all the winds, and ye shall know that I Jehovah
have spoken it. Men may think it a point of policy to dissemble in their
covenants; and when their ends are attained to break them, but God counts it
profaneness, and therefore this King is called by the Prophet, Ezekiel. 21. 25.
Thou profane and wicked Prince of Israel. Let all covenant-breakers read it
and tremble, for God has a net and a snare for them which they shall not be
able to escape, were they whole Hosts and Bands of men. The oath which Christ
has taken is with a curse, as if he should say, let me not live if I do not
recompense such dallying with oaths and covenants upon the heads of all such
men. And so I shall have done with the Oath or Curse that devoureth the land.

And they that dwell therein are guilty.] The word translated Gulty, properly
signifies guilt of sin, as if the prophet should say, (...)
These covenant-breakers (notwithstanding all the evils that do befall the
poor land, will wipe their mouths like the adulterous woman, Prove. 30. 20.)
and say, I have done, no wicednesse. But the Prophet holds his hand upon the
sore, tells them, they are guilty of all the wickedness before mentioned, to
wit, hypocrisy and dissimulation both with God and men: apostasy from their
first principles, breach of their covenants, oaths and protestations, whereof
God, Angels and Men are witness^s. And And this is no slight matter, for in the
end it brings ruin and (...)
desolation, as our translation renders the word. In which sense the word there
used has a near affi^ity with another root which signifies to make desolate.
Thus you see two sad consequences of covenant breaking, to wit, Curse and
Desolation. Another is the inraging or heating of men's spirits, and the
consequent of that, to wit, a consuming and burning up of the inhabitants with
intestine wars. Therefore.] The word (...)
here used is properly rendered, Because it is thus, as if the Prophet should
say, Because the curse of God is upon the land for their covenant breaking,
etc. and men still lie under the guilt thereof without repentance and will not
be convinced; their spirits therefore grow to be overheated and enraged, so as
the fire of intestine wars does burn and consume them. Such is the
Concatenation of woes and Calamities, upon that poor miserable land. And yet
we are not come to an end of them.

Therefore the inhabitants of the Land are enraged.] The word (...)
properly signifies to kindle and inflame with internal or external heat,
such as consumes the Radical moisture. Hence it is sometimes translated
burning or consuming, which is the proper effect of this heat of spirit and
wrath. And this will be the state of the Land in general, only the poor
little man will escape this rage and fury.

And the poor little man left.] The word translated poor man (...)
signifies a feeble sorrowful calamitous man: and the word little, is a man
that is low or little in estate, and low in the reputation of the world. God
chooses the foolish things of this world, to confound the wise; and God has
chosen the weak things of this world to confound the things which are mighty;
and base things of the world, and things which are despised, has God chosen;
and things that are not, to bring to naught things that are, 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28.
The meaning I conceive may be this, either that the afflictions of these times
will be such, as all universally through the Nation will be reduced unto sorrow
and calamity: So that the people who were formerly renowned and dreaded of all
Nations, will now become mean and despicable. Or else the meaning may be this,
that in the midst of these combustions and tumults, God will reserve a company
of poor sorrowful mourners, which for estates are weak and feeble, and for
repute in the world are mean and despicable; even these shall be reserved,
according as it is writ, Zeph. 3. 12. I will also leave in the midst of thee,
an afflicted and poor people; and they shall trust in the Name of Jehovah.

These despicable ones which the world thinks to be deluded with an
apprehension of a fifth Monarchy, or Kingdom of Christ, these poor men are
left: they escape the rage wherewith the men of the world are incensed, and
carry it in all humility, meekness, patience, and simplicity, (without any
secret plots and designs) and are of a sweet, peaceable, quiet, calm and cool
temper, when all the land is in a hot burning fever. If they loose their
estates, they bear it patiently: if their lives and liberties, they are (like
their Master Christ) dumb before the shearer, not opening their mouths: yea,
so far are they from being enraged and incensed with the sad calamities that
happen, that on the contrary they lift up their heads and rejoice, knowing that
their redemption draws nigh. Call them what you will, Presbyterians,
Puritans, Independents, Anabaptists, Fifth Monarchy-men, giddy headed fellows,
or what the world pleases* they are not moved, their spirts will not be chafed
or overheated, but they patiently bear it all with an amiable, quiet and calm
spirit, and are not ashamed of the Cross of Christ; they rather rejoice that
they are counted worthy to suffer reproaches and imprisonments for their Lord
and Master, and for their hope and faith, in the word of his truth: They know
that after they have suffered with him, and for him, they shall assuredly
reign with him: and therefore they still wait for and pray for, and preach
for, and suffer for the Kingdom of Christ, which they know will assuredly
come, and is now at hand, even at the doors.

Thus have you a brief, yet full description of the State of that poor
miserable Land, whereof the Prophet speaks; and the various mutations of
Government in that Land, together with the several steps and degrees of all
those Changes, and the causes thereof, and the Curse that comes upon the Land,
and the fruits thereof, and upon the inhabitants of the same; only a small
lemnant excepted. And now follows the Judgment of God upon their choicest
Comforts, their foreign Trade and Shipping, verse 7, 8, 9. and upon the great
City or Metropolis of the Land, verse 10, 11, 12.

Verse 7. The new wine mourns, the Vine languisheth, etc.] This verse and the
two following verses, do hold forth Gods blasting hand upon all their chiefest
comforts under these Metaphorical expressions. And whereas the Prophet says,
The new wine mourns, etc. It seems to imply a decay or obstruction of their
foreign Trade, and also of their shipping by which such comforts are imported,
their mirth and music also, with all their jollity, will be blasted, by
reason of the heavy judgments of God (...)
upon them.

Verse 10. 11, 12. The City Tohu is broken] The word translated Tohu does
properly signify an Existence of Being without form or order, as I have
observed upon Genesis 1. 1. where that word is first used. and is in our English
Bibles translated, Without form. This argues the Factions, distractions, and
Divisions of the Citizens of this great City within themselves; some will be
for one party, some for another party, and others for neither. Insomuch as no
man dare keep his doors open, nor suffer any to come in. This faction and
division within, exposes both the City and suburbs to breaking, plundering,
astonishment and desolation. And all this in a special manner spoken of the
Metropolis, or chief City of the Land, according to the usual manner of
Scripture.

And thus you have an ample description of the calamities which will befall
both City and Country, Government and Governor of these Islands. Which
Catastrophe being ended, the Prophet in the next verse puts in a word of
comfort and support unto the poor despised ones of Christ, before mentioned.

Ver. 13. When thus it shall be, in the midst of the Land among the people, and
as it were the shaking of an Olive tree, as the Gleaning of Grapes when the
Vintage is done.] These words hold forth two things. 1. That this time of Gods
Judgment is his vintage; And if you compare it with Rev. 14. 19, 20. it will
appear to be a bloody vintage, a vintage of red wine indeed. And so I conceive
the Prophets meaning by this Metaphor, to be this. That since the people of the
Land here spoken of, would not accept the opportunity which God set before
them, of moulding themselves a new, according to the revealed will of Christ in
his word; but would still retain their old ancient customs and forms of
administration of their own modelling; the Lord is put upon a necessity (as we
may speak with reverence) to scruice them and press them as Olives are
pressed, and to tread them as grapes are trodden in the wine press, ere they
will come off to a professed subjection to Jesus Christ: Yet after they have
been thoroughly harrazed and broken under several forms of Government one after
another of their own forming and modelling, God will produce precious Oil and
Wine at length, and then they will be willing to listen to those poor
contemptible persons, which they before slighted, as fifth Monarchy men, etc.

And now they will be glad to submit to the quiet, peaceable and righteous
Government of Christ, having tasted and found by woeful experience, the
instability, imperfection and unrighteousness of all other forms and
administrations.

Secondly, these words hold forth unto us the distinguishing love of God to a
poor remnant of despised ones, which the world hates. For whilst God is thus
pressing the fat ones and great ones of the land (which number up Riches as the
dust of the earth, and rear up Trophies of honor and greatness to eternize
their memories) I say, whilst God casts these into the Wine* press of his
wrath, he reserves to himself a handful of these poor mournful men, who
wait for the kingdom of Christ, and pray for it, and preach for it; and these
he saves from the press, and reserveth for afterward, that they may glorify
him with their light, when the indignation is overpast* and when the vintage is
done.

Verse 14. Then shall These lift up their voice and sing with a Divine Majesty
the song of Moses and the Lamb, Rev. 15. 3 and from all quarters of the land,
yea from the Navy and Maritime coasts and haven Towns, shall their voice be
heard.

Verse 15. Wherefore glorify ye Jehovah with URIM, etc. The word translated
Wherefore, does properly signify, Because it is thus; speaking to the little
Remnant before mentioned, as who should say, since God has expressed such
distinguishing love toward you, to preserve you in the midst of the flames,
and reserved you to sing forth his praises when the vintage is done, therefore
glorify ye Jehovah with URIM, all ye that dwell in those Islands. The word
URIM is translated in our English Bibles Tyres, but not so fitly. Never do the
translators ever render that word in that sense, save only in this place.
Indeed the word [UR] in the singular number i^used for fire; but never is URIM
in the plural number so taken: Although it is a truth that the Saints should
glorify the Lord in the fires, and in the waters also.

URIM and THUMMIM were two precious stones (as is conceived) which were
purposely made by God, and appointed to be set in the Breast Plate of
Judgment, Exodus 28. 30. to manifest the counsel of God unto his people, when
they enquired of him in dark and doubtful cases, whether God did give answer
by that URIM, showing them, as in a glass, a verbal answer to that which was
inquired, or how else, it is not manfest. For my own part, I rather conceive
that those URIM and THUMMIM (whatsoever they were) being worn by the High
Priest in his Breast Plate, as an ordinance and institution of Christ under
that Pedagogie of Moses, were as Symbols to assure the people that their High
Priest should be enlightened with divine light from Christ Jesus, to give a
clear and perfect resolution to the matter inquired. And in confidence hereof,
the people did Aquiesce in the answer of the High Priest, so that by URIM in
this place, I do understand nothing else but divine and heavenly light from
Christ. And this is that which the Prophet calls upon them here to glorify God
withal. But yet observe the punctation of the word, which is with a short
vowel not with a long vowel; to show us that the light which shines forth in
those Islands, will not be so full and clear as afterward, when the Jews are
called; but yet it will be a heavenly and Divine light. And the Prophet would
have the Saints in those Islands, to glorify God with that light they have
received, and improve it to the benefit of the whole Land, which by this Time
will be prepared to receive it. Which argues, that the Land whereof the Prophet
speaks will abound with much divine and heavenly light. And now it will be a
fit season to hold it forth. Tell them now of the Kingdom of Christ, and the
righteousness and perfection of his Laws and administrations both in Churches
and Civil State, and they will now listen to it. And now let every one come and
hold forth the light he has received from above, and add light unto light: For
as it is in a room where many lights are added together, they yield a great
light; so it is in this case: only see that the light you hold forth be Divine
and Heavenly light, grounded on the word of God; and let your words be as the
Oracles of God. Come not with false lights or false fire; bring no kitchin-fire
of your own invention, but let all your light have the stamp of God upon it,
and it will tend much to the honor of Christ. And thus you should glorify God
with light.

Even the name of Jehovah the God of Israel.] These words do hint unto us the
Church Order and Government, wherein these precious souls are united; and
therefore he exhorts them to glorify God, as the God of Israel: That is, a God
in covevenant with his Church. And indeed this will be the great and principal
work of that age, and of those Christians before spoken of; they will improve
their light, for the gathering of the people of that land into due order, and
into holy Covenant with God and one with another. For that is the right way of
advancing the Kingdom of Christ.

Verse. 16. From the wing of the land, etc.] The wing is sometimes put for the
utmost part of the land. And so the meaning will be this: The Saints in the
utmost confines and borders of the land shall sing songs. Or else, by the wing
of the land may be understood the Churches in New England beyond the Seas
(whither they have sailed as with wings) even they shall sing, and keep days
of thansgiving, when they shall hear what God has done in the land here spoken
of, and the report of it shall be carried back from thence. They will applaud
the wonderful works of God in that land, and acknowledge the righteousness of
Gods dispensations in behalf of his own people. And thus you see the joyful and
comfortable issue of all these sad calamities foregoing.

But the prophet then looking back upon the perfidious treachery of those who
had been chiefly instrumental in all the changes and calamities aforementioned,
he breaks forth into a most bitter lamentation for the same, crying out, My
leanness my leanness, woe unto me, the treacherous dealers have dealt
treacherously, yea the treacherous dealers have dealt very treacherously. The
prophet was so deeply affected herewith, that he pined away with grief, crying,
My leanness, my leanness. And the reason of this his bitter complaint is,
because those that were betrusted by God, and by the people of the land, to
have rescued them out of the hands of the Tyranny of the first Government, and
to have set up the Government of Christ, when the first Government and also the
second were dissolved, have betrayed their trust, and dealt perfidiously from
first to last, carrying on a secret design of their own; and have improved
their power and trust, to ensnare the land.

Verse 17. FEAR, and the PIT, and the SNARE are upon thee, etc] These words. I
take to be Metaphorical expressions, to hold forth unto us the various forms of
Government in that land, and the nature of them: For I find these phrases used
in the like sense, Jer. 48. 43 44. where the prophet speaks of the various
mutations of Government, that should come upon Moab. And Lam. 3. 47. where he
also speaks of the changes that befell the Kingdom of Israel, after the death of
Josiah; and so I take it in this place. And you shall observe how the prophet
Marshals them in order. The first form of Government he calls FEAR] which
implies the terror and Tyranny of (...)
the first Government; putting the effect for the cause by a Metonymie. The
second he calls a PIT.] The word here used, (...)
signifies properly such a pit, as is dug under ground: which implies that
this second form of Government, was purposely contrived, to obviate the Tyranny
of the first. And it is called a PIT, to show that it is of a lower
constitution then the former was. Yea, such a pit it is, as may yield some
shelter or hiding place from the pursuit of a Tyrant, as may appear, from the
use of the same word, 2 Samuel 17. 9. where Hushai speaking of David, when he was
pursued by that Tyrant Absalom, he says, Behold, he is hid in some pit. And
the third form of Government, he calls a SNARE] The word properly signifies
such a (...)
snare as fowlers use to lay to catch the birds withal, either by the foot or
by the neck, from which they cannot deliver themselves. Which snare the fowlers
use to cover with chaff or some such thing, so as the birds shall not see the
snare, till they be taken in it. Which does imply, that this third form of
Government in that land, for the nature of it, shall be a snare. And for the
manner of errecting the same, it shall be secret and hidden; covered over with
such specious and fair pretenses, that men shall not discern their Snare, till
they be taken in it. And being once taken, it will be difficult to rescue and
deliver themselves, such will be the strength of it. FEAR, and the Pit, and the
SNARE, are upon thee, O inhabitants of the land] He does not say, Oh
inhabitant, but Oh inhabitants in the plural number, to show that universally
all of them, and particularly every of them, shall be taken in this Snare.

Verse. 18. And he that ascends out of the midst of the PIT, shall be taken in
the SNARE] This ascending argues that the form of Government is of a higher
constitution, in regard of the external pomp and glory of the fame, then the
Government foregoing was. And such will be the subtle and curious contrivement
of the same, as they will catch all men in snares that resist them, and such as
cannot comply with their new-devised power. So the Prophet has done with the
threefold form of Government in that land, and the treachery of the
instruments. And in the words ensuing tells you that God looks on all this
while: and though men drive on their designs in all that foregoeth, yet God
will at length turn about their actings, to accomplish his grand design. For
says the prophet, The windows of that MOST HIGH are opened.] The most high
here mentioned, is the Lord himself, who only is the MOST HIGH Psalm. 56. 2. It
is Gods attribute, and therefore let mortal men tremble to assume Gods title to
themselves, except* God give it them. The windows from this MOST HIGH are
opened] As who should say, God looks out of his lattesses (speaking after the
manner of men) and he sees the treachery of the instruments in all these
mutations; and therefore he resolves to overturn all those earthly moldy forms
of their own devising, and by certain steps and degrees, to make way for an
utter abolition of them all. Now the steps and degrees God takes for removal
of those three sorts of Government in that land, are in number seven, to wit,
shaking, bruising, breaking* displacing, reeling, removing, falling. And all of
them do aptly express the several steps and gradations which God takes toward
the removal, and utter abolition of the old heavens and old earth in that land.
The first, I take to relate unto the first and ancient Government of that land.
The three next steps, unto the second. And the three last, have relation unto
the last form of Government.

We may not suppose that the Prophet affected to show his elocution in
Rhetorical strains of speech. For that would not become the holiness of the
Prophet, nor the matter in hand. Neither is it likely that he heaps up words by
way of Exegesis and amplification only. For then he could have chosen sundry
more words* or other words that would have been very comprehensive also. But I
take it that the Holy Spirit that guided him, did not call out such choice
expressions as would most aptly hold forth the several steps which he intended
to make, in removal of their earthly forms of Government; and yet with such a
Divine elegancy, as no art of Rhetoric can exceed it, if you consider the
words in their proper language. I shall therefore give a brief touch of them
all in their order.

And first of the first word. The foundations of the earth (...)
do shake or are shaken.] This I conceive does relate unto the first and
ancient form of Government, which the Prophet calls FEAR: and here he makes
his pause, or full point, to intimate, that this shaking of the foundations,
put a period to that Government. And so the Apostle interprets the word
shaking, Heb. 12. Where he says, It signifies the removal of those things that
may be shaken. So then the shaking here spoken of, signifies a removal of that
first Government, as has been said. And the shaking of the foundations does
import no less.

Verse. 19 The land is sore bruised, the land is utterly broken, the land is
quite displaced.] These words I understand do hold forth to us a threefold
gradation, leading to a dissolution of the second Government called the PIT.
The first step is expressed in these words, The land is sore bruised; speaking
of the representative of the land. The word Translated sore bruised, in the
Hebrew is, The land in bruising is bruised. Which word properly signifies
bruising (...)
by collision of two hard things together, Jer. 10. 9. And it also implies that
this bruising shall be by the exercise of the power of the sword, as may appear
from the Psalm. 2. 9. where the same word is used. And that rod of iron, means
the power of the sword, Revl. 19. 17. So that the meaning as I conceive is
this, that by the power of the Militia, the Representative of that land shall
be sore bruised. The next step is, They shall be utterly broken] or, in
breaking they shall be broken. The word properly signifies (...)
to evacuate or break a thing upon some semblance or pretense of condition;
which argues that there will be some condition ground, or reason, pretended for
the breach and dissolution of the Representative of that land. The third step
is this, The Land is quite displaced] or moved out of (...)
place: An argument that after the dissolution of the first Representative,
there will be a second. But that is here said to be moved quite out of place:
Or, as it is in the Hebrew, In moving out of place, it shall be moved out of
place. The word here used does properly signify to move a thing out of its
place. And the phrase seems to imply such a motion as from the first calling of
them together to their dissolution, is quite out of course, and not agreeing
with the ancient customs of the Representatives of that land. And thus you are
come to the end of the second Representative, and the second form of Government
together. The third kind of Government* which is called a SNARE, follows. And
you have three steps and degrees to the ablition of that.

Verse 20. The land shall reel to and fro like a drunkard.] (...)
These words show the giddy, tottering, unsettled condition of the land under
the third kind of Government. The word signifies the nodding or trembling of
the head. And it argues the unstayed giddiness of the representative, reeling
(as a man in drink) sometimes this way, sometime that way.

The next step is, They shall be removed as a cottage] The word Translated
removed, properly signifies to wander as a Vagrant (...)
or Vagabond. It was the curse of Cain, Genesis 4. 12* 14, 16. A vagabond shall
thou be upon earth. And now behold the woeful state of the land here spoken of;
they shall wander here, and wander there, and know not where to rest. The
phrase I conceive, does express the consternation and dejection of their
spirits, under the heavy pressure of their sins (as it follows in the next
words) and Gods just indignation against them for the same. And now they are
(like Cain) afraid of all kinds of Government having felt already, the sad and
woeful effects and fruits of one after another, and finding nothing but FEAR,
and the PIT, and the SNARE in them all: God has so blasted all earthly
Governments and the glory of them, that now the poor land is afraid to make
proof of them any more. They are gotten into the land of NOD, a vagrant
condition, by reason of their transgression, as it is in the next words, For
the transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it] These words give us the
reason of all these woes and calamities, to wit, their transgression, and their
impenitency under the same, because they would not hearken to the messengers of
Christ. The word translated transgression, does (...)
properly signify such a transgression as is against light, and such as is
accompanied with obstinacy and contumacy. It is a compound of Pride and
Rebellion; Or as Aben Ezra says, it is an exemption of a man's self from a
lawful power, and an opposition against the same. The meaning I take to be
this; that the land here spoken of, counts it self free, and exempted from the
jurisdiction of Christ's Laws and Statutes, and assumes to it self a legislative
power, which is here called transgression, or contumacy against the light held
forth by the servants of Christ. And this lies heavy upon the land, as an
insupportable load or burden that presses it down. For (I conceive) that here
will be fulfilled (in some degree at least) the word of the Lord, Rev. 14. 19.
And the Angel thrust in his sicle into the earth, and gathered the vine of the
earth, and cast it into the winepress of the wrath of God. And the winepress
was trodden without the City, and blood came out of the winepress, even unto the
horse-bridles* by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs. May not
this City well be called the City of confusion, as our English Translation
reads it? And now follows the third and last step under the third kind of
Government: It shall fall, and never rise any more] These words put a period to
the third and last kind of Government in that land. The heavens pass away with
a noise the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also, and the
works that are therein, shall be burnt up* 2 Pet. 3. 10. And now will be
fulfilled that word of Isaiah, Isa. 65. 17.
who says, the old heaven and earth shall not come upon their heart. They will
henceforth have no more to do with earthly forms of Government, but now they
are prepared to submit unto Christ's Government and administration, according to
his word alone. And when thus they are ashamed and confounded for their folly,
in all their civil administrations, and Church-administrations also; then they
set up Christ's plain, pure, and perfect administrations in both. And this was
Christ's maine scope and design, from the very first mutation and change in the
beginning of the Chapter; which being now attained unto in some good measure in
that land, behold, Christ takes a speedy course with that HIGH ONE and his
host, which have been instrumental in all these sad changes, and have
obstructed the work of Christ in that Nation.

Verse 21. And it shall come to pass in that day] To wit, when God has subdued
the spirits of the people, and prepared them (as wax) to receive the
impression of a new form of Government, and now they are willing the Government
should lie Isa. 9. 6. Isa. 33. 22.
upon the shoulder of Christ; and are resolved, Jehovah shall be their
Legislator, and not a Representive of their own. Now I say, when it is thus,
Jehovah will punish the host of that MOST HIGH ONE, with that MOST HIGH ONE]
To wit, him that in the fourth verse is called the MOST HIGH ONE of the people.
And it seems, that this Most high one has the command of the Militia of that
land; wherefore the Militia is called his Militia or host. It may also be
called his Militia, because they have been instrumental to advance him to that
height or highness, and so the fourth verse seems to intimate. Or if you will,
it may include both. But take it which way you please, the Lord Jehovah that
gives all Beings their existence, and gives a Being to all his judgments, will
visit the Militia of that MOST HIGH ONE, with the MOST HIGH ONE. You may either
understand it thus, that God will make that MOST HIGH ONE an instrumental cause
of the Hosts punishment; or, that he will punish the Host in that MOST HIGH
ONE, as being the head and chief of them: or else, that he will punish them
both together. The phrase is very observable, and though our English
translation read it otherwise, That God will punish the host of the high ones
that are on high, yet it is not so proper. For 1. The (...)
word is there used in the singular number, not in the plural. 2. There is
affixed an Emphasis to the word, the Host of that most high one. And 3. The
word there used, signifies properly height in the abstract; And is as much as
if you should say in our English Idiome, that MOST HIGH ONE. And in propriety
of speech, there can be but one Most High: Wherefore God assumes it as his own
proper title, verse. 18. And David attributes it to God, Psalm. 56. 2. Oh thou
MOST HIGH. Let mortal sinful men therefore tremble to arrogate such titles of
God unto themselves, unless God give it them. The place of the punishment of
this MOST HIGH ONE, and his host, together with the Kings of the earth, it is
in this world. God will not respite it unto the world to come. For so much is
employed in that phrase, upon the earth. And well it is for them, if they may
receive their punishment in this world only. What the kind of their punishment
shall be, is not expressed, save only that they shall be gathered with a
gathering, a prisoner for the dungeon, and shall be shut up in prison. Or, as
we use to say, shall be close prisoners. And whether that only shall be their
punishment, or whether they shall be reserved unto further punishment
afterward, is not very clear from the text. Possibly, if they then repent, as
Manasseh did, God may show them mercy.

Verse. 23. Then the Moon shall be confounded, and the Sun ashamed.] The word
translated confounded, does signify to digg through the earth, as men use to
do, until they come to a living spring. And so the word is used, Genesis 26. 18.
And Isaac dug again the wells of water, which they had dug in the days
of Abraham his father. The meaning is, God will so digg through all those
earthly, moldy, carnal politics of civil Government in that land, till he
show them at length, the limpid clear fountain, and living spring of
righteousness and Judgment out of the word of Christ, so that they will be
confounded with shame at all their former moldy principles, after which they
have walked in all their former administrations.

And the Sun shall be ashamed] The Churches of Christ, even the most
reformed, shall then blush, to see how far they fall short of the Primitive
institution. Thus will God shame them, when he begins to set up the Government
of his Son in this, and in other of the Nations. And so I come to the time when
all these things shall be fulfilled; when God will put a period unto all
earthly forms of Government in the land here spoken of, and in the rest of the
Nations, and when God will visit that MOST HIGH ONE, and his Host, and the
Kings of the neighboring Nations. It is [ when Jehovah of Hosts shall Reign:]
you may understand the word translated when, or for, either as an Adverb of
time, and so it shows forth the season wherein these things shall come to pass:
Or you may take it for a Conjunction causal, and so it show forth both the
principal efficient cause of all that has been spoken before, and also the
main scope and end, or the main design which God had in hand, and aimed at in
all these mutations in Churches, and Civil State; to wit, That Jehovah might
Reign, and so that word is also used. And whereas it is said, when Jehovah shall
Reign; or for Jehovah Reigns: or that Jehovah may Reign; and there makes a
distinction, it argues there will be some beginning of Christ's Reign in that
Land, and in the other Nations of the Gentiles, before the calling of the Jews,
but the most glorious manifestation of Christ's Kingly power both in Church and
State, will be reserved for his ancient people the Jews, when they are called
home again.

In brief therefore to gather up the sense of the words; it is as if the
Prophet should have said, after Christ has proceeded by all the forementioned
gradations to dissipate the old Heaven, and old Earth; to wit, their civil, and
Church administrations of their own invention, and to set up new Heavens, and
new Earth, new administrations in them both, according to his Word: Then
Jehovah the Lord of Hosts, the Lord Jesus Christ will Reign in that Nation
whereof the Prophet speaks, and then he will punish the Host of that MOST HIGH
ONE, and that HIGH ONE both together, and so proceed to the rest of the
Nations, and will there rule and Reign as King in Mount Zyon, and in Jerusalem,
in Church, and Commonwealth throughout the Nations. But most gloriously before
his Ancients the seed of Abraham, to whom God has of old promised, and sworn,
that his Seed should possess the gate of his enemies Gen: 22. 17. And indeed
God showed to Abraham as in a Type or shadow, what he would do in the ends of
the world, in subduing all the four Monarchies, and giving the Kingdom and
greatness thereof to Abraham's seed. For in the 14 of Genesis you read of four
Kings, to wit, Amraphel King of Shinar, Ariech King of Elleaser, Chederlaomer
King of Elam, and Tiddal King of Nations, whom Abraham pursued to rescue his
Kinsman Lot, and overcame them and slew them. These four Kings were the root
(as I may say) of the four Monarchies, which in aftertimes became afflictive
to the Church of God. And the fall of these was prefigured in the overthrow of
those which Melchisedeck does so congratulate with a blessing from the most
High God possessor of Heaven and Earth.

In Mount Zyon, and in Jerusalem,] I will not deny that Mount Zyon and Jerusalem
are here literally meant; for it is an undeniable truth that Christ will Reign
there. But withal I take it that by Mount Zion, and Jerusalem is here intended
the Church and civil State, not in Jury only, but in all other the Nations. For
Mount Zyon is often put for the Church, as Psalm: 87. 2. 5, 6, Jehovah loves the
gates of Zyon, more then all the dwellings of Jacob. And of Zyon it shall be
said, this and that man was born in her. Jehovah will count when he writes the
people: this man was born there. And Psalm. 128. 5. Jehovah shall bless thee out
of Z^on, that is, out of his Church. And Jerusalem is put for civil State where
Judgment is administered, Psalm: 122. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. There are the Thrones of
judgment, the Thrones of the house of David, etc. Palaces and Thrones of
Judgment are not for the Church, but for the civil State. And thus you have a
sweet close after all the sad calamities and changes of that Nation, which God
^^lled out as a stage to act this tragical Comedy upon; closing up al in a
glorious administration of Christ's aimable, peaceable, and righteous reign over
all the world, but most gloriously before his ancient people the Jews.

Having thus briefly unfolded the chapter in a way of Ex^plication, I shall in
a few words close up all in a word or two of Application, analogically, and
leave it to the Reader to enlarge upon the same in his own private meditations.

First, therefore let it be for admonition to all the Nations of the world if
my voice would reach them. Beware of resisting Use 1.
the Kingdom of Christ Jesus, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to
deliver. Beware of abusing, and mocking and imprisoning his servants, and
Messengers, lest the wrath of God arise, and there be no remedy, 2 Chro: 36.
26. Beware of breach of Oath, protestations, and Covenants, for God will not
hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain, Exodus: 20. 7. were it but
breach of Covenant with men, even with such as have advanced you, and put you
in trust, and impow^red you, God will not bear it, Christ has taken an Oath
upon it with a curse. Let me not live if I be nor avenged upon such despisers
of Oaths, and Covenants. And he will spread his NET upon them, and take them in
his SNARE, Ezekiel: 17. 20.

2ly. Repent of all you Apostacies, and Hypocrisy, and of your breach of the
Everlasting Covenant. For behold King Jesus with a Crown of gold on his head is
gone forth already with a fickle in his hand, and has begun to reap, Rev: 14
14, 15. But yet there is another Angel shortly to go forth of the Temple which
is in Heaven, and if the word of command be once given, he will reap you with a
Witness, and cast you into the Wine press of the wrath of God, til the blood
come out to the Horse bridles, Rev: 14. 17, 18, 19, 20. therefore let the City
and country repent, let high and low repent as Niniveh did in sack cloth and
ashes if so be you may find mercy in that hour.

3ly. Affect not to change one earthly form of Government for another, but let
the ensample of the Land whereof the Prophet speaks, be a warning to you, you
will find either FEAR or a PIT, or a SNARE in all Governments, that are not of
Christ's moulding, or else you will find a Wine press of Gods wrath in the close:
Therefore when you resolve to change, (as undoubtedly you will) be persuaded to
change your earthly and imperfect Governments, for that heavenly, perfect, and
everlasting Government of Christ which hitherto has been a matter of scorn to
the world, and the Lord persuade Japhet to dwell in the Tents of Shem.

Secondly, let me speak a word or two to the mourners in Use 2.
Si^n, even to the poor despised Flock of Christ that wait for, and preach for,
and pray for the coming of his Kingdom. 1. Take ye the course which this
Prophet directs, Isa: 20. 17. Come ye my people, enter thou into thy chambers,
and shut thy doors about thee: hide thy self as it were for a little moment,
until the indignation be overpast. The words are weighty, and suited for these
times, [ Enter thou.] that is let every one of the people of God enter. It is a
word of command from God, and requires obedience in us. Enter into thy
chambers. Gods people have several chambers to retire into for safety in this
case. 1. They have a chamber of Meditation into which they do retire themselves
in private Soliloquies with God, Gen: 24. 63. Isaac went into the field to
meditate upon the word of God, and his gracious promises to his Father and to
himself, and Gods various dispensations about him. And he shut the doors
against all worldly cogitations, and employments for that season. David was
frequent in this duty, especially in the persecuting times of Saul I may call
this the chamber of Gods presence, where God reveals much of his cabinet
counsels to his servants, as men use to do to their friends in their private
chambers. 2ly. There is a chamber of prayer, Matt: 6. 6. When thou prayest
enter into thy closet and shut the doors, and pray to thy Father which is in
secret. Here you unbosome your selves, and pour out your souls before him
fully and freely. And truly Christians never more need then now. And this a
chamber of safety, you know how Moses by prayer prevailed when yet his spirits
and hands began to fail, and yet he prevailed more by prayer, then all the
Host of Israel could do by their Arms, Exodus: 17. 11, 12, 13, 14. and God
commanded that this should be written for a memorial. Israel you know how he
wrestled with God, and prevailed against his Brother Esau, and four hundred
armed men, Gen: 32. 28 for he had power with God, and with men, and prevailed:
Little does the world know what they do, when they set themselves against such
praying Saints, their weapons of War are of no use here.

3ly. The Saints have a chamber of Church communion, whereof you may read, Cant:
3. 4. I held him and would not let him go til I had brought him into my Mothers
House and into the chamber of her that conceived me, and this chamber is a
hiding place for Saints Psalm: 27 5. In the secret of his Tabernacle will he hide
me, he will set me upon a Rock. 4ly. God himself is as a chamber of safety to
his people, where they may hide themselves in time of fear and danger, Psalm:
119 114 Thou art my hiding place, and my shield; Psalm: 31. 20. Thou shall hide
them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of man; thou shall keep them
secretly in a pavillion from the strife of tongues: Lo! here is your safety
Christians. God will keep you as the apple of his eye, and what can the arm of
flesh do against the Almighty power of God.

And last of all, let me add one word of comfort to you that now weep, for ye
shall laugh, Luk: 6. 21. You now go forth weeping, bearing precious seed, or
seed of the Basket, but you shall doubtless come again with rejoicing bringing
your sheaves, you sow in tears, but you shall reap in joy. Psalm: 126. 5. 6. You
are imprisoned and hated for the sake of Christ, but he will (shortly) appear to
your joy, and your adversaries shall be ashamed, Isa: 66: 5. You hope for,
believe, and pray for the coming of Christ to rule over the world in
righteousness. Behold it is but a little while, and he that shall come will
come, and will not tarry: Heb: 10. 37: You are now underlings to the world, and
now you suffer for Christ, but you shall reign as Kings upon Earth, Revel: 5:
10. Read the Sermon of the fifth Monarchy preached by Mr. Thomas Goodwyn, and
printed by Livewel Chapman in Popeshead-Ally. Only be careful to keep your
garments unspotted of the world and hold fast the word of Christ's patience that
no man take your crown; Rev: 3. 10: 11. And when you see nothing but fire and
sword devouring on every hand, and the powers of Heaven shaken, and men's hearts
failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on
the earth: Then lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh.

Finally, to conclude, let me speak a word or two to my Brethren in New
England. I know you are ^ot the Land of which this Prophet speaks in
particular, yet I may analogically apply the same to you: I could show you how
you have passed under two of these forms of Government in some measure and
degree, how sometimes you were under FEAR lest the Magistrate should have
assumed too much power to themselves, (although it was more your fear then any
reality) and you took a speedy course to prevent that: and now you are fallen
into the PIT, and have the main power residing in your Deputier. Beware lest
you come to another change of your own devising, for that will certainly become
a SNARE. To you therefore give me leave to commend this word of advice and
counsel as from God, that you may avoid the SNARE. Remember you had an old
Prophet of the Lord amongst you who is now at rest, and he, according to the
wisdom given him of God collected a whole Sistemee, or body of Laws (as you call
it) out of the word of God: with a divine stamp upon them, and presented the
same to your general Court to have been ratified by their professed subjection
thereunto, which had you done, it might have saved you many thousands of pounds
that since have been spent in making, and repealing of Laws of your own
framing, whereas as Christ's Laws are made to your hand, and are unrepealable. I
know you will acknowledge your own Laws are not perfect (some capitals only
excepted, wherein you followed the advice of that ancient Prophet) and you will
also acknowledge that there is no imperfection in the Laws given by Jesus Christ
our King.

Therefore I beseech you again to revise what was commended to you by that
faithful servant of Christ (Mr: Cotton I mean) and weigh with your selves
whether Christ's Laws be not equally as wise, complete and perfect touching the
civil administrations of Judgment and Justice in the Commonwealth, as in the
matters that concern his Church; and if so, then be persuaded in the Lord to
take his Laws for yours, and make them your Magna charta. And let all your
administrations of Judgment be according to that perfect platform only: that it
may be said of your Judgments, they are not yours, but the Lords. I might give
you sundry arguments, and motives hereunto; as first, from the example of that
Nation whereof the Prophet here speaks, which after trial of sundry forms of
Government finds nothing but FEAR, and a PIT, and a SNARE in them all: 2ly:
Your solemn Engagement before God in your Church covenants, to submit your
selves wholly to Jesus Christ as your King; and the dangerous consequences
which will follow the breach of that everlasting covenant in so main a part of
it. But 3ly: and principally let me press this argument as most suitable for
Evangelical christians: You will hereby greatly honor the Lord Jesus your King,
when you own his wisdom, faithfulness, and perfection as well in civils as in
spirituals. And you will hereby become exemplary to all other christian Nations
whose eyes are upon your actings.

And let me tell you this, that your desert herein has greatly impeded the work
of Christ with us. For well may men reason a minori ad majus; that if the Laws
of Christ our King be not sufficient to guide a small colonie, much less can
they be thought an adaequate rule for administration of Judgment and Justice in
such great and populous Nations: I might have added much more, but verba
sapienti sat est. I could have answered many Objections, which are usually made
by such as would grasp into their hands a share with Christ in making Laws, but
I judge it not fit for this place and this time: And I know you have many
amongst your selves that are far better able to obviate such slight pretenses
and shadows, these things I thought it my duty to recommend to you as one that
has spent upwards of 22 years amongst you, and still cordially affects the
peace of your Jerusalem: I may assure you of this, that if old England
Christians who walk in holy fellowship together had had the opportunity which
you have had, and still have, they would ere this have set up Jesus Christ as
King, not only in their churches but in the commonwealth also: You are a as a
Beacon set on a Hill. Great things God has done for you, and great things he
expects from you: Do not you therefore so unkindly requite him as to dishonor
his Son by withdrawing your necks from under his Yoke, whose Yoke is easy, and
his burden light: And the Lord that persuades Japhet, persuade you the Sons of
Japhet to dwell in the Tents of Shem*

FINIS.

