By the Mayor.
WHereas the slow coming in of the moneys upon the Ordinance of Parliament of
the sixteenth of October last for the releif of Ireland, is like to prove a
great hinderance to this summer service against the Rebels of that Kingdom,
by reason that the proportion of money to be levied in London and Middlesex
(which is designed for the supplying of the Officers and soldiers, with that
little which is allotted for their present encouragement, and to furnish them
necessaries for their taking of the field) comes in more slowly then was
expected, notwithstanding that some weeks ago this has been represented in
all the Churches of London. It is therefore again desired by the Lord Major,
in compliance with an Order of the Committee of both Kingdoms of the
seventeenth of April last, and in Commiseration of our distressed Brethren,
the Protestants of Ireland That the Ministers of the several Churches and
Chapels within the City of London and the Liberties thereof, would earnestly
recommend to their Parishoners the speedy advance of their whole Assessment for
the twelve months (whereof very near 10 are now elapsed) as they tender the
preservation of that poor Kingdom, and welfare of this, and as they would
testify their thankfullnes to God for his late mercy and success against our
enemies here. By assisting our Brethren that were first in the same trial of
Affliction and are fighting in the same Cause, against a most Barbarous and
Cruel Enemy, and as they desire to show their good affections to the
Parliament and Protestant party, which we may expect (through Gods Blessing)
will begin to lift up the head, even in Ireland also, (If the Protestant Forces
there be in any competent measure supplied) that we by this means here may
be freed from the Apprehension of any more Rebels to come over out of
Ireland; Nor can the advancing of so small a proportion of Money, be a great
burden to any, it being only the Assessment of two Months more then what is
already due, which ought to be cheerfully advanced by every one, it being of
no less concernment then the saving of a Kingdom.

And the Collectors in every Ward, are hereby warned to bring into Grocers Hall
an Account of their proceedings herein, upon Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday
come seven-night, being the last of June, and first and second of July, as they
will answer the contrary at their Perils, together with the Names of such
Persons as shall show themselves backward in furthering so pious a work. On
which days some Persons of trust shall be appointed, who shall take special
notice of their neglect, or diligence in this matter, as also of the good or
bad affection of the Assessed to a work wherein the welfare and safety of both
Kingdoms are so nerely concerned.

Old-Iury London, 20 of June, 1645.
I allow that this be Printed and read in the Churches.

Thomas Atkin Mayor.
The Ministers of every Parish are desired to read this on the Lords day, and
on Wednesday being the Fast day.



London Printed for Edward Husband, 1645.


