A TRVE RELATION, OF THE MOST Chief Occurrences, at, and since the late
Battle at Newbery, until the disjunction of the three Armies, of the Lord
General, the Earl of Manchester, and Sir William Waller, together with the
London Brigade, under the Command of Sir James Harrington.

Published upon necessity, both to undeceive the mistaken multitude, and to
vindicate the Earl of MANCHESTER, From many undeserved aspersions commonly
cast upon him, either through ignorance or prejudice.

Penned by SIMEON ASH, Who as his Chaplain did wait upon his Lordship, in the
Western Expedition.

PROVE. 18, 17. He that is first in his own cause, seems just, but his
neighbor comes and searches him. PROVE. 19.21. There are many devicees in
the heart of a man, nevertheless, the counsel of the Lord, that shall stand.
LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Edward Brewster at the Sign of the Bible at
Fleete-Bridge, M.DC.XLIV.

A true Relation of the most chief Occurrences, at, and since the late Battle
at Newbery, until the disjunction of the three Armies of the Lord General,
the Earl of Manchester, and Sir William Waller, etc.
NOt only importunity from friends, but necessity in regard of others of
various ways and spirits, does compel me to give in a true Narrative
according to my knowledge and best intelligence, concerning the proceedings of
the three Armies conjoined ( vid. the Lord Generals, my Lord of Manchesters,
and Sir William Wallers) both when the Battle was fought at Newbery, and since
the Enemies retreat from thence. For not only the reports of many, but also a
Letter sent unto me, do suggest; that my silence, now, when my testimony may
do good service, does give occasion both to my Noble Lords foes and friends,
to suspect his faultiness (if not unfaithfullnesse) in a great measure;
because heretofore I openly appeared in relating his actions in the North, when
there was no need to vindicate his reputation; but now I am mute, when his
fidelity to Church and Commonwealth is questioned, and when he is censured,
yea clamoured against, as the only blameworthy cause of the disappointments
lately in the West. For my silence hitherto, I can make this just apology. 1.
In regard of the daily intelligence, which went from the Army to London, either
by Post or otherwise, I conceived it not necessary, or much useful for me to
be a weekly Intelligencer to my friends in the City, as when the Army lay
before York. 2. Neither was I altogether silent, when I espied occasion and a
call to speak: For within few days after the releeving of Dennington Castle,
when I understood what clamours and censures were in London, through the
misreport and mistake of our actions, I gave a short and true Relation of our
Occurrences, for the satisfaction of private friends, which Relation, was the
sum of that which I shall now report: and at that time I was very far from
imagining, that my Lord, the Earl of Manchester, would by any Officer of the
Army, be accused, as less faithful, or less careful then others, in
promoting the Kingdoms good. 3. Since the Accusation charged upon my Lord, in
the Honorable House of Commons, I have held my tongue, lest I should incur
displeasure, by seeming pragmaticall, in intermedling in a business, committed
by them to examination, with expectation of a report. But now hearing, that the
business there is suspended (some say silenced) and knowing that the loud
cries of people, either ignorant, or disaffected to my Lords credit, do sound
far and near, to his dishonor, I have resorved to take the boldness, to
represent what I know, both to vindicate my Noble Lords honor, and to
undeceive them (if my testimony may be of any credit) who are too apt and easy
to believe calumnies cast upon well-deserving men, wanting patience to wait
for truths discovery, by a full and impartial trial; which in this business,
cannot be more earnestly desired by any: then it is by my Lord himself, and by
his best friends.

I wish that these things may be premised, which I suppose cannot with any
color of truth be contradicted. 1. That no motion, no march, no service of the
three Armies after their first conjunction, was made or undertaken, but
according to the relust of the Council of War. 2. That the Earl of
Manchester, never assumed to himself, to be accounted or observed, as
Commander in Chief, but always voted, as one that had but equal authority
with the rest, and acted accordingly in observation of the orders, concluded by
common Council. 3. That he often professed unto the chief Commanders; that
because himself was no experienced Soldier, therefore he would rather be
guided, then guide; rather be acted by their counsels, then act on either
himself or them, according to his own private thoughts.

Upon Friday October. 25. we hoped (from the news brought in by our Scouts) the
day following, to fight with the Enemy; but the next morning drawing up our
whole body, we found that the Enemies had in such sort blockt up the way to
Newbery by many works, that our hopes of engageing with them were disappointed.
Hereupon it was resolved at a Council of War, that to force the Enemy to
fight, our Forces should in this manner be divided, (vid.) All my Lord Generals
Horse and Foot, the greatest part of my Lord of Manchesters Horse, and almost
all the Forces under the Command of Sir William Waller and Sir Arthur
Heislerig, together with the London Brigade, did march to Speene hill: But the
Earl of Manchester; Foot, with a small body of Horse, was left in the field on
this side Shaw (a little village) near to Mr Dolmans house, which was
possessed and fortified by the Enemy. When the Army was thus divided, this
order was left with my Lord of Manchester; that so soon as he heard of the
engagement of our Friends on Spcene hill (by the discharging of the Canon) he
should fall on the Enemy on this side the River, that he might divert the
strength of the battle, from them there.

I will forbear here, to relate the hardship which both parts of our Army met
with, that night; because that would be a digression not to my purpose.

On Sabbath day morning early, my Lord of Manchester, with the Forces remaining
under his command, were in readiness to assault the Enemy, expecting from
hour to hour, to hear of the engagement at Speene hill: And here to witness
the Earl of Manchesters willingness to fight with the Enemy, let this be
noted, which is a known truth (vid.) that in the morning, he commanded a party
of about 400 Musketeeres to fall on, over the little River, on the left hand of
Shaw, that he might soon enough divert the enemies strength from Speene hill:
This party of ours, took two of the Enemies works, one Captain, and several
prisoners; but marching too far, contrary to order, they were beaten back
with some loss; by this service, the greatest part of the Kings Foot was
drawn toward us, and so the work to which we were designed, was accomplished
long before our friends on Speene hill did engage. In this place, I might take
occasion truly to report, the great pains which my Lord Manchester took from
morning till evening, often exposing himself to very much danger (the Enemies
Drakes playing frequently upon us) in riding from Regiment to Regiment, to
encourage the Soldiers, and to keep them in due order, fit for that service
which every moment almost was expected: but there are many hundreds, I might
say, diverse thousands, who can tell the truth hereof, which proves, that my
Lord was not so backward to fight, and so regardlesse of the Kingdoms service
that day, as many would have the world to believe. About 4 a clock (as was
guessed) we heard the Canon begin to play on Speene hill, at which time, my
Lord commanded 2 Drakes to be drawn forth (though our Canon hitherto had not
been altogether idle) and to be planted in a convenient place to do service
against the Enemy at Dolmans house, and to make way for the falling on of our
Foot there, according to the order given, when our Army divided. Those Drakes
did good execution upon the Enemy diverse times, forcing their retreat to their
works about the house. Now we saw the fieting of the Muskitieres on Speene
hill, which discovered the service there to be very hot; and not long after,
with joy and thankfulness, we beheld the hasty, disorderly retreat of the
Enemy toward Newbery, wondering that our party did not pursue the victory. It
is besides my intention in this Relation, to report the posture of our Army on
Speene hill, or to give by a full report, the due praise to my Lord Generals
Foot and others, who then and there, did excellent and praiseworthy service:
Neither indeed, need I, to bestow words hereon, because the world has been
acquainted with these things heretofore. But my Lord of Manchesters Horse,
commanded by Liev. Col. Cromwell (from whom very much was expected) did little
service, gained no honor in this work this day. For my part, I know not whom
to blame, I will asperse no man, but leave it to their judgment, who were on
the ground, to judge who were blameworthy, in being backward to pursue that
happy opportunity, upon the flying, fainting Enemy. Notwithstanding, let me
here tell you, what many speak; That it my Lord of Manchester had now been in
his own person, at the Head of his body of Horse, this neglect would have been
charged home upon him, and conclusions would hence, confidently and clamorously
have been inferred, that my Lord of Manchester was unwilling to bring the Kings
Army too low, otherwise, now the woeful wasting wars, might in all
probability have been fully well ended.

But to return unto my work. You must not imagine that my Lord of Manchesters
Foot were all this while idle spectators on this side the River (although as I
told you before, the Enemies best Foot were diverted from Speen hill, which
might have extenuated the seeming fault of some delays) for while our Drakes
(before mentiond) were at work, a commanded party of 500 Muskiteers was drawn
forth as a Forelorn-hope, to assault the Enemy, who being seconded with the
several Brigades of Foot, continued in hot service, until for want of day light
to direct, our Soldiers wounded and killed one another. The undaunted valor
of our Foot was admirable, they were indeed too forward too adventurous,
overrunning their commands, unwilling to be called off. And here this is
notable, that when one company of our Foot had taken one of the Works of the
Enemy, another Company (through overmuch forwardness and mistake) did beat
them out again. So that our greatest loss, both in regard of men wounded and
slain, was from our selves. All this while, my Lord of Manchester was with his
Soldiers, (as mine eyes, and thousands more can witness) to countenance and
encourage the service: and those who know what dangers he then adventured upon,
and how long he continued in the field that night, yea, what care he took to
prevent the mischiefs of the night from a Neighbor Enemy, and to prepare for
the continuance of the battle, which was verily expected by us the next
morning; those many (I say) who understood and remember these things, will not
easily believe that his Lordship was averse to fighting, and unwilling speedily
to end these wars, though multitudes, through ignorance, rashness, and
misbeliefe, do in this manner asperse and calumniate him.

That night, the daunted Enemy did in the dark steal away from Newbery; what
no tice our friends at Speen, had of the marching away of the Enemy, I cannot
affirm, for reports are various; though all acknowledge, that they had some
noise thereof: but this I am sure of, that my Lord of Manchester had not the
least hint of the Enemies retreat, till near daybreak in the morning; and his
intelligence then, was single and uncertain, from a stranger. Yet upon this
intimation, his Lordship hastened into the field, to improve opportunity, there
the news was confirmed, that the Enemy was gone indeed. Hereupon our whole
body was called together; and so soon as we had in the field (near the dead
bodies both of friends and foes, which lay on the ground) made our addresses to
God, both by praise and prayer, according to the present affecting providence,
we marched over the River to Newbery: all this while we neither met with, nor
heard from our friends at Speen, whereupon we hoped that they were in pursuit
of the scattered flying Enemy. My Lord of Manchester rested not, till he met
with some of the Commanders, who had been upon the service at Speen, and with
them returned to Newbery, to consult about the improvement of the present
Victory. These particulars, which I knowingly do report, may evidence my Lords
forwardness, to husband advantages and opportunities, for the promoting of the
public service. But though my Lord Generals Horse, and Sir William Wallers
Horse were gone some hours before after the Enemy, yet my Lord Manchesters
Horse, (commanded by Lieu. Genesis Cromwell) we found in the field near Newbery,
together in a body.

It would be impertinent, for me here to speak of by-businesses of small
importance, which common fame has trumpeted abroad. The taking of the Coaches,
with the Men and Horses attending the persons in them, was effected by my Lord
of Manchesters forwardness, to furnish Col. Birch with a party of Horse for
his assistance, whereof I am a witness, being used as a messenger unto my Lord
to expedite that work.

And whether his Lordship during our stay at Newbery, was not as desirous as
any others, in every kind to serve the public, I refer it to the judgment of
them who were daily conversant with him. We having after some days, full
intelligence, that the King was at Oxford, there recruting his Army, and
hearing also, that he intended to fight, so soon as the additionall forces sent
for, came to him, our Army marched from Newbery on Saturday toward Oxford, and
that night the Head quarter was at Compton. Upon Sabbath day the Army marched
toward Blewbery, and the Head quarter that night was at Harwell, and the Army
quartered in adjacent Villages, until this time the Lord Warriston and Mr.
Erem (who came to us at Basing, being sent from the Committee of both
Kingdoms, to assist the service of the Army by their counsel) can testify
what was my Lord of Manchesters care and carriage in his place, and unto their
testimony thus far I might refer them, who are unsatisfied. This day at a
Council of War (before these our friends left us) it was found impossible
for us to march with our Carriages beyond Abbington, because the ways, were
judged deep and unpassable.

On Monday my Lord with some few who attended him, went to Abbington to
express his respects to Major General Brown; and that acquainting himself
with the state of that place, he might the better know, how to be serviceable
to it, and to the Kingdom in it, as occasion might require. On Tewsday, all
our Horse were called to a Rendevouz upon Chilton-plaine (if I forget not the
name of the place) where all the chief Commanders of the Army, at a Council of
War, concluded our return unto Newbery, the next day. Now because this act
(as I hear) is much censured (though it was the result of the Council of
War, and we had also the express approbation of the Committee of both
Kingdoms, I will therefore make bold to suggest the grounds thereof as they
were related unto me. 1. That corner of the Country (being bare before we came
thither) could not afford means of subsistence for our Army, and we had small
hope of receiving seasonably sufficient supplies elsewhere. 2. By continuing
there, we should wholly devour those provisions whereby our friends at
Abbington (being Neighbors) might expect some relief. 3. Because there was no
hope of getting over Wallingford-bridge, to fight with the Enemy on the other
side the River; and the Enemy might, by making overtures of engaging, and yet
deceiving our hopes, have wasted our Army through unavoidable wants, without
striking one blow. 4. And our forces did daily weaken very sensibly, through
the great scarcity of provisions of all kinds, our Soldiers being under much
discontent and discouragement.

These reasons (as I believe) moved our return to Newbery, upon Wednesday, and
the same night some of the Enemies came from Wallingford, into the same
Quarters, from whence we were removed. Upon Thursday, our Scouts brought news
to Newbery, that the Kings whole Army was come over the River, with a parpose
to relieve Dennington Castle. And although many amongst us, gave little or no
credit to these reports; yet (of my knowledge) my Lord Manchesters
cautiousnesse was such, that hereupon he moved the drawing up of all our Horse
to a Rendevouz the next day, that we might be ready to prevent the relieving of
the Castle.

How this his Lordships motion took with others I cannot say; but that it was
disliked and gainsai'd by Lieu. Genesis Cromwell, my self, and many others can
testify, who heard him earnestly dissuading it, by words to this effect; My
Lord, you Horse are so spent, so harrassed out, by hard duty, that they will
fall down under the Riders, if you thus command them, you may have their skin^,
but you can have no service.

Although I dare not say, that Lieu. Genesis Cromwell did from unfaithfulness to
the public, thus dissuade the drawing up of our Horse on Friday. Yet this my
self, and many thousands are most confident of, that through this neglect
followed the advantage of the Enemy, in relieving the Castle, and our
disappointments. For our Horse being (through the searcity of provisions)
quartered at a great distance from one another, and some of our Troops being 10
miles, some 12, and some 14 miles from Newbery, they could not possibly (after
the Alarm on Friday in afternoon) come in soon enough to prevent the Enemies
coming to the Castle, much less to fight with the Enemy in a convenient
ground, before he came thither: whereas, if our Horse had been brought together
upon Friday (according to my Lord Manchesters motion on Thursday, before
mentioned) we might have met the Enemy with a timely and successful
resistance (through Gods mercy) at least for the preventing of the Castles
relief.

But I will look backward, and take up my Relation where I left it. The former
intelligence received from the Scouts, and the motion from my Lord made on
Thursday, not being improved, we waited, to understand, what another day would
bring forth: and when certain unquestioned tidings came on Friday in the
afternoon, that the whole Body of the Enemies Army was on their march toward
the Castle; then Posts were dispatched to the several Quarters of our Horse,
to command them to come in early the next morning: but the Enemy having gained
the opportunity which we lost, the Castle was relieved, before we were ready to
make resistance: yea, the Enemy had placed themselves in Battalia, in the field
betwixt Dennington-Castle and Newbery, before our maine Body of Horse were in
any posture for service. It would not be to my purpose in this Relation, to
specify how bravely a party of the Enemies Horse did assault a party of ours,
routed them, and did beat them to our Foot, who received the Enemy with much
courage, and repulsed them bravely, who took away with them (as we heard after)
the dead and wounded bodies of many, who were much esteemed. Neither do I
intend here to tell, how the several Commanders, had now disposed of
themselves and their forces. My Lord Manchester was with Major Skippon in the
field, where all the skirmidge was that day betwixt us and the Enemy, and they
both often and earnestly called and sent for Lieu. Genesis Cromwels Horse, (as I
am credibly informed) but they came too late; for before they marched through
Newbery toward the Army, the Sun was set, the Enemy was making his retreat
out of the field, which mine own eyes and others beheld with much grief of
heart. Major Genesis Crafford (who is known to be sufficiently forward to engage)
though his command was over the Foot, yet upon my Lord of Manchesters cummand,
himself also being moved in the approach of the daring Enemy, did with 9 or 10
Troops (some or most whereof he rallied amongst them formerly routed) charge a
body of the Enemies Horse, and caused them to give ground. By this it may be
guessed what good service might have been done, if more Horse had been at hand.
That night, I hearing many accusations charged upon the Horse which came not
in, I made bold for mine own satisfaction, to enquire (of a valiant Commander
my worthy friend) the reasons wherefore those Horse kept at such a distance
from service that day, from whom Ireceived these. 1. Because there was not
field room for our whole Body to serve in. 2. Because (if they had come in) in
that ground, they should have been exposed to the Cannon, playing from the
Castle, which would in probability, either have broken, or disordered their
several Bodies before they could engage. You see, that I am desirous in my
Narration, to give all men their right, and to keep off groundless censures.
And here I wish, that it may still be impartially considered, whether yet it
appear by this true relation, that the Earl of Manchester was more averse to
the Kingdoms service, then other men, when either necessity or opportunity did
require it.

The Castle being relieved, and the Enemy retreated, our Commanders in chief,
upon consultation resolved that night to send forth about 4000 Horse with some
Foot, to fall upon the Enemies Rear, so soon as the Moon did arise, hoping by
this means to regain what we had lost the day before: but the Enemy continuing
all night in a full body, that design was disappointed.

In the morning our whole Army was drawn forth, with intention and expoctation
to fight with the Enemy, before his removal out of our reach. This being
noised, my self, with other Ministers who attended the Camp, did our duty by
prayer and exhortation, to prepare them for the expected battle. But when our
Commanders had viewed the strength and posture of the Kings Army, and the
advantage of ground which they had gained, together with the dangerousnesse of
the passages to the Enemy (being both near Dennington Castle, and through
Lanes) they with one mind at a Council of War, judged it unsafe to engage.
What passed in conference at the Council of War, I know not, neither did I
judge it meet for me to enquire after those matters: But this I profess, that
I heard not any, either Officer, or other, to blame my Lord of Manchester, as
more backward at that Council of Want then others, to engage with the
withdrawing Enemy. Afterward, while the Army continued at Newbery, and the
parts adjacent, I remember nothing of moment to be reported, but this one
thing, (which if not rightly understood, may occasion mistakes, no prejudice)
that whereas 3 Regiments of my Lords Foot, were ordered to march unto Basing,
to assist the Horse in the service there, they were commanded (when on their
march) to return back, according to the counsel of Sir W. Waller and
Lieutenant General Cromwell (as they were going with my Lord in his Coach to
Aldermarston) upon these grounds, as I was informed. 1. Because there would not
in likelihood be any need of that strength there at that time. 2. Because their
coming thither would straighten the Quarters of those who were already there,
and consequently, make their continuance more uncomfortable. When upon an
Alarm, that the Kings whole Army, was on their march to relieve Basing-house;
it was ordered, that our Forces should remove from Newbery to join with our
Horse sent to Basing before. Now I was necessitated through bodily distempers,
to withdraw from the Camp, and therefore cannot from observation speak of the
passages afterward. But I have been told again and again, that the calling
off of our Horse and Foot, from Basing, was from the order of a Council of
War, no man deserting; and also, that no man was more forward in giving his
vote, for that Order, then Lieutenant General Cromwell.

This is the sum of what I have to say, concerning the chief Occurrences in
our Western expedition; wherein, though we had not such happy success, as was
desired and expected, yet therein, those acknowledged much of Gods goodness,
who did most exactly observe his providence in our motions and adventures.
Herein I have faithfully, according to my observation and best intelligence,
represented things, with special references to my much Honored Lord, because
through misreports, and misbeliefe, his Lordship is rendered to the world, under
the black clowd, of sad reproaches. His Honor I confess, is very dear unto
me, and the heavy censures with which many do load and wound his estimation
amonst men, do much afflict me: yet (I bless God) the cause, wherewith his
Lordship has been trusted, and wherein he has successefully appeared, is much
more deate and pretions, yea (if I know mine own heart) I would desert his
Lordship, and my self also, deserting that glorious cause of Jesus Christ. I
well remember, those words, Job. 13.7. Will ye speak. wiekedly for God, and
talk deceitfully for him? And therefore I am awed with the fear of God, while
I am pleading for man. Yet this I do most seriously profess, as in the
presence of the heart-searching Majesty, that I know no cause, wherefore I
should once question his Lordships sidelity to the cause of Reformation, and
that service of the Kingdom, wherein he has been prosperously employed. But as
the matter of his Accusation is to me most strange and unexpected; so the
manner of managing it, by many, who are accounted not only ingenious but
eminently pious, is to me and many, a matter of much wonder: For should not
those who have received favors from my Lord of Manchester, and have solemnly
professed truth and strength of respects to his Lordship, rather have signified
in private their suspicion of his faithfulness (if they apprehended cause)
then proclaim to the world, offenses, whereof he never heard? Might not his
known meekness and sweetness of disposition, have encouraged them, to
perform this office of faithfulness, who often had the opportunity of
secrecy to have performed it? Would not such a course rather have answered
that rule of our Savior: If thy brother offend, go and tell him his fault,
between thee and him alone, etc. then to divulge (I will say no more) in a
public way, those things whereof his own heart never suspected himself to be
suspected? What Christians, yea what men do not look for such friendship,
such ingenuity, from them who converse with them daily, and ordinarily come to
eat meat at their tables? And had the prejudice of the public long been
feared, through the apprehension of any ill principles possessing the Earl of
Manchesters breast, why was not this sooner suggested, for the prevention of
public prejudice?

I will not dare to guess either at the grounds, or ends of that which now is
broken forth, but shall leave secrets unto the Lord, who in his own time will
make the counsels of all hearts manifest, and bring to light the deeds, the
designs of darkness.

Neither do I thus expostulate, as yielding to the truth of the matters, which
are commonly charged upon him: for I have many reasons to believe the contrary,
some whereof, I shall briefly mention.

His Lordships former actions and adventures for the public, rendered him in
the opinion of the godly party in the Kingdom, as a true, trusty Patriot, both
to Church and Commonwealth; and truly, I am ignorant, what should cause people
to alter that opinion, though I have of late, had more opportunities to
discover him, then other men.

His Lordship has often, in the hearing of many witnesses, thus expressed
himself solemnly, I could contentedly part with halft my estate, upon
condition the discipline of Christ was established, and a good Ministry settled
in every Congregation of the Kingdom, yea with those couditions, how gladly
could I betake my self unto a Country life, and leave all other contentments
in the world. Oh how frequent, how constant have his breathings been after
peace, with the perfecting of that Reformation which is hopefully begun. And
therefore it is a thing incredible to them who know him, that he should take
any course, to continue the Civil (or rather uncivil) wars of the Kingdom,
which do continue and increase confusions. I know no man, who attends the
Camp, less self-seeking, and more desirous to issue the Wars, in a
comfortable Peace, then my Lord of Manchester.

And this is to my self, an evidence of my Lords innocence, in regard of what
is laid to his charge; that when friends had suggested to him by Letters,
Lieutenant General Cromwels purpose to accuse him (as was gathered from
intimations looking that way) he solemnly protested, that his integrity was
such, that he could not believe any such matter: Yea though he did cast about
in his own thoughts, what matter of just exception might be laid in against him
(for he was far from expecting false accusations) he professed seriously, he
could not imagine what it might be; except it were some old complaints, in
reference to Major General Crafford, and some late estrangements from Liev.
Genesis Cromwell, since his heates expressed at Lincoln, which gave occasion of
just offense.

And when upon his coming to London, his Lordship understood in generals, that
unfaithfulness, and unwillingnesse to improve opportunities and counsels for
the public good, against the common Enemy, was laid to his charge, by Liev.
Genesis Cromwell; this was his Lordships answer: I pray God forgive him, for he
knows in his conscience, that he has wronged me, in speaking untruly. And
these words falling from a friend, How much will your Lordship suffer in your
honor, by means of this aspersion? His Lordship returned this reply, My
defense is from God, who saves the upright in heart. These things, which of my
credit are truths (unto which many more might truly be added) I leave to the
consideration of the ingenious, calm, unbyassed Christian, how far they may
at least persuade the suspension of censures and clamours, till my Lord has
vindicated himself from his accusations.

But it will be said. There is no smoke, but it argues some fire. And the
reports of people, yea of good people, against my Lord of Manchester are so
common, that doubtless all is not right.

I doubt not but Gods hand is in my Lords sufferings of this kind, who has
learned to justify God when injured by men. He has expressed his desire to
know Gods meaning in the Rod, and has professed his willingness to see, that
he might reform, whatsoever others espy blameworthy in his course. But the
opinion and language of the multitude, is no good argument to prove him guilty
in that kind and measure, as charged. It is an evil to be lamented, that
people are so apt, with credulity to take up evil reports against their
Brethren. Besides, the world understands, that diverse persons acted by
principles opposite to one another, are yet both violently contrary to the
ways of my Lord of Manchester: from hence the dust may be raised and
continued, which for the present does darken his repuration, which was wont to
shine forth more brightly, and which God (I hope) in his good time will clear
again.

I might here take occasion, to mention many strange palpable untruths,
standerously raised and spread, yea, conveyed by Letters beyond the Seas, to
blast the credit of them, who desire to walk with God: and no reason here can
be imagined, but their difference in indgement and practice from them, in some
matters of Church Government. But that Scripture does check me. Tell it not in
Gath, and publish it not in Ask^lon, lest the uncircumcised triumph. The Lord
heal our breaches, reconcile our differences, and knit our hearts together in
more strong brotherly love through Christ.

My self expects severe censure from many people for this service, which (in
the judgment of many worthy godly friends) I had a call to discharge: but I
hope the sincerity of my heart through Gods grace will support me under such
burdens, if they shall be cast upon me.

If my faultiness shall be discovered, the Lord I trust will so far preserve
me, that I shall not add stubbornness to weakness. And if any shall
passionately and unchristianly throw stones at me, and cast dirt in my face, I
hope, that my God will make me able to pity them, and to pray for them, and to
learn more humility and circumspection in my conversation.

FINIS.

