AN ATTEST OF THE Householders within the Parish of Buttolphs Aldgate London,
Unto the Innocence of Mr. Zach. Crofton, their present Minister and faithful
PASTOR. Wherein we Acquit our selves from the Guilt and Odium of prosecuting
Him. And Rescue him from the Clamours of Incivility charged upon him, to the
Scandalizing of his Name and Ministry.

Jer. 18.18. Come and let us devise Devices against Jeremiah: Let us smite him
with the Tongue, and not give heed to any of his words.

20.10. I heard the defaming of many: Report, say they, and we will Report it.

Prove. 14.5. A false Witness will utter Lies.

Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for James Nuthall, and are to be sold at his house in the
Minories, next door to the Dolphin, and likewise at Booksellers shops. 1657.

THE Stationer to the Reader.
COurteous Reader, If thou have in thee any modesty, thou will much wonder that
the world should see these ensuing lines; but let me tell thee, thou may
rather wonder at the immodesty of such as have occasioned them, by fastening
with (shameful impudeney) a charge of incivility on a man of long approved
modesty, and piety, who is ashamed to plead his own cause in so shameful a
case, by reason of which, though he have ready prepared a full History, and
Narrative of his late tragedy, and defense against the scandals raised and cast
abroad concerning him; and though he has by many of his Parishioners and
other friends been importuned to send it abroad to silence slanderous tongues,
yet could not be prevailed with so to do, but chooses rather to commit his
cause in silence unto God, by reason of which, many of his friends considering
the spreadings of this scandal, and how it gains credence for want of public
contradiction, did see necessity of speaking in his behalf, and I living in the
Parish, having seen a short plea for his innocence, did much desire it, and by
the help of a friend at length, obtained a copy of the Paper, annexed to this
Attest, the which I have out of zeal to the credit of his never blemished name,
and Ministry, and did of my own accord commit those Papers to the Press, and so
send it abroad to the view of the World, that so the truth might be vindicated,
and innocence cleared, therefore if that it is, not so full, or plain as it
should be, nay, and wherein soever it fails thy expectation, let him bear the
blame, who doubis not but to all just unprejudiced men, it will. clear the
innocent man, and put an end to the clamours of men against him, to which end
he commends it to thy reading, and Gods blessing,

Who is thy loving Friend, JAMES NUTHALL.

AN Attestation of the Houshoulders within the Parish of Buttolph Aldgate,
LONDON, Unto the Innocence of Mr. Zachary Crofton.
WE, the Inhabitants within the Parish of Buttolphs, without Aldgate, London,
have with a long silence (though much sadness of spirit) observed the workings
of the spirits of fury, possessing the breasts of some discontented men among
us, against Mr. Zachary Crofton our present Minister; and our ears have heard
to our great amazement, the many scandals, each after other, by which they have
labored to render him vile among men, nay, and with no little trouble of
spirit, we have sitten still, and seen the malicious prosecution of him, in
extraordinary, and extrajudicial courses; and the violent endeavors to fasten
upon him the scandal of uncivil whipping Mary Cadman, his late servant, and
then drawing her contrary to her knowledge, and conscience, falsely to swear
he had not so used her; (An act we confess in the first part immodest, yet
we much question whether modesty were more assaulted by the act, if done, as
represented, or by men's taking cognizance, and making a clamor of it) by all
which we find our said Minister, not only reproached among men,
overcredulous, and ready to believe any thing, that may in this
Anti-Ministerial age, render a Minister vile, but also the work of God in his
hands, to be in the midst of us much hindered: We conceiving it to be our
duty to deliver our selves, as well from the guilt of this transaction before
God, as from the odium before men (who are ready to cry out, The Parish does
this against him) cannot but at length break silence, and profess in the
presence of God and men, that having been spectators in the transaction of the
whole business, and many of us ear witnesses to the pleadings and
expostulations that have been about this matter: We are provoked in conscience
to declare our apprehension, and give this Attestation to his Innocence, as to
the whole matter of fact; of which we could not but be convinced, when we
seriously weigh and consider,

1 The spirit of discontent and enraged sury; nay, of direct enmity to his
Ministry, by which he is prosecuted; the which is so visible to the world,
that we need not) (though we could) give legible demonstrations of it.

2 The positive falsehood of the Testimony produced against him, there being not
only oath, against oath, and Certificate against oath, but also witnesses
having before some of us and others affirmed his Innocence, contrary to what
they now charge him withal, and have palpably contradicted the one the other,
and some of them their very selves, in the testimony by them given against him;
the which appears in the annexed Writing, and to the certain truth of which
many of us were earwitnesses, some of them having sworn themselves to be
fore-sworn, and they openly proclaiming themselves to be notorious liars, and
persons upon whose testimony no credit can, or ought to be given.

3 The constant readiness we found inhim by all honest, and just amicable ways
to expostulate the case, and assert his innocence, to which end he did not
only adjure them, and himself endeavor, to bring it into judgment, and that
by the honesty of men, the credit of a Minister, and honor of the government
of the Commonwealth: But as soon as he heard that the persons who had
acquitted him, were wrought to witness against him, he did by some of us at
several times offer before twelve honest indifferent men, chosen by joint
consent to plead his cause, and trust his credit on their conscience and
censure: this many of us did offer in his behalf, and he in his own person
made the same tender unto his furious prosecutors, who studied, as we discern
more to fasten a scandal on him, than to find out the truth; and therefore did
betake themselves to extraordinary and extrajudicial courses, and certainly it
is truth that seeks no corners; falsehood avoids judicial scrutiny: Besides,
such has been the cheerfulness of his spirit unto his constant labors, and
under so smarting an affliction, as will not be found consistent with
concealed guilt in his conscience.

The constant and serious Protest of Innocence, as to the whole matter of fact,
both to us, and others, and in the public assembly at the Guild Hall made by
him, a Master of a Family unstained, a man of modesty to us approved, in his
whole demeanor, a Minister of the Gospel accepted by the Church of God, and of
whom we must say that he has been among us faithful and diligent, in his
Ministry holy, and unblameable in the course of his life, and so in his
practice, as well as preaching a blessing to us from the Lord, who has rendered
him much succesful in his Ministry among us: All which considered, we cannot
but stand by him, and for him, with all zeal, endeavoring the rescue of his
precious name from reproach, desiring to be humbled before the Lord that any
should arise from among us, so to defame a godly man, and faithful Minister,
and desire others may be careful how they do take up a report upon false
witness against a man, a Brother, much more an Elder and eminent Minister; and
constantly pray that God may sanctify his hand as to him, so to us his people,
afflicted with him: Teach us to keep our esteem of him, as of one that we have
found faithful; arise to plead his cause, and proclaim his innocence to the
world, in the mean time encourage his heart, and strengthen his hand unto the
work of God among us; Who bless God for him, and rejoice in his Ministry, as a
burning and shining light.

A List of the Subscribers names.
Richard Garford Deputy. Rowland Swinnerton Churchwarden Alexander Green
Churchwarden Edward Mico Ralph Cawte Robert Manley Thomas Lewis John Green
Robert Lorret Kellum White Roger Thomas Edmund Peirson Thomas Griffen Joseph
Surbut Edward Quick James Henks Phillip Shipton George Ayraye William Tailor
John Hutton Thomas Guner Harman Tivil Richard English George Echel Robert
Thompson Edward Asell John Urdres James Reyner Robert Duke Vincent Izot Robert
Skinner Thomas Draycot John Barford William Shippy John Merry Charles Elmer
Robert Sabin James Nuthall Ralph Brown William Burd Henry Hardy William Leek
Abraham Venhack Paul Dobie Henry Smith William Beck Anthony Smith William
Rowland Henry Winsloe Edmund Man John Duncombe Jonathan Grammar William Grammar
Thomas Cox Richard Barnard Thomas Wharton William Huchings Andrew Crofts Ralph
Guillum Thomas Westraw Thomas Ingrame Peter Robinson Anthony Hancock Robert
Kate John Bowden William Clackstone Stephen Sleigh Thomas Farsey Jonas
Awtherson Henry Tanner Thomas Forest Edward Dexter Antony Woods Robert Wadup
Robert Phillips Nathaniel Duckfield Thomas Nettleton Richard Lawless Timothy
Roberts William Acton Thomas Batt Nathaniel VVhiting Chr. Alley Sa. Shakmapel
Arthur Hancock Paul Elwood George Spencer Richard Rogerson Anthony Trevilion
Gauwen Armstead John Campion Samuel Granger Thomas Holett Richard Davenport
Thomas Hutcheson Thomas Partridge John Murel John Miles Will. Bradford John
Mason James Hunnyburn William Lecher F. Heath John Greenhaugh, alias Greenaway
Eleazer Berens George Danvers Joseph Stretton John Peacock Nicholas Adams
George Powel Thomas Gostlin Richard Farley Thomas Bedford William Fletcher
Robert Hall Walter Thomson Timothy Smart Abraham Row


Innocence asserted, and evidenced by Testimonies Falsehood. Or, Mr. Zach.
Crofton cleared from the Charge of Incivility by Witnesses self-contradiction.
THe God, whose Prerogative Royal it is, to keep his servants in a Pavilion
from the strife of Tongues; does sometimes (to abate their pride, exercise
their patience, and other holy and wise ends) give up his dearest David's
thereunto, who whilst they study wisely to improve the affliction, and cheer
themselves in the testimony of their conscience concerning their Innocence,
knowing the excellency and use of a good Name among men, do by all good and
just means endeavor to manifest their Innocence, This being (by the Providence
of God) my present condition, by reason of the scandals by the just hand of my
God; But pride and malice of ungodly men, falsely raised, and most impudently
fastened on me, viz.

That I should use Mary Cadman, my late servant, very uncivilly by Whipping her
with Rods, and then by importunity induce her to make oath contrary to her
knowledge and conscience, I never so used her. I having humbly prayed for the
sanctified use of so smarting an affliction; and been supported under the
spreading of so great a scandal, by the sense of mine own Innocence, am at
length constrained, to the rescue of my Name and Ministry from the reproach of
the wicked: And finding none other fence against the strife of Tongues, than to
prove them false; and solemnly in the presence of God, and his people to
protest mine innocence, do propound to serious consideration these things
following.

Pretermitting the improbability and unlikelihood of such uncivil correction to
be given by me, a man (whose modesty was never stained) a Minister of the
Gospel, and that for toys and trifles; The biting of a Sugar Loaf, Lying in
bed too long in a morning, Staying too long for a Pint of Wine, and the like.
Whilst this very Maid was guilty of most notorious crimes, which she never
mentions: And that in so much secrecy, in my study over my wife her bed
chamber, and my wife in bed, in a morning. And yet neither wife, or any other
servant, nurse, nor any in my Family (which is considerably full) should know
of it; She so submissive as never to resist, to take up her own Coats, and lie
still in silence, whilst she was whipped with such severity she could not sit
with any ease at all after: All which seems to me to be sufficient to suggest
to, and convince all men of Modesty and Reason; that it is an imagined
Correction, and strained Accusation, devised to render me vile, rather than
really, and by me acted on this Maid; That which I specially propound, is the
positive falsehood, of which the Witnesses impudently fastening this scandal on
me, have been palpably convinced, not only by others, but by themselves, and
one by the other: As by comparing the Oaths, or Examinations, will appear: As
for instance,

1 For proof of the fact pretended to be by me done, Mary Cadman, makes her
appeal to Mary Welsh her fellow servants, pretending she showed her the marks
of her correction, and did unto her complain. the said Mary Welsh has not
only before many witnesses, but also on her Oath declared: That Mary Cadman
never did to her complain of any such usage, or showed her at any time the
marks of her Correction. Nor did she at any time speak of such Correction, to
the mother of this Mary Cadman, nor (...) knew or heard of such usage, until
the common report and clamor brought it into my house: So that by the Witness
to whom she makes her appeal, she stands palpably convicted of falsehood.

2 William Cadman the Father of this Maid, swears, in Christmas last was
twelvemonth, she came home, and told him, that her Mr. Crofton had whipped her,
Mary Cotton swears that at the same time she told her the same. Yet the
Father declared to Mr. Charles Elmore, and Mr. Nath. Whiting, he never heard
of such usage of his daughter, and that neither from wife, nor daughter, nor
any other person, until Mr. Crofton came to him on the common report, and told
him of it; and said, he was confident there was no such thing, and thereof he
would swear an hat full of oaths. Nay, and Mary Cadman did not only declare to
many when she did affirm this incivility to have been acted on her, that she
never spoke it to any body, save her mother, but has made oath, that she
acquainted her mother therewith, and to me in the hearing of her father, and
without the least contradiction by him, when I charged her to have raised the
report; thee said, I pray God I may never live, if ever I spoke such a thing;
so that here you may see the pretended Plaintiff against the parties
complained to, and the father against himself.

3 Mary Cadman swears, she left her service upon, and by reason of such
incivil usage; yet she her self declared to Mrs. Stent, and Francis Roch at
several times, that she left her service not by reason of any fault in either
Master or Mistress, who were as good solks as she could desire to live
withal; but by reason of her own (...), and by reason of Mary Welsh: And to
Mr. Story she said, she left her service because her mother was sick, and she
had rather live with Mr. Croston, than any man in Eugland, or to that purpose.
And her father has declared on his oath, that she told him sometime before
she came away, she was to come from her service, and when she did come away,
she came not in any discontent. And her mother did quarrel, and fall out with
Mr. Crofton for putting away her daughter. So that even now you had the
daughters oath against the fathers, and now you have the fathers against the
daughter: In the next you shall see the father against himself.

4 The Father swears he brought his Daughter back to her Master, and bad him
if she offended to take a Wand and wand his daughter, and her Master gave no
other answer, but that he would have no such Tales carried out of the house,
by which he subtly suggests that he did to me complain of Whipping his
daughter, and so all men do, and must understand it; yet he has sworn on his
examination that at the time he bad me wand his daughter, he spoke not a
word, or did he complain of whipping his daughter, nor had we any discourse
of any such thing.

5 Mary Cadman swears, that I whipped her when she was under the issue of blood;
yet Alice Grible on her oath declares that she denied it ever to be acted on
her, she being under such a condition; The same she said to Francis Roch.
and further says, Mary told her this was the invention of the Prosecutors.

6 And lastly, as to the whole matter of fact, this Maid Mary Cadman said to
Sarah Wilkin, asking her if her Master had whipped her, it is a lie whoever said
it; and to Sarah Austen she said she was ashamed, they should raise such a
report of the Good man, for there was never any such thing. And these were her
companions, and thus she answered them, when the thing was muttered, before it
came to my ears. Moreover she has mode oath, that in all the time she lived
with Mr. Crofton, she was never whipped (as is reported) And that he never did
to her the least act of violence or immodesty: And the Patents certified under
their hands, they never knew of any such usage of their Daughter, and that on
deliberation before Alderman Burdet, and Alderman Garford, the Mother binding
the testimony with that affeveration, as she was a sick dying woman; and this
they do not in a comparative senses the which the quibling fancies of
prosecuting enemies, who would gladly fasten somewhat, would put upon it.

But a positive plain and simple sense and meaning as is evident by their
contrary oaths, so that herein you have oath against oath, and certificate
against oath; and in reference to these the Father swears himself, Wife and
Daughter, all to be forsworn; In the oaths by them sworn, before the Mr. of
Chancery they all swear, that by my powerful encouragements and importunity,
they did make oath, and certify, I did whip her. Yet the Father on his oath
deelared, when I propounded to them the oath and certificate for my
vindication, they never deny ed to sign them, they never demurred to them, they
never excepted against them, I never reminded them of past kindnesses, nor
promised them future favors, nor urged them by any Argument: was not here
violent importunity, where was no denial; and very forcible persuasion, where
was no Argument.

So that besides that lying spirit which in a constant course acted this Maid,
yea, and her Father and Mother (and that in her dying condition of which I can
give instance) of which not only I, but also Mr. Rutton Minister of Bow, Mr.
Newton at the Cammel in Fanchurch street, Mris. Ames in Gratious-street, and
all that ever knew her do complain: you see they are clearly convict of false
oaths, and a lying tongue, If there were such a story and person.
and if Susanna were acquitted by the contradiction of her Accusers in one
circumstance, shall not I be acquitted by the contradiction of themselves, and
one of another in matters of substance; to which let me add, they instance but
in one time considerable, and that is Christmas was twelve month; When I was in
an exceeding infirm and weak condition, without either lift or liberty to such
an action, being afflicted with the Stone, and Jaunders, the which distempers,
though much weakening me, yet admitting some entervails of ease, did now and
then give liberty of creeping on a staff, on business of concernment, though
with very much difficulty. And I do as a Minister of the gospel in the presence
of God, declare that by reason of these distempers, to the utmost of my
knowledge and remembrance, on recollected thoughts, I was not on any occasion
whatsoever in my study from the fourteenth of December, until after the
twentieth of February: And therefore in that place, and in this time, I could
not give this Maid any such correction.

The falsity of this Testimony is so plain and visible, that I hope in the
judgment of every unprejudiced man, I shall be acquitted, though I should say
no more, yet because some pretend my concession of the act, and the affidavit
of the dead Mother, does thereby endeavor to fasten on me the scandal of this
fact; though it is convict of falsehood in one thing by Mary Welsh, in another
by the surviving Father, and so ought not to be credited in the third (which
lies between her and me) and for that some can stir up a jealousy of
guilt, by pretending he waves the charge, by disproving, but does not deny the
fact: I think fit, though I am tender of folemn protests in the name of the
great God, which we are much to dread; yet to the stopping of the mouths of
flanderous men, and satisfaction of such as shall believe truth, and the fear
of my God to be in me. I do make this serious profession, I Zachary Crofton,
of the Parish of Buttolphs Aldgate, London, do as a Minister of the Gospel, in
the presence of the God of truth, solemnly, and with all seriousness profess,
that I never did with Rod, or Rods on any occasion, or at any time, whip mary
Cadman my late Servant: The Father and the Mother of the said Mary Cadman, nor
either of them, never did to me at any time complain of any such usage; nor did
I ever declare to them, or either of them, that I had whipped their said
Daughter, nor did I ever render any such reason as is pretended for such
correction, nor did I in the whole course of my life, ever hear or know of any
such mis-hap as is pretended to befall my Mother in the correction of any
servant of hers, nor have I ever had any communication or discourse with any
man about the whipping of the said Mary Cadman, until such time as the rumor
of such a thing being common, came unto my ears, since which time I have with
constancy; and to all men with whom I have spoken, asserted and declared mine
innocencle, as to the whole matter of fact pretended against me.

So that if the falsity of witnesses, which ought to acquit any man accused
among men, and to silence all slanderous reports, be considered: Or if you
will give credit to me, a Master of a family this twelve year, or thereabouts,
never stained with the least disorder or incivility. A Minister of the Gospel,
approved and accepted this fourteen years, by the people of God: I hope I shall
be discharged this charge of Incivility, and be adjudged innocent,
notwithstanding all clamours that have past. But if not, I shall cease to
strive any longer by words, and study submission under, and a sanctified
improvement of Gods hand, saying with David God has bid Shimei curse, and
waith until the Lord shall plead my cause against all such as are risen up
against me, rejoicing in this mine innocence, and that the faithful discharge
of my Ministerial duty is the ground and reason of this reproach and slander.

We whose names are subscribed Citizens of London, and frequent attendants on
the Ministry of Mr. Zachary Crofton; having (with much grief) heard the many
clamours, and reproachful speeches by which some discontented men (in his
Parish) have labored to render him vile, and observed the spirit of fury, with
much height of impudence, endeavoring to fasten on him the scandal, of using
Mary Cadman his late Servant very uncivilly, by whipping her with Rods, and
then drawing her, contrary to her knowledge and conscience, fallely to swear
she was never so used: on our knowledge of his modesty in his whole demeanor,
fidelity in his Ministry, and piety in the course of his life; and having many
of us been spectators and hearers in the expostulations that of late have been
about this business, and having seriously weighed the palpable falsehood of
produced testimony, and its positive contradiction of it self, together with
his solemn protest of Innocence, cannot but apprehend and attest his Innocence,
as to the whole matter of fact; and declare the same; not doubting but to all
impartial, just, and unprejudiced men, his Innocence will be evident to the
rescue of his name from reproach, and the rendering him no less acceptable in
his Ministry, than he has been for many years past, and yet is unto us.

The List of the Subscribers follow.
Charles Offspring Minister of St. Antholins Daniel Andrews Stephen White John
White John Gregory John Hetherley John Jackson George Maio Isaac Ligay Richard
Smith Will. Rutt Joshua Gearing William Sheldon Alexander Sharp Will. Clerk
Will. Webb Matthew. String Will. String Ralph Thicknoss Rich. Pepys Peter Jurin
Tho. Boughey Benja. Proud Roger Nettleship Tho. Clendon Minister of Allhallows
Barking Will. Chisworth Churchwarden Ed. Mitton Churchwarden Thomas Mullineux
Roger Alsop VVil. Allen Tho. Low Tho. Abrahall Will. Graves Will. Spiar George
Dickens John Bellamy will. Hiott James Hichson Henry Hunter James Man Thomas
Roe Adam Edwards Rob. Lewellin Tho. Davis


FINIS.

