Speculum Nauticum.

A Looking-glass FOR SEAMEN.

Wherein they may behold, how by a small Instrument, called the PLAIN SCALE,
all Nautical Questions, and Astronomical Propositions, are very easily and
demonstratively performed.

First set forth by John Aspley, Student in Physic, and Practitioner of the
Mathematics in London.

The Sixth Edition.

Whereunto are added, many new Propositions in Navigation and Astronomy, and
also a third Book, showing a new way of Dialling.

By H. P. and W. L.

LONDON, Printed by W. Leybourn, for George Hurlock, and are to be sold at his
Shop at Magnus Church-Corner, in Thames Street, near London Bridge, 1662.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL, THE MASTER, WARDENS, and ASSISTANTS OF THE TRINITY HOUSE;
JOHN ASPLEY, IN TESTIMONY OF THE HONOR HE BEARS TO THE GOVERNORS and
PRACTISERS OF THE ART OF NAVIGATION, DEDICATES THESE HIS FIRST LABORS.

The Printer to the Reader.
THis little book having been well accepted of among Seamen, being the first
fruits of Mr. Aspley's Mathematical Studies, has passed five Impressions,
without any alteration; and so I doubt not might have done still: But because
since that time there have been several books put out of this nature, I have
procured this to be revised, and several alterations and additions to be made
therein, So that here you have both the old, and a new book intermingled all
in one, with a third part added thereto, concerning Dialling* by a way not
formerly published by any. All which I doubt not you will kindly accept of, and
receive much delight and profit thereby.

Your. G. H.

ERRATA.
PAge 34 line 26 read 360. Page. 45. l. 8. r. Distance I M. Page 50. line 13.
for 14 etc. (...) which is just the length of the Gnomon. Page. 50 line. 28.
for increase, read decrease, Page 52 line 4. r. H A I. line 18. r. point O.
Page 57 line 11 r. point L.

Also for some lite^all faults we shall desire your Pardon*

Speculum Nauticum, OR THE SEA-MANS GLASS.
The First Book.
CHAP. I.
The Explanation of certain Terms of Geometry.
BEing intended in this Treatise of the plain Scale, to declare the manner of
projection of the Sphere, in plano, I have thought fitting first, to show unto
you some terms of Geometry which are necessary for the unlearned to know, (for
whose sake chiefly I write this Treatise) before they enter into the definition
of the Sphere. First therefore I intend to relate unto you, what a point or
prick is, and afterward a Line both right and crooked, and such sorts thereof
as are appertinent unto the operations and use of this Scale.

Punctum, or a point, is the beginning of things, or a prick supposed
indivisible, void of length, breadth, and depth: as in the Figure following is
noted by the point, or prick A.

Linea, or a Line, is a supposed length, or a thing extending it self in
length, not having breadth nor thickness, as is set forth unto you by the Line
BAD.



Parallela, or a Parallel Line, is a line drawn by the side of another line, in
such sort that they may be equidistant in all places. And of such parallels,
two only belong unto this work of the plain Scale, that is to say, the right
lined Parallel, and the circular Parallel.

Right lined Parallels are two right lines equidistant one from another, which
being drawn forth infinitely, would never touch or meet one another, as you may
see in the Figure, where the line H I is Parallel unto the line CE, and the
line GF is Parallel unto them both.

A circular Parallel is a circle drawn either within or without another circle
upon the same center, as you may plainly see by the two circles BCDE, and XVYW.
These circles are both drawn upon the center A, and therefore are parallel the
one unto the other. There is another kind of Parallel also, which is called a
Serpentine Parallel, but because it is not belonging unto the use of this
Scale, I will omit it, and so proceed unto the rest.

Perpendiculum, or a Perpendicular is a line raised from, or let fall upon,
another line, making equal Angles on both sides, as you may see declared in the
figure, where in the line AC is perpendicular unto the line BAD, making equal
^ngles in the point A.

Diameter circuli, or the Diameter of a Circle, is a right line drawn through
the center of any circle, in such sort that it may divide the circle into two
equal parts, as you may see the line BAD is the Diameter of the circle BCDE,
because it passes through the center A, and the two ends thereof do divide the
circle into two equal parts, in the two extremes B and D, making the semicircle
BCD equal unto the semicircle DEB.

Semidiameter circuli, or the semidiameter of a circle is half of the Diameter,
and is contained betwixt the center, and the one side of the circle, as the
line AD is the Semidiameter of the circle BCDE. This Semidiameter contains 60
degrees of the line of Chords, which we sometimes call the Radius.

Semicirculus, or a Semicircle, is the one half of a circle, drawn upon his
Diameter, and is contained upon the Superficies, or Surface, of the Diameter,
as the Semicircle BCD which is half of the circle BCDE, and is contained above
the Diameter BAD.

Quadrans circuli, is the fourth part of a circle, and is contained betwixt the
Semidiameter of the circle, and a line drawn Perpendicular, unto the Diameter
of the same circle, from the Center thereof, dividing the Semicircle into two
equal parts, of the which parts, the one is the Quadrant, or fourth part of the
same circle. As for example, the Diameter of the circle BCDE is the line BAD,
dividing the circle into two equal parts: then from the center A raise the
Perpendicular AC, dividing the Semicircle likewise into two equal parts; so is
ABC, or ACD, the Quadrant of the circle BCDE, which was desired.

CHAP. II.
The manner how to raise a Perpendicular from the middle of a line given.
(...) first a ground line whereupon you would have a Perpendicular raised,
then open your Compasses unto any distance (so it exceed not the end of your
line,) placing one foot of the said Compasses in the point from whence the
Perpendicular is ^o be raised, and with the other foot make a mark in the line
on (...) removing your Compasses unto any other distance that (...) set one
foot thereof in one of the marks, and with the (...) foot make an Arch over the
middle point, then with the same distance of your Compasses set one foot in the
other mark upon the line, and with the other foot make another Arch of a Circle
over the middle Point, so that it may cross the first Arch, and from the
meeting of these two Arches, draw a right line unto the middle Point, from
which the Perpendicular was to be raised, which line shall be the Perpendicular
desired.



Example, suppose your Base or ground line whereupon a Perpendicular is to be
raised be the line FLK, and from L the Perpendicular is to be raised, set one
foot of your Compasses in the Point L, and with the other, make the marks G and
M on both sides of the point L, the^ opening your Compasses wider, set one foot
in the point M, and with the other draw the Arch S over the point L, then with
the same distance of your Compasses, set one foot in G, and with the other make
the Arch R, crossing the Arch S in the point T, then from T draw the line TL,
which line is perpendicular unto the line FLK from the point L, which is the
perpendicular desired.

CHAP. III.
To let a Perpendicular fall from any Point assigned, unto the middle of a line.
LET the line whereupon you would have a Perpendicular let fall be the line
LFK, and the point assigned to be the point T, from whence you would have a
Perpendicular let fall upon the line FLK, first set one foot of your Compasses
in T, and open your Compasses unto any distance so that it be more than the
distance TL, which here we suppose to be the distance TM; then make in the line
FLK the marks G and M, then with your Compasses take the one half of GM, which
is the point L, then from L draw a line unto the point T, so the line TL shall
be the Perpendicular, which was desired to be let fall from the assigned point
T unto the middle of the line FLK.

CHAP. IV.
To raise a Perpendicular upon the end of a Line.
SUppose the line whereupon you would have a Perpendicular raised, be the line
FLK, and from the point F a Perpendicular is to be raised: first open your
Compasses unto any distance, which here we put to be the distance FG, and set
one foot of your Compasses in the point F, and with the other draw the Arch
DEGREES, then set one foot of your Compasses in the point G, and with the other
draw the Arch E; then placing one point of your Compasses in E, with the other
draw the Arch DB; then place your Compasses in D, and with the same distance
draw the Arch A, cutting the Arch DB in C, then draw a line from C unto the end
of the line FLK, unto the assigned point F, so shall the line CF be a
Perpendicular raised from the end of the line FLK, and from the assigned point
F.

CHAP. V.
To let a Perpendicular fall from any point assigned unto the end of a Line.
LET the line FLK be the Base or ground line, and from the point I a
Perpendicular is to be let fall upon the end of the line at K, first from the
assigned point I, draw a line unto any part of the Base, which shall be the
line IHM, then find the middle of the line IM, which is at H; place therefore
one foot of your Compasses in the point H, and extend the other unto I, with
which distance draw the Arch INK upon the Center H, cutting the Base or
ground-line in the point K, then draw the line KI, which line shall be the
Perpendicular desired.

CHAP. VI.
A right Line being given, how to draw another parallel there unto at any
distance required.
LEt the line given be AB, unto which it is required to draw another right line
CD which shall be parallel to the former line AB, and at the distance AC.

First open your Compasses to the distance AC, then set one foot in the point
A, with the other describe the Arch C; again, place one foot in B, and with the
other describe the Arch D; Then draw the line CD, so that it may only touch the
two Arches C and D, so shall the line CD, so drawn, be parallel to AB, and at
the distance required.

CHAP. VII.
A right line being given, how to draw another parallel thereunto, which shall
also pass through a point assigned.
LEt AB be a line given, and the point assigned be C: and let it be required to
draw another line parallel thereunto, which shall pass through the given point
C.

First, take with your Compasses the distance from A to C, and placing one foot
thereof in B, with the other describe the Arch DE, Then take in your Compasses
the whole line AB, and placingone foot in the given point C, with the other
foot describe the Arch FG, crossing the former Arch DE in the point H. Lastly,
if you draw the line CH, it shall be parallel to AB.

NOw I doubt not but you understand the way to let fall, or to raise any manner
of Perpendicular line, either from, or upon any part of a line: as also to draw
lines parallel one to another at any distance required, therefore now I intend
to proceed unto the main point here aimed at, which is, to declare, and make
known unto you the several operations performed by the plain Scale, which
though it be in use with very few, yet it is most necessary for Seamen,
because all questions in Navigation are thereby easily and plainly wrought. And
also all questions in Astronomy (belonging unto the expert, and industrious
Seamen) may both speedily and easily be wrought by the same Scale: in regard
whereof I have declared in this little Book, that knowledge (which God has
been pleased to bestow upon me) concerning the necessary use and practice
thereof; hoping that you will as kindly accept it, as it is freely offered unto
your courteous considerations.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the description of the Scale.
THis Scale usually is divided into three parts, the first whereof is a Scale
of equal Parts, divided into Miles, or Leagues, from 1 unto 100, and upwards,
at your pleasure, and numbered with 10, 20, 30, 40, and so forth unto the end.
All these divisions are equal one unto another, and is in use for to measure
the Leagues that any ship has run upon any course, or the Leagues that she
has raised or depressed the Pole, or departed the Meridian, as in the work,
hereafter shall be more fully declated. The figure of the plane Scale.



The second part of the Scale, is the single Chorde of a circle, or the Chord
of 90, and is divided into 90 unequal divisions, representing the 90 degrees of
the Quadrant: and are numbered with 10, 20, 30, 40, etc. unto 90. This Ghord is
in use to measure any part or Arch of a circle, not surmounting 90 degrees: The
number of these degrees from 1 unto 60 is called the Radius of the Scale, upon
which distance all circles are to be drawn, whereupon 60 of th^se Degrees are
the Semidiameter of any Circle that is drawn upon that Radius.

The third part of the Scale is divided into eight parts, representing the
Points or Rumbes of the Mariners Compass; which in all are 32 points: but upon
the Scale there are only S reckoned, which is but one Quadrant or quarter of
them, being to be reckoned from the Meridian of North and South both ways, as
you may see more plainly by this figure, representing the order of the points
of the Compass.



It is usual also to have another line placed upon your Scale, to she^ you how
many leagues make a degree of longitude in every latitude, concerning which you
shall have directions in the 14 Chapter following.

CHAP. IX.
Knowing the course any ship has made, and the leagues she has sailed: to
find how much she has raised or depressed the Pole; and likewise how much she
is departed from her first Meridian.
The Course is South-west and by South, the leagues sailed are 100, the
difference of the Latitude, and the distance of the Meridians is required.
IN the first demonstration, first draw the line AB, and from the Center A, let
fall the Perpendicular AF, which represents the Meridian; then opening your
Compasses unto the Radius of your Scale, set one foot thereof in the Center A,
and with the other draw the Arch KCB: Then in regard your Course is South-west
and by South, that is three points from the South, take three of the eight
points of the Compass with your Compasses, out of your scale, and place them
from K to C; then draw the line ACD, which represents the Rumb or point of the
Compass you have sailed upon; Then out of your scale of leagues, take with
your compasses the number of leagues you have sailed upon this course, which is
100 leagues, and place them upon the Rumb line ACD, from A to D, crossing the
line ACD at theend thereof with the Arch GDH: Then from the point D, draw the
line DF parallel to the line AB, so it will cut the Meridian line AKF in the
point F.

Now you must heedfully observe this point D, for this represents the place
where your Ship is, and does show both the differencefo the latitude of the
place you are in, and also your distance or departure from your first meridian.

First for the latitude, you see the line DF, being parallel to the line AB,
cuts the Meridian line AF in the point F: So that if you take the distance FA
with your Compasses, and apply it to the scale of equal leagues, you shall find
it is just 83 leagues, which counting 20 leagues to a degree, makes 4 degrees 9
min. and so much you have altered your latitude by the said course, which
degrees and minutes being added to, or subtracted from the latitude of the
place you came from, according as your course requires, shows you always the
true latitude you are in.

Likewise from this point D, take with your Compasses the distance DF, and you
shall find it by your scale of equal leagues to be 56 leagues, and so much you
are departed from your first Meridian to the Westward; which when you are near
the Equinoctial, where the degrees of longitude are equal to the degrees of
latitude, would show the longitude, by taking 20 leagues for one degree, etc.
so it would be two degrees, and 48 min. for your difference of longitude, from
your first Meridian AF. But in other places, you must first (...) howmany
leagues make a degree of longitude about that latitude where you are, and so
turn your leagues of distance from the Meridian, into degrees and minutes of
longitude, of which more hereafter, Chap. 14.

I have been the larger in these two Propositions, because they are ^he first,
for the better understanding of all the rest; and because they are most
necessary, for thereupon depends the knowledge of the true Traverse point, and
the keeping of your dead reckoning. Now because this cannot always be kept
exactly, it is to be corrected by the observation of the latitude, according to
this following proposition.

CHAP. X.
Knowi g the difference of latitude of two places, and the Rumb you have sailed
upon, to find the leagues you have sailed, and the difference of Meridians.
The Pole depressed four degrees and the Rumb South-West by South or the third
from the Meridian, to find your true Traverse point, viz. how far you have
sailed, and how much you are departed from your first Meridian.
In the first figure
DRaw the lines as in the former Chapter, so that AKF may represent the
Meridian line, and ACD may represent the third Rumb from the meridian; then
because you have altered your latitude 4 degrees, which make 80 leagues, take
80 leagues with your Compasses out of your Scale, and set them upon the
meridian line AF, from A to L: Then keeping the same distance of your
Compasses, draw the line LM parallel to AB, (or else you may erect LM
perpendicular to the line AF, in the point L) and mark where the said LM
crosses the Rumb line ACD, which is in the point M. This point M is the true
Traverse point, the leagues sailed are showed by the line AM, which being
measured in the Scale, will be found to be 96 leagues and an half, and the
departure from the Meridian is LM, which is 54 leagues.

Now by this Proposition (as I said) you may correct your dead reckoning; for
suppose by the former proposition you reckon you had sailed 100 leagues upon
the ^hird Rumb, then as you see there, you should have been at the point D, and
have altered your latitude 83 leagues, and departed from your Meridian 56
leagues; but now suppose that by a good observation of the latitude, you find
that you have altered the latitude only 80 leagues, from A to L, by drawing
this line LM, which crosses the Rumb or Ships way in M, you may conclude your
true Traverse point to be at M, so that you have sailed only from A to M, which
is 96 leagues, and departed from your Meridian 54 leagues. So that as you are
short of the latitude you reckoned for 3 leagues or 9 min. you are also short
of your way you reckoned 3 leagues, and two leagues less in your departure from
the Meridian. And this you must account for your true reckoning, being thus
corrected.

CHAP. XI.
By the difference of the latitudes of two places and the distance between
their Meridians, to find the Rumb by which you must sail from the one place to
the other, and how far it is from the one place to the other?
The difference of latitude between the two places is 4 degrees. 9 min. and the
distance between the two Meridians is 56 leagues, and it is required to find
the Rumb from the one place to the other.
IN the former figure draw the quadrant AKCB, then turn your four degrees 9
min. of latitude into leagues, it makes 83 leagues, which you must place upon
the meridian line from A to F. And from the point F draw the line FD parallel
to the line AB. Then open your Compasses to the distance of the meridians which
is 56 leagues, and set it on the line FD, from F to D. Then lay your Ruler by
this mark D and the Center A, and draw the line ACD. Then mark where this line
cuts the quadrant, which is in the point C, and setting one foot of your
Compasses in the point C, open the other to K, and keeping your Compasses at
that distance CK, measure it upon your Scale, either in the line of Chords, or
in the line of Rumbs, you sh ll find it to be in the one 33 degrees. 45 min. and in
the other just the third Rumb from the meridian. So that the Rumb from A (...)
D ^s South-west and by South, and the Rumb from D to A is the Rumb opposite
thereunto, which is North-east and by North.

Then for the distance between the two places in the Rumb, ^et one foot of your
Compasses in the one place at A, and open the other to the other place at D,
and the length of the line A D ineasured in the Scale of leagues, shows the
distance between them to be just 100 leagues.

These three (or rather these six) Propositions, (for they are each of them
double) are the most useful and necessary in the art of Navigation. By the
first of these, knowing the point of the Compass you ^ail upon, and judging
howmany leagues you have sailed thereon, you know and are able to give a
reasonable account where you are, both in respect of latitude and longitude. By
the second having a fair observation of the latitude at any time, you may more
perfectly know where you are; and thereby correct your former account. And by
this third you may know how to direct your course from any place to your
desired haven. So that in effect you need no more, but yet for your better
instruction by variety of cases and examples, I shall proceed.

CHAP. XII.
The difference of Latitude and the lea^^es sailed being given, to find the
distanee from the Meridian, and the Rumb you have sailed upon.
Sailing 100 leagues between South and West, until the Pole be depressed 4
degrees. 9 min. the distance from the Meridian is demanded, and what Rumb you have
sailed upon?
IN the first figure draw the Quadrant AKCB, as in the former Chapters, and
then reduce your degrees of latitude into leagues, so 4 degrees. 9 min. make 83
leagues, which you must take with your Compasses out of your Scale of leagues,
and set them off in this Meridian line from A to F. Then from the point F draw
the line FD, parallel to the line AB, which you may do with the foresaid
distance of your Compasses. Then open your Compasses unto your distance failed,
which is 100 leagues, and setting one foot of your Compasses in the point A,
with the other draw the little Arch HG, cutting the line FD in the point D. So
the line FD measured in the Scale of leagues, shall show you the distance from
the M ridian, which is 56 leagues, and if you draw the line ACD, it i^ the Rumb
line upon which you have sailed, and the Arch KC (...) ed in the Scale of
Rumbs, shows it to be the third Rumb from the Meridian, or South-west by South.

CHAP. XIII.
To find the distance of any Island from you, that you may discern at two stati
n^, knowing the po^ut of the Compass, the Island bears unto each of the
stations.
Suppose, being at Sea you discover an Island bearing North-east off you, which
place let it be your first station, and then sailing seven leagues full North
you observe the Island to bear full East off you, which let be the second
station; the aemand is to find the distance of the said Island from both the
said stations?
IN the second figure, or demonstration, let A be the first Station, and upon
the Center A draw the Quadrant ABDE; Then in regard you found the Island to
bear North-East from you, take 4 of your 8 points of the Compass our of the
Scale, and place them upon your Quadrant from B to D, then from the Center A by
the point D, draw the line ADF, representing the visuall line passing between
your sight and the Island, being at the first station A. Then seeng when y^^
had sailed 7 leagues North, you observed the Island to bear full East off you,
set off the said 7 leagues from A to C, (reckoning every 10 leag^ s of your
Scale to be but on^) and from this point C, which is the second station, draw
the line C F parallel to AE, and it will cut the line ADF in the point F: So
shall the point F, be the place of the Island desired, and the distance AF, is
the distance of the Island from the first station, viz. 9 leagues 90 parts or
almost 10 leagues: Likewise the distance from C, to F, is the distance of the
Island from the second station, which is just seven leagues. And by this manner
of work, you may find the* distance of any Island or head land from you, or you
may take the distances of as many places as you will or can see at any two such
stations, and by the crossing of their visuall lines, find their position and
distances each from other.

CHAP. XIV.
To find how many leagues, miles, and parts do make one degree of longitude in
every latitude.
Note, All this while we have been sailing according to the Rules of the plain
Chart, which supposith the degrees of longitude to be equal to the degrees of
latitude, in all latitudes, but that is very false and erroneous; it being true
only in places near the Equinoctial, where every degree of longitude contains
20 leagues, as the degrees of latitude do; But in places near the Poles it
alt^rs very much, so that in the latitude of 60 degrees, 10 leagues make a
degree of longitude: and in other latitudes the degrees of longitude alter, as
in this little Table, which shows at what degree and minute of latitude, any
nnmber of leagues make a degree of longitude, by which you may divide a Line
upon your Scale for your ready use.
Leagues in one Degree.
20 00 d 00 m 19 18 11 18 25 50 17 31 47 16 36 52 15 41 25 14 45 34 13 49 27 12
53 08 11 56 38 10 60 d 00 m 9 63 15 8 66 25 7 69 31 6 72 32 5 75 31 4 78 28 3
81 22 2 84 16 1 87 08

Now to return to the Question, and show you by demonstration how to find how
many leagues, miles, and parts, make a degree of longitude in any degree of
latitude?
TAke 60 parts out of your Scale of equal parts, which you must reckon for
miles, and count three of them to a league, and therewit^ draw the quadrant
ABC, then from the point B set off the degree of the latitude proposed (which
for example, let it be 58 degrees. 54 m.) from B to D, then from the point D* draw
the line DF parallel to AB, so shall the length of this line DF, being measured
in your Scale of leagues, show you the number of leagues and miles, which
answer to a degree of longitude in the said latitude af 58 degrees. 54 m. which you
shall find to be 31 miles, or 10 leagues and one mile. So also BE being the
Arch of 51 degrees. 55 min* the line EG shows one degree of longitude to be 37
miles, or 12 leagues and one mile.

The larger you make your Quadrant, the more exact will the work be, and show
the leagues and miles more exactly, which you may make into a Table, as this
following.

A Table showing how many leagues, miles, and hundred parts of a mile make one
degree of longitude in any latitude.
Latitude Leagues Miles Parts Difference Latitude Leagues Miles Parts Diffe
ence Latitude Leagues Miles Parts Diff^rence 0 20 0 0 -- 30 17 0 96 -- 60 10 0
0 -- 1 19 2 99 1 31 17 0 43 53 61 9 2 09 91 2 19 2 96 3 32 16 2 88 55 62 9 1 17
92 3 19 2 92 4 33 16 2 32 56 63 9 0 24 93 4 19 2 85 7 34 16 1 74 58 64 8 2 30
94 5 19 2 77 8 35 16 1 15 59 65 8 1 36 94 6 19 2 67 10 36 16 0 54 61 66 8 0 40
96 7 19 2 55 12 37 15 2 92 62 67 7 2 44 96 8 19 2 42 13 38 15 2 28 64 68 7 1 47
97 9 19 2 26 16 39 15 1 63 65 69 7 0 50 97 10 19 2 09 17 40 15 0 96 67 70 6 2
52 98 11 19 1 90 19 41 15 0 28 68 71 6 1 53 99 12 19 1 69 21 42 14 2 59 69 72 6
0 54 99 13 19 1 46 23 43 14 1 88 71 73 5 2 54 100 14 19 1 22 24 44 14 1 16 72
74 5 1 54 100 15 19 0 96 26 45 14 0 43 73 75 5 0 53 101 16 19 0 68 28 46 13 2
68 75 76 4 2 52 101 17 19 0 38 30 47 13 1 92 76 77 4 1 50 102 18 19 0 06 32 48
13 1 15 77 78 4 0 48 102 19 18 2 73 33 49 13 0 36 79 79 3 2 45 103 20 18 2 38
35 50 12 2 57 79 80 3 1 42 103 21 18 2 1 37 51 12 1 76 81 81 3 0 38 104 22 18 1
63 38 52 12 0 94 82 82 2 2 35 103 23 18 1 23 40 53 12 0 11 83 83 2 1 31 104 24
18 0 81 42 54 11 2 27 84 84 2 0 27 104 25 18 0 38 43 55 11 1 41 86 85 1 2 23
104 26 17 2 93 45 56 11 0 55 86 86 1 1 18 105 27 17 2 46 47 57 10 2 68 87 87 1
0 14 104 28 17 1 98 48 58 10 1 80 88 88 0 2 09 105 29 17 1 48 50 59 10 0 90 90
89 0 1 05 104 30 17 0 96 52 60 10 0 0 90 90 0 0 0 105

CHAP. XV.
The difference of latitude, and the Rumb or distance sailed being known, to
find the distance of the Meridians, and thereby to find the degrees and minutes
of the difference of longitude in any latitude.
Sailing from the North parallel of 56 degrees and 5 min. latitude, 100 leagues
upon the third Rumb from the Meridian* viz. South-west and by South until I
find the Pole is depressed 4 degrees. 9 m. and the Meridional distance 56 leagues;
the longitude is desired thereby?
I^ the first figure
DRaw the Quadrant as is showed before, then reduce your 4 degrees. 9 min. o^
latitude into leagues, it makes 83 leagues, which set off upon the meridian
line from A to F. Then upon the Rumb line ADC set off the distance sailed from
A to D, and after, by these two points, draw the line F D; So shall D represent
the place of the Ship, and as AF is the difference of latitude, so FD is the
difference of meridians, which measured in your Scale of leagues is 56 leagues.

Now to reduce this 56 leagues into degrees of longitude, you must consider
from what latitude you have sailed, and to what latitude you are come, viz.
from latitude 56 d. 5 m. to 4 degrees. 9 min. less, which is 51 d. 56 m. and take
the middle latitude (or somewhat more) between the two places, which in this
example falls out to be 54d. 01 m. Then by the Table in the former Chapter,
find out howmany leagues and miles in the said middle latitude make one degree
of longitude, and you shall find in that Table, that in the latitude of 54 d.
there is but 11 leagues, and 2 miles, and 27 parts in one degree of longitude;
Therefore open your Compasses upon your Scale of leagues, to this 11 leagues, 2
miles, 27 parts, and keeping your Compasses at that distance, set one foot of
them at 56 leagues in your Scale of leagues, or in the line DF in the figure,
(or upon the like line in your Chart at any time) either at F or D, and measure
howmany times you find that distance either to the end of your Scale coming
backward, or in the line DF, for so many degrees is the difference o^
longitude, and if any odd part remain, you may proportion i^ by your eye,
judging it to be a quarter, a third, an half, or any part more or less of a
degree, which you may either reckon by parts, or 15, 20, 30 etc. minutes,

Thus this line DF being 56 leagues, opening your Compasses to 11 leagues 2
miles 27 parts, you will find this distance in it, 4 times and 3 quarters; so
that the difference of longitude is 4 degrees. 45 min.

Or you may reduce it into miles and work by the rule of proportion, so you
shall find As 11 leagues, 2 miles, 27 parts, that is 35 miles 27 parts. 35,27
To one degree of longitude in the latitude of 54 d. 01,00 So is 56 leagues, or
168 miles. 168,00 To 4 degrees, 76 parts. 04 76

But if your Scale be large, the other way with your Compasses will give you
the degrees and parts of longitude as exactly as you need for most uses.

Also if the latitude fall not out in equal parts, you may find out for your
odd minutes by proportion, for which purpose I have set the differences
between each degree in the Table.

So that as one hundred parts or 60 minutes being one degree, to the difference
in the Table between the two next degrees;

So the odd hundred parts or minutes of latitude, to the parts and minutes
proportional to be allowed.

CHAP. XVI.
Sailing from the South latitude of 60 degrees, 51 min. and from longitude 25
degrees, 24 min. 99 leagues, upon a South-west course: the latitude and
longitude of the second place is demanded.
IN the second demonstration, draw the Quadrant ABCDE, as is formerly taught,
then in regard you sail South-west, take 4 points of the Compass from your
Scale, and place them from B unto D, then by the point D draw the line ADF,
then place your ninety nine leagues upon the line ADF, from A unto F, so shall
F be the place of your Ship. Then from F draw the line FC parallel unto AE,
cutting the line ABC in C, so shall the distance CA be the leagues you have run
South, which is seventy leagues, or 3 degrees. 30 minutes, which being added to the
latitude from whence you dearted, makes 64 degrees. and 21 minutes for the latitude
of the second place: then take the distance CF, and apply it unto the line of
equal parts, and you shall find it likewise 70 leagues: Then finding the middle
latitude 62 degrees 36 minutes in the Table, Chap. 14. you shall find that 9
leagues and 0 miles, and 61 parts, do alter a degree of longitude in that
latitude. Then opening the feet of your Compasses to 9 leagues 0 miles 61
parts, in the Scale of equal leagues, and keeping the Compasses at that
distance, see howmany times that distance is in the line CF, which is seven
times and somewhat above an half, the true difference of longitude being 7 degrees.
36 m. which being subtracted from the longitude from whence you departed,
leaves 17 degrees and 48 minutes for the longitudeof the second place.

CHAP. XVII.
A Ship sailing from the North Parallel of fifty degrees, having an hundred
leagues to sail South-west, and by West, by the way is enforced by contrary
winds to sail upon several points of the Compass, first sailing thirty leagues
upon a direct course, then West North-west twenty leagues, then South sixty
leagues, the question is to find the latitude of the second place, how far it
is to the place whereuuto you are bound, the distance of the Rumb that is
betwixt them, the distance that you are from your first Meridian, and thereby
the difference of longitude.
IN the third demonstration, draw the line AD, and from the point A, raise the
perpendicular AB, then open your Compass unto the Radius of your Scale, and
place one foot thereof in the center A. and with the other draw the Quadrant
BCD, then take three points of the compass and place them upon the Quadrant
from D. unto C, then from the Center A, by the point C, draw the line ACL, 100
Leagues in length, which is the true course you are to sail, Then in regard
you sailed thirty leagues direct, take thirty leagues from your Scale of
equal parts, and place them upon the line AEC, it extends from A unto E: then
in regard you turned your Course, West, Northwest, from the Center E, draw the
Line EG parallel unto A. D. and again from the center E draw the line EH
perpendicular to EG, and parallel to AB, then witn the distance of the Radius,
set one foot of your compasses in the center E, and with the other draw the
Quadrant GMH, and in regard you sailed West, Northwest, which is two points
from the West Northward, take from your Scale two points of the Compass, and
place them upon the Quadrant GMH, from G unto M, then from the center E unto
the point M, draw the line EFM, then take 20 Leagues with your Compasses from
the Scale of equal parts, and place them upon the line EFM, from E unto F,
then is your Ship in the point F. Lastly, in regard you run South 60 Leagues
from F, draw a Line Parallel unto the Meridian AB, which is the line FI, then
take from your Scale of equal parts sixty Leagues, and place them from F,
unto I, then is your Ship in the point I: then last of all is to be found how
far it is to the place where unto you were bound, the distance of the Rumb that
is betwixt you, the degrees and minutes you have raised the Pole, the distance
of departure from the first Meridian, and thereby the difference of Longitude:
and that you may so do, first draw the line OIK, Perpendicular unto the line
IF in the point I, and with your Compasses opened unto the distance of the
Radius, set one foot of your Compasses in the Center I, and with the other draw
the Quadrant KNF, then in regard your ship is in the point I, and the place
whereunto you are bound is the point L, therefore from I, through the point L
draw the line ILN, cutting the Arch KNF, in the point N, therefore let IL, be
the Leagues you have unto the place whereunto you are bound, which is forty
one Leagues and a half, and the Rumb the distance KN, which is West, and by
North, and three degrees unto the Northward, so likewise is the line AO, the
number of Leagues you have run due South, which is sixty eight Leagues and one
mile, or three degrees and twenty five minutes, which being taken from fifty
degrees, the parallel from which you departed, leaves forty six degrees and
thirty five minutes for the Parallel you are in. Last of all, shall the line
IO, be the Leagues that you have departed your first Meridian, which are forty
two leagues and one mile, Then take the middle latitude which is forty eight
degrees seventeen minutes and in the Table chap. 14 you shall find that
thirteen Leagues 0. mile, 92 parts, do answer unto a degree of Longitude in
that Parallel; then setting one foot of your Compasses in thirteen Leagues,
and ninety two parts, extending the other to the beginning of the Scale,
keeping the Compasses at that distance, turn them over the line I O, and you
shall find it contains that distance three times and almost a quarter, So the
difference of longitude is three degrees eleven minutes.

CHAP. XVIII.
Two Ships departing from one Parallel, and Port, the one in sailing eight
Leagues betwixt the North, and the West, has raised the Pole two degrees, the
other in sailing a hundred Leagues betwixt the North, and West, has raised the
Pole four degrees, I demand by what Rhumbs the said Ships have sailed, and the
Rhumb and distance that is betwixt them?
IN the fourth Demonstration, draw the Quadrant ABCDE, then in regard the first
Ship has raised the Pole two degrees, which is forty leagues, take forty
Leagues off your Scale, and apply them unto the Meridian line AGL, from A unto
G: then from the point G, draw the line GF, parallel unto AB, then opening your
compasses unto 80 Leagues, set one foot in the Center A, with the other make a
mark in the line GF, which will be at F, so shall F be the place of the first
ship; the second Ship has raised the Pole four degrees, which is 80 Leagues,
therefore place 80 leagues upon the Meridian line AGL, from A unto L, and from
the point L draw the line LM, parallel unto GHF, then open your Compasses unto
the distance of a hundred leagues, which are the Leagues the second ship did
run, and set the foot of your Compasses in the Center A, and with the other
make a mark in the line LM, which will be at M, then draw the line MA, which is
the course of the second Ship, and the line FA, is the course of the first
ship, then from F let a Perpendicular fall, being Perpendicular to the line GF,
which is the line FK, then opening your Compasses unto the Radius of your
Scale, set one foot in the Center F, and with the other draw the Quadrant HIK,
likewise from F, the place of the first Ship, draw a line by the point M, the
place of the second, cutting the Quadrant KHI, in I, so let IK, be the course
that is betwixt them, that is, if you will sail from the first ship unto the
second, you must sail North and by East, and one and forty minutes to the
Eastward, likewise let F M, be the distance that is betwixt them, which in this
Demonstration is forty Leagues, two miles, so shall BC, be the course of the
first ship from the West Northward, wh ch here is found to be thirty degrees
and one minut from the West Northward, or Northwest by West, and three degrees
and forty four minutes to the west ward. Lastly the Arch ED, is in the
distance of the course that the second Ship made from the North Westward, which
is found by this Demonstration to be Northwest and by North, and three degrees
five minutes to the Westward.

CHAP. X^X.
Two Ships departing from one Parallel and Port in the Parallel of 47 degrees. 56
min. the first in sailing 80 leag. betwixt the North and West, has raised the
Pole two degrees, I demand by what course the second ship must run, and how
much she shall alter in her first Meridian or longitude, to bring her self 40.
leagues and two miles North and by East, and 41. minutes to the Eastward of the
first ship?
IN the fourth Demonstration draw the Quadrant ABCDE, then multiply your two
degrees you have altered your latitude by twenty and it makes forty
Leagues; which forty Leagues set upon the line AEL, from A unto G, then from
the point G draw the line GF, parallel unto AB, then open your Compasses unto
the distance of 80 Leagues, which are the Leagues your first ship did run,
and place one foot of your Compasses in the Center A, and with the other make a
mark in the line GF, which will be at the point F, then from the Center A unto
the point F draw the line AF, representing the distance of the Course of the
first Ship 80 leagues: Then from F let fall a Perpendicular FK, and upon the
Center F, with the Radius of the Scale draw the Arch HIK, Then in regard you
must bring the second ship North and by East, and 41 minutes Eastward of the
first ship, take 11 degrees 56 minutes from your Scale of Chords, and place
them from Kunto I, upon the quadrant KIH. Then from F draw the line IF, and
upon the line, FI, place the distance that you must bring the second ship from
the first (which is forty leagues and two miles) from F unto M. So is M the
place of your second ship. Then from M draw the line ML parallel unto FG,
cutting the line AGL in L, then draw the line MA, cutting the Quadrant BDE in
D. So shall the Arch DE be the course that the second ship must run, to bring
her self forty leagues and two miles North and by East, and 41 minutes East of
the first ship. Then to know what you have altered the latitude, first take the
distance LA and apply it unto the Scale of equal parts, and you shall find it
to be 80 leagues, which is just 4 degrees, which you have altered your
latitude, or Poles elevation: which 4 degrees added unto the latitude you depar
ed from, it makes 51 degrees 56 min. for the latitude that your second Ship is
in, then take the distance LM and apply it to the Scale, it gives 60 leagues;
then open your Compasses unto the distance of the middle latitude, which is 40
degrees. 5^ min. of the Chord, and apply it unto the Table of longitudes, and it
gives 12 leagues, and 2 miles, and 62 parts, to alter one degree of longitude
in that Parallel: Then set one foot of your Compasses in 12 leagues 2 miles,
and 62 parts, and open the other to the beginning of the line, and with that
distance measure the line L M, being 60 leagues, and you shall find that it is
contained there in four times and two thirds, so the longitude is 4 degrees 40
minutes.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, and of the Tides, and how to find them
in all places.
A general Table for the Tides in all places.
The Moons age. Hours and minutes to be added. Hours and minutes to be added.
The Moons age. Hours and minutes to be added: Hours and minutes to be added:
Days. Degrees: Minutes: Days. Degrees: Minutes: 1 0 48 16 0 48 2 1 36 17 1 36
3 2 24 18 2 24 4 3 21 19 3 12 5 4 0 20 4 0 6 4 48 21 4 48 7 5 36 22 5 36 8 6 24
23 6 24 9 7 12 24 7 12 10 8 0 25 8 0 11 8 48 26 8 48 12 9 36 27 9 36 13 10 24
28 10 24 14 11 12 29 11 12 15 0 0 30 0 0

The use of the Table of the Tides.
FIrst it is to be understood, that by the swift motion of the first Mover, the
Moon and all the rest of the Stars and Planets, are turned about the World in
four and twenty hours, upon which swift motion of the Moon, the daily motions
of the Sea, do depend, which motion of the Sea falls not out always at one
hour, the reason thereof is, because of the swift motion of the Moon in regard
she goes almost thirteen degrees in four and twenty hours, and the Sun moves
scarce one degree, which gives every day twelve degrees, that the Moon comes
slower to any point in the Heaven than the Sun: which twelve degrees makes
forty eight minutes of time for the difference of every full Sea, according
unto the middle motion of the Moon, which difference is here set down in this
Table for every day of the Moons age. Therefore if you would know the full Sea
at any place in the World, first you must know at what hour it is full Sea at
the new or full Moon; which hours and minutes keep in mind, then seek the age
of the Moon as is before taught, and with the number of her age enter this
Table, under the Title of the Moons age, and having found her age in the Table,
against it you shall find the hours and minutes which are to be added unto the
time that the Moon makes full Sea in any place, and the whole number of hours
and minutes is the time that the Moon makes full Sea in that place upon the
day desired. As for example, I desire to know the full Sea at London Bridge
upon the 13 of July 1624. the age of the Moon being found as before, is eight
days, then in the Table I find eight days, and against it 6 hours, and 24
minutes, which being added unto 3 hours, the full Sea upon the change day gives
9 a clock 24 minutes for the time at the full Sea upon the 13 day of July 1624.

THE SEA-MANS GLASS.
The Second Book.
Wherein is declared the Definition of the Sphere, a Description of the six
great Circles, and also of the four lesser Circles, last of all, certain
Questions Astronomicall, performed by the said Scale.
CHAP. I.
Of a Sphere, and the Circles thereof.
The figure of the plain Scale.



A Sphere according to the Description of Theodosius, is a certain solid Sup^
ficies, in whose middle is a Point, from which all lines drawn unto the
Circumference are equal; which Poi^^ is called the Center of the Sphere, by
which C^^^er a right Line being drawn, and excending himself on either side
unto that part of the Circumference whereupon the Sphere is turned, is called
Axis Spherae, or the Axle-tree of the World.

A Sphere accidentally is divided into two parts, that is to say, in Sphaeram
rectam and Sphaeram obliquam.

Sphaera recta, or a right Sphere, is only unto those that dwell under the
Equinoctial, Quibus neuter Polorum magis altero elevatur: that is, to whom
neither of the Poles of the World are seen, but lie hid in the Horizon.

Sphaera obliqua, or an oblique Sphere, is unto those that inhabit on either
side of the Equinoctial, unto whom one of the Poles is ever seen, and the other
hid under the Horizon.

The Circles whereupon the Sphere is composed are divided into two sorts: that
is to say, in Circulos majores and minores.

Circuli majores, or the greater Circles, are those that divide the Sphere into
two equal parts: and they are in number six, viz. the Equinoctial, the middle
of the Zodiac, or the Ecliptique line, the two Colures, the Meridian, and the
Horizon.

Minores vero Circuli, or the lesser Circles, are such as divide the Sphere
into two parts, unequally, and they are four in number; as the Tropic of
Cancer, the Tropic of Capricorn, the Circle Artike and the Circle Antartike.

CHAP. II.
Of the six greater Circles.
I. THE Equinoctial is a Circle that crosses the Poles of the World at right
Angles, and divides the Sphere into two equal parts, and is called the
Equinoctial, because when the Sun comes unto it, (which is twice in the year,
viz. In principio Arietis, and Librae, that is, in March and September) the
days and nights are equal thoroughout the whole World, whereupon it is called
Equator diei and noctis, the equal proportioner of the day and night
artificial: and in the figure is described by the line CAE.

II. The Meridian is a great Circle passing through the Poles of the World, and
the Poles of the Horizon, or Zenith point over our heads; and is so called,
because that in any time of the year, or in any place of the World, when the
Sun (by the motion of the Heavens) comes unto that Circle, it is noon, or
twelve of the Clock. And it is to be understood, that all Towns and places that
lie East and West one of another, have every one a several Meridian: but all
places that lie North and South one of another, have one and the same meridian.
This Circle is declared in the figure following by the Circle BCDE.

III. The Horizon is a Circle dividing the superior Hemisphear from the
inferior, whereupon it is called Horizon, that is to say, the bonds of sight,
or the farthest distance that the eye can see, and therefore it is also called
Circulus hemisphaeri. The Horizons are divided into 2 sorts, viz Rectus and
obliquus, a Right and an oblique, or a declining Horizon: whereof those have a
right Horizon which have the Equinoctial for their Zenith, and the Poles of the
World in their Horizon: because the Horizon (hiding both the Poles of the
World) is a Circle supposed to be drawn by the Poles of the World, dividing
the Equinoctial at right Angles, as in the figure following you may plainly
see. First imagining the Circle XVYVV to be the earth, and those that inhabit
at the Point V have the line B D for their Horizon, cutting the Equinoctial
CAE at right Angles in A, and therefore is called Horizon rectus and Sphaera
recta, a right Horizon, and a right Sphere. Those have an oblique Sphere, or an
oblique Horizon, to whom one of the Poles are visuall, or elevated above the
Horizon, and have the other hid under the Horizon, and in regard such a Horizon
does cross the Equinoctial at oblique Angles, it is called Horizon obliquus,
or a declining Horizon, as for example, Those that inhabit at the point S have
T for their Zenith, and KAL for their Horizon, dividing the Equinoctial CAE at
oblique Angles, making the Angle contained betwixt the Horizon AK and the
Equinoctial AC, an Angle of thirty eight degrees, and twenty eight minutes,
and the Angle contained betwixt the Horizon AL and the Pole AD, an Angle of 51.
degrees 32 minutes, which is the elevation of the Pole for those that inhabit
at S, as those at London, these and all other have an oblique Sphere, except
they inhabit just under the Equinoctial Circle, unto whom only does a right
Sphere belong.

IV. The two Colures, Colurus Solstitiorum, or the Summer Colure, is a Circle
passing by the Poles of the World, and by the Poles of the Ecliptic, and by
the head of Cancer and Capricorn, whereupon, the first scruple of Cancer, where
the Colure crosses the Ecliptic Line, is called Punctus solstitiae
aestivalis, or the point of the Summer Solstice: to which place when the Sun
comes, he can approach no nearer unto our Zenith, but returns unto the
Equator again. Arcus vero Coluri, The Ark of the Colure contained betwixt the
Summer Solstice and the Equator, is called the greatest declination of the Sun,
which Ptolomy found to be 23 degrees, 31 minutes: but by the observation of
Copernicus it was found to vary, for ^e found the declination sometimes to be
23 degrees 52 minutes, and in the process of time to be but 23 degrees 28
minutes. And in these our days (by the observation of Ticho de Brahe, and that
late famous Mathematician, Mr. Edward Right) it is found distant from the
Equinoctial 23 degrees, 31 minutes, 30 seconds.

V. The other Colure passes by the Poles of the World, and by the first point
of Aries and Libra, whereupon it is called Colurus distinguens Equinoxia. These
two Colures do cross each other at right Angles in the Poles of the world,
whereupon these, verses were made. Haec duo Solstitia faciunt Cancer
Capricornus,
Sed noctes aequant Aries and Libra diebus.


VI. The Zodiac is another of the greater Circles, dividing the Equinoctial
into two equal parts, by the head of Aries and Libra, the one half of it does
decline unto the North, and the other into the South, the greatest of which
declinations is 23 degrees, 31 minutes, and 30 seconds. Note also, this Circle
is divided into twelve equal parts, which parts are attributed unto the twelve
Signs, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagitarius,
Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces. And every one of these Signs are divided
into 30 equal parts, which are called degrees, so the whole Zodiac contains
one hundred and sixty degrees. Likewise every degree is divided into sixty
equal parts, which parts are called minutes, and are in number 21600 minutes,
and as 21600 minutes is the whole Circumference of the Heavens, so is 21600
miles the whole circuit of the Earth.

CHAP. III.
Of the four lesser Circles.
THe Sun having ascended unto his highest Solstitial Point does describe a
Circle, which is the nearest that he can approach unto the North Pole,
whereupon it is called Circulus Solstitii aestivalis, the Circle of the Summer
Solstice, or the Tropic of Cancer, and is noted in the figure before, by the
line H Y I.

The Sun also approaching unto the first scruple of Capricornus, or the Winter
Solstice, describes another Circle, which is the utmost bounds that the Sun
can depart from the Equinoctial Line toward the Antartike Pole, whereupon it
is called Circulus solstitii hyemalis, sive Tropicus hyemalis, vel Capricorni:
the Circle of the Winter Solstice, the VVinter Tropic, or the Tropic of
Capricorn, and is described in the figure by the line GXF.

So much as the Ecliptic declineth from the Equinoctial, so much does the
Poles of the Ecliptic decline from the Poles of the World, whereupon the Pole
of the Ecliptic, which is by the North Pole of the World, describes a
certain Circle as it passes about the Pole of the World, being just so far
from the Pole as the Tropic of Cancer is from the Equator, and it is the third
of the lesser Circles, and is called Circulus Arcticus, or the Circle of the
North Pole, and is described in the Diagram, in the second Chapter by the line
PO.

The fourth and last of the lesser Circles is described in like manner, by the
other Pole of the Ecliptic, about the South Pole of the world, and therefore
called Circulus Antarcticus, the Antarctick Circle, or the Circle of the
Antarctick or South Pole, and is demonstrated in the former figure, by the line
NM.

CHAP. IV.
Definitions of some peculiar terms fit to be known by such as intend to
practice the Art of Navigation or Astronomy.
THe Zenith is an imaginary point in the Heavens over our heads, making right
Angles with the Horizon, as the Equinoctial makes with the Pole.

The Nadir is a prick in the heavens under our feet, making right Angles with
the Horizon under the earth, as the Zenith does above, and therefore is
opposite unto the Zenith.

The declination of the Sun is the Ark of a Circle contained betwixt the place
of the Sun in the Ecliptic, and the Equinoctial, making right Angles with the
Equinoctial. But the declination of a Star is the Ark of a Circle let fall
from the Center of a Star, perpendicularly unto the Equinoctial.

The Latitude is the Ark of a Circle contained betwixt the Center of any Star,
and the Ecliptic Line, making right Angles with the Ecliptic, and counted
either Northward, or Southward, according to the situation of the Star,
whether it be nearer unto the North or South Pole of the Ecliptic.

The Latitude of a Town or Country, is the height of the Pole above the
Horizon, or the distance betwixt the Zenith and the Equinoctial.

The Longitude of a Star is that part of the Ecliptic which is contained
betwixt the Stars place in the Ecliptic, and the beginning of Aries, counting
them from Aries according to the succession or order of the signs.

The Longitude of a Town or Country are the number of degrees, which are
contained in the Equinoctial, betwixt the Meridian that passes over the Isles
of Azores, (from whence the beginning of longitude is accounted) East wards,
and the Meridian that passes over the Town or Country desired.

The Altitude of the Sun or Star is the Arch of a Circle, contained betwixt the
Center of the Sun, or any Star, and the Horizon.

The Amplitude is that part of the Horizon which is betwixt the true East or
West points, and the point of the Compass that the Sun or any Star does rise
or set upon.

Azimuth's are Circles, which meet together in the Zenith, and cross the
Horizon at right Angles, and serve to find the point of the Compass, which the
Sun is upon at any hour of the day, or the Azimuth of the Sun or Star, is a
part of the Horizon contained betwixt the true East or West point, and that
Azimuth which passes by the Center of the same Star to the Horizon.

The right ascension of a Star is that part of the Equinoctial that rises or
sets with the Star, in a right Sphere: or in an oblique Sphere, it is that
portion of the Equinoctial, contained betwixt the beginning of Aries, and that
place of the Equinoctial, which passes by the Meridian with the Center of the
Star.

The oblique ascension is a part of the Equinoctial, contained betwixt the
beginning of Aries, and that part of the Equinoctial that rises with the
Center of a Star, in an oblique Sphere.

The difference ascensionall, is the difference betwixt the right and oblique
ascension: or it is the number of degrees contained betwixt that place of the
Equinoctial that rises with the Center of a Star, and that place of the
Equinoctial that comes unto the Meridian, with the Center of the same Star.

Almicanterahs are Circles drawn parallel unto the Horizon, one over another,
until you come unto the Zenith: these are Circles that do measure the
elevation of the Pole, or height of the Sun, Moon, or Stars above the Horizon,
which is called the Almicanter of the Sun, Moon, or Star: the Ark of the Sun or
Stars Almicanter, is a portion of an Azimuth contained betwixt that Almicanter
which passes through the Center of the Star, and the Horizon.

QUESTIONS ASTRONOMICAL, performed by the plain Scale.
CHAP. V.
The true place of the Sun being given, to find his declination. The Sun being
in the head of Taurus, his declination is desired.
BY the seventh Demonstration, draw the line AD, then upon the Center A raise
the Perpendicular AB, then opening your Compasses to the Radius of your Scale,
place one foot in the Center A, and with the other draw the Quadrant BCD, then
opening your Compasses unto the greatest declination of the Sun, place it upon
the Quadrant, from D unto K, then from the point K draw the line KH, parallel
to DA, cutting the line AB in H, then with the distance AH draw the small
Quadrant GEH, and in regard the Sun is in the head of Taurus, which is 30
degrees from the beginning of Aries, let AD be the Equator, and D the beginning
of Aries, DC 30 degrees, or longitude of the Sun, then from the point C draw
the line CA, cutting the Quadrant GEH in E, then from E draw the line EI
parallel to AD, cutting the Quadrant BCD in I, so shall the Arch ID be the
declination of the Sun desired, which in this demonstration is found to be
eleven degrees, and thirty one minutes.

CHAP. VI.
The declination of the Sun, and quarter of the Ecliptic that he possesses,
being given, it is desired to find his true place.
The Declination is 10 degrees. 31 min. the first quarter that he possesses, is
betwixt the head of Aries and Cancer.
FIrst, by the seventh Demonstration, draw the Quadrant ABCD, as is taught in
the former Chapter, then set the greatest declination of the Sun upon the Chord
from D unto K, which is 23 degrees. and 31 min. then from K draw the line KH
parallel unto the Equator DA, cutting the line BA in the point H. So shall HA
be the sign of the Suns greatest declination, then with the distance AH draw
the Quadrant GEH, then from D upon the Quadrant DBC set the declination of the
Sun, which is 11 degrees 31 minutes from D unto I, then draw the line IE
parallel unto AD, cutting the Quadrant GEH in E. Then from the Center A by the
point E, draw the line AEC, cutting the Quadrant BCD in C. So shall the Ark CD
be the distance of the sun from the head of Aries, which is here found to be
just 30 degrees, which is in the beginning of Taurus.

CHAP. VII.
By the elevation of the Pole, and declination of the sun, to find the
amplitude of the sun, or his distance of rising, or setting from the true East
or West point.
The elevation of the Pole is 51 degrees. 32 min. the declination of the sun is 14
degrees. 52 min. North.
BY the eight Demonstration, first draw the line BD, then upon the Center A
draw the Circle BCDE, then from A raise the Perpendicular CAE, then is your
Circle divided into four equal parts: then suppose the elevation of the Pole
to be 51 degrees, 32 minutes, which must be placed upon the Circle, from D unto
F, then from the point F, by the Center A, draw the line FAG, representing the
Pole of the World, F being the North Pole, and G the South Pole, then substract
51 degrees. 32 min. from 90 degrees. and the remainder is the height of the
Equinoctial, which is 38 degrees. 28 min. which must be placed upon the Circle
from the Horizon B, unto the point I, then from I, by the Center A, draw the
line IAH, representing the Equinoctial Circle. Then from I unto M set the
declination of the Sun, being here supposed 14 degrees. 52 minutes North, then from
the point M draw the line, or Parallel of declination MTN, parallel unto the
Equator I A H, cutting the Horizon BD in T, then from T raise the perpendicular
TV, cutting the Circle BCDE in V, so shall the distance CV be the true
amplitude of the sun desired, which here is found to be 24 degrees, 21 minutes
North.

CHAP. VIII.
By the Amplitude of the Sun, to find the variation of the Compass.
HAving found the Amplitude of the Sun by the last Chapter, first observe with
a Compass, or rather with a Semicircle, upon what degree and minute the Sun
rises or sets, beginning to reckon from the East or West, and ending at the
North or South at 90 degrees: and when you have diligently observed the
Magneticall rising or setting, by the Semicircle, or by some other like fitting
Instrument: and also the true Amplitude found, as is declared in the last
Chapter, the difference of these two Amplitudes, is the variation of the
Compass: But when the Sun rises upon the same Degree of the Compass, as is
found by the Scale, the variation is nothing, but the Needle points directly
unto the Poles of the World, which by M. Mulinux was affirmed to be at the
Westernmost part of S. Michaels, one of the Islands of the Azores, from whence
he will have the Longitude reckoned. Secondly, when the Sun is in the
Equinoctial Circle, where he hat^ no Amplitude, look what distance the Compass
makes the Sun to rise from the East or West of the Compass, the same distance
is the Compasses variation, from the North or South. Thirdly, if the Sun rise
more to the South of the Compass, or sets more to the North of the
Compass, than is showed by the Scale, the difference betwixt the Amplitude
given by the Scale, and the Amplitude given by the Needle, is the variation of
the Compass from the North Westward. Fourthly, if the Compass shows the Sun
to rise more Northward, or set more Southward, than is showed by the Scale, the
difference is the variation of the Compass, from the North Eastward. Fifthly,
if the Scale show the Amplitude of the Sun rising Southerly, and the Compass
show it to be Northerly, add both the Amplitudes together, and they show you
the variation Westernly.

CHAP. IX.
The place of the sun being given, to find his declination, by a whole Circle.
The suns place is the tenth degree of Taurus.
ACcording unto the eighth Demonstration, first draw the Circle BCDE, then draw
the Horizon BAD, and then the Equinoctial IAH, as is before taught: and then
the Tropic of Cancer KL, twenty three degrees and a half from the Equinoctial:
then draw the Tropic of Capricorn PO, of like distance from the Equinoctial,
and after from K to O draw the Ecliptic line KAO. And when you have thus laid
down the Sphere, suppose the Sun to be in the tenth degree of Taurus, at which
time his declination is desired. And in regard the Sun is more near unto the
Tropical point Cancer, than unto Capricorn; first find how many degrees he is
from the Tropic of Cancer, and you shall find him to be 50 degrees; therefore
take with your Compasses 50 degrees from the Chord, and apply it from the
Tropical point Cancer at K, unto V, upon one side, and unto P on the other
side: then draw the Line UP, cutting the Ecliptic KO in the point R, then from
R draw the Line MRN parallel unto the Equinoctial IAH, and cutting the Quadrant
BC in the point M. So shall the arc MI be the declination of the Sun desired,
which being applied unto your Scale, gives you 14 degrees. and 52 minutes.

CHAP. X.
The elevation of the Pole, and declination of the sun given, to find his
height in the vertical Circle.
The Pole is elevated 51 degrees 32 minutes, the declination of the sun is 14
degrees 52 minutes North, his height in the Vertical Circle is found as
follows.
FIrst, according unto the former Chapter, draw the Circle BCDE, then the
Horizon BAD, and after the vertical line CAE, then the Axis of the World FG,
and likewise the Equator IAH, this being done, place the declination of the Sun
14 degrees 52 minutes, upon the Circle from I unto M, and also from H unto N,
then draw the line MN, cutting the line CAE in S, then from S draw the line
SVV, parallel unto the Horizon BAD, cutting the Meridian Circle BCDE in VV: so
shall the distance DVV be the height of the Sun in the vertical Circle, for the
time demanded, which by this proposition is found to be 19 degrees and 8
minutes.

CHAP. XI.
The elevation of the Pole, and the Amplitude of the sun, being given, to find
the declination.
The elevation of the Pole is 51 degrees 32 minutes, the suns amplitude is 24
degrees 21 minutes, the declination is found as follows.


FIrst, as in the eight demonstration, upon the Center A, draw the Circle BCDE,
then draw the Line BAD, representing the Horizon: dividing the circle into two
equal parts then draw the Line CAE, perpendicular to BAD, representing the
East and West points of the Compass, then placing the elevation of the Pole
51 degrees and 32 minutes, from D unto F, from F, by the center A* draw the
Line FAG, which let be the Pole or Axletree of the world, then from B unto I,
and from D unto H, set the complement of the Poles elevation: which shall
represent the Equinoctial, in regard it makes right Angles with the Pole of
the world, in the center A. Then from C unto V place the amplitude of the Sun,
which is 24 degrees and 21 minutes: then from V let fall the perpendicular VT,
cutting the Horizon BAD in the point T, then from the point T, draw the Line
MTN parallel unto the Equinoctial IAH, and cutting the Circle BCDE in the
points, M and N, so shall the distance, M, or HN, be the declination of the
Sun, which was desired: which being applied unto your Scale, gives you fourteen
degrees and fifty two minutes.

CHAP. XII.
The elevation of the Pole, the declination of the Sun, and hour of the day
being given* to find the Almicanter.
The elevation of the Pole is thirty degrees, the declination of the Sun is
twenty degrees North, the hour is nine in the morning, at which time the
Almicanter is found, as follows.
BY the ninth demonstration, first upon the Center A, draw the Circle BCDE,
then draw the line BD for the Horizon, then place your Poles elevation, which
is thirty degrees, upon the Circle from D unto R, then from R by the center A,
draw the Line RAS, representing the Axis of the World, then from B unto F place
the complement of the Poles elevation, which is ^0 degrees, and from the point
F, by the Center A, draw the line FAH, representing the Equinoctial line, and
then set the declination of the Sun from F unto L* and from L draw the Line LPO
parallel unto the Equator FAH, cutting the Axis of the World in the point P,
then set one foot of your Compasses in the point P, and extend the other either
unto L or unto O, and with the same distance of your Compasses, upon the Center
P, draw the circle LNOQ, which is called the hour circle: so shall L be the
point of twelve a clock at noon, N the place of six a clock after noon, O the
place of twelve a clock or midnight, and Q the place of six a clock in the
morning: Every one of the four quarters must be divided into six equal parts,
or hours, making the whole Circle to contain twenty four parts, representing
the twenty four hours of the day and night, then in regard the hour of the day
was nine of the clock, which is three hours before noon, take three of those
twenty four hours, and place them upon the circle LNOQ, from the Meridian point
L unto K, the nine a clock point in the morning, and unto M the point of three
a clock after noon, then draw the line MK, cutting the parallel of the Sun LO
in the point I, then from I draw the line IG parallel unto the Horizon BAD,
which shall cut the Meridian Circle BCDE in the point G, so shall the distance
of G and B be the Almicanter the Sun, which was desired, which in this
demonstration is found to be forty eight degrees and eighteen minutes.

CHAP. XIII
The elevation of the Pole, the Almicanter, and declination of the Sun, being
given, to find the hour of the day.
The elevation of the Pole is thirty degrees, the declination of the Sun, is
twenty degrees, the Almicanter of the Sun, is forty eight degrees, and
eighteen minutes, the hour of the day is found as follows.
FIrst, as in the ninth demonstration, upon the Center A, draw the Circle BCDE,
then draw the Diameter BD, representing the Horizon, then from D unto R, set 30
degrees, the elevation of the Pole, then from R unto the point A, draw the line
RAS, representing the Pole of the World, then draw the line FAH, crossing the
Pole in A, at right Angles, cutting the Meridian circle in F, then from F, set
twenty degrees, the declination of ^he Sun unto L, and then from the point L,
draw the line LPO, representing the parallel of the Sun, and cutting the Pole
of the World in P, then placing one foot of your Compasses in P, extend the
other unto L, with which distance of your Compasses, draw the hour Circle LNOQ,
then from the Horizon at B, place the Suns Almicanter: (which is forty eight
degrees, and eighteen minutes*) upon the Quadrant BGL, from B unto G, then from
the point G, draw the line G^ parallel unto the Horizon BAD, cutting the Line
LO, in I, then from the point I, draw the line KIM, parallel to the Pole of
the World QAN, cutting the Circle LNO, in M, then let LN, be divided into six
hours, whereof LM, are there: whereupon I conclude, that is is three hours
from noon, that is, at nine a clock in the morning, or three in the after noon.

CHAP. XIV.
The Latitude of the place, the Declination of the Sun, and the Altitude of the
Sun being given, to find the Hour of the day: By a n^w way differing from that
in the former Chapter.
degrees. min. degrees. m The Suns Altitude is 48 18 The Lat^ude of the place is 30 00
its Comple. 60 00 The Suns declination is 20 00 N. 70 00 Sum 130 00 difference
10 00

The Complement of any arch less then 90 degrees, is so much as the arch wants
of 90 degrees, as the Complement of 20 degrees is 70 degrees, etc.
FIrst, find the sum and difference of the Complement of the Suns declination,
and the Complement of the Latitude, as above is done, where the sum is 130 degrees.
and the difference 10 degrees. Then your Compasses being opened to the Radius of
your line of Chords: describe the Semicircle ABC, and divide it into two
Quadrants by the perpendic^lar BD, then out of your line of Chords; take 48
degrees. 18 min. the Suns Altitude, and set it from B to E, and draw E F parallel
to B D: Then from your line of Chords take 130 degrees. the sum, and set it from A
to G, (or its Complement to 180 degrees. which is 50 degrees. from C to G) and draw the
line GH also parallel to BD. Again, out of your line of Chords, take 10 degrees.
(which is the difference) and set that distance from A to K, and draw K L
parallel to OF or BD.

This done, take with your Compasses the distance from F to H, and seting one
foot in A, with the other describe the Arch MP, likewise take the distance from
F to L, and seting one foot in C, with the other describe the arch NQ. Lastly
draw the straight line PQ* which only touching the two former arkes will cut
the line AC in O, Upon the point O, therefore, erect the perpendicular OR,
cutting the Semicircle in R, so will CR being measured upon your line of
Chords, give you the degrees of the Sun from the South part of the Meridian,
which here you will find to be 45 degrees, which make 3 hours, allowing 15
degrees for an hour, for 15 degrees make one hour, and one degree makes 4
minutes of an hour, so that it is either 9 of the clock in the morning, or 3 in
the afternoon.

CHAP. XV.
The Almicanter, or height of the Sun being given, to find the length of the
right shadow.
The Almicanter is 45 degrees.
ACcording unto the tenth Diagram, draw the line AF, and upon the center A,
raise the perpendicular AC, then upon the center A, draw the Quadrant CDF, then
suppose the height of your Gnomon, or substance yelding shadow be the Line, AB,
which is to be divided into 12 equal parts, which Gnomon, I have here made
just 12 degrees of the equal Leagues of the Scale, then from B, to the top of
the Gnomon draw the Line BE, parallel unto AF, then set the Almicanter which is
forty five degrees from F, unto D, and from the point D, draw the Line DA,
cutting the Line BE in the point G, so shall BG, be the length of the right
shadow desired, which here is found to be fourteen degrees and eighteen
minutes, which is but just the length of your Gnomon, and 2/12 and of a twelfe
over: Note that the right shadow, is the shadow of any post, staff, or
steeple, that stands at right Angles with the Horizon, the one end thereof
respecting the Zenith of the place, and the other the Naedir.

CHAP. XVI.
The Almicanter, or height of the Sun being given, to find the length of the
contrary shadow.
The Almicanter given is 70 degrees.
BY the verse or contrary shadow, is understood the length of any shadow, that
is made by a staff or Gnomon, standing against any perpendicular wall, in such
a manner that it may l^e parallel unto the Horizon, the length of the contrary
shadow, does increase as the Sun rises in height, whereas contrariwise the
right shadow does increase in length, as the Sun does increase in height: the
way to find the verse shadow is as follows. First, draw your Quadrant as is
taught in the last Chapter, wherein let AB, be the length of the Gnomon,
likewise from B, draw the line BE, parallel unto AF, as before, then set your
Almicanter from C upon the Quadrant which is given to be seventie degrees and
it will extend from C unto H, then from the point H draw the line HA, cutting
the line BE, in the point K, so shall KB, be the length of the contrary shadow,
which here is found to be thirty four degrees and eight minutes, or twice so
long as your Gnomon, and ^0/^2 about part of a twelfth more.

CHAP. XVII.
The latitude of the place, the Almicanter, and declination of the Sun being
given, to find the Azimuth.
The latitude of the place is fifty one degrees, thirty minutes, the
declination of the Sun twenty degrees North, the Almicanter thirty eight
degrees thirty minutes, the true Azimuth of the Sun is desired.


FIrst as in the eleventh Demonstration upon the Center A, draw the Circle
BCDE, then draw the Diameter BAD* and from D unto F, set the Elevation of the
Pole, which is one and fifty degrees, and thirty minutes, whose complement is
eight and thirty degrees and thirty minutes, which must be placed from B unto
H, then from H, draw the line HAL, representing the Equinoctial line, and from
F, draw the line FAG, representing the Pole of the World, then from H unto P,
and from I unto Q, set the declination of the Sun, which is twenty degrees,
and by those two points draw the line PQ, for the Parallel of the Suns
declination; then upon the Circle from B unto H* set the Suns Almicanter,
thirty eight degrees, and thirty minutes, then from H, draw the line HR*
parallel unto the Horizon cutting the Suns parallel POQ in O, then draw the
Line TVAE Perpendicular unto the line BAD, in the Center A, and cutting the
line HVR, in V, then seting one foot of your Compasses in the point V, extend
the other unto R, and with the same distance draw the Semicircle HLR, then draw
the Concentricke Circle upon the Radius of the Scale MTN, and where the Line
POQ, and the line MON do meet in the point V, raise the Perpendicular OL,
cutting the Semicircle HLR in L, then lay the Scale from the Center A to the
point L, and draw the line LK, cutting the Semicircle MTN, in K, so shall M K,
be the true distance of the Sun from the East, or West point Southward, or the
Suns true Azimuth, which is here found to be seventie two degrees, and forty
minutes from the South part of the Meridian.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Latitde of the place, the Declination of the Sun, and the Altitude of the
Sun being given to find the Azimuth: By a new way differing from that in the
former Chapter.
degrees. min. S. degrees. m. The Suns Declination is 20 00 The Latitude of the place
is 51 30 its Comple. 38 30 The Suns Altitude is 12 00 78 00 Sum 116 difference
39 30

HAving found the sum and the difference of the complement of the Suns
Altitude, and the complement of the Latitude as above is expressed where you
find the Sum of them to be 116 degrees. 30 min. and their difference 39 degrees. 30
min.

These things being premised, with your Compasses being opened to 60 degrees. of
your line of Chords, describe the Semicircle ADC, and upon the Center B, erect
the perpendicular BD, then First, out of your line of Chords take 20 degrees. the
Suns declination, and set that distance from D to E, (if the Sun have South
declination (as in this Example it has) or from D to O, if the Sun have North
declination) and draw the line E F parallel to DB.

Secondly, take 116 degrees. 30 min. the sum out of your line of Chords, and set it
from C to G, and draw the line GK parallel D to B,

Thirdly take 39 degrees. 30 min. the difference, out of your line of Chords, and
set it from C to H, and draw the line HL parallel also to BD.

Fourthly Take in your compasses the distance from F to K, and setting one foot
in A, with the other describe the arch S.

Fifthly, Take the distance from F, to L, and setting one foot in C, with the
other describe the arch R.

Sixthly, Lay a rular, that it may only touch these two arches, S, and R, and
by it draw a line as SR, cutting the line AC in N.

Lastly, upon the point N, erect the perpendicular NM, then the distance AM,
measured upon your Line of Chords, is the Azimuth from the South part of the
Meridian, which in this example will be found to be 34 degrees. MC the Azimuth from
the North 146 degrees. And MD, the Azimuth from the East or West, 56 degrees.

CHAP. XIX,
The place of the Sun being given, to find the right ascension, Suppose the Sun
be in the twentieth degree of Taurus, his right ascension is found as follows.
FIrst, as in the 12 demostrastion, draw the line BAF, for the Pole of the
World, the ^ upon the Center A draw the Circle BCDE, then from the Center A,
raise the Perpendicular CAE, for the Equator, then place your greatest
declination from C unto Q, and from E unto P, then daw the line QAP, which does
represent the Eclipticke line, then in regard the Sun is in the twentieth
degree of Taurus, which is forty degrees, from the head of Cancer, which forty
degrees, place from Q unto L, and unto K, then draw the line KL, cuting the
Eclipticke in I, then from the point I draw the line HI, parallel unto CAE,
cuting the Pole of the World in O then set one foot of your Compasses in O, and
extend the other unto G, with which distance draw the Semicircle HDG, then
opening your Compasses unto the Radius of the Scale, and upon the Center O,
likewise draw the Circle HNFG, then draw the line IM, parallel unto AOD,
cutting the Semicircle HMDG, in M, then lay your Scale from the Center O, unto
the point M, and draw the Line NM, cutting the Concentricke Circle in N, so
shall the distance NF, be the right ascension, which is here found tobe two and
forty degrees, seven and twentieminutes.

CHAP. XX.
The elevation of the Pole, and declination of the Sun given, to find the
difference of the ascensions.
The Poles elevation is 51 degrees, 32 minutes, the declination of the Sun is
21. degrees.
FIrst, as in the 13th. demonstration, draw the Line BAK, representing the
Horizon, then upon the Center A, draw the Circle BCDEF, Then from K unto D, set
the elevation of the Pole which is 51 degrees, and thirty two minutes: then
from the point D, by the Center A, draw the Line DAF, representing the Pole of
the World, then from B unto C, set the Complement of the Poles elevation which
is thirty eight degrees, and 28 minutes: then from C by the center A, draw the
line CAE, representing the Equinoctial Line; then from C unto G* and likewise
from E unto H, for the declination of the Sun, which is 21 degrees, then from
G unto H, draw the parallel of the Suns declination, cutting the Pole of the
world in L, and he Horizon in I, then set one foot of your Compasses in the
point L, and extend the other unto G, then with that distance of your Compasses
draw the Semicircle GMNH, then opening your Compasses unto the Radius of your
Scale, upon the same Center draw the Concentricke Circle, GXOH, then from I,
where the declination of the Sun does cut the Horizon, draw the Line IN,
parallel unto the Pole of the World AM, cutting the Circle GMH in N, then lay
your Ruler from the point I unto the point N, and so draw the line NO, cutting
the Concentricke Circle GXOH, in O, so shall the distance of O and X, be the
difference of the ascentions, which is here found to be eight and twenty
degrees, and four and fifty minutes.

CHAP. XXI.
The right ascension of the Sun or of a Star being given, together with the
difference of their ascension, to find the oblique ascension or descention.
The Sun is in the 4th. degree of Sagitarius, his right ascension is 242
degrees, or 16 hours 8 minutes, the difference of ascension is 1 hour 53 min.
or 28 degrees. 28 min. the oblique ascension or desce^tion is required.
THe right ascension of any point of the Heavens being known, the difference of
the ascension is either to be added thereunto, or else to be subtracted from
it, according as the Star is situate in the Northern or Southern Signs: As
for example, if the Sun be in any of these six Signs, Aries, Taurus,
Gemini, Cancer, Leo, or Virgo, then the difference of the ascentions is to be
subtracted from the right ascension, and the remainder is the oblique
ascension. Suppose therefore the Sun to be in the fourth degree of Gemini,
where the right ascension is found to be four hours, and 8 minutes, or 62
degrees, and the difference of ascension where the Pole is elevated 51 degrees,
is found to be one hour 53 minutes, otherwise 28 degrees 50 minutes, which
being taken from the right ascension, leaves two hours and 16 minutes, or 33
degrees and 42 minutes, which is the oblique ascension of the Sun in the
fourth degree of Gemini. But if the Sun be upon the South side of the
Equinoctial, either in Libra, Scorpio, Sagitarius Capricornus, Aquarius, or
Pisces, then the difference of the ascentions is to be added unto the right
ascension, and the Product will be the oblique ascension. Suppose the fourth
degree of Sagitarius is given, for which Sign and degree the oblique ascension
of the Sun is desired, his right ascension being then found to be 242 degrees,
or 16 hours 8. min. the difference of the ascensions is one hour, 53 minutes,
or 28 degrees, 18 minutes: which being added unto the right ascension, makes 18
hours, and one minute; or in degrees 270 degrees, and 18. minutes: which is the
oblique ascension of the Sun, when he is in the fourth degree of Sagitarius.
And if you would find the oblique descention, you must add the difference of
the ascentions unto the right ascension, when the Sun is in these six Signs.
Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo: and contrariwise, when the Su^n is
in the other six Signs, you mnst substract the difference from the right
ascension, and you shall have the oblike descention of the Sun or any Star,
whose right ascension and difference of ascentions is known. But it is to be
understood, that this manner of operation, does serve no longer than you are
upon the North side of the Equinoctial. For if the South Pole be elevated, the
work is contrary: for so long as the Sun is in any of the Northern Signs,
the difference of the ascentions is to be added unto the right ascension, to
find the oblique ascension. And contrariwise, subtracted to find the oblique
descention. Likewise if the Sun or Star be in the South^rn Signs, then is
the difference of ascentions, subtracted from the right ascension, to find
the oblique ascension, and added, to find the oblique descention.

The end of the Second Book.
THE SEA-MANS GLASS: The Third Book.
Showing how by the Plain-Scale, to delineate Houre-lines upon all kind of
Upright Plains, either Direct or Declining, in any Latitude. The figure of the
plain Scale.


CHAP. I
How to draw hour lines upon an Horizontal Plain, in any Latitude.
With the Radius of your line of Chords, upon E as a Center, describe the
Circle ABCD, and cross it with he diameters AB, and CD. This done, out of the
line of Chords take the complement of the Latitude of your place (which we here
suppose to be London, whose latitude is 51 degrees. 30 m. and its complement 38.
degrees. 30 m.) which set from B to G, from G to N, and from D to M; then lay a
ruler from A to G, and it will cut the line CD in H, and from A to N it will
cut C D in O, and from A to M it will cut the same line in F.

This done, upon O (as a center) place one foot of your compasses, and extend
the other foot to F, and with this distance describe an arch of a circle, which
(if the rest of your work be true) will fall just in the points A and B, and
so constitute the arch AFB, representing the Equinoctial Circle, and so we
shall hereafter call it.

Having drawn the Equinoctial AFB, divide the Semicircle ADB, into 12 equal
parts in the points ***, etc. Then laying a ruler to the Center E, and every
one of these marks *** etc. it will divide the Equinoctial circle into 12
unequal parts in the points ^^^^ etc.

Again, Lay a ruler to H, and every of these unequal parts ^^^^, etc. it will
cut the semicircle ADB in the points 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6.

Lastly, If you lay a ruler on the center E, and from thence draw right lines
to the several points 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. they shall be 12 of the true
houre-lines belonging to an horizontall dial for the latitude of 51 degrees,
30 minutes.

But for the hours before 6 in the morning, and after 6 at night, do thus;
draw the hour lives of 4 and 5 in the evening, quite through the center E, and
they shall be the hours of 4 and 5 in the morning; also, 7 and 8 in the morning
drawn through the center, shall give the hours of 7 and 8 at night, as in the
figure.

Now, for the Style or Cock of your dial, you must take out of your line of
Chords, the degrees of your Latitude, viz. 51 degrees, 30 minutes, and set it
from D to S, and draw the line D S, so shall the triangle DES be the just
pattern for the Cock of your dial; which being made of brass, or the like,
and set exactly upright upon the hour line of 12, your dial is wholly
finished,

CHAP: II.
Concerning direct South Dials.
A Direct South dial is no other then an horizontall dial, the making
whereof is before described, the difference consisting only in the numbering of
the hours, and in the placing of it, the one being to be fixed on a post or
the like, and the other to be fixed to a Wall which exactly beholds the South,
I say here is no other difference: for degrees degrees An Horizontall Dial for
the Latitude of 10 Will be a direct South Dial in the Latitude of 80 20 70 30
60 40 50 50 40 60 30 70 20 80 10

And the like in any other Latitude, as 15, 16, 33, etc.

CHAP. III.
Of driect North dialls.
A Direct North dial, is the same with a direct South dial; for, i^ you take
a South dial and turn it upside down, causing the Sc^le or cock to point
upwards, as the Cock of the South does down wards; and leaving out the hours
near the Meridian, in these Northern Latitudes; as the hours of 9, 10, 11, and
12 at night, and 1, 2 and 3 in the morning, all which time the Sun is under
the Horizon. I say a South dial so disposed, and fixed against a direct North
Wall, shall give you the true hour of the day.

CHAP. IV.
How to draw the hour lines on a direct East or West plain.
A Direct East or West plain, is such a plain as direct (...) lies open to the
East or West points of the heavens; as the North and South plains do to the
North and South points. To make such a Dial, Upon the plain CBDM, (in some
convenient place thereof toward the lower part) assume the point B, then with
the radius of your line of Chords, upon B as a center, describe the obscure
arch AF, then fromyour Chord, take the Complement of the Latitude of your
place, 38 degrees. 30 minutes, and set it from A to F, then from B, through F,
draw the line BE, representing the Equinoctial Circle, which in these plains,
(as also in a Polar Dial) becomes a straight line. In this line EB, assume two
points, one toward one end, and the other toward the other end of the same
line, as the points G and N, one for the hour of VI, as N: the other for the
hour of XI, as G: through these two points N and G, draw two right lines quite
through your plain, perpendicular to the Equinoctial line BE, as in the
figure, which two lines shall represent Eleven and Six ^ clock

This done, upon the point G, with the radius of your Chord, descirbe an occult
arch of a Circle H I, and set thereon 15 degrees fr om H to I, then from G,
through I, draw the line G K, cutting N Min K, On K, as a center, with the
radius of your Chord, describe the quadrant K S T, which divide into 6 equal
parts in the points ^^^^, through which points and K, draw the lines, K^, K^,
etc. cutting the Equinoctial EB in **** etc. Through these points ***, etc.
draw right lines quiet through your plain perpendicular to the equinoctial,
which will be parallel to your lines of VI, and XI, and will be the true hours
of VII, VIII, IX, and X, then the like distances of VII and VIII, set above VI,
on the other side, and drawn parallel thereto, shall be the true hours of IIII.
and V. and thus have you all the hours of an East dial truly drawn, which is
from Four in the morning, till Eleven at noon, and is the same with a West
dial only naming the hours contrary: for, in the East dial 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, in the morning, are in the West dial 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, h in the
evening.

The Style of either of these dials, is a t in plate of brass, made directly
of the breadth of the distance between the hours of VI, and IX, and must be
placed directly perpendicular upon the line of VI, and so is your dial
finished.

CHAP. V.
Of upright declining Plains.
BEfore we come to draw the hour lines upon a declining plain, two things are
first to be discovered, viz.

First. The height of the pole above the plain, which is the height of the Cock
or Style.

Secondly, The deflexion, or distance of the substile from the Meridian or line
of Twelve a Clock.

1. To find the height of the Pole above a declining Plain.
With the tadius of your line of Chords, upon A, as a center, describe the
Quadrant AB C, then your Latitude being 51 degrees. 30 min. take it out of your
line of Chords, and set it from B to F, and draw the line ED parallel to AB,
cutting the line AC in D, then with the distance DE, on the center A, describe
the Quadrant GHR. Then supposing your plain to decline 30 degrees. set 30 degrees. from
B to F, in the Quadrant BEC, and draw the line FA cutting the Quadrant GHR in
H, through which point H, draw the line SHN parallel to CA, and cutting the
Quadrant BE C in N, so shall the arch CN be the height of the Pole above the
plain, and in this example contains 32 degrees. 37 min.

2. To find the Deflexion, or the distance of the Substile from the Meridian.
Out of this figure, take the distance HS, and set it in the line DE, from D to
K; through which point K, draw the line AKL, cutting the Quad ant BC in L; so
shall the arch CL be the distance of the Substile from the Meridian: and in
thls Example will be found to be 21 degrees 42 minutes.

CHAP. VI.
How to draw the Houre-lines upon an upright Plain declining from the Meridian
toward the East or West.
WE will here take for Example a South erect plain, declining Eastward 30 degrees.

Having (by the Fifth Chapter of this Book) found the Defl^xion of such a plain
to be 21 degrees. 42 min. And the height of ^he ^^ile (by the same Chapter) to be
32 degrees. 37 min. we may proceed to draw the Dial in manner following.

With the radius of your line of Chords, on the Center C, describe the Circle
XNSW; and in it, draw SN through the Center C, for the Meridian, or line of 12.
Then the deflexion being found to be 21 degrees. 42 min. set that from N to E, and
draw the line ^C through the center to G* This line represents the Substilar
line of your Dial, upon which line the Style or Co^k must stand* Also, out
from your line of Chords take 32 degrees. 37 min. the height of the S^ile, and set
that distance from E to H, and draw the line CH for the Style of your Dial; so
shall the Triangle EACH, be the true pattern for the Cock of your Dial.

The Substilar line EG being (...) ^^aw the line XW through the center C, and
perpendicular to EG. This done, take the distance EH, (which is equal to the
Styles height) and set that distance from A to B, and from W to D. Likewise,
take the distance from W to B, and set it from B to I. These three points I, B
and D, being found in the circumference of the Circle XNSW, lay a ruler from X
to I and it will cut the substilar line EC being extended in the point G, which
is the center upon which the equinoctial Circle must be described. Again, a
ruler laid from X to B, will cut the substilar line in F, and a ruler laid from
X to D, will cut the substilar in O. Now, if you set one foot of your Compasses
in G, and extend the other to X or W, you may describe the Equinoctial circle
XOW, which (if you have not erred in your former work) will pass exactly
through the point O in the substilar line before found. In the next place, if
you lay a Ruler from F to N, it will cut the Equinoctial circle in P, and a
ruler laid from C to P, will cut the Dial circle in V.

These things being performed, the next thing is to draw the hour lines, which
will be easily effected if you (...) the former directions.

First, from the point V last found, begin to divide your hour circle into 24
equal parts (or only one half of it into 12 parts) which you may do by taking
15 degrees. out of your line of Chords and set that distance on both sides of V at
the marks etc. so many times as the plain is capable of hours.



This done, If you lay a ruler on the center C, and every of these points ****
etc. you shall divide the equinoctial Circle into 12 unequal parts in the
points ^^^^ etc. Now a ruler laid from F to every of these unequal points
^^^^, etc. will divide the hour circle into 12 other unequal parts marked
with 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.* 9. 10. 11. 12. 1. on the one side of V, and with 2. 3* ^n
the other side of V.

Lastly, a ruler laid from C to the several points 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.
12. 1. 2. 3. and lines drawn by the side thereof they shall be the true hour
lines belonging to such a declining plain of 30 degrees. in the Latitude of 51 degrees.
30 min. But if you desire more hours then 12, the equinoctial may be divided
into more unequal parts, being continued beyond X and W, and if you will,
quite round the whole Circle, but that is needless without you would make 4
Dialls in the making of one as you may easily do. For,

The hours that are on the West side of the Meridian of a South East dial,
being drawn through the Center, will make a North West dial of the same
declination. And the hours on the east side of the Meridian of a South West
dial; being drawn through the center, will produce a North East dial of the
same declination. And Again, the real hour lines of a South East dial being
drawn on the other side of the paper, and the hours named by their Complements
to 12, that is, 10 for 2, 9 for 3, 8 for 4, etc. will make a South West dial
of the same declination.

CHAP. VII.
How to place any upright dial truly.
ALL upright dialls, in what oblique latitude soever have the Meridian
perpendicular to the horizon, wherefore to set your dial exact, hang a line
with a plummet at the end thereof, and with a nail fixed in the line of 12
toward the top thereof, to hang the plummet upon, apply the dial to the place
where it is to be fixed, so that the line and plummet may hang just down upon
the line of 12, neither inclining on one side or the other, the dial thus
fixed if the declination were truly taken, and the dial rightly made, by the
former directions, shall at all times (the Sun shining upon it) give you the
true hour of the day.

CHAP. VIII.
How to insert the halve and Quarters of hours in all dialls.
THe halves and quarters of hours are drawn in all plains by the same rules,
and the like reason, that the hours are inserted. Therefore take notice that if
you would insert the half hours into any dial, you must divide your
Equinoctial Circle into 24 equal parts instead of 12, and if you would insert
the quarters, then you must divide it into 48 parts, and then proceed in all
respect, as you did for the whole hours.

CHAP. IX.
How to find the declinatioon of any upright Wall.
THe declination of a plain is an arch of the horizon comprehended between the
pole of the plains horizontall line, and the meridian of the place.

To find this declination, two observations must be made, the Sun shining, and
both at one instant of time (as near as may be.) The first is the horizontall
distance of the Sun from the pole of the plain. The second is the Suns Altitude.

First, to find the horizontall distance. Apply the side of a Quadrant to your
plain, holding it (as near as may be) horizontall, that is to say, level, Then
holding up a third and plummet, which must hang at full liberty, so that the
shadow of the third may pass directly through the center of the Quadrant, then
diligently note ^ through what degree of the Quadrant the shadow passed, and
count those degrees from the side of your Quadrant which is perpendi^cular to
the plain, for those degrees are the Horizontall distance.

Secondly, At the same instant, take the Suns a^^itude, these two being
heedfully taken, will help you to the plains declination by th rules following.

By the 17 or 18 Chapters of the Second Book find the Suns Azimuth. Then
observe whether the Sun be between the pole of the plains horizontall line and
the North or South points, or not.

If the Sun be between them, add the Azimuth and horizontall distance
together, and the sum of them is the declination of the plain.

If the Sun be not between them, substract the lesser of them from the greater,
and the difference shall be the declination of the plain. These rules show you
the quantity of your plains declination. But,

CHAP. X.
Showing how to know whether your plain declin from the Meridian toward either
the East or West.
YOu must take notice in your observation, that if the Meridian point fall
between the Azimuth and the pole of the plains horizontall line, then does the
plain decline to the Coast contrary to that wherein the Sun is, that is to say,
if the Sun be to the Eastward of the Meridian, the plain declines to the
Westward, But if the Meridian point be not between the forementioned distance
and the pole of the plain, then does the plain decline to the same Coast in
which the Sun was at the time of observation.

CHAP. XI.
Concerning Polar Dials.
A Polar dial is made in all respects as an East or West Dial is made, only
the line of 6 a clock in the East or West Dial, is 12 a clock in the Polar
Dial, the hour of 7 is 1, of 8 is 2, of 9 is ^, of 10 is 4, and of 11 is 5.
Also the hour of 5 in the East or West Dial, is 11 in the Polar, of 4 is 10,
of 3 is 9, of 2 8, of ^ is 7, etc. The Cock of this Dial is a plate of Iron or
Brass made of the breadth between 12 and 3 a cloock, and set perpendicular
upon the line of 12, as in the East or West Dial it is upon the line of 6. In
these Dialls the Equinoctial line is to lie parallel to the Horizon, and not
to be elevated according to the complement of the Latitude of the place, as in
the East or West Dial it is.

CHAP. XII.
Concerning Equinoctial Dialls.
AN Equinoctial Dial is of all other Dialls, the most easy to make, for if
you describe a Circle, and divide it into 24 equal parts, and draw lines from
the center through eve^^ one of those equal parts, the lines so drawn shall be
the true hour lines.

For the Style of these Dialls, it is no other but a straight Wyre of any
length set perpendicular in the Center of the Circle, whose shadow shall give
the true hour of the Day.

CHAP. XIII.
Of such Plains as decline very far from the East or West toward the Meridian
as 75, 80, or 85, degrees* above which plains the Pole has small Elevation.
SUch plains as decline above 60 degrees the hour lines will come very close
together, so that if they be* not extended very far from the center, there will
be no sensible distance between hour and hour*

To remedy this inconvenience, there are several ways, I will instance only
in one which is familiar and easy, and that is this.

When (...) have (...) your dial on a large sheet of paper, fix it on some
large Table or smooth Floor of a Room, if the Dial you are to make be very
large, as 5, 6, or 7* foot square, then by the side of a long Rular laid to the
Center and every hour line, as also to the Style and Substile, draw lines to
the full extent of the Table or Flour, and you shall find them to be of a
competent largnesse. Then according to the bigness of your plain, cut off the
hours. Style and Substile, leaving the center quite ou^, and yout work is
finis^ed.

CHAP: XIIII
Concerning Declining Reclining and Inclining Dials.
WE should now show the manner of drawing hour lines upon declining reclining
and inclining plains, of which there are several varieties, and many cautions,
which in this place and at this time, would be too many to ennumerate: but if
this which has been already delivered concerning Upright decliners shall be
kindly accepted, it shall animate me to do the like for all other plains
whatsoever.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
NOte, that this Scale and all other Instruments for the Mathematics, are made
by Walter Hayes, at the Cross dagers in Moore, Fields next door to the Popes
head Tavern, London.


