An Account of the Taking the Late Earl of ARGYLE, and the Running away of the
Rebels in SCOTLAND.
Published by Authority.

Whitehall, June 22. at Nine in the Morning.
SInce the Account we received yesterday from Scotland, which is already made
Public in the Gazette, a Flying Packet arrived this Morning with Letters
Dated at Edenburg the 19th Instant, at Ten in the Forenoon, with this further
Account.

The Earl of Dumbarton, Commander in Chief of his Majesty's Forces in Scotland,
having notice that the Rebels had passed the River Levin above Dumbarton,
Marched from Glascow the Seventeenth very early in the Morning after them, they
taking their way toward Sterling, and overtook them in the Parish of Killerne;
The Horse and Dragoons kept up the Rebels till the Foot arrived, but they were
Posted in so strong a Ground, and it was so late in the Evening, that it was
not thought fit then to Attack them, so the Kings Army stood in Battle all
Night, to be ready so soon as Daylight appeared, to fall upon them, but the
Rebels with great silence Marched off in the Night toward the River Clyde,
which they Swam with their Horse, and carried over their Foot in Boats near a
Village called Kilpatricke, and so got without much resistance into Renfrew.
The Kings Army missing the Rebels in the Morning, Marched with all diligence to
Glascow, where, after they had rested two Hours, the Earl of Dumbarton with the
Horse and Dragoons Marched after them, leaving the Foot to follow with all the
haste they could make, but soon after he received Intelligence, That the Rebels
were Running away in great Confusion.

The same day (being the 18th) about seven at night, three Servants belonging
to Gentlemen of Renfrew, found the late Earl of Argyle running away with a
Bonnet on his Head, endeavoring to get toward the Ford of Clyde at Inchennan;
He refused at first to tell his Name, or to render himself, whereupon they
Wounded him, and would have Killed him; but that he told them he was the Earl
of Argyle; Then they took him and brought him to their Commander the Lord
Cochran, who carried him Prisoner to Glascow to the Earl of Winton, who
Commands there, and who sent this Relation to His Majesty's Privy Council at
Edinburgh.

Printed by Tho. Newcomb, in the Savoy, 1685.


