THE Way to Bliss. IN THREE BOOKS. Made Public, By ELIAS ASHMOLE Esquire. Qui est
Mercuriophilus Anglicus.

-- Deus nobis haec Otia fecit. LONDON, Printed by John Grismond for Nath.
Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill, 1658.

TO THE READER.
IT is now somewhat above five years, since I published the first Part of my
THEATRUM CHEMICUM BRITANNICUM; immediately after which, my Studies of that
Nature received most unfortunate Interruptions, from the Commencement of
several vexatious Suits against me: But GOD, not only enabled me to endure
those impetuous multiplied Storms, but some few Months since, was pleased to
sweeten my long-Sufferings with a fair and peaceful Issue.

And because my Studies in HERMETICK PHILOSOPHY, would not bear with the
aforesaid troublesome Rubs, (She requiring a serene Mind, quiet Thoughts,
unwearied Endeavors, indeed the whole Man,) I was with great unwillingness
forced to lay them aside: Yet, (that I might not tot^^^y quit Minerva's
society, who had nursed me up so indulgently,) I betook my self to such other
Studies, whose Nature would better deal with Disturbances, and suffer
themselves (when unhappily broken off) to be reassumed with less difficulty;
and where Variety also might beget something of Appetite and Delight.

All this while I well hoped to meet with One or Other, who (inclined to
advance the honor of HERMES his Family) would have taken the pains of adding a
Second Volume to my said THEATRUM, in regard those successive Troubles (hanging
so long and heavily upon me) had denied me the Leisure: Nor were either my
Invitations to it wanting, or the free Contribution of whatever I had so
painfully Collected, unoffered: to the end my Design (of letting the World see,
what excellent Men we had once of our own Nation, famous as well for that kind
of Philosophy, as any other Learning, and Masters of so transcendent a Secret;)
might have been furthered: Notwithstanding this, I hear of nothing (hitherto)
done, nothing endeaoured.

But instead thereof, I lately met with a pretended Copy of the following
Discourse, ready fitted for the Press, which (upon perusal) I found mutilated
with many Imperfections, much injured by several incongruous Additions, and
they confessed to be only made up of some scattered Shreds and Fragments,
collected from the whole Work; And besides intended, that the World should take
it for the Child of one Eugenius Theodidactus, being (by Re-baptization) called
the Wise Man's Crown, or Rosie-Crucian Physic; under which Titles notice has
been given of its coming abroad, by other Books since Published. All which
considered, together with the Zeal I have for this noble Science, and Regret to
see so able a Champion thereof thus boldly, thus nefariously robbed and
dispoiled of his Honor; loath I was any longer to keep my Perfect Copy by me;
and thereupon resolved, rather to venture it abroad, (though unaccompanied,) to
prevent the Injury would otherwise be done our dead Author, and the World. (I
say unaccompanied, for my past and present Engagements, in finishing the
Productions of some of those Hours, I snatched from the intervals of my late
Disturbances, will not afford me time to fit it with such Associates, as
formerly I intended should complete one of the later Parts, of my above
mentioned THEATRUM.) However, (considering the Nature of this Piece,) it will
properly enough appear by it self, and very well serve as a large Preface, to
usher forth the remaining Volumes, (or any thing else,) that shall be published
of this Subject.

As for our Author, he was without doubt an ENGLISHMAN, but has hitherto
passed with us among the Anonymi, and the Book (his Offspring) shows it self
sufficiently Legitimate, though the true Father thereof be as yet unknown. I
have heard some notable Stories, and those backed with persuasive Circumstances,
to make an easy Faith think the Providence very observable, that not only
furnished a laborious searcher into this myst^rious Learning, with the Original
it self, but most fortunately directed him to three Grains of the Powder,
closed up between two Leaves thereof, with which he made Projection; But I
affect not to Fly-blow the Ears of my Readers: Only this, I can modestly
averr, that my Copy was a Transcript of that Original.

The Work seems to be written about the beginning of the last (or end of the
former) Century; The main drift of the Author being from weighty and serious
Arguments and Examples, to prove the Possibility of such a thing as the
PHILOSOPHERS STONE: whereby is largely manifested, that Nature has exhibited
greater Wonders to the view of the World, and as great things have been (and
consequently may be) performed by other weaker and lesser Means, where a due,
friendly, and Philosophical conjunction of Art and Nature is fully understood.
And yet howbeit (because such are familiar unto, and ordinary among us) we
consider them not. It Is a Discourse fraught with variety of excellent rational
Matter, and fitted to the Learned as well as meaner Capacities; Nay, such, as I
boldly persuade my self, will fully satisfy both, beyond any thing yet extant
of this Nature: and I believe many captious Arguments, heretofore used and
urged, against the truth of this so infallible a Science, will here meet with
satisfactory Solutions, and henceforth find no further place in any Discourse
savouring but of Sobriety.

I must also acquaint my Reader, that this piece was of so high a value with
the industrious Doctor Everard, as it invited him to bestow his pains in the
Marginal Notes; wherein (like a skilful Philosopher, whose first operation is
to make Hidden things Manifest) he drew forth and discovered, that which our
Authors Magisterial Pen thought fit to conceal; and having obtained those Notes
(they being added to a Transcript of this Work, and both fairly written with
the Doctors hand) from a very intimate Friend (one extraordinary Learned, and a
great Ornament of our Nation) I was willing to make them public also.

And now (I confess) notwithstanding all this, I do not expect, what I here
publish, should please every Palate; in regard the Fate of Men's Writings is
very much suitable to that of Money, which sometimes passes current, and at
other times is cried down, or called in: To this I consider, how we are not
born with Fancies and Appetites, that relish every thing alike; and that it is
as possible to shape a Coat for the Moon, as to Print a Book that can please
every Genius: such and so various are the generality of our Inclinations!
Besides, I have often observed, that Men, both Wise and Learned, distaste or
affect not some parts of Learning, and yet by a secret willingness, or natural
force, are carried on in Admiration and Love of other Branches thereof; And
this I suppose partly grows from the neglect of a strict and unbyassed
Examination of their choice, which (if made) would appear to proceed more from
Affection than Judgment.

But if any whose Ignorance in, or Disaffection to this Divine and laudable
Science, shall think no better of the Work, then of a Spiders Web, [fit only
to be swept away:] I shall nevertheless confidently hope it will fall into some
other hands, that may consider the curiosity of the Woofe, and esteem it worthy
their Contemplation, to observe how our Author (like that ingenious Creature
traveling with her Industry) has composed a Discourse, whose Excellencies
will not discover themselves to the satisfaction of a superficial Eye, but
only the intent and serious Inquisitor; And that such may reap all possible
Advantage by their Labor, is the hearty desire of

E. ASHMOLE.
April 16. 1658.
The WAY to BLISS.
THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I. What BLISS and HAPPINESS is.
IF in all orderly Speeches and matters of Learning, Cic. Offic. lib. 1.
it first of all behooves to agree upon the Thing in hand, what it is, and what
is the Reason and Bounds [or definition] of the same: It seems very needful
in this Discourse of THE WAY TO BLISS, to show first what is BLISS, because
it is a thing much in doubt, and in question among the Learned.

He that uses to behold and view the Reason and Nature of things, may easily
perceive by the outward shape, and inward gifts of Man, unlike and passing all
other Wights (or living Creatures) that he was made for some notable end and
purpose above the rest; and so not for Pleasure, Honor, Health, or enough of
needful outward things, which they call Riches, nor yet for any other matters,
which other Wights void of Wit and Reason, seek and follow. Therefore a Man
ought not to make any such thing his End and Happiness, unless he think it
reason for the Master and better Workman, to learn of the Servant and worser:
For what other pattern and end have we in the world to follow? None at all;
because we are the best Creatures in the World.

Then it is without the World, say you, and among the blessed Minds [or
Spirits] above and without all: Neither yet have we found it; for they be our
Fellow Servants and Subjects under one Almighty King. Wherefore there remains
nothing but GOD and his Happiness to be sought and set before us, not with hope
to overtake and reach it, (that were madness) but with desire to attain so much
thereof, as the proportion between Him and us will suffer. Or if the
unmeasureable and boundless [or infinite] Blessedness of GOD admit no
comparison; It were best (yea, and by the example of the best Men) to make the
bounds of our BLISS so much of the Bliss of GOD, as our whole Power and Nature
will hold and carry.

Now then, if we knew that Divine Pattern and Bliss of GOD, all were well: And
this, as almost all other truth (especially in case of Life and Manners, for
the which it was chiefly written) by the witness and record of Holy Writ, were
each to be known and proved, if that were not too strange, and far off from
this purpose, which is appointed (as you see) to run through the midst of
Nature, Reason, and Philosophy.

Wherefore, sithence both in this and all other Matters, I mean not to lean
overmuch upon my own device, because a Man (especially a young man) is apt to
swerve, but to call other to counsel with me; and they can be no more but Men,
at most endowed with ripe and sound Reason and Judgment, in the course of
Kind [or Nature] and Philosophy: yet we will look, as near as we can, that
they be still squared by the Rule of Truth and Reason.

Then, to find this Happiness of Heaven among Men, to whom were it best to
travel? Unto Poets, think you? No; because they take their aim still at a vain
Mark Terent. Prolog. in Andr. and Plat. (...).
, the Peoples liking, as we may see by Pindar, one of the best among them, (for
I will not draw of the dregs) when he says, Pind. Olym. Od. 5. and Isthm. Od.
5.
If a man be Rich, and have his Health with a contended Mind, and Honor, let
him not care to be a GOD. -- A vain and worldly BLISS, God wot, far from a
Divine Nature.

Nor yet need we go to the lower and lesser houses of Philosophy; where, as
they be tainted and unsound in other pieces of Learning, so in matter of
Manners, they do not well to place our BLISS in Honor, Pleasure, Health, or
in suchlike outward things; no, nor to set it in good Life alone, and Virtue.

Plato and Aristotle, for their matchless understanding in Natural things, and
Divine Light, in the good order of Life and Manners, have been these many Ages
best accepted with the best, and followed in all things: Therefore, in this
high point of Manners which we have in hand, let us see what these Men hold,
and how near they come to the right line of Truth, whereof we spoke before.

To begin with Plato, the Spring of this Philosophy, his Bliss, as he disputes
in Philaebus, as near as I could gather, out of so large and scattered a
speech, is nothing but Pleasure.

And yet this divine Man means not, (lest you should marvel) with that Herd
of Swine, (though they were not the broachers of that foul Opinion, but watered
their Gardens, as Cicer. de Not. Deor. lib. 1.
Tully says, with other men's Springs) to set open all the gates of the Senses,
and to let in all that comes; but only at a few narrow loops, to receive clean
Delight, without all grief enterlaced; and by name Plat. in Philaeb.
delight in Colors, Concent, and some Smells, in Health, Wisdom, and Virtue.
And again he says in Theaetetus, Plat. in Timaet.
that Justice and Holiness, together with Wisdom, makes us like unto GOD.

To let these two places serve for him, and to come to Aristotle: As there are
two sorts of Men, one disposed to deal with others, which are called
worldly-men; and another quite contrarily, bent to live alone, and to seek
Knowledge, which are called Philosophers: So he in his Book of Manners,
Aristot. Ethic. lib. 10. cap. 7. and 8.
appoints two like several Ends and Blisses; for the first, Virtue, (I mean a
doing, and no idle Virtue) garnished and fenced with outward helps and gifts of
Body and Fortune; for the next, Knowledge of the best things: and this he
sets before that other, for many reasons vouched toward the end of that
Book, but especially because GOD, whom we ought to follow, leads the same
Life.

These be the best grounds of BLISS, that ever any Philosopher has laid at
any time, (for never a one has quite built it up;) let us see how they be
squared.

If the stall-fed Epicure may again be justly reproved, and reckoned as an
impious person, whom never any heavenly Thoughts touched, for bringing Cicer.
de Not. Deor. lib. 2.
in an idle God, neither ruling the World, nor regarding it; How can Aristotle
seem wrongfully accused of Impiety, and for the same banished out of the
Academy, if there were no other proof against him, than that he says in that
place, that GOD leads no other, than this beholding and gazing Life of his?
Is it not an idle, and, as it were, a covetous and envious Life, turned back
upon it self, and estranged from all outward Action applied to other? yea, (and
that) in his own and all other men's Understanding? Then to encounter him with
his worthy Master, Plato; If that were the best Life, or the Life of GOD, why
did GOD make the World? He lived so before, if that had been the best Life;
Plato in Timaeo.
But because He was Good, He would have other enjoy his Goodness; and therefore
he was busy in Making, and is yet in Ruling the World: And yet indeed, it is
no Business, as we reckon it, that is, no Care and Trouble; but an outward Deed
and Action, clean contrary to the inward Deed of a musing Mind, only shooting
at his own good Estate, which is Wisdom and Knowledge.

But if he deny all this, as it is like he will, because, to increase the heap
of sin, he grants no Beginning; then, what can be greater evidence than his own
Writings, one quite thwarting another, as cross as may be? for in his Arist.
Polit. lib. 7. cap. 1.
seventh Book of State, he comes again and says, that Every man has so much
BLISS, as he has Wisdom and Virtue, even by the witness of GOD himself, who
is therefore happy, and not for outward Goods. What can be more divinely
spoken, and more cross to that former foul and godless Opinion? Nay, see the
force of Truth; he yields again, according to his heavenly Plato N. I.
Master, That, Arist. Pol. lib. 7. cap. 3.
to forestall the Place from the worser sort, good Men ought to take Office
upon them, and to manage Affairs of State: Yea and further, Arist. Polit. l. b.
2. cap. 7.
If they refuse, (which if they be Wise they will, quoth Zeno) that they may be
rightly compelled. Then, if his Wiseman has Virtue in possession, as no doubt
he has, he must (as we see by his own confession) use it: And the same reason
is of GOD Himself in this great City of the World. But Plato in A^cibiad.
primo, sub fin^m.
Plato by name, thinks these two so nearly tied, and of kin together, as he
dare openly deny his Happiness to that Commonwealth, where they be dis-linked,
and stand asunder.

Then we see, that in the judgment of these two great Philosophers, where they
be best advised, and in deed and truth, the Divine Pattern of BLISS, which we
ought to strive unto, is no more, nor no less, than that worthy couple of
Wisdom and Virtue, knit together in that band of Fellowship, which may never
be parted and set asunder.

But you may say, We have reared our BLISS aloft, and made it a fair and
goodly Work, but more fit for the dwelling of those single and clean Minds [or
Spirits] above, which they call Messengers, [or Angels] than for us Men, so
buried here below in these earthly Bodies, as we be scarce able to look up unto
it: And therefore Aristotle both in his Book of Arist. Eth. lib. 10 c. 8.
Manners and of Polit. lib. 7. cap. 1.
State, with good advice often receives in enough of bodily and outward Goods,
to help this matter, (though not as any other cause of BLISS, than the
Instrument is of Music:) and so Plato we see names his Servants and Helpers.

Indeed, I grant that this full and high pitch of Happiness, (I mean that
measure above set) is free and easy, to free and lively Spirits; but to us
impossible without other outward means and helps, which, nevertheless, shall
not be counted as any part of the frame of BLISS, needful to make up the
whole; but, as it were, loose and hang-by steps and stairs leading up unto it.

Then if these be so needful as they be, it were as much need to lay them down,
and in just account, which those Philosophers do not; lest if there be too few,
our Happiness should halt; if again too many, the idle parts might in time
infect and mar the rest: As we may fear of Plato his first three Delights,
although they be not hurtful of themselves. Without more words, the just sum is
this.

To obtain so much Happiness, as our Nature is able to take and hold, the Body
had need be first willing and obedient, and then store of outward needful
things to be at hand and ready: These every Man knows. But for the Body, that
is obedient when it is long-lived, healthful, young, clear and temperate: when
all these helps flock together, we may be happy if we will; if any want, we
shall never, do what we can, as we shall hear hereafter.

Then let us marshal, at last, these things in Order, and comparing BLISS to a
Family, make that loving Couple, Wisdom and Virtue, as Man and Wife, and Heads
of the Household; the five Properties of the Body, like Children; and Riches, as
Servants. These again, if the chief of the Household will suffer them to Marry,
will beget other two Bond-children, to beautify the same house, Honor and
Pleasure: But the wise and good Householder will in no wise suffer it, lest his
Household be troubled with more than may be ruled. And although true and right
Honor and Pleasure will perforce follow, yet he shall not regard them, but be
minded toward them, as those grave Men were toward Hellen, and often use
their saying, Hom. Ill. (...). v. 142. Arist. E^hic. lib. 2. cap. ult.
Although they be such kind ones, yet let them go.

CHAP. II. Reproof of the common and lighter sort of Arguments cast against the
Way to Bliss.
NOw that we know what is BLISS and HAPPINESS; we may, when we will, go into
the Way, and show how all Men may be Blessed: wherein I am quite bereaved of an
helps from the Grecians, as men ever apter to speak and think well, than to do
and perform any thing; (though constancy and agreement in their Sayings, would
have left BLISS, as well as other good things, in the power and reach of all
Men:) And I must fly for aid into Egypt, a People so far passing all other
Nations, as it is better and nearer to GOD, to work and do great wondrous
things, than to behold and look upon them.

For it is delivered to ancient and true Record, that one HERMES, a King and
Lawgiver of that Country, a Man of rare and divine gifts in Knowledge, above
all that ever were, found out a Medicine able to bring all men to that BLISS
aforesaid, and left it behind him in writing to his People; and that it was
after him a long time by the wiser sort closely wrought and used, until at last
it crept abroad, and stole into Arabia, when she flourished in Arms and
Learning, and there got the Name which it now commonly keeps of the
PHILOSOPHERS STONE; And that from thence, in the same secret and disguised
manner (for it is the wont thereof, as becomes so deep a Secret) it has
traveled and spread it self over all Nations, now and then opening and
discovering it self to a few of the better and wiser Company.

Then this is THE WAY TO BLISS, which I mean to take: And withal to prove it
no pleasant Dream, and happy Tale, if it were true, as the common Proverb goes
of it; but, as it is in Nature, an heroical and almost divine deed, scarce to
be reached or matched with any words, so I vow it a true and certain Story, a
thing often done, and again to be done as often.

I am unfit, I grant, and unable to bear so great a Burden, but that the great
desire I have both to defend the Truth from slander, and to do good to them
that love it, makes it light and easy: And again, this hope upholds me, That
if I chance to stumble or faint at any time, they will as gently and willingly
lend their hand to stay me, or at the least, bear with the fall and misfortune.
Then for the common and viler Sort, which either for lack of good Nature, or
want of good Manners, use to wrangle about Words, or twitch at Things, I care
not; And because I know them not, I will pass by them, as unknown men; for
neither was Hercules able, Plato in Euthydem.
as they say, to match with many-headed Hydra, nor yet with the awk and crooked
Crab.

Then, to turn my Speech, which way were it best to set forward? Not right and
straight to the matter? No; Because there is such crying out against the
Possibility of the good Works which our Medicine promises; And that awk
fore-judgement of the Matter has been the chief cause which has hitherto
buried this Divine Art from the sight of good and learned Men: I take it the
best way of delivery, before I come to the point it self, to fetch about a
little, and show the possibility of these effects, and the way to work them, by
other and weaker means, as well as by HERMES his Medicine.

For although it be Arist. lib. De incessu animal. and Histor. animal. lib. 1.
c. 15.
not so Natural in marching forward, to move the left and weak part, yet I ween
it right Artificial; and then it shall agree with that good order of Art, first
of all to put by a few of the light things laid against this blessed Science:
Because, albeit they be gathered but by guess, besides all grounds and rules of
certainty, yet they have so wholly possessed the common people, yea and some of
the better and wiser sort likewise, that, without any further search or hearing
of the Matter, they have streightway cast it off for false, and condemned it:
for as when sleep has once taken the Fort of the Body, the Senses yield and
can do nothing; so if wrong belief once get possession of the Soul, Reason is
laid to rest, and cannot move again, before that must be loosened, and put to
flight and scattered.

First, say they, since there be seen in all places and times, so many hundreds,
with great Pains, Heed and Cunning, to study this Art, and to put the Receipts
in practice; sure, if they were true and faultless as others are, some should
appear to hit the Mark, and to gather the fruit of their Travel, and not to
live as they all do, of all men most miserable: Or at least, because it is so
ancient an Art, it would have been recorded in some public or private Writing,
besides their own, which, be it bound with never so deep Oaths, (as it is) yet
is it unsufficient proof and witness in their own case.

These be the most saleable Reasons, and best approved among the People,
wherewith they use to batter this exchanging Science; But mark how light and
weak they be, and easy to be wiped away: for how could the Acts and Deeds of
these Philosophers come into the Writings and Records of Men, (to begin there
with them) whose Fame, nay whose Company they have ever shunned? And when their
own Records, if they chanced to like of leaving any, were not sown abroad, and
published to the World, as is the use of Worldlings; but left like precious
Heirlooms unto some Friend of secret trust, which was counted as a Son adopted,
upon Condition to keep it still within the House and Stock of HERMES, from the
Eyes and Hands of the World and Strangers, running evermore, like the wise
Stars, a contrary race unto the World, that no marvel though they be both in
like sort, crossed by the World, and mis-called Cicer. de Not. Deor. lib. 2.
and Plat. de leg. lib. 7. prope finem.
Wanderers [or Planets] when in deed and truth they go better.

Now when they deem credit to be denied to the Men's own Report and Witness, it
is a sign that either their own Report and Witness is of light and little
weight, whereby they judge of others; or else that their Thoughts are vain and
fantastical, puffed up, I mean, with that new kind of Self-love, and
overweening Wisdom, to set up themselves, and pull down Authorities; of which
sort it falls out most commonly in proof, that while they strive to avoid the
Lake of Superstition, they run headlong unawares down the Rock of Impiety: for
if such a wild breach and entry may be suffered to be made into the Credit and
Authority of Writers, which are the life of Antiquity and light of Memory,
great darkness and confusion will soon come in, and overcast the World; yea,
and so far forth at length, as naught shall be believed and judged true that is
not seen; Cic. de Not. Deor. lib. 1.
that even they which dwell in the main Land, shall not grant a Sea: A thing
not only fond and childish among all Men, but also (ill be to me, if I speak
not as I think) wicked and godless amongst us Christians, whose whole Religion,
as S. Augustine says, stands upon that ground.

Wherefore, if we must needs believe Recorders of Acts and Stories, yea though
they be sometimes lewd men, foolish and unlearned, as if they were as whole and
harmless as Diog. Laer. vita Xenocrat.
Xenocrates, but especially although they had great cause to lie, and to speak
more or less than the truth; who can, in any common Reason, refuse the solemn
Oaths of so many good, wise and learned Men? Plat. de Repub. Dial. 6.
for he that is Good, for the love of Virtue it self, he that is Wise, to avoid
the shame of Lying, will speak the Truth. What should I say of the learned Men,
whose whole care and practice, drift and study, is nothing else but to find
and set down the Truth? But all is well and clear of all suspicion, if it may
be thought these Oaths and Protestations to have sprung from themselves, of
mere good will and desire to persuade the lovers of Wisdom and Virtue, and not
wrung out by fear of flattery. Which may be easily judged in such Men, as were
all either Kings that needed not, or Diogenists that cared not, as it is clear
in all their Eyes that are conversant in these kind of Studies.

Wherefore, such men as are so bold without sure ground of Reason to deny, and
deny still all that comes, are, in my Opinion, greatly to be looked into; for
although they, like Cic. de Not. Deor. lib. 1.
Xerxes, pull not down Religion with hands openly, yet they are of another sort
as dangerous, that undermine it closely with wrong Opinions. If our Men avowed
such plain untruths as might be reproved by common sense and daily experience,
as when Cic. Acad. quaest. lib. 4.
Anaxagor as said Snow was black; and Xenophanes, the Moon inhabited, and full
of Hills and Cities; and Nicetes of old, with some Copernicus, G^lbertus,
Campanella, Gallilaeus, Wrightus.
of late, that the Earth, the only unmovable thing in the world, only moved,
and such like ugly and misshapen Lies, wherewith Greece over-swarmed; then you
had reason to use them with ill words and thoughts as you do: But when they
maintain, that by a Heavenly Medicine they have made many great and wonderful
Changes, turned all Metals into Gold, Folly into Wisdom, Vice into Virtue,
Weakness into long Life, and all Diseases into sound Health, and Age into
Lustiness and Youth again, how can you disprove them? when did you see the
contrary? You scarcely know the Nature of the Deeds and Effects, for they
require great Knowledge; but the Doing, Cause, and Workman, that is; this
Medicine, you never saw, nor can imagine what it is, much less conceive the
Reason, Strength and Nature of it: -- Nay you see nothing, but grope and
blunder in the dark, like blindfold men at all things: Else, how could these
exchanges have escaped, and been hid from you, in a World so full of all kind
of changes? I mean, you see great and admirable things, (albeit you do not so
take them, Cicer. de Divin. lib. 2.
because you see them often) but you do not thoroughly see them, that is, you
perceive not the Nature, Cause and Reason of them, and that makes you so
childish, to believe naught unseen, and count all things Wonders which are not
Common amongst you; Much like that harmless and silly kind of People, of late
discovered, which made Miracles and Wonders of many matters, that in other
Countries are common and ordinary; insomuch as (to take one for all) P^t.
Martyr Decad. 3. lib. 8. in p. 135. Et Tho: Campan. de sensu rerum, lib. 4.
cap. 3. in p. 274.
they could not conceive how two Men asunder, could by Letter certify one
another, unless a Spirit was wrapped up in the Paper, to make report and tell the
News. But if you and they could once by the edge of Wit, cut into the Depth and
Nature of the great and mavelous Works of Kind and Skill, which are common
and daily among you, then and not before, you would be ready and easy by
comparison, to receive almost any thing unseen, and brought by Report unto you.

Let me awake your Wits a little: You see daily, but not thoroughly, how the
Moon, by drawing the Ocean after her, makes the Ebb and Flow thereof. It is
likewise commonly, I know not how truly, reported, G. Agricol. de Not. fossil.
lib. 5. cap. 3.
that the Loadstone roof of Mahomet his Church, draws up his Iron-Tomb from the
ground, and holds it hanging in the middle way: like as the Miners in Germany,
by chance found their Tools, which they had left in such a Vault, hanging in
the Morning; which was accounted for a Miracle, before such time as the Cause,
by the skilful, was seen and declared unto them.

What should I say more of this Stone? It is not unknown that there are G.
Agricol. ubi supra. Et Serapio, and Olaus Magnus ap. Guil. Gilbert de Magnet.
lib. 1. cap. 1.
whole Rocks thereof in India, drawing Ships that pass by laden with Iron unto
them: and yet we see that this mighty Stone, in presence of the Diamond, the
King of Stones, is put Aug. de Civit. D i, lib. 21. cap. 4. Plin. Not. Hist.
lib. 37. cap. 4. Jul. Solin. Polyb. cap. 65. Mar. Paling. in Scorp. Aurel. Aug.
Chrysostom. lib. 2. Albert. Mag. de reb. Met. lib. 2. c. 1. G. Agric. de Not.
fossil. lib. cap. 9. Card. Cusan. Epci. lib. 7.
out of Office, and can do nothing.

To come abroad, it has been often seen, at Sea, that the Plin. lib. 32. cap.
2. Arist. Histor. anim. l. 2. c. 14. Plu^. Symposia, lib. 2. q. 7.
little Stay-fish cleaving to the fore-ship, has stopped his full Course.

I should now pass over to that other side of Skill and Craft, and call to
mind many great and wondrous Works there done and performed: The curious work
of that Nich. Causinus Syntag. Elector. Symb. and Parabol. Histor. p. 65.
Italian Ring, which held a Clock, besides a Dial within it. Those three common
Feats found out of late, passing all the Inventions of Antiquity, the Gun,
Card, and Printing, and many other dainty Devices of Man's Wit and Cunning: if
this short and narrow Speech appointed, would suffer any such outridings. Let
these few serve to awake you, and call your Wits together: you see these
things, I say, and are never moved, but if you had never seen them, but heard
the stories only reported, what would you have thought and said?

And because no man so well judges of himself, as of another: Vide Plat. Dial.
7. deRep. in princip. and Cicer. de Not. Deor. lib. 2.
Suppose a plain and harmless People, such as those Indians were, had from the
beginning dwelt in a dark Cave under ground, (let it be the Center, if you
will) and at the last one odd man more hardy and wise than the rest, had, by
stealth, crept out into the light, and here by long travel and traffic with
our People, had seen and learned the Course and Nature of things, which I have
rehearsed unto you, and then returning home, had suddenly start up, and begun
to recount the Wonders which he had seen and learned; first, that he found the
Earth hanging round in the middle of the Air, and in like sort a bright and
goodly Cover, compassing afar off the same; This Cover beset and sprinkled with
infinite moving Lights and Candles; and among the rest, One (to be short) of a
foot in bigness, to his sight, Sen. de Provid. cap. 1. Scalig. Exer. 52.
without all Touching, or other means and instruments to be perceived, to hale
and pull huge heaps of Water after her, as she passed up and down continually;
would they not shout, and lift up their hands, and begin to suspect the Man of
infection with strange and traveling Manners?

But, admit, when the noise were done, and all hushed, he went forward, and told
them of such a Church, and Vault, where other things as well and more strangely
than the Earth, (for that cannot be otherwise, unless heavy things flew up
against Nature) hanged in the Air alone; And of such Hills, that, as the Moon
Waters, so drew Ships out of their full courses, without any strength, or means
visible. Furthermore, if he laid abroad the wonderful might of a little Fish,
Geor. Pisid. de Mundi opisi. verse 983. Et Phile. de Animal. propriet. cap. 32.
Exer. cap. 93.
like half a Foot long, able to stay the main course of a Ship under sail; do
you not think with what sour Countenances, and reviling Words and Reproaches
they would bait him, and drive him out of their Company? But if the good and
painful Man, burning with desire to reform the estate of his rude and deformed
Country, would not be stayed so, but espying a calmer time, durst come in
presence, and step forth before them again, and say, that by his Travel he had
learned to make such a Ring as I spoke of; such warlike Engines as should fall
as fearful as Thunder, and as hurtful as any Ram upon the Wall, a mile off
planted; such a kind of Writing, whereby four Men might Record as much in the
same time, as four thousand of the Common Clerks; such a Card, wherewith a
Countryman, that never saw the Sea, shall sit in the bottom of a Ship, and
direct the Course thereof throughout the World, without missing; Is it not like
they would apprehend him for a Cozener, and adjudge him to Punishment? Then put
the case you stood by, and saw the Matter, I appeal to your own Conscience,
would you not think the Traveller worthy of Pity and Praise, and the People of
Reformation?

Well then, let us return to our purpose; There is a Nation of Wisemen,
dwelling in a Soil as much more blessed [than yours] as yours is than theirs:
That is, As they bide under ground, and you upon the face thereof, so these Men
inhabit the edge and skirt of Heaven; they daily See and Work many wondrous
things, which you never saw nor made, because you never mounted so high to come
among them: If any one chance to fly away from you to those heavenly Places,
and after like experience to return, and make the like Reports, you give him
like Rewards; Compare the rest, I say no more; But if GOD would give you leave
and power to ascend unto those high places, I mean, to those heavenly Thoughts
and Studies, you might quickly, by view of deep Causes, and Divine Secrets, and
comparison of one to another, not only believe the blessed-Art, but also learn
and perform the same.

But they will not be rid so, and follow as fast again another way: That
whereas so many have been, and are daily seen to wear their lives in Alchimy,
and to find nothing that good is, but contrary for the most part, to wit,
untimely and unordinary Death, Sickness, and Age, for Long-life, Health, and
Youth; and always Smoke for Gold, and Folly for Wisdom; and very near as
often, bad and lewd Conditions, for good and honest Natures; (for, by boiling
themselves long in such deceitful stuff, as though they were burnt in the Pots
bottom, they carry most commonly for ever after, an unsavory smack thereof;)
It is a plain sign the Trade is vain, false, and deceitful. This is the third
Charge they give unto us, let us see how to bear and withstand it.

The most wise and great Philosophers, albeit they knew GOD had made all
Mankind for that happy Life abovesaid, and that it was at first enjoyed, or
else it had been made in vain; and that by corruption of ill Custom, (by his
secret appointment) our kind is grown out of kind, and therefore may be
restored, because it is a mis-leading, and no intent of Nature: (which
fore-castings gave them occasion to seek the remedy;) Yet they thought it
unlawful, and set straight against the Will of GOD, that all should be
restored; for that he seemed of purpose to have sown Good and Bad, and great
store of both together, in such sort as we see them; lest if all were alike,
and in one state of Happiness, the great variety of business and stirring, and
so the society and Commonwealth among Men, should be clean taken away: Like as
if the four first striving Seeds (whereof all things are made and spring) were
all alike, and one friend to another, all should be still and quiet, without
Succession, Change and Variety in the World, and so there should be no World.
For GOD, when he cast his Mind upon the building of the World, he meant to
make a goodly and beautiful Work, meet for the Power, Wisdom and Pleasure of
such a Builder, and therefore a stirring and changeable Work, because there is
no might nor cunning shown, no delight taken in one ever-like or still thing.
But light footing, for speed, is ever best in such a ground; Let us away.

Wherefore, by the example, and, as it were, by the secret blast and motion of
GOD, after our Men had found this Restorative, and used it for the time, and
meant to leave it, as becomes good Men, to Posterity, they took this way of
Counsel, to lay it up safe in a strong Castle as it were, in the which all the
broad Gates, and common easy Entries, should be fast shut up and barred,
leaving only one little and secret backdoor open, fore-fenced with a winding
Maze, that the best sort, by Wit, Pains and Providence, might come into the
appointed BLISS, the rest stand back forsaken: Severin. Dan. Idaea Med. Phil.
ca. 1.
Their Maze and Plot is this; first they hide themselves in low and untrodden
Places, to the end they might be free from the power of Princes, and the Eyes
of the wicked World: And then they wrote their Books with such a wary and
well-fenced Style, (I mean, so over-cast with dark and sullen shadows, and sly
pretense of Likes and Riddles, drawn out of the midst of deep knowledge and
secret Learning) that it is impossible for any but the wise, and well-given, to
approach or come near the Matter.

And therefore it is, when godless and unlearned Men, hovering over Gain and
Honor, presume against Minerva's will, to handle their Words, when the Things
should rather be handled, they wrest and wring them a hundred ways, (for,
(...) Plat. Polit. 9.
nothing is so soft and gentle as Speech, especially so thoroughly tempered) and
yet all besides the secret meaning thrust up in deep Knowledge.

Then, if these Ways and Fantasies they practice, and set on work as fast (as
their Fingers itch) and miss as fast (as they must needs do;) shall they say
they followed our Rules and Precepts, and put our Work in practice, and found
them false? That were like as if a cunning Archer and Huntsman, had delivered
dark Rules of Shooting and Hunting unto his Countrymen, and these by chance had
fallen into the hands of another wild and untaught Nation, which simply
misled by mis-taking his Drift and Meaning, had made them Ploughs to shoot in,
and goared their Oxen to the game, and then missing of their purpose, cried out
and blamed the Arts of Shooting and Hunting, and sought to blow Envy upon the
Man that taught them; would not a Wise man judge, hold and deem, both these and
them, and all other busybodies, that so use to mine and dig in other Men's
dealings, to be sent unto their own Trade and Business, wherefore they were
made and fashioned, and to let the rest alone for the right owners? And for
these of HERMES house, do not think they make claim, sue and recover their own
in open Court, as others use, (that were a way in such a wicked World, to lose
Land, Life, and all together quickly) but in that secret sort, which falls
not within the compass of your Reproof.

Neither would I have you follow so hard, and be so earnest upon the next
Reason, That albeit our Men had cause to hide their Works and Practice, yet
they would have showed the fruit and effect thereof, advancing themselves, as
others do, to Honor and Pleasure, and not have lived like the refuse of the
World, in such mean plight and wretchedness; for that is the lightest of all
other, though it seem the greatest: If I list to rifle in the Rolls of ancient
Records, I could easily find and show you, that although the most part, of
purpose, lived in this harmless and safe Estate, which I told you; yet some
again were Kings, and Men of great Place and Dignity, (and yet I think by
Remainder, and not by Purchase so) but I love not this kind of reasoning; Let
them that thirst go to the Fountain, and us remember, that in the Household of
BLISS, Riches are made but Servants, and not Masters, and Rulers; because they
be for the most part unruly and ambitious, and for that cause they have no
liberty granted them, but are enjoined to serve lowly their Betters, and to
look no further; Comment. in Hermet. lib. de lap. Phys. secret. cap. 2. Theat.
Chym. vol. 4.
So that, if our Men were Happy, or at least lovers of the same, their Riches
ought to be employed in their own service, that is, to purchase and win Wisdom
and Virtue, and not sent out to wait upon, I know not what strangers, Honor
and Pleasure; which as they be strangers, yea and dangerous strangers, lying
open (as all high things) to the blast of Envy; so, most commonly, they will
not be ruled, no more than they which get them; and then rebelling against
them, which are their Lords and Rulers, do overthrow an happy Estate.

Wherefore, what marvel is it though our Men did thus, when they did no more
than Wisdom requires, nor any more than all wise Men have ever taught and
followed? thinking, and calling it an heavenly Life, because it sunders the
heavenly Mind from the earthly Body, not (as Plin. Not. Hist. l. 7. c. 52.
Pliny writes of Hermolinus) by sending the same out of the Body, to gather and
bring home News; but by an high contempt of earthly Matters, and flying up to
divine Thoughts, not with the golden feathers of Euripides, but with the
heavenly wings of Plato in Phaedro.
Plato.

And therefore Plato in Alcibiad. 1. and Men's cujusque is est quisque. Cic. in
Some. Scip.
this same divine Man, makes the Mind alone the whole Man; the Body as a thing
that is his, and belonging unto him; but Riches, Honor, and such like outward
Goods, none of his own Matters, nor belonging unto him; but unto his, that is,
the Body, and as I may term them, his Mans-men. And this thing also Bias, Cic.
Paradox. 1.
before him, did as well perform, when at the spoil of the City, having leave,
he took not his Carriage with him, and answered to the check of his Friends,
that he carried all his own things with him, which was nothing but a naked Body.

Aristotle is of the same mind just with Plato, as appears notably in his
Arist. Ethic. lib. 10. cap. 7.
last Book of Manners, where he has laid down many sound Reasons, why this
Life is best, and so, by wise men is, and ought to be taken: Because it is,
says he, the most quiet Life, and fullest of true Delight, and with all things
needful best stored, for indeed it wants nothing; for that as a Mind is
divine in respect of a Body, so is the Life of it, which is that we speak of,
in regard of a civil and worldly Life. And again, if our Minds are Our selves,
it were meet to lead our own Life, before a strangers; But last of all, which
is worth all, because GOD our only Pattern, leads none other Life but this.

I might be very large, if I list to seek about and traverse this Matter: but
here is enough to show the Purpose and Reason our Men of Egypt had, if it was
in their choice, to choose this kind of Life, which the World so despises; But
how if I could bring them in bereaved of all choice and free will, and driven
by force of Necessity to do the same? would not that stop the widest Mouths,
trow you, in all this lavish Company? Let us know first that the Mind of Man,
being come from that high City of Heaven, desires of her self to live still
that heavenly Life, that is, the blessed Life above described; And if there be
any let, as there is lightly, it is in the weight and grossness of our Bodies,
over-weighing our Mind down to the Ground, and to all our own muddy Matters:
-- Then that our Men, after they have gotten this Golden Stone, so famous in
the World, do not, as they think and would do, straightwayes run to their
Coffers, but first and chiefly Gild their Bodies with it; wherefore after that
by that mighty, fine, and temperate Medicine, they have scoured out all
Grossness and Distemperature of the Body, the only lets to Understanding, and
good Manners, as we shall hear hereafter, and thereby left the Mind at large,
and almost at her first freedom; she, and so they together, laying aside, and,
as it were, casting down all earthly Matters, must needs return to their own
former Life again, so far I mean, as the Condition and State of Man will
suffer. And so, put case you find your own dark and dusky Eyesight so soon
taken with every foul and vain worldly Beauty, yet you must not judge these
heavenly Men thereby, but think the most sharp and clear eyesight of their
Understanding, easily able to see the blemish, and to avoid the bait of common
love.

Wherefore, to close up this point at last; since this happy Craft and WAY TO
BLISS of HERMES, for ought that they know, may be true and honorable, let the
Common and Unlearned sort stay their Judgment, and leave the trial and sifting
of any further Matter unto the Wise and Learned.

And therein all Suidas in (...). and Coel. Rhod. l. b. 7. cap. 2. and
Panciroll. Tit. de Alch^m. and M. Mayer, Symb. au^. men's, lib. 1. and P.
Diacon. vit. Diocles. Caes. and Oros. l* b. 17. cap. 16.
Dioclesians, if they have none of themselves, might learn better Advice,
before (for the fault of some) they run to any raging Counsel, and bend the
edge of Authority against all.

I grant that, as in all good Arts, so in this, because it is sweetest, there
be some Drones, crept in among the Swarm; what then? As they are of another
kind, and never begotten by HERMES, or any of his Sons: So no reason they
should slander the Name and House of HERMES, but bear the burden of their own
fault. They may be sorted out and known from the holy, stinged, and profitable
Be, first by their bigness in Words and Brags, and then (as follows lightly
by the Course of kind) by their stingless, and unarmed weakness, in all
defense of Learning; And thirdly by their sloth and idleness. For although they
never lyn stirring, yet Sen. lib. de Brevit. vit. c. 13
as Seneca says, Operose nihil agunt, they painfully do Nothing, because all
they do is to no purpose, all is fruitless and unprofitable.

But Dioclesian lacked this discerning Wisdom, and rashly ran upon all, and
burnt the Books, much like that part of Lycurgus, who for the Drunkenness of
the People, cut down the Vines. Had it not been better to have brought the
Springs of Water nearer, and to have bridled, as Pla^to says, that mad God
with the sober? Even so the Emperor might with better advice, have tempered
the heat of Alchimy, with the cooling Card of Discretion, and made it an Art
lawful for a small Number only, and with the like charge to be Practiced,
which had been a Counsel worthy a wise Prince, neither to let the hope of so
great a Treasure go for a small loss; nor yet upon uncertain Hope, be it never
so great, to lose a certain great thing, to wit, the Life and Goods of his
Subjects, well and orderly bestowed.

THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of LONG LIFE.
AFter we have met with the common Arguments, wherewith the Unlearned use to
deface this goodly Science; we must go forward, and encounter with the Learned;
who, because the great Deeds and Effects which are promised, (that is, to make
all men Long-lived, Healthful, Young, Rich, Wise and Virtuous) are above any
Skill of theirs, or of their Ancestors the Gracians, rate both the Work
impossible, and the Workman vain, false, and guileful; I must, I say, prove,
according to my Task appointed, That these great Acts and Deeds, may be done
and performed by other weaker Means than HERMES MEDICINE: And this I must do
with more pains and diligence, because this Way and Entry once made in their
Hearts, the great and mavelous Truth of this famous STONE, may the more
easily come in and take possession.

But in such variety of hard and slippery Matter, whence were it best to set
out? which Way first to take? Were it not meet the means and helps unto BLISS
should be first rid and cleared, before we come to BLISS it self? and among
them to give Long Life the foremost place, if not for his worthiness, yet for
his behoof and necessity? being needful in all Commonwealths and private
persons, first to seek to live, before to live well, though that, unto this
end: Then let us see what is Long Life, and how all Men may reach unto it.

But why do we make such great haste? we had need be slow and advised in so
great a Matter, and to look, before we venture upon so long a Way, and of so
many days Journey, that we be well provided and furnished of all things;
wherein I hope, if I have not of my own, or if after the thrifty manner, when I
am well stored my self, yet I borrow to prevent lending, although I take upon
trust so much as shall serve this turn, it shall be no stain to my Credit; but
rather deemed a safe and wary way, to cut off occasion of Robbery both at home
and abroad: especially if I take it up of such Men, as are most famous and best
beloved. These should be my Friends of Egypt and Arabia, (though we have their
secret help now and then) the best able indeed, and the nearest unto me, if
they were so well known and beloved in the World: But because they be not, I
will fly to the other side of Greece, and to the most renowned there, and best
liked, Hippocrates, Plato and Aristotle, whom I doubt not to find very free
and willing in this Matter. Let us then awake our old Studies out of sleep, and
hye us to them: what need many words? after Greeting, and the Matter broken,
they make me this Answer jointly together.

GOD, because he was good, Plato in Tim. and Arist. Metaph. lib. 1. c. 2.
did not grieve to have others enjoy his Goodness, (that is, to be, and to be
well) meaning to make a World (though Aristotle Lib. de Coelo per tot. and lib.
2. c. 1. Excusatur a B. Kecker. Syst. Phys. l. 7. Verum condemnatur a Pbil.
lib. de Mund. Incorrupt.
withdraw his hand herein) full of all kind of everlasting and changeable
things, first made all, and blended them in one whole confused Mass and Lump
together, born up by his own weight, bending round upon it self.

Then seeing it lay still, and that naught could beget and work upon it self,
he sorted out, and sundred away round about, a fine and lively piece (which
they call Heaven) for the Ocell. Luca. cap. 2.
Male, Mover and Workman; leaving still the rest (as gross and deadly) fit for
the Female, to receive the Working and Fashioning, which we term the four
Beginnings, [or Elements] Earth, Water, Air and Fire; and thereof springs the
Cor. Agrip. de Oc. Phil. lib. 1. c. 38. and Jos. Quercet. Herm. med. defens. l.
2. tract. de quintess. and Gerard. Dorn. praef. ad Artif. supernat. T. C. Vol.
1.
Love which we see get between them, and the great desire to be joined again,
and coupled together.

Then, that there might be no number and confusion of Workmen, and doing
Causes, but all to flow from one Head, as he is One, he drew all force of
Working, and virtue of Begetting into one narrow round Compass, which we call
the Ocell. Luc. c. 2. and Plat. Pol. 6. and 7. stat. ab initi^. and Fernel. de
abdit. rerum cause. l. 1. c. 8.
Sun, from thence he sent out, spread and bestowed all about the World, both
above and below, which again meeting together, made one general Light, Heat,
Nature, Life and Soul of the World, Cause of all things. And because it becomed
the Might, Wisdom and Pleasure of such a Builder, to make and rule the
infinite Variety of Changes here below, (...). Plat. in Tim.
and not evermore one self-same thing; he commanded that Fernel. ubi supra (e)
One Light in many, to run his eternal and stintless Race to and fro, this way
and that way, that by their variable presence, absence and meeting, they might
fitly work the continual change of flitting Creatures.

This Soul which Plato in Phaed. Plotin. Ennead. 4. l. 7. c. 9.
Plato calls the Ever-moving Mover, quite contrary to Arist. de Anim. l. 2. c.
1. and Phys. c. 5. (...), De genesis ^a^. 1. Vid. Simplic. ad Epict. En. c. 1
Aristotle's (...), which he himself construes an Immovable Mover, (that we may
marvel Tusc. qu. l. b. 1.
how Tully could translate it so, as to make it all one with Plato, unless
(...). Luc. (...). Excusat. Cic. a Coel. Rhod. l. 2. c^. 21. qui tamen acer^ime
oppugnatur a Bart. K^ck. Syst. phys. c. 9.
Lucians gallows misled him, which is found in some Copies) that he might be
an Eternal Mover, is, in Nature and Being, a most subtle and small Beam, or
spark of heavenly Fire; in property and quality, for his Cleanness, Light and
Fineness, Hot; and for his Moistness withal Temperate, as appears to him that
bends his Mind upon it.

If you doubt of his Moistness, Sever. Dan. Id. med. c. 9.
think nothing made without Mingling, which is, by drawing in, Nuisement tract.
du sal and de l'Esprit du Mond. l. 1. c. 5.
and breaking small together the whole stuff, when a dry heat draws out, and
scatters the fine from the great, and thereby wastes and narroweth all
things, making nothing: As for Example; Arist. Hist. An. l. 6. c. 2.
Dung hatcheth an Egg, and quickneth any thing apt to receive Life, when warm
Card. Subt. lib. 2. in p. 77.
Ashes will never do it. What need we more? Imagine an heavenly Flame by a good
Card. ibid. and B. Kecker. Syst. Phys. lib. 2. c. 10. and ap. eund^m. Joan.
Pi^^ier. lib. 4. var. meditat. c. 15.
burning Water, which flaming upon your Hand, or a dry Cloth, heateth them both
gently, without hurt or perishment. And yet this Sunny Beam is not moist of it
self, and before it is tempered with the moisture of the Joach. Curaeus de
sens. and sensib. lib. 1. cap. 18. and Ger. Dorn. Phil. chym. T. C. Vol. 1.
Moon his Wife, to make it apt for Generation; Thence Tab. Smaragd.
HERMES calls the Sun and Moon, the Father and Mother of all things.

Now the stuff and Female, to be fit to suffer Working, must be first open,
that is, Soft and Moist: and then not one, nor yet many like things, lest in
both these cases they should stand still the same, and not when they be stirred
by the Workman, rise, and strive, and bruise and break one another fitly by
continual change, until they come at last unto a consent, rest, and stay; And
that upon small occasion the same consent might jarre again, and come to
change, the wished end and purpose of the work. And therefore GOD cast in at
first, the known Ocel. Lut. c. 2.
four fighting enemies; yet in the soft and open Stuff, there are but two of
them, (...). Hom. Il. 7.
Earth and Water in one mixture, seen and extant at the beginning, Ger. Dorn.
in Phys. Trism. T. C. Vol. 1.
before the painful Soul draws and works out the rest, Fire out of Earth, and
out of Water that breath-like and windy thing called Air.

So that, Card. Subt. lib. 2.
if there were much Earth, little Water, and great Heat to mingle them, Fire
will show it self and bear the sway: If but small Heat upon the same measure of
Earth and Water, Earth will rule the rest: If on that other side, upon small
store of Earth, and much Water, but a small Heat of working, the thing will
fall out to be raw and waterish: If upon the same quantity a stronger Heat, it
arises an Ayery, which is termed a fat and oily Body.

Wherefore, when the Soul comes down upon the Stuff, clothed with a fine windy
coat of the cleanest Air, next unto Heaven, called Ether, (without the brokage
of which Cor. Agripp. de Oc. Phil. l. 1. c. 14: and Mars. Ficin. de vit. Coel.
comp. l. 3. c. 3. and Fern. de abdit. rerum cause. l. 1. c. 10.
Mean, the two Extremes and unacquainted Strangers would never bargain and
agree together) by his moist mild heat it moves it, and alters it very
diversely, making many fuits and kinds of things, differing according to the
Strength of the one, and the Obedience of the other.

And so by reason in that separation of the fine and Male part at first, Ovid.
Met. l. 1. and Mars. Fic. Arg. in Plat. Critia. and arg. in Men. and Franc. S.
Albane Not. Hist. Cent. 9. Exper. 100.
the stuff was thoroughly tossed and mingled, and the Heat of Heaven thereby (like
a hot Summer after a wet Spring) very fierce and eager, the two causes serving
very fitly, all Wights, Tho: Campa. de sens. rerum, l. 4. c. 19. and Jo: Pic:
Miran. conclus. secund. Avicen. 5.
Man and all, were made alike, without any seed sown, otherwise than by the
great Seedsman of Heaven, upon the common stuff of Earth and Water. As is still
seen in the common Tillage yet used in those lame and unperfect Wights, which
some call Start-ups, and sprung out from themselves. As we may be easily led to
think, if we consider how, not only all kind of Plants, without all setting
or sowing, grow up by themselves in some places, Arist. de genesis anim. l. 2. c.
5. and Cardan. variet. lib. 7. c. 37.
and some kind of Fish in the Sea are only Female; but also what plenty of
Fish there Gonzal. Ferd^n. Ovied. de Region. Septentrional. and Cardan. de
varietat. l. 7. c. 37. and Dithmar. Blefken. descript. Island.
abounds in the frozen Countries, for the great heat and fatness of the Waters;
and chiefly that upon the slimy and hot Land of Egypt, there are yet some
bloody and perfect Land-wights (as Hares Card. Subt. lib. 2.
and Goats, etc.) so made and fashioned.

But because afterward the well-mingled and fat fine Stuff, and the strong
working Heat failed, (as it must needs in time) and yet the great Lord would
have the continual flitting, change, and succession hold; The same two fit
Causes were duly kept, by continual succession P. Bonus Margar. pretio^. c. 25.
within the Bodies of perfect Wights, (the Stuff in the She, and the Heat in
Both) yea, and as far as need required, in seeded Plants also.

Now we must understand as well, that this heavenly Soul, (which when it is so
clothed with that windy Body, is called Spirit) not only moves, and works
with his Heat, but also Fortun. Licde vita l. 2. c. 11 and Marc. Paling. in
Libra.
for Food wastes the Stuff: for nothing that is made, is able to bear up his
state and being, without his proper and like food and sustenance. Then, as our
gross Fire here below Rob. Fludd in Macrocosm. tract. 1. l. 6. c. 8.
feeds upon Weather and Wind, called Air, as upon his likest meat; And as it,
in his due place, is too thin and scattered, spreading the Fire so far as it
follows his Food, until at last it vanishes to nothing, unless it be
plentifully heaped and crowded up together, and so kept in a narrow shell of
Water, which is called Oil or Fatness: Even so it is between the fine starry
Fire, and his like Food, the fine Fat of Ether: for that cause, besides the
Divine Purpose above set, it comes down in post into these Quarters, to find
and dress himself store of meat, as appears by his tarrying; for as soon as
his Food is spent, he flies away as fast, and leaves his House at six or
sevens uncared for. -- I was about to tell you the Cause of the diverse sorts
and suits of these lower Creatures, but that there was a great puff of Matter
came between and swept me away; which now being passed over, I will go forward.

Then if the suffering Joachim. Curaeus de sens. and sensib. l. 2 c. 23. and
Leo Hebraeus de Amor. Dial. 2. and Hermes in Min. Mundi.
Stuff be Gross, Foul and Tough, and the making Heat very Small and Easy, as
it is within and under the Ground, things are made which they call Metals, or
better by the Arabic word, Minerals, Id quod quiescit simplicius est
virescente, and virescens vivente, vivens denique eo quod loqui potest. Phys.
H^b. in p. 111.
little broken, altered or changed, but the gross Beginnings, Earth and Water,
(Earth especially) rule still; and the Life and Soul, as it were, in a dark
dungeon, fast shut up and chained, is not able to stir and show it self at all.
When the Stuff is Finer and Softer, with greater Heat upon it, there will arise
a rooted and growing thing called a Plant, better mingled, and smaller and
further broken from the low and foul Beginnings, and the Life of Heaven shall
have more scope, because Wind [or Air] and Water, (and yet Water chiefly)
swayeth the Matter.

But if the Soul be yet more mighty, and the Stuff yet finer, he is able (Air
and Fire, but that above this exalted) to show himself a quicker Workman, and
to make yet a finer piece of Work, moving forward, and by mighty sense
perceiving. But by reason these two Causes, passing by those degrees, do so
mount and rise at last, there is an excellent and fiery kind contrived, even
Our kind, I mean, most thoroughly, and fair and finely wrought, even so Fat
indeed, Card. Subt. l. 5. in p. 197. and Fernel. de abdit. rerum cause. l. 1. c.
3. and Fort. Licet. de vita, l. 2. c. 12.
that he may not easily seem made at all of these All-making Seeds, the four
Beginnings: whence it is, that when a Corpse is consumed with Fire, there are
found scarce Card. Subt. l. 11. in p. 449.
six Ounces of clean Earth remaining; which fineness of Body gives occasion to
the greatest freedom and quickness of the Soul, and ability to perform (as his
duty of Life) Moving and Perceiving; yea, and shall I put in Understanding
also? for albeit GOD has inbreathed us with another more fine and clean Mover
called St. Alb^ns lib. 4. de Aug. Scient. c. 2.
Mind, for a special and Divine purpose, yet that Mind as well as the Soul
above, is all one of it self in all places, and works diversely according to
those diverse places, as we shall see more at large hereafter.

Then you see all the differences of the four great Heads or Kinds, which
contain all things: yea, and of many lesser degrees and steps, lying within
every one of these, which I named not before; as also of sundry sorts (not
worth the naming) of Doubtful and Middle things, touching and partaking on each
side of the four great ones, (as between the first two, Stones budding like
Herbs Card. varietat. l. 5. c. 19. and Fr. St. Albans Not. Hist. Cent. 7. Ex. 9.
in the Scottish Sea; between Plants and Beasts, Arist. Hist. Animal. l. 1. c.
1. and Card. Subt. l. 10.
the Sponge: Apes, or rather hairy Wildmen, between Arist. Hist. Anim. l. 2. c.
8.
Beasts and Us;) to proceed from the diverse mixtures of the Bodies. If you
cannot quickly perceive the Matter, behold at once the outward Shapes and
Fashions, as they here go down a short pair of Stairs before you.

Do you not see Man alone, through his exceeding fine and light Body Arist. de
part. Anim. l. 2. c. 7. and Selva di vary lezzioni, di Piet: Messia di
siviglio tradot, etc. par. 1. c. 9.
carried up and mounted with a mighty heat of Heaven, of an upright stature,
and carriage of himself, that this Divine Wit might be free from the clog of
Flesh? when other Wights, from the contrary Cause (which the gross and earthly
Leavings [or Excrements] of Hair, Horn, Hoof, and such like, declare) are quite
otherwise disposed, as we see, toward the Ground, their like Companion: and so
the less hot and fine they be, that is, the liker the Earth, the nearer they
bend unto her, being less of stature still, and after that many-footed, to
support them, but at length Footless and grovelling, until it come to their
Heads downward; and there it stays not, but passes quite over, and
degenerates from Wights to Plants; And from thence, if I might tarry about it,
I would send them down still, through all the steps of them and Minerals, until
they came to the main Rest and Stay, from whence they all sprang, clean Earth
and Water.

But I think it be now high time to take my leave of these Philosophers, and to
set forward as soon as I have packt up my Stuff round together, especially the
best and most precious Things.

Then, we gather by that enlarged Speech, one chief and notable Rule in
Learning; that the Cor. Agrid. de Occ. Phil. l. 1. c. 10.
Shape, Nature, Being, Perfection, and all the difference in all things here
below, springs from the Mixture and Fort. Licet. de vit. l. 2. c. 2. and Leo:
Heb. Dial. 2. de Amore.
Temper of the Stuff and Beginnings: The Doing, Making, and Working-Cause that
Makes, Mingles, Brocheth and sets all a running, to be a piece of the finer
part of the whole, parted, and packt up together in the SUN: Hipp. lib. (...).
and ^endivog. de Sulp. in p. 12.
Of which finer part, some remaining still in the Raw and rude Stuff, secretly
hid and placed, othersome more freely, in the half-made Stuff, called Seed; and
in finer Seed yet more lively; and in Man most at liberty, excepting where I
said it was free indeed from all kind of Body: And yet all these but one and
the self-same thing called Soul, Life, Heavenly and Natural Heat, etc.

This meant Divine Hippocrates, when he says, Lib. 1. de Diaet. and Severin.
Danus Idae^ med. Phil. c 8.
Naught is made, and nothing perishes, but all are altered and changed up and
down by Mingling: And again, Lib. de Hum. Not. vide insuper Ocell. Luc. c. 1.
and Phil. Jud. lib. de incorrupt. mund. and Her. Trism. l. 18. (...). and
Macrob. in Some. Scip. l. 2. c. 12. Franc. St. Albans Not. Hist. Cent. 1. Exp.
ult. and Sen. de benefic. l. 5. c. 8. Epist. 36. and Nuisement du sell, etc. l.
5. c. 1. Dr. Hackwell of the Power and Providence of God, lib. 1. c. 4. sect.
1. and M. Aurel. medit. l. 10 sect. 7, etc. and Plotin. Ennead. 4. l. 7. c. 14.
That no Wight can die, unless all fall; wherein he is most agreeable, and
jumpeth even with these Grounds and Rules, and with the whole Web of our
Philosophy. If any man doubt of the other two, Plato and Aristotle, let him
read their Books with heed, and he shall find them where they speak
naturally, and by the light of humane Reason, to draw still toward this one
head and point of Truth: though they seem to stray sometimes, to the infinite
Variety of divers-natured and conditioned Stars above, causing the like endless
odds and difference of all things. Let us now, I say, set forward in our first
days Journey to Long Life, unfolding first What it is, and the Cause thereof,
and lastly the Common and high way to it.

It seems hard for a Man to appoint what bounds of Life are large and long
enough for BLISS, unless GOD (who knows best, both the measure of Happiness
fit for us, and the race of Time meet for it) had first set and marked them. So
that the greatest Age and furthest Time that the lustiest Men, and best
disposed Bodies, both by kind and diet, have at any time reached and lived,
may well, by the grant and good will of our great Landlord, be set the Bounds,
Stint and End of Life, large enough to hold all the Bliss meet for Mankind,
and the Mark which we may all aim and level our endeavors at, yea and with sure
hope to hit and reach it, and no further, is about an hundred and fifty years,
as you shall hear anon.

Now, if there do three Causes meet to the making up of Things, and thereon
leans all their Being, the Stuff, the Mover, and the Meat of the Mover, which
is the Fatness of the Stuff; then, sure, the cause of their long Being and
Continuance in their Estate can be nothing else, but the favor and goodness of
those three Causes.

The Soul and Heat of Heaven is good and favorable to Wights, (to let the rest
go, far more dark, and further off my Purpose) when she pours her self
plentifully upon them; for there can be no other odds in one and the self-same
thing in all places. But the Fat Food of Life, (which they call the first
Moisture, and the finest piece of all the Seed lying hid and unseen in the
sound parts of Wights, and yet by skill to be fetched out, and set before us)
must not only be plentiful and great in store, to match the feeding Soul, but
also Fast and Fine, that by his Fineness he may be both friendly and like to
Life, and Aerie, or rather Aetherial (we must Utrunque omnino durum, sed usu
mollienda nobis verba sunt. Cicer. de Not. D^or. l. 1.
wear these Words with handling) to keep himself, both in Cold and Heat
flowing: and that through his Fastness or Closeness, (which they call in Latin
densum or solidum) that is, through his much Stuff in a narrow room, he may be
more lasting, and fit to continue. Now the Stuff and Body is best, when it is
Fast and Fine also; one to hold and hang long together; and that other to give
free scope without stopping or let, unto the continual and swift race of Life.

Then, to make a sum of all, P. Palmar. in lap. Philos. dogmat. c. 14.
The Cause of long Life, is a fast fine Body, sprinkled and seasoned with
muchlike first Moisture, and store of heavenly Heat: If this Matter needed any
further proof, I could easily, by cutting up the Nature of Things, so lay it
open before you, as your own Eyes should witness and see the same; But if it
need to some, they shall see something, and that sufficient to content them.

For the first, De Longit. and brevit. v. tae, c. 1. and 2.
Aristotle says, and we find it true by Experience, that they live longest in
hot Countries for the Dry, Sound, Fast and Fine Bodies; but chiefly for their
Fineness, yielding free recourse and passage unto Life: for* Age and kindly
Death come of Rottenness, which flows from the stillness of Heat, and slackness
to salt and refresh the parts.

Touching the rest, to wit that much Heat and much good Fatness are a cause of
Long Life, mark the short life of those Wights, that either want them by kind,
as the maimed and imperfect ones; or waste them by motion, as the Arist. de
Hist. An. l. 6. c. 2 and Plin. Not. hist. lib. 10. c. 63.
Male Greyhound of Lacedaemon was, against the course of Kind, shorter lived
than the Bitch, for his pains in Hunting; and Arist. de long. and b* ev. vitae,
c. 2. and Plin. l. 10. c. 36.
the Cock*Sparrow lives but half so long as the Hen, (and yet this but three
years) for their Venery: The World is full of such Examples. And behold, again,
the Elephant, on that other side, for the great help and favor of all the
Causes, above the rest, (as may appear by their great fruits and effects in
him, that is, Strength, Bigness, and Stomach, being able to Arist. de hist.
Anim. l. 8. c 9. and Lib. 9. c. 46.
be the groundwork of a Castle of fifteen armed men, to eat nine Bushels at a
time, and to drink fourteen Tun) to endure and hold out much longer than the
rest, and to live (Aristotle is mine Author in the story) three hundred years
in all.

Now we know what Long Life is, and the Cause thereof, let us see whether all
Men reach it or no; and then which way they may reach it.

At the first all Mankind, by the will and appointment of Kind, was Sound and
Lusty, and lived long; and all the fail and corruption now adays (which falsely
seems a weak Condition of our Nature) crept in through Disorder in our selves
by little and little, and so by sowing still the like Children, it spread it
self at last, deeply rooted over all, and made it, as it were, a certain State,
Nature and Kind of Man; wherefore by good order in our Selves, it may be
reformed and brought back again unto the ancient State. But how may we prove
this? If GOD and Nature have ordained Man unto a Divine End and Bliss above the
rest, and yet some Beasts (as Cicer. Tusc. quaest. l. 3. and Cardan. de var. l.
7. c. 34.
Theophrastus for a wonder complains) live longer than our common rate, yea and
longer than any Bounds above-set; certainly we ought to do as much and more, by
the rule of Nature, and of all Right and Reason: and so we did at first, before
we fell by our default, which may be amended.

But lest I may happen to deal with some, who will neither grant the Justice of
GOD, nor yet yield to the End of Man; with some, I say, that have so far put
off all Humanity: I will bring them to Natural Causes; I will open and lay
before them, both the sorts, and suits of Wights, I mean, of Men and Beasts;
that they being a monstrous and doubtful Kind between both, that is, Beasts
within, clothed only with the outward shape of Men, may the better judge of
both (as in like case they feign of the like misshapen Monsters -- The Poets
know my meaning, it is not worth the flourish of a chaste and modest Pen) which
had in kind the more cause to live long: That seeing at last the worser Wights
to overgo us in Life, and to run to the very goal it self, and yet to have
received less cause from Nature, they may be driven by force of Reason to
yield, Macrob. Sat. l. 7. c. 5.
that we have a better Kind and worser Custom, and that we did and might live
long, but for our own fault, which may be reformed.

To begin with the Soul and Natural Heat, for his worthiness; let us see which
of them is endowed with more store of him, that is, of the chief cause of Long
Life. If we call to mind a little, we shall remember, That Man walks
upright, when the rest are thrown to the Ground, because they lack the force of
this ascending Heat, to bear up the weight of their Bodies, which we have
abundantly. But, if we leave the outward shape, and look into them, we shall
find that by the great foresight of Nature, all Wights which are Arist. Hist.
Anim. l. 1. c. 16.
Hot and full of Blood, have against the Root and Spring thereof, to cool and
temper the same, a Contrary in place and property, set: the Brain, I mean, some
more and some less, still according to the behoof and Considera in teipso, quia
Cerebro frigidissimo, Cor fontem caloris supposuit Deus. Bonavent. ser. de uno
Martyr. 4. in Ordine 16. l. de Sanct. in com. Tom. 3.
request of the Heart; Insomuch as they that have no Blood, and small Heat
within them, as not needing any Cooler, have no Brain at all. Then, by certain
race and course of Kind, if that be true which all Philosophers and Leaches
hold, that a Man Arist. hist animal. lib. 1. cap. 16. and De part. animal. and
earum causis, lib. 2. cap. 7.
has the greatest Brain of all Wights, it must needs follow that he has the
greatest store of Heat also. But enter further into them, and you shall see
Man, by how much more he goes beyond a Beast in Wit, Arist. de Resp. c. 6.
Vide Fort. Licetus de recond. aut Lucer. l. 4. c. 9. and Arist de gener. anim.
l. 2. c. 4.
so much to burn in Heat above him: for Wit springs out of the clearness of
the Body, and this out of Heat, as I will prove in his place hereafter.

Now, if this first point be done and granted, the next is quickly made, even
as one Match is made by another: It standing with the Justice of Nature that
makes naught in vain, to match this greedy Heat with store of good Meat, that
is, of Fast and Fine first Moisture, suitably; or else sure, says Heraclitus,
the Officers of Justice, the Furies, would soon apprehend her.

To be short, both this, and that, and the third likewise, to wit, a close fine
Body and all, is cleared, if it be so that a Man in making is most far and
finely mixed and broken, of all the lower Creatures, as we heard even now
Decreed in the Council of the best Philosophers: For, if naught makes but Heat,
then naught makes well but much Heat, if there be no other odds in Souls, as
was said above. And if the Beginnings be well and firmly mingled, and the
Concoction hold, they must needs gather themselves in, close together also, to
make another cause, yea and the last; for what is fast fine Oil and Fatness,
but Water (where with we flow, as our Brain declares) thoroughly mingled, and
raised into an Aerie, or rather into an Aetherial close Substance: But if you
will not stand to this Decree, then once for all Consider, and weigh but this
one Example: That albeit Man be more given Card. Subt. l. 12. in p. 468.
to Lust, than any other Wight, and thereby drying up the Body, plainly pareth
off more than any other, and weakneth all the helps of Long Life together,
(both the Moisture that knits and holds the Frame, and that which feeds our
Heat, and this and all;) and so that sum of Life which yet is due to Nature, he
pays before his Day to his own Wantonness; yet he Lives and holds out
longer than Fort. Licet. de vit. l. 2. c. 11.
almost any other: that we may easily see, that if he lived as Chastely, and in
other points as Orderly as the rest, he might far pass and overrun them all,
in this Race of Life and Continuance.

But methinks I hear them whisper, that I forget my self, and the Bounds of my
Long Life, when I make Men able to live as long, and longer than any Beast: for
to let pass the Heart and Camel, which overtake the longest life of our old Men;
sure the Elephant, as we have heard, goes far beyond the very bounds of Age:
especially the Raven, whom De Hesiod. idem asserit Plin. Not. Hist. l. 7. c.
48. and Plut. lib. cur. orac. cessant.
Euripides will have to live Nine of our Ages.

These may seem sore matters, but chiefly the last uncurable, and yet they are
indeed light and easy, and the last most of all, I mean the Raven: for if
there was never yet Man of sound Judgment and Knowledge in the ways of Nature
that allowed the Story, (and Aristotle by name De long. and brev. vit. c. 2.
condemns it, when he gives the Elephant the longest Life of all, and Man next
to him) what should we reckon of a Poets Record? Besides, does not one among
them confess himself, Hesiod. in Theog.
they are not to be believed, and held as Witnesses? Does not Plato, once a
Poet, and then a wise Philosopher, Card. lib. de Anim. immort. in p. 253.
chase them up and down in all places? and in one say, Pla. No^. ^. and D. Aug.
de Civ. l. 2. c. 14. and Lud. Vives, and Leon. Coqu^us, com. in loc.
They be besides themselves when they sit on their Muses stool, and run like a
Spring, pouring out all that comes? Are they not in all wise Men's account the
greatest Enemies to GOD, good Manners, and all right and true Knowledge, that
ever the World or the Devil bred?

But I slide too far unawares, and if we must of force receive this aged Raven,
yet perhaps there shall be no great hurt received; and I cannot see why we may
not match him with Methusalem, and some other aged Fathers in Holy Writ,
reported to have lived as many years as Nine of our Lives come to with
advantage. It is not enough to say, that which some say, those Years to be
meant for Months, and not as we account them: for albeit I know the Egyptians
reckon so (as we may see in Not. Hist. l. 7. c. 48.
Pliny, where some of them are said to live a thousand Years apiece, that is,
so many Months;) yet it is agreed among the D. Aug. de Civ. l. 14. c. 10, 11,
12, etc. and Dr. Hackwell Apol. l. 3. c. 1. and 2. and Pet. Mexia de Siviglia.
Selva di vary lez. l. 1. c. 2.
Divines, Men best skilled in these Matters, that the Jews account was
otherwise, even as we, and almost all other Nations make it. But if this
ancient Story of our old holy Man be a thing in doubt, or certainly untrue, and
to be meant of Months, yet our Aged Raven may go with it, and the Father of
that Tale together: And we may, when we will, pass to the Elephant.

Aristotle indeed is the Author of this Story, that the Elephant lives three
hundred years; How then? shall me mislike in like manner of this Man, and
refuse his Witness? I cannot tell what to say: It is a very hard matter that he
says. And again, I know that when by the power and purse of his King and
Scholar Alexander, who Lud. Vives censur. de Arist. operibus praefix. ejusdem
oper. Tom. 1. and Phil. Melancth. in vit. Arist. quim praemisit Tom. 2. operum
Arist. and G. Agricol. epist. nuncupat. ad lib. de not. eorum quae eff. e terra.
gave him eight hundred Talents of Silver, a huge sum, to that use, he heaped
up a rabble of all kind of Reports and Hear-sayes, into those Books, (thereof
by some called (...) some false and untrue Tales might creep in among them; yet
I owe much to that Man's worthiness; and again, the Books have ever held the
place of a true Record: And besides, this matter of the Elephant, Elephanto
bell uarum nulla prudentio. Cicer. de Not. D or. l. 1.
both for the fore*vouched Causes, and for his Wit and Manners, somewhat near
our Nature, may reasonably well agree with the sound of Reason.

How then? I say again, Methinks I feel (...). Soc. ap. Plat. Hipp. min. in
fine.
my Mind ebb and flow within me: and yet suppose it true that the Beast
lives so many years. The Islanders Card. Subt. l. 21. in p. 712.
of Zeil near Calecut, and the Inhabitants of the Hill Pomp. Mela l. 2. c. 2.
and Jul. Solinus Polyh. c. 21. and Lucian in Macrob. in p. 781.
Atho, both of them commonly and usually reach our appointed time of one
hundred and fifty Years, by the favor of the Air only, and Soil where they
dwell, taking besides, for ought I can know, the common race and course of the
World: That we may lawfully deem, if they lived as chastely as the Elephant, who
comes but once in two Coi^um triennio interposito repetunt. Arist. hist. anim.
l. 5. c. 14.
years to Venery, and followed his other good Orders of Life as well, that they
might easily draw forth their age longer, and come to the days of the
Elephant. For as we in our less happy Soils, by our own ill Diet and crooked
Custom, have cut off and lost the better half of our Time; so it may seem of
them: for we must not think, in this disorder of the World, that any Man
fulfilleth the time of Nature, but all are swept away with the blast of
untimely Death.

But it may chance that long race of Life, which the Author makes the Beast to
run, was no common and ordinary course in that Kind, but some odd and rare
Example; And then no doubt, as there be some amongst us, which by their
diligence, and I know not by what good hap, Dithmarus Blefk. descript. Island,
in p. 33. and Joh. de Temporibus vixit annos 361. mortuus in Gallia an. 1139.
Jean Neucleras Chronograph. vol. 2. Gener. 38. in p. 830.
double the common Term; so they be not wanting in those places, which sometime
prove aged Men, and which live twice as long as the common sort, that is, as
long as the Elephant. Wherefore, for all this, or ought else that can be cast
against us, let us conclude, That Lucian. in Macrob.
Man, if he kept the good and kindly Diet and Order of Life, which other Wights
void of Reason, by the true and certain guide of Nature, keep, having more
helps and means unto it, might live longer than any of them, yea, and with ease
reach the bounds of Long Life appointed, and perhaps further also: but we have
staid in the midst, and mean, as it were, because it seems to obey the secret
Will of GOD the better, and yet withal to fulfill the whole desire of Nature.

Then say you, it were good to learn the Order of Life, which Beasts do use to
keep and follow, if it were meet and seemly for Men to lead a Beastly Life: Do
not so take the meaning of a good thing, with the snare of a foul and filthy
word: A Man is not one and single, as they be, but double, and two things; and
partly a Wight, nay a Beast (be it spoken with reverence) and partly a more
divine thing: and therefore, albeit according to his Divine Part and Reason, he
ought to follow the Divine Pattern, and Form of Life above-set; yet as he is a
Wight, and an earthly Creature also, it is not uncomely, Tener chaulds les
pieds and la test, au dem^urant viver en b^st^, Mich. de Mo^^. Essaii. l. 2.
c. 12. in p. 466.
nay it is necessary to do as they do after a sort: And if it were altogether
so, it were better, and more agreeable with the Will of Nature, who knows
best what belongs to Life, that is, unto her self: for Kind leads them still
after one due and orderly manner, when great variety of Wit and Device guides
us against Minerva's will, as they say, and quite besides the way of Nature,
unto a Thousand by and foreign Customs, which is the only Cause of our
degeneration from our ancient and first whole and sound Estate.

Wherefore, if a company of picked and lusty Men and Women would agree to live
together in some wild, open, clear and sweet Air, scatteredly like a Country
Village, and not like a close and smothered City, (which one thing prevents a
thousand Diseases and Deaths alone) and to lie together to the right end of
Nature, that is, for Children, Ocell. Luc. c. 4. in p. 47.
and not for Pleasures sake, (for this was made a Spur to the right purpose)
and in as seldom and due a course, as the better sort of Beasts, (the ready
way to preserve Life and fore-stall Diseases, but specially to get good
Children;) and to bring up their Children in Labor and Hardship, Card. Subt.
l. 12. in p. 474.
mingled with much Mirth and Sleep together (no small helps to Long Life and
Health, as the Dieters themselves confess and know:) But for this Meat and Diet
(wherein those Leaches offend and fail greatly) if they would consent to take
no Physic, but in great danger cast in by misfortune, (in which case the
Beasts do not want their Remedies) never to drink Wine, the shortner of Life;
and to be short, not take any Meat and Drink that the fire has touched, (for
it Card. Subt. l. 2. in p. 77.
sunders the Fine from the Gross, that is, the best from the worst, which we
now choose) but as Nature has left them, and other Wights use them. If these
things, I say, were duly kept and performed, I am fully persuaded within three
or four Generations and Offsprings, it would come to pass, that we should see
this People prove a Nation of Giants, not only passing the age of Beasts, and
the bounds of Long Life afore-set, but wholly recovering and restoring all the
Blessings of the first estate of Body.

And this I gather, not by our own contrary Customs only, taking effects as
cross and contrary, but chiefly by the Life and Use of Giants and lusty People
in times past, and some other yet at this day; which was and is the very
self-same race and course which I described.

And sure for the Inhabitants of Zeil and Atbo, which I brought in even now,
filling the Term of our Long Life, although I am not certain of their use and
custom, and where Card. Subt. l. 21. in p. 712.
I find the Story, I know the Cause is laid upon the goodliness of the Soil in
the first, (for it is thought to be the blessed Paradise) and upon the goodness
of the Air in the next, for the height of the Hill, Hom. Odyss. 6. de Olymp.
and Card. Cusan. Ex. l. 5. in p. 509.
without all Wind and Rain, two great troubles of Men's bodies: yet I am led to
think, that they do keep the same orderly and kindly form and rule of Life, or,
at the least, do draw near unto it: because albeit clean Air, by cleaning and
quickening the Spirits, and searching the Body, be no little help and comfort in
this Journey; (As we shall easily see, if we mark, Jo. Bicker Hermes Rediv. c.
20.
how amongst all Creatures, those that lead their lives in the cleaner Element
do live the longer; Fish than Worms; and Land-Wights than These; and Winged
ones, yet longer, because the higher, the better Air still: Insomuch that Card.
Subt. l. 12. in p. 474. and Marc. Paling. in Libra.
Cardan dares think, that if any dwell in Ether, as Plato's heirs affirm, they
live for ever:) yet if ill Diet went withal, it would mar as much as the
other made, and greatly cloy and hinder, yea, and cut short the race of their
Long Life.

I am of the same mind for all other odd and private Persons of great Age and
Long Life recorded; (as for some Italians in Not. histl. 7. c. 48. See S.
Alban. hist. Vit. and Mort. in p. 130. and 155. and Sir W. Rawleigh History of
the world, l. 1. c. 5. s^ct 5.
Pliny's time registered of one hundred and forty years, and such other aged Men
in Authors) a Man might let in here a Sea of Examples, but I must be short.
Neither would I name King Arganthon, Plin. l. 7. c. 48. and Cic. de Senect.
that lived a hundred and twenty years, and reigned eighty thereof; nor yet
that old Knight of our Country, Sir -- St. Albans hist. Vit. and Mort. Vid.
Purchase his Pilgrimage, l. 5. c. 8. in p. 538.
Allington, yet twenty years older, but that it is so strange in Nobility: that
they came as near unto that kindly course of Life, as unto the goal and end of
Long Life.

Then we see at length, that it is not impossible, as they say, but an ordinary
and easy matter to strengthen the weak Nature of Mankind, to enlarge the
straits of his Life, and to lead him on still to the ancient Age, and Long Life
appointed.

But I see them start and say, that like as Cicer. ad Attic. l. 2. c. 1.
Cato in Affairs of State, used to give Counsel (unwisely, though never so
well) as if he had been in Plato's Commonwealth, and not in the Dregs of
Romulus: so I, in matter of Diet, and order of Body, speak as if we lived in
the former Golden Age, which, as Poets feign, was under Saturn, and not in the
corruption of Jupiters Kingdom: and that since the World, as it now goes,
cannot be brought, without a kind of Divine Power, to raze out the old, and
make a new World, (and that in long time) unto the first and kindly custom of
Life; I must, if I mean to do wisely, take the Men as I find them, and prove
that all such weakness, as is now among them, may by Man's endeavor and skill of
Healing, be upholden and led forth unto those bounds, and that end of Long Life
afore-set.

Albeit I have done as much as reasonably may be required at my hands, in this
place, which was allotted out to show the possibility of the Matter; yet
because I count it better, by plainness of speech to do good, which is the end
of my Writing, than by subtileness of Argument to obtain my purpose; I will
come unto you, and venture upon that Point also, be it never so hard and
desperate, hoping, not that Fortune will favor bold Men, but GOD good Men.

Then, as there are three Causes of Life and Being: the Life and Soul it self;
and his Food the first Moisture; and the frame and temper of the Body that
holds them both: so let us take them all in order, and see how they may be
preserved and kept together, beginning first with the last, because it is least
and lightest.

It is enacted by the Law of Nature, Plat. in Tim. sub finem. Paracels. de modo
pharmacand. tractat. 1. Tom. 5. in p. 251.
That no Body, mixed or single, shall or may live and preserve his estate and
being, without two helps or stays, that is, Meat and Exercise, each like his
Kind, and of his Nature: As in lone and simple, or subtle Bodies, (for it is
plain in the first row, especially if they be Living, as they term them, though
all things indeed have Life and Soul, as we heard above) the Hot ones crave
fiery Meat and moving Exercise, Moist ones, as Wind and Water, flowing Food and
Exercise; Cold and Dry things like and Earthly Sustenance, and Rest for
Exercise, which is also like, and preserves their State and Being.

But if all lone and simple things are within the Compass of this Law, then
Heaven may not be free nor exempted; and they speak not altogether fondly that
say, the Stars Card. Cusan. l. de venat. sap. c. 1. in p. 299. and Cicer. de
Not. Deor. l. 2. and Dr. Hackwell Apol. of power, etc. l. 2. c. 4. sect. 1. and
Manil. Ast. l. 1. and Ptol. in lib. (...). sive quadripart. ap. Coel. Rhod. l.
c. 13. and Sen. Not. quoest. l. 6. c. 16. and. Plin. Not. hist. l. 2. c. 9. and
Macrob. in Some. Scip. l. 2. c. 10. and Sat. l. 1. c. 23. and Gu^l. Men's aur.
veller. l. 1. c. 11. T. C. Vol. 5. in p. 358.
feed upon the Sea, and for that cause, by good advice of Nature, the Ocean so
rightly placed under the course and walk of the Sun: for although the Water be
yet so far off and unlike them, yet their power and strength is such, as they
are able by their labor, easily to refine it, and turn it first into Air, and
then into Ether, a weaker like thing, and their proper food.

That this is so, the hungry Souls (which are but Imps slipped off the Heavenly
Body) make it plain here below unto us, when we see them still unwilling to
tarry, and unable to live amongst us without Meat; as they bewray themselves by
the plain expense and waste of the first moisture: Nay, take this one away, if
you will mark well, and all lies on the Ground; Then there is an old coyl and
fighting here below, for Meat and Exercise, that is, for life and being, (which
makes the cause of all action and doing, rest and change, and of all things:)
and every one runs easily and gladly to his like, and if his strength be
never so little greater, he subdues, digests, and turns him into his own
Nature, and is strengthened by him: But if he miss of his like food at hand, and
be much stronger, he dares encounter, and is able to quell unlike things also;
as I said of the Stars, the mightiest things (giving Might to all things) in
the World. But in case the unlikes and contraries be of equal power, and
matches, then neither devoureth and consumes other, but both are marred,
dulled and weakened, which they call Consent, and Temper and Mixture. For
Example, Fire extreme hot and somewhat dry withal, and Water very cold and
somewhat wet, meeting together in even powers and proportions of strength are
both impaired, but neither lost and destroyed: But if this Water chance by the
heat of Heaven to be taken in hand, and turned into Aerie and fat substance;
though there be now two Moistures set against the drought of Fire, yet because
of the heat of Weather and Heaven abounding, it is now become partly like to
Fire, and friendly, or at least his weaker Foe and Enemy, yielding himself for
Food unto it, and increasing his strength and Nature: But if, on the other
side, Air, unto his exceeding Moisture, matching the drought of Fire, get some
strength and watery coldness (as appears in a thick and foggy weather) it is
able easily to overcome the Fire, and eat him up.

Now for a mixed Body (which is a Aver. apud Joach. Curaeum l. 2. de sens. and
sensib. c. 19. in p. 168.
consent and dulling the four first famous Enemies, made and kept in tune and
awe, by the force and skill of an heavenly and natural Heat upon them) it has
the same reason; for when, either for lack of Meat, or driven by Violence, this
Heat departs, the friends begin to stir and fight for Food and Freedom, until
some one stands out above the rest, and recovers some part of his former Power,
(which puts those that can feel to pain, and breeds Diseases) and at last gets
the whole Lordship and rule over all, and turns them all into his own Nature;
Then the old consent, knot and body, is broken, lost and spoiled; and a new
made and gotten, still going downward, until they return to Earth, from whence
they all came; for Example, and that near home; for the fiery frame of Man's
Body, Joach. Cur. de sens. and s^nsib. l. 2. c. 24. in p. 175.
when the Soul for want of food fails and flits away, they straight retire, and
run back in order; first Fire waxes moist and lukewarm, supt up with Air; and
this, soon after, thick and cold, that is, Waterish; and Water muddy, still
more and more thick and dry, till at last it be moist, dry and heavy, and all
be devoured and brought to Ocell. Luc. c. 1. in p. 19.
Earth, from whence they all set forth before.

And this is natural Dissolution, and Death of our Bodies, forcible Death and
Destruction is by Diseases, (to bar out other force, which no man can warrant)
when either Breath or Meat, distempered in some quality, do feed and nourish
some one their like beginning above the rest, and make him strong and able to
vanquish them, and bring in the Jarre of that Musical Consent aforesaid: As
when by waterish Meat and Air, all the beginnings are changed into Water, the
Hot and Dry, into a fiery temper, and so forth; or else when the Body wants the
Exercise, which is owing and due unto him; which is quick Motion, to preserve
the Air and Fire in the fine frame and temper of Man, from the sloth and
idleness of the slow and rusty Beginnings.

By which grounds laid, we see the way to uphold the temper of our Body, made
plain and easy; No more but to feed and cherish it with clean and temperate
Air and Meat continually: that all the Beginnings served and fed alike, one may
not be more proud, strong and able than another, to subdue the rest, and
overthrow the state. And thereof it is that Poison kills, is, because it is
extreme Cold and Dry, (for we may shut out all Rotten, as also Fiery and Watery
Tempers, from the name of Poison) feeding and strengthening the Dregs, but
devouring the fine Liquor of the Body, wherein the Life stands, when as the
same Poison nourishes and maintains the like framed and so tempered Body, as
venomous Juyces the like Plants, and these noisome Beasts, as one of these
another. Nay, which is very strange, I have read of such natured Card. Var. l.
8. c. 40. Vide Coel. Rhod. l. 11. c. 13. and Purch. Pilgrim. l. 5. c. 3. in p.
537. and Cor. Agrip. de Occ. Phil. l. 1. c. 19. in p. 39. and Purch. Pilgrim.
vol. 2. p. 1495. of the Sultan of Cambaya.
Men of India, that used to eat Toads and Vipers: And Albertus says he saw a
Girl of three years old, that fed greedily upon Spiders, and was never hurt,
but liked greatly with it.

Do not think it any Discord, when I said above Fast-fineness, and now
Temperateness upholds the Body; all is one. It cannot be Fast, unless the Earth
and Water be well and evenly mixed; nor Fine, except Fire and Air bear as good a
stroke of rule among them.

But you will say, that Nature has given her Creatures a walk of course, not
to stand still in one stay and place for ever, but to move and walk up and
down, to and fro, from one side to another; that is, as it was said before, GOD
has made a changeable World; and therefore this frame and building of Man's
Body, cannot ever hold and hang together, but must needs one day be loosened,
and fall asunder. -- I grant it must be so, by the course of Nature, because to
fulfill the Will of her Lord, she has appointed a stronger means and cause to
work it; either the want and absence of the inward Friendship, and keeping of
the Soul in those which the common sort call Living things; or, in the rest,
the presence of some ravenous and spoiling Enemy: But if cunning Art and Skill
(which by the help of Nature, is above the course of Nature) by knowledge of
the due Food for Life, and defense against the Enemy, may be able to defend the
one, and keep off the other; then, no doubt, the frame and temper of both Dead
and Quick may last for ever.

The way is found already, and known by certain and often proof for the one; I
mean, that Art has often, by keeping off the spoiling Enemy with a strong
Contrary, preserved and upheld a dead thing of slippery state, and soon decay,
for ever: as a Paracels. de Terpertin. c. 1. Tom 7. in p. 83. Vide Beguin.
Ty^oc. chym. c. 6. in p. 168. and Stow Survey of Land. Billingsgate Ward, in p.
393. and R^phael. Volat. l. 33. c. de Coe^* and Terr. Progen, ap. Fortun.
L^^et. de recoad. aut Luc. l. 1. c. 11. and Naucler. Chronog. vol. 2. gener.
36. and Bernardin. Corium vit. de gli Imper. vit. di H^nr. 2. in p. 555.
Corpse by Balm, or Water of Salt, Timber by the Oil of Parac. lib. de conser.
r^r. not. Tom. 6. in p. 211.
Brimstone, and such like: why then should the next prove impossible? to wit,
by giving store of fit Food still to Life and natural Heat, (for the other two
helps of Meat and Exercise are easy) to under-shore, and keep upright our weak
and falling frame for ever? The Greeks hold, that our natural Heat and Life,
because it feeds upon and washes the most fine and unseen Oil (called first
Moisture) daily, which no Food of Air or Meat is fit and fine enough to repair,
must needs faint and fail withal, and cannot be restored: Let us see what may
be said to this, yea and bend all our force unto it; for this is all.

The Soul and Life, and Natural Heat of things, is often and fitly compared and
likened unto the other gross and fierce, hot and dry Body, called Fire; to feed
and maintain this, his weak Like, that is, Air, cannot be wanting: and because
it, in his due place, is too thin and scattered, dividing the Fire to naught in
pursuit of his Food and Sustenance, it must needs by heaps be crowded up in a
shell of Water, called Oil or Fat, as we heard before. In that Fight and
Battle, if much Heat and Oil meet together, the work is great and busy, and
thereout arises a smoke, as a leaving of the Meat, and the Fire follows as far
as the Smoke has any Fatness, which makes a flame.

Albeit the Nature of Fire be, as long as he has Food enough to crave no great
Exercise, and will last well in a close place, card. Subt. l. 2. in. p. 64.
as under Ashes, etc. yet a Flame being more than Fire, (a hot Smoke or Breath
besides) desires open and clean Air, both to receive the think refuse, which
else would choke him; as also for his like weaker Food, that he be not starved:
which two are enough, besides a little Motion for his Exercise. That we may
marvel as those Men Arist. lib. de* R^spirat. c. 4.
which bring in Cooling for another needful thing in this business, whereas the
kind of Fire and Air abhor Cooling as his contrary; as it is engraven in the
Nature of all things, still to fly from that which hurts it.

Now in like manner to come to the purpose, if the Fire of Life and Natural
Heat be not great, a little fine Oil and first Moisture will serve to feed it,
and out of that slack working small store of refuse Breath and Smoke arises,
to make any need of fresh and open Air to cleanse and feed it, as appears by
those Wights, which are able to live in their places without help of Wind,
Breath and Air: The little parted Vermin (called in Latin Insecta) anywhere;
and Fish in the Water, Senec. not. quaest. l. 3. c. 19. and Athen. Deipnos. l.
8.
nay in the sound Earth sometimes; and Toads in close Rocks, as Lib. de Anim.
subterran prope finem.
Agricola; and Flies in the most fierce Miners fire, as Hist. Anim. l. 5. c.
19. Vid. Card. Subt. l. 9. in p. 367. and Ph l. Jud. lib. de G^gant. and Sen
not. quaest. l. 5. c. 6. and Cic^r. de not. Deor. l. 1. and Phil. de Anim.
prop. c. 23. de Cynclis and Pyraustis.
Aristotle reports. But when that Heat on the other side, is great and lively
like a Flame, as in the hotter St. Alban. Not. Hist Cent. 7. Exp 96.
Fish, and other; no Wight can want fresh Air and fine Breath, both by his
clearness to purge, and his weaker likeness to nourish the Ethereal Smoke, and
Spirit that carries it: Now this, no more than a Flame, needs cooling to
preserve his Being, but to temper a kind of hid proportion, fit for Wit and
weighty Perceiving, which I said before, the Brain and not the Air performed.

That Ether is stronger than Air, and able to consume it, it is plain in Reason
by his Warmth and Moistness, passing Air in his own Nature; and yet gross and
thick Air, as bent toward enmity and contrariety with it, will stand in combat
against it, and overcome it: And thence it is, that in deep Mine-pits and Caves
under ground, where the Air is thick, corrupt and unkind, for want of flowing,
no Wight nor Light can draw Breath and live, unless by sly device the way be
found to move and nourish the same Air and make it kindly.

Then to draw near the Matter; If the Stars do feed on Ether, and this upon
clean and spotless Air, as on the weaker Likes; and our Soul and Life is of a
starry kind; even a slip and spark thereof, as is aforesaid, then it follows,
That to feed our Ether Anonym. Enchi. Phys. rest. tut. can. 163, and 164.
, the carrier of our Soul, good Air which is round about us, will serve the
turn; but to nourish Life and Heat it self, Ether it self must be the Food,
even this Body which is so high, and so far past our reach, except this Spark
of heavenly Fire, were able like the whole Body, and Spring above, by his power
over our Meats, to turn the Water, first into Breath, and this into Ether;
which it is not, and can go no further than to Air, and to make a common Oil
and Fatness, fit to nourish an Elemental, as they term it, but not an Heavenly
Fire.

Where then shall our Life find Food and Sustenance, say you, fit to bear it
up, and maintain his Being? In that fine Oil, and unseen first Fat and
Moisture? And call you that Ethereal? how can that which was once Seed, and
before that Blood, and first of all a Plant, become a Body so fine, clean and
Ethereal? especially when one weak Star, a soft Fire of Heaven, is not able to
make so fine a Work, so far and highly sundred? -- I marry, this is the Secret
and Depth of all, which because the Greeks never sounded, I do not marvel if
the means to preserve Life did escape them. But let us shut out Envy, and help
them in this helpless Matter; yea, although we be driven to open the things
that have lain long hid, and covered long with great Darkness.

When our Life in the lusting parts is by the Bellows of Thought stirred up and
moved unto Work, it sends forth out of every part, the hot natural Spirits
and Breath of Begetting, P^t. Sev. ^ Dan. Ideae Med. Phil. c. 8. in p. 102,
103, 104.
clothed with the shell of Seed, cut out from the dewy part of our Meat, ready
to be turned into our Body; (or at least, already and now newly turned) and not
from the Refuse and Leaving of it, Arist. de genesis anim. l. 1. c. 18. and
Paracels. lib. de genesis homin. To. 8. in p. 11.
as some say, when I could show it, if time would suffer, Hippoc. lib. (...).
princip.
the best Juice in all the Body.

This is the furthest and finest Workmanship of our Meat and Food of Body, the
very beginning and first Stuff of that fine Oil the Food of Life, after that
remaining forty days in heat, before it come to perfection, being wrought, as
we know, with the double natural heat of the begetting Breath and Womb, forty
days before it be fully framed and fashioned into the Form and Shape of a Man,
ready to draw Food and Nourishment (be it Milk or Menstrue, received by Mouth
or Navel, I cannot stand to Reason) from the Mother, to the increase of the
tough or sounder parts: But the first Moisture is now at his full growth and
perfection, and from thence feeds Life, being unfed it self, and wastes
daily, against the grounds and rules of Physic: for the Child has now
received all that the Workman can, and is put over for the rest, which is his
Nourishment, unto his Mothers payment; but what has she to give unto the food
of Life? naught, as I showed, else we might live for ever.

Then we see what the first Moisture is, and how it excels the Food of the
Body, and why it cannot be maintained by it, because it is the most fine and
aerie piece (for the rest go every one his own way, to make his own part from
whence he came) of all the Seed mingled, wrought, purged, raised and refined,
and then closely thickened, and driven up close together, forty times more and
above our Meat, which in one day is ended, and ready to be turned, and
therefore unfit in any wise to increase and cleave to our first Moisture, the
Food of Life, even as unmeet for all the world, as Water is to other Oil and
Fatness.

And by this, to come to the point, we have a plain Pattern (if we be Wise and
Careful) and way to work the great Mystery of Adjournment of Life; for if it be
so as I proved above, that all the Moisture of the Matter lies in the
maintenance of our Natural Heat; and it, as our Men, and all Reason teaches,
follows the steps of common Fire, waxes and waneth, is quick and faint,
according to the store of his Food and first Moisture; then sure if we can make
an Oil as fine and close as this, nay in all points all one with this, it will
easily mingle and join with our first Moisture, and so feed, nourish and
encreafe it, and Life withal; even in as good and plain Reason, as the same
Oil dropped in still into the Fire, augments both Food and Flame together: yea,
put case the same natural Fire of ours, should not only pair his strength, for
lack of Meat, and slack his force, but abate of bigness also, as some
Physicians hold, yet there were no great hurt done; for this second spark and
slip of the great and common Fire of Nature, being a piece of the finer part of
the whole, (which is all one in all things) and fellow to his Like in us, when
it is made free and loose in this fine and Ethereal Medicine, would restore
the Heap and mend the Matter.

But how shall we get the like fine Oil and first Moisture? the Matter is
driven so far, that there is all the hardness. I showed you the Pattern; even
as Nature got the same before you, by the like Stuff and Seed, and by the like
Heat and moving Workman: This by certain proof of all our Men is easy to be
found, even any gentle, continual, equal, and moist, that is, any rotting Heat.
But the Seed seems hard and unable to be matched, because a kind of strange
and hid proportion and temper of our Body, (which no Man by conceit and
knowledge, much less by hand and workmanship, can reach and counterfeit, no not
if he boiled all the Mixtures in all the Heats, that all the Wits in the World
could devise) made it thus after his own fashion.

Then, how if we take the same frame and temper, not by us, but by Kind
proportioned, I mean, the same Blood, Flesh and Seed, if we will, (which the
Man of Germany chooses, and commends above all, and calls it Mummia) would
it not be very natural? for if the Fernel. de abd. rerum cause. l. 2. c. ^7. in
p. 168.
Leaches hold it good, if any part about us fail in his duty, to correct and
help him with the like part of some Beast, passing in that property; as to mend
fainting Croll. de signat. int. rerum in p. 66. and Fernel. de abd. rer. cause.
l. 2. c. ult.
Lust, with the Yard of a Lusty Beast; the Womb that cannot hold, with the Womb
of a quick Conceiver; Narrow breathing, with the Lungs of a long-winded Wight,
and so forth: then consider with how much more kindly consent, we might with
our own parts finely dressed help our selves in our Diseases.

But for my part, I cannot unwinde the bottom of this great Secret of Germany;
for we mean not to make a Man, which is to be feared in that course, if his
Rule be true, but a first Moisture only: and then, since all things are made of
the same Stuff, by the same Workman, and differ but by Mingling only, it boots
not where we begin, and upon what Stuff, in stead of that Seed, if we give him
the same Mingling and form at the last, which Art is able in time to do,
because that which Kind is forced to do at once, she may do often, and so reach
the end of Nature.

What need I say more? Is not the Matter clear enough? that another fast fine
Oil and first Moisture may be made in all points like to our own, and able to
maintain or repair it, and the natural Heat together? and then that by the same
(though other easy means would serve) because it is so temperate, the Body may
be brought and held in square and temper? And so, by reason all the Causes meet
and flock together, that Life may be preserved, I dare not say for Ever, for
fear of the stroke of Destiny, which GOD has made, and will have kept, but
unto that Term, and those Bounds above-set, and beyond them also, if any Man
have ever gone beyond them.

But if it should chance any of our chosen Children, (to use the phrase of our
Family) to be unable yet for all this teaching, to take and digest this Food of
Learning, what is to be done? shall we cast them off for untoward Changelings,
as the foolish Women think? or else for Bears and Apes, as Gal. de sanitat.
tuend. l. 1.
Galen did the Germans? No, that were Inhumanity; Let us rather nourish them
still easily and gently, hoping that they will one day prove Men; and give it
out unto them, That all the most Wise and Cunning Men in the World, I mean, all
the Hosts of Hermetists, have from Age to Age ever held (but under Vails and
Shadows somewhat covertly) and taught for certain, that such a first fine Oil,
whereof I spoke, and which they call a Fifth Nature, Heaven, or, by a more fit
name Ether, is able alone to hold together the brittle state of Man very long
above the wonted race, both in Life, Health and Lustiness. Nay, for fear there
be yet some suspicion left in their Authorities, I will go further.

As many of the other side of Greece, as had traveled in these Matters, and
seen something, (though not with Eyes, but in Mind, I think) confess the same;
as (besides them which perhaps I know not) Fernelius in part, and altogether
Ficinus and Cardan, (two as wily and learned Men as any time has of late
brought forth) do openly declare in their Writings. But if this soft and easy
kind of delivery will not yet serve the turn, and they must feed their Eye as
well as their Belly, as the Proverb goes; then let them tell me, by what
diligence did S^n. E^. 58, and Lips. (...). 15, 16, 17* and Mar. F^cin. in vit.
Pla^* q^am suae verse. ^^^mittit.
Plato so order Himself and school his Body (to use his own words) as he could
be able to cause Nature to end his days at his pleasure? And by Departing upon
the same day Eighty one years after his Birth, to fulfill of purpose Nine times
Nine, the most perfect Number? Might he not have had some such Medicine? Nay,
is it not like he had, when he was in Diog. Laert. in vita Pl^^*
Egypt among the Priests and Wisemen, and brought home Learning from them?
and when he speaks so much and often in disgrace of his own Country Plato in
Charmid.
Physic, though Hippocrates himself then reigned? But it is for certain
written in diverse of our Records, that many of those wise Egyptians, the
Springs of this Water of Life, have before and since Plato, by the self-same
Water, kept themselves twice as long as Plato, if I might bring in their
Witness, or if this whole proof, (which I like full ill) were not counted by
the Art of proof unskilful.

Then let this one Example told by Card. var. l. 10. c. 50. and Hieron. Rubaeus
de distill. sect. 2. c. 2. in p. 73.
Cardan, a Man allowed among them, serve for all: That one Gallus of late,
Charles the Fifth his Physician, by this Heaven of ours, beset with Stars, (as
some do term it) that is, increased with the Spirits of Herbs, by an easy feat
put into her, preserved himself in lusty sort, until a hundred and twenty four
Years. Neither think that Mixture better than our single Oil, (though Lully,
Rupescisse; Paracelsus, and some others allow it so) but rather worse in
Reason, for too much Heat in a weak and loose Body; worse, I mean for Long
Life, by his overgreediness in eating up too fast his own and our first
Moisture: It may be better, because it is stronger against Diseases, even as
the Leaches judge between a Dunghill and a Garden Herb, for the same cause. But
I think the devise not good in either, nor agreeable to the Justice of Nature,
which more evenly weighs her Works; nor yet to the kindly skill of HERMES,
who, to the great heat of his Medicine, has a most fast, tough, and lasting
Stuff, according as we shall show in that which follows. Now it is time to
rest, we have made the first a long days Journey.

CHAP. II. Of HEALTH.
AFter a Man has ended his desire to Live, he begins to wish for Health,
without which no Life is sweet and savoury. Then let us bend our Selves that
way next, and endeavor to show the Means, (besides the Way of HERMES) how every
Man may get and keep his Health; that is, as I partly told you before, the
consent, and equal (I mean, agreeable to Kind) temper and dulling of the four
first Beginnings, the Stuff of our Bodies, for if this Knot be broken, and they
let loose toward their former liberty, they wax proud and strong, and fight,
as their Nature is, together, and put us to pain, and Let the Rule of Nature,
which they call Disease.

Then to handle one at once, as we did before, and will do still; To keep our
Health, and Body in temper, seems no such matter to me as the world would make
it, even plainly impossible, when I know that all the Ways and Entries to let
in Diseases, and distemper the same, may by small heed be stopped and fenced.

We must needs draw Breath, and eat Meat, for the causes before-alledged; and
as this is not all clean and agreeable, so Nature has her Leavings: And again,
Labor and Rest are needful; and perhaps we cannot choose but be moved in Mind
with Joy, Grief, Fear, Hope, and such like Passions, though the Stoics do deny
necessity.

By so many Ways and Gates Diseases may enter, if they be not well watched and
looked unto, which may be done in Reason, and has been done often, as they
assure us that have lived long without all Diseases and Sickness: As Not. Hist.
l. 7. c. 50.
Pliny of a Musician called Xenophilus, to have so continued for the space of
one hundred and five years together, and such like Stories are to be found
enough, if we might stay to seek them: Some are contented for all but Air and
Meat, but these they say have often seeds of Diseases lie hid in them, unable
to be foreseen or prevented: and as we find those Meats that make the finest
show (as Wine and Sugar, and such enticing Baits) to have hid in them most
hurtful dross and dregs in the bottom; so the Air, when it seems the best and
lightest, yet is sometime infected and poisoned with a venomous Breath, sent
and thrust into it, either from below, or from the Stars of Heaven; and as the
cause is hid and unknown unto us, so the hurt impossible to be warded and
prevented.

If I list to let my Speech run out at large, especially in other Men's grounds;
I could find that Division false first, (to come to Meat anon) and then, if it
were true, yet the cause of that Infection not unable to be foreseen and
warded: But I am so sorry for the fault above, that I can the better take heed
hereafter. Yet, methinks, it is a grief to hear the harmless Plot. Ennea. 2. l.
3. c. 2.
and glorious Divine things above, so defaced with Slander, and no Man make
answer for them; Then by your leave a little.

If the Stars have no Light, and so no Power but from the Sun, that most
wholesome and prosperous Creature; then they hurt him most wrongfully, and
reprove themselves very rightly. And again, if they be but a piece of the finer
part, and first Nature, as it were, of the World, (as it was declared above)
then they be the wholsomest things in the World, so far be they from poisoned
slander: Fran. Geor. Venet. de Harm. Mundi totius Cant. 1. Tom. 3. c. 8. and 9.
and Strozza Cicogna del palagio de gli incauti. Prospet. 1. l. 2. c. 4. in p.
173, 174. and Ibid. Mer. Trism.
And so, let their Lights be never so crosly mingled in their Meetings, Joan.
Picus M^rand. in Astrol. l. 3. c. 21. in p. 341.
and thereby the state of the Weather suddenly changed, and from thence our
Bodies troubled, and tumbled into Diseases, because they were not prepared and
made ready for it, Macrob. in Some. Scip. l. 1. c. 19. and Rob. de Fluctibus
Macrocosm. l. 3. tract. 1. c. 9. in p. 105, 106.
yet the things are good and prosperous, and by knowledge of the Stars, and
their Race, we may prepare our selves and prevent all: Now for the lower
Infection, it is not worth answering, when there is so much waste ground in the
Work.

Then let us pass over to that other Branch; May we not shun the luring Baits
of our Diet, and take such Meat as is most temperate and near our Nature? and
then dress the same, after the most kindly and wholesome manner, seasoning it
well with Labor, Mirth and Sleep? And to be plain, did I not show before, what
a Jewel of Health it were, to use all raw and temperate Meats? Or, because we
be Wise and Virtuous, and this Diet perhaps would change our Nature, and bring
it down toward the ground, and a Beastly kind; we may by skill dress our
Meat, if we will, and use the Fire, but not as Cooks do, (for I told you the
nature of Fire) but like Philosophers a quite contrary way, taking the best,
which is now last, and leaving that which we now take, which is the worst: A
way, I say, to strip off all grossness and foulness of Bodies, the only hurt
of themselves and us, and the Seeds of all Diseases.

I will tell you another way, which you will think strange, and yet you shall
find it true; If the Meat be temperate, as I bid you choose it, there is no
hurt can come thereby, (if you keep measure in your selves) save from the
Leavings; These, in so clear a Diet, first will be very few; But if you would
be ruled by my Counsel which Nature taught me, those few should never hurt you.
Of all the Leavings in the Body, there are three which the Liver makes most
troublesome unto us, for the rest are easily dispatched: A light and easy, or
rather a fiery Scum called Choler: A cold and heavy Mud called Melancholy, and
a third is Urine; but those two the worser. And this fault is not in
themselves, but all by reason of the needless and hurtful Bowels in our Bodies,
(as the Seedsman uses to sow good and bad together) which being of the same
kind and quality with those Humors, do hale and pull them still unto them,
(as all other parts and things do) for their food and nourishment: and so by
the narrow passages to and fro, their greediness in pulling and holding, and a
hundred such like means, subject to great mischances, have brought in as many
mischiefs; Whereas Nature, the great expeller of her Unlikes and Enemies, if
she had her free choice and liberty, would otherwise with ease, and without
hurt, expel those Leavings, especially so small a number of the better sort, in
so clean a Diet. Nay, see the malice of those Parts (those Parts are Milt, Gall
and Reins) if there be not sufficient store of other foul Meat at hand, like a
poisoned and purging Medicine, they use to draw good Juyces, and to make food
of them.

Wherefore Aristotle, the wily Spy of Nature, as if he had been made in this
matter, showing the need and use of the greater Entrails and Bowels of Wights,
says very truly and wisely, De part. anim. l. 3. c. 8.
The Heart and Liver as the Spring of Life and Food to be needful for all
Wights; adding to the hotter ones the Brain to cool, and the Lights to cleanse
the heat; staying there, as if he thought the other three unprofitable: Nay,
for one of them, De part. anim. l. 4. c. 2.
in the same Book, I ween, telling the stories of the Heart and Camel, and
giving reason why they be both so Swift, Healthful, Long-lived, and of such
other good properties above the rest, enfeoffed, voucheth in plain Terms, the
want of the fiery and scummy Gall, as a great Enemy unto them.

For the Milt, that muddy Bowel, that it may be left out as needless, in the
Bodies of the better Wights, Discors del Mathiol. nel. 3. lib. di Dioscor. c.
145. and Alex. ab Alexan. dier. genesis l. 5. c. 25.
the Medows of Candy, near to Cartina, declare; When by a strange and hidden
Virtue, they bereave the Beasts thereof that graze upon them: Nay, that the
Milt is not only idle, but hurtful withal, Experience even in our selves has
taught it, in the Turks light Footmen, I say, (I know not by what Example,
except it were the want of the same in the Camel, making that Beast able to
travel an hundred miles a day, and so without drink fifteen days together)
being in their Childhood gelt of their Milt, prove thereby the most Light,
Swift, Sound and Fasting Footmen in the World.

As for the Reins, the Urine*drawers, as drinkless Wights have none at all; so
some Men have but one of them, as if Nature passed not to make any: and if we
could forbear our Drink, (as those Beasts do by kind, and some Men by custom)
we might the better spare them, and avoid many Mischiefs in our Bodies.
Therefore that odd man L b. 2. de vir. membror. c. 7, 8, 9, etc. Tom 3.
Paracelsus, I know not by what Light, (cast in, I think, from above) not only
sees these faults, but also finds ways to amend them, and to cut off the
mischief of all these three noisome Parts, not with any gelding Craft, but with
his Divine kind of Healing. So that to avoid all Diseases that spring of the
Leavings, my Counsel is, either with Knife in Childhood, or rather with this
Man's gelding Medicines, (you know where to find them, I need not show you) to
put out the sway and power of those idle Bowels: Or perhaps it should not need,
and in a stock that uses our clean Diet, Nature her self, as she does in those
Medows, would quite raze, and dispatch them within a few Generations.

But I will go further; Hear a new and unheard of Opinion, and yet let not your
Judgment run, before you see good ground of Reason. What if we could fast for
ever, and live without all Food? Might not all hurt and danger of Meat be then
fore-stalled? If other Wights, whose Life hangs upon the same hold, by the
sufferance, nay by the command of Nature, do Fast for ever; there is no Reason
but the same common Nature, will at least, suffer it in us. Let us see -- And
to step over the Chameleon, because it is a cold and bloodless Wight, what may
we say to a Bird which is a hot and perfect one? a Bird in the Molucca's, Card.
Subt. l. 0. in p. 430. and A drovand. de Avibus, l. 12.
Manucodiaca by name, which by reason she has so large Wings upon so small a
Body, (her Wings are as large, almost, as the Wings of an Eagle, when her Body
is no bigger than a Swallow) is born up by force of Wind, with more ease than
A. Gel. noct. Act. l. 10. c. 12.
Archyta's Dove, and hovereth and hangs in the Air continually, taking no
other Food (as, alas, how can she?) than there is found? Nay, have you not
heard of the little Card. Subt. l. 10. in p. 415. and Gonz. Fer. Ovi. sum.
hist. Indiae Occid. and Purch. Pilgrim. Vol. 3. l. 5. c. a. in p. 978.
Dog in the West India, which sings so sweetly all the Night long, neither
Night nor Day eating any thing? But if there be Examples in our kind as well,
then it is certain, and above controlment.

Not. hist. l. 7. c. 2.
Pliny says, there is a Mouthless, and so a Meatless kind of Men about the
head of Ganges, which lives by the breath of their Nostrils, except when they
take a far Journey they mend their Diet with the smell of Flowers: And lest you
might think I lean upon bare Authorities without the stay of Reason, all the
matter rests upon this Reason; I told you before, that our Life lay in the
hands (besides a little Exercise) of two like Meats; One for the Soul and
Natural Heat, which is within us, and the finest and first Moisture in the
Body; The other is without, even any Meat of the same temper with our Bodies,
as near as may be, to uphold the Frame and Bullding of the same, which I said
to be a fine aerie and fiery Frame.

Then the Air it self, especially when it is evermore (as the wet Sunbeams
declare) so sprinkled with some fine foreign Fatness; Vid. Ath^n, Deip. l. 2.
in p. 40. De Democrito mori volente, etc.
may seem sufficient food to nourish the fine part of our Frame, whereon the
temper of Mankind and his Life touching that point stands; which is as much
as any Meat can do to Life, (for it is not fed by common Food, as I said above)
though not enough for strength, because the grosser, sounder and tougher parts
whereon the strength lies, shall want food in this Diet, and fail, no doubt,
greatly; yet Life shall hang still, as long as Air and first Moisture hold, in
my Opinion.

Or, if we think that too spare a Diet, we may mend it, as the Mouthless People
do, Vide Mars. Ficin. argum. in Plat. Phaed. in p. 490.
with smell of Flowers: Or rather, as we know Nature is able to draw Air, and
other Food which she desires, through the Skin in all places of the Body; so
if she had Meat applied to the Stomach, she would, no doubt, satisfy her self
that way most finely, without the heap of hurts let in at the broad and common
Gates. As we see, by Example, for Drink, that all the while we sit in Water, we
shall never Thirst: and for Meat, Paracel. A^chidox. lib. 1. de prolog. and
M^crocosm. Tom. 6. in p. 5.
Paracelsus reports a Man of his knowledge, that by applying of fresh Sods (a
bare Food, God wot) in this sort fasted, without all hunger, for half a year
together.

But if all that would not serve the turn, and we must needs receive in Meat at
the common Gate, yet we may let it pass no further than the Gate, and make the
Stomach in the Mouth (which was the use of some holy men, Paracels. in modo
pharmac. tract. 3. Tom 5. in p. 244, and 245, and 259.
as he does witness) and so provide enough, both for Life and Strength, and a
great deal better for our Health than we do, because the cleaner part alone
shall be received; and moreover, as he says, for the clean dispatch of that
our ordinary trouble and annoyance, which your reverence will not suffer me to
name (although I might, among Physicians) but they know my meaning.

But it shall not need to seek shifts and holes, if we will believe the German,
that we may easily Fast all our Life (though it be many Years together) without
all kind of Meat, and so cut off all doubts and dangers of Diseases there of
springing, for he says in the first Book of his high Paracels. Archidox. l. ^.
Tom. 6. in p. 5. and Fortun. Licet. de his qui diu sine al. vixerunt, l. 1. and
The admirable and memorable Hist. of our Time by J: Goulart, Englished by Ed:
Grimston, in p. 352, 353. and p. 429. and deinceps. and Car. Bovill, Epist. ad
N^c. Grambusia.
Opinions, that, He knew some holy Men, that had fasted and lived without all
Food, for twenty years space together.

What need I say more? If you be both so hard of belief, and dull of sight, as
neither Reports of good Authors will sink into you, nor yet you can see the
Light of Reason shining before you; take here a few of ordinary matters, in the
life and use of Men, and weigh one with another.

Is it not as common in use, and indeed as needful to Spit, and to avoid
another nameless Leaving, and to Drink, but to Sleep especially? If some of
these, nay all may be spared, why not our Meat as well? Let us see a little,
and by Example, because Reason is both too long, and too open to cavil.

To leave Drink, plin. l. 7. c. 18. and Athen. D^ip. l 2.
which many have all their lives left; Antonia Pli. l. 7. c. 19.
the Wife of Drusus the Roman never spat; No nor the whole Indian Nation:
Fernel. De part. morh. and sympt* l. 6. c. 10. (h.i.k) Sen. de Ira. l. 2. c. 12.
says, he knew one that kept that nameless Matter forty days together: and
although this answers not the Question, yet it shows the truth of the
former holy Story; for if he, in so foul and gross a Diet as the common Diet
is, could so long want it; why not those Men for ever, in so clean and fine a
Diet, almost empty and void of all Leavings? for the grosser sort, which make
up this foul and shameless one, were left before as you heard, and the finer in
that passage from the Stomach, through the former Guts were drawn all away, to
the Liver, as the like is ever in us, and voided other ways.

To close up all; Mecaenas, Plin. l. 7. c. 51. nunquam horam totam dormiisse,
int^rpretatur. J. Lipsius ad Sen. lib. 2. de Ira. c. 12.
Augustus his Minion, slept not one wink for his three last years space
together, as Pliny reports. And thus we see these strange things fall out in
proof: But how, I cannot stand to show; first Nature suffers them; then Use and
Custom, another Nature, brings them in, that we may well believe the like in
this matter of Meat we have in hand: for as the Gonz. Ferdinand. Ovied. in fol.
261. and St. Albans Syl. Sylvarum, Cent. 9. Ex. 99.
Bear, according to the guise of many Beasts that lurk in Winter, fasteth forty
days; so SubClement. 7. subt. l. 11. in p. 459. Vide Corn. Agrip. de Occ.
Phil. l. 1. c. 58. in p. 118. and Keckerm. Syst. Phys. l. 3. c. 12. in p. 401.
and Strozz. Cicogna. Palog. de gli in cant. pros. 1. l. 4. c. 6. sub finem. and
Her. Mercurial. Av. 12. ad Hipp. (...) and Bernardin. Cario del Hist. Millan.
part. 3. in fol. 216.
Cardan tells of a Scottish young Man in the Popes Court at Rome, that by use
brought himself to Fast thirty days together, which by use might have been
three Hundred, three Thousand as well, if he had ordered himself thereafter, by
slow and creeping Custom, and by such Means as I set down before.

So we see, I say, great worldly Wonders prove plain and easy Truths in the
sight of Wisdom; and that by the means aforesaid (where are more than one, if
this like them not, they may take another) it is possible for all Men by Kind
and Custom, to keep their Health for ever: Let us come to the next point, that
it is as well to be recovered, if it were lost; and that all Diseases may be
cured: This is a point much harder than the first, even so beset and stopped with
all kinds of Letts and Encumbrances, that a Man can scarce tell which way to
set a Foot forwards.

First appears Aesculapius, Hippocrates and Plato, the chief among the
Grecians, bearing in hand sundry Diseases of both kinds (both came by descent,
and gotten by purchase) hopeless and past recovery, and giving over the Men
that owe them for troublesome to themselves, and to the Commonwealth; Then you
may see Galen, and his soft and fine Company with him, and those with a long
train of Caters and Cooks after them, laden with all kind of dainty Drugs,
stand forth and cry, Fr. S. Alb. de augment. Scient. c. 2. in p. 200.
They have these many Ages, devoured heaps of Books, and took endless pains in
s^arching out the Natures of single Medicines, and making Mixtures of the same,
and yet could hardly cure some Agues, and other less Diseases: But for the four
Stagers, to wit, the Gout, Leprosy, Dropsy, and Falling Sickness, they could
never heal them, and have for Oracles set them down incurable.

What were best to be done in this matter? What shall we set against the weight
of so many great Men's Authorities? Marry, put them in Balance, as we have done
hitherto, and weigh them with Truth and Reason. But where shall we find it,
say they? As it is every where (as Cic. Acad. quaest. l. 1. sub fine. and
Fernel. de abd. rerum cause. l. 1. c. 7.
Democritus said) drowned in the Deep, so in this Matter it is scattered all
about, and largely spread withal; for there be three things, and every one full
of under-branches belonging to this Art and way of Healing: The first is
knowledge of the Diseases: the second is the Remedies against them: and the
third of the appliance of Remedies; All which should be traversed in this
Discourse. But it shall not need, I hope, nay we must take heed how we enter
into so large and long a Race, in so short and narrow a compass of time
appointed: Especially being never run before by any of our worthy Ancestors,
the wise Egyptians, whose steps we strive to follow; for when they have once
hit the Mark they shoot at, and gotten the great and general MEDICINE, curing
with ease all Diseases; they think it straight enough, and an empty and
needless labor (as it is indeed) to trouble themselves and their Children with
large Rules about innumerable signs and causes of Infinite Diseases, and about
such other small particulars in appliance.

Neither would I have you set Paracelsus and his heirs upon me, and say they
have taken great and goodly pains in this field; you will then force me to
speak my Fantasy. Though this Man, (to let his Scholars go, as too young yet)
by great Light of Wit, wherewith he flowed, and by long proling about both with
Eyes, Ears and Hands in the Mysteries of Egypt, saw and performed many of
their Deep Secrets, yea and found out some of his own worthy praise, (albeit I
think a number feigned;) yet his new Art and Rules of Healing are not good in
mine Opinion; for First, against the Example of his Ancestors, from whom he had
received all things; and then in spite and disgrace of Galen, for mis-calling
his Countrymen, as you have heard; but chiefly carried away with a mad and
raging desire of Fame and Honor; he took in hand, (a Man unfit to do it) to
pull down and raze the old Work of Physic, and to set up that strange and
famous New one: Then see how it is performed: He sets down some false Rules,
some waste and idle, and some wanting; and all unconstant, disordered and
unlearned! Where he does well (as he does sometimes) he does no more than was
done before him, and brings in the same things disguised with new, odd, cross,
and unheard of Names, such as may move Wonder at the first, but when they be
scanned, laughter, De sin. bon. and mal. l. 4. prope fin^m.
as Tully says of the Stoics like device in Philosophy.

And that I do not slander them, for this is no Cause, I could easily prove, if
this place would admit such a Volume. Wherefore, let us follow the true and
right Egyptians, and leave Paracelse in this ill Matter, or light one, if it
were good; and spend all our care and thought about that which is all, good
Medicines and Remedies against Diseases: with which old Wives in the Country,
and simple Men on our side, (I mean, simple in respect of the Grecian
Subtilties about Nothing) have healed most, nay even all Diseases: and with
which indeed the German (let us give him his due praise) has utterly slain the
Grecian Physic, and herein done much for Mankind, by descrying and
dispatching our close and secret Enemy, which under color of friendship, and
fighting against our Enemies, has this long time betrayed us, and done us much
mischief: which thing one of their best Captains and Pillars of their State,
Fernel De abdit. rerum cause. l. 2. c. 18. in p. 173.
by name, after he had been a while in Egypt, began to smell at last, and to
repent him of all his former pains, (which we know were great) bestowed in that
kind of Healing, saying it to be but Words, and the whole force and weight of
this Art, to lean upon the Knowledge of the virtues of Medicines secretly hid
and couched in the midst and Oil of Bodies, to be fetched out and gotten by
skillful means of Alchimy, even of that Art, I say, which is so much condemned
of his Fellows and Companions. To this Harbor also the best of his Fellows,
before and since him have fled, and do daily fly apace, from the toil and
trouble of their fruitless and barren dead Sea; Then let us shift our Sails,
and fly as far and further too, I hope, if Tide and Wind and all, which we have
at will, fail not.

But first let us describe that Haven of Medicine, and see what Marks it has,
and how it differs from other Creeks adjoining, lest at our Journeys end we
miss with more shame and grief, and suffer shipwreck.

A Medicine is that which kills the force of that which hurts us: and this it
does many ways, and yet all to one end (which is the End of all doing and
working) as I said before) for his Food and Sustenance; then let us come again
and sort our Speeches. A Medicine heals us, and kills our Enemy, either by
dulling or consuming it: for when it meets with the contrary of even strength
(as when Fernel. de abdit. rer. cause. l. 2. c. 19. in p. 180. and Fort. Licet.
de his qui diu sine aliment. vixerunt, l. 3. c. 42.
Oil and Poison, etc. join) then in Fight they neither eat up nor destroy each
other, but both are dulled and weakened, and make one blockish thing, which
Nature casts out for an unlike and unkindly dead thing, which they call a
Leaving (or Excrement.) But in case it be of more strength and power than our
Enemy, then it quite destroys, devours and turns him into his own Nature; --
And this Consumer is either like the thing that hurts us; In which sore, even
as every Herb of sundry qualities draws and feeds upon his own Juice in a
Garden, so one Plin. l. 27. c. 2.
Poison does cure another, and all purging and drawing things do heal us, and
all (...), Ferr. de ab. rer. cause. l. 2. c. 2. in p. 88.
Fernel's hid and divine Properties work by plain reason; Or else it is unlike
and contrary; after which manner, As dry Sticks and Towe, and Vinegar quench
wild Fires, or other fat Fires, before Water whose fatness feeds it, for the
stronger contrary quality quelling and eating up the weaker; so does any cold
and dry thing, as Fern. de ab. rer. cause. l. 2. c. 19. inp. 180.
Bole Armin, Terra Lemnia, etc. cure a rotten Poison, and so are a great number
of Cures done; which only course in word the Grecian Physic takes, though
not in deed; for we heard even now of two oother ways of Healing, which they
themselves and other Folk did take unawares; though Paracelse found out the
name, belike, of late, but he strayeth as much as they on that other side, when
he thinks all Cures thereby performed.

Now when the consuming Medicines have done their duties, Nature expels them
for Poison and unlike strange things, according to the Grecian Rules, because
all their Medicines were, by their own confessions, such. But if they had
either Thought of the dulling Nourisher, which, as I told you, takes the nature
of Leaving; or had known our Men's wholesome Medicines, they would have made
another reckoning. But let them go, and let us set out in time toward the
Haven of Health.

If the Art of Healing be nothing else but the matching of hurtful things and
their stronger Enemies, (but equality will sometimes serve the turn) or Likes
together, and the world be full of both these kinds of Creatures, following
the nature of their Parents, the four Beginnings, which are, as we see, some
like, and some contrary, one to another; Then sure our All-healing Art is not
impossible, and wants naught but a Man well skilled in the Nature of things,
a Philosopher by name; for I need not put in a Physician also, to know that
other part, the causes of Diseases which must be matched, because, as Paracelse
well says in that, he that knows the causes of Changes and Chances in the
great World, may soon espy them in the little.

But our nought-healing Leaches will step in and say, Diseases are some so
great, and in all so many, Man's wit so weak and shallow, and the Medicine so
hid and drowned in the deep of Nature, that it is not possible to find them
all; or if they were found, to apply them with such discretion, as Nature might
abide those poisoned frayes and battles within her: And again, that admit all
this untrue, yet there be some Diseases sent from Witchcraft and Sorcery, and
other means, which have their Cause, and so their Cure, without the compass of
Nature; to let pass our tickle standing daily and hourly so beset with
Destinies, that a man can warrant nothing.

I marry, Destinies are too deep and bottomless, (to return straight (...),
Plant. in Phaed. in p. 38.
Homer-like upon them) and therefore it were best indeed to let them go, and
the applying of the Medicines with them; the rather, because the other, (the
former, I mean) is so slight a matter to a discreet and well-ordered Leach,
such a one as is pointed out by their old and famous Leader Hippocrates, who,
both in this, and all other duties of his Art, has made such speed, and so far
passed all his Fellows, as none since (which is a good time) could ever
overtake him, no nor yet come so near, as to keep the sight of him whom they
had in chase, and followed. Then, for those unsearchable and supernatural
Causes, (as they call them) if they flow from unclean and wicked Spirits, (as
some think) they are not the Stuff of the thing that hurts us, (though they
sometimes dwell in and possess the Body) but windy movers, workers and
disturbers of the peace and good order of our Bodies, much like unto those
fierce and sudden changes of Weather, proceeding from the Stars, and working
the like effect in Men's Bodies; so that since the nearest Cause is Natural, let
the rest be what it will, and the Cure be done by Natural Means, as we see it
sometimes amongst us. And therefore Par. lib. de Philos. accult. Cap. de
insigni Magica abus. and quomodo in incant. illa abeat. Tom. 10. in p. 27.
Paracelse, who puts the fault in the Faith of the wicked Witch, (a thing as
far above Nature) yet holds it curable with a natural Medicine, which they call
a Quintessence; Although I am not unwitting that sometimes (his Sickness is
such) he bids us withstand it with another as strong a Belief set against it.
But for my part, I cannot reach it with my Conceit, (let deeper Heads think
upon it) How those Beliefs and Imaginations, and other parts and powers of the
Soul or Mind of Man, can so fly out of their own Kingdom, and reign over a
foreign Body; when we know the whole Soul and Mind so fast bound in durance,
and so like to be, until it be the pleasure of the great Magistrate, who has
committed them, to let them loose at once, and set them out at full liberty,
let old Wives buz of Plin. l. 7. c. 52. and Tertull. lib. de An. cap. 44.
Hermotimus, and such like Tales, what they will.

But if those Diseases spring (as some of Learning hold, and with Reason) from
neither of both those two Roots named, but from a foul and venomous Breath,
sent forth from a Poisoned temper of the Witches Body, through the Windows of
hateful Eyes, for Thought Cor. Agri^. de Occ. Phil. l. 1. c. 63. and Fr. St.
Albans Aug. scient. l. 4. c. 1. in p. 189.
fashioneth the Blood and Spirits almost at his pleasure; then all the Causes
being ordinary, and agreeing to the course of Kind, they may be cured and put
to flight by the same course and means; which Opinion, (bear with the tarrying,
it is worth the handling) takes hold upon this Reason, because (as good
Authors do witness) some Beasts of ranker Venom do bewitch and hurt after the
same manner: As an old Toad, Card. var. l. 16. c. 89.
by steadfast view, not only amazeth and benums a Weasel, but also kills a
young Child: And by the same means the Torpedo. Arist. hist. anim. l. 9. c.
37. and Plin. l. 9. c. 42. and Phil. de anim. propriet. c. 39. and Oppian. hal.
l. 3. v. 149. and Fern. de oc. rer. cause. l. 2. c. 14.
Benummer hurts the little Fish and takes his prey; but most fiercely and
mischievously of all Creatures in the World, the two Monsters in kind, the
Plin. l. lib. 8. c. 21. and Ficin. de vit. ^oel. comp. l. 3. c. 16. and G.
Pisid. lib. de Mund. op. v. 933. and Bodin. des Sorcier. l. 1. c. 6. in p. 46.
Cockatrice and Plin. l. lib. 8. c. 21. and Ficin. de vit. ^oel. comp. l. 3. c.
16. and G. Pisid. lib. de Mund. op. v. 933. and Bodin. des Sorcier. l. 1. c. 6.
in p. 46.
Catoblepas: Again, for that the Eye of a Menstruous Woman (as they Plin. l 7.
c. 15.
all report) does spot the Glass which it beholds: And moreover because Plin.
l. 7. c. 2.
Pliny out of Tully, forth of his Books which are lost belike, and many good
Authors Au. Gell. noot. at. l. 9. c. 4. and Rog. Bac. lib. de mirab. pot. art.
and not. cap. 3. T. C. Vol. 5. in p. 497. and Gaud. Merula. mem. l. 1. c. 2.
and Cor. Agrip. de Occ. Phil. l. 1. c. 19. p. 40. and H. Salmuth. Com. in
Pancirol. nova rep. Tit. 15. in p. 655.
, tells of many Folk, that through a Poisoned Prerogative, which a monstrous
mark of a double-sighted Eye gave unto them, were able to bewitch to death all
those upon whom that Eye was angerly and surely set and fastened: But chiefly
because we see them that use this wicked Trade, to be by kind of a muddy and
earth-like Temperature and Complexion, brought by Age, (as they be most
commonly) lone-life, and foul Diet, unto the pitch of Melancholy, that is, unto
a cold and moist, dry Temperature, which is the most poisoned and venomous
Temperature in the world: for certain proof whereof, bring one of them out of
that beastly Life, unto merry company, and full and dainty Diet, and within
twenty days (as has been found true by Report Card. Va. l. 15. c. 80.
of a good Author) the whole state and order of her Body will be so changed, as
it shall not suffer her to bewitch and hurt again.

To come to the next and chiefest point: Let us not say for shame, those Helps
and Remedies lie hid in Nature, too far for the Wit of Man to find, unless we
will accuse our own sloth and dullness: for Nature has brought them forth, and
laid them open as well as the Poisons and hurtful things; or else she were very
cross, and ill-willing toward him, for whose sake, it seems, she does all
things: Nay further, her good will is such, as she has not only laid them
open, but given us ways to come by them, and means of Speech, Hands and Wit
also, far above all other Wights and Creatures. And yet she has not left us
so, but lest by chance we might go wide and miss them, to show her Motherly
Love and Affection toward us, she has guided many witless Beasts, even by
common sense, unto their speedy help and remedy in their Diseases Pudendumque,
rursus omnia animal^a quae sint salutaria ipsis nosse praeter hominem. Plin. l.
27. c. 3.
, that we by the plainness and shame of that Example, might be taught and moved
to seek and find us help in the like Diseases Vide Mathiol. Ep. ded. in suo
Discors. lib. de Dioscoride.
As to name a few not unworthy naming; she makes the Beast Hippopotamus Plin.
l. 8. c. 26.
in time of his fullness and fatness to go to a Reed, and by rubbing a Vein
against a Knot, to let himself Blood, and to stop it again by laying Mud upon
it. A sick Dog, to seek an Canarian. Plin. l. 25 c. 8. and Arist. hist. anim.
l. 9. c. 6.
Herb and purge himself; and the Bear to do the same, Aron. Plin. l. 8. c. 36.
after his long fast in Winter: She leads the Panther Cic. de not. Deord. 2.
and Aristot. ubi supra (o) and de mirab. auscult. and Plin. l. 27. c. 11. and
lib. 8. c. 27.
when he is poisoned, to our foul and nameless Leaving; and the Tortoife A^ist.
hist. anim. l. 9. c. 6. and lib. de mirab. auscult. and B. Porta. Mag. not. l.
1. c. 10. De his omnibus and multo pluribus vide Georg. Pisid. lib. de Mund.
Artificio V. 915.
, after he has eat a Viper, to Summer-Savoury, and many such like Examples
has Nature laid before us, for our Instruction.

By the which, at last, wise and painful men of Greece (as themselves report,
be they Apollo, or his Son, or whosoever) and by laying Reason and further
Proof together, first made the Art and Rules of Healing, to know whence
Diseases come, and how to Remove them: And then seeking all about for Remedies
to serve each turn, by little and little they matched the most part of the
lesser rank, with single Medicines; and for the greater ones, they doubled and
coupled a-many of them together, Insomuch that at last (which was in
Hippocrates his time) they were able to heal all, saving four of the greatest
and deepest Diseases, the P. Severin. Danus Idea med. Philos. c. 2. in p. 15.
Gout, the Dropsy, the Leprosy, and Falling Sickness. This race they have
held on ever since, both in Greece and all the World: Thus much, with much ado,
they could, and no more, leaving the rest, with one consent, uncurable.

But to come to the point; What wrong this was both to Skill and Nature, they
do easily see and laugh at, which know that in this labor, they did not only
oversee and skip the Minerals, the stoutest helps in the whole storehouse of
Kind, (although they could dig them out well enough to other and worser uses;)
but also, which is all in all, did let HERMES skill of dressing Medicines
(whereby weak things are made almighty) quite escape them.

Wherefore, to make up the Art of Healing, and to make it able to help and cure
all Diseases, came in (or rather went before them) the Egyptians Hom. Odyss.
4. v. 229, etc.
, Men in great favor with Nature, both for their soil and bringing up, so
notably commended above all Nations, (having for example to move and teach
them, even the great Wight of the World, as HERMES says) for Wits to devise,
and Bodies to put in practice: Whereby in short space, they unfolded the Knot,
why the Minerals were of greatest force and power against Diseases: And soon
after (which was a divine Light and insight) they perceived the huge labor in
seeking such an infinite sort of Singles and Mixtures to be vain and empty, and
pitiful among Wise Men. Because, first, See Purch. Pilgrim. Tom. 2. l. 10. c.
1. sect. 1693. of those Trees which are Poison on the one side (the West) and
an Antidote on the other. Hen: de Luith hant com. sur le Tresor. de Tres. de
Christ. Gamon. in p. 90.
there is nothing hurtful and a breeder of Disease, but it has the help and
remedy for the same about him; for as the Wings Galenus; and Aetius, l. 13. c.
49. ap. Mathiol. Discors. sop. lib. 6. de Diosc. c. 1. and l. 2. c. 54.
and Feet of Cantharides, the Fruit Cardan. Subt. l. 7. in p. 265.
of the Root Bezar, the Ashes of Scorpions, Toads and Vipers, and diverse other
stronger Poisons, both by Nature and Skill dressed and prepared, do cure and heal
their own and all other Poisons; Nay, as all stronger Likes do cure their
Likes, throughout the whole World of Diseases; Jo. I saat. Holland oper. miner.
l. 2* c 4. T. C. Vol. 3. in p. 421.
Even so, when a Man has once found out the thing that hurts him, he may, by
easy skill, mingle and break the temper of the same further, that is, make it
stronger, and able to eat up and consume it self as easily, without any further
doubt, toil or labor. But especially, Card. Subt. l. 5. in p. 186. and Sen.
not. quaest. l. 3. c. 10. and Arist. Metaph. l. 4 c. 5.
because there is no one thing in the World, take what you will, that has not
all the Virtues of Heaven, and of the qualities thereof, within it self; that
is not as good as all, and may not serve in stead of all; and that is not able
to cure all Diseases: which thing weighed, and with discourse of Wit and Reason
fully reached, they went to practice, and by the like sharpness of Wit, they
found out as soon the kindly and ready way to dress and make fit those three
kinds of Medicines aforesaid, which contain all the Art of Healing: All the
rest are but waste Words, and grievous Toil, to tire a world of Wits about a
bootless Matter.

But especially they rested in that one the last, which is enough alone; and
yet not without great forecast to choose one of the best, or rather the very
best of all, for their ease in dressing; though Paracelse, of late, was not
content with this, but ran through the rest as well to spite his Enemy, as I
said, and to make himself known and famous, against the Rule of Wisdom and
Virtue, and the example of all his Ancestors.

But how has every thing all the Virtues of Heaven and Earth, that is, all the
Curing and Healing power of all things in the World? very well; you must
remember that I proved above, all the Virtue and Power of Heaven, poured down
upon these lower Creatures, to be nothing else, but One self-same Life and
Soul, and heavenly Heat in all things: And again, that All Diseases flow from
Distemper, and as it were from discord of the kindly consent of the Body: Then,
that that thing which is endued with store of Life, and with exact and perfect
temperateness, seated upon both a subtle and strong Body, (which all things
are in the bottom) is able alone, by subduing his weaker Enemies, the
distempered Diseases, by strengthening his fellow Life in our Body, and lastly
by binding together again the Frame that was slipped out of Order, to do as much
as all the powers and forces of all the Plants, Wights and Minerals in the
World; that is, to put to flight all trouble of Diseases, and restore the Body
to perfect health and quietness.

But how is all this done? we huddle up too many great matters together; It
were good to mark them out more distinctly. When this hot (by the Heat we spoke
of) and strong tempered Medicine slips into the Stomach, it stays no long
digestion, being already thoroughly digested, nor looks for any ordinary
passages to be opened unto it, but as soon as it is raised out of sleep by his
Fellow the Natural Heat, by and by he flies out and scowres about, even as fast
as the Arist. hist. anim. l. 9. c. 48. and Plin. l. 9. c. 8. and Cicer. de Not.
Deor. l. 2. and Oppian. hal. 12. v. 533.
Dolphin after her prey, or as Nature her self, whom Hippocrates says to
pierce bounds and all to that purpose; that is, to seek his like food and
sustenance, whereby to preserve his State and Being, which is the purpose of
all things in the World, as it was said above.

Now, there is nothing so like and near a perfect temperature in the World, as
the Ethereal first Moisture of Man. This is best and most in the Heart, the
Root of Life: then thither it hieth, and preyeth upon that part first, and that
is the Cause why it presently restores a Man half dead, and as it were pulls
him out of the Throat of Death; then it runs to the rest all about, increasing
by that means the natural Heat and first Moisture of every part of the Body:
When this is done, he turns back upon the parts themselves, and by encountering
with them in the same sort, according to his might feeds upon them, and brings
them a certain way toward his own Nature, even as far as we will by our usage
suffer; for if we take it with measure and discretion, it will bring our Body
to a middle and Mean state, between his own exact temperature, and the
distemper of Diseases, even a better state than ever it had before. If we use
it out of measure Sendivog. tract. de Sulph. i ^ p. 68.
, it takes us up too high, and too near his own Temperature, and makes us
unmeet for the Deeds and Duties of an Earthly Life.

But in the mean while, and in the midst of this work, we must know, that by
his exceeding Heat and Subtileness, which is gotten by his lofty workmanship,
and which makes up his Strength above all things, it divides and scatters, like
Smoke before the Wind, all distempered and hurtful things, and if they cannot
be reconciled and turned to goodness, Nature throws them out as dead and
unfruitful Leavings.

But how do we talk so much of exact and perfect Temper, when by the verdict of
all the Quest in these Cases, there is no such thing found in Nature, save in
Heaven, extant? Neither heard you me say that it floated aloft, but was sunk to
the bottom of all Nature, notwithstanding by skill to be sounded and weighed
up: for as Heaven was once a gross and distempered Lump, by the Divine Art of
GOD refined and sundred away round to that place and nature where it stands;
Even so, one of our gross Bodies here below, being a piece of the same Lump
also, and all one with that which Heaven once was, may by the like Art and
Cunning be refined, and parted from all his distempered gross and foul
drossiness, and brought unto an heavenly Nature, and unto the Nature of the
best and goodliest thing in Heaven.

And yet you must not take me so, as though I would have the Mind and Wit of
Man, which is but a Spark of the Divine and great Mind, to be able to reach
the excellency of his Work, and to match so great perfection; If he do but
shadow it, and make a Counterfeit, that is, if he reach not so far as to make
all things, but to mend a few by this his Heaven, all is well; it is as much as
can be looked for at the hands of weak Mortality.

Then this Heaven Vide Jos: Querc. Hermet. m^^. def. l. 2. tractatulo de quinta
essent. in p. 284.
, nay this Sun of ours, is naught else but an Oil full of heavenly Spirits, and
yet in Quality of his Body, just, even and temperate, fine and piercing, close
and lasting, able as well to rule this little World, as the great Sun is able
to govern the great World. But what is he, say they, that can see the Divine
Art and Way whereby GOD made his great and mighty Work? Or if he saw it, learn
and match it by Imitation? None but he whom GOD has enlightened, and unsealed
his Eyes; then shall he easily spy the Way lying open in all places, and in all
kindly changes; he shall see them pass and travel, I say, still by that course
which HERMES calls soft and witty, that is, kindly separation: And if he be not
swift and rash, but will have sober Patience, his own skill and labor shall be
but little, and Nature her self very kindly will in her due time perform all,
even all that heavenly Workmanship; And yet I mean not so, but that Art must
accompany and attend upon Nature, though with no great pains and skill, both
forward and backward in this Journey, (some know my meaning) until she come to
her wished rest, and to the top of all perfection.

If you perceive not, call to mind and consider the way whereby we made our
Ether in the former Chapter, and matched our first Moisture, a thing
Ethereal, I say, and almost Temperate: Mark what I say, there is a further end
in the matter: hold on the same Means, whereby you came so far, which is the
return I speak of, and you may reach it. Then you see the way to cure all
Diseases by the third way of Egyptian Healing, which they do, and we may well
call the Egyptian Vide P. Palmar. Lap. Philos. dog. fine Liban. rest. Cap. 15.
in p. 89.
Heaven; And yet it is a way far beneath HERMES Medicine, as we shall hear
hereafter.

But if they will not yield yet to Reason, but mutter and blabber out, still
Country-like, that this heavenly Medicine of ours is over-high for the reach of
Men's silly Wits here strewed below upon the ground, for other lesser and baser
uses; and that no Man since the first Man has ever yet been known to have
found and wrought the same: I will not stand to beat Reason into such hard
Heads, but go to the other two lower and weaker ways of Healing, which the
Egyptians also found, but used not, and called the first Mineral Medicines,
and the next Mysteries and Secrets, as may appear by Paracelse. We may fitly
call this Second Kind, because that is too large a Name, (if it be lawful for
us, as well as for all learned Men, where a fit Word wants to make a new) we
may do well, I say, to call it a Cure-it-self, because it is by that way of
Healing, whereby every self-same thing, further broken, Cures it self; and the
inward and hidden thing, as they say, the outward and apparent, by that course
of Kind, whereby the stronger-like eats up in trial, and consumes the weaker.

If this leave be once granted, we will borrow a little more for the other two
likewise, because their Names do not yet square and fit our purpose; and call
that Heaven a Cure-all, for that it does so, and the next a Cure-the-great,
because the order of Paracelsians is, always to match the greater and more
stubborn sort of Diseases with the stout and mighty Minerals, and the rest with
those hidden Cure-themselves. Or at least, in the lower rank of lighter
Diseases, with their Likes only raw, as the Graecians use them, without any
curious dressing.

Let us set forward afresh toward the Matter; and because the Graecians
themselves are able, if it hit well, to cure the lighter sort, and to heal all
but the four Stagers aforesaid, we will leave the rest for them, and so let
this second kind of Healing go, called our hidden Cure-themselves, and bend
all our battery against these four, which they could never shake, and see how
by force of Mineral Medicines, they may be won, and beaten down, and quite
razed out of Being.

We see the poisoned Spirits and Breaths of venomous things, with what force
and might they come upon our Bodies, things in Nature and Quality set against
them, and how they spoil, waste and consume them: If you do not see by
Imagination with your selves, nor remember those abovenamed that killed by
sight; hear one or two that work the same by Touch as violently. The Lepus
Marinus, Plin. l. 9. c. 48. and Mathiol. discorsnel. l. 2. di Dioscor. c. 18.
Hare-fish, a most cold and dry Creature, (to omit that she makes a Man's Head
ache by Sight) if you touch her aloof only with a Staff, that her venomous
Breath may go straight and round together upon you, you die presently: The Root
Baaram in Palestine, (as Joseph. de bell. Jud. l. 7. c. 25. and Card. Subt. l.
8. in p. 310.
Josephus writes) kills the Man that handles it, and therefore they used to
make a Dog pull it up, who thereby was put to death immediately.

To come into the Body, that costly Poison in Card. Subt. l. 2. in p. 102.
Joan. Leon. hist. Afric. l. 7. ap. Purch. Pilgrim. Tom. 2. l. 6. c. 1. sect. 7.
in p. 831.
Nubia, in one Grain weight kills a Man out of hand; yea, stay but a quarter of
an Hours working, and that one Grain divided will overcome ten Men. I hope you
doubt not but these mighty Poisons, if they were like in Nature to the four
great Diseases, and by little and little, in a proportion to be born by Nature
to be set upon them, would be able easily, by their great strength, to devour
and consume them, or else sure such heaps of Poison could not dwell so long
within us, but would put out Life in a moment.

Now, what are these poisoned Vapors, but most cold and dry Bodies, wrought
and broken by natural mingling unto great fineness and subtileness, by this
piercing swiftly all about, and by those contrary qualities overcoming? Then
let us take the stoutest Minerals, such as are called Middle Minerals by our
Men, or hard Juyces, by G. Agricola, (to leave the Metals for a better purpose)
be they Poisons, as some say, or what they be, I care not, and after we have by
mere working cleansed them, and stripped off their clogs and hindrances, broken
and raised them into a fine substance, match them with their Likes, the hurtful
things in our Bodies; shall they not let all the rest alone, and straightway
cleave to their Fellows, as well as a Purging Medicine, and so devour and draw
them out by little and little? If there be no Likes, I grant they will, Plin.
l. 27. c. 2.
as well as that, fall upon their Enemies, our good Juyces, and feed upon them.

Then what do you doubt? Is not a Mineral Body far better? and therefore, if it
be raised to as great a Fineness, much stronger in Working, than the gentle and
loose temper of a Wight or Plant? Wherefore, these our Mineral Medicines, and
Cure-the-greats, as we call them, shall, in any Reason, work more violently
upon their Likes, than the natural Poisons of Wights and Plants do upon their
Contraries, both because the Like does more easily yield than the Contrary, and
for that the lighter here is stronger.

But if you cannot see these things by Light of Mind, open your Eyes, and cast
them a little way into the School of Alchimy, into the lesser and lower School,
I mean of Germans, and you shall see the Scholars, especially the Master, by
stripping the Minerals but a few degrees, to work wonders: As to name three or
four; By quenching the Loadstone Parac. li. de Transmut. r^r. Tom. 6. in p. 235.
in the Oil of Iron, his proper food, they make him ten times stronger, able to
pull out a Nail of a Post, and such like: And by this kindly Pattern, they make
artificial Drawers, not for Iron only, but for all other things: Id. Archidox.
l. 7. Tom. 6. p. 59. and Nomen illa Creago. Cardan. Subt. l. 7. in p. 280. and
Scribit Albertus esse magnetem quendam qui hominum carnem non secus ac ferrum
ad se trahat. Joach. Vadian. Comment. ad Jul. Solin. poly. c. 65. in p. 314.
yea, and some so mighty, as they will lift up an Ox from the ground, and rent
the Arm of a Tree from the Body, as the Master himself does witness; who
reports again, that he saw a Fleshdrawer, that pulled up a hundred weight of
Flesh, and a Man's Eye out of his Head, and Lights up his Throat and choked him.

They make Binders also, Paracels. ubi supra ad (k)
to glue two pieces of Iron as fast together as the Smith can join them: To be
short, they make Eaters Idem ibid.
also, consuming Iron, Stones, and any hard thing to naught, in a Moment: And
all these Wonders, and many more, they do by certain Reason, if I might stand
about it. In the mean while consider, if these, or any other such like Minerals
were raised higher, and led to the top of their Fineness and Subtileness, and
matched with their like Companions, or with their Contraries, if you will,
those great Diseases in our Bodies, what stirs and skirmishes they were like to
make among them, how easily they would hew them, pierce, divide, waste and
consume them! But you must have always special regard, that the Medicines be
not liker our Nature, than the Nature of the thing that hurts us; for then they
would first fall upon us, and let the Diseases alone; which heed is easily
taken in Minerals, things very far off our Temper.

What is to be said more in this matter? I think nothing; unless through the
Countenance of an idle opinion that reigns among them, they dare fly to the
last, and of all other the most slender shelter, and deny our ability to break
and tame, and handle as we list, such stout and stubborn Bodies. What? because
you know not how to do it, will you fashion all Men by your own Mold? Wise Men
would first look into the power and strength of Skill and Nature, and see what
they can do, and measure it thereby, and not by their own weakness: Then shall
you understand, that there is nothing in Nature so strong and stubborn, but it
has his match at least, if not his over-match in Nature, such is the Nature of
things: But admit somewhat weaker, yet this, if he get the help of Art unto
him, shall quickly wax and mend in strength, and be able easily to overcome
that other. Mark how the Dregs of Vinegar (a thing sprung out from a weak
beginning, and it self as weak as Water) is able, if it be but once distilled,
to make stouter things than Minerals, even Metals themselves (all but Silver
and Gold) to yield and melt down, toward his own waterish Nature. Parac.
Archidox. lib. 5. Tom. 6. in p. 37. and Hieron. Rubeus de distill. sect. 2. c.
20. in p. 131.
Nay, which is more, the mild dew of Heaven, as they call it, wrought first by
the Be, that cunning Beast, and then twice or thrice by the Distiller, will do
the same: that you may weigh with your selves, what not only these, but other
fiercer and sharper things, (as Salts, etc.) were like to do upon Minerals: And
by the way Consider, if such mild things as Wine and Honey, so meanly
prepared, are able to subdue in that sort the most stiff and tough things in
the World, what they would, nay, what Minerals in their highest degree of
dignity would do to the stoutest Disease that can grow in our Bodies.

But I wear the time in vain, to speak so much about so small a matter; and yet
since all are not of like Capacity, I will add yet one familiar example: When a
Surgeon goes about to search the matter somewhat deeply, if he thrust at it
with a Butchers Prick, he shall do nothing but move laughter; let him take a
Thorn, and it will pierce somewhat prettily; but to do it thoroughly, and at his
pleasure, he will use (though to the great grief of his Patient) a fine and
long Instrument of Metal: But a right Surgeon (the common ones are but
Butchers) such an one as is a Physician, nay a Philosopher also, would touch
his Tool with a kind Card. Subt. lib. 7. in page 280. and Christofle de Gam.
en sa semaine apud H: de Linebaut Sieur de Monlion. en son Comment. sur le
Tresor des Tresors du dict Christofle in p. 33.
of Loadstone, (such as is to be found) to make it pierce throughout the Body
without all Sense and Feeling.

Even so a good Physician, such an one as is not often seen, if he have to
encounter with our greatest Enemies, those four we spoke of, would not, I hope,
be so mad as to thrust at them with the raw and blunt Herby Medicines, no nor
although they be sharpened by plain Distillation; neither would he, I think, for
pity, sting the poor Patient with the Martyrdoms of rude and rank Minerals,
unless they were made into a fine and clean, and a kind of temperate quality,
which would work mightily to vex and spoil his Enemies, but feed and comfort,
or at least not offend and hurt his Friend the Patient: This is the Medicine
which a good and wise Physician ought only to seek and use; if he cannot find
it, let him use the Cure-themselves: But such a thing as this, I say, brought
to this equality and fineness of frame and temper, (were it at the first Wight,
Plant or Mineral) was it which our Father and Founder In Tabula Smaragdina.
HERMES said is like to Heaven, and the Strength of all Strengths, piercing and
subduing all things.

This is it that warranted his Sons to avow stoutly, Parac. Com. in Hippocrat.
Aphorism. Tom. 5. in p. 100.
That Art was short, and Life long, and all Diseases curable; when Hippocrates
Hipp. Aph. 1.
the Father of them, was driven by the infirmity and endless matter of his weak
and feeble Medicines, to cry out in the first setting forth, that Art was long,
and Life was short: And whereas both he and all his Offspring were fain to
leave many Diseases helpless, to the great shame of Art, and plague of
Mankind; Is it any marvel, when as they prick at them, as I said, with a
Butchers Prick? Nay, see what they do by their practice; They be so far from
all help and comfort to the Patient, in greatest danger, that they increase his
Miseries many ways, except that great easer of all pain, and their common
Medicine Death, be quickly administered. First they make the Patient suffer the
punishment due to their own proud and slothful Idleness, burthening his weak
Stomach, with that labor of loosing and sundering the fine from the gross,
which they should before have taken in their Glasses: And then, by doing the
same often, they clean tire his feeble Nature, (as it would tire a Horse) when
as by stripping off the foul and gross Stuff, that dulls the working, and
retaining the Virtue in a narrow strong body, they might do as much, and
without hurt, at one time, as they do now at Twenty: And lastly, because their
Medicines applied are of smaller power, and weaker than the things that hurt
us, they feed, nourish and strengthen the Disease and Sickness.

But for all this, (to close up this Matter) if some of this Company and side
of Leaches have been and are yet sometimes able to heal all Diseases in our
Body, (though with much ado, as you have heard) save the four Remediless, yea
and those as well in their Spring, and before their Ripeness, as they
themselves report; Is there any proportion in Geometry (let Galen lay the
Measures) why the German mighty Medicine, which I call the Cure-the-great,
passing these in power, as much as the Ripeness of a Disease is above the
Spring, shall not over-match the ripe as well as the green Diseases? Wherefore,
if there be no doubt left, but this plainly true, that albeit the Graecians Art
is weak and halting in this work of Healing, yet the Egyptian, or as they now
term it, the Paracelsian and Mineral Skill is sufficient and able to cure all
Diseases, then I have paid the whole sum of my Promise, touching the second
means and help to BLISS and HAPPINESS, and we may go to the third at our
pleasure.

But first it were meet, while the time and place very fitly serves, to do a
good Deed, (and this is the drift of my Travel) to admonish and exhort the
Grecian Leaches, whom I like for their Learning, and pity for their
Mis-leading, (although it be grievous, Etenim qui in Galeno nunc consenuimus,
etc. Sev. Danus Id. med. Phil. cap. 1. in p. 5. and S. Albans Aug. Scient. l.
5. c. 2. in p. 233. Quia turpe putant parere minoribus, and quia Imberbis
didicere senes perdenda fateri. Horat. l. 2. ep. 1.
I know, for old Scholars, worn in a kind of Learning, to unlearn all, as it
were, and begin again) for their own Credit and Virtue, yea and Profits sake
also, if they esteem the best, to leave those gilded Pills and sugared Baits,
and all other crafty Snares, wherewith the World has been so long caught and
tormented; and to seek this one, heavenly, plain, and (to you that be Learned)
easy, ready, true and certain way of healing Diseases.

I think before-times they were not greatly to be blamed and accused, but of
dullness and weakness in Understanding, in not espying and seeing this
Perfection, and supplying of all their Wants; But now since of late they have
been so often warned, not with Words only, but with Examples of Learned Men,
Matheolus, Gorraeus, Fernelius, Severinus, Danus, and other such like, which
have and do revolt, and fly away from them daily; yea, and by the certain and
sufficient both written and living Witness of the Deeds of Paracelsus, it were
Impiety to stand still. Well, few words will serve to Wise and Virtuous
Physicians, such as are of themselves forward.

But there is another, and (I am afraid) the greater sort, less honest, more
idle and covetous, full of windy Pride and Words, but empty of all good
Learning, with whom gentle warning (no though the Truth her self should come in
person) would prevail nothing: who care not, it seems, to behold half Mankind
to perish for want of help and succor, rather than they would either blot
their Credit, increase their Pains, or lose their Gains, and which not only
speak foully, and write foolishly against this over-flourishing Virtue, but
also, like the giddy People, where they catch the State, banish the Men that
hold and possess it: Whereas, if it were a good Commonwealth, says Polit. l.
3. c. 13.
Aristotle, the matter would be so far from Banishment, as they would deem such
a Man, as well as the Laws, (for he is himself a Law) exempt from all
Obedience, and judge him worthy to be followed and obeyed as a perpetual King.

This untowardness and crookedness in Men, caused all our All-healing
Ancestors, from time to time never to abide their Sentence, but (to the great
hurt and loss of Mankind) to go into willing Banishment: -- You have
established a kind of Government among you, (to pursue the same Like a little)
wherein you rule alone over the weak and sorry Subjects of Men's Bodies: Then
their Health and Safety you ought to seek only, (besides enough to maintain
contented estate, which Plat. Polit. 3. sub finem.
Plato allows his Governors) and not profit only, (that were Tyranny) both
for Humanity and Religion sake; for to omit Religion, which they do lightly
omit, if a Leach begin once to make a prey of Men, he is not only no Man, but
a most fierce and cruel Beast; not so fit to be compared and matched any where,
if you seek all over, as with that misshapen Monster of India, (which
Aristotle describes and calls Arist. hist. anim. l. 2. c. 1. and Plin. l. 8. c.
21. and Jul. Solin. polyhist. c. 65. and Phil. de. anim. propriet. c. 35.
Mantichora) which being by Kind, or Custom, (I know not whether) very greedy
upon Man's flesh, is with manifold and wonderful helps furnished and armed unto
it; first with a Face like a Man, and Voice like a Trumpet, two fit things to
allure and toll him in; and then, if he fly, with the swiftness of a Heart to
overtake him, and darts like a Porcupine, to wound him afar off, and with the
Tail of a Scorpion, as it were a poisoned shaft near hand to sting him;
furthermore, lest all this might not serve, by reason of Armours he has Feet
like a Lion, fiercely and stoutly to tear him, and three rows of Teeth on each
Chap for speed in devouring.

Apply You, and your Apothecaries the rest of your selves in secret; for my
part, as I am sorry to see evil done, so am I as loath to speak evil of it; and
sure, were not the great grief and Envy I do bear, and always did, to see
desert trodden down by such unworthiness, and some little hope besides, to hear
of your amendment, and so of the return of the Truth and her honors out of
banishment; you should have found me, as I have been long, and mean to be
longer, quite dumb, and Tongueless, both in this and all other Matters.

Do not think I speak of Spite, or for hope of gain, or for any such matter;
There is no cause, God knows, I am no Physician, never was, nor ever mean to
be; what I am, it makes no matter. Let us go forward.

CHAP. III. Of YOUTH.
ALbeit we live Long and in Health, yet if our Bodies be weak and unwieldy, as
it is in Age, it must needs let and clog us much in this happy Race; Wherefore
the third help and step to BLISS, that is, Youth, was not idle, nor out of
Order. Then what is Youth? They know best that have lost it; It is the most
active, fruitful and beautiful state of the Body: These be the Marks and
Differences whereby we may know it from all things else; I mean Activity, not
in deeds of Moving only, but of Life and Sense also: This is it which makes up
the Nature of Youth: The other two Marks are taken in, not as needful helps,
either to Youth or BLISS, and such as may not be spared, (especially Beauty)
but because they be very notable Marks, as I said, to know Youth by; and that
as we heard of true Honor and Pleasure above, so these will also perforce hang
on and follow, though they be unlooked for and unregarded.

Then this is the matter underhand in this place; This we must prove possibly
to be kept and preserved unto our lives end; yea, and although it were lost
before, that it may be gotten again and restored: And yet, first, as our
Natural Heat is the cause of our Being, so the cause of our best Estate and
Youth, is the flower and best estate of it, that is, his chief strength and
quickness: Then keep or recover this, and all is done.

But we had need be sure of this, that the flower of Heat, makes us Young and
flourishing, and sure by proof and experience, the best assurance in the World;
Let us look all over, and we shall find it so.

To begin with Plants, although their life is dark, and they be but lame and
unperfect Wights, (for In Timaeo and De Pl^^. testatur Cl m. Alex. Stro. 8. in
p. 555. and Tho. Campan^lla de sen rerum, exert. l. 3. c. 14.
Plato gives them sense) yet their flourishing and decay, their Youth and Age,
(as I may term them) do clearly follow the quickness or dullness of their in
bred heat, caused by the two Seasons of Summer and Winter; as appears in Card.
Subt. l. 8. in p. 312. and Gonz. Ferdin. Ovied. hist. of the West Indies. and
Mathiol. Disc. nel prim^ lib. di Dioscor. in Prooem.
India, where for the continual heat and moisture and Summer of the Country, no
Plant feels Age, or fall of the Leaf, (that word is idle in those parts) save
Fen-greek, because by a strange property besides the rest, it has strange
cooling above the rest, standing in Water first, and then somewhat deeply from
the Sun. Nay, Card. ubi supra (y)
amongst us we see those Plants which are Hot and Dry, sound and hardy, able to
withstand the force of Cold, to keep their leaves in Winter.

Moreover, keep off that starving Cold, and cherish the Life within, and you
may help and amend Nature, and make any Plant flourish and bear in Winter. How
is that? But an easy matter, T^o: Erastus disput. advers Paracels. par. 2. in
p. 181.
plant it in a Stove, and cover the Root with Horse-dung, and the rest with
Chaff, and you shall see the proof, if not the profit worth your cost and
travel. The same is seen in Beasts; But let us leave the middle, that we come
not to the end too late.

Then why are Children and old Folk less active, fruitful and beautiful than
the younger sort, but for want of heat? for let the Sun the first day, as Galen
says, or before the Birth, as I showed, be greatest in store, bulk and
quantity, because it waxes and waneth still with his food, our first Moistner,
and this from thence decays daily; yet this quality, strength and activity,
which makes him worthy the name of Heat, is then little, as drowned with
overmuch foreign and strange wetness, (like as we see in a green Faggot) and
unable to work his will, and show himself, either to knit the Sinews for
Strength, or concoct the Blood for Seed and Color, before that foreign
moisture be spent and gone, which is not in long time.

Now for old Folks, what is so clear as this, that by reason of the daily decay
of the food of Life, the fainting heat, lets the strong knot of Strength and
Lustiness slack and loose again, and the good concoction and color of Blood,
which before made Seed and Beauty, to decline and grow to waterishness? In the
same case are sick Men and Women for the same cause; And albeit Women have
their Seed, yet it is not hot and quickening Seed, but a dead Stuff, only fit
to receive Life and Fashion: And admit they be more A^ist. de gener. an^m. l.
1. c. 19.
fair and smooth than Men, which are hotter, it comes by chance, because the
foul Leavings, the blemish of Beauty, by the force of manly heat are driven
outward, when the slackness of the heat of Women suffers them to remain
within, and turn into Menstrues, a thing more grievous and noisome, in truth,
than Beauty is delightsome. And thereof Ubi sup^a cap. 20.
Aristotle very well calls her a Weak Man, which our Tongue more fitly calls a
Wombed-man; and he makes the Male in all kinds, to be that which is able to
concoct the Blood; and that which is not, the Female.

Then, if it be cleared of all doubt, that the chief strength of heat is the
cause of the flower of Age and Youth, and nothing else in the World; Let us
take and stick to that matter, and see how that may be maintained first, and
then restored.

I will not urge the way of upholding heat in Plants, abovesaid, nor yet the
witness of the German, who has found out means for the same, both in Plants
and Wights, as he teaches in his High Opinions; Nor yet make Account of those
Examples, which by course of Nature and good Order of Life have done well, and
drawn near to this matter, as of Lucia Plin. l. 7. c. 48.
the Player, who pronounced upon the Stage at Rome an hundred years together;
nor of Cornelia, who bare Plin. l. 7. c. 14.
Saturnine the Consul after sixty two years; nor yet of King Mass^nissa, who
about Ninety got a Child, and ever t^avelled both in Frost and Snow
bare-headed; nor of such other like, notably marked with long continued Life
and Lustiness; I will come to the point at once.

Lib. 7. c. ^
Pliny (such an Autbor) reports, that the whole Nation of India lives long
free from all Diseases, wellnigh, and grief of Body, not once touched with ache
of Head, Teeth or Eyes, nor troubled with spitting, all the great Companions
(as we see) of Age, that we may gather by likely guess, when they know not the
Companions, the thing it self is unknown to them: But what needs any guessing,
when the same Man sor certain, and in plain Terms assures, That in that part
of India, where the Sun being right over their heads casts no shadow, the Men
are five Cubits and two handfuls high, and live an hundred and thirty years,
never waxing Old, and being when they Die, as in their middle Age, and chief
Strength and Lustiness? what needed more words? If this Report be true, as we
may not easily doubt of such an Author, then sure this matter is not
impossible, as they would have it, but all Men, if they lived in such an Air,
and took so good a race of Life as I described, (I must still fly to that
succor) might preserve their Youth, and never was Old, until the term and
stint of Life appointed. Or if this kind of teaching be now somewhat stale,
and bare with wearing, yet perhaps some other means may be found for the
matter, in the Storehouse of Skill and Cunning. Let us see, much more briefly
than we have done before, because this part is already well-nigh dispatched; so
straight is the link of all these helps, that one can scarce be loosened
without the rest, and all must go together.

Then, what means may we find? what preserves this natural and heavenly Heat
of ours? the common use takes hot Meats and Drinks, and thinks that these
preserves Heat and Nature; as simply, as if a Man should put Lime to the Root
of a Tree which he loved; for as this hastneth the Fruit with Heat, but kills
the Stock with Drought, and soaking up the lively juice and moisture, so in
them their hot Meats out of kind, laid to the Root of Life, quicken and stir
up the Spirits, the fruit of Life, for a season; but withal underhand, drink
up and waste the first Moisture, that is, the whole Stock of Nature: and so by
softning thus the hardness of Age, as if it were Plat. (...). in p. 527.
Iron in the Fire, they make it seem for a time Youthful and Lively, yet it is
but a vain and empty show and shadow; and as Iron when it comes out of the Fire
is the harder for it, so they make their Age more unwieldy, and draw it on the
faster by that means. And that is the very cause, together with Care and
Pleasure, why Princes and Nobles, by drying up their Bodies in that sort, live
not so long, for the most part, nor in so good Health, as other Folk; and
depart especially at such times (if the Report be true) as those bushed Stars
called Comets, appear. Because whether it be a steadfast Star, or an Elemental
Flame, (I am not to dispute such Questions here) it is never seen but in very
fine and dry Weather, which consumes dry Bodies, and sends them packing; and
besides, (though it be besides my purpose) turns good humors into scum, called
Choler, cause of Broil and Sedition; and so making, as we see, Card. Subt. l.
4. in p. 157.
the Bush-starr a plain sign of both these matters, but causes of neither.

What then preserves Heat? Learned Men have brought in certain fine, fat, and
aerie Meats, as Butter, Oil and Honey, and Vide Plin. l. 11. c. 12. and Lib.
22. c. 24. and Athen. Deipnos. l. 2. in p. 46.
commended them for very great helps and means to preserve Life and Youth, (for
both are done by one way, and under one) but especially one of them, that is,
Honey, have they lifted up above the rest, for this the Be, that little, cold
and bloodless Beast, by reason it is both made of, and fed with the same,
lives so long above that kind of parted Wights, even Card. Subt. l. 6. in p.
365. At Arist. lib. de respirat. cap. 4. septem tantum annos vivere ait.
eight years, as they report; and because Manna that famous Nourisher unto Man,
is nothing else but Honey, Arist. Hist. anim. l. 5. c. 22. and Card. Subt. lib.
21. in p. 695. and Scal. Exer. 7.
a Dew concocted in Hot Countries by the heat of Heaven, in stead of the Be;
and for such like Causes too long to be told in so short a race of Speech, as I
have throughout appointed. But these Men are wide, as well, though not so far
as the former; for if you remember well, when we spoke of things that preserved
Life, (which is nothing else but Heat) there were found only two belonging to
that use, like Meat and Exercise; and that (to let pass Exercise) although the
finer Breaths of the outward Air, or of Meat, may serve to feed the Ethereal
Spirit, which carries Life, yet our heavenly Heat must have finer food, an
Ethereal Body, which is ready and at hand no where in Nature, save in our
first Moisture of our Body.

Then this fat and aerie Meat of theirs, may help to lengthen Life and Youth
indeed; but not directly by feeding Life, and maintaining the first Moisture,
but by another by-way procuring Health and Soundness, (for Sickness and Disease
bring Age and Death apace.) And this is because for their great cleanness,
whereunto they be wrought by Nature and Art together, they neither breed (as
other Meats do many) any drossy Disease, nor stop the Lives and heats free
course and passage.

Since then there is nothing in the world within the compass of reach, able to
maintain and nourish Heat, but it must needs faint and wane daily with our
first Moisture; How falls it out, say you, that those Indians so kept their
Youth without waxing Old, as we heard out of Pliny? I cannot tell, unless the
Sun, for that great and familiar acquaintance sake, has favored and blessed
them above all People, and brought down Ether, and given them to nourish them;
for their Soil and Meat, because it lies right under the Suns walk and
travel, Card. Subt. lib. 1. in page 122. and Pallad. Spagyr. cap. 23. in p.
307. and Marcell. Paling. in Aquario. and Gaud. Merula memorab. l. 5. c. 14.
and S. Alban. Not. Hist. cent. 4. exp. 98. and Pet. Mart. Decad. 3. l. 1. and
Jos. Acost. Not. Hist. Jud. li. 2. c. 8. 9, 10. and G^ovan. Boter. relat.
universal. par. 1. li. 4.
is not through extreme heat uninhabitable, (as in times past some fondly
supposed) but of all other the best and most temperate, by reason that extreme
Heat of Heaven is most equally answered, and justly tempered with Cold and
Moisture of the Ground proportionable; which thing they knew not, because their
Eyes were set too high, to see the lower cause and course of Nature most plain
and certain.

For GOD, when he meant to make our changeable World here below, by a
wonderful fore-sighted Wisdom, stinted the Sun within the known bounds, the
North and South turns, (which they call Tropicks) lest if he had run round
about, he should have worn and wasted it every where alike, and made it smooth
and even in all places, and so all either dry Ground, or a standing Poole, both
unfit for the variety of Change, which he meant to see play before him. But now
he is so curbed and restrained within those bounds aforesaid, he can wear the
Ground no farther then his force can reach, nor any otherwise than as his Force
serves: Gonzal. Ferd. Oviedo, Hist. of the West Ind. in fo. 183.
So that the Earth must needs be most worn and lowest where it lies within the
compass of his Walk, and so rise by little and little on both sides without
the Turns, until it come to the top and highest pitch, where it is furthest
off; that is, under the Pins (which they call Poles) of the World.

Then here, for the Coldness, the Earth is fit to thicken the Air and breed
Water, and for the bent and falling to send it down to the widest and lowest
part; where by the great strength of Heat it is drawn upon heaps, and in great
plenty; and for this cause, and the length of the Night, it cannot scatter
abroad, and vanish away to naught, but thickens apace, and falls again
abundantly, raining three or four times a day; whereby we may judge that this
middle girdle where our Indians inhabit, cannot be so broyled and unsufferable,
(as some have avowed) but in all reason very mild and temperate, and think,
that as the Sun meant to favor all parts as much as may be, so chiefly, and
above all that (as Reason, yea and Necessity bound him) with which he is best
acquainted. And as this is certain (by report of all Authors) in all other
things, yea and in Men, touching all other Gifts and Blessings, so we may
guess this one, which we have in hand, was not skipt and left out in so large
a Charter.

But for all this, and in good sadness, (we have but argued hitherto) it is
not good to seek dispense against the Law of Nature; and it were better to
discredit Pliny the Reporter (though he be never so good an Author) than Nature
her self the Author of all things. For this Story is set against the whole
course and drift of Nature, whose Works as they be not woven and made up at
once, so they decay and wear away by little and little: And therefore admit
these men of India by special License from above, do bear their Age fresh and
young a long time, in respect of other Nations; yet we must in no wise think
this is for Ever, and until Death, as Pliny says; for then they should not
dye and depart as other Men do, naturally, which is, when Age creeping on, and
changing by little and little, is at last made ripe and falling; but rather by
some sudden force be taken, and as it were delivered by and by to the hands of
I know not what Hangman amongst the Destinies, to be cut off and put to death
by Violence. But what Force can that be? Nay I assure you farther, that if the
stock of Sickness and Disease were away, as, says he, it is almost, they
might live for ever; another breach of the never-broken Laws of Kind.

Wherefore let this Story go, and us hold this rule of certain, that by reason
there is no other Food for natural Heat, open in Kind but our fitst Moisture,
which because for want of supply, it likewise wastes daily, Youth must needs
by Nature fail away, and cannot last for ever: And yet we must also (to come to
the purpose) remember how it was full often above proved, that such a supply of
due food of Life, were to be made by Skill, and fetched out of the bottom of
Natural things, by the Divine Art of HERMES. Wherefore to avoid the jarre and
ill sound of our often beating upon one thing, our Cureall and Heaven above
declared, is it that feeds our hearts, that holds and perserveth Youth; This
is it, I say, that does the deed, for many causes set down before: I will send
them that cannot come hither along the right way, back again to take all before
them.

But there is another thing, Motion, I mean, that helps to bear up the state of
Life, and Heat, which I scant touched there, and yet it should be handled;
because although it be not so needful as the former, yet it cannot in any case
be wanting: For as a Martial People, like unto Mars, (as we term it) and
Valor it self, loses his Glory and Brightness in Peace and Quietness; So
this Heat that rules our Body, though he be never so strong and lusty, yet he
cannot so soon rest, as he decays, and, as it were, rusts with Idleness: Nay,
the Body it self, being (as I showed above) an ayery and fiery temperature,
must needs have quick Motion, as one of the two Pillars of his Estate; And
therefore Plata, Plat. in Timaeo. Plutarch. lib. de Praecept. san. sub finem.
by the Example of the great World; very well advises us still to move both
Body and Mind, and that together, if we mean to have them long to continue. And
we find his counsel good by daily proof, when we see those that move the
Memory most, as wise and learned Men, to hold it longest; but because they do
not for the most part exercise their Body, to lose that quickly; whereas, quite
contrary, the common sort, by reason they move this much and that other little,
are a great while in Body lusty, when their Memory is gone as quickly.

How Moving increases Heat, appears in all places, first in the spring of
all Heat, the Sun above, which could in no wise serve to stretch so far, as to
heat half the World at once, if those huge heaps of heavenly Beams and Spirits
were shut up fast, as they be in stones and metals, and such like close and
hard lower lodgings, and not (as we see them) most free, quick, lively, and
swiftly stirring: Card. Subt. l. 2. in p. 81.
No more does any Fire below burn so fiercely, as that by a cold blast driven
up close together, we see to move, and stir most lively.

To pass the Lightning, (as the swiftest, so the strangest fire in the World)
and a number more such proofs, (for what should I stand so long upon so plain a
matter?) Motion does not only increase Heat where it is, but beget and
purchase it of nothing: and not only that way which every Man sees by rubbing
two hard things together, but also by grating an hard thing against the soft
and yielding Air, which is somewhat rare, yet known to the Card. Var. l. 7. c.
39. Coe!. Rhod. Lect. ant. l. 8. c. 12. Jo. Heilfield Sphynx Theolo. cap. 6.
Babylonians in time past, when they used to roast Eggs by whirling them about
in a sling, in the same manner. And so those Archers Arist. de Coelo, l. 2. c.
7. and Coel. Rhod. Lect. ant. l. 24. c. 16. and R. T. Lucrec. lib. 6. and
Algaret. Philosoph. l. 2. tract. 2. c. 4. and Fort. Licet. de vita, lib. 3. c.
15.
that have seen the leaden Heads of their Arrows to melt in flying; so great a
father of Heat is Motion, that we may judge easily he is able to keep it, when
it is once gotten.

Now, if this be sufficiently shown and proved, we need bestow the less labor
in teaching Men how to move their Heat and Spirits, because every Child that
can go, can do it, and it is enough to exhort them that love themselves to do
it.

Then by these two Means of like Heat and Motion, we have our Youth still, that
is, our chief Color, Fruitfulness and Activity; Is there any thing else? These
make up all the being and nature of Youth; except you fear the loss of his
Hang-byes, and appurtenances, which are, Teeth, the sweetness of Breath, the
smoothness of the Skin, and of Hair the color that is natural. But it is no
danger, if you will let me run them over; for if our Heat and Moisture remain
without decay, first the Jawbones, wherein the Teeth be mortized, will be full
and moist, able to gripe and glue, and so to hold the same from falling: Then
as ill Smell comes St. Alban^ Not. Hist. or Sylva Sylva um Ce^t. 9. Exp. 33.
of rawness, and want of Heat to concoct it, Wrinkles of Cold, which makes to
shrink, and gathers that together, which heat spreads abroad smoothly; and gray
Hairs from the same cause; for when our Natural Heat faints and fails, it
withdraws it self from the outmost and coldest parts soonest, and leaves the
Moisture raw, which, for lack of inward Heat and Salt to keep it, lies open to
the force of outward Cold, whence comes all rottenness, and from this, a white
Coat, and hoariness. Therefore we (...) Pind. Olymp. 4.
see why Sickness and Sorrow bring gray Hairs so fast, yea sometimes presently;
As, to pass by the plainer, you shall hear of one strange Example of a
sorrowful young Gentleman of Italy, Card. lib. de Anim. immort. in p. 212. and
Treat. of ancient and modern Times, lib. 5. c. 6. and Scalig. Exerc. 312. and
Bart. Keckerm. Syst. Physic. l. 3. c. 17. and Levin. Lemnius and Jo. Rudolph.
Cam^rar. Syllog. mem. medic. cent. 2. particula 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
that being fallen into the hands of Pirates, and laid wrapped in a Sail ready to be
cast overboard, and within four and twenty hours space released and set at
liberty, by great Grief and Fear, forcing his Heat to retire to the Heart his
Castle, made his Head white and aged in that space, and could never get it turn
again all his life, which was long after.

And so we have this point briefly and easily dispatched, because it was a
loose and easy matter: But the next, that is, to recover Young Years spent and
blown away, seems no such thing, nor to be used in that Order; for as a new and
strong Building, by due and daily reparation is kept sound a long time,
whereas, if for lack of care it be once fallen to decay, it cannot without great
cost and time be renewed; even so it is of our Body: As it is easy if it be
taken in time, with heed to preserve it, so if by Negligence the Weather have
once beat in, and made it rotten, it seems a mavelous work to repair it.

Although, indeed, it be much harder not only than his fellow, but then all
the rest that went before; yet we will not give it over now, and like an idle
Poet, faint in the last Act of Life: wherefore let us go forward, and with all
our endeavor strive to show, that Youth long before lost, though not easily,
yet as well may be recovered; as it was before preserved.

There be so many kinds of waxing Young again named in Philosophy, and given
to the nature of Wights, that it were good first to sort them out, to say which
we mean in this place, lest our labor fall into their hands that can quickly
mistake. One of these ways is by Name only, and not in deed, as when the soft
and bark-skinned Beasts use by course of kind, twice a year, at the Spring and
Fall of the Leaf, to cast off their upper Coat and Skin, they say they put off
Old Age, and wax Young again; when it is in truth, the putting on of Age
rather, and decay of Nature, as appears to them that know the Cause, that
even for very Cold and Drought, Card. Subt. l 9. in p. 353.
the two plain Ear-marks of Age, their Skins do loosen and wither away.

There is another kind as far in extremity that other way, and altogether in
deed, which Alomaean calls joining of ones End to his Beginning, and which he
says Man cannot do, and therefore dies: And this is, and ever was the Opinion
not of Poets only, but of Philosophers, and not of Greece only, but of all
Nations, except our old Egyptians, (...), Synes. lib. de Provid. princ.
Men always in all rare Wisdom excepted: These Men, as I said above, do not
only use to mark the steps of Kind, and her most strange and unwonted
changes, but also set and venture upon the like by Skill; yea and to pass
further, if any Reason will carry them: and so at length they come, I know not
how, nor whether by guess or knowledge, to this Rule and certain Ground, that
it was possible for any Man, put out by forcible and violent Death, by natural
means to Rise and quicken again, and so to be renewed, and as it were by a new
Birth restored.

But what be their new and mavelous means? which way is this incredible
course performed? After they saw not only some parts of other Wights, (as
Card. Subt. l. 9. in p. 371, 372.
the Tails of Lizards, the Plin. l. 11. c. 37.
Eyes of Snakes, and Arist. hist. anim. l. 6. c. 5.
Swallows) but also the whole Bodies of cold and bloodless ones, clean rased
and destroyed, naturally to spring afresh, and to be restored; As a Paracels.
lib. de Resuscit. rerum, Tom. 6. in p. 226. and Of the Fish called Macove, see
Joan. de Santos Hist. Aethiop. orient. ap. Purch. Pilgrim. vol. 2. l. 9. c. 12.
sect. 3. in page 1546. and Of the Snake Cucurjuba, see him, Tom. 4. l. 7. c. 1.
sect. 6. in p. 1317. and Of the Serpent Cobrus, see him, Tom. 4. l. 6. c. 8. in
p. 1243.
Snake cut in pieces, and rotted in Dung, to quicken, and every piece to prove
a whole Snake again, and such like, they began to reach by device and practice
at some further matters, and to slay some hot and bloody Wights, that spring
not out of nothing, but are bred by force of Seed and conjunction of Male and
Female, and by the like kindly corruption, to raise them up again, and renew
them, (as Paracels. lib. de not. rerum seu de generat. rerum not. Tom. 6. in p.
201.
a Bird burnt alive in a close Glass, and so rotted, and then enclosed in a
shell, to hatch it under a Hen, and restore the same;) And other such strange
proofs they ceased not to make, until at last they durst be bold to think, that
any Wight, even a Man and all, might by the same course wax young, and be born
again still and live for ever.

This is the second way of waxing Young again, and as great an Extreme as that
other, and as far from my meaning: Though there be diverse Reports and Stories
flown abroad, of Men that took the same race in themselves, and others, and
found both good and bad success, according (as a Man that favors it will
think) as the Work was tended by them which were put in trust. Medea sped well,
say they, in proof upon Jasons father, and made him Young again, as Tully
says, recoquendo; But HERMES, and the Poet Virgil, and that Spanish Earl
failed upon themselves, as some hold, but as others hold, they had good luck,
and came to their purpose.

What should a Man say to this matter? Albeit I do not choose this kind of
Renewing, yet I will not condemn it without cause, and judge it for kind
impossible; for I see no Reason but that the Story of the Snake may be full
easily true, because it is bred by it self, and of more unfit Stuff in the same
manner; And for the rest, all is one to Nature, if the Stuff and Place be meet
and current, having that her general Seed of begetting, (which I said) was all
one in all things, in her bosom ever ready, and thereby making yet (as we heard
before) all seeded Plants without seed, somewhere; yea and perfect Wights, both
Water and Land ones: And at first, when the Stuff and Womb, and her own Heat
and all served very fitly, having wrought Man and all, so.

But now why is Seed given unto things? Because Nature for want of the former
helps (as they could not last for ever) is not able, in all places, to work the
raw stuff of the beginnings so far, to such perfection, unless she find both
the stuff well dressed, and half made to her hand; and an hot Womb, like an
artificial Furnace to help and set her forward: Well then, for this our matter,
and manner of restoring Man, let us call it to the account of Reason, and
consider what is that Seed that makes Man, and the place where he is made: What
is all the work? Is it any thing else, but a part of Man (except his Mind)
rotted in a continual, even, gentle, moist and wightly Heat? Is it not like,
that the whole Body rotted in like manner, and in a Womb agreeable, shall swim
out, at last quicken, and arise the same thing? I cannot tell; I will neither
avow nor disavow the matter; Nature is deep, and wonderful in her Deeds, if
they be searched and unwound to the bottom: I cannot tell, I say, Nature may
suffer this, but not Religion; And yet it is a dangerous trial, as our Men, and
the Poet found it, by some Men's sayings.

They might more safely have made a proof upon a piece of themselves, which we
call Seed, ordered by that skilful kind of Recoction, (which has been found
true De Homunculo. Vide Paracels. lib. de gener. rer. not. Tom. 6. in p. 204
as some Report, and I think it certain) or perhaps more kindly and thoroughly,
but, sure, more civilly and religiously, in the due place appointed: for this
is also a kind of renewing of himself, and waxing Young again, when his Child
is (as De anim. l. 2. c. 4.
Aristotle says well) another Himself, only severed and set apart from
himself. But neither is this third kind enough for us; we must have the whole
and unparted Man restored.

Then the fourth Kind is it I mean, which is indeed a Mean between all the
rest; especially between that empty Word, and dangerous Deed aforesaid;
performing more than the one in the outside, and less within than the other:
for this way does not only by a better race of refreshing it with Heat and
Moisture, renew the Skin, but the Hair, Nails and Teeth also, though these by
the same way of putting off the old ones. But for the inward, chief and needful
parts, hewn out of the Seed at first, by the Natural Workman, it shall neither
make nor mar any, only change and alter, purge and place them all in their
former State and Soundness, Youth and Lustiness.

Then let us see how we may be renewed and wax Young again in that order;
beginning first with those idle and needless things (I cannot call them Parts)
of the Body, which after we were made up and finished, grew and sprung out from
the Leavings of our Meat and Nourishment, the Teeth, Nails and Hair; As for the
Skin, it is a part of the Seed, or the Crust that overcast the thing, when it
was fully baked. Then, as these keep no certain course and order of Kind in
coming, for (to omit Hair, that comes and goes upon every light Occasion) some
are born without Nails; some with Teeth, when others again have none before
they wax old, and such like disorders; so, no doubt, by Skill, they may come
and go again, without any hurt, or great change to the Body. De Xanche
Samothraceno. Not. hist. lib. 11. c. 37.
Pliny tells of one whose Teeth came again after he was an hundred years old
and upwards: and I know not well whether the Soldiers in Plin. l. 25. c. 3.
and Card. Subt. l. 2. in p. 103.
Germanicus his Host, that by drinking of a Spring by the River Rhyne, had
their Teeth shaken out and loose, had them come again, or no: But this is
certain, that there be Waters in the World, which by a special quality, make
those Beasts that drink thereof, cast their Hair, Horns and Hoofs, and so renew
them.

What need many more words? This part is easy, and of small weight, we may
pass it over: But that an old, withered, crooked, feeble and barren Man, should
be taken from the brink of his Grave, as it were, and led back to his former
Youth and Lustiness, is a thing, say they, both in Truth false, and in Reason
incredible; nay, if two such Men were set before us, it would seem, in sense,
ridiculous: -- Indeed it will seem to such Men, as are either all Sense, and no
Reason, or else whose Wit is all bestowed upon the search of such Truth, as is
not worth the searching.

If it had been spent about the deep and hidden works of Nature, there would
have some appeared as great as this is, and staid all Childish Wonders; for my
part, I am willing enough to supply that want, to unfold the greatest Acts of
Kind, and set them before you, but that this Work grows too fast, and proves
bigger than either I wist or would, it is planted upon so good and fruitful a
Ground; yet have one or two of the fittest examples, and nearest, and match
them and this together, that you may see it, at last, fall out no jest, and
worthy laughter (I am loath to fall into the mouths of Jesters) but a sad and
earnest matter.

Is it not as hard and wonderful a change, think you, to see a Woman suddenly
prove a Man, as to behold an old Man, by little and little wax Young again?
Compare; -- yes, but you doubt of the Story: Plin. l. 7. c. 4. Vide Strozz.
Cicogna. Pal. de gl^ incauti. prospet. 1. l. 4. c. 5. in p. 412, 413, etc. and
Admirable and memorab. Hist. of our Times by J. Goulart, in p. 275. and Phot.
Biblioth. 244. ap. Purch. Pilgrim. l. 3. c. 1. in p. 226.
Pliny is mine Author still, who reports of three such sundry chances, whereof
he himself saw, (he names the place and party) performed upon her marriage-day.
(i) Gardan doubts no whit of the Truth, but ventures at a Reason for it, (which
because it is both likely to be true, and unseemly to be told, I will let it
go) and voucheth the same change Cardan. de variet. l. 8. c. 43. in p. 4* 7.
and Bart. Keckerm. Syst Phys. l. 5. c. 3. in p. 754, 755, etc.
again, but in another kind; and yet more strangely than the first, and
whereof no Man ever durst or could yield a Reason. Plin. l. 8. c. 30. and Ovid.
Metam, l. ^5. and Oppian. de Venat. l. 3. and Aelian. l. 1. c. 24. Videtamen e
contia Fort. Licet. de recondit. antiq. lucern. l. 2. c. 37.
The same Man again says, that the cruel Beast Hyaena every year changes her
Sex, being by course one year Male, another year Female, never ceasing nor
missing that strange and mavelous turning. Is not this a much more hard and
greater kindly change and alteration than that we spoke of? Then we grant
Nature is able to do this, if she be willing; But it seems no, because she
never does it; she runs still, if she be not let her appointed race: But
if there be many dead chances able to let and hinder this Course of Nature,
how much more can the Wit of Man (which is a spark of that Mind which gave
Kind her Commission) do it? As he does often (if I might stand to show it)
both stop and lengthen, and turn her course another way, and yet she is ever
willing and consenting.

Let us see then for this matter in hand, how Skill is able to overruled Kind
by her own consent, and make her willing to return, and wax Young again. First
let us know, that all Philosophers Macrob. in Some. Scip. l. 1. c. 14.
hold the Life and Soul, and Natural Heat to be always of it self young and
lusty, and never old, but to appear so by reason of the failing parts, her
Instruments; And that I have often showed it a kind of Fire, waxing and waning
still according to her Meat and Motion: Then here is one good help to the great
Work of Renewing: In like sort the parts of the Body are not marred and lost,
but as they say of a Rich Man, that he is decayed, when his Money, the Life of
the World, has left and forsaken him Arist. de anim. l. 1. c. 3.
; Even so, when our Natural Heat, the Life of this little World, is faint and
gone, the Body shrinks up, and is defaced; But bring again Heat into the parts,
and likewise Money into the Bankrupts Coffers, and they shall be both lusty,
and flourish again as much as ever they did.

But how may this Heat be brought again? To make few words, even as she is kept
and held, by due Meat and Motion; for if she faint, and falls for want of
them only, then give her them, and she shall recover her self again; Meat is
the bait that draws her down: Motion comes after, like a Gad-Bee to prick her
forward; but the work is performed in this Order: first this Meat, which is
that fine and Ethereal Oil often above-described, by the exceeding piercing
swiftness divides, scatters and scowres away the gross and foul Dregs and
Leavings, which for want of the Tillage of Heat, had overgrown in our Bodies,
and which was cast like a blockish Stay-fish in the way, to stay the free
course of the Ship of Life: These flying out of all sides abundantly, pluck up
all the old Leavings of Hair, Nails and Teeth by the roots, and drive them out
before them: In the mean while our Medicine makes not only clear way and
passage for Life, if she list to stir and run her wonted race, (which some
think enough of this matter) but also scatters all about her due and desired
Meat and first Moisture to draw her forward.

By which means our Life having gotten both her full strength and liveliness,
and returned like the Sun in Summer into all our quarters, begins to work
afresh as she did at first; (for being the same upon the same, she must needs
do the same) knitting and binding the weak and loose Joints and Sinews,
watering and concocting all by good digestion, and then the idle parts, like
leaves, shall in this hot Summer spring and grow forth afresh, out of this new
and young temper of the Body, and all the whole face and show shall be young
again and flourishing.

This is quickly spoken, say you; If it were as soon done, it were a happy
Medicine; Nay that were an Miracle, but I work no Miracles; I only help, as I
said, the willing race of Kind: wherefore, as a Man is long decaying and
wearing away, or rather in making and waxing to his perfection, so in mending,
no doubt, he cannot return all at once, but must creep back by little and
little, and so be restored: or else I would have told you at the first dash of
that Spring in the Isle Bovicca, which (as P. Decad. 2. lib. 10. Bojucam sive
Agueveo appellat. and Card. Boniccam Subt. lib. 2. in p. 7. and Gaud. Merula
Bonamem, l. 3. c. 4. and Langius Doniccam, epist. med. 79. ap. Strozz. Cicogn.
Pal. de gli incauti prospet. 1. l. 4. c. 7. in p. 390. See Anton. Herrera his
Descript. of the West Indies in Purch. Pilgr. vol. 3. l. 5. c. 1. in p. 868.
Martyr does witness) will in few days restore a Man quite, (having gray hairs
and wrinkles) and make him young again. Nay, if I had taken a course to delight
Women and Children, and to win credit among the common sort, I could have
sought the Legend, and rifled all the goodly Wonders in the World, and fitted
many to my purpose. But as I serve Nature, and wait upon a wiser Mistress, yea
and in the most inward and secret place among them, so I would by my Will,
speak nothing that should not be pleasing in her sight, and well-sounding in
the Ears of Wisdom; wherefore, let these few suffice for this Matter.

CHAP. IV. Of RICHES.
WE are now come to that point at last, which the Golden World looked for
first, the way to Riches; because it is indeed the last and lowest part, (being
Servants, and so to be used) and yet very needful, and not to be spared in this
blessed Household; for although we have all the helps of Long Life, Health and
Youth that may be, yet if we want the service of Riches, Poverty will besiege
us, and keep us under, and cut off and hinder many goodly Deeds and Works of
Wisdom and Virtue: -- But what are Riches? for the World and Philosophy agree
not in this account: No nor this within it self. The World (...). Arist. Pol.
l. 1. c. 9. (...). Ibid. c. 8.
reckons store of Gold and Silver to be Riches; Aristotle, enough of needful
things; the Stoics, enough of Earth and Air: To begin here; These might be
stretched and made large enough, but that we know their straitness: would they
have us live by breath alone, and never eat, according to the guise which I set
out in the Art of Healing? Be it possible, as it seems, yet it is somewhat
feeble, as I showed there, and so somewhat halting and unperfect (by lack of
Youth and Lustiness) for our first and perfect Life appointed, besides the
maims and hurts of Poverty, which I right now touched.

Aristotle is somewhat strait also, for so the Beasts are rich as well; If he
had put in enough of things needful for good Life, wherefore we were made, he
had said much better, yet not all, for so should all the bodily means and helps
aforesaid be counted Riches, a great deal too confusedly. Now much less can we
rate the Golden-wealth right and true Riches, Arist. Pol. l. 1. c. 9.
because a Man may die with hunger for all this; as he that sold a Mouse for
two hundred pence, died himself for lack of Food, when the Buyer lived; and
Plin. l. 9. c. 57.
this was done (to let go feigned Midas) when Hannibal besieged Casiline.

Then true Riches are enough of outward things needful for good Life, that is,
for our BLISS above-set: But because that golden and worldly Wealth is a ready
and certain way and means to this, (out-barring Violence, which no man can
warrant) we will use the cause for the effect in this place, and strive to show
how all Men may get enough of Gold and Silver; and that by weaker means than
HERMES Medicine, as the place require^h, although by the same way concerning
the Stuff we work on, that is, by turning base Metals into Silver and Gold.
This is the hard matter, which turns the edge of worldly Wits; the brightness,
I say, of this glorious thing, dazles the Eyes of the common and blear-eyed
People, because it is, in their account, the best and highest and most happy
thing in the World; when in deed and truth, as it is the least and lowest, and
worst of all the helps unto BLISS belonging, so it is in proof and trial, the
less hard and troublesome both to Art and Nature, the most ready, and easy to
be gotten and performed.

And to show this, (we will make no long tarrying) it were good first of all to
enter into the way and order which Nature below keeps, in making the Metals
under ground. If I thought I might not run into that part of Plato in Apolog.
Socrat. statim a principio.
Socrates accusation, for searching over-deeply the Under-ground-matters: But I
hope I shall not, now by the mighty pains of Miners Spades and Mattocks, the
way is made so plain before me; or else sure, as they be indeed, I would
account them over-deep and hard for my Pen to dig in.

Then all underground Bodies, which the Arabians call Minerals, are either
Stones, or hard Succos concretos vocat G. Agric.
Juyces (which we name Middle-Minerals) or else they be Metals: These, as all
other perfect things, have all one Stuff, Earth and Water, and one Workman, the
Heat of Heaven, as I said above: for their Womb, because they be but dead
things, as they call them, Comment. in Hermet. lib. de lap. Phys. secret. c. 1.
T. C. vol. 4. p. 693.
the Earth will serve. But for that Nature meant to make most perfect things in
that kind, which require long time to finish them, she chose a most sure and
certain place, Card. Subt. l. 5. in p. 190.
even the deep and hard Rock it self; not to the end the Earth might hide them
as hurtful things, and lean upon them with all her weight, as De benefic. l. 7.
c. 10.
Seneca says very severely, or rather finely (for we know how he hunts after
fineness) like an Orator, to whom it is granted to lie a little in a Story,
that he may bring it in the more prettily, as the Concessum enim Rhetoribus
ementiri, ut aliquid dicere possint argutius. Cicero de clar. Oratoribus.
Orator himself confesses.

Then the manner of the work of Minerals is this: first the Water piercing
downwards, softens and breaks the Rock, taking her course still that way where
it is softest, to make the cross and crooked race, which we see, Ibidem de
stiriis Falopius tract. de met. seu fossilib. subter. l. 5. c. 7.
of Wombs, called Veins and Pipes of the Minerals: But as the Water runs (to
take the stuff as the next thing in order) it washes and shaveth off small
Aquae fluxus t^rram m^^iens, and s^cum rapiens. Agric. de Ort. and cause.
subterran. l. 5. c. 7.
pieces of the Rock, and when it stands and gathers together in one place,
Roger. Bach. specul. Alchim. c. 4. T. C. ol. 2. p. 414.
by continual drayning cleanses and refineth the same, until the middle heat
of the Earth, which is the heat of Heaven, come, and by long boiling makes it
thicker, and grow together in one body of many kinds, according to the
difference of the stuff and heat, which they call Hard-juices, as I said, or
Middle-minerals.

This Workman continuing and holding on his labor, (though Agricola Ort. and
causis subter. l. 5. c. 12.
says the cold and drought of the Rock now lays hold upon the stuff, and by
little and little, at last binds it into that hard form of a Metal; Nay,
though Aristotle from the beginning gives the work to the same cause) out of
the heart, as it were, and best part of them, wringeth out at last, a clean,
close and heavy, raw, waterish and running Body, called Quicksilver. Here it
stands in perfection of this Mineral work, except there chance (which chance
happens often) by the means of that boiling any contrary hot and dry breath of
the same kind, to be made withal in the same place. Then this meeting with
that raw, waterish and unshapen lump, like Rennet with Milk, or Seed with
Menstrue, curdles, thickens, and fashions it into the standing body of a Metal.

This Mineral breath our Sever. Dan. Id. med. Phil. c 7. in p. 67. 68.
Men, for his likeness in Quality, (though their Substance do greatly differ)
do use to call Brimstone: Now when this Vide Bernard. Trevisan. Epist. ad
Thom. Bovan. Artis auriferae vol. 2. in p. 83. 84.
second and earthly heat is come into the work, the mild Vide Bernard.
Trevisan. Epist. ad Thom. Bovan. Artis auriferae vol. 2. in p. 83. 84.
heat of Heaven sets the stuff, which stayed before, to work again, and drives
it forward, and these Vide Bernard. Trevisan. Epist. ad Thom. Bovan. Artis
auriferae vol. 2. in p. 83. 84.
two together, by continual boiling and mingling, alter and change, cleanse and
refine it from degree to degree, until at last, after many years labor, it
came to the top of perfection in Cleanness, finenesse, and Closeness, which
they call Gold. These degrees, if the Heat be gentle and long-suffering (as
they say) be first Christophle de Gamon. Tresors de Tresors. in p. 39 and Hen.
de L^nthat. Comment. Ib.
Lead, then Tin, thirdly Silver, and so to Gold: But if it be strong and
sudden, it turns the weak work out of the way quickly, and burns it up, and
makes naught but Iron, or at least if the Heat be somewhat better, Copper. --
Yea, and sometimes the foulness of that e^rthly Brimstone alters the course of
Nature, in this work. As also there is odds Gast. Clav. Apol. Chrysop. and
arg. T. C. vol. 2. in. p. 80.
of Quicksilver: But indeed the cause of all the difference is in the working
Heat, that makes and disposes the beginning, midst, and end of all thus or
thus, according to her strength, and continuance, and which is the main ground
to this purpose, Quicksilver is the Mother of all the Metalls.

Now, when the work is done, it lies yet Tho. Erast. disp. de met. p. 19. and
Ovied. hist. l. 6. c. 8. ap. Sin. Mayol. colloq. 19. Metal. and Fort. l. cet.
de spont. viv* nt. ort. l. 3. c. 15.
as it did all the while, in a thick flowing form, like the form of a molten
Metal, and when the owner comes to enjoy it, bringing in the cold breath of
the Air upon it, like unto Ovid. met. l. 15. and Plin. l. 32. c. 2. and Gaud.
Merula l. 4. c. 21. and Dioscorid. l. 5. c. 29. and Jo. Langius in ep. ad Gul.
Rascolon, habetur in fine. and Bacii. l. de gem. not. in. p. 227.
Coral, and other soft and growing Seaplants, it freezeth and hardens of a
sudden, fit for the turn and use of Man, wherefore it was made and ordained.
These be the grounds of the most and best Men, that is, of Men best seen, and
furthest traveled in such matters; whereunto Cardane, a man indifferent, and
none of us, and yet very learned, agrees jump as may be.

But lest these dim and little lights may seem to be darkened with the
brightness and fame of Aristotle and his Scholar Theophrast, and the late
renowned Agricola, holding hard the contrary, and the same sometime stiffly
maintaining, I will as much as in me lies, and my narrow bounds will suffer,
endeavor to lay the Reasons all down in order, which moved them to think thus,
and stayed them in the same opinion: That Wisemen at least may weigh one Reason
with another, and judge which is the weightiest, and worthy to bear the best
price, without the vain regard of outward shows and Authorities.

First, that the Mineral stuff sprung out from those rock-shavings aforesaid,
all cunning Miners can tell you, who still by the nature and grit of the stone,
though there be twenty sundry sorts, (as there be sometimes) in the Rock, are
able certainly to say this or that Vein follows. But to pass over lightly
the lighter matters, and such they grant as well as we: The Quicksilver is the
nearest stuff and Menstrue, or Mother of Metals, that is the thing in great
strife and question; when it needed not in mine opinion, if we mark the consent
of all those Men, in all Nations, that put the name upon things (which were not
of the unwisest so^t) flatly to allow his saying, when they by calling it in
Vocatur a Graecis (...). Ab Arist. and Theophrast. (...) ab Alexand. Aphrodis.
(...). Arabice Zaibar, vel Zibach. H^spanice Argento bivo, vel Azoque. Galli^e
Argent. vif. German. Queck ^ver, etc. ^ a. Uazer. Anatom. spagyr. M^rc. l. 1.
c. 1. Chiamano Argent vivo. i. Grae^. (...) i. Lvine Argent. vivum oli Arabi Za
bar and Za^bock I tedes^hi Quicksilver. gli spaynus Azoque discors. del
Matthial. nel. 5 lib. di dioscorit. c. 69.
Greek, Latin and other Tongues, Quick or liquid silver, in secret meaning
plainly say, that if by the force of those two hot Workmen aforesaid, it were
stayed and better purged, Card. s^bt. l 5. in. p. 220.
it were nothing else but silver: for indeed Avicen, and some other of the
learned side, leaving out the middle degrees, hold the very same opinion; which
I also think true, if the stuff and heates (as they are in hot Countries) be
good and faultlesse.

But the disputers will account this kind of Argument unskilful, and soon
cast it off: Then Ric. Anglic cor^ct. fat. c. 6. and 9. T. C. vol. 2. and
Rosar. abbreviat. T. C. vol. 3. in p. 721.
remove the cold that at last came upon the Metal and hardened it, and it
appears to the eye nothing else but such an altered Quicksilver: Or, if the
witness of sense be sometimes false and deceitful, enter into our School, and
behold them by a more kindly and gentle way, lead them back to a true
Quicksilver, both in cold and heat abiding; being a true Mar. Aur l. Anton.
meditat. lib. 10. Sect. 7.
rule in Philosophy, Every thing to be made of that, whereunto it is loosned
and dissolved.

But if this will not serve, pass a little further into the border and edge of
secrets, and you shall see them by following the steps of Kind underneath
(which I marked out before) that is by sowing the dissolved seeds and breaths
of Metalls upon Quicksilver, to curdle and bring her into that form of Metal,
which they will and wish for.

Now for that earthly Brimstone; As Nature to make a perfect Wight, is fain to
break her first order, and to take the help of an hot Womb, and of another
Workman; even so, to frame a perfect dead Creature, beside the help of a
certain dead Womb, she must needs use the hand of a lusty fellow Workman, both
to fashion and to boil it to perfection; then, as Physic. l. 2. c. 2. and
Metap. l. 12. c. 4.
Aristotle says, The Sun and Man make a Man, and the rest have two working and
moving causes, the Heat of Heaven, and the breath of the Male-seed; so in this
work of Metal, there is not only the great and Franc. Vales. Sac. phil. c.
49. in p. 279.
general begetting breath of Heaven, but also the private and particular seed
of the Earth their father.

That there lacks a little Earth to stay Quicksilver, Aristotle himself
shows by a pretty like example; He De part. animal. l. 2. c. 4. and Hist. an.
l. 3. c. 19. and M^^eor. l. 4. c. 7. and 10.
says the Hares blood flameth still when it is cold, whereas others stand,
because it wants those earthly Streams which others have, to make it grow
together, as we may see by trial, Hip. l. 6. (...). and Plat. in Timaeo. and
Galen. l. quod animi mores etc.
finding no blood which has them with a Strainer taken away, to stand and
cluster, but run continually. Even so, take away the Earth and Brimstone of a
Metal, (which our Art can do) and the Water will not stand again, but flow
for ever: And this is general, if we mark well, that nothing stands and leaves
his running, before Earth ruling binds and stays him.

Whosoever allows not this way of making Metalls, besides other fayls and
errors, he shall never unfold the Nature of Quicksilver, as we may see by
Meteor. l. 4. c. 8.
Aristotle and De ortu et c^usis subt. l. 5.
Agricola, struggling and striving against the stream about it, giving the cause
of his flowing and flying from the Fire, unto abundance of Air in him, for
then his lightness and feeding of the Fire, two things far from his nature,
would as well as in all ayrie Bodies appear and shine forth unto us. But he
that stands upon our Grounds and Rules laid down before, may easily perceive
his raw, Mathiol. nel 5. l. di Diosccrid. n^l prooem. and Dion. Zacharias
opusc. T. C. Vol. 1. in p. 802. and C^nsi^. Conju^. Solis ^t Lunae. T. C. Vol.
5. in p. 484.
cold and watery condition, to make him fly the Fire his Enemy; and this even
proportion in power, and equal rule of Earth and Water in him, to be the cause
of his running. The first is plain; But there is as much Earth in power, as
Water in Quicksilver, (albeit it seems all Water, for a little Earth is as
strong as much Water) and no more of this then of that, surely mingled and put
together, appears, because it is the only dry Water in the World; her Earth
haling one way makes her dry, and her Water another causes her to flow: but
this is a certain sign thereof, that when we find by reason all other things,
if either Earth or Water rules over them, either to stand with Cold and
harden, or else to melt with Fire and Water; yet we see plainly this one dry
Water called Quicksilver, to stoop and yield to neither. But to our purpose.

The Reasons why the heat of Heaven is the Workman in the Mine, are many; but
hear a few, and briefly delivered. If he works and mingleth (as I proved
above) all perfect mingled Bodies, then what shall let and bar him from this
labor also? the depth and hardness of the Rock? No, for if those subtle
Bodies, Transit enim fulmen coeli per septa domorum, etc. Lucret. l. 1. and
Parac. Archid. mag. li. 5. to. 11. in p. 53. and Anonym. Enchi. Phys. restit.
can. 199. and Asclep. ad Ammon Regem li. 1. and S. Alban. de augment. Scien. l.
3. c. 4. and D. Hackwell Apol. lib. 2. c. 4. sect. 1. and Picus Mirand. disput.
in Astrol. l. 3. c. 4. p. 311.
which we call Spirits, are able, in the opinion of all Men, to pierce through
stone-walls, without breach or sign of passage, how much more subtle, and
strong, and able to do it, is this heavenly Soul? But all Men grant the
Workmanship (w) of living things to flow from the only cause and fountain;
Then tell us how it comes to pass, that Fish (by the witness of good Authors)
are sometimes found in the deep and sound Earth, where no Water runs? Nay
which way do very Toads get into certain Rocks in Germany, and Milstone-Rocks
in France, even so close that they cannot be spyed, before they be set in
grinding, and break themselves, as Lib. de animant. subter. prope finem. Vide
insuper Card. Subt. l. 10. p. 437. S. Alban. Syl. Syl. Cent. 6. ep. 70. Pontan.
Alex. ab Al. B. Fulgos. Collect. l. 2. Treasure of ancient, etc. l. 5. c. 11.
and Guil. Nabrig. rerum Angl. l. 1. 6. 28.
George Agricola reports.

But, if Mineralls as well as Plants, take Food and Nourishment, wax and grow
in bigness, all is clear, I hope, and void of doubt; This will I prove
hereafter. In the mean time, let us win it again by proof and trial, the
strongest Battery that may be. Cold binds and gathers in the stuff of both
like and unlike, gross and fine together, without any clensing or sundering;
But Metalls, especially Gold, are very finely and cleanly purged Bodies. Again,
if Cold had frozen and packt up Gold together, Arist. M^t^orol. l. 4. c. 7.
the force of Heat (as we see the proof in all things) should cut the bands,
and unmask the work again, which is not. To this, what Color springs from Cold
but his own waterish and earthy color? That Nuisement: Tra. du sell and esprit.
genesis ca. 3. in p. 24.
if a thing be dyed with other Colors, we know straightway where it had them.
Besides, Arist. l. de sens. and sensib. c. 5. and T. Norton tract. Chym. c. 5.
in p. 147.
Cold leaves no smell behind it; but Heat is the cause of all smells. Then, to
omit the fiery smell of some stones, and sweet savor of others, and the
variety of sent in Juices, how happened it that Silver found at Mary-berg smelt
like Violets, as Agricola De Not. Fossil. l. 1. and de ort. and cause. sub. l. 5
and Card. subt. l. 5. in p. 186.
reports? That all Men feel the unpleasant scent of Copper, and other base
metals? But mark the practice of the plain Men when they devise to judge of a
Mine below, Card. ib. p. 201.
they take their aim at no better mark, then if by grating two stones of the
hill together, they feel a smell of Brimstone, because they take this the
Leaving of the Metals in their concoction.

To be short, do but cast with your selves, Card. sub. l. 5. in p. 190. and G.
Agric. de vet. and nov. met. l. 1. and Gonz. Fer. Oviedo. li. de genesis met. and
Sendiv. Novum Lum. Tra. 5. and Augurel. chrysop. li. 1.
why there be no Metals but in Rocks and Mountains, unless these unload them,
and shoot them down into the Plain; and then, wherefore chiefly foul Metals in
Cold, and fine Silver and Gold, besides Precious Stones in Hot Countries, and
you shall find the cause of this to be the Card. Subt. l. 5. in p. 190, 191.
difference of that purging and refining Heat, and the closeness of the Place
to keep in that heavenly heat, and barrenness withal, and emptiness of
Plants to draw it forth and spend it.

Some cannot conceive how Heat should cause this Matter, when they feel not
Heat in the Mine; I will not say to such, that this Heat is most Jo. Pic.
Mirand. in Astrol.. 3. c. 4.
mild and gentle every where, and there especially; but bid them bring up a
piece of Mineral earth, and lay it in the open Air, and they shall feel, if
they lay their hand upon it, G. Agricde Ort. and cause. Sub^. l. 5. and de not.
fossil. l. 1. c. 6.
no small, but a burning Heat, by the cold blast stirred up and raised; even as
the lurking heat of Lime is stirred up with Water.

Wherefore we may safely set down, Rich. A^glicus corrector c. 5. T. C. vol. 2.
p. 421. and Phel. Mosemius Instit. ad his perfect. contemp. 4. part 2. c. 5. in
p. 333.
and build upon it, that all Mineralls are made with Heat, and get thereby
their Being and Perfection; Albeit, the outward shape and last cover (as it
were) of the work is put on by Cold.

Now for the steps and degrees of Metals, that they all except Iron and Copper
(though some do not except them) arise from the steps and degrees of baking
the self same thing and stuff of Quicksilver, it appears in Lead-mines, where
is always, for the most part, some Gold and Silver found, by report of good
Authors. And therefore Pet. Bon. Terrar. Margarit. pret. c. 20. T. C. vol. 5.
in p. 804.
Albert says, that cunning Miners use in such case, to shut up the Mine again
for thirty or forty years, to bake the Lead better, and lead it on to
perfection, and that thing to have been found true in his time in Sclavonia.

But what do white and yellow Plin. l. 33. c. 6. and G. Agric. de not. fossil.
l. 9. pr^ncip.
Coppers sometime found in the Ground, signify unto us, but that Nature was
traveling by way of Concoction unto the end of Silver and Gold? Again, how
comes it to pass, that plain Artificers can fetch Mich. Mayerus l. de circ.
quadrat. c. 5.
out of every Metal some Gold and Silver, and out of these some base Metal,
unless Gold and Silver were the Heart and best part of the whole Body, and of
one self same thing with the Metals? Nay Lib. de Generat. r^r. not. 2. Tom. 6.
in p. 207.
Paracelse avoweth that not only these, but Mines of Middle-Minerals, things
further off, as you know, are never without some Silver or Gold; and therefore
he gives counsel to water them, as it were Plants with their own Mine, and
kindly water, assuring us that they will grow up to ripeness, and in few years
prove as rich as any Silver or Gold Mine.

Then we see at last, the truth of this Metalline Ground unshaken, and standing
sure for all the Battery of the stoutest Graecians, that A^teph. clav^s major
sapient. cap. 1. T. C. vol. 4. in p. 225. and R^i. Lul. Thear. t^stam n^. c.
12. in p. 28.
All Metals have but one Quicksilver, Stuff, Kind, and Nature, being all one
self same thing, differing by degrees of Cleanness, Fineness, Closeness, and
Color; that is, by those Hang-byes, called Accidents, sprung out from the
degrees of Boiling and Concoction: It is now time to go to build upon this
Matter, and to show how these lower and unclean Metals may be mended, and
changed into Silver and Gold, to make the way to attain Riches.

If all Metals are so near and like one another, especially some of them (which
I set down before) wanting nothing but continuance of Cleansing and Purging by
Concoction; then sure this exchange may seem no such hard and impossible
matter, nor to need perhaps the help of the Divine Art of Hermes, but a Lesser,
and Baser Skill may serve the turn: And as Nature is not Poor and Needy, but
full of Store and Change, so may Skill, if She will mark and follow the steps
of Nature, find more ways then one to one Matter. Then, which is the lower
way, and lesser Skill following Nature? We will fetch it from that way, which
we saw Nature take even now beneath the Ground: What is that? I will tell you
shortly.

As Nature in her work below used two hot Workmen, so will I; and because we
cannot tarry her leisure, and long time she takes to that purpose, we will
match and countervail her little Heats with proportions answerable and meet for
our time, that we may do that in forty days which she does in as many years.
And this proportion is not hard to be found, when we consider the odds and
space that lies between the Founders Fire and the gentle Heat of Heaven: And
again, the difference betwixt such a scowring Purger, and that Eater above,
consuming Stones and Iron so quickly, and the mild Heat and easy Breath that
thickened Quicksilver. And therefore as the Miners do well in trying and
purging, the rude Metals from the outward filth and leavings, besides a great
outward fire, to put to the lump many Pulveres nempe liquefac. ut sunt Sal
Alchali Litharg. Sal fluxum, Fell vitri, scoria, sal gem. sal pet. etc.
Paracels. l. 8. Archidox de separat. rer. not. Tom. 6. in p. 239.
hot and piercing things, to further the work of Boiling; so after they have
done, and made the Metals clean and handsome, if we mean to cleanse them
further from the inward Filth and Drossiness, we must take the same course, but
with greater force and skill, even so much more, as it is more hard to part
away the inward and inbred uncleanness, then the outward and strange scurf and
foulness.

Although I did set before diverse differences and marks upon the Metals, yet,
indeed they are but two to be counted of; and there is no odds between them and
Gold, but in Closeness and Color; the rest, as Cleanness, Fineness,
Weightiness, and Stedfastness in the Fire, follow all under Closeness; for a
thing is close, Albert. Magn. de reb. met. l. 4. c. 6.
when much stuff is packt up together in a narrow room, which cannot be unless
the stuff be clean and fine before; and when Lauren. Ventura de lap. Phil. c.
3. T. C. vol. 2. p. 238. and Geb. Sum. perfect. part. 1. l. 2. c. 5. in p. 626.
this is so packt up it must needs be weighty and steadfast also; heavy for the
much stuff, but steadfast for two causes, both for that there is neither Ros.
abbrev. T. C. vol. 3. page 701. and Geb. Sum. perfect. l. 2. part. 1. c. 7. in
p. 631.
entrance left for the Fire to pierce and divide the stuff, (and by division
all things are spoiled) nor yet any gross or greasy stuff, the food of Fire
remaining -- Quicksilver, as I said, was clean at first, and if it meet with a
fine Brimstone, to stay and fasten it, (which is often in hot Countries) it
straitway, (I mean without any middle steps) proves Silver, and then Gold: But
if that curdling breath be foul and greasy, (as it is most commonly,) it turns
Quicksilver into foul Metals first, and the work must tarry longer leisure to
be made clean and perfect, that is, until such time as that foul Brimstone be
clean purged out, as it is only in Solum aurum pinguedine caret. Card. subt.
l. 6. in p. 232.
Cold.

That Nature does in due time, and Art by imitation may part and drive away all
that filthy Rennet, this is a sign, because it is no part of the thing; How is
that proved? For that it is the Male-seed, that begets, makes, and fashions
all, and Arist. de generat. animal. l. 2. c. 1.
naught begets it self, but is made by a strange and outward Mover, which is
like a Carpenter, or other Workman toward the work that he makes. That this
is so, it is plain by the Male-seed of Wights, Locus desumptus ex Aristot. de
gener. Animal. l. 1. c. 20, 21, and 22.
which is not the waterish stuff seen with Eyes, (that is but a shell given
for the safe keeping) but an unseen Hot Breath of their Bodies, whereby alone
without the help of that shell, many Wightes beget their Mates with Young, as
we may read De Histor. Anim. l. 6. c. 7.
in Aristotle, and other good Plin. l. 10, c. 58, 60.
Authors; but what makes it so plain as the barren Eggs which many Birds
fashion fully in themselves by conceit of Lust, wanting only an outward
quickening cause from the Male.

Then how shall we purge out this foul and greasy Workman to make the work of
any Metal close and well-colored? Nature would have done this in time by
concoction without any other help; But we must have to shorten the time fit for
our use, two devices; one to breed Closeness, and the other to bring on good
Color: The first is a binding Skill, the next is a dying Cunning; for the
first, let Nature still be our guide and leader; As she, in all her easy
changes, uses to consume and raze out the weaker with the stronger, like so
we, if we mean to devour and consume all the gross and greasy stuff of the
Metal, that when all is clean and fine, the Fire may draw it up close together,
we must encounter it with a strong Like: What was that Brimstone, or any other
filth in Quicksilver, and of what stock think you? Did I not tell you it
sprung out of a confused heap of Middle-Minerals, and was a Mineral Breath and
Vapor? Then let us take the foul and sharp MInerals, and in a strong Fire set
them upon the Metal, Vide Geb. summae perfect. part. 2. l. 2. c. 14. in p. 653,
654, etc.
and they shall sure, by searching and lifting round about, quickly draw to
them, eat and drink up all the weaker like dross of the Metal, and leave the
rest which is unlike, clean and untouched: I need not stand any more about it;
Do we not see how Tract. 5. Rosar. abbrev. p^r Toletan. phil max. T. C. vol. 3.
in p. 698. and Paracels. in Manual. Phil. T^m. 6. in p. 318, 319. et in frag.
l. 3. de vit. longa c. 8. Tom. 6. in p. 168.
Soap, a filthy strong thing, in battle and work with a foul and filthy Cloth,
takes and eats up the filth as his Food and Like meat, and leaves the Unlike
Cloth clean and spotless? Nay to come nearer, how does Antimony that fierce and
foul Mineral, where he is set on work with Gold to cleanse him, search and run
all over the Metal, take and consume his like meat, and the strange and unclean
parts, leaving the rest as unlike and unmeet for him: To be short, if you mark
well, you shall find it the plain, ready, and kindly way, not only in all
purgings, but in every natural changing.

Then let this part go by, and since now the Metal i^ as clean, fine, and
weighty again as Quicksilver, and as close and steadfast as Silver, or rather
more; let us take the next Point in hand, and bring on the Color of Gold: This
stands upon two Points; It must have the fairness, and lastingness of Gold:
That first is an easy matter in the proof of common Skill; But here is all the
cunning, to die the Metal all over with an everlasting Color; To this purpose,
it had need be able to pierce the Metal, and to abide all Fire: That first is
not hard again, but how shall this be done? Perhaps we need not strive, before
we lay the Color, to make it steadfast and abiding; but like as Gold will so
fast embrace, and hold his flying maker Quicksilver, if she be a little
cleansed and made fit to receive him, that no Fire shall depart them, so the
closeness of this our steadfast Metal shall defend and save the Color. But
suppose it will not, yet if Iron and Copper, nay if the Middle-minerals may be
bound and made abiding in the Fire, (as our Men hold and teach) then their Vide
Basil. Valent. Practic. delap. sapient. in p. 19.
Colors may be stayed and made steadfast also.

What is remaining? If you be not yet content, go to School and learn to fasten
and stay Rasis Cistrensis lib. lumin. Harmon. imperscru. Decad. 1. in p. 71.
flying Spirits, as they call them. Cardane who denies it possible to make an
open Metal close and steadfast, yet allows this matter easy; And since we are
here, and he is so ready, let us talk with him a little. I marvel much at him,
a Man so well learned, (but indeed not skilled in this Art, the chief of all
Learning) that although he had spoken well a great while, and allowed all
Metals to be made all of one stuff, and to travel by one way of Concoction
unto one end, Est aurum perfectio metallorum atque conatus. Card. subt. l. 6.
p. 233. and de Varietate l. 10. in p. 405.
Gold, and to differ but by one accident only, and chance of those degrees of
boiling; and thereby yielded that all the fouler Metals may be turned into one
another, and Silver likewise into Gold, because it is nothing else but
imperfect Gold, and the worser part thereof, wanting naught but Color, which
is easy, and a little closeness, which by purging out of the greasy food of
Fire, may be given him; yet for all this, he denies it possible to change any
of the lower Metals into either Silver or Gold, because of over-sudden Heat (as
I said of Iron and Copper) being burnt they cannot be brought to their old
Quick-silvery cleanness, nor yet be made abiding and steadfast in the Fire.

This he would never have said, if he had been brought up in our Trade of
Learning: He should have seen us easily lead the Metals back from whence they
all came, and then, by means aforesaid, stay them; for, he grants himself that
all the cause of uncloseness, unsteddiness, and wasting in the Fire, is that
our fatty Brimstone, and that it may be cleansed out of Silver; Why not out of
the rest also? Will they not abide the violence? Not at first, but by little
and little they will, as Gentle and Wise Men know how to use them. -- There are
others also as well as he, Erastus and such like, that deny this Art of
Changing: if I thought these Men needed any labor of reproof, who through
ignorance of the points they handle, blunder and rush in the dark, cross and
reprove themselves all about, in such sort as they seem rather to Eorum decreta
usque adeo sunt obscura, dubia, incerta, falsa, puerilia, ut misericordiam
poti;us quam reprehensi^nem mereantur. P. Severin. Dan. Idea Med. Philos. cap.
9. in p. 132.
move pity to the standers by, than to make a challenge, and to call forth an
Adversary.

Then such Men I will exhort to be better advised, by the view of certain plain
examples, which I will lay down before them, and thereby wish them to stay
their over-swift and fore-running judgments, until they come to the trial and
battle it self, in that which shall follow.

Lead, as the Workmen know, is one of the greatest spoilers of his fellows the
foul Metals in the World: save them from the rage of him, upon a shell of
Ashes, which they call a Test, and he is counted safe, sure, and steadfast
enough against all assayes. Cardane Cardan. de subt. l. 6. in p. 240.
tells of a Man at Millain, which I know not how so dressed and armed his face
and hands, as he could suffer to wash them in molten Lead; Might not then a
tougher and hard Metal be more easily armed and fenced against all force and
violence? Nay, you shall see more Wonders by the skill of Nature easily
performed. Clear Sanctus Epiphanius lib. de 12. gemm^s in v^ste Aaronis cap.
17. p. 9. and Joannes Matalius Metellus ^raefat. in H^eron. Osorii Lusitan.
hist. de reb. ab Eman. rege gestis. Verum hic de oculo catti, ille de Hyacintho.
Crystal saves the Cloth that is wrapped about it from the rage of Fire: so does
Oil defend Paper, Card. subt. lib. 2. in p. 78.
insomuch that you may seethe Fish therein, without either burning the Paper,
or the Oil soaking through; and all this is because the extreme and deadly
feuds do save the middle thing by their fighting. Is it then a Wonder if Iron
or Copper, be by some pretty slight, or kindly skill defended from all Fire,
and made sure and steadfast? To draw nearer unto you; It is very well known,
that base and unripe Gold, Paracels. lib. de Element. Tom. 6. in p. 300.
as it were a mean between Silver and Gold, wanting Color and Closeness,
wasting much away in time of proof and trial, may by some of the lesser and
lower degrees of binding be refined, and made as good as the best Gold in the
world. Then, is there any let in Reason, why the rest, especially Silver, by
strong and more forcible means, may not be bound and colored, and reach
perfection?

To conclude, if we may, by tracing the Path of Kind, which she treads
daily, turn a Plant or Wight into Stone, and a Mineral into a Metal, and Lead
into Tin, nay Lead into Copper, (as I will prove hereafter) with so great
exchange and increase of Color and Closeness; then tell me, why by means
fitted in proportion, Lead, or rather Copper may not be turned into Silver; or
either of these, especially Silver, into Gold.

Therefore, to make up all; Paracelse Lib. de Tinctura Physicorum c. 4. Tom. 6.
in p. 276.
reports for certain, that in Carinthia they commonly turn Copper into
Silver, and this into Gold in Hungary: Though he names not the means whereby
they made those exchanges, yet we may easily judge those ways of binding and
coloring set down before, that is, lesser ways then HERMES Medicine, and yet
sufficient to serve our turn, and to raise that Wealth appointed, as we may see
by guess of their common practice, which else were empty, vain and foolish; as
also by the light charge of Middle-Minerals, in respect of the return and gain
of Gold.

And if the praise of an Enemy be lightly true and incorrupt, let us hear what
Porta, a denier of the Art of Hermes, confesses upon his own experience; that
Quicksilver diverse ways may be bound, and colored, and made perfect Gold and
Silver; and one way when it is with Brimstone burnt and made Cinabar, very
gainfully: (which thing Joannes Chrysippus Lib. de art metal. metamorphos. T.
C. vel. 1. in p. 32, 33.
also found true:) And further that in his due time and place, Mercury by the
smoke of Brimstone within one Month will be turned into perfect Luna.

I might press you with more as good proofs and trials of Men of credit; but
here is enough, I say, to stay your judgment for a while: Let us go forward.

CHAP. V. Of VVISDOME and VIRTUE.
Since now Long Life, Health, Youth, Riches are dispatched, and we have gotten
such a goodly Quire of Helps, Instruments, and Means to Wisdom and Virtue, that
is, to perfect BLISS and HAPPINESS; what is wanting but Will and Diligence to
bring all Men unto it? unless there be some, as there be many, so lewd and fond
by Birth and Nature, having the difference defaced, and being so far from their
Kind estranged unto the kind of Beasts, that although they lack not those helps
and furnitures, no nor Good Will and Endeavor to set them forward, yet all will
not serve to amend them, and bring them to Wit and Goodness.

Then let us seek the salves for these two sores likewise, that we may make it,
at last, a whole and perfect Happiness: let us, I say, bend our selves to show
the means how all foul and vicious persons, may be cured and brought to health
of Mind, which is Wit and Goodness. -- No cure can be skilfully performed,
without the cause be first known and removed: The cause of Wisdom and Virtue,
and so of their contraries, (for one of these do bewray another) I opened
heretofore when I brought into the Bound and Household of BLISS, yet two other
properties, that is, Clearness and Temperateness of Bodies. -- But, because we
have no such grounds and beginnings, Solent G^ometrae non emnia docere, s^d
quaedam postulare ut sibi concedantur, quo facilius quae volunt explic. Cicer.
offic. li. 3.
as the Measurers have given and granted, and it behooves, if we mean to build
any thing, our selves to lay all the foundation; let us take the matter in hand
again, that those two are the very causes and makers of this health of Mind,
that is, of Wisdom and Virtue, and then teach the way to apply the remedies.

To begin with Wisdom, (for that Knowledge had ever need to go before Doing,)
and therein to let pass all the idle subtilties about the difference between
Arist. Eth. l. 6. cap. 5, 6, 7.
Sapience and Prudence, (if I may so term it for once and use it not) as one of
them to be seen in general D. August. de Trin. lib. 13. cap. 19. and Cicer.
Tuscul. quae. lib. 4.
and everlasting, the other in particular and changeable things, etc. because
they ought evermore (as I showed at first) to go together, (even as our Tongue
better than either Greek or Latin, has linked and shut them up both in one
Word together:) I will take the Common and true bounds of Wisdom, that is to
wit, The Knowledge of Divine and Humane things; those containing all Minds and
Bodies; these the Matters and Affairs of private Men, Families, and
Commonwealths. -- It will be very hard, indeed, to bring a Fool to be able to
understand all these matters: But let us march, we have passed greater dangers.

And if in this Discourse of the Mind, (as well as in the former of the Soul,
and some other) I call in again the best Philosophers, and make them abide the
brunt, I hope you will not blame me in a course ever blameless, and allowed in
matters of such weight, both that the Truth might be the better bolted out, and
the Man warded against the shot of Envy.

Therefore letting pass these earthly Judges, as Aristoxenus Cicer. Tusc.
Quaest. lib. 1. and Academ. Quaest. lib. 1. and 4.
, Dicaearchus Lib. 7. cap. 55.
, Pliny, Galen, etc. who rating the Mind as an earthly thing, do adjudge it to
die, and to be clean razed out with the Body; and all other wrong Opinions of
the same; Mine old Philosophy, where it is best advised, holds and teaches,
that, Plato in Phaedon. Hipp. de D^aet. lib. 1.
Piutar. de Opin. Phil. lib. 5. c. 20. Phil. Mosemcus Archiep.
Nicosiens. univers. institut. ad hom. perf. contemp. 3. part. 2. cap. 11, and.
12.
Cael. Rhod. lib. 2. c. 31. Lips. ceat. 1. Ep. 50. Jossius de risu and fl^tu.
apud Burton. seu D^m. jun. de Melancb. part. 1. Sect. 1. m^mb. 2. subsect. 5.
in p. 19. in margin.
G. Merula memor. lib. 1. c. 1.
As the soul and life of all things is all one of it self, and all the odds
springs from the diverse tempers of Bodies; so the Divine and immortal Mind
proper unto Man, and Author of Wisdom and Virtue, to be Wise, and alike Wise,
and one and the same in all points in all Men (as God from whom it came, is One
and Wise) and to differ when it is divided and sent into sundry places,
according to the Natures of the same places. P. R^c^us de coel. agricult. lib.
4.
Herm. in Clavi.
A^ist. de sens. and sensib. cap. 4.
Sen. not. quaest. l. 3. cap. 20.
Dion. Areopag. cael. Hierarch. c. 13.
Even as many Rivers passing through many Grounds of sundry qualities do
lightly every one take a sundry Taint, Smack, and Nature from the Ground,
though at first they all sprung and flowed from one Head and Fountain: Or, more
fitly, like as there are innumerable kinds of Lights in the World, differing
according to the Seats and Houses that receive them, Porphyr. de Occas.
Card. Variet. l. 8. cap. 42. in p. 309.
Jo. Pic. Mirand. conclus. secund. Av. 2. and. 4.
when the light of the Sun, from whence they all receive light, is of it self
all one, and the same in all places.

Then as the Sun (think not much if I be still driven to Likes, because it is
the lightsomest way of delivering Divine things, wherein you see me plunged;
for as the Eye can Plato in Alcibiade. 1. and in Phaed.
behold all things but her self and the Sun, and those it cannot see, but in
another thing fit to represent the figure; Herm. in Minist. Mundi.
even so the Mind, cannot understand her self, nor yet other Divine Matters, so
well as in a like and comparison:) As the Sun, I say, of himself ever shows,
and sees all things, if his Beams be not stopped with a Cloud, or some other
thick imbarment; even so, the Mind alone, and before she fall into the Cloud of
the Body, is ever busy, and likewise knows all things, as unto so Divine a
thing belongs: But now De quinque incommodis quae affert materia menti
humanae vid. Fortun. Li^e. de vit. l. 2. c. 27.
she is entangled and so darkened in this manner, she is sometimes idle, and
never sees all things, yea, naught of all without the leave and help of the
Body.

This course therefore she now takes; Since she may not her self step forth and
range abroad, to see things, she craves and takes the help of the Soul and its
servants, which they call Beams or Spirits: first she uses the outward
Spirits that sit in the Edge and Border of the Body, for Messengers to receive,
(by means of their Instruments and Parts where they lodge) and bring in
Tidings, that is, Shows and Shapes of things: And then the inward Beams
sitting in the Brain, take the same Tidings, and represent them, as it were, in
a Glass before her, that she may cast her light, (which they call the suffering
or receiving Mind) upon them and see them.

To skip over the known Five; -- Those inward Wits and Spirits which we have
(not unfitly) compared to a Glass, are divided into sundry and several Seats
and Offices, first, Eadem pene ad verbum Phy. Hebrae. c. 2. in p. 21
one sort called Thought, inhabiting the fore part of the Brain, takes hold,
and represents the shapes, let in at the Windows of the five outward Senses:
Then another Crew which we call Remembrance, keeping the hinder part of the
Head, receives still these shapes in great plenty, and lays them up as it
were in a Storehouse, until first, the third company of the Souls Spirits,
called Common sense, and sitting in the middle of the Brain (as becomes a
Judge) calls for them to examine them and determine of them (though this
lower Judge hears present matters in Thought also) And then at last the great
and chief Justice, called Understanding, by laying the things together, and
gathering one of another, judges of all.

But which is the Seat of the Chief Judge? That is a Question among the
Learned: when I take it to be no Question if they all grant that the Soul, by
the Pattern of her Sire the Macrob. in s^m^^um Scip. l. 1. c. 20. and Archang.
Burgon. minorit. Comment. in cab. dog. dogm. 20. and Ger. Dom. phys. Trismeg.
T. C. vol. 1. in p. 406. and Fortun. Iacet. de Ort. an. hum. l. 1. c. 15. and
Rob. Flud. Microcosm. Tract. ^* Sect. 1. lib. 8. c. 8.
Sun in the great World, dwells in the Heart, the Hippoc. li. (...) and Cael.
Rhod. lect. an^iq. lib. 15. c. 23.
middle of the Body, that by casting her Beams all about, and equally to all
parts, she might give Light and Life equally to all, as equidistant from all:
And in the midst of the Heart, as the only immovable, and thereby to move
others the only fit part of the Body; for then sure the Mind, being the
inward Kernel, as Plato says, Phil. Jud^. de. mu^di opifi^i^.
of the other two, the Soul and the Spirit, must needs rest and be rooted there
also.

Seeing then the Mind sees and knows nothing but by means of the Soul and
his inward Wits and Spirits; nor these, but by the help of the outward ones,
called the five Wits or Messengers; nor neither of both, without the parts
where they lodge and rest: then, Vide P. Palinar. lap. Phil. dogmat. seu
Libavium rest^t. c. 15. in p. 88.
even as the parts of the Body stand affected and disposed, so does the Mind
understand. Let us go down more particularly to the matter, and see what
Condition or Disposition of the Body helps or hinders this Work of
Understanding.

After that the Five Wits and Messengers have thus received and delivered up
the Tidings to the threefold Glass within the Brain, this by stirring and
running up and down presents and musters them before the Mind, and she by
casting her light and view, judges and determines. That we may easily gather
two things needful to Wisdom and good Understanding; first, such a Glass, or
such inward Spirits, as are able to receive and hold many shapes imprinted,
that is, very clear, clean, and smooth Spirits, by the example of an Eye, that
kindly Glass, or of an artificial one, which will easily take and show, in that
case, every little spot, shape, and fashion set upon them; whereas, when they
be dark, foul, and uneven, they can take nothing, nor yet represent them if
they had them. Secondly, these Spirits had need be quick and lively, that is,
hot, to be able by their swift running to and fro, to represent and show them
all apace, and easily, for the Mind does all by matching and laying things
together.

That Heat is the cause of Quickness and stirring of the Spirits, appears in
Sickness, Age, and sound Sleep, especially in Age and Sickness, more clearly
than needs any light of teaching. But how in Sleep? when the heat of the
Spirits serving Wit, is either laden with the clogging Fumes and Breaths of
the Stomach, or spent either with Labor, or with Sweat, and still beholding
(for Rest abates Heat, as I ever said) or else lent for a time unto his
fellow servants, the Spirits of Life for digestion sake, then the Spirits of
the Brain be still and quiet, and outward and inward Senses, Wit, and
Understanding all cease at once: But if the Meat (to omit the expense of Heat)
was neither much, nor of an heavy and clogging kind, and so neither breathing
out loading stuff, nor needing foreign help to digest it, then our perceiving
Spirits begin to take their own and Natural Heat again unto them, and to move a
little before the Mind, whereby she beholds some old shapes and shows of
things in their passing, which is called Dreaming. But in case they recover all
that Heat, they bestir themselves apace, running to the outside of the Body,
and bringing back new tidings to the Mind, which when she perceives, it is
called Waking.

Then the cause of Wisdom is clear at last, as we see, to wit, a clean and
stirring Glass; and of Folly, when the same is foul and still. If the Glass be
fouled all over it causes natural or willing folly, as in Fools, Children, and
Drunkards: but if it be but here and there besmeared and drawn, as it were,
with dark strokes and lines of foul humors, the shapes appear in the Mind even
as the forms in a broken Glass appear to the Eye, by halfs and confusedly, and
it makes Madness.

But how came the Spirits of this inward Glass so foul and slow, when they are
of themselves (as becomes the Beams of an Heavenly Soul) both very clean,
clear, quick, and lively? (But we need say no more but clear and foul alone,
when these two qualities make or mar the whole work of perceiving; for if the
Spirits be clear, it is a sign they are in their own Nature, and so hot and
quick withal; but if they be foul, it is a token their whole condition and
property of Kind is lost and gone, and so, that stilness is come upon them
also.) Neither is that ethereal thing, which is called by the name of a
Spirit, that carries the Soul and all his Beams down into the Body, and
broketh (as I said Supra page 32.
above) between them, foul or still of it self; (for Spirits are not, as some
Leaches think, made of, but fed with the breaths of our Meat) but very fine,
clear and lively, as all Men grant of Ether. How then? Must it not needs
follow, that all the cause of fail and want in this case springs from the
Body, and from that part especially where the Wits inhabit? If the naked
Reason, brought in above, will not serve to content this matter, let us lead
him forth clad with proof of Eyesight and Experiences, the plainest, greatest,
most filling and satisfying Reason in the World.

If Man alone does pass all other Wights in Wit, for his Aerie and Fiery
temper above them, as we heard before; then if one Man goes before another in
Wit, it must needs follow from the same cause: Now, as Air and Fire are clear
and quick, when Earth and Water are foul and slow, so are the Wights where they
bear the sway, affected both in Wit and Body, as appears in difference between
the Heart and the Toad, and all other wholesome and noisome Wights. To go further,
Hipp^^^ de A^r^, aq^is and locis. in si^.
why are the Men so gross and rude, under the two Pins of the World, in the
frozen Countries, and so Civil and Wise in Hot; Problem. Sect. 14 q^aest. 1.
and 15, 16.
as Aristotle well notes, but for that the outward Heat cleanses, as it is a
cleanser, and dries, and so clears the Bodies? whereas Cold on the other
side, binds and thickens, and so likewise by stopping the flying out of the
gross, foul, and waterish humors and leavings, makes all, not only dark and
cloudy, but hot and moist also, as it were drunken, by boiling together, as (e)
Aristotle terms it.

But methinks (I must favor them a little because they are our Neighbors) he
might have done better to have resembled those broiled People to Old Men
otherwhere, and the Aged Men in frozen Countries to the Youth in hot Soyles,
because the odds between the Wisdom of Age and Youth flows from the same cause
of Drought and Moisture, that is, Clearness, and Foulness of the Bodies: And
therefore S^crat. ap. Plat. in Sympos.
Plato was not ill advised when he said, that at such time as the Eye of the
Body failed, the Eye of the Understanding began to see sharply; because when
this waterish Instrument dries up, with the rest of the Body, though it puts
out the sight of Sense, yet it is a Token that the light of Wit increases, for
Drought as I said, (...) imm^r^^o si^^as animas s^p^^nt^s appellarit
H^ractitus. Joan. Bodi^. method. histor. in p. 108. and Jo. Huarte Examen de
los ingenios. and Charron de la sagess. l. 1. c. 13.
breeds Clearness, if it be not mixed with coldness, for then it brings in
Earthliness, the most foul and sluggish Element of all: And therefore those
that are very old and cold, are very doting, and childish again: But if that
Drought be seasoned with Heat (the more the better) they make the Man very
wise, and full of Understanding, as it has been always observed: Caesar is
described so; but more strangely before him Plutarch. Sym^os. l. 1. quaest. 6.
and Quint. Curt. l. 10. sub. fin. and Card. subt. l. 8. and Cae^. R^od. An^.
lect. l. 29. c. 17. Idem etiam de Socrate asserit Arrian. Epict. l 4. c. 11.
Alexander, whose Body, by his great Heat and Drought, was not only most sweet
in his lifetime, but also able, lying dead above the Ground, in a hot Soil and
Season, without any balming, alone to keep it self fresh and sweet, without all
taint and corruption many days together. But I am too long: Therefore Prophets
are said to be wiser than Men, and the Spirits wiser then they, and the Stars
Quos qui vacare m^nte putat is ipse mentis expers est. Cic. de Not. Deor. lib.
2.
most wise of all, for the odds and degrees in the Heat, Droughth, and
Clearness of the Bodies.

Now when we know the cause of this Hurt and Disease, let us upply the
Medicine; let us clear the Idiots body. In many kinds of foolishness, as in
Childhood, Drunkenness, Sleep, and Doting Diseases, Nature her self is this
Salve, to disperse in her due time and season, and scour out the foul and
cloggy, cold and gross humors, which overwhelmed the Spirits, and made them
unclean, and quiet: or at least, in the ranker sort of them, as in Doting
Diseases, she may be helped easily and enabled by little skill to do it: that
we may judge, if great, and strong, and mighty means of Art chanced once to
join with Nature, the rankest of all, and deepest rooted, that is, Natural
folly it self, may be rooted out and dispatched.

But you may reply, as Author quaestionis a^ Lap. Phys. v^lent. contra ^^^sem
T. C. vol. 3. in p. 175.
some do, that the rest, which sprung out from outward, light, and hang-by
causes, may be cured; when this being so rooted in the Nature and first mixture
of the Seed, (a mixture as ill as a Beastly mixture) can never be mended,
unless we grant that a Beast may be helped also, and put on Manly Nature. -- I
had need send you back to the degrees of Kind, allotted and bounded out above,
by the Counsel of Philosophers, whereby you may see, if you consider well, that
a Beast standing in a lower kind of mixture, can in no case be bettered and
made a Man, unless his temper be marred first, and made anew, and so his Life
and Being put out and razed: when as a foolish Man has no such cause and
reason, being both for his Divine Mind, (though it be eclipsed by the shadow
of an earthly Body) in respect of his temper a degree above a Beast, and in the
state and condition of Mankind, fire abounding in him, as his shape declares,
as well as in other Men, though not so much, and in the same point and measure.
And what is the cause? Not because Nature meant it so, but by reason she was
let and hindered by some cross thing laid in her way, within the stuff,
whereby she was driven to stray, and miss, and come short of her purpose: like
as the Mole D' H^st. Animal l. 4. ^. 8.
Aristotle says, for all her blindness, is in the same kind with all other hot
and bloody perfect Wights, which should have all their Wits and Senses; because
having all the parts of an Eye whole and perfect, it is a sign that Nature
meant to have gone forward, and was let with the bar of a gross and thick
Skin.

Now then we see the fails and errors of Kind by Skill daily corrected: yea
and some hold opinion that the blemish in the Mole, may be washed out and
mended also; that we may hold it possible to do the like in this fault of
Folly. Nay we may think it more easy than some of them, because there is no
several degree and whole kind, as if Nature had run this race of purpose,
which seems so in that work of the Mole; but some odd and rare Examples, and
as it were, Monsters in kind; or, more fitly, Diseases left by Nature, Descent,
and Inheritance, sprung out from some ill temper of the seed of the Parents.

But how may this Disease be cured? All things in kind by the course of Kind,
have both their highest and deepest pitch and end, and, as it were, their South
and North turns, from whence they still return and go back again, to avoid
Infinity. So these natural and left Diseases have their Race, which they run
and spend by little and little; And when it is all run, and all the stock of
corruption spent, (which is within nine or ten Offsprings) then they mend, and
return to health again: such is the Race of Wisdom also, and of all health of
Body, (for the health of the Mind is enclosed within that other,) as we see by
the Children which Wise men beget, and so forth; the case is plain and easy.

Then we see in this Matter how Nature inclines, and is ready to help her self:
and if Art would lend his hand, we may think the cure would be much more
speedy, and many parts of the time cut off and abated. And as we find in sores
and other lighter inward hurts, this done by slight means of slender Skill; so
we may deem that by more mighty means, more great and mighty deeds may be
performed. -- But what do I fetch about the Matter, when it is above, and as I
think sufficiently proved, that all left Leprosies, and other Natural Diseases
of the Body, by those Heavenly and Mineral Medicines (which I call the
Cure-alls, and Cure-the-greats) may be quite cleansed and driven away; and this
is among the number of Left and Natural Diseases, all sprung out from an ill
temper of the seeds of Parents: And to omit the rest; if the Leprosy, flowing
from the foulness of the Blood of all the Body, may be cured; much more this,
which proceeds from the ill frame of one part only, that is, from a muddy
Brain: Or, if that Disease may be said to come from one part alone, that is,
the Liver, because it is the maker of all Blood, yet that one is a most
dangerous part if it be ill-affected, because by need of Nature it sends to all
places, and so reaches through all, and strikes all by contagion: whereas the
Brain, as other more, keep themselves within their bounds, and stretch no
further.

But let us go further: If a good and fine Temper, through ill Diet, and
passions of the Soul, has often fallen from a good Wit, to a kind of Madness,
scarce to be descried from the state of an Idiot: then sure through the
contrary cause, a foul frame may be cleared and rise to Wisdom, by as good
reason, as the Art of Reason has any, especially if those contrary Passions
and Diet be helped and set forward by meet Medicines, which the Graecians know
and teach, and wherewith they make great changes in Men's Bodies; But without
all doubt and question, if that our most fine, clear, and hot Egyptian
Cure-all came in place to help the matter: for, if the mightier Enemy shall in
fight overcome the weaker (as you all grant, and thereon stands your Physic)
then shall this passing fineness and clearness, when it arises in the Body,
like the Sun in the Morning, scatter and put to flight all Mists and Darkness,
clearing and scouring mightily by his matchless heat, strength, and swiftness,
every part of the Body.

Neither shall you say, Life will not suffer such violent and forcible dealing,
when as Life it self shall do it; for what is that which made and mingled at
first the foolish Body, but a Beam of Heavenly-Fire carried on a Couch of
Ether? And what is this our Heavenly Medicine but the same? as is above shown
at large; Then let us put same to same, strength to strength, and if one,
before, was too weak to break, as it would, and mingle the fond Body finely;
now both together, one helping another, and still with fresh supply renewing
the Battle, shall be, I think, able to overcome the work, and at last to bring
it to the wished end, pass, and perfection.

If you fly to the last Hold and Shift, and say the time is now past, and
occasion of Place and Stuff now lost, and slipped away, being too hard for
Nature, upon so hard a Stuff and Place to work such exchanges; If you look to
her ordinary race in all things, you shall see that she is able, and does daily
rule, square, and frame very gross and unmeet Stuff in most unfit Places, to
our thinking, yea, much more then these in this Work: and not only the thick
and sturdy stuff of Minerals, cleansing the Rocks, (yet in unseen places) down
to the bowels of the Ground: and that gross and rude gear in the bottom of the
Sea, to make Shellfish: But also living, moving, and perceiving Land-Wights,
in the close Rocks, (as you heard before) and in the cold Snow, and burning
Fire, as those Worms and Flies in Aristotle.

To close up all, and end this matter at once; If you remember how this our
Heavenly Cure-all, when he was sent into the Body, to work Long-life, Health
and Lustiness, did not only strike, and kill, and put out of Being all foul
and gross distempers, his own and our enemies, but also cherish, nourish, and
feed our Bodies, and bring it toward our own Nature, (even as far as we would
by disposing of the quantity:) you may easily conceive the plain and certain
way of this great exchange, when you know his most clean, fine, clear, bright,
and lightsome Nature.

Now we have dispatched the first part of BLISS, let us go to the second; and
because we have not done it before, though we talked much thereof, we will now
begin to bound the Matter, and make Virtue (as (...). Arist. Ethic. l. 2. c. 6.
Aristotle and Truth teaches us) A mean in our outward deeds and dealings with
other Men: or A Reason in Manners and Conditions, as Plato terms it, all is
one: The cause of Virtue is likewise set out in the beginning, to wit, A
temperate Body, but I left the Proof unto this place, which is all the hardness
in this cure of Lewdness: for, if it be once known that Temperateness is the
cause of Virtue, we shall easily, by that temperate Medicine, so notable in the
speech going before, purchase and procure the same: And why that is so, it has
been so often worn before, that we may quite cast it off, and leave it, being
enough, in this place, to prove that a temperate state of Body is the cause and
way to Virtue.

But first let us see whether all Manners flow from the Body or not, and then
from what State and Condition of the Body. Among them that have searched the
Reason and Nature of things, the cause of Manners is laid upon the Disposition,
either of Stars, or of Men's Bodies, or of their Wills, thus or thus framed,
either by the bent of Nature, or by use of Custom. Let us scan the matter, and
yet briefly. They cannot flow from the Will of the Mind of Man, lest all Men
should perforce be good against our daily proof and experience; because the
Mind of it self, as coming from goodness, is good, and alike good in all Men,
as I said before. And sure no Custom can alter and turn so Divine and Right a
Will to lewdness, but by great force of Necessity, which force cannot be sent
and laid upon it by the Stars; for whether the Stars be Wights or no, they are
all (as I showed above) of one good Plotin. Ennead. 2. lib. 9. c. 13. page 212.
and Cornel. Agrip. de Occult. Phil. l. 3. c. 39. in p. 417.
strain and quality. -- Or if they were not; or whatsoever they be either in
substance or quality, they cannot touch the Mind immediately, but must needs be
let in by the loops of the Body, and so change and dispose the Body first and
by means of this affect the Mind; for if the Mind it self, a finer thing then
the Stars, cannot pierce out of the Body, as we heard before, then much less
shall they make way to get in by themselves, without the helps to our Mind
allotted; and as these are all bodily, (I mean the first helps) so the nearest
cause of Manners must needs flow from the Body: And if the inward Spirits and
Wits likewise, do naught without the Instruments of the Body, and follow the
Affection and Disposition of the same, then the appetite of the unreasonable
Soul, common between us and Beasts (upon which Aristotle and his heirs do lay
the cause of Manners) is dispatched also, and all the whole strain must needs
clearly run from the Body.

But, lest some All-denier come and shake these old Grounds, which you saw the
Philosophers lay so long ago, and so this Building might fall and tumble, I
will shore it up with Experience, a thing most fit to fill and please the sense
of them which have nothing else but sense.

As all Diseases, so all Manners spring, either from the natural and inherited,
or from the purchased temper of the Body; To keep the first till anon: This we
have either from the Air and Soil where we live, or from the Meat which we
take: The Air follows, either the place of the Sun, or the Nature of the
Ground. But this is somewhat too hard and thorny a kind of teaching; let us
enlarge our selves, and unfold, and prove, how, (though I showed the manner at
large before) the Air and Meat alters and changes, and makes to differ, the
Bodies first, and so the Manners.

All Hippoc. lib. de Aere Ag. and locis. and Alexand. ab Alex. dier. genesis lib.
4. c. 13.
Astronomers and Philosophers, (no otherwise than we see by proof) hold
Opinion, that where the Sun is either too near the People, as right over them,
or too far off, as under the two Pins of the World, there the Bodies are big
and strong, Omnis in Arctois sanguis quicunque pruinis nascitur, indomitus
bellis, and martis amator. Ap. Silvest. Girald. Cambrens* Topog. Hiber.
particul. 1. cap. 27.
and the Manners rude and fierce; whereas within the two Middle and Temperate
Girdles of the Earth, they keep a mean, and hit the midst, as they say, both in
Body and Manners, for that acquaintance with him, and his fellow-wanderers.

To come down to the Ground (for I must be short) we see that a fat and Hippoc.
ubi supra. and Cicer. de not. Deorum lib. 2.
and foggy Land makes the Blood and Spirits thick and gross, and thereby dull
and slow, and so the Men fond in Wit, and rude, and simple, faithful, chaste,
and honest, and still in that strain of Manners: whereas a barren and dry
Ground, if the Sun be temperate therewithal (as at Rome and Athens Plat. in
Tim. and Cicer. l. de Fato. and Jo. F. Picus lib. de Imaginat. and G. Merul.
Mem. lib. 1. cap. 1. and Les diverses Lecons de Pierre de Mexia etc. part. 4.
cap. 6.
makes the same thin, clear, and lively, subtle and deceitful Men, valiant,
unchaste, and so forth of all other properties appertaining. For meet Manners
in Men are like the Virtues and Properties of Plants, following both the sundry
tempers of the Bodies, when the Soul in them, and Mind in us, is one in all. --
Then as the mixtures, qualities, and virtues of Plants are altered up and down,
according to their Food and Sustenance, as (to omit the outward nourishment of
the Ground, whereby Cardan. subtle. lib. 8. in page 304. and Discors d^l
Mathiol. nel. 1. lib. di Dioscor. in Pro^emio. and S. Alb. Syl. Sylvarum. or
Not. Hist. Cent. 6. exper. 17, 18, 19, etc. and Fort. Licet. de Spontan.
vivent. ortu lib. 4. c. 31.
Pepper brought out of Calicut into Italy, will, after a few settings, turn
into Ivy, and such like): the case is plain, a cunning Gardener, either by
steeping the Seed or Slip, or better by enclosing the Root or Stock, can give
to any Plant any color, taste, smell, or power of Healing: even so the temper
of Men's Bodies, and Condition of their Manners change to and fro, upon the same
occasion.

To let go that hold in Physic, That distempered Meats do breed the like
distempers in those famous Humors which make Complexions, and their Conditions;
why are the Quinetiam cibo quo utare interesse aliquid ad mentis aciem putant.
Cicer de not. D^or. l. 2. See Ric. Eden in his Book of Moscovia and Tartary,
ann^xed to the Decades of Peter Martyr. fol. 299, etc.
Tartarians so Beastly and Barbarous in Manners, but because (besides their
Soil) they eat and drink the Flesh and Blood of Horses? we see the Islanders
Cardan. subt. l. 8. in p. 339. and de varie^. l. 8. c. 40. vide Cusan. de
Co^jectaris l. 2. c. 8. in p. 103.
of Corsica prove as bold, cruel, and false, as Dogs, whose Flesh they feed
upon. -- A man may range far in this Field, but let us draw near home; It is
not without cause that Lib. (...).
Plutarch, Lib. 7. de leg^b.
Plato, and A. Gel. l. 12. c. 1.
other grave and wise Philosophers give so strait charge of care and heed in
the choice of Nurses* Is it not like, nay, in their opinion, certain, that the
Child sucks in with their Milk, their outward Shape, and inward Manners? Why
not? As well as Beasts, that suck of strangers out of kind, do plainly draw
unto them much of their unkindly qualities; as appears by the Scal. exerc^^.
206. 5. and Jo. Leo. Afric. lib. 9. ap. Purch. Pilgrim. vol. 2. l 6. c. 1.
Sect. 9. and Girald. Camb. Itiner. Camb. lib. 1. c. 2. ap. Burton seu Democ.
jun. de Melanc. par. 1. S^ct. 2. Memb. 4. Subsect. 1. in p. 127.
Foles in Africa, which by sucking Camels are made more painful then their
kind, swift and healthful for it; and enough such like examples might be
brought if time would suffer.

To come to our Bodies left us by our Parents: If we see Manners ingrafted and
inbred in Stocks and kindreds, and Children and Nephews still down, to take
one after another a long time, by Kind and Nature, (as that cursed
father-beating kindred set down in Ethic. l. 7. c. 6.
Aristotle, and other pilfering Stocks, which though they have no need, yet
must needs steal; to let pass Lechery, Valor, and other good and bad
qualities, which we see daily descend and reign in Kindreds:) whence are these?
Not from the Parents Minds, which offspring not, nor can be left nor
engraffed, but must return straight, and whole, and all at once, when they flit
out of this Life, to that Heavenly place from whence they came: Neither are all
their Wits alike framed by Sen. de. Ira, l. 2. c. 20.
use and custom, but brought up sometimes quite contrary: Therefore, to cut
off the Astronomers opinions, as a string too much discording, those Manners
spring out of the Hipp lib. de Aere* Aquis, et locis.
Parents seed, which is a part of their Bodies, I mean of their second Bodies,
purchased by Meat and Nourishment, which Bodies if they use good and temperate
Diet, are ever like the first; otherwise they follow the Nature of the Meats,
and of their distempers, as Cardane Subt. l. 18. in p. 643.
in a few of the worst Diets, has most notably marked, that drunken, or
over-studious, or too great fasting, or large Onion-eating Parents, do beget
and bring forth, for the most part, mad and frantic Children.

To close up all this First Part, with this one little proof at once: If we
find our selves do many things against our Wills, (as when a fearful thing is
offered, our Hearts will pant, and fail with fear; when a fair, Lust and his
part will arise, whether we will or no, and all incontinency springs from that
Root:) then sure the Body must lay this force upon us. But how is this: And
which way does the Body so violently overrule, and carry away the Will and Mind
after her? when any shape appears in the thought of Man, the doing Mind takes
it straight, (we must wear these words with use, and make them softer) and
laying it with good or bad, and matching and comparing all things, decrees and
determines; and then her Will and Reason, which Plato places in the Head,
follows and desires: But at the same time steps in another double Will and
appetite, sent from that unreasonable and perceiving Soul, which is common
between us and Beasts, sitting, one part in the Heart, and desiring outward
goods; the other in the Liver, and seeking the goods of the Body; And look
which of these is stronger, that is, which has the stronger house, either by
descent or purchase, (or else the baser would be still the weaker, and obey the
better) that prevails and moves the Spirits unto it; and those the Sinews, and
those again by other middle means the whole Body or part thereof, as is the
pleasure of the Commander.

Wherefore to come to the point more plainly, we shall never be good and follow
Virtue, that is, a mean and reason in our desires and doings, before these two
parts, the Heart and the Liver, be first by Kind, and then by Diet in order,
square, and temper, apt to obey the Laws and Rules of Reason. -- for to begin
with the Root; If the Heart Sen. de Ira. l. 2. c. 18, 19, etc.
be very Hot and Moist, the Man is Courageous and Liberal, desiring Honor and
great outward things; if Hot and Dry, Cruel, Angry, Deceitful, etc. But if it
keep a Mean, and be Temperate in Quality, it keeps a Mean and obeys Reason
in that kind of Manners. -- for the Liver, if it be Plato in Timaeo.
Hot and Moist likewise, it follows Venery and Gluttony, if Hot and Dry it
does the same, but crookedly and out of course; but if it be Cold and Dry, the
Man on the other side is very Chaste and Abstinent; and if Cold and Moist,
somewhat Chaste and Abstinent, but untowardly: whereas a Temperate Liver holds a
Mean in both, and following the Race of Kind, desires to live Soberly in
Company, and Honestly in Marriage, a Life as far from Monks and Eremites, as
Gluttons and Lechers.

Wherefore, we see that all Manners proceed from the Temper of those parts,
(nay perhaps Understanding also, if it varieth still according to the diverse
Heats and Moistures of the Brain, and if these two parts be the Springs of all
Heat and Moisture in the Body:) so that all good Manners and all Virtue, bud
forth from the good, middle and equal mixture and temper of the same parts: And
all our labor and travel (if we seek Virtue) must be to bring those twain into
square and temper, that is, equality, as near as may be, of the four qualities;
not only by the Philosophical Salve of Use and Custom, (though In Timaeo. in
p. 499. and in Prol. in p. 296. and Epictet. Enchirid. cap. 64. and M. Aurel.
Antonin. Meditat. lib. 4. Sect. 43. and lib. 11. Sect. 16. and Palingen. in
Scorp.
Plato hits it right in his Timaeus, when he will have no Man lewd by his Will,
and therefore not to be blamed, but through his Body by Use or Nature
ill-disposed; but rather by good Diet, and by right Physic especially.

And thus we have, at last, finished these Parts, wherein we meant to prepare
the Minds both of the Common and Learned People, and to make the way to the
Truth of HERMES MEDICINE.

THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. 1. Of mending and bettering the State of MAN'S BODY.
ALbeit we have shown heretofore diverse ways to BLISS and HAPPINESS, and
sundry means whereby the whole Kind of Men may come to Long-Life, Health,
Youth, Rich^^, Wisdom, and Virtue; yet, in truth, they are all by long and
cumbersom ways, fit rather to put them in mind of a better way (which was the
drift of that purpose) than to be gone and traveled by the lovers of Wisdom
and Virtue; Wherefore, I would not wish them to arrive their counsels in any of
those places, but to seek to the Haven of HERMES, and of his sons the wise
Philosophers, as to the only one, ready, and easy way to all BLISS and
HAPPINESS. -- Then we are come at last, to that which was the first intent and
meaning of all this labor, that HERMES and the PHILOSOPHERS STONE and MEDICINE
is the true and ready way to BLISS.

But how shall we prove this, unless we unlock the door of Secrets, and let in
Light to these matters, which have been ever most closely kept, and hid in
darkness? We must, I say, first open what is HERMES MEDICINE, except we would
put on a Vizard, and make a long buzze and empty sound of words, about that
which no man understands.

We are like now to be driven unto a mavelous strait, either to fly the
field, or to venture upon the curse and displeasure of many wise and godly Men;
yea and of GOD HIMSELF, as we heard in the beginning. -- If In Tim. in p. 476.
and Philo l b. (...). in princip.
Plato thought he had cause, when he took in hand that mighty piece of work of
the World, first to make his prayer; how much more may we in such a world of
doubts and dangers? And to desire of GOD that we may prove our question, not
only with sufficient evidence, but with such discretion also, that those Men
which can use it, and are worthy of it, may see the truth, and the rest may be
blinded.

Then both to direct my speech, which must have some ground to stand on, and
their steps which crave a little light to guide them. I think it best to come
to the entrance of this way to BLISS, and to point afar off unto the end,
leaving the middle way unto their own Wit and Labor; for I may not be their
guide, lest the rest should espy us, and follow as fast.

HERMES MEDICINE, and the ready way to BLISS, lies among the Metals, and upon
the top and highest among them, even in Gold; And the end of this journey,
where Bliss begins is the Son of him. Albeit that I am not ignorant, that
Father HERMES, and the rest of his wise Foster*children hold and teach that out
of any Plant, Wight, or Mineral may be fetched a Medicine for all Diseases of
Men and Metals, as good as this which we have described: Neither do we, as
though we had drunk the water of Lethe, forget the reason of it above declared.
Because Cusanus de loct. Ignorant. l. 2. c. 5. in p. 28.
all things are all things, and the same and one thing, as having all one stuff
and Soul, if their stuff had the like, and not diverse minglings. And for that
all things, if they were wrought to the top and highest of perfection (as they
may be) flowed alike with all the Virtues of Heaven and Earth, Soul, Body,
Life, and Qualities. But these ways are long, cumbersome, and costly, as well
as the rest, and I seek, you know, the most ready, near and easy, which is
Gold, far above all other things in the World; The Reason is, because Nature
Crollius Basilic. chymica, in p. 258.
has poured her self wholly upon him, and enfeoffed him of far more, and
greater gifts, both of Lib. secret. max. Philosoph. galli de delph. anonym. T.
C. vol. 3. in p. 819.
Soul and Body, then all the rest: having given him not only great store of
the heat of Heaven, but also the most fine, temperate and lasting Body;
whereby, but especially by Reason of his excceeding tough and lasting Body,
wherein he wonderfully passes all things, we have him half ready dressed to
our hands, and brought very near the journeys end, quickly to be led forward
and finished with little labor; when as the rest are left in very hard way,
and finished with little labor.

It is strange; I am persuaded that a thousand ounces of Plant or Wight (as for
Ger. Dorn. Physic. genes. T. C. Vol. 1. in p. 388.
Minerals, they be much better) cannot with great labor, cost, skil^, and
time, be brought to that goodness, and nearness to perfection, as one ounce of
Gold has already given him by Nature; And I durst warrant you, that out of one
ounce of Gold, in less then one years space, with a few pounds charge, may be
gotten a Medicine, as good as the PHILOSOPHERS STONE of a Plant or Wight, that
takes a thousand ounces of stuff, many hundred pounds of charge, three years
time, and the wearing of many Men's Bodies: That we may think, although the wise
Philosophers in Egypt saw and showed the depth of Nature, and these Works, yet
they were not so mad and fond, as to put them in practice: And therefore Sum.
perfect. part 2. cap. 24. in p. 535. E^ quidem in rebus omnibus, sed in ex
ractione ejus, vita deficeret, S^ndi. vog. Tract. de Sulph. in p. 50.
Geber says, It is possible out of Plants to make the Stone, and yet almost
impossible also, because thy Life would first fail thee: Wherefore we may be
content also to know the Secre^, but let us use no other way but this, and so
dispatch not only Plants and Wights, as foul and earthly things, but also
middle Minerals, which are like the standing Lights of Heaven, in this
Comparison.

Nay, neither hold we his fellow Plants to be his equals, no, though they be
Quicksilver, or Silver themselves, the best and nearest of all the rest,
especially Silver the Wife of Gold, but even let her pack away with the rest;
for, as her fire above glisters, and makes a fair show, until she come in
presence of her Huusband; (as the wont of bad Women is;) so this our Earthly
Moon be she never so bright and excellent in another Company, yet in sight and
regard of Gold her Husband, she appears as nothing. If you marvel why, It is
because she wants much in heat of Heaven, temperateness and toughness of
Body; but in fineness an hundred fold -- These things are high and lofty, and
soar above the common sight, we will fetch them down anon, and make them plain
and easy.

Then let us fall to the Matter, that the Son of Gold may be found the ready
way to BLISS, and the perfect Medicine both of Man and Metals; And first, as
it is meet, let us regard our selves, and cure our own Bodies, before we help a
Stranger.

There is no Gift, Property, or Virtue, but it springs either from the Soul
or Body: The best gift of the Soul is most store thereof, as we showed before;
And of the Body, fit temperateness in the first qualities; and then fineness
and closeness, which causes lastingness, in the second. Let us see how Gold
excels in all these virtues, and overgoeth all other things, first by the
gift of Nature, and then by a Divine Science. But it were not good, in such a
heap of Matters to be disposed and dispatched at once, to regard those that be
clear and received; so then let the fineness of Gold go his ways as clear in
all Men's Eyes, and his temperateness, which all Leaches grant, and take the
rest as things both more in doubt, and of greater worth.

Plin. l. 10. c. 63.
Those that are longest a ripening and growing to perfection, are both the most
tough and lasting, and fullest of Heavenly Virtues; whereas on the other side,
Card. subt. l. 7. c. 37.
soon Ripe, soon Rotten, as they say, an ill Weed grows apace, and so forth.
The cause of this in Bodies is, because the first Moisture, if it be Cardan.
subt. l. 12. in p. 467. and Levin. L mn de occu't. not. mirac. l. 2. c. 39.
fast and close, that is, Fat, proceeds and spreads slowly, and is hardly
consumed, and eaten up with the Fire of Life, when K^ck rm. syst. phys. l. 3.
c. 13.
thin and waterish Moisture, both spreads apace, and spends as fast. And for
this that Heavenly Virtue, when the stuff has long lain open under the hands
of the Spirits of Heaven, it must needs receive great store of them, and hold
them surely with his strength and toughness; what Reason can show this more
plainly, except you will call me to examples? then bend your Ears awhile, and
mark the Arist. d' generat. animal. l. 4. c. o. and Phi. l. 8. c. 10. and Phil.
Pigafet, apud Purch. pilgr. vol 2. l. 7. c. 4 sect. 3.
Elephant, two years in making in his Mothers Womb, and a long time in growing
to his best estate and lustiness, to reach the highest and best pitch in
mortality (for Man is immortal) not only by his strength and long life, which
you heard before, but through Montague Essays. l. 2. c. 12.
a kind of Wit and good Conditions also drawing near to the Nature of Mankind.

Consider again of Mice, those little Vermin, how soon they be bred, as,
sometimes the Earth creates them, sometimes the Mother without the Male, Arist.
hist. an^m. l. 6. c. 37.
by licking salt, and otherwiles (for a Wonder in Nature) they Plin. l. 10. c.
65.
conceive and are big with Young in their Mothers belly; Consider, I say, how
soon again they be swept away, even with a shower of Rain, as Hist. an. ut sup.
(n)
Aristotle reports; who tells of ^ Ephesians. Hist. anim. l. 5. c. 16.
one-day Fly, bred in a leaf in the Fore-noon, at Midday fledge, and ever dying
at night, with the setting of the Sun.

Again, Pliny Lib. 7. c. 6. and Senec. consolat. ad Marciam. c. 23.
writes of a Child, that within three years space, grew three Cubits, and was
now grown to Man's estate (which they call Pubertatem) but haste makes waste, as
they say, and within three years after his Limbs shrunk up again, and he died:
Nay, he Lib. 7. c. 2.
says, that the whole kind of Women, amongst the Calingians, conceives at five
years of Age, and lives but eight.

To cut off living Wights, and to come to Plants, are not Trees, the longer
lived the better in use, for that long growth and ripening? And among Trees,
does not the Oak, Kickerm. syst. physic. l. 3. c. 10.
after his long growth to perfection, stand, to our great profit, even for ever
almost? It is strange that I say, and yet Josephus Cardan. subt. l. 8. in. p.
333.
writes of one, that stood from Abraham's time, to the razing of Jerusalem, two
thousand years at least, and God knows how long after that time it lasted. --
To be short, the best Tree of all that the Earth brings forth, the Cocus of
India, Cardan. ubi supra (u) in p. 325. and Scalig. Exerc. 158. and Purch.
pilgr. Tom. 4. l. 7. c. 5. sect. 1.
in one Man's age, scarce begins to bear any fruit, and lasts after that
almost past all Ages; wherefore the Minerals, by the course of Reason and
Custom, being by the grant of all Men, longest in making and perfecting, must
needs, of all other, be both best in Virtue, and last the longest; and among
them, Gold above all, because it is the end of all, and so far, in that point,
passes the most part of them, that as some Men think, a thousand years are
spent before he come to perfection; for his long lasting, we plainly see he is
everlasting. -- And if we doubt of his Heavenly Virtue, let us weigh the Place
and Womb where he is bred and fashioned, and we shall see it a Leo. Heb. de
Amor. dial. 2. in p. 384. and Nuisem^nttraict du^sol and ^del esprit u^ivers.
l. 2. c. ^. in p. 102, 103, 115. and l. 1. c. 4. in p. 26 etc. 7. and Mars.
Ficin. de vita. ^ae, com. l. 3. c. 16. and Alb. mag. de reb. m^tal. l. 3. c. 10.
Common Gulf of all the Beams of Heaven, even as the Sea is the receipt of all
Rivers that run.

How is this? All the beams of Heaven set forth from a round and wide compass,
and like Lines in a Circle, after they have traveled a great wide way one from
another, do meet at last together jump Joan de ^eung complant de Nature l. B.
p. 246. vide T. C. vol. 1. p. 719, 730. and Dan. Mylium in opere Medico chym.
par. 2. praefat. par. 4. de primo mobili, sen sol^.
in the Navel of the Earth; yea, and with great force and strength above all
other Spirits in other places, not only by reason of the length of their
journey (for all natural things, the Denique quod longo venit impece, sumere
debec m^^bilitatem, etiam atque etiam quae crescit eundo, and validas auget
vires and roborat ictum. Lucret. lib. 6.
further they go the more they mend their pace) but chiefly because the meeting
in such a strair, with such abundance, they violently thrust, and throw one
another on heaps together, as we see the force of Winds or Water meeting in
that order; or rather as the Sun beams falling upon the Stone G. Agricol. de
not. fossil. l. 5. c. 14. and l. 6. c. 7.
Hephaestites, or the Steeple-fashioned burning-Glass, thereby shows such
strange and unwonted force, Paracels. lib. de Transmut. rerum not. Tom. 6. p.
234.
to burn dry things, melt Metals, and such like, because the beams that light
upon it, do meet all on heaps, and apace, in one narrow point of the middle.

Wherefore the Minerals, because Vide Auto. incert. de princ^p. Not. and Art
alchym. Harmoniae Imperscrut. chymicophil. decad. 1. in p. 12. and Nuis^ment
trai^^. du fol. etc. c. 3. p. 24.
they be bred and brought up about that place, first receive great plenty of
those Heavenly Spirits, and then those very surely set on by the swiftness of
the stroke, and as fast held and kept for the sound and close bodies that take
the printing; when as Plants and Wights dwelling in one place, and outside of
the ground aloft, where these Beams and Breaths of Heaven are more scarce,
slack and weak, must needs have, not only less store faintly put upon them,
but also those which they have, for their loose and soft stuff, quickly lost
and foregone again.

But if the edge of some Men's Wits be too blunt and dull to cut so deeply into
the Earth, to find this Matter, let them cast their eyes, and behold the daily
experience, how these Heavenly spirits in Minerals, for all they be shut up and
bound so fast in the prison of that hard and sturdy Stuff, yet are able to
show their force as much, and work as mightily as the free Breaths of other
things enlarged in their soft and gentle Bodies.

It would not be amiss I think, to bring in a few and set before us, because
for the sloth of the Times past, and spite of the Later Leaches, these things
have lain for the most part buried as they be, and hid from the light and
common knowledge.

Then, to pass by the Camel. Leonard de Lapid. lib. 2. and Joseph. Michel.
Apol. chym. in p. 175. and Wolfgang. Gab. comment. ad And. Bacii lib. de gem.
and lap. c. 5. and 16.
Pearl, that helps swoonings, and withstands the plague of Poisons; the
Camil. Leonard ubi (d)
Smaragde and Camil. Leonard ubi (d)
Jacinth, which keeps off the Plague likewise, and heals the wounds of Venomous
stings, and many more such rare and worthy Virtues, which they themselves
grant, and give to precious Stones in their Writings, nay in their Broths,
Pills, and Discors del Mat. nel D^oscor. l. 5. c. 114.
Electuaries; let us come to hard Juyces, and Middle Minerals: The Water of
Nile, which makes the Women of Egypt so quick of Conceit, and so Fruitful, as
to bear seven at a Birth, as Lib. 7. cap. 3. and l. 31. c. 10. and Libav.
comment. Alch. par. 2. l. 6. de judic. aq. mineral. par. 3. in p. 188.
Pliny writes, is known to be Salt-Peter-Water. -- It is found by common proof,
that the same G. Agric. de not. fossil. l. 1.
Saltpeter, or Common Salt, or Coppress molten and made a Water, kills the
poison of the Toadstool, and juice of Poppy: That a Plaster of De his omnibus,
^ide Dioscorid. de. Mer. Medic. l. 6. c. 43. and l. 4. c. 85.
Salt or Brimstone, heals the hurt of Venom in-stinged: That Amber, Gab. ubi
supra ad (d) cap. 9.
which is no Stone, but a hard clammy Juice called Bitumen, eases the labor
of Women, and the falling sickness of Children; It is known likewise that
almost all wholesome Hieron. Rubeus de distillat. sect. 2. c. 20.
Baths, both wet and dry, of Water or his Vapor (which are without number in
the World; but especially that famous Hot-House in Italy, called G. Agric. de
not. little quae effluunt e terr. l. 4. c. 3.
Salviati, for the space of three miles compass wrought and hewn out of the
ground very daintily, deserves to be named, and delivered to the Memory of Men
to come;) flow from Guil. Caesar. Capaccio Antichita di Pozzuel. cap. 13 and
St. Albans de Aug. Scient. l. 4. c. 2. and Jose. Quercitan. Hermet. Medicin.
defens. cap. 22. and Cambden says as much of the Baths in Somersitshire. Sed
quid? Sulphurerum nolumus esse locum. Necham. Ibid.
a Brimstony ground, and draw from thence all their Nature, Quality, Force, and
Virtue; except a few of Copperess Water, as appears by their dying property,
whereby they give any white Metal, their own yellow and Copper color.

Now for Metals; If it be true, that precious Stones in that hard and ungentle
fashion, show such virtue and power of healing, why should we mark the German
for a Liar, when he awards Paracels. Archid. magic. l. 5. Tom. 11. in p. 149,
151, 153, 154.
great praise to the Mixture of all the Metals, made in the conversion of their
own Planets, which he calls Electrum, saying it will cure the Cramp, Benumming,
Palsy, and Falling Sickness, if it be worn on the hearty finger; and gives
signs besides if the Body aileth any thing, by spots and sweating: and bewray
Poison if it be made in Plate, by the same tokens, for all that Lib. 33. c. 4.
Vide Card. subt. l. 6. in. p. 239.
Pliny will have Poison so descried by the natural Electrum, and wash off Gold
and Silver, and by the signs of Rainbows, and by noise of Fire when it hisseth;
and not by the artificial mixture to be made of Silver and Gold, and Copper,
adulterando adulteria naturae, as he more finely then constantly says, when he
had allotted so chaste Virtue before unto her.

But suppose this Virtue in the hard form of Metals not so apparent, yet no Man
shall deny the daily proof of them, opened by rude Skill, and set at liberty,
as the great use of Burnt Aes ustum. Plutarch. sympos. l. 3. q. 10. Fallop. de
met. c. 14.
Brass, Crocus martis. Fallop. ib. ca. 20.
Iron-Saffron, Fuligo mettallorum Arsenic. Realgar, Auripigmentu^, and simul
Parac. de Morb. Metal. lib. 2. cap. 3. Tom. 5. in p. 21.
Metal-smoke, (and this by Gallen's own witness) and mavelous help in
Surgery; Nay, the mighty power, both within and without of Dioscorid. l. 5. c.
58. and Fallop. c. 29.
Antimony, which is unripe Lead, and of Quicksilver, very raw and running
Silver, so often tried before their Eyes, has so amazed, and quite daunted the
later Leaches: though Galen Simpl. l. 4. c. 19. and l. 5. c. 18. vide Fernel.
de abd. rer. cause. l. 2. c. 15. and Fallop. ubi supia c. 37.
himself in times past, has termed this rank Poison, set straight against our
Nature, and the least part thereof taken inward, to hurt and annoy us, to the
great laughter of the Country Wits, which, even with Child, a dangerous time
to take Physic in, without any hurt at all, nay with speedy and only help,
Matthiol. nel l. 6. di Dioscor. c. 28. and Fallop. de Metal. c. 37. and Libav.
Tom. 1. Syntag. l. ^. c. 13. and Horat. Augenius. Tom. 1. l. 1. Ep st. 1.
use to drink it against Worms in great quantity. -- But Galen did but rove by
guess at the matter, when as S^mplicius l. 9. c. 19. citatur a Mat. Vutzer. in
anatom. Spagyr. Merc. l. 1. c. 4. and R^spons. ad Aubert. T. C. Vol. 2. in. p.
167.
in another place, forgetting himself, (as he does often) he says he never had
tried her force, neither within, nor without the Body.

But if these Stones, Vide P. Severin. Dan. Id. Med. Philosoph. c. 8. in p.
127. and Paracels. l. de Mort. rerum. natural. Tom. 6. in p. 216.
Juices and Metals were by greater Skill, more finely dressed, and freely set at
liberty (as they be by the German) what wonders were they like to work in the
Art of Healing? Neither let us think (as Galen and his band thinks of all
things) that those great and rare Mineral virtues could issue out and come from
the gross and foul Body, but from an Heavenly gift of a mighty Soul, which
cannot be kept in awe, and held so stra^ with those Earthly bonds, as it shall
not be able, in some sort, to stir and break through, and show his force and
power.

Wherefore, to return to my purpose, If Nature has bestowed upon these three
sorts and suits of Minerals, so large Gifts and Virtues, what has she given to
Gold And. Bacius de gem. not. c. 17.
the end and perfection of them all, which has passed in that travel through
the midst of them all, Vide Anto. Mosen. Patric. Venet. de trans. his ad Deun.
l. 1. c. 44. in p. 468. and Rosar. abbrev. T. C. Vol. 3. in p. 699.
so receiving and holding the Virtues of them all with advantage? What say the
Leaches to this matter? They are loath to say any thing, albeit their deeds
speak enough, when they lay raw Gold to the outside Cardan. varietat. l. 8. c.
44.
of the Head, to heal his Ache; right (e) against the Heart, to comfort his
sadness and trembling; and when in such sort they apply it to such purposes:
Again, why do they boil it in their (d) Cullises? mix it with their Joseph.
Quercitan. Herm^t. Med. defens. c. 24. and Severin: Dan. Id. Med. Phil. cap.
15. and Dan. Mylius oper. medicochym. praefat. ad Basilie. Philosoph part. 5.
de Auro.
Pills and Electuaries? bid the Lepers swallow it? etc. Do they not seem to
smell his great and matchless power against Diseases, and mavelous comfort
and wholsomness unto our Nature, but that like rude and unskilful Cooks, they
know not how to dress it? But if they knew the Skill, they should see it rise
in Power and Virtue, according to his degrees in Freedom; and when it came to
the top, which I call the Son of Gold, to prove Almighty, I mean within our
compass; for consider, Gold is now good and friendly above all unto us, for his
exceeding store of comfortable Heat of Heaven, shining through the mist of a
most fine and temperate Body; Then what would it be, if those properties of
Body, were by great mingling and breaking of the Stuff, refined and raised in
their kind, an hundred degrees at least? (which our Art professes;) and those
lively and piercing heaps of comfortable Spirits, freed and set at liberty, and
all these seated upon a most mighty Body, subduing all things? Is there any
thing in the World to be compared unto the mavelous Work which he would make
in our Body? Could any of these very violent and mortal Poisons, which I
brought in above, so easily and roundly destroy, as this would help and save
us? But to come to the Point: If that our Old, Fine, Close and Ethereal Oil,
which they call a Fifth Nature, was able alone, for the Reasons set down in
their places, to breed and beget all those blessed bodily gifts and properties,
that is, Lastingnesse, Health, Youth, and the two springs of Wisdom and Virtue,
Clearness and Temperatenesse; How much more shall this Son of Gold, the
Medicine and Stone of HERMES, and his Offspring be sufficient and furnished
for it?

For first, when his Soul and Heat of Heaven is much more great and mighty, and
his Body a more fine and fast Oil, that is, a more like and lasting Food of
Life, it both upholdeth and strengthens Life and Natural Heat the better, and
so proves the better cause of Long Life and Youth: Then being more temperate,
and that quality carried upon a finer and tougher, that is, a stronger Body, it
is able with more ease and speed to subdue his and our Enemies, the distempered
Diseases, and to cleanse and clear, fashion, and bring into good order and
temper, the whole frame of our Body, and so procure Health, Wisdom, and Virtue
in better sort, and in more full and heaped measure: for you must not think
that a Fifth Nature of Wine, or such like, which I brought in heretofore, and
which many Vide Hier. Rubeum de distillat. S^ct. ^^. c. 5. and Sect. 2. c. 20.
Men do make for their Bodies, is so good by twenty degrees, as the
PHILOSOPHERS STONE, I mean the same measure of both; when, besides that it is
not so temperate, and near unto Heaven, (though the name be never so near) for
it wants twenty parts of the Soul, and as much of that fine Stuff closely
and finely tied up together; and therefore one part thereof will last longer,
and spread further with all his Virtues, and so do more good in our Bodies then
twenty times as much of the former. Deliver to mind what I say, it is worthy
marking, -- I shall not need to stand to show you the Reasons why, and manner
how this great Medicine of HERMES shall be able to get and purchase these our
Blisses of Mind and Body, because it is already done at large elsewhere, and it
may suffice, in this place, to win by force of Reason (which has been done as
much as needs) that this Medicine is much better, and more able than an Ether,
Heaven, or Fifth Nature.

Then these Men may see (I mean Paracels. in man. Philos. Tom. 6. in p. 316 --
319. and In Fragment. de vita longa l. 3. c. 8. Tom. 6. in p. 168.
Paracelse, and such as know whereof they speak, let the rest go) how rash and
unadvised they prove themselves, when they are content to let in the name of
Poison into this happy Medicine, and to avow that it works all those wonders
in our Bodies, by that way of curing which I showed, by stronger like ^oisons:
for then it would be, at most, but a general Medicine, and Cure-all against
Diseases, and fit for Health alone, but no blessed way to Long-life, Youth,
Wisdom, and Virtue, which grant as well as the other, both he and all the rest
do give unto him: for it might not be taken and used in a sound Body, no more
then a purging Medicine, except it wear off that Viperous kind aforesaid: for
he would then battle with our Nature, spoil and overthrow the first moisture,
and the whole frame of the Body, fo far would it be from nourishing the Natural
Heat and Moisture, from clearing and tempering the Body to cause Long-Life,
Youth, Wisdom and Virtue. And the reason of this reproof is, because when every
Poison is very barren and empty of Heat of Heaven, and very distemperedly cold
and dry in body, set straight against our Hot and Moist Nature, as appears by
flying the Fire and Oil his Enemies; The PHILOSOPHERS STONE was temperate in
respect, at first; and is now exactly so, and a very fine Oil, and full of
Heavenly Spirits: and so, for these three causes, not only most friendly, and
like to our Nature, but also a very deadly Enemy, and most cross contrary to
all Poisons.

CHAP. II. That the PHILOSOPHERS STONE is able to turn all base METALS into
SILVER and GOLD.
ANd thus we have lightly run over the former part of Long-Life, Health, Youth,
Clearness, and Temperatenesse, which make up all good gifts of Body needful:
Let us now come to the outward help of Riches, and borrow so much leave again,
as to use the Cause for the Effect, and to take Gold for Riches, and strive to
show that the Son of Gold is able to turn any Metal into Gold; and not so
sparingly, now, and hardly as we did before, by those bastard kinds of Binding
and Coloring, (though a little, if it were without mispence of time and
travel, would serve our turn) but as fully and plentifully, as any of our Men
avow, to the amazement of the World: They set down no certain sum nor stint,
which I will do, because I have to do with thirsting Ears, and because again I
love not to run at random, but to have a certain mark whereat to aim and level
all my speeches.

Then let us say, By this great Skill of HERMES, and a little Labor and Cost,
we may spend with the greatest Monarch of the World, and reach the Turks
Revennue, yea, though it be Fifteen Millions Sterling, as I find it Francesco
Sansovino del governo de S. regin. lib. 6. in fine.
credibly reported; yea, let us be bold, and not, as Plato in Phaedro.
Socrates did when he spoke of Love, hide our Face for the Matter. -- The Truth
is vouchable before GOD and Man, and will bear it self out at last; though it
be my luck, still to be crossed by Men of our own Coat, HERMES Foster-children;
-- But what do I call them so? Albeit Paracelse, with whom we dealt of late,
was plainly so; yet his Scholar Dorne which now comes in place, is out of this
account as clearly: This Man, I say, to excuse his own Ignorance, has learned
a new trick in unfolding of HERMES Riddle, that neither Gerard. Dorn. Artis
Chymistica l. 1. c. 9. T. C. Vol. 1. in p. 218. and alias passim.
HERMES, nor any of his Followers, in saying they turn the four foul Metals,
Lead, Tin, Iron, and Copper into Silver and Gold, mean plainly according to
common speech, but still Riddle and double the matter, understanding the four
Complexions of our Body, (which he busieth himself to match with those four
Metals) into good form and temper changed: And these to be the Silver and Gold
which they make at any time; and that by this token, because they fetch their
Medicine, as you heard even now, out of all things. -- Then he flies out and
lifts up his Master with high praises, for finding first, and untwining the
Knot and Riddle; whereas there is nothing so plain, both in Paracelse and all
other of his Hidden Science, as their Opinion, as touching this matter: Nay,
see the worthy Memory of the Man, he himself in construing the words of his
Master, concerning the same Matter, makes, as well as he, and the rest, a plain
division of this Work, and yields in open terms, that our Medicine serves
both for Men and Metals.

This Noble Doctor, when I was a Novice and first-ling in this study, as he
misled me in other things, which he took upon him to unfold, so he amazed me
in this, before he himself knew the least of them: But after I went forward,
and began to consider earnestly, and weigh the things by their own weight, (and
not by the weight of Words and Authorities) the only way to Knowledge, I
quickly saw the falsehood of that new opinion, and more plain reason and cause
of belief, for this point, then for all the rest, which he allows, and which I
showed before. Then let us not stay for him, nor for any thing else, but let us
march forward, with all speed and courage. -- And if it be never good in
discourse of Speech, to heap and huddle up altogether, but for light sake to
joint the Matter, and cut it in diverse pieces, let us do so too, and prove
first that the Son of Gold is able to turn Metals that are base into Gold; then
that he can change so much as to make up that Son, I set as needful.

He is to turn Metals two ways; first, as a Seed, if a Man list to sow him
upon them: And then, after his Birth, by Nourishment, or turning them into his
own Nature; And this is either into his Fathers (which is his own after a sort)
or, into his now-being, and self same Nature. Of these I will treat severally:
And first of Seed, which cannot be denied unto Gold, if all Elementa and
Elementata omnia vivere fuse probat Gul. Gilbert. de Magnet. l. 5. c. 12. per
totum. and Fortun. Licet. sparsi exertim vero de spo^t. vivent. ort. l. 3. c.
14, 15, etc. and Plotin. En nead. 6. l. 7. c. 11. in p. 703.
things have Life, and Life have Arist. de animal. l. 2. c. 4. and Fort. Licet.
de vit. l. 2. c. 16. in p. 359. and Algavel. l. 2. t^act. 4. c. 1. de anim.
vegetat.
three powers and abilities, to be Nourished, and to Wax, and to beget his
Like, also; The second part is clear and granted among all Philosophers: And
that all things have Life, it has been often showed before by their feeding
and diverse other Arguments.

But because it is a thing whereon almost all the frame of my speech leans,
and yet much in doubt, and hardly believed among the Learned, let us take it
again, and prove it by name in Minerals, because they be both farthest from
belief, and nearest our drift and purpose.

Cardan. subtle. l. 5. in p. 199 Omne mortem obiens vivens est. Fort. Licet. de
spont. viv. ortu. l. 3. c. 2.
Those things that have Diseases, Age, and Death, cannot but live; and we see
plainly the Diseases, Age, and Death of precious Stones; but most clearly in
the precious Lodestone (though he be foul in sight) which is kept, fed, and
nourished in the filings of Iron, his proper and like Food, when Quicksilver or
Garlike quite destroys him, and puts out all his Life, Strength and Virtue.

But how if the g Minerals by feeding, wax and grow as Vide Fran. Georg. Venet.
de barmonia mundi totius Cant. 2. Tom. 1. c. 6. and Discors. del. Mathi. nel.
5. lib. di Dioscor. in prooemio. and P. Sever. Danus Id. Med. Phil. c. 2. and
Comment. in Her. lib. de lap. Phil. secret. T. C. vol. 4. in p. 759. and Tho.
campanel. de sensu. re^u^. l. 3. c. 13.
well as Plants or Wights? As Miners have good experience of that, when they
see them by those due and constant fits, so dangerously void their Leavings.
-- Agricola says, Idem cardan. de subt. l. 5. in p. 210.
that Saltpeter, after that by draining it has lost its taste and virtue, if
it be laid open in the Weather, will within five or six years space, grow and
ripen, and recover his power and strength again. The De vet. nov. metal. l. 2.
and de I'ua. Rutil. Claud. Numat. Gal. ap. Onuph. Panum. in urb. Romae
descript. l. 1. and G. Fall. Tract. de Therm. aq. ac. met. c. 5. and Geo.
Fabrit. obser. de r^. net. in fo. 20. 22.
same man tells of one Lead-mine, and two other of Iron, which after they be
dug and emptied, within few years space, ripen and grow to be full again,
and one of these every tenth year.

But admit these by the slight and canvass of a crafty Wit, may be shifted off,
yet they shall never rid the next that follows of Lead, after he has been
taken out of his proper Womb, where he was bred, and nourished, and fashioned
into his form for our use requisite, yet, if it be laid in a moist place under
ground, it will wax and grow both in weight and bigness, Cardan. sub. l. 9. in
p. 239. and St. Albans syl. syl. Cent. 8. Exp. 97. and G. Agricola de ort. and
cause. subterran. lib 5.
by many good Authors, yea, and by (k) Galen his own witness, which although it
be light otherwise, yet is of weight in this matter, because it makes so much
against his own cause; Nay, mark what l. 8. de not. fossilium.
G. Agricola reports, that the same has been found true on the top of houses,
and shows where and how the proof was taken.

But, to come to the very point, Lib. de generat. rerum naturalium. Tom. 6. in
p. 207. Vide Alex. ab Alex. dier. genesis l. 4. c. 9. and Scalig. Exer. 102. 1. et
B. Full. l. 1. c. 6. ap. Sim. Maiol. Ast. Coll. 19. met.
Paracelse says, that Gold buried in a good Soil, that lies East, and
cherished well with Pigeons dung and urine, will do the same; and sure, I dare
not condemn his witness in this Matter, because the rest that went before,
seem to say as much in effect, and to avow the truth of this Story.

Then, if it be so certain that Gold has life, there is no help but he shall
beget his like also, if Philosophy and common proof be received: But they G.
Agric. de ort. et cause. subter. l. 3.
will say, that nothing does so that wants seed, as many Wights and Plants
do, and all Minerals; No man says so, that knows what is seed; S^m^n res
est invisibilis, sed Sperma visibile. Sendivog. Tract. 7. T. C. Vol. 4. in p.
490. and Anonym. phys. restit. enchirid. Can. 186. and Arist. de g^nerat.
animal. l. 2. c. 3.
Seed is no gross thing that may be seen with Eyes, but a fine and hot
Heavenly breath, which we call Life and Soul, wherewith not only the common
soul of the World, but also Wights, yea, and perfect P^rdices. Plin. l. 10. c.
33. and Jul. Solin. polyhist. c^p. 12. and M. Varro de Ag^ic. l. 3. c. 11. Apud
Jo. Comerte. Council in pr fat. ^lini lo.
Wights sometimes, beget without the company and sense of that frothy stuff and
shell, as I said above; but yet most commonly Nature takes the help and guard
of that Body called Seed: This was proved to be not only a branch and part
slipped from the whole Body, but the whole it self sometimes, as by kind, in the
four beginnings, and in Minerals, and in seedlesse Plants, and Wights; and by
Skill in all. Therefore Minerals and all have their Seed, and their whole Body
is their Seed.

Then, as by Nature, they are wholly sown and die, and (or else under-moon
Immortalia sunt n. om^ia perfect mista, tam^tsi non in individuis, at in
speciebus suis. Anon. Enchirid. phys. rest. Can. 166. and 186.
things would prove mortal) rise again the same increased according to the
wont of Nature, even so they will above ground, if we can by skill use them
kindly, which we may, as well as Nature, if we could espy her Footings, not
unpossible to be seen, as I could show you quickly, if I might a little unwind
the bottom of secrets, and lay them open; But I must take heed.

Then, as the seed of Plants and Wights rises again much increased in store
and bigness, because it draws unto it and turns into his Nature much of the
kindly stuff and ground that lies about it to corrupt it: Even so, if you Vide
Aurel. Angurel. Chrysostom. l. 2. T. C. Vol. 3. p. 214.
make the Metals a ground fit to receive and corrupt the seed of Gold, it will,
after his due time rise again, turning them, or much of them, into his own
Nature.

Now Dr. Dorne may see, if he be not blinded, that this is no Riddle matter,
but a plain and certain Truth, grounded upon the open and daily race of Nature,
which not I spied first, (as he spied out the subtle falsehood:) but the same
all the Troop of the wise Egyptians saw and taught before me; yea, and some of
them that sit in darkness, as those worthy Leaches, whose aid we took before,
Ficine, Fernel, and Cardane; especially the two first, because they bare
good-wil to the truth of this Science; But Cardane, as a man that neither knew
nor loved it, halts a little; for when he had all about held for certain, that
Minerals and all had life, and were nourished, and grew and waxed, yet he
buried the third point with silence.

But let us not urge this so much in this place, because it is not the right
Son of Gold, and Stone of HERMES, but a lesser skill, and lower way to Riches,
fit to have been followed in the Second Book. -- Then how does the PHILOSOPHERS
STONE, and the natural Son of Gold it self turn base Metals into Gold? For
that was the second thing to be handled in this place.

When this Child is born, keep him in his heat, which is his life, and give him
his due and natural food of Metals, and he must needs, if he be quick, and
able to be nourished, digest, change, and turn them into his own Nature, much
more easily than Lead, and he in a cold place, and rude and hard fashion, was
before able to turn strange meat and digest it.

And as I showed above the change of natural things when they meet in Combat,
to be either throughour, or half way, that is, either by Consuming to raze one
another quite out, and turn him into his own self-same Nature; or when by
mixture both their Forces are broken and dulled equally: Even so, in this great
skillful change, we may so order the matter, and match the two Combatants, that
is, the Meat and Feeder, Stuff and Doer, with such proportion, that one shall
either get the Victory, and eat up the other quite, or both be maimed alike and
weakened.

To be plain; If we give Vide P. Bonus Ferrar. Margarit. pret. c. 3. T. C. Vol.
5. p. 679.
this mighty Child and Son of Gold, but a little Food (the quantity I leave to
discretion) he will be able to turn it througly into his own self-same Nature,
and thereby to mend himself, and increase his own heap and quantity: But if you
will make Gold, which is your last end and purpose, match your Medicine with a
great deal, an hundred times as much, or so (your eyes shall teach you) and
both shall work alike upon each other, and neither shall be changed thoroughly,
but make one Mean thing between both, which will be Gold, if you will, or what
you will, according to your proportion: And if you perceive not, mark how (the
comparison is somewhat base, but fit and often used by our Men) they make a
sharp and strong Medicine, Dio. Z^char. T. C. Vol. 1. p. 810. and P. Bon. marg.
preti. c. 9. T. C. Vol. 5. in p 677.
called Leaven, of the best wrought Flouer, which is Dough; and such another of
Milk, well mingled in the Calves bag, named Augurell. Chrysostom. li. 2. T. C. Vol.
3. in p. 216.
Rennet; and how by matching them with just proportion of Flouer and Milk, they
turn them into the middle Natures of Dough and Curds: Nothing so fit; mark it
well.

Nay, since you begin to call me to examples, I will ply and load you with them,
and yet I will lay no strange burdens upon you, no, not the quick nature of
the Scottish sea, returning wood G. Merul. Mem. l. 3 c. 43. and Sil. Gyrald.
Camb. Topograph. Hiber. Distinct. 1. c. 11 and Alex. ab Alex. l 4. c. 9. and
Ibach. Vadian. Com. ad Pompon. Mela. l. 3. Et Mi^b. Mayer qui integrum tract.
scrip. de voluc. arboria. Et Bapt. Post. l. 2. c. 3. and Card. Var. l. 7. c.
36. and Scal. Exer. 59. 2. and Fort. licet. de spon. viv. ort. l. 3. c. 47. and
Ortelius in descript. Hioern. and du Bart. fixicsme jour. and Dith. Blefken.
descript. Island. and Brem. Palissy. Traicte de Pierres, etc. and Purch.
Pilgrim. Tom. 3. l. 3. c. 22.
into Geese; Nor yet the Plin. l. 10. c. 3. and Phile. (...) c. 1. and Card. de
variet. l. 16. c. 89. and Theophyl. Simo^atus, (...). and ^lbert Mag. l. d.
mirab. mundi.
Eagles feathers, that lying among Goose quills eat them up, two more
mavelous changes, then all those that are professed in the Art of Changing,
yet I leave them, I say, for things too strange and far of my purpose; here are
many Waters and Earth, which I am credibly informed by De nature. eorum quae
eff. e ^err. l. 2.
G. Agricola and Card. subt. l. 2. and G. Merul. mem. l. 3. c. 4. and Matthiol.
discors. vel l. 5. de Dioscor. in proem. and Leand. Alberti descrit. de tutta
Italia. in f. 49. and Cambden says as much of a Well in Leicest shire near
Lutterworth, and another near Knaresborough in Yorkshire. and Sen. not. quaest.
l. 3. c. 20. and Poutan. de Meteor. c. 44.
others as good Authors, are endued with the properties to turn any Plant,
Wight, or Metal into stone. Cardane De varietat. l. 2. c. 7. and Nuisement
Poem. Philosoph.
tells of a Lake in Ireland, wherein a stake stuck down will turn in one years
space, so much as sticks in the Mud, into stone, and so much as stands in the
water to Iron, the rest remaining Wood still.

There is an old Mine-pit in the Hill G. Agric. de Fosse l. 9. and Cardan. subt.
l. 6. in p. 227. and Parac. l. de Tinct. Phys. c. 6. T. C. in p. 278, and M.
Mayer. symb. aur. men's. lib. 11.
Carpat in Hungary wherein the people daily steep their Iron, and make it
Copper: the reason of these things is plainly that which I brought, for our
great and Golden change, and likened to Rennet and Leaven hard before.

The waters and Earths which astonish things in that order, are evermore,
infected and mixed with some very strong Stony*juyce, De Not. eorum quae ^ff. e
terr. l. 1. and 2.
as Agricola, says; and Reason agrees plainly in the waters, when they no
sooner Cambden in Scot.
rest from running, then they go into a stone. Nay, l. 31. c. 1. and Sen. not.
quaest. l. 3. c. 25. and Purch. Pilgrim. Tom. 3. l. 5. c. 1.
Pliny says, that Stony-slix in Arcadia, goes into stone running; which thing
the foul Traitor Plin. l. 30. c. ult. and Vitruvius ap. Ant. Muret. in vot. ad
sen. ubi supra (^) and Card. Subt. l. 2. p. 136.
Antipater belike perceiving, meant thereby to try such a change upon his Lord,
the great Grecian Monarch, when he gave it him to drink and killed him.

The Irish-water is, without doubt, Mineral, and as I gather by the
description, tempered and dried with that Iron by juice which is called
Ferrugo: But every Man knows for certain, that the water of Carpat Card subt.
l. 6. p. 227.
is Coppress water; Now Copperss is as near the Nature, as the Name of Copper,
which the Greeks set out most clearly, calling Copper, (...), Chalcum, and that
other, (...), Chalcanthus, and the stone Pyritis, or Marcasite, (as it is
termed in Arabia) that breeds them both, (...). It is like Leaven to dough, G.
Agric. de ort and cause. sub. l. 3. and de ^at. fossil. l. 3.
made of Copper, and raised to a sharp quality, which when it is loosened into
water, and by draining and distilling up and down in that Hill refined, it
becomes yet more sharp and strong, able easily to overcome Iron, a like and
near weaker thing, (for what is so near as Iron to Copper) and turn him into
his own, old, mean and middle Nature.

But how shall we show that Coppris came of Copper in that Order: first the
proof of our Men makes it clear, Paracels. l. de Mort. r^r. not Tom 6. p 218.
and Gasto Claveus. Apol. Argyr^t. and Chrysop. ^. C. Vo^ 2. ^^ p. 41.
when they turn that into this, and this into that again, so commonly: Then the
authorities of Geber and Agricola (the best skilled in Mineral matters, of all
that ever wrote) Cum a h^mer ^^rroseri^ py^^^^^ and aerosum and friab^lem,
fi^talis succus astringens G. Agric. de Ort. and Cause. subter. l. 3.
the one after that he had observed it long in Mines, setting it down for a
Rule, and Sum perfect. par l. 2. l. 2 c. 23.
Geber calling it the Gum and as it ^ere the droppings of Copper: But chiefly
the Workmens daily practice, who by following the steps of Nature, softning and
dissolving that brazen stone Pyritis, do commonly make Copper.

Let us now see what Art has done by counterfeiting these patterns by Nature
set so plainly before her. If she has not done as much, and more surely, she
was but a rude and untoward skill; let us see what is done.

She has likewise, and as well as Nature, Paracels. l de Transmut. rerum Tom.
6. in p. 236
by a sharp stony Water, called sal-gem water, tu^ned Wood into stone, yea, and
Metals also into prec^^us sto es, not by any counterfeit way which
Glass-makers use but Philosophically, and Naturally. by a mavelous clear and
strong water of Quicksilver, leading them back in the middle nature of fine
stone. To let pass middle Minerals, which by the same course Art easily
changes one into another; she ^u nerh Antimony G Agric. (...) fossil. l. 1 and
l. 8. and Bapt. Port. not. mag l 5 c. 7.
into Lead, and this into Tin easily; these things Agricola reports, and
tells the way of the first by Concoction only; but not of the second, which
Paracelsus supplieth, Pa^ac. l. de trans^rer tom. 6 in p. 235.
by purging him our way of binding with sal Armoniak. I could set down a w^y to
turn Iron in to such Card de ^^b^ l 6 in p. 242 and (...) Mag. de reb me^tall.
2. c. 2. in. p. 196.
steel; as would cut Iron as fast as this will cut wood, and bear out all small
shot, but that they are both but one kind, Arist. meteorol. l. 4. c. 6.
one better purged then the other, as indeed so are all the Metals, though not
so nearly allied.

Even so I esteem of the silvery and golden Coppress, which Nature sometimes
yields under ground, and Art counterfeits by our binding and coloring Rules
above-set, as Agricola tells and teaches: Neither think these bastard ways
quite out of Rule, but to follow the same reason of Nature; and as the rest
take the finer like part and leave the gross unlike, so do these feed upon
their like the fowler parts, and leave the better as unlike their Nature.

But to proceed; To turn Iron into Copper by Coppress water, is somewhat more
ordinary then the rest. de not. fossil. l. 9. and Keckerm. Syst. phys. l. 5. c.
4.
Agricola says, an old parting water, which is made thereof (as we know) will
do it. But the workmen in the Hill Paracels. l. de tinct. phys. c. 6. tom. 6.
p. 278. and Cusan. de static. exper. Idiotae l. 4. in p. 176.
Kuttenberg in Germany, do more nearly follow Nature in that Hill of Carpat,
for they drain a strong Lie from the Brazen-stone, that is, they make
Coppress-water strongly and kindly, and by steeping their Iron in it, make very
good Copper. Nay, further Paracels. De transmut. rer. not. tom. 6. in p. 234,
235.
says again, that in Casten they turn Lead also into Copper, and though he
names not the means in that place, yet other where he does, and teaches how
by Coppris sundry ways sharpened, to turn both Lead and Iron into Copper; In
which place he delivers another pretty Feat, to unloose, and lead back, both
Iron and Copper into Lead again, and this into Quicksilver, by the force of a
sharp melting dust, which Miners use, and this by our common Rule still of
stronger Lakes; for this dust being of the same nature still with exalted Et
hoe est spissum rarefacere and alleviare ponderosum, ex quo omne subtle
dignius est gresso, sicut omne rarum spisso. Avicen. T. C. vol. 4. p. 991.
Lead and Quicksilver, two great softners and looseners of hard Bodies, is
able to make the stubborn Metals, to retire and yield into the middle place of
Lead, and this into Quicksilver.

Now then we see that Art has reached and overtaken all the natural changes of
Minerals; why may not she by the same pattern devise more of her self, as the
guise of good workmen is, and go beyond Nature, and turn the foul Metals into
fine Silver and Gold? She has a great advantage of Nature. First her Patterns,
and then her help in working: and lastly the Light and Instruction of a Divine
wit and Understanding, whereby no marvel if all wise men have said, she passes
Nature.

Albeit it is uncertain whether Nature has such a Golden Medicine in her
bosom hid, or no, as well as those of Copper, Stone, and such like; yet this
is sure, that by the bastard way of binding (as we have heard before) she
turns Lead and Tin, and perhaps Copper too, but surely Quicksilver and
silver into Gold. Then I say it is a sign of a weak and shallow wit, if Art
cannot by these patterns aforesaid, devise further to turn other Metals into
Silver and Gold. Is it any more to do, then to exalt and raise Silver and Gold
(but this Vide Joan. Isaac. Holland. oper. miner. l. 1. c. 16. T. C. vol. 3 in
p. 312. Et Consil. Conjug. Sol and Luna. lib. 1. T. C. vol. 5. in p. 483. Et
Phil. Gal. Delphin. Avon. T. C. vol. 3. p. 825.
will serve for both) into very sharp and strong qualities, able, like the
rest, to devour and turn their like meat into their own middle Nature, from
whence they sprung; certainly the reason is so plain and ready, that I must
needs deem him less then a child, that cannot conceit it. Nay, bend your ears
and minds: By reason, if the workman be very strong over the stuff, he will
turn, in trial, things unlike and contrary, as well, though not so easily, as
like and friendly.

And for the proof of stonyjuyces, turning all sorts of things, even Metals
themselves Detransmut. Meta^. c. 1. T. C. vol. 1. p. 539. Et Paracels. de Call.
Ph^l. sive lib. Venat. 6. p. 291. Et And. Libit. Alch. l. 2. tract. 1. de
Magister. cap. 24.
into stone as has been found by the stamp remaining; of Ant^mony and Coppress
turned into Lead and Copper; of the ripening of the Mineral Mines of Lead and
Gold, eatin^ Durg and Urine, and such like exchanges set down before, I am led
to think, that a very lusty and strong Medicine would be able to change ^ther
things, as well as M^ttals especially minerals, into go^d Rich. Angl Correct.
T. C. vol. 2. in p. 425. and Taulad animad. i* Bra^es. cap. 7. p. 350. Et
Rosar. Philos. Art. Aurif. vol. 2. in p. 337, 338.
some of our m^n sa no, because there wants in the rest the ground of
Quicksilver, the knot of friendship and unity: I grant it very hard in respect
of the right way; and yet I hold it possible.

And thus you have seen the ability of Hermes Medicine, to turn base Metals
into Gold by three sundry ways. First, as he is sown and rises again to be
made a Medicine, which I call begetting. And then by changing the little food
that is given him into his own Nature, to make him wax and grow in heap and
bigness, which I term nourishment. And Lastly, by changing the great store of
stuff wherewith we match him, half way in the middle nature of Gold which is
the best change and drift of our purpose. And this I may do well to call
M^xtion, though De vit. Cael^^us compar. l. 3. c. 3. p. 175.
Ficine and De addit. rerum cause. l. 2. c. 17.
Fennel name it Begetting also: as it is a kind indeed: But because it goes
not the kindly way, let it go, and us keep our Order.

CHAP. III. That the Philosophers Stone will turn base Metals with as much
advantage as we will.
BUt how shall our Son of Gold be able to subdue and turn so much of base
Metals with so little charge and travel, and so great return and gain as we
have promised. It is for three causes: First, for the fitness and readiness of
the stuff to be changed; and then for the great store and strength of the
changing workman; (to send away the lightest still first and foremost:) And
lastly, for his increase in store and quantity, which may be made either by
sowing or nourishing the Son of Gold without end and number, for sowing first.

There be sundry sorts of sowing and making this our Medicine: One is an
excellent way, but a bare and naked and lone way; because if Gold can be made
open and fit to be wrought, as behooves a seed within himself; and the less
contagion there is of unclean stuff, the more excellent and mighty will he
rise again. This way, by deep and painful Wits has been sometimes taken, but
very seldom, because it is very hard, long, and irksome, and therefore we will
leave it also: but chiefly because it crosses my purpose abovesaid; for if he
be sown alone, he cannot rise increased, whereas we desire to augment his heap
and quantity. Then there are two kinds of Grounds, and yet both one kind,
which we may put unto him to corrupt him easily, and raise him again with
increase in quantity. One nearer his Nature then another, one better then
another; so much is enough for that. Now for the store of ground fit to be laid
about him, there is a choice better or worse also: But that is no great matter,
so you keep the measure and discretion which a common Basil. Valentin. clav. 6.
in p. 42.
Seeds-man can keep, neither to overlay and drown him, nor to leave him dry and
barren. Then to our purpose.

Cast with your self what increase in store one grain of Corn will yield within
a few times sowing. When I had a little leisure, I did once cast what one
grain, by the increase of fifty, (which happens often) would arise to in seven
times sowing, and I wearied my self in an endless matter. A greater Sum then
any Man would think: I have forgotten it, 781250000000.
cast you that have leisure. Now a Grain, I mean an Ounce of our Seed, though
it rises not with such advantage (for if it were so sown. it would be quite
drowned, Rippley dissolut. port. 2. Stanz. 6. and Calcinat. gat. 1 Stanz. 11.
and Recapitul. Stanz. 3.
or at least not worth the tarrying) yet it rewards it another way with speed
in working, for albeit the first time be much alike, about forty weeks, or
such a matter; yet the second is run much sooner, both because now he is softer
then the first seed, and easier to be loosened, and also mightier and more able
to turn the work over, Vide Jo. Tab. in Pallad. Spagyric. c. 29. in p. 378.
so that if we keep our selves within the Number of ten Rosar. Phil. ars aurif.
vol. 2. p. 240. citat a Luca Rodarg. lib. de Solut. Philos. c. 25. T. C. Vol. 5
in p. 846.
as some do set the bounds, (yet I think the midst between Si december sunt multa,
and duo pauca, sex ipsius rei media capiantur. Arist. Ethic. li. 2. c. 6.
duplum and decuplum a notable mean, although that be as it happens) yet by
this great haste and speed, we may quickly overtake Infinity.

R^pl. li. de Mer^. and lap. Phil T. C. vol. 3. in p. 876.
But if you think this to be too slow a course, let us run to the next increase
by Nourishment, whose great speed and readiness will easily supply all, and
fill the biggest desire in the world.

Phil. Rovill. practic. lib. G. p. 115.
After the Son of Gold has been once sown and raised again, he is now able to
work mightily and not before, and to turn a hundred parts of his due meat, into
a third middle thing Gold his fathers nature: this we will show hereafter.
Then, if he be able to turn a hundred times as much half way, he can sure turn
as easily and quickly one part, that is no more then himself quite through into
his own self same Nature, especially if that Food be Silver or Gold, which is
best of all to that purpose: then is he twice as big, and as strong as he was
before, able to devour as much more, and all this as much again, and so for
ever; for his strength shall never be abated, when after his feeding, he is
left the same still: even as one Ripley multiplic. the 11. Ga^^ Stanz. 2.
Candle lights another still, or more strangely, though not so largely, like
unto the Lodestone, which as In Jone, et Plin. l. 34. c. 14 Et D. Aug. de
Civitate Dei, li. 21. c. 4. Et Lucret. l. 6. Et G. Agricol. de de not. fossil.
l. 5. c. 3. Et Cor. Agrip. de occult. Phil. li. 1. ca. 16.
Plato reports, after it has drawn one Ring of Iron, it gives this power to
draw another, and this to the next, until you make a long row and link of
Rings, close and fast, one hanging upon another.

Then since we may so soon heap up so great a quantity of this Golden Medicine,
it may chance we should not need any great help of the readiness of the stuff,
and strength of the Workman. And if but ten parts of the Gold might be made at
once, between a week workman, and a sturdy stuff, yet perhaps it would serve
the turn to raise the Sum appointed. But suppose it comes short ten parts of
the way, yet if through the means of the nearness of the stuff, and force of
the doer, one part may come to turn a hundred, then we shall supply and
overtake all the want and hinderance; let us see.

And first again of the stuff, because it is the shorter and easier matter; a
thing is fit and eath to be changed, when it is like to the nature of the
workman, and near the ways end. The strait affinity and nearness of the
Metals one to another we have opened above, Quid si cuncta etiam fint uni
subdita formae. Quae specie vulgo prohibent differ metalla? E quibus
extiterit quod cunque impurius atque Cordibus infectum terrestribus exuet omue
Art luem citius, etc. Augr. Aug. Chrysostom. l. 1. T. C. vol. 3. in. p. 195. Et
Rog. Bacho. specul. Alchym. c. 7. T. C. Vol. 2. in p. 417 Et Alb. magn. T. C.
Vol. 4. in p. 969.
when we found them all to be one thing, differing only by certain Hang-byes
of cleanness, fineness, closeness and color, sprung out from the adds of
Concoction; and that, if the same Concoction hold, they will come at length to
their journeys end, which they strive unto, the perfection of Gold, (except,
perhaps, Iron and Copper by over-sudden heat, or some other foul means, have
been led out of the way, yet they may be led back again, and cleansed as we
heard before:) and that they were all made at first of Quicksilver, a foul and
greasy thing in respect, and then were grimed and bespotted greatly again with
that foul earthly Brimstone, which after wards came upon them, whereby they
were all gross and ill-coloured, open and subject unto fire, and other spoiling
enemies, before by long gentle and kindly Concoction, all the foul and gross
stuff was cleansed and refined, and so made apt to take good color (as we see
in Plants and all things) and to gather it self up close together, and likewise
to be weighty, for the much fine stuff in a narrow room (when Lead and Avic.
tracta^ul. (vel ut habetur, T. C. vol. 4. in p. 948. Alb. mag. li. 8. cap.) c.
2. Art. Aurif. vol. 1. in p. 410.
Quick-silvers heaviness flows from the rawness) and lastly to be steadfast
and safe from the fire, and all other enemies, because there was neither any
way of entrance, in so great closeness, left, to make division and dissolution,
that is destruction; nor yet any greasy stuff the food of fire, remaining.

Wherefore we see the near Neighborhood of Metals, and easiness to be changed
one into another (especially if we work upon silver, which is half Gold
already) when they want nothing of Gold, but either long gentle concoction, or
instead thereof (because we cannot tarry) a strong and fierce one answerable
unto it; first to cleanse out all that gross and greasy stuff, and then to
bring color upon it.

So that I cannot but wonder at those Men, if they be learned, who, in reproof
of this Art unknown, vouch unfitness of the stuff to be changed, saying, that
Metals being of sundry kinds and natures, cannot be turned before they be
brought into that stuff whereof they were first made and fashioned; which we
do not when we melt them, only, and which is not eath to be done. It is a fign
that, either they never knew, or at that time remembered not the Nature of a
Metal, or of the first stuff; for if they mean the Grecian Qui materiam
primam fictitiam ct umbratils naturae fundamentum posuerunt. Anonym. enchyr.
phis. rest. Can. 13.
supposed, first, empty, and naked stuff, without shape, but apt to receive
all, even that which is the middle See St. Alban. not. hist. Cent. 9. ca. 37.
Vide P. Bon. Fer Margarit. pretios. cap. 26. T. C. vol. 5. in p. 761.
state of a thing lasting but a moment, when b^ the way of making and marring
(which our Men with Hypocrates well changeing) it is passing from one to
another. Then if I yielded, and quickly granted, with Geber, Arnold, Lully, and
many more learned Men on our side, that in that very violent work of changing;
the Metal being a far altered and broken, even into dust of another fashion,
was quite marred and bereft of his old Nature and being, and passed even
through the midst of the naked stuff, unto another kind and fashion: I think
I might drive them to blow the seek, as they say, and they know not what to
answer.

But if they mean, as it seems they do, we should not melt our Metal, but
bring him back again unto his nearest beginning and stuff^ Quicksilver, and
then put on our shape, and form upon him, according to the kindly sowing of
Gold upon his base ground abovesaid, they are deceived not knowing the nature
of Metals: for they be not of sundry P. Bon. Ferrar. Marg. pret. c. 20. T. C.
vol. 3. in p. 760.
kinds and beings, (as they say) but all one thing, differing by degrees of
baking, like diverse loaves of our paste; that it were madness, if any of them
lacked baking, to lead him back Dion, Zachar. T. C. vol. 3. in p. 797.
, or mar and spoil him of his fashion, but in the same form and being to bake
him better. And so did Nature in the Ground, in baking Quicksilver or Lead into
Gold, she went forward and not backward with the Matter: Nay, why go I so far
with them? They never marked the nature of their own Words, which they use in
their own Philosophy, where changing is flitting only, and shift of those
Hang*byes called Accidents, the form, kind, and being of the thing remaining.

Then, if the stuff be so fit, let us see what the Worker is, not in store
which is done already, but in force and power. His strength and power is seen
in two things, purging and coloring; for first he must mightily show himself
in purging and driving out all the gross greasiness of the stuff, and then
when all is fine, clear, and close, he ought to stretch himself at large, and
to spread far forth in color upon it; for albeit long and gentle purging by
Concoction, of it self, breeds and brings good color, yet this our short and
violent heat proportioned does not so, (as I showed above in the discourse of
binding and coloring) but must needs bring Color with him already Coined.

So that when he purges the stuff underhand, he draws not out the foul and
gross stuff, and departs away from the work withal, as the foul purging Binders
did; but being a clean and fine thing like the Nature of a Wight, he purges by
Digestion and Expulsion, driving out the foul and unlike parts as Leavings,
taking and imbodying with himself the fine and clean for her Food and
Nourishment.

Then let us see how this work of Purging is performed, for that is all; and
the Color hangs upon the same, and is done all under one, as we shall hear
in the going out of this Treatise: If nothing purges but Heat through
concoction, and this is ever to be measured according to the need and behoof of
the Work underhand; and we must scour an hundred times as much stuff in one, or
two, or three hours space at most, (for that is their task) when we had need of
a mavelous fiery Medicine (besides the great outward Heat to prick him
forward) scarce to be-found within the compass of the World and Nature. It must
show it self an hundred times fiercer then a Binder, which was scant able in
longer time, and stronger heat, to scour and purge one part, and as much of
the same stuff.

This is a mavelous hard point; I had need whet my Thoughts and Memory, and
all the Weapons of Wit unto this matter. If we search all about, and rifle all
the Corners of Kind, we shall find no Fire in the world so hot and fierce as
the Lightning, able to kill Plants, and Wights, and melt Metals, and to
perform other such like mavelous things in a Moment: As (to let pass Plants
not so strange) I have read Cardan viriet. l. 8. c. 43
of eight Reapers in the Isle of Lemnos, which as they sat at meat under an
Oak, were all suddenly stricken stark dead therewith, sitting still in the
same guise of living and eating Creatures. Again, that it has sometimes passed
Plutarch. quaest. convival. l. 4. q. 2. Et Plin. l. 2. c. 21. Et Sen. not. q.
l. 2. c. 31. Et Mars. Fic. de vit. cael. comp. l. 3. c. 16. Et Du Ba^t. on
second jour de le sepmaine.
through a Purse at a Man's side, and molten the Coin without hurting the
leather, because such a subtle and speedy Fire found that resting stay Arist.
Meteorolog. l. 3. c. 1. and Sen. ubi supra (s) c. 52. Et Card. subtle. l. 1. p.
58.
to work on in the Metal, which it wanted in the open soft and yiedling
Leather; And many more such strange deeds we may find done by that most violent
Fire. Then our fiery workman, if he be tasked, as he is, to work as great
wonders as these be, had need to be fierce and vehement as the fire of
Lightning, as it is also sometime termed in our Philosophy.

Let us match these two together, and see how they can agree, that all things
nearly laid, and as it were, stricken together, the light of Truth may at last
appear, and shine forth out of that Comparison: let us, as Tully says, and
does, at the first setting out, lanch and row a little easily, before we hoyse
up sail.

Gold, in our Philosophy, is of it self a Fire, that if it be raised and
increased an hundred degrees in quality (as it must be) may well seem like to
prove the greatest Fire in the World. But our Men as they speak all things
darkly, so this perhaps Oswaldus Vogel. Belg. l. de lap. phys. condit. c. 4. T.
C. Vol. 3. in p. 613 Et Mich. Scot. de not. Solia et Luna T. C. Vol. 5. in p.
798.
in regard of other Metals; or rather because like the Salamander; No, like
the Fire-flyes (for though Phil. (...). c. 16. Et Nicand. in Theriaca. Et G.
Pisid. (...).
the Salamander can, as well as Serpents Eggs, by his extreme coldness quench a
little Fire, yet a strong Arist. Hest. Animal. l. 5. c. 19* Et Plin. l. ^0. c.
67 Et F^r^^icet. despont. viv. art. l. 4. c. 54.
Fire consumes him, and puts him out of being:) because, I say, like the
Fier-fly he does live and flourish in the Fire: when as, indeed, Vide gloriam
mundi Musaei Hermetici. p. 281.
Gold, as all other Mettalls, is cold and waterish far from the kind of Fire.
And yet it is not the outward show of the Body alone that makes a fiery Nature,
but sometimes the inward quality does the deed of Fire, (if we speak at large,
as the common custom is;) And so the Star-fish in the Sea (a) burns Stella
Marina. Plin. l. 9. c. 60. Et Cardan. variet. l. 7. c. 37.
all she touches; and a cold spring in Plin. l. 2. c. 103. and Pallad.
Spagyric. c. 17. in p. 223.
Slavonia sets on fire any Cloth spread upon it; and to come nearer, by such a
fiery force does the water Styx in Thessaly pierce through any Vessel save a
Horse-hoof.

But now we are come into the deep, let us hoyse up sails, and speak more
properly and Philosophically, and more near the purpose; let us, I say, hear
the Nature of Fire and how it comes. Fire, as they bound it, and we shall
find it if we mark his Offspring, is a very hot and dry Substance: The first
cause of Fire is Motion, gathering and driving much dry stuff, into a narrow
strait, which by stirring and striving for his life and being, is still made
more close, fine, and hot, then its Nature will bear and suffer; and so it
breaks out at last, and is turned into another larger, and thinner, dryer,
and hotter nature, called Fire: Hence the great underground Fires in Aetna,
Hecla, and many other places, grow and spring at first, when the Cold drives a
heap of hot earthly Breaths and Vapors, either round up and close together, or
along through the narrow and rough places, rubbing and ringing out Fire, which
the natural fatness of the Ground feeds for ever.

So the Star, called Plin. l. 2. c. 37. ^* Et Gardan subt. l. 2. in p. 5.5.
Hellen-star, that lights, (a sign so dangerous) upon the tackle of the Ship,
and falling melts Copper Vessel, etc. comes of a heap of such Vapors, carried
up by cross winds, etc. So by rubbing Milstones, Flints, and such like, we see
Fire arise after the same manner; and this is the manner of the Offspring of
all Fire, others flow from this one, still sowing, as it were, one another. But
if the stuff of this Fire be tough and hard, and then when it is wrought into
Fire, it be moved again apace, it proves, for these two causes, a mavelous
hot, fierce, and and violent fire, whence springs all the force of
Lightnings, for it is nothing else but a heap of thick and Brimstony vapors,
(as some hold with Reason) by the coldness of the Cloud beaten up close in that
Order, and now being turned of a sudden into a larger and thinner Element than
it was before, when it was Earth and Water, his old place will not hold him,
and so by the force of Nature, striving for room and liberty, he rents the
Clouds in that manner which we hear in Thunder, and bursteth out at last a
great and swift pace, as we see in Lightning, which swiftness together with the
toughness of the stuff finely wrought, makes up his violence, above all Fires
in the world.

Now for the Son of Gold and Hermes his Medicine, what kind of Fire is he,
when he can be no such Elemental extreme hot and dry Fire? for he is temperate
and has all the qualities equal, and none working above other; and yet,
indeed, by reason of the fine and tough (and therefore) mighty Body whereon
they be seated, they work in equality together, much more forcibly then the
extremely distempered, cold and dry Poisons can work alone, and as fast and
faster then they devour and destroy temporate bodies, these do overthrow the
contrary: Then what a Fire he is I showed before, how full stuffed with Heavenly
spirits above all things, and so he is a Heavenly fire, which is much more
effectual in power, and mightier in action then that other, by reason of his
exceeding subtileness, able to pierce through Rocks and all things, where that
other shall quickly stay.

Admit it, say you, if that Heavenly fire were quick, free, and at full
liberty: But it is fast bound up in a hard Body; Then I will tell you all the
Reason, bend your Wits unto it. -- Gold, at first was full fraughted with the
most piercing fire in the World; Art then came and wrought it into a most fine
flowing Oil, and so unbound it, and set it at full liberty; Not so freely
indeed as in Heaven, but as can be an Earthly body, closely crowded up
together, (which helps Heat, as we hear in a burning-glass) upon a most strange
and mighty Body, far above all things in the world; and lastly, with a violent
outward Fire, she sent all these a part away to work together. Judge then, you
that have Judgment, whether it were not like to bestir it self, as lustily as
the Lightning? Compare; The Heat of the hot spirits is as great; and if it were
not, yet their passing subtileness, would requite that matter easily, and make
him even; yea and perhaps, when they be drawn and carried up close together,
make some odds and difference between them; But sure the exceeding toughness of
the Body (as we see in Iron and the rest) augments his heat greatly, and
carries him far beyond it.

Now for the pace, it is much swifter, as driven by a much stronger Mover, even
so much as a Founders Fire passes in strength the top of a thick Cloud, for
this is he that sends the Lightning, which else would have flown upwards.
Therefore because the fire is stronger, and has the helps of Body and Motion
far more favorable, the fire of the Son of Gold must needs pass the Lightning
in power and wonderful working. Then bethink your self, with what ease and
speed, Vide Palladium spagyricum, c. 21. in p. 277. 278.
such a fiery Medicine were likely to pierce and break through, sift and search
all about, and so scour and cleanse a great Mass of foul Metals? how many
times more then a weak and gross Mineral binder? fasten and bend your Minds
upon it: we see how a weak, waterish and earthly Breath in a narrow place,
within a Cloud, the Gramide, or Gunne, (all is but Cardan de subt. l. 21. in p.
704.
Thunder) because he is so suddenly turned into a larger Element, and lacks
room, bestirs himself and works mavelous deeds; what may we think then of
the heaps of those fat vapors of Heaven, and of that most strong golden body,
closely couched up together in a little room, when they be, in a narrow Vessel
drawn out, and spread abroad at large by a mighty fire, and thereby still
pricked and egged forward? (for as long as the fire holds, they cannot be
still, nor draw in themselves again.) What thing in the sturdiest Metal can be
able to withstand them? How easily shall they cast down all that comes in their
way, break and bruise all to powder? May we not all say plainly, that which the
Horac car. l. 3. Ode 16.
Poet by borrowed speech avoweth, That Gold loves to go through the midst of
the Guard, yea and p^ss through the Rocks, being more mighty than the stroke of
Lightning? It is so fit as if it had been made for the matter.

I have heard that the extreme cold weather in G. Agric. de not. fossil. l. 8.
c. 9. Et Cardan. Appendix ad c. 2. de rer. varietat.
Lappia and Finland (which lie under the pinny Girdle of the World pierces
frezeth, and cracketh the Rocks, yea, and mettalline Vessels: Again, that the
poisoned Cockatrice, by Plin. l. 8. cap. 21.
his violent, Cold, and dry Breath, does the same on the Rocks where he
treads: Then what may we judge of the force of our fiery Medicine upon the
Metals, by these comparisons? How fiercely and quickly were it like to divide
and bre^k them, having an extreme fire, the greatest spoiler of all things, to
over-match the cold and dry quality; and a much stronger Body then those vapors
which carried th^se former qualities, and both these sent with far greater
speed and swiftness, as appears in the difference of the Movers?

Lift up your Ears and mark what I say; A deaf Judge had not need hear these
Matters, who has not seen how Quicksilver enters, cuts, and rents the Metals,
though many doubt, and differ about the cause thereof? Subt. l. 5. p. 216.
Cardan thinks, that, like as we said of the cold Weather in those frozen
Countries, so this mavelous cold Mettalline water, entering the Metals,
freezeth their Moisture within them, and makes them crack and fall assunder,
and therefore Gold soonest of all other, because his moisture is finest: even
as sodden-water for his fineness, freezeth sooner then cold.

Surely very wittily Archidox. magi. l. 6. tom. 11. in p. 153.
Paracelse deems this done by the Spiritual subtilty of the Body, even as the
understanding Spirits of the Air, and the lively Spirits of Heaven use to
pierce through stone walls, and Rocks by the same strength, without the force
of qualities: But I think it is rather for his stronger like Nature; seeking to
devour them; else he would pierce you hand, and leather, and such like easy
things, which he leaves untouched, as unlike and strangers. As for the
qualities of Quicksilver, it is a question what they are, and which excels;
some judge her very Cold; some again mavelous hot (as Paracelse for one;)
some most moist; other dry: But, as she has them all apparently, so I deem her
Temperate, like him that has sprung from her, and is most like unto her, Gold
I mean, though perhaps the qualities be not all in her, as in him, so equally
balanced. -- But let the Cause be what it will, (I love not to settle upon
uncertain matters,) the great Spirit of Metals, after she is first wrought
into Gold, and then into his Son our Medcine, shall be in any reason, both for
Soul and Body, an hundred times stronger, and more able to do it. Nay, Antimony
and Lead are much grosser then Quicksilver, and yet we see how they rend and
tear and consume base Metals even to nothing. But what say we to Plants? there
is as great difference in sharpness and ability to pierce, and enter between
them and minerals, as is between a Thorn and a Needle; and yet you hear above,
the gentle Plant of the Vine and the mild Dew of Heaven yielded stuff to an
eating water, able, within three or four distillings to devour and dissolve
metals. -- Then what shall not only other sharp mineral eaters, but this our
almighty Golden medicine show upon them, which besides that wonderful passing
sharp and piercing Body, has the great help (which they want) of that Heavenly
fire, and of his swiftness, stirred up by a mighty Mover. These things are
enough to suffice any reasonable man, (if they will not stop their ears against
the sound of Reason) touching the power, might, and strength of our Medicine.

What is then behind? Yes many, I heard them whisper, that albeit this Stone
of ours has such thundering power, yet it may not force to our purpose,
consuming all the Metal (as the guise and forcible use of so fierce things is)
without regard or choice of any part or portion: But it is not always I hope,
the guise of violent things; I need not go far: There is a natural stone in
Plin. l. 36. c. 17. and Card. subt. l. 7. p. 283, 284. and De Variet. l. 5. c.
19.
Asia, which by a mighty and strong property ueth, in forty days space, to
consume and make away all the flesh and bones of a dead man's body, saving the
Teeth, which he leaves ever safe and whole, and therefore they called it in
times past ((...)) Flesh-eater, and made Tombs thereof for dead, and Boots for
Gowty men. -- I could cloy a world of Readers with like examples, if I might be
suffered: But weigh this one and our artificial Stone together, why may not it
as well have his choice, and save a part in this great waste and spoiling? They
know not why: And how then, there are many deep, hidden and causeless
properties in the bosom of kind and nature, which no man's wit is able to reach
and see into, the World is full of them, when Art is open, and all his ways
known.

Indeed, the World is full of late, of such causeless and blind Philosophers,
which (like as the Ut tragi^i Poetae confugiunt ad Deum cum explicare argum^nt^
exitum non poss^nt. Cic. de not. deorum l. 1.
Poet, when they stick a little, call upon Jove by many names, to help to shore
up the fall of a verse, or stop a gap in the number; so they) when their eyes
are dazzled upon the view of a deep matter, fly to Nature as fast, and to her
Franc. Sanchez. lib. Quod nihil scitur. in. p. 96.
hid and unsearchable Secr^^s to cover the shame of Ignorance: as though GOD
moved all with his finger (as they say) without any ^ween means or inst^uments.
-- There is nothing done without a middle cause, fore running, if it were
known, (as I think it is to some, though never so dark and hid from others) and
therefore to come to the purpose, as the reason of the natural eating Stone was
clear to De Ort. and cause. subte^. l. 4. 6. 17 Exertim vero de not. Fossil. l.
10. c. 16.
Agricola, (though unknown to Pliny, and many more the Reporters) and found to
be for the loose and light temperature of his Body, apt to drink up Moisture,
and Coppress nature, fit to eat the flesh and softer bones, and yet unable to
do a thing above his st^ength, that is, to overcome the harder. Even so you may
think the reason in this like property of the PHILOSOPHERS STONE, is seen to
some; and certain, howsoever it was my luck to see it I cannot tell, it has
been sure unfolded twenty times, at least in the speech going before, if you
remember well; it follows but the high and common way of all nature, I mean
that eating nature; for all things eat, and that is the cause of things done
below: Then, there is nothing eats and devours all the stuff which it
overcomes but so much as is like, and turnable, the rest he leaves as strange
and untouchable. So did all the foul binders purge above; nay, so and no
otherwise does the Lightning and all fire eat and consume the stuff subdued,
turning the Air and Water into fire, and leaving the Earth and Ashes; even so
does our Medicine, after it has driven out and scattered all uncleanness, it
takes and sticks unto the fine part, like unto it self, and makes it like
himself, as far as his strength will carry.

What need I pray in aid of any more examples? Is it not clear enough, that all
things seek their likes, and shun their Contraries? Yet because these Mineral
Matters have been evermore very strange and unacquainted with the Grecians, I
will set down one or two of the clearer examples. Why does Coppress water part
and draw away Silver from Gold? But, that Coppress is like to Copper, and this
to Silver; for as La Fountain des amourex de science. lib. 1. p. 233, 239.
Lead is to Gold, so is this to Silver, both very like one another, both in
weight and softness, and therefore counted Leprous Gold and Silver. -- For try
all of both together; when you have so parted Gold and Silver, cast in plates
of Lead and Copper, and that will cleave to the Gold, and this Paracels. de
seperat. rer. not. tom. 6. in p. 242.
to the Silver. But Silver is liker to Silver than Copper, therefore to part
Silver from Copper; the Miners use to season a lump of Lead with a little
Silver, that softneth the work and makes it ready; then one Silver draws the
other part unto her. Nay, view Quicksilver, Paracels. de Miner. tract 1. tom.
8. p. 252.
as she is strange in all things, so in this very wonderful: Quicksilver, I
say, the Grandmother of our medicine, and the spring of all her goodness, will
quickly receive and swallow, either in heat or cold; her near friend and very
like, clean, fine, and temperate body of Gold, (and therefore as the one is
termed unripe Gold, so the other ripe Quicksilver) when the rest she refuses,
and bears aloof, as foul, gross, and unlike her Nature; and this secret the
miners also, by their practice, have opened unto us, when they so part Gold
from the rest mashed altogether in a dust heap. -- Wherefore when this fine and
clean body Quicksilver, is made by Nature and Art, yet much finer and clearer,
and again as much more piercing and Spiritual, and able to perform it, how much
more readily will she run to her like and devour it, the clean, fine, and
spiritual, that is, the Quicksilvery part of the Metal? And if she do devour
it, then it cannot be lost, but must needs go into a better Nature, even the
Nature which we desire.

What is then to be said more? I have not yet bounded the matter, as I
promised, and showed how the Golden Stone should turn an hundred times as much
into Gold; I have shot a large compass, but all at random, now it is time
enough, every thing has his due time and place.

You have heard I am sure, of the hot Stomach of the Elephant, Lizard, and
Sea-calf, able to digest and consume Stones, yea, and to come to the point, the
Struthio [Estridge] that mavelous Beast, Iron also; If the stomach of a Wight
be able in short space, to divide, expel, and turn the fine part of the Metal
into his own self same nature, how much and how soon, may the Stomach of our
Medicine turn into Gold? not only an hundred times more then the Beast,
because it is an hundred times more fitter and able to do it: first, for the
likeness and nearness of the stuff; and then for Ber. Trevis. T. C. vol. 1. in
p. 768.
the two great Heats I spoke of; and thirdly, for the wonderful, subtle, and
strong piercing and cutting Workman. But especially, because he goes not quite
though with the work, as the Beasts did, but half way to the middle nature of
his Father: consider and weigh the matter, but if it be somewhat too far off,
Ripl. multiplic. part. 11. Stanz. 6. and Epistol. Stanz. 23. and Artephius his
secret Book. lib. M. p 163. and Aur. Augur. Chrysostom. l. 2. T. C. vol. 3. p. 216.
mark how Wood, and other things of like strange gifts and qualities, are
easily able to overcome and change a hundred times so much of like Stuff, with
whom they meet, even without this our great mingling and boiling: why shall it
then be hard for our Medicine, with great Concoction, to do the like upon his
own subject? for proportion of strength, for strength will allow him as able to
overcome the stubborn Metals, as these two the weaker Water.

To close up all; Remember what I said, and what is most true and certain, that
Gold is closest, and most full of fine large-spreading stuff, of any thing
else in the World, passing the wonderful gift of Silver in this point an
hundredfold; Insomuch that one Ounce of Gold, by the blunt skill of the
Hammer, may be drawn out and made to stretch over ten acres of ground: Consider
well this one point, and all snall be plain and easy; I mean to them that be
Learned, for these be no matters for dull and mazed Wits to think on: Then
after this spreading Metal is made a fine flowing Oil, and drawn out at
length, and laid out abroad most thinly, by a vehement heat of fire, upon how
much will it spread may you think in reason? But such a view may quickly dazzle
the Eye of the Understanding, let us picture out the matter as Plato uses.

Think the difference in fineness and color, between the Son of Gold and
Silver (if you will take him to turn, as I bad you) to be like the odds
between very fine red Sarcenet, and course white sackcloth; let that be closely
thrust up together in a Walnut-shell, this packt up as hard in a very round Pot
of a quart, or of that bigness, which will take the measure of a hundred
VValnuts, you see the bulk of both; and so if you weigh them, one will prove as
much an hundred times in weight as that other; but draw them out, and spread
them abroad one upon another, and one shall overtake, match and fit another on
all sides; Now one is very course and big, and the other fine and small, as
appears by their threads; yet the small may be full as strong as the big, as
we see in a little Gall, Poison, etc. it is common: Then these two encountering
(as we must suppose) shall, of force, hurt and change each other equally, and
so the exceeding fine and gross mingled, make a middle thread, and the extreme
red and white colors, carried with their bodies take a Yellow mean also: even
so you must think, when an hundred Ounces of silver, and one Ounce of our
Medicine, are both by the Fire beaten and driven out at length, and to the
farthest thinness, every part overtakes, fits and reaches other, and the small
part being as strong as the big, in striving one overcomes, consumes and
turns the other, that neither shall be quite razed, but both equally changed,
and mingled into a third Mean thing, both in fineness and color, which is
gold, for the Medicine is as far above gold, as this beyond Silver, both in
fineness and color, and all other properties whatsoever.

And so you see the Color also dispatched, which I kept unto this place, and
which seems a wonder in some Men's sights; for I hope you will not ask me how
gold got this high red and unkindly color; unless you be ignorant how all such
Hang-bies fleet and change up and down, without hurt unto the thing that
carries them; and except you know not, Pet. Bron: Ferrar. Margarit. pret. ca.
2. T. C. Vol. 5. p. 622, 623.
that by a kindly course (whereby all soft and alterable things, gently and
softly boiled, wax first black, then white, next yellow, and lastly red, where
they stay in the top of the Color) we see changed and drawn up our seed of
gold unto this new unwonted Color.

And thus you have at last, all the Reason which I saw, or at least, thought
good to deliver to writing, for the truth of HERMES or the PHILOSOPHERS STONE,
and MEDICINES, why it is the ready way to bring all Men to all the Bliss and
Happiness in the World; that is, to Long-life, Health, Youth, Riches, Wisdom
and Virtue; it is now time to sit down, and take our rest.

CHAP. IV. That Gold may be wrought into such a fine oil as we speak of.
BUt methinks I hear them mutter among themselves, that there is never a Reason
given as yet, no not one; because all standing upon a feigned and supposed
ground, which being nothing, all that is built upon it must needs come to
nothing. -- For even as Lib. de vit. longa Tom. 6. in p. 114.
Paracelsus in his supposed Paradise, in the end of his High opinions
concludes, that if it were possible to be made by any Labor of Wisdom, it
would prove no doubt, a notable place for Long-life and Health; even so may be
thought of this Stone of gold, if any Art or skill were able to contrive it,
that it would without doubt, work those wonders aforesaid; But as his Paradise,
(if he mean plainly as he says, and not of the Philosophers Stone, whereto it
may be wrested) is impossible to be made, unless he would include himself in a
place free, first from the contagion and force of the outward Earth, Water, and
Weather, yea and therefore of the Fire of Heaven and Light also: and secondly,
Sendivog. Tract. de sulph. cap. de Jgne, in p. 33.
where all the Beginnings were in their pure and naked Nature, which they call
a Fifth nature which is no where save in Heaven, and which were a Miracle to be
conceived; And lastly, except he could live without Meat and his Leavings,
which both Learned and unlearned hold ridiculous to think.

Even so, it is as hard in opinion and unlike, that Gold may be spoiled, and
brought to nothing, (as he must be first) and then restored and raised to such
dignity; Because as Heaven is ever one and unchangeable, for that in it all
Beginnings are weighed so evenly, and surely tied together in a full consent,
and unable ever to jarre and to be loosned; in like sort Gold is so close and
fast, for his sure and equal mixture of his fine earth and water, that no force
Rosar. abbre. T. C. Vol. 3. in p. 700. and Hermes lib, de lap. phys. secret. c.
7. T. C. Vol. 4. in p. 762.
of nature, neither of earth, air, or water, no nor of fire, although he be
helpen with lead, antimony, or any such like fierce and hot stomach, easily
consuming all other things, will ever touch him: nay, which is strange, the
greatest spoylers in the world fire and his helps are so far from touching
him, that they G. Agricde Ort. and cause. subter. lib. 5. c. 18.
mend him, and make him still better and better; what is to be said to this?

Albeit I confess that to be the main ground and stay of all the work and
building; yet I supposed it not, nor took it as granted, as if I had been in
Geometry, but left it to be proved in the fittest place. -- As for that
supposed Paradise, it is hard to judge, because he did but glance at it, and so
leaves it unlawful to be told; Albeit a Man may devise in thought as well as
he, (for I think he had not tried it) what may be done, and what Nature will
suffer.

Then, what if a Man enclosed himself in a pretty Chamber, free from all
outward Influence, which is easy; overcast for lights sake, if need be, with
such Marble as Nero made his temple shine in darkness withal; floored thick
with Terra Lemn. or the Earth of a Fifth nature, (which is better, but much
more hard to be gotten;) and had such Water within the lodging, as that, Anno
nempe circiter 1500. in Agro Patav. de quo vid^ Fort. Licet. de recondit.
an^iq. lucernis, and apud eum complures alios. lib. 1. c. 9.
not long since found under ground, between two silver Cups in Italy; then if
he could ever live quiet without Meat, (which I showed not impossible, or
preserved himself with a Fifth nature, which breeds no Leavings; what think you
of the matter?

But think what you will; If it jarre and sound not well in the ears of any
Man, let it be among other his incredible and impossible Monsters; yet our
Cause shall not be the worse for it, but easily possible, as I will open unto
you, as far as my leave will suffer me, which has been large indeed, and must
be, because I made a large promise at first, (perhaps too rashly, but for the
good meaning) which must be paid and performed.

Physic. li. 8. c. 10. vid. Haniball Rossel Calab. in Mer. Pimand. li. 1.
comment. 16. quaest. 1. cap. 2.
Aristotle says like a wise Philosopher, that nature makes her Creatures and
subjects apt to move and rest, that is, changeable; and again, that a Body that
is bounded, cannot be without end and everlasting: And therefore, that when
Heaven ever moves, and Earth ever rests, it is beyond the compass of Nature,
and springs from a more Divine cause. If his Rule be true, as it is most
certain, then Gold a thing not unbounded, nor yet an extraordinary and divine
work, but made by the ordinary hand of Kind, as we heard above, must needs
decay and perish again, and cannot last for ever: And if Nature can dissolve
him, much more shall she with the help of Art perform it: And that which was
said of Fire, and his helpers is nothing, for why do they better Gold, but
because they remove his Enemies, when Nature? had secretly laid about him to
destroy him; And so a very stick, as I said above, may be saved from decay: But
let nature have her swinge under Ground, or skill above, and they shall cause
his enemies in time to spoil and consume him. We cannot tell, (say they
Country-like) it may be a divine and no natural work, for we see it
everlasting; -- Go to, be it so: I will overtake them that way too; for as we
know, that which Aristotle knew not, that both Heaven and Earth by the same
divine cause that made them both, may be, and once must be, marred and changed;
so we may think that Gold, although it were a divine work, yet by the like
skill, following the divine Pattern, might fall to decay and perish.

But what is that divine Pattern? and how shall men be like unto GOD? even by
the goodness of God, who has, as I said above, left this Pattern open in all
places, and easy to be seen, to them that seek to be like the main Pattern,
Plin. lt. 37. c. 4.
whereof wewere al made: And this, as HERMES In Tabula Smaragdina.
says, is gentle and witty separation, where with he avoweth both the great,
and this our little work made and woven, and so to be marred and unwoven again;
to figure unto us privily, that there is no great and cunning work performed by
such rude and smith-like violence, as you speak of, (viz. Horat. carm. li. 3.
od. 4.
consilii expers mole ruit sua) but by gentle skill and Counsel; as we may see
plainly fitly, by a thing in virtue and price, I mean in worldly estimation
most near unto Gold, the noble and untamed Scal. Exercit. 74. 3.
Diamond, which when he comes into the smiths hands, will neither yield to Fire
nor Hammer, but will break this rather then he will break; and not so much as
be hot (as Pliny says) but not be hurt, (as they all grant) by that other: And
yet by the gentle means Plin. li. ult. c. 4. and Aurel. Augurell. Chrysostom. li. 2.
T. C. Vol. 3. p. 210. and Jul. Solin. Polyhist. c. 65. and Joach. Vadian. com.
in loc. D. and Aug. de Civi. Dei. l. 21. c. 24. and Theophil. Symocat. (...) a.
and i. and Auselm. Meianus, a monte Meiano in Enhicrid. 60. quaest. 29. and G.
Agricola de not. fossil. li. 6. c. 9. and Cardanus ausus est negare, de subtle
li. 7. in p. 253.
of Lions, or Goats blood, (though they be hot bloods, that by kind, and this
by disease of a continual Ague) you may so soften and bring under this stout
and noble stone, as he will yield to be handled at your pleasure; Nay by the
flowing Tears of molten lead (a thing not so hot as may be) he will quite
relent and melt withal: Even so we may judge of Gold; That albeit the more
roughly that it be handled, the less he stoops, as the nature of stout things
is, yet there is a gentle and heavenly skill, and a way to soften him and make
him willingly yield, and go to Corrruption; though this, as well as that, be
not common and known abroad, as no reason it should.

But what need we fly with Aristotle to any divine shelter? As Gold was made by
a common course of Kind, and must dye and perish the same way; so this skill of
ours needs not be fetched from any hid and divine secret, (whatsoever our Men
say, to keep off the unworthy) but from a plain Art, following the ordinary and
daily steps of Nature in all her kindly works and Changes. -- Then mark and
chew my words well, and I will open the whole Art unto you.

Prove. 22. 2. Eccles. 33, 16. and 42. 24. and Georg. Venet. Harmon. Mundi.
Cant. 2. Tom. 4. cap. 9. (...) Plat. Eunead. 1. lib. 8. and Prosper. Opusc. de
provid. Dei in p. 522. and Sendivog. de sulph. cap. de Igne, in p. 31. and
Parae. de genesis rerum not. lib. 3. tom. 6. p. 208.
GOD, because he would have none of these lower Creatures eternal, (as is
aforesaid) first sowed the four Seeds of strife in the world, one to fight with
and destroy the other; And if that would not serve, as it will not here, he
made those that spring from them of the same nature; and there is nothing in
the world, Plin. lib. 8. cap. 21. and Aegidius de vadis. T. C. Vol. 2. in p. 98.
that has not his match, either like or contrary, able to combat with him and
devour him. But the Like eats up and consumes the like with more ease, and
more kindly then the contrary, for their nearness and agreement. -- Then, if
nature mean to spoil Gold, and make him perish, because it is so strong a
thing, she takes the nearest and most kindly way, she sets a strange Like upon
him to eat him up and consume him; -- What should I say more, or more plainly?
you know the thing most like and nearest unto him; This is, in all Men's sight,
corrupt and subject to decay, and then, when it is loosened very Paracels. lib.
de vexat. seu caelo Philos. Can. 5. de Saturno. Tom. 6. in p. 283.
strong and fierce: It is ever more wrapped about him, and so by contagion it
strikes, and enters, and pulls him after; and all in their own natural heat and
furnace, rot together, and in due time rise again, and the same; for being all
one in effect, as the seeds of Male and Female, it booteth not whether overcome
in the end, and a new thing like the old, must needs arise, if some occasion in
the place (as I said of Heat and Brimstone) come not between and turn the
course.

You have heard of Nature, let us now come to Art: If she cannot follow those
steps of nature, she is but a rude skill; Nay, she must pass them far if she
mean to take profit by the work, for albeit I deny not but all things may fall
out so luckily, that our Son of Gold may start up under ground, (though never
found, for who would know it? yet nature may so easily fail in the choice
Comment* in Her. lib. de lap. philos. cap. 2. T. C. Vol. 4. in p. 720.
of the corrupting ground, but chiefly in tempering the degrees of her kindly
heat, (without which the work will never see end) and again the lets are so
many and so casual, that perhaps we would be worn, before the work were
finished.

Then how shall Art her Counterfeit pass this kindly Pattern very easily, by
the understanding skill of a divine Mind, which I said to pass nature in her
own works? first in choosing the best ground and best proportionated for
generation, which nature in this, respects not, as aiming at destruction
only; then in removing all Lets to come between; But especially in well
ordering that gentle and witty fire of HERMES, wherewith all the work is
sundered, that is, turned, altered and mingled.

But what is this Witty Fire? for here is all the hardness: here all the Work
is blinded; All the rest is easy: Bend your minds I say, I will tell you all
the Art: Enclose the seed of Gold in a common, and yet kindly place: lo, here
is all the Art; All the rest is written to blind and shadow this; so far as I
may do good and avoid hurt, I will unfold this short hid and dark matter, and
yet Hermetically and Philosophically.

Clangor Bu^cinae. Art. Aurif. vol. 1. p. 463 and R. Lus. in Repert. in p. 233.
As the Sun is the Father of all things, and the Moon his Wife the Mother, (for
he sends not down these begetting Beams immediately, but through the belly of
the Moon) and this double Seed is carried in a Wind and Spirit into the Earth,
to be made up and nourished: so our Margar. pretios. cap. 14. T. C vol. 5. in
p. 710. and M. Seudivog. in Epilog. 12. tractatuum.
Sun has his Wife and Moon, though not in sundry Circles, but De transmut.
met. c. 6. T.C.v. 1. p. 553.
Adam-like, and both these are carried in a Spirit also, and put into a kindly
Furnace.

To be more plain, this Seed of Gold is his whole Body loosened and softened
with his own Water, (I care not how, but best with his beloved, for ease in
working:) There is all your Stuff and Preparation. A very contemned trifle.
Here is the Fire: this Belly is full of Blood of a strange Nature; It is Earthy
Arteph. his secret book. p. 202. and Poutan. in epist T. C. vol. 3. in p 775.
and Basil. Valent. clav. 10. in p. 46. and Pract. Arnaldi T. C. v. 3. p 769
and yet Watery, Aerie, and very Fiery: It is a Bath, it is a Dunghill; and it
is ashes also. And yet these are not common ones, but Heavenly and
Philosophical, as it becomes Philosophers to deal with nothing, but Heavenly
things.

Search then this rare kind of Heat, for here is all the cunning: This is the
Key of all; this Ber. Trev. T. C. Vol. 1. in p. 769.
makes the seeds and brings forth: search wisely, and where it is; in the
midst of Heaven and Earth, In centr* ter. est sol cent. and Scudevog. l. 12.
Tinct. c. 13. and Coment in Her. l. de lap. Phis. Secret. c. 6. T. C. vol. 4.
in p. 778.
for it is in the midst of both these places, and yet but in one indeed. --
You may think I cross my self, and know not what I say, but compare and look
about, and you shall find nothing prosper but in his own place.

Let then the Ep. etc. de lap. philas. T. C. vol. 5. p. 894. and Arteph. secret
book. p. 170.
Dew of this Starry blood beat about the Womb, and your Seed shall joy and
prosper, yet so much the better and sooner also, if that Blood be whole and
sound, (u) and standing of all his parts. Wherefore no marvel if the World
misseth this Happy Stone, when they think to Laud. sanct. Harmon. impers. chym.
decad. 1. p. 114.
make it above the Ground; I say they must either climb up to Heaven, or go
down deep within the Earth, for there and no where else is this kindly Heat.

Wights are heat with Blood, and Plants with Earth, but Basil Valent. clav. 5.
in p. 38.
Minerals with an Heavenly Breath: To be short; because Men are too heavy to
mount up to Heaven, you must go down to the midst of the Earth, and put your
Seed into his Mine again, that he may take that Influence of Heaven equally
round about him.

Muse and conject well upon my Words, you that are fit and skilled in Nature,
for this is a very Natural Heat, and yet here all the World is blinded. -- Nay
indeed Ut per quirenti mentis impetu occurrat citius, quam ratione aut sudore
inveniatur. Arcan. Herm. phil. Can. 36.
if a man could read little and think much upon the ways of Nature, he might
easily hit this Art, and before that never.

What does now remain? we have all the way to mar and spoil our Gold, and that
was all the doubt, I trow, for if he be once down so kindly, he will rise again
sure, or else all Nature will fail and lose her custom. -- And if he rise, he
shall rise ever in Virtue ten-fold increased; I mean, if he be not imbased as
the seeds of Plants and Wights are, and as the feed of Gold was by that base
way abovesaid, with the Ground that corrupts it.

So if a poisoned Plant or Wight be rotted in a Glass, she will rise again a
most Venomous Beast, and perhaps a Cockatrice, for that is her Offspring.
Corrupt in like sort a good Plant, and it will prove Cardan. subt. l. 18. in p.
662.
a Worm, or such like, with much increased Virtue. What is the Reason? Because
the same temper and measure of the qualities still rises in power, as the Body
is refined, and the gross stuff that hinders the working, stripped of the Lets
of Body, Avonym. Consil. conjug. Solis and Lunae, scu trium verborum. part. 3.
T. C. Vol. 5. in p. 563.
and all the qualities shall be raised equally, and shall work mightily, devour
and draw things to their own Nature, more then any thing else; because they be
not only free, and in their clean and naked Nature, but also seated upon a
most subtle and tough Body, able to pierce, divide and subdue all things.

Again, both Metals and stones, the more heat they have, (as in hotter
Countries) the finer and better; and therefore the oftener, they be brought back
to their first matter, and baked with temperate heat, the more they increase in
goodness.

And if he be brought to such a temperate fineness, that is, to such an
Heavenly Nature; then he keeps no longer the nature of a metal, in respect of
any quality, save the lastingness of the Body; nor of any other gross meat nor
Medicine; and therefore he cannot be an Enemy to our Nature, nor yet need any
Ordinary digestion in our Body, but straitwayes flies out, as I said before,
and scours most swiftly through all the parts of the Body, and by extraordinary
means and passages, as well as Nature her self; and so coyneth with our first
moisture, and does all other good deeds, belonging to this BLISS of Body, in
such sort, and better, then I have showed you of a fifth-nature.

And so Erastus, and all other slanderous mouths may now begin again, for there
is not a word spoken to any purpose, because all runs upon a false and
unknown ground. A wise man would first have known the Nature of the thing he
speaks of, if he meant not to move Laughter to them that hear him, and know
the matter.

But indeed, these Railers are safe enough, because these things are so hid and
unknown to the World, that no man, but one of their Household, can espy them or
control them. Therefore I took in hand this hard and dangerous labor, which
all other of our Ancestors have refused, both that they might be ashamed of
their wrongful slanders, and the wise, and Well-disposed see and take profit by
the Truth of so great a Blessing.

If they ever find it let them thank GOD, and use it, as no doubt they will,
to do good to good men, If I have slipped in Words or Truth of matter, let them
think how common it is among men, and weigh the good and bad together. Or else
Indignior quandoque (id est quandocunque) dormitat Homerus. Hor. de Art. Poet.
Homer himself, when he slips now and then, could never escape it; and yet he
was in an easy matter, (A Man may fain for ever) and had Orpheus and Musaeus,
I think, before him. But you see the hardness of this stuff, although my
Pattern you do not see, because it is not to my knowledge, in the World to be
scen. But what care I? These Men whom I regard will take all things well, and
then the rest I passed by long since unregarded.

FINIS*
All glory be ever and only to him that is, that was, and that is to come,
Amen, Amen, Amen.

