A Perfect RELATION OF All the passages and proceedings of the Marquess
Hartford, the Lord Paulet, and the rest of the Cavelleers that were with them
in Wels.

With the valiant resolution and behavior of the Trained-bands and other
Inhabitants of those parts, for the defense of themselves, the King and
Parliament.

As also what help was sent from Bristoll to their aid; with the manner of the
Lords and Cavalee^s running out of the Town.

And many other things very remarkable.

As it was sent in a Letter from the Committee in Summersetshire to both Houses
of PARLIAMENT.

ORdered by the Lords in Parliament, that this Letter be forthwith printed and
published. J. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

12. August, 164^.
London, Printed for Joseph Hunscot, and I Wright.

A Perfect Relation from the Committee of Sommersetshire.
SIR,
FOr want of time to give you a large and perfect relation of all that has
past here since our meeting at Shepton-Mallet upon monday last, of which you
had by our last letters a full relation, I am commanded by the Committee, and
Deputy Lieutenants to send you a brief information, until the other be
perfected; and the rather because of the convenience of this conveyance by your
messenger Master Combs, who has done you very good service, and adventured
himself very far to observe the doings and behavior of Captain Digby, upon
whom he has attended some 14 or 16 days to his great expense, and hazard of
his life. After our meeting upon monday aforesaid. The Lord Marquess with the
other Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen lodged altogether at Wells, they labored
to bring in thither all the great Horses that possibly they could procure, and
make up amongst themselves and their friends, and had gathered together about
500 excellent good Horses very well armed, and manned with many desperate
companions. Upon wednesday morning the Gentlemen, to wit Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir
John Strewell and the rest accompained with all their Horseman came from Wells
to Shepton-Malet, and rode through the Town up unto a certain great Hill near
Shepton called Mendeepe, which being observed by the people (who were thereby
stricken into a great affrightment and terror) they forthwith sent scouts and
posts unto every Gentleman's house that lay on that side Mend^epe, to wit, unto
Sir John Horner, Master Alexander Popham and my self most especially, willing
us to look unto our selves, for that these Cavaleer^ were coming to destroy
us, or greatly to mischief us, and all the good Gentlemen in these parts of
the Country, this caused very great stir and cumbustion in the Country, and
every man a^med and made ready for their coming, But those Gentlemen with
their Cavaleers after they had made a bravado a mile or two upon the Hill
beyond Sh^pton, returned again to the same Town where they spent a short time,
refreshing themselves at the Innes and Taverns, during which t^^e some of their
Cavaleers marching about the Town found out all the honest religious men^
houses that were there, those houses they brake, into plundered, and robbed,
especially of all Arms and Ammunition, and made ^he owners with their wives and
children to forsake their h^uses, and hide themselves for fear of their lives,
and never durst to return home until yesterday; But after the G^ntemen had
refreshed themselves, and the Cavaleers done their said pranckes, they departed
again to Wells, when they had ordered the billiting of 100 of their Troopers
there upon them of Sbepton; upon this their bold march and bravado Sir John
Horner called many of his Neighbors, and Tenants together and armed them or
caused them to be armed, and so marched away unto Mastar Alexander Popham, to
whom resorted presently above 1000 armed men ready to spend their lives for the
said Gentlem^ns safety.

From thence upon Friday morning they all marched together unto the place
^ppointed for that days meeting, in the Town of Chewton, which Town lies
about 4 or 5 miles distant from Wells, and the great vast Mendeepe Hill^ lying
between the said Town and that of Wells, and thither came unto us all the
Trained Bands of that quarter of the shire, and especially Master Pophams
Regiment, complete in number, nay doubled twice over by means of volunteers,
who came best armed and were most ready in the use of their Arms. At ^his
place met some of your Commit^ees, and some of your deputy Lieutenants, to wit,
Sir Edward Hungerford (who lent Arms of his own unto 150 or 200 volunteers)
Sir John Horner, Master Alexander Popham* Master Cole, Master Harbyn, Master
Hipsly, and my self, and after we had been upon the place about one or two
hours our company was increased to the number of about 40 thousand as we^ did
conceive, many of these had no more weapons but their swords, yet all came to
show their affections to the King and Parliament, and to oppose with the haz^rd
of their lives the Lord Marquess, and his company with their commssion of
Array, This great company was made up of all the Gentry, and Yeamondry, and
lastly youths that inhabitted in the northeast part of the County, there came
unto us every one of Master Smiths Tennants 4^ Yeomen well armed, and all the
Inhabitants in that quarter where Sir Ralph Hopton lives unto his very Gates.

There came also out of those parts of Wiltshire ne^re Sir Edward Hungerfords
quarter, about 2 or 3 hundred Horsemen some of them well armed, the rest only
a sword and a pocket Pistol; there came likewise above 300 lusty stout men of
very good rank and quality of the City of Bristoll, all of them on Horseback
with Swords, Pistolls, or Carbines; there came from Glostershire a Company of
Foot well armed, consisting of 250, or 300 men led by a valiant and expert
Captain; they were not of the Trained Bands, but all volunteers.

These with the rest discovered abundance of stoutness and resolution, we
had likewise two Waynes laden with Powder, Bullet, and Match and some Arms
sent us by the honest good men of Bristoll, with two Waines more laden with
four small field pieces, and their carriages, and two Gunners; although the
Major and sheriffs of Bristoll by the means of the Lord Pawlet, and Master
Smith (as we were informed) did hinder and oppose it with all their skill, by
one or two of the clock we had put our Company in order, but with much ado
for want of expert Soldiers and Commanders, which done the Soldiers (although
they had neither meat nor drink) could not be stayed, but would march over
the Hill which was near four miles, until they came in sight of Wells, and
there pitched upon a great Hill in view of the Town; by this time the day was
near spent and victuals we had none nor could we get any upon the sudden,
yet such was the courage and resolution of our Company, that after they had
planted their Ordnance, they would not dep^rt that place but lay all that night
upon the Hill, fasting and in the ^old, and spent the time in prayers and
singing of Psalms, Sir John Hornor, and Master Alexander Poph^m with his two
valiant Brothers, and Sir John Horners youngest son, with many other young
Gentlemen, Captains, and others, lay all that night in their Arms upon
Fursbushes in the open Fields amidst the Camp, the old Knight often saying that
his Furs-Bed was the best that ever he lay upon. It was very much to be
admired, that the spirits and resolutions of so great a Company, and men so
tenderly b^ed could be kept up to tha^ hight, as to endure so much hunger and
cold. But such was the love and affections of all the County within 6. 8. and
10 miles distance that by the next mo^ning day light they sent in such
provisions of all sorts in Waynes, Carts, and on Horses, that this great
Company had sufficient and to spare both for breakfast, and dinner, and would
not take one penny for it, nay many men did carry home again their provisions,
for want of company to eat it.

After our Camp had been victualled, we your Committees and Deputy Lieutenants
could scarce prevail with them, but upon the Town they would fall, they would
destroy the Cavalleers and take the Incendiaries, those Delinquent Gentlemen
then with the Marquess and carry them to the Parliament. Thus far I have
made you a true and perfect relation, the rest of the story (because it
concerns the Lord Marquess Hartford, the Lord Seymore, and the Lord Paulet
(and its reported an Earl and some Lords more) besides the Gentlemen my
neighbors, of which were twelve Knights besides M. Smith, M. Wyndham, M.
Kirton, and other Esquires) I shall at this time omit, until your Committees
and Deputy Lieutenants give their consent to that which shall be written; only
I shall tell you that before we removed from Chewton, the Lord Marquess, etc.
sent us a Message to stay there, and to find a way to preserve the peace of
the County; in our next you shall receive a copy of that message, for I have it
not by me. Our answer was that for want of the rest of our Deputy Lieutenants
and Committees which we expected every hour, we deferred our full answer
until the next day: the next day we sent five propositions unto them, with
advise that if they were not yielded unto very speedily, we should not be able
to keep our Soldiers from falling upon them, they desired time for an hour or
two to consider of an answer to our propositions, and in the mean time whilst
we expected the answer, and our soldiers very impatient with the delay, They,
the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and Cavalleres forsook the Town and rod all
way. In this I have been brief in regard I have not all the papers by me in
which the messages are contained, it gave the soldiers some content to go down
into the Town to see the place where these lewd Cavalleers their enemies lay.
Some of us went down with them to keep all things in order and quiet (when we
could not prevail nor persuade them to depart without going into the Town) we
left all in quiet and do hope that those which remained there after our
departute were not disorderly, unless they were provoked by the Cathedral
Company.

Upon all this relation, you may clearly see the condition and stout
resolution of our good Country men, how ever heretofore ill thought of. But
observe I pray you, this company now appointed to muster at Chewton was the
Regiment only under M. Popham called Bath-regiment, and some part of
Wels-regiment, they all dwelt within the compass of one quarter of our shi^e,
and they were the ^est and principallest Company from whom Sir Ralph Hopton,
Sir Francis Dorrington, and M. Smith might expect obedience, and over whom they
had the greatest power heretofore. M. Rogers, M. Francis, M. Pyne, nor M.
Sirode did appear at our muster, nor could bring or send us one man, for as
they were coming up unto us with some Gentlemen and good Yeomen of those parts
to accompany them, they were met by the way with Sir J. Stowell and his two
sons, and about 120, or 140. of the desperate Cavaleers, by whom some of the
ho^est country men were wounded and slain, and so for want of powder and sh^t
not able to resist, they ^eturned home again, and came not forward unto us. I
shall leave this relation to M. Pyne and M. Strode who were eyewitnesses to
what was done. But this wounding and killing has very much daunted the honest
^ountrey-man, yet not to forsake his good resolut^ons; for I am confident that
the Commissioners of Array will never be able to make any of them to fight to
maintain them or their Commission, for when they were at Wels that friday
which we came to Chewton, they had got into Wels by fair means and by foul,
about 400. of the Trayned-bands and Volunteers, but that Friday at night (as we
were credibly informed) they all stole away out of the Town, and some of them
came up the hill unto us upon Saturday morning. But sir, having now done with
the relation, the Committee and Deputy-lieut^nants do very much fear, that the
Lords and the other Commissioners will attempt again in some other part of the
County, and so may do us extreme mischief in case they prevail any where to
raise a regiment of Foot; Wher^fore I do humbly pray you in the behalf of
this county* that without any further loss of time, ten or twenty good
Commanders with some ammunition may be speedily sent down unto us, and that my
Lord of Bedford with three or four hundred horse would presently come amongst
us. And then I am consident you shall find this County as right as the best;
but if you should forget us, and my Lord not speedily to come unto us, we may
notwithstanding (after this very good beginning) be yet lost, and we all
destroyed by the Cavaleers. Sir, I have been over tedious, and trespassed upon
your patience, wherefore pardon I pray you,

Your most humble servant, John Ash.
Freshford. 7 Aug. 1642.

