At a House holden in the Counsel Chamber upon Ouse-bridge, in the City of
York, this Twenty-Fifth day of August, in the Third year of the Reign of our
Soueraign Lord and Lady William and Mary by the Graee of God King and Queen of
England, etc. Annoque Dom. 1691.
THE Zeal of their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary to work a Reformation
in Manners as well as in other things throughout their whole Kingdoms; is so
manifest and conspi^ous, That with gratitude to Almighty God we acknowledge our
great happiness in living under their gracious Government, who by their pious
Examples do teach their Subjects to live virtuously and by their Precepts do
require their Magistrates and Officers to punish all those that shall do
otherways. And therefore to restrain the detestable yet spreading sins of
Cursing, Swearing, Drunkenness, and other Enormities, and to prevent the
frequent profanation of the Lords Day, (too commonly profaned) by people
unnecessarily Traveling, Selling, or Exposing things to sale on that day, by
excercising their ordinary Callings, by using other Employments, or vain
Sports, and especially by Tippling thereon and neglecting the Worship and
Service of God): We thought it our Duty strictly and impartially to put in
Execution within this City, and County of the same City, all the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, provided against the Offenses aforesaid. And to the
intent that neither the Offenders nor those that ought to be instrumental in
bringing the Offenders to condigae Punishment may pretend ignorance of the
Laws; We do hereby make known, That

Whosoever shall prophainely Curse or Swear, 20 Jac. 1. cap 20 convict before a
Justice in his hearing, or by 2 witnesses or confession.
he shall forfit for every such offense 1 s. to be levied by distress, and for
want of such distress, to sit in the Stocks 3 hours, if the Offenders be 12
years of age, and if he be under 12 years of age then to be whipped.

Whosoever shall be convicted of being Drunk, 4 Jac. cap. 5.21. Jac. 1. cap. 7.
convict by view confession or one Witness.
shall forfit for every such Offense 5 s. If he refuse to pay, it shall be
levied by distress, and if he be not able to pay he shall sit in the Stocks 6
hours, and for the second Offense be bound to the good behavior.

Whosoever shall remain or continue Tippling, 4 Jac. 1 cap. 5.21 Jac. 1 cap. 7
convict by view confession or one witness.
or Drinking, in any Inn Victvailing-house, or Alehouse, shall forfit 3 s. 4
d. to be levied by distress, and if not able to pay shall sit in the stocks 6
hours

Every Innkeeper, 1 Jac. 1. chap. 9.21. Jac 1. cap. 7. convict by view
confession or one VVittness.
Victualler or Alehouse keeper, who shall permit or suffer persons to sit
Tippling or Drinking in his house, shall forfit for every such offense 10 s. 1
Jac. cap. 9. and by the Statutes 7 Jac. 1 cap. 10.21. Jac. 1. cap. 7. be
utterly disabled for 3 years to keep any Alehouse.

Whosoever shall frequent or use any Bull batings, 1. Car. 1 cap. 1, convict
by view confession or one wittwess.
common Plays, or any other unlawful Exercises, Sports, or Pastimes, on the
Lords day, shall for every such Offense forfit 3 s. 4 d. to be levied by
distress, and for want of a distress the Offender shall sit in the stocks 3
hours.

Whatsoever Tradesman, 29. Car. 2. cap. 7. convict by view confession or one
wittness.
Artificer, workman, Labourer, or other persons whatsoever, (being 14 years of
age) shall do or exercise any worldly buisiness or work of their ordinary
Calling on the Lords day, (except works of necessity and charity) shall for
every such Offense forfit 5 s. to be levied by distress and for want of
distress or inability in the offender to pay, shall sit in the Stocks 2 hours.

Whosoever shall publicly cry, 29 Car. 2 cap. 7 convict by view confession or
one wittness.
show, f^rth^ or expose to Sale any wares, Merchandises, Fruit, Herbs, or other
goods or chattells on the Lords day, shall forfeit the goods so cried showed or
exposed to sale, which by warrant may be seized.

Every Drover, 29 Car. 2 cap. 7 convict by view confession on one wittness.
Horse-courser, Waggoner, Butcher, Higler, or their Servants, that shall
travel or come into his Inn or Lodging on the Lords day, shall forfit for
every such Offense 20 s. to be levied by distress, and for want of distress or
inability in the Offender to pay, he shall sit in the stocks 2 hours

Whosoever shall use employ or travel on the Lords day, 29 Car. 2. cap. 7.
convict by view confession or one wittness.
with any Boat VVherry, etc (Except on extraordinary occasion, to be allowed by
some lustice) shall forfit 5 s. to be Paid as aforesaid or sit in the Stocks 2
hours.

Whosoever by himself, 33. Hen. 8. cap. 9.
or his Servants shall keep, set up, or maintain any House or place, wherein
Carding, Dicing, or any kind of unlawful Gaming whatsoever is or shall be set
up used or practiced, the keeper, setter up, or maintainer thereof shall forfit
for every day 40 s.

Whosoever shall refort to, use or haunt, any such House or place, and shall
there game or play shall forfit for every time. 6 s. 8 d.

If any person shall Receive, Entertain, or maintain any incontinent or lewd
Women into their houses, unto which diverse, loose persons, Apprentices,
Servants, and other the youth of this City, do frequently resort, to the
corruption of their Manners, and mispence of their time and estates, every such
offender, as well the Keeper of such houses, as the Resorters to them, ought to
find Sucrties for their good behavior, and are indictable and finable,

AND for the more effectual preventing the profanation of the Lords day, It
is Ordered that such of the Posternes of this City, as the Lord Major for the
time being shall think fit, shall be kept close shut every Lords day from
Morning till Evening, and that every Bar of this City, shall be kept shut on
every Lords day from nine till cleaven of the Clock in the Forenoon, and from
half an hour after one of the Clock till three of the Clock in the Afternoon,
and that none shall be suffered to come in or go out thereat, but upon good and
lawful occasions: And it is likewise Ordered that in Service and Sermon time
on every Lords day, the Searchers in every Parish, shall walk through the
Streets and also search such public houses as they suspect, to have any lewd
or disorderly persons in them, and bring all such persons as they shall find
offending against the Laws, before the Lord Major of this City, or some other
of their Majostics Justices of the peace, that they may be dealt withal
according to Law.

And all and every the Constables, Churchwardens, Sidemen, and other Officers,
and Ministers of Justice within this City, and County of the same City, are
hereby required diligently to do and perform their several and respective
duties, in the due and effectual prosecution of the said Offenders, as the
Laws and Statutes in the several Cases abovementioned, have directed and
provided.

And it is further ordered, that in case any of the said Officers shall sail or
be negligent in their respective duties, That then the penalties (appointed by
the several Laws and Statutes above mentioned) shall be severely inflicted upon
them for their Neglect.

And to the intent that no Constable or any other Officers, may be slack, or
any ways discouraged in their lawful and due prosecution of the promises, it
is hereby Ordered and declared, that if they or any of them shall be Resisted,
Vexed, or Molested, in the just and lawful execution of their respective
Duties, they shall be Encouraged, Desended, and vindicated by this House, and
the Offenders shall be presecuted and punished according to Law.

per Cur' Tho: Mace Deputat Com' Cler.


