THE SPEECH OF WILLIAM ASHHVRST ESQUIRE; One of the Commissioners of the
Parliament of ENGLAND, at Edenborough, the 28 of Febr. 1647.

Upon their first hearing by a Committee of LORDS and others, appointed for
that purpose by the Committee of Estates of SCOTLAND; as it was taken by one
that was then present.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1648.

The SPEECH OF William Ashhurst Esquire; One of the Commissioners of the
PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND, at Edinburrough, the 28. of Feb. 1647.
Upon their first hearing by a Committee of Lords and others, appointed for
that purpose by the Committee of Estates of Scotland; as it was taken by one
that was then present.
My Lords and Gentlemen:
I Am commanded by the rest of the Commissioners of the Parliament of England,
to acknowledge your Lordships favor and respect, in appointing our lodging to
be the place where you will receive our Addresses to the Honorable Committee of
Estates; for which I am to return Thanks unto your Lordships.

For our business I am to acquaint your Lordships, that the chiefest end why
we are sent hither by both Houses of the Parliament of England, is, to maintain
a good Correspondence betwixt them, and the Parliament, Conventions, and
Committee of Estates of this Kingdom, and to continue and preserve the Union
and brotherly Agreement that we hope (by the blessing of God) will ever be
betwixt both Kingdoms.

My Lords, I conceive that I need not say much to enforce this part of our
Negotiation, when I consider by how many ways God and Nature has united us.
We are two Kingdoms in one Island, of one language, under one King, and (which
is more then all) professing one Religion: I cannot but look upon these as many
cords that cannot easily be broken. Wherein I am the more abundantly confident,
when I consider what we have added to them of later times, by Treaties,
Leagues, and especially by solemn Covenants betwixt our selves, and betwixt God
and us for Union, which have been sealed with so much Blood, and seconded with
such success and blessing from heaven. And when I further consider that we
have been so long united in one common Cause, wherein so many of both Nations
have hazarded their lives, and against a common Enemy, by whom so many of both
Kingdoms have lost their lives, and others their estates; And that (as we have
common Enemies, so) we have common Friends, and common Interests; And (as I
hope it will appear at last) common Ends. And all these are accompanied with
great advantages by our Union, not only in a comfortable converse and
communion, and a profitable Trade and converse betwixt the people of both
Kingdoms; But with so great an assurance of public safety in the prayers and
Arms of both Kingdoms united, that (if we do not foolishly, and make God our
Enemy) we need not fear any (nor all) earthly powers that can be raised up
against us.

Besides all this (my Lords) shall I only say England, nay I hope that I may
say Scotland also, has other strong engagements to Union. England, I am
confident, will not (nay it cannot) forget their seasonable assistance from
this Nation. And Scotland (I doubt not) will remember, that both these Houses
of Parliament (at their first sitting) could not be drawn by all the earnest
endeavors of the Malignant and Prelaticall party (who were then exceeding
powerful) to engage or assist when it was against their Brethren of Scotland,
which I do the rather now mention, because that party in England who would
have engaged us against Scotland at the first, and since, have been in Arms
against both Kingdoms, are now renewing their manifold former endeavors to
divide us; By sowing jealousies, and fomenting discontents, thereby hoping we
should do that for them they could never by all their policy and power do for
themselves. But the more it stands with their interest to divide us, the more
it must needs be ours to unite; And the stronger seige they lay to our Union,
the more it stands us upon to fortify it.

My Lords, I wonder at the confidence of our Enemies, that can hope for our
Divisions; do they look upon us as men so altogether void of Reason, that we
should not see or consider, That dissentions amongst Brethren must necessarily
very much weaken, and does usually prove destructive to both; And that if it
should fall amongst us at this time, it were far more probable now when the
Popish, Prelaticall, and Malignant, are so much strengthened by a discontented
party, (though we should both resolve the contrary) to bring in Tyranny and
Episcopacie (it may be Popery) then be any good means for the establishment of
the known Truths of God amongst us, or a right Discipline in the Church, or a
good and peaceable Government in the Kingdoms, the things so much desired by
all good men.

My Lords, Division is the Devils work at all times, and it would be more
especially so amongst us at this time when the Aids sought for in all parts by
the bloody Irish Rebels fails them, and they have no other hopes of
subsistence under Heaven left; these things considered, if yet we should fall
into dissentions amongst our selves, not only all the Protestants in the world
would condemn us, but we should engage the God of all the world against us, to
whom we have sworn to preserve the Union, and then what could we expect but
ruins, upon which might be written, These were they that (when there was no
other visible way to effect it) did with the foolish woman in the Proverb, pull
down their house with their own hands.

My Lords, To deal freely with your Lordships, I have spoken the more upon this
point, because we hear (which it may be your Lordships do not) that some of our
great English Delinquents are at this time come too or near this City, if their
business be to blow coals betwixt us, we hope they will never be able to
kindle them to a fire, especially when not only the Ministers, and good people
of both Kingdoms, and poor bleeding Ireland, and all the Protestants in
Christendom (whose interest and welfare is much lapt up in it) do all cry to
us to take heed unto, and preserve our Union. But the great God of Heaven and
Earth, to whom we have sworn it, bids us look to it at our perils, lest he
bring upon the breakers of it Ruin without remedy; And only those (for the
most part) that have been, and I fear will still be found to be our Enemies,
incite us to division, where it is thus unequally dealt I hope our choice will
soon be made. And for the Parliament of England we do assure your Lordships, it
is their real resolution to preserve the Union, and in order to it to do all
just and honorable things for the satisfaction of this Nation; Nor can we
doubt but the like affection and resolution will appear in the Parliament and
Committee of Estates of Scotland. And for my Lord Nottingham, and the rest of
us that are come hither upon this Employment, we are sensible that what we have
depends upon the welfare of these Kingdoms, which in a great part rests upon
their peace and Union, for the preservation whereof we are resolved to
contribute our greatest care and utmost endeavor; And to carry our selves
with all respect to this Kingdom, whereunto all of us have general, and some
of us former particular obligations.

My Lords, I have done: the rest is only the tender of some Papers I am
commanded to deliver to your Lordships, whereof I shall speak little; only
thus much for the first that concerns the preservation of the Union and
brotherly Agreement betwixt the Kingdoms: which although it be the same (for
the most part) which we have already sent to the Honorable Committee of
Estates, yet we thought fit now to offer it to your Lordships, because we knew
not how far your Lordships would regularly take notice of what we have done,
until it come to you in a way of your own designing. For the rest, one is
concerning the payment of the 100000 l. the other, A Proposition in order to
give satisfaction unto the Scottish Army in Ireland. For however it has
pleased God to exercise the Kingdom of England with sore troubles, that have
occasioned a vast expense, which they could neither prevent nor foresee; Yet
both Houses of the Parliament of England are fully resolved to satisfy all
their just Engagements by all the ways and means that lies in their power.
Which is all I shall trouble your Lordships at this time.

A Copy of a Letter from Scotland to a Friend in London, in which the Speech
was enclosed.
SIR,
THe common Discourse here, is how far the Scottish Army is advanced into
England, and how little opposition they are like to meet with; yet we are
confident God will meet with them that have so unrighteously invaded your
Kingdom. In the mean time they are uplifting more men to strengthen themselves
against you and us; But our Kirk (despising all danger) do still declare and
stick to their old principles, and prophecy their ruin: and we are glad to see
such a letter to them from the House of Commons, which gives great satisfaction
to honest men here, as does the dinted transactions betwixt our Parliament and
Committee of Estates, and your Commissioners of England (who carried themselves
with great integrity to the Parliament that trusted them, and unblameable to
all) in which passages we see how reasonable their offers were, and what
unreasonable Answers were returned to them. And yet God suffers wicked men to
be over us, but I am persuaded that it will not be long for the prayer of his
faithful people in both Kingdoms will be heard. And however these wicked
Malignants in our Kingdom have broken the Treaties with England, and do use the
utmost endeavors to break the Union betwixt both Kingdoms, yet if you in
England should take occasion thereby to break off from us, or that advantage to
make the breach National, as you would gratify the Malignants of both
Kingdoms who have long designed and endeavored it, so you would be unfaithful
to God unto whom you have sworn to preserve the Union; and exceeding unkind to
us, who have lost our goods, and hazarded our lives in opposing those here who
labored to break it, with whom if we should have concurred, we could have had
a visible security to our selves, and have raised thrice as great a strength
here, and made a far greater party to have opposed you in England; Besides
it would be a disadvantage to your Nation as well as ours (at least the honest
party in both) as was well expressed by Mr. Ashhurst in a Speech at the first
coming of the Commissioners; A Copy whereof (as it was than taken by one that
heard it) is here enclosed: which although I would not have you to publish
commonly without his consent, yet though he should not be in Town I pray you
get some Copies printed at my charge, and put it to acc(...), and send them to
me by the first safe opportunity; only out of them send some few Copies to my
good Friends Mr. Goodwine, and Colonel Birch: but let them not know that they
come from

Your very loving Friend, J. L.

FINIS.

