THE Work of the Age: OR, The sealed Prophecies of DANIEL opened and applied.

Wherein is plainly proved that all the Governments in the World, except the
Government of Christ, are but Images, or parts of Nebuchadnezzars Image, and
shall be suddenly broken in pieces by the little Stone cut out of the Mountain
without hand: Together with the means how Christ will effect all this.

Showing also that Image-Government, and Image Worship have always been
Companions.

Explaining likewise Daniels mystical Numbers, and discovering some Misprisions
about the Little Horn, both in the Translation and Application of the same.

Amending sundry places in our Common Translation, and clearing some
Chronological points from the common errors.

By WILLIAM ASPINWALL.

LONDON: Printed by R. I. for Livewell Chapman, and are to be sold at the Sign
of the Crown in Pope's Head Alley. 1655.

The Preface.
MOses thought it uncomely for Hebrews and follow Brethren to strive together,
Exodus 2. 13. And when Joseph dismissed his Brethren, and sent them back to
Canaan to his Father, he imposed this charge upon them, See ye fall not out by
the way, Genesis 45. 24. So me thinks it ill becomes Christians, and Co-witnesses
for Christ to bandy Arguments, as men toss Balls forward and backward, drawing
black lines one upon another, as if they did fearfully and shamefully stretch
both the text, and reason, if they dissent from what is held forth by them.
This savours not of a Spirit of Christ, it is not the language of Canaan. We
may rest our selves satisfied, when we have born witness to the truth, and held
forth the light we have received. For this end was I born, and for this cause
came I into the world to bear witness to the truth, Joh. 18. 37. This was
Christ's work, and it should be ours also. It is the nature of Light to expel
Darkness. We shall need to do no more, but hold forth the word of truth, with
as much clearness as we can, and apply all other interpretations thereunto, and
it will appear what is strait, and what is crooked. For, Rectum est index sui
and obliqui. And truly if we pass these limits, it is a thousand to one that
instead of bearing witness to the truth, we shall bear witness against some
truth or other.

We may possibly with mistaken Arguments beget Disciples to our selves, but
seldom or never (with such Carnal weapons) shall we beget Disciples unto
Christ, or to his Truth. The Sun has no need of Candles, or other adventitious
lights, to inlighten the same, or to augment the light thereof. Let us hold
forth the truth with all clearness, and if any thing be obscure (in regard of
the Dialect, wherein it was originally written) let it be our care, with all
faithfulness, to explain the same; and leave it to the blessing of God (...),
Genesis 2
to persuade, and to the breathings of the Spirit (whose office it is) to (...).
convince, Job. 16. 8. Which were it duly attended unto, would spare a great
deal of precious time, and tedious writing, which many times is fruitlesly
spent in Answers and Replies, that tend little to the honor of Christ, or the
advantage of his Cause.

I know it often fares with Christians as with little Children, that make haste
to their Father; sometimes they catch a fall, or a knock. Peter though he was
most resolved, and most forward, fell foulest. And if we look narrowly into the
matter, we shall ordinarily espy a spice of Spiritual pride, as well as a
strong affection to our Lord and Master, secretly couchant under our
precipitancy and prefidence of spirit. Whereby it now and then comes to pass
that we write crooked, or walk crooked, and besides our rule.

The advice therefore which I would give to others, which also I desire to take
my self, is briefly this. Let us lie low before the Lord, in all our studies,
and inquiries into the holy Counsels of God, especially these mystical
Scriptures, and seriously weigh every word, and every IOTA in the text,
comparing Scripture with Scripture. For holy men of God spoke, (and writ) as
they were acted by the holy Spirit, 2 Pet. 1. 21. And the Lord keep our spiri^s
humble. For, God will teach the humble his way, Psalm. 25. 8. The Apostles
advice is singularly useful in this case, Let each esteem other better than
themselves, Phil. 2. 3. And in all our explications of dark and Prophetical
Scriptures, let there run through all the veins thereof a spirit of love, and
Self-denial. Not in word alone, but in deed, and in truth; for oftentimes there
lies much of Self, secretly hidden under verbal Self-denial. This in sum is
the advice I would give to others, and to my self also. Let me only add a word
more by way of Cau^^on, when we come to treat of sealed Prophesies, such as
Christ has commanded to seal until the time of the end (a). Take heed of
engaging too far, Of which ^d Daniels ^phecies are, Master Til^ghast well
serves, p. 157 ^^.
and beware of pre-occupating Christ in opening the Seals, lest we discover our
own nakedness, and out live our own interpretations. Stay we but a little, till
Christ in a way of Providence open the Seal, and then we may with safety make
particular applications of such Prophetical Scriptures; as we see the Saints of
old have done, in applying that which is written of the Little Horn (as it is
called) Dan. 8, 9. 25. unto Antiochus Epiphanes. To which end you may read the
Story of the Maccabees, Josephus, and others. In like manner, I doubt not but
the Little Horn, Dan. 7. 8. may rightly, and without injury to the truth, be
applied to Charles Stuart the late King. For as much as there are so many
remarkable Characters which Christ in a providential way has delineated* even
to the very last stroke as I may say, which are applicable all of them unto
Charles Stuart, and cannot suitably be accommodated unto any other of the Ten
Horns besides him, as I suppose. But I shall speak more fully of that, when I
come to treat of that Little Horn, the Lord assisting. Weigh therefore and
consider what is written, and the Lord give a right understanding in all things.

Sixth Month (commonly called Febr.) 1655. WILLIAM ASPINWALL.

Daniels Prophecies in the 2, 7, 8, 9, and the 11th. Chapters, unsealed and
opened, in some brief exercitations upon those Chapters.
DANIEL II. Verse. 31. Thou O King, was contemplating, and behold one great
Image, this Image which was so great* and his brightness excellent, was
standing before thee* and the sight thereof terrible.

32 This Image, the head of it was good gold* his breast and his arms of
silver: his Or Bowels,
belly and his Or Side.
thigh of brass.

33 His legs of iron: his feet [part] (...)
of them of iron, and [part] (...)
of them of clay.

34 Thou was contemplating, until a stone (but not with hands) was cut out, and
it smote the Image upon his feet of iron and clay: and brake them in pieces.

35 Then were broken in pieces (as one) the iron, the clay, the brass, the
silver, and the gold, and they became as the chafe of the Summer
threshing-floors, and the wind carried them away, that no place of them was
found; and the stone that smote the Image became a great Mountain, and filled
all the earth.

36 This is the Dream, and we will tell the interpretation thereof, before the
King.

37 Thou O King [art] a King of Kings: that the God of Heaven has given to
thee a Kingdom, Power, Strength, and Glory.

38 And every where that ^he children of men are dwelling, the Beast of the
field, and the Fowl of Heaven has he given into thine hand, and has made thee
ruler over them all; thou art he, the head of it, that is of gold.

39 And after thee shall arise another Kingdom (the land inferior in
comparison of thee) and another third Kingdom of brass, which shall bear rule
in all the earth.

40 And the Fourth Kingdom shall be strong as iron: for as much as iron does
break in pieces, and subdueth all things, and (as iron that breaks all these)
shall it break in pieces and bruise.

41 And whereas thou did contemplate the feet and the toes, [part] (...)
of them of Potters clay, and [part] (...)
of them iron, the Kingdom shall be divided, but there shall be in it of the
strength of the iron: for as much as thou did behold the iron mixing with
mirie clay.

42 And the toes of the feet [were part] (...)
of them iron, and [part] (...)
of them clay; in part the Kingdom shall be strong, Chald. of it.
and in part* shall be broken.

43 In that thou did behold the iron mixing it self with mirie clay, they
shall mix themselves with the seed of men, but they shall not cleave this with
that; even as iron cannot be mixed with clay.

44 And in the days of them (of these Kings) shall the God of Heaven cause to
arise a Kingdom that shall never be destroyed, and the Kingdom thereof shall
not be left to other people: it shall break in pieces and consume all these
Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.

45 For as much as thou did contemplate that the stone was cut out of the
Mountain (but not with hands) and it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the
clay, the silver, and the gold, the great God does make it known to the King
what shall be after this: and the dream is certain, and the interpretation
thereof faithful.


NOw ere I come to the explication of these ensuing Prophecies and Visions, let
me premise these few things to be considered.

There be some Prophecies in Scripture that are sealed by a Divine decree or
command, as it is written, Dan. 12. 4. But thou O Daniel, shut up the words,
and seal the Book, even to the time of the end. And Rev. 5. 1. I saw in the
right hand of him that sat on the Throne, a Book written within, and on the
back side, sealed with seven Seals. Though they be written in the Mother
Tongue, as I may say, and the words intelligible, yet they are sealed.

Now that I may express my self briefly, yet plainly as I can, to the meanest
capacity, let me propose these few Questions, with their Answers.

Quest. 1. What is the Seal, whereby God is wont to Seal? that is, to ratify,
and yet to conceal his holy Councels?

Q. 2. What are the ingravings of this Seal?

Q. 3. Whar is the effigies, or impression made by this Seal?

Q. 4. What is meant by the Book, or writing sealed?

Q. 5. How, or after what manner does God seal this Book?

Q. 6. How does Christ open the Seals?

Seal, for so he is called, Ephesians. 1. 3. and God uses no Seal but this.

Seal (as I may speak) are the secret Counsels of God, which are known only to
the Spirit of God, and by him revealed to us, as it is written, 1 Cor. 2. 10,
11. But God has revealed them to us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searches
all things, yea the deep things of God. For what man knows the things of a
man, save the spirit of man which is in him? Even so the things of God knows
no man, but the Spirit of God.

effigies, or impression made by this Seal; For holy men of God spoke as they
were acted by the holy Spirit, 2 Pet. 1. 21.

Book sealed is the Book of Providence, wherein is portrayed (as I may say) in
a most lively manner, the persons and things, with such distinguishing
Characters and Marks, as do exactly answer the mind and Counsel of God
revealed in his Word, as appears by the opening of the Seals, Rev. 6.

Judah (who only is worthy to open the book and unloose the seals, Rev. 5. 5.
12) do in a way of providence first break open the Seals. And then we may be
capable to discern the perfect Harmony, that is betwixt the Prophecies, and the
persons there described and not til then.

Act in a providentiall way, according to the eternal Counsel of his Father,
revealed in his word. Which is called the Decrees-bringing-forth, Zeph. 2. 2*
And I may (not unfitly) call it a providentiall description, or exemplification
of his Fathers Counsels. Thus Christ breaks open the Seal, and then if we
have spiritual eyes, we may discern each lineament or ingraveing of the Seal
(imprinted as it were upon wax or clay) answering line to line exactly. Until
which be done, yea, til Christ begin to draw out the last line or character,
we shall not be able to make particular Application of such Sealed Prophecies.
Wherefore I durst not attempt to make particular application of that little horn
in the seventh of Daniel, unto Charles Stuart the late King, t^ll Christ had*
first begun to draw out the last line or Character, in a way of providence.

Thus I have given you the sum of my thoughts, touching Sealed prophecies, as
briefly and as plainly as I could. Let me only add this word of Caution more.
That Keys were never ordained to open Seals. Wherefore since the wisdom of
God* saw it not good, to set Looks upon Prophecies, but Seals: and since none
has prevailed* nor was judged worthy to open these Sealed Books, but the Lamb:
Let us want with faith and patience till Christ open the Book and then we
shall see him delineate the persons and things (intended) in the Actings of his
providence. And so doing, we shall neither be deceived our selves, nor
mis-lead others. For which end it is that I have thus opened my self* in these
poor broken expressions, ere I proceed to the unfolding of Daniels Prophecies.
Intending to speak briefly, to those Prophecies only, which are already
accomplished, or in accomplishing; and shall proceed no further than Christ
has gone before me in the Actings of his Providence. This being premised, I
shall briefly come to speak of those Prophecies which are unsealed, and first
of this Dream or Vision of Nebuchadnezzer.

The Explication. Dan. 2. 31.
31. Verse. One great Image.] It is very remarkable, that in this Dream, God
represents to Nebuchadnezzar, the true and proper nature of all earthly forms
of Government, which should be in the world, during the time of the four great
Monarchies (after Nebuchadnezzar had demolished that Government which was of
Christ's own institution, until the time that he would restore the same, and
deliver the Kingdom and greatness thereof unto the Saints of the most high)
under the representation of an (...) Signifies any form or figure which we make
or fancy to our selves. An invention of our own, or according to our own minds.
IMAGE, even the Image of a Man. Which does denote unto us thus much; that all
the governments instituted and erected in the world (under these four
Monarchies) by men or by humane policy, ever since the Government of Christ^
own institution was laid aside, even to the time of the Acts 3. 21.
restitution thereof, are in Gods account, but very Images, or all of them put
together, do but make up this one Image, as it is here called. And though I
cannot say these Images and Forms of Government of men's devising, are those
Images forbidden in the second command (for the word is not the same, nor do
civil forms of Government imediatly concern the worship of God,) yet this is
observable, that in the next chapter, Nebuchadnezzar frames to himself a Golden
Image, for divine worship, Semblable thereunto. Which has ever since been the
woeful Concomitant, and bitter fruit or result of such ^mage Government.
Wherefore Paul taking notice hereof, that it has been the constant practice of
Gentile Nations, to modle their Divine Worship, and Church Administrations,
according to the form of their Civil Governments, he advertiseth the Romans,
not to be conformed to the world, Romans 12. 2. His meaning is, (as Mr. Cotton
has often observed) he would not have the Saints in Rome to modle their
Churches, and Church-Administrations, according to the Pattern of the Roman
Civil Power. This IMAGE is here called (...)
one Image] although it comprehended all the Four great Monarchies and Kingdoms
under it. To show, that all of them are but parts of this one Image. And their
Governments are but Image-Government.

Now the Characters of this IMAGE are these four.

1 It was so great] to wit, it comprehended the Four Monarchies, or Kingdoms,
as it is interpreted, Verse thirty eight, thirty nine, forty.

2 It is described by the outward Pomp and Splendour, not only of the Head, but
all the parts of it; his splendour or brightness excellent.] And this is a
common Character of all the Four Monarchies and Kingdoms under them, they all
affect worldly pomp and glory.

3 It is said to stand before him, (...) which imports the acceptance that this
Image-Government found in the hearts of all the Kings and Monarchs. And so the
word is used, Psalm. 1. 5. to stand with acceptance. And this shows the
complacency and content they take both in their pomp and splendour, and in the
Government new Modelled by them. This is the Third Character.

4 This Image is described by the Tyrannical spirit, that appears in all of
them, from the first to the last, from the highest to the lowest; His visage
(...)
terrible,] dreadful, or formidable. This is not here put for a Character of
the Little Horn, Dan. 7. but for a common Character of the great IMAGE, and all
the Four Monarchies comprised therein, and the several Kingdoms appertaining
thereunto; and this ever has been, and ever will be the close of all
Image-Government of men's devising; Terror and Tyranny are indelible and
inseparable Characters of all worldly Governments whatsoever. Pleasing indeed
are their new devised Governments to themselves, as was showed before else they
would not endure that they should stand before them. But terrible, dreadful,
and tyrannical are they to others that cannot comply with them, nor fall down
and worship them. These are the Four Characters which are common to all the
Four Monarchies, and the parts thereof, and they are true of the whole Image,
and every part thereof.

The next thing remarkable in this IMAGE, or Image-Government Verse. 32.
is, the progress they make from evil to worse, they are always best at first;
At first they are good gold] they themselves pretend so, and many others think
so. And comparatively they may be called good gold, because their Actions at
their first rising are more just and righteous, than afterward they prove to
be. A kind of necessity putting them upon it, that they may ingratiate
themselves, and their New Image with the people. And it is most natural, that
the Head, which is the most noble part, should first be brought forth, but this
continues not long. The durance of the Babylonian Monarchy, or head of Gold was
but seventy years; the special Character of this Monarchy is the unity of it,
in which respect it is called the Head, which is but one.

In the next place it degenerates from Gold to Silver, which is a Metal of a
baser alloy; and this is interpreted, verse. 39. of another Kingdom and
Government succeeding the Babylonian, and inferior to it. This Government for
the nature was meaner, and baser, more formidable, and obnoxious to the Church
of Christ, but of longer durance, and so was the Persian Monarchy. The
Character of this Monarchy is Union and Division together, it is one Breast,
but two Arms, Medes and Persians Dan. 6. 8.

Thirdly, from Silver it becomes Brass, which shows the worsness of the Third,
or Grecian Monarchy, which more bitterly infested the Jews with Wars, and
set up the abomination of desolation, as Daniel shows at large in his eighth
Chapter. The division of this Monarchy is expressed when he says, his Thigh of
Brass.] He does not say, thighs of Brass, for that would imply only a twofold
division of Alexanders Successors, which was Fourfold, Dan. 8. 22. but he
says, its thigh of brass, to intimate that one of Alexanders Successors should
prove very infence against the Jews the people of God, as Antiochus Epiphanes
in more especial manner was. This Monarchy as it is baser for the original of
it, so it is longer for continuance then the Persian Monarchy.

In the Fourth and last place this Image degenerates under the Verse. 33.
Fourth Kingdom, or Monarchy, unto Iron Legs, and then into feet and toes,
part Iron, part Clay. The special Characters here given of this Fourth Monarchy
are these three.

1 Its division into two parts, his Legs of Iron.] And this expresses the
division of the Empire after Constantine the Great into the Eastern and Western
Monarchy.

2 The division of this Monarchy into Ten toes, or Ten Kingdoms, which is
another Character whereby this Fourth Kingdom is deciphered, and distinguished
from the other foregoing Monarchies.

3 This Fourth Monarchy is differenced from the rest by the mixture of
strength, and weakness, in all the Ten constituting parts of this Monarchy.
They are part Iron, part Clay.] Iron expresses strength, or prevalency, and
clay, or Potters clay expresses the fragility of this Monarchy, after its
ten-fold Division, verse. 42. or the capacity it stands in to be broken, in
regard of its composition of such Heterogeneal parts, the one being fit to
break the other into pieces, as it is written, Psalm. 2. 9. Thou shall break
them with a rod of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel.
So that by Iron thus interpreted I understand the Godly part in these Nations,
which at length shall break down all Image-Government in all the Ten Nations,
that will not submit to Christ, they shall break them as a Potters Vessel is
broken, never to be peiced more. Yet before that time, this Iron part, or
better part will mix themselves with the seed of men, verse 43. They will make
Genesis 6. 2. 2 Chro. 18. 1.
Confederacies* and Marriages with Carnal men, and adversaries of Christ's
Kingdom. And this has been fulfilled in Marriages and Confederacies with
Idolaters, whereof I might give plentiful examples both old and new. This is
mixing with the seed of men, or mixing iron and myrie clay.

Again, as Silver denotes a Kingdom inferior to Gold; and in regard of the
nature of it baser: so Iron does imply that this Fourth Monarchy should be
baser than the Third, which was of Brass; and as Iron is harder than Brass, so
the Fourth Monarchy should use the people of God more hardly than the former.
And taking Iron in this sense it does not denote the better part, (as when the
Prophet compares the Toes to a mixture of Heterogeneal or contrary parts) but
the worseness, baseness, and hardness of this Monarchy, beyond the Grecian
Monarchy next foregoing. And this is for durance longer than any of the rest,
yea than all of them put together.

Thus you see a lively portraiture of worldly Governments, and how they do by
degrees degenerate. Take them at the first, and they are the best. They are in
appearance good gold; and in some respect they may be called good gold; for
necessity requires, that in the first entrance of their Government they should
put forth some acts of Justice, Ad faciendum populum.
and fairer pretenses of public good, in their new devised form of
Image-Government, than any other Government that did precede. Now this Image of
Civil-Righteousness, cannot be satisfied without another Image of
devised-holiness suitable thereunto, to please their own Consciences, and the
Consciences of others that look toward Heaven. Therefore as Nebuchadnezzar
did, so do they frame and contrive a form of Church-Administrations suitable to
their Civil State, else they should be counted irreligious.

This being done, the Image stands before them, as it is said, verse. 31. They
are well pleased with it. And now all men must stoop and bow to this
Image-Government, and Image Worship, or else it will become a terrible Image to
them that oppose it, and cannot in Conscience comply thereunto. Nothing but
Fire and Faggot, and all kinds of Torments and Sufferings shall be prepared for
such, Dan. 3. 20, 21. Hebr. 11. 36, 37. If Amos be too plain and bold to meddle
with great Personages, the Land is not able to bear his words, Amos 7. 10, 11.
yet Amos escaped with a check only. But had he lived in the days of this great
Image, as John Baptist did, it might have cost him Imprisonment, Matthew. 14. 3,
4. And verily, little do men know what their hearts will be, when they cast
Christ's Heralds into prison. This is the terrible visage of the Image under
all the Four Monarchies, but most of all in the Iron-Age of the Roman Monarchy.

The very natural effect of this terror and tyranny is Division, verse. 41. The
Kingdom shall be divided; and the end of Division is Ruin; As our Savior
tells us, Matthew. 12. 25. Every Kingdom divided against it self comes to
desolation. Thus you see the Revolution of all Human earthly Forms or Images of
Government, from their Rise to their Ruin, which you may call the MONARCHICAL
Ring or Circle. And let such as wait for the downfall of this Fourth Monarchy,
and the Ten Kingdoms thereof, and the setting up of the Kingdom of Christ
Jesus, remember this for their comfort, that God does represent these Toes or
Kingdoms (unto N^buchadnezzar) made up and compacted of such parts as are
inconsistent, and will at length break one another. In which respect it is
said, The Kingdom shall be partly strong, and in part broken, verse. 42. And it
is considerable, how the Holy Ghost directed the Pen of his Servants in
writing. For first, when the Prophet speaks of their parts, he writes the
word, (...)
part of them were Iron, with Jod, which is the numeral letter for ten. And
when he says, (...)
part of them were Clay, he writes it with the letter Vau, the numeral letter
of six. As if he would intimate to us, in the very manner of writing. That in
the first beginnings of these ten Kingdoms, there should be more strength and
hardness, and less fragility. But when he speaks of them the second time, verse.
41. (...)
he writes the Pronoun alike, in speaking of the Iron, and of the (...)
Clay, to express the equality and likeness of these two tempers. But when he
speaks of them the third time, verse. 42. (...)
he writes the Pronoun, as if he would express more fragility of (...)
Clay, than strength of Iron in the Toes, toward the end of the Fourth
Monarchy; so that the brittleness of these earthly Governments seems to be
intimated in the various writings of the Pronoun, which I conceive to be the
reason of their various readings in the Text, and in the Margent.

The last thing observable in this Dream, or Vision, is the stone cut out of
the Mountain, and breaking in pieces these former Governments. Touching which
stone let these things be inquired.

Quest. 1. What is meant by this Stone?

Quest. 2. What is meant by that phrase, cut out but not with hands?

Quest. 3. How does it smite the Image* upon his feet of Iron and Clay? and how
does it break them to pieces? and when?

Quest. 4. What will be the effect of this Stones smiting of the Image?

Stone is meant a Kingdom, as may appear by comparing verse thirty four with
verse forty four, where it is so called; The word there used for (...)
Kingdom, is the same that is used to express the Civil Power, and Government
of the other Monarchies, verse. 39, 40, 41. which argues that the Kingdom here
spoken of is not (as some apprehend it to be) a Spiritual and internal Kingdom,
whereby Christ reigns in the hearts and Consciences of his people; but it is an
external Kingdom, whereby he rules and guides the World with Righteousness and
Judgment, Psalm. 98. 9. He comes to judge the earth; with righteousness shall
he judge the world, and the people with equity. Of this Kingdom it is spoken,
That the (...)
Government shall be upon his shoulder. The word there used is always put for
Temporal Government (as we call it) not for Spiritual; for a Dominion over the
bodies, and estates, and outward actions of men, not for a Dominion over their
Consciences and Spirits.

Of this Kingdom and Government, it is said to begin in the days of the ten
Kings, or Toes of the Fourth Monarchy, verse. 44. And in the days of them (of
these Kings) shall the God of Heaven cause to arise a Kingdom that shall never
be destroyed, etc. The words are very observable, he had spoken of the toes of
the feet, and their unequal mixture, in the next preceding verses, and now in
this verse he says, (...)
In the days of them, that is, in the days of these Toes, as the Pronoun
relative does necessarily infer. And then by way of Exegesis, adds a
description of the dignity of those Toes, they were Kings. Now in the days of
these Kings he says, The God of Heaven (...)
shall cause to arise a Kingdom; which does infer, that the Kingdom here
spoken of, is such as had not a being, or to use the Prophets words was not
caused to arise until the days of these Ten Toes, or Kings. Whereas the
Spiritual Kingdom of Christ, and his Regiment in the Souls and Consciences of
his people, was begun many years before the time of these ten Kings, yea long
before any of all the great Monarchies, even from the beginning of the world.
The Kingdom therefore here spoken of, cannot be meant of an inward and
Spiritual Kingdom, but of an external Kingdom over men's bodies, and outward
actions.

This Kingdom is here described;

First, By its Divine original, It is cut out, but not with hands, verse. 34.
45. Jesus Christ the Genesis 49. 24.
Stone of Israel, received this power from the Father actually, in the days of
these ten Kings, toward the end of the Fourth Monarchy, Dan. 7. 14. And to him
was given absolute Sovereignty, and Glory, and Dominion, and all People,
Nations, and Languages shall serve him, etc.

Secondly, This Kingdom is described by the perfect constitution of it, it is
such a Kingdom that shall never (...)
be destroyed, or as the word signifies, shall never be corrupted; the
Constitution being Divine, and the Administrators thereof Saints, it can
neither be corrupted nor destroyed, as it is said, Dan. 7. 14. where the same
word is used.

Thirdly, The perpetu^ty of it is set forth in these words, Shall (...)
never be destroyed, and therefore it is called an everlasting Kingdom, Dan. 7.
14. These are the Three principal Characters of the Kingdom of Christ, or the
Fifth Monarchy, as it is called.

but not with hands, does deny, that it is from any Human policy or
contrivement, and therefore the Dominion and Sovereignty thereof is from above.
My Kingdom is not of this world, Joh. 18. 36. And therefore his Servants would
not then fight for it, till the time was come which the Father had appointed.
And then he goes forth to War, and his Servants with him, verse. 12. 7. and
17. 14.

Image, or Image-Government, by the Ministry of his Word, Rev. 19. 15. Out of
his mouth goes a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the Nations. This
is the first Act, as I may say, of this Stone. Which argues, that when the
season comes for Christ to challenge his Kingdom, his Servants first prepare
his way, by publishing to all the world his Royal Power and Sovereignty, and
declaring the encroachments of worldly Powers upon his Royalty, whereby the
free passage of Judgment and Justice has been obstructed, and the inhabitants
of the Nations deluded with an Image-Government. And having thus sent his
Heralds before to advertise the People and Nations, he then comes to break
and crush them with his Iron Scepter, and rules them with a rod of Iron, Rev.
19. 15. Psalm. 2. 9. And who is it that does not see (or at least may) that
Christ has already begun to break the Nations, and Governments in the World,
and in these our Nations also, in the late Wars and revolutions of State? And
is not this some beginning of his Kingdom? As for the time when this shall be
done, it is said in the days of them, (of these Kings) that is, Christ will
first send abroad his Heralds, and such as will not stoop to him he will break
in pieces, whilst yet these Kings and Kingdoms, or various kinds of governments
have a Being. And has not Christ made good all this before our eyes? The
Servants of Christ, as Heralds, have gone before to publish the Royalty of
this only and blessed Potentate, witness Mr. Archer, M. Tho. Goodwin, and many
others, and some to this day suffer for their boldness in that behalf. And that
Christ has ruled with his Iron Rod is manifest to our own experience. We all
know what strange Revolutions, and overturnings* of this Government after that,
has been already made.

effects of this Stones smiting the Image-Government of the Fourth Monarchy
upon its feet, are clearly expressed to be two; First, by the Ministry of his
Servants, he so smites them with the word of his mouth, that they become as the
chaff of the Summer Threshingfloors. The word (...) here signifies such an
action as reduces this Image of Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, and Clay into most
fine and subtle dust or powder, whether by rubbing, filing, pounding, or the
like, as the next word (...) does import, which properly signifies in pulverem
tenuissimam redigere. And Daniel himself was one of Christ's Heralds that filed
the Golden head of this Image to limell, Dan. 4. 25. and 5, 25, 26, 27, 28. and
yet he was honored by Belshazzer, Dan. 5. 29. The meaning I conceive is this,
that Christ's heralds do so smite and thrash these Image Governments consisting
of Heterogeneal parts, to wit, iron and clay (but now become more clay than
iron,) that they bruise them to dust. In so much as now men grow to be awakened
more and more to see the vanity of all humane forms of politic governments,
and more to relish, and admire, and affect, the purity and simplicity of
Christ's righteous administrations. So that now they begin to perceive the
Levity of these worldly Governments, and begin to grow weaned from them. The
Second Act or effect of this Stone upon the Image, and all the parts thereof,
thus broken to pieces, as dust in the Summer threshing floor, is, the utter
removal of these powers; Which is here elegantly expressed, the wind (...)
carried them away, or lift them up, as the word signifies, they were become
such light dust by the ministry of the word, that no place was found. They
will be totally removed, and forgotten, as it is written Isa. 65. 17. they
shall not be remembered, nor come upon the heart. And as the ministry of the
word and Spirit, does at first smite them, and reduce them to powder, so now it
blows them away, and blots out their memory; Which argues it must be a
continued Act of the ministry of the word that must effect this, when the
season is come of Babels ruin, and a little before.

Now this Stone having broken to pieces and dissolved all other Governments,
he proceeds to set up his own Kingdom, according as it is said, this Stone
that smote the Image became a great mountain, and filled all the earth. This
shows the universality of the Kingdom of Christ over all Nations, which you
may make a fourth mark or description of the fifth Monarchy.

And this may suffice to have spoken touching this Dream or Vision of
Nebuchadnezzer, wherein you may see how God represents to him, not only what
should ensue in his Monarchy and Government, but what should come to pass (...)
after that, even to the utter abolition and removal of Image-government, unto
the setting up of the Kingdom of Christ all the world over. All which he has
done in most exquisite and choice expressions and metaphors, so as none could
make particular Application of the same, had not Christ first gone before us in
his word, and after that in his providence, so opening the Seal.

Dan. Chap. 7.
Verse. 8. I was considering the horns, and behold, another little Horn came up
among them, and three of the first Horns were plucked up by the roots by his
prerogative: and lo eyes as the eyes of a man in this horn, and a mouth
speaking great things etc.

I have already writ an Explication and Application of this Chapter, and in
particular of this Little Horn. But because others apply it otherwise, I shall
add a few words in this place, for further clearing of the same.

To which end I shall gather up what the Prophet speaks of this Little Horn,
and give you the principal Characters, by which this Horn is described, and
compare it with the providentiall accomplishment thereof in the late King. And
make some Queries upon the various interpretations, which I have found made by
others, and so leave it to others, to consider and judge, as God shall please
to cast in any Beam of Light.

Diverse are the Interpretations which are made of this Little Horn. Some apply
it to Antiochus Epiphanes; Others to Mahomet: Others to the Roman Civil Power,
or to the Antichristian power, or both; Others to the Norman Race, or William
the Conqueror; And lastly I have made Application thereof to Charles Stuart, the
late King that was beheaded. Some other Application I have met with, which I
judge not worth the answering or inquiring into being inconsistent in it self.

The little Horns Characters, as they are given us by Daniel, are these.
1 He is a Horn, Dan. 7. 8. which denotes Sovereignty, verse. 24.

2 He is one of the ten horns, or amongst the ten horns of the fourth great
Beast, verse. 7, 8, 24.

3 He is a little horn, verse. 8. which must be understood to be little in some
scripturall sense.

4 He plucks up three of the ten horns, by his prerogative, verse. 8.

5 He is described by his vigilance, and carnal policy, he has eyes as the
eyes of a man verse. 8.

6 He is described by the Bent of his spirit against God, and against the
ways of God, and against his Saints, expressed by his words, verse. 8, 25. and
by his actions, wearing out the Saints, verse. 25.

7 He is described by the wilfulness of his Spirit, expressed by his
Countenance (for vultus est index animi) or if you will the Stoutness of his
Spirit, and aversness to be counseled by his Compeeres, verse. 20. his visage
was more stout then his fellows.

8 He is described by his engagement in war against his best Subjects,
namely the Saints, verse. 21. and that in all the three Kingdoms. In respect
whereof they are said to fall by his prerogative, verse. 20.

9 He is described by the advancement of his prerogative to the ruin of his
Subjects. Wherefore it is said, that he plucked three of the Kingdoms up by
the roots by his prerogative, but one of them more especially, verse. 8. and
three of the ten Kingdoms of the fourth Monarchy fell by his prerogative, but
one above the rest, verse. 20. That is, they were slain with the sword, as that
phrase imports, Lam. 2. 21. Touching which see more in my Explication and
Application of the 7* of Daniel, formerly put forth.

10 He is described by his oppression of his best Subjects, (here called
Saints) with taxes, and tribute, loans and Shipmonies, as the word may import,
verse. 25. he shall wear out the Saints of the most high.

11 He carries on a secret design, to subvert the ancient government of the
nations, expressed in these words, he shall think to change times and laws,
verse. 25.

12 He is judicially tried and sentenced, verse. 26. the judgment shall sit,
and verse. 10. the Judgment sat, and the Books were opened.

13 He is divested of his Royalty in all the three Nations, The Thrones were
cast down, verse. 9.

14 He is beheaded, verse. 11. The Beast was slain by dismembring, as the word
imports.

15 After this proceeding with the Beast, or little Horn, there follows a total
removal of Sovereign Power by a public Act of the State. They shall take away
his absolute Sovereignty, v. 26. And they shall burn his carcass, ver. 11.

16 All this must be done before the change of Government in the other seven
Kingdoms of the Empire, verse. 12. As concerning the rest of the Beasts, they
removed away their absolute Sovereignty: yet a prolonging in life was given
them for a season and time.

17 You may add to all these, the season in which all these things shall be
acted; To wit, at or nigh, the expiration of a time, times, and half a time, as
the word (...) does import, verse. 25. Touching which you may read more in my
Explication of this Chapter at large.

These are the principal Characters, which the text gives us of the Little
Horn, whereby to distinguish it from all other. Now let it be considered, to
what King under the Fourth Monarchy ( or great Beast) these may most fitly be
applied.

First therefore to speak of Antiochus Epiphanes, he was one of the successors
of Alexander the Great, and a member of the Third Monarchy, not of the Fourth,
as Mr. Tillinghast rightly observes, in his knowledge of times, page 102, 103.
Neither did he pluck up the other three parts of the Grecian Monarchy by the
roots; nor was he judicially tried, sentenced, and beheaded, as it is said of
this Little Horn. Neither did his Actions fall out, within the compass of a
time, times, and half a time, spoken of by Daniel: but many hundred years
before. In all which respects, it may be justly Queried, how these Characters
of the Little Horn can suit unto Antiochus.

Secondly, as touching Mahomet, I shall need say no more but this: That Mahomet
was never (that I remember) accounted by any, to be one of the Kingdoms of the
Fourth Monarchy, and therefore cannot be intended by the Little Horn. But if it
be said, that the Little Horn is distinct from the ten, and therefore may be
understood of Mahomet well enough. Let it then be considered in what sense
Mahomet can be said to rise up among the ten Horns of the Fourth great Beast?
and what those three former Horns were, which are said to be plucked up by the
roots, and to fall before him, or by his Prerogative? Moreover, some of the
Characters of the Little Horn are not yet accomplished in Mahomet. He has not
been judicially tried, sentenced, and beheaded. He has not been divested of
his Sultanship, but retains it still. Nor can it be averred definitively, that
the rest of the Beasts shall have a prolonging in life granted them, after he
is slain. Wherefore it cannot be concluded positively, that Mahomet is the
Little Horn, till all be accomplished.

Thirdly, as touching William the Conqueror, or the Norman Race, let it be
inquired, how it can be said of him, that three of the ten Horns or Kingdoms,
belonging to the Fourth great Beast, were plucked up by the roots, and slain
with the sword, before him, or by his Prerogative? He did indeed invade England
and subdued it, but whether he left Religion (the ch^efest Root of a Nation)
better or worse than he found it, is hard to say. Yet suppose he had inverted
the Government, and rooted up Religion in England, what is that to three
Nations? Neither was William, that Conqueror judicially tried, and beheaded, as
it is said of the Little Horn. Neither was his absolute Sovereignty utterly
abolished, but has continued ever since, until the time of Charles Stuarts
beheading, during the space of many hundred years.

Fourthly, If it be apprehended to be spoken of the Roman Civil power, or of
Antichrist, or both: (as I know it is by some of late) Then let it be
considered, how it is possible that the Roman Civil-power, consisting of ten
Horns, as the constituting parts thereof, can be said to be one of them, or to
rise up amongst them? Can the whole be one of the parts? or rise up Quae. 1.
amongst the parts? It might rather have been said that the Horns spring out of
the Beast, than that the Beast should spring up among the Horns.

Quaer. 2. Seeing the Ten Horns (or constituting parts of the great Beasts
power) did but begin to be divided, Anno 456 (as In his Knowledge of the times,
p. 57.
Mr Tillinghast does observe out of Mr. Mede) which was some years after the
first rise of Antichrist, and many hundreds of years after the rise of the
Roman Civil-power; How can either the one, or the other (which had their rise
and existence before the Horns) be said to rise up amongst them? And if amongst
them, will it not infer that the Horns were Horns, ere the Beast, (whose Horns
they be) was a Beast? which seems to be inconsistent. See Master Tillinghast
in his Knowledge of the times; p. 61.

Quae. 3. Seeing the ten Horns are constituting, or integral parts of the
Fourth great Beasts power; How can it be said, either of the Roman
Civil-power, or of Antichrist, that three of the ten Horns, or integral parts
of their power, were plucked up by the roots, and slain with the sword, either
by the one or by the otber, before that either of them had a being? Is it
possible that the parts can have existence (as such) before the whole? Or in
what sense can the whole be said to pluck up any of its integral parts by the
roots, ere it self have existence?

Quae. 4. How can it in reason be imagined, that the rest of the Beasts, Horns,
or Kingdoms (viz. the seven that remained) being constituting parts of the
Fourth great Beasts power, I say, how can they retain life for a season, after
the Beast whose Horns they are, is slain?

Quae. 5. Seeing that three of the ten Horns of the Beast, are said to fall
before the Little Horn, or by his Prerogative: Let it be considered and well
weighed, whether the (...)
word there used, be ever used (in Scripture) for a peoples revolting from
their Prince? Or whether it ought not here to be understood rather of a
falling by the sword, as Jeremiah uses the same word, Lam. 2. 21. But yet if
it might be understood of a falling off or revolting, let it be considered
notwithstanding, how suitably this can be applied to the Goths and Vandals, who
sacked Rome, and took it, under the conduct of Gensericus? Might it not rather
be said, that the Roman* Civil, or Antichristian Power fell before them, then
they before it? And how can this suit unto the Little Horns Character, verse.
20? where it is said, before whom, or by whose Prerogative, three fell.

Quae. 6. If Antichrists rise added Mr. Tilling. Knowledge of the times, p. 61,
62.
Crowns unto the ten Horns Rev. 12. 3. and 13. 1.) to wit, Sovereignty and
jurisdiction: How can it be said of these three Horns, that they were plucked
up by the roots, and fell before the little Horn, or by his prerogative? Is
adding of Crowns, a pluking up by the roots? Or which three of the ten Horns
are they, of whom it is here meant? If it be said, that we are not to
understand three as a definite number, but as a number of perfection, denoting
diverse and many of the Horns; I wish it may be well weighed, how unsafe such an
interpretation may be. For if it be granted that three in this Prophecy is not
a definite but an indefinite and uncertain number, put for Many: will it not
open a door to some, to question the Trinity of Persons in the Godhead? and to
say, there are many persons, because three is counted a number of perfection,
and does not denote a certain but an uncertain number, which, would be of
dangerous consequence? Besides, it may justly be inquired, where the Scripture
accounts the number three, a number of perfection? Often we read of seven so
used, as the Seven Spirits of God, the Seven Golden Candlesticks, the Seven
Churches of Asia, the Seven Stars, the Seven Angels, the Seven Seals. And it
is usual in Scripture to reckon by Sevens. But I do not remember the like
rotundity in the number three. And if we should make such an interpretation of
the number three, as if it were put for an indefinite number, it would render
the Accounts of Scripture very uncertain, which is not safe to be admitted.

In the Fifth and last place, let it be considered, how the Characters of the
Little Horn before mentioned, will suit unto Charles Stuart the late King, in
every particular.

For First, He was a King.

Secondly, He was one of the ten Horns, or amongst the ten Horns or Kings,
appertaining to the Fourth Monarchy or great Beast.

Thirdly, He was by original a Scot, and by consequence a little Horn, for as
much as Scotland is one of the least Kingdoms of the ten. And as he was the
least in respect of his original Nation, so also he was least or youngest by
birth. He was not the oldest but the youngest son of James. And he did
spring up (as Daniel says) from being a King of the least of the Kingdoms, to
be a King of three Kingdoms.

Fourthly, He did in a great measure pluck up by the roots all the three
Nations or Kingdoms, by his prerogative; If you understand by that Metaphor,
religion and the civil rights of the Nations. Which are to the Nations, as
roots be to the tree. And he made use of his prerogative to that end. For he
said, he would not leave a Puritan in all his Dominions. And it is well known,
how far he proceeded to root up religion and the Nations Civil Rights, and
to introduce an arbitrary government, and Popery, into all the three Nations.

Fifthly, He was a vigilant Prince and politic, and had the eyes of a man, as
Daniel speaks.

Sixthly, His Spirit was bent against God, and against his people, and against
the ways of God, as might be instanced at large.

Seventhly, He was a Prince of a wilful resolute spirit, insomuch as King
James (his Father) sometimes would say of him, that through his wilfulness,
he would lose the three Nations.

Eighthly, He made war against the Saints (the better part giving
denomination to the whole) throughout the three nations. Witness, the
displaying of his Banners first against the Parliament, not they first against
him. And witness, the Commissions he granted to the Popish-Rebells in
Ireland, against the Godly party there.

Ninthly, He made use of his prerogative, to the extirpation of religion, and
the Nations Civil Rights, as far as lay in his power, infesting all the three
Nations with intestine and bloody wars.

Tenthly, Who is it that knows not, how he oppressed his Subjects with Taxes,
Loans, Ship-monys, etc? according as it is said of the Little Horn, that he did
wear out the Saints, the whole taking denomination from the better part.

Eleventhly, It is a thing well known, that he had a secret design to change
the ancient Government of the Nations, and instead thereof to have ruled by his
Proclamations. And what else did his billetting of foreign Soldiers up and
down the Country import, before the beginning of these late wars?

Twelfthly, It is apparently known not only to these Nations but throughout the
world, that he was brought to a Judicial trial, and received his sentence
before the High Court of Justice.

Thirteenthly, He was unkinged, as I may say, and divested of his royalty,
when the Court proceeded against him as Charles Stuart a delinquent, without any
Kingly title.

Fourteenthly, All these Nations, yea the whole World, can witness, that he
was beheaded and slain by dismembring, as Daniel foretold.

Fifteenthly, It is well known and still remains upon record, that after his
beheading, the State removed away all sovereignty out of the Nations by a
public Act of State.

Sixteenthly, We know it to be a truth, that though Charles be beheaded and
Sovereignty abolished, yet the rest of the Horns or Beasts appertaining to the
Empire, still retain their power and Sovereignty, and so are like to do for a
short season.

Seventeenthly, It needs no proof that all these things have been thus acted as
upon a Stage, in the latter end of a time, times, and half a time. Our times
drawing nigh to the expiration of the Fourth great Beast or Monarchy, as it is
acknowledged by most.

Now let every judicious and unbyassed Reader consider, and laying all that
has been spoken, by me or others, in the balance of the Sanctuary, looking
up to Heaven for direction, and then comparing the word of God and the
dispensations of his providence together, let them judge (as God shall cast in
any light) who it is that is meant by this little Horn. And if any doubt should
arise about the Characters I have collected out of the Text, whether they be
the proper Characters of this little Horn, because some good men express them
otherwise, let the Reader himself be judge, which of the Characters have best
footing in that Scripture that describes this little Horn. For to fetch
Characters from the second, Eighth, or Eleventh chapters of this Book, will be
altogether improper, and raise a mist before the Readers eye, unless it could
be manifested that those Chapters speak of the same thing, which with
submission to better judgments, I may be bold to say has not yet been done,
nor can be. For as much as the matter of those Visions does apparently differ
from this of the little horn, as in part I have showed upon the second Chapter,
and am now about to show further in the opening of the eighth Chapter.

Dan. Chap. 8. 1 In the third year of the reign of Belshazzar: a Vision
appeared to me, even to me Daniel, after that which appeared to me at the
beginning.

2 And I saw in a Vision: (and it came to pass when I saw) that I was in
Shushan the Palace, which is in the Province of Elam: and I saw in a Vision,
that I was by the River Vlai.

3 Then I lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold, one Ram standing before
the River, and to him two horns: and the two Horns were high, but the one
higher then the Heb* the Second.
other, and the higher came up last.

4 I saw the Ram pushing Westward, and Northward, and Southward, so that no
Beasts could stand before him, neither was there any that could deliver out of
his hand: but he did according to his will, and magnified himself.

5 And I was considering, and behold, a He-Goat of the she Goats came from the
West, upon the face of the whole earth, and touched not the earth: and that
He-Goat had a horn of sight between his eyes.

6 And he came to the Ram Heb. Master of those two Horns.
that had those two horns, which I had seen standing before the river: and ran
unto him in the fury of his power.

7 And I saw him come close unto the Ram, and he imbittered himself against
him, and he smote the Ram, and brake his two horns and there was no power in
the Ram to stand before him: but he cast him down to the ground, and stamped
upon him, and there was none that did deliver the Ram out of his hand.

8 And the He-goat of the Shee-goats magnified himself: and when he
strengthened himself, that great Horn was broken, and in the room thereof
ascended a Vision of four, toward the four Winds of Heaven.

9 And out of that one of them, came forth one Horn, even the youngest by
birth: and it waxed very great, toward the South, and toward the East, and
toward the pleasant Land.

10 And it magnified it self against the Host of Heaven: and it cast to the
earth from that Host, and from those Stars of Heaven, and stamped upon them.

11 Yea it magnified it self against the Prince of that Host: and from him the
daily Sacrifice was taken away, and the place of his Sanctuary was cast away.

12 (And thou O Host shall be given up, because of the daily sacrifice with
transgression:) and it shall cast down the truth to the ground, and it
practiced and prospered.

13 Then I heard one Saint speaking, and another Saint said unto that certain
Saint which spoke, How long shall be this Vision, concerning this daily
Sacrifice, and this transgression, making desolate, to give both the Sanctuary
and Host Heb. For a treading.
to be trodden under foot?

14 And he said unto me, until evening and morning, two thousand and three
hundred: then the Sanctuary shall Heb. Justified.
be cleansed.

15 And it came to pass, when I, even I Daniel, saw the Vision: that I sought
the meaning, and behold, one standing before me, as the appearance of a man.

16 And I heard the voice of a man between the banks of Ulai: and he called and
said, Gabriel, make that very man to understand this Vision.

17 And he came near where I stood, and when he came I was afraid, and fell
upon my face: and he said to me, Understand O Son of Man, that toward the time
of the end this Vision will be.

18 And in his speaking with me, I was overwhelmed with sleep upon my face
toward the earth: then he touched me, and caused me to stand Heb. Upon my
station.
upright.

19 And he said, Lo I am making thee to know, that which shall be in the Heb
after part of this indignation.
latter end of this indignation: for it shall be at the appointed time of the
end.

20 That Ram which thou saw* the Lord of those two Horns: are the Kings of
Media and Persia.

21 And that He-Goat, that shag-haired Goat, is the King of Graecia: and that
great Horn that is between his eyes, is the very first King.

22 And that was broken, and four stood up in the room thereof: four Kingdoms
shall stand up in the Nation, but not with his power.

23 And in the after part of their Kingdom, when those transgressors are
complete: a King of fierce countenance, and understanding dark sentences, shall
stand up.

24 And he shall strengthen his power, but not with his power, and he shall
destroy wonderfully, and shall prosper and practice: and he shall Or Corrupt.
destroy the mighty, even the people of holy ones.

25 And through his policy, he shall also cause craft to prosper in his hand,
and in his heart he shall magnify himself, and by peace shall corrupt many: he
shall also stand up against the Prince of Princes, but he shall be broken
without hand.

26 And the Vision of that Evening, and of that Morning (which has been told)
is truth: as Heb. and thou.
for thee, shut up this vision, because it is for many days.

27 And I Daniel, fainted and was sick some days, then I rose up, and did the
Kings business: and I was astonished at the vision, but none understood it.


The explication of the words.
IN the third year of the reign of Belshazzar the King] These words do plainly
hold forth to us the time when Daniel saw this Vision; to wit, in the third
year current of Belshazzars reign, which, as is commonly taken, was the last year
of Belshazzar and the Babylonian Monarchy together. As Mr. Tillinghast well
observes in his Knowledge of the times, p 134. line 14. But to say it was after
Belshazzar was slain, (and Darius and Cyrus did reign) is more than the text
will allow, and we may not add unto the text. The words of the text do rather
hold forth the contrary. For when it is said, in the reign of Belshazzar, it
always in Scripture language (to my best remembrance) implies that that King
was then living. And let it be considered how it can with reason be spoken, or
how it can stand with truth, to say a man does reign after he is dead? Besides,
Daniel dates his Solemn Fast and Humiliation, Chap. 9. and his Prophecy,
Chapter 11. from the first of Darius. And what good reason can be imagined,
that Daniel should choose to date this Vision, from the reign of such a profane
Epicure as Belshazzar, (suppose he had been dead) then from the reign either of
Darius or Cyrus, who were propitious to the people of God, and then living? But
I pass it over, as a point that does not at all hinder the main scope of the
Vision, which way soever you take it. Yet some little obscurity it puts upon
the Scriptures Chronology; for which cause I would in a few words give you the
Chronology of Daniels Acts, for the help of such as shall inquire into the same.

1 Daniel was carried Captive in the third year of the reign of Jehojakim, Dan.
1. 1. which cannot be understood of the third year of Jehojakims reign after
his first Coronation; for the Fourth of Jehojakim was Nebuchadnezzars First,
Jer. 24. 1. And he cannot be imagined to carry away any Captives, ere himself
was created Monarch. But this third year of which Daniel speaks, it is the
third year of Jehojakims administration and government, after he became
tributary to Nebuchadnezzar, whereof we read, 2 King. 24. 1. And that was the
last of Jehojakim, and the first of Jeconiah, with whom the seventy years
Captivity do begin as I might demonstrate at large. See Junius, and Tremel.
upon the first of Daniel.

2 Daniel in the beginning of the Fourth year of their Captivity was brought
before the King. Dan. 1. 20.

3 Two years after this, to wit, in the latter end of the Fifth, or the
beginning of the Sixth year of the Captivity, Nebuchadnezzar dreamed, Dan. 2.
1. And in the second year (in the Kingdom of Nebuchadnezzar) Nebuchadnezzar
dreamed dreams, etc. This was not the second year after Nebuchadnezzar first
began to reign (for the first Captivity when Daniel also was carried captive,
was in the seventh year of Nebuchadnezzar Jer. 52. 28.) but the second year,
after Daniel and his companions were brought before the King, of which he had
spoken in the foregoing Chapter. Read Tremellius his annotations upon this
place.

4 Daniel interprets Nebuchadnezzars Dream* and was advanced by him, Dan. 2.
19, 29, 48. This was Daniels first 1 Vision.
Vision, Dan. 2. 19.

5 Daniel was promoted to be ruler over the whole province of Babel, Dan. 2.
48. And continued in Babylon in that honor, until the first year of Cyrus,
Dan. 1: 21. And Daniel was, unto the first year of Cyrus.

6 In the first year of Belshazzar, Daniel had a Vision of the four great
Monarchies, Dan. 7. 1. And this was Daniels second Vision. 2 Vision.


7 In the third year of Belshazzar (and as it is most likely, a little before
Belshazzar was slain) Daniel had another Vision of the Persian and Grecian
Monarchies, Dan. 8. 1. This was Daniels third Vision. 3 Vision.


8 In this third year, even the day before Belshazzar was slain, Daniel
interprets Therefore he was then resident in Babylon.
the hand writing upon the wall, Daniel 5. 26. And he tells the King to his
face, that God had weighed him, and found him too light, and divided his
Kingdom to the Medes and Persians. And yet (though Belshazzar was a most
profane Epicure, and Daniel foretold no good but evil to him) he was so far
from committing him to prison, under the notion of an incendiary, or seditious
person, or one that was dissatisfyed with his Government, and preached against
it, that on the contrary, he promotes Daniel to higher honor, than ever his
Grandfather Nebuchadnezzar had done; and commands that he should be clothed
with scarlet, and a chain of gold put about his neck, and that Proclamation
should be made, that he should be the third Ruler of the Kingdom, Dan. 5.
verse. 29. Will not this profane Epicure rise up in Judgment against some that
are called Christians, and have a form of Godliness without power?

9 In the first year of Darius (who was at that time 62 years of age, Dan. 5.
31.) Daniel kept a solemn fast, after the taking of Babylon, Dan. 9. 1. And in
the same year (which was also the first year of As Mr. Tillinghast rightly
observes, in his Knowledge the Times, p. 146. lin. 27. and p. 147. lin. 17. and
p. 152. lin. 10.
Cyrus, Ezr. 1. 1. Dan. 1 21.) Cyrus made a Proclamation and decree, for the
Jews return out of Babylon, according to the word of the Lord, by the Prophet
Esaias, 44. 28. Whereupon the Jews return to Jerusalem, Ezr. 3. 1. But Daniel
that was now aged, went with old Darius into his own Country unto Achmeta, soon
after Babylon was taken, and there he was made chief of the three Presidents
of the Kingdom, Dan. 6. 1. But through the malice of the Princes and
Presidents was cast into the Lions den, Dan. 6. 16.

10 In the third year of Cyrus, (Darius now being dead) Daniel had his last
Vision, Dan. 10. 1. which Vision seems to 4 Vision.
be a year or two after Darius his death, and (as Mr. Tillinghast well
observes, in his Knowledge of the times, page 151, 152.) not long before Daniel
dyed; as may be collected from Dan. 12. 9, 13. And this I take to be the true
and plain Chronology of the remarkable passages in Daniels Prophecy.

I shall only add a few words, touching the place where Daniel was at the time
when he saw this Vision. It is said, it was in the third year of Belshazzar
his reign. Now this Belshazzar was Resident in Babylon, as we read Dan. 5. 2.
And so also was Daniel, Dan. 1. 21. and 5. 13. And therefore Daniel, when this
Vision (...)
was showed him, was locally and personally present in Babylon. And as I
suppose, it might well be, after the siedg was begun. For though some do
think it incongruous, to say, that Daniel saw himself in two places, to wit, at
Shushan, and by the river Vlai in a Vision, yet it can be no absurdity to
imagine, that Daniel being in person at Babylon, might in a Vision apprehend
himself; as if he had been at the Palace of Shushan, scituat upon the river
Vlai; and there beholding a Ram with two Horns, and a shag-haired Goat with one
horn, conflicting together etc. For in a Vision, he might be showed the one as
well as the other Mat. 4. 8.
. And yet there was neither Ram, nor shag-haired Goat really and locally, nor
was he really nor locally at the palace of Shushan, or by the river Vlai. Only
these things were represented to Daniel in a Vision.

After that which appeared at the beginning.] To wit, at the beginning of
Belshazzars reign, mentioned in the chapter foregoing. But ere we pass the
words, let the phrase be well observed. For who would not understand without
telling, that the third year of Belshazzar was after the first? Doublesse
therefore, the Holy Ghost intended to teach us something by it, when he added
these words, after that which appeared to me at the beginning. The meaning I
conceive to be this, that this was the next Vision which Daniel had in
Belshazzars life time, after that which is mentioned in the seventh chapter. It
was not second in number, which Daniel had seen, but the third. Moreover these
words do intimate unto us, that this Vision was in order and time, before that
solemn fast which Daniel kept, immediately after the taking of Babylon, Chapt.
9. And therefore must needs be understood, to be seen of Daniel in Babylon, in
the life time of Belshazzar.

Verse, 2. And I saw in a Vision.] These words do put the matter out of
question, whether Daniel was locally at Shushan by the river Vlai, or that he
was there visionally only. Consider therefore the form of speech, and the
distinguishing accents. For he does not say, I was in Shushan the Palace, and
I saw in a Vision, as I walked by the river Vlai etc. But I saw in a Vision,
and there makes his distinction. And what did Daniel see in a Vision? The next
words tell you, he saw himself in the Palace of Shushan, which is in the
Province of Elam: And there makes his great distinction.

And what else did he see in a Vision? He saw in a Vision that he was by the
river Vlai. And what else did he see visionally? He lift up his eyes and
looked, and behold a Ram standing by the river etc. Whence we may argue, That
as Daniel saw the Ram, and the shag-haired Goat, so he saw himself at the
palace of Shushan, and by the river Vlai. But he saw the one Visionally, and
therefore he saw the other visionally also. And for that end it is, that he
prefixeth those words ( I saw in a Vision) unto his whole relation; making a
great distinction of these words, with the Accent Saegoltha, and his
concomitant Zarkah.

Verse. 3. There stood a Ram before the River etc.] This Ram with two Horns,
expresses the Second Monarchy, consisting of two parts, the Medes and the
Persians. And both of them are described and differenced by their Characters.
The one, to wit, the Persians do exceed the Medes in power and prowess,
wherefore it is said, it was higher than the other. The other, to wit the
Medes, were more ancient than the Persians, wherefore it is said of the
Persians, the higher came up last. And so the Angel interprets the Ram with two
Horns, giving pre-eminence of antiquity unto the Medes, verse. 20. These two
Kings being joined together, (as they were in Darius, and Cyrus his Nephew)
they grow so potent and prevalent, that none of the Beasts of the field, none
of the other Nations, could stand before them, neither could any deliver out of
their hand, verse. 4.

Verse. 5. Behold an he-Goat of the she-Goats came from the West etc.] These
words denote unto us the Third or Grecian Monarchy, by giving us (in the first
place) a brief description of the first Prince or Monarch. Whose Characters are
these.

1 He is called a hee-Goat, and verse. 20. he is called a shaghaired Goat,
thereby distinguishing him from a kid or young Goat. To show the grown strength
of this Prince.

2 His Country in regard of the situation thereof, was Westerly from Persia,
he came from the West. Verse 5.

3 He is of an ambitious spirit to conquer the whole world, wherefore it is
said, he came upon all the earth.

4 He is irresistible in regard of his power, none touched him in the earth.
And Verse. 7. there was none that could deliver out of his hand.

5 His heroical exploits are of public observation in the world, and
therefore he is called a Horn of sight, verse. 5.

6 He ingageth in war with the Persian Prince. He came to the Ram, and ran
upon him in the fury of his power verse. 6. which congresse is amplyfied by his
invasion of the Persian in his own Country, he came close to him.

2 By the fierceness of his spirit, he imbittered himself against him.

3 By the issue of this engagement, he smote the Ram, and brake his Horns,
which argues the expiration and extirpation of that Persian Monarchy.

7 And Lastly, He is described by his death, and the division of his Kingdom
into four parts, verse. 8. and Chapter 11. 4. The great Horn was broken, and in
the room thereof ascended in Vision four. Which four are distinguished by a
distribution of them, unto the four quarters of heaven, verse. 8. and Chap. 11.
4. All which characters do very aptly set forth the Grecian Monarchy, under
their first Prince Alexander the great, and also after his death.

For first of all Alexander was a shag-haired Goat, a strong and puissant
Prince.

2 He was by Original of Macedon, which lies west from Persia.

3 He was ambitious of conquering, as stories report, and when he had
conquered the world, he wept because he had no more worlds to conquer. I
might instance the like in other Characters, but that it is confessed of all,
that Alexander was the Hee-Goat here spoken of. And after his death, his
Kingdom were divided into four, as is generally acknowledged. Which four was
afterward reduced into two, to wit, the Kingdom of Macedon, and the Kingdom
of Syria, resembling the two legs of a man, as it was showed in the Dream of
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2.

Verse. 9. And out of THAT one of them.] The particle THAT, is not added for
ornament of speech only, but for demonstration, To show us, out of which of the
four successors of Alexander, the Horn hereafter insisted upon, should descend,
viz. out of THAT which has his second Son to succeed in the Throne, and not
out of any of the rest. So careful was the Holy Ghost to point out unto us (as
with the finger) from which of the four successors of Alexander, this Horn
should proceed. That we might not be mistaken in the interpretation and
Application thereof.

Came forth an Horn, even the youngest by birth.] It is commonly translated a
Little Horn, but not so properly. For the word, (...)
whether you take it for an adjective, as most do (the letter Tzadde being
affected with dagesch forte, besides rule) or whether you take it for a mixed
word contracted with dagesch forte As if you should say (...) instead of (...)
or as we speak the least, for least by Birth.
which is a thing not unusual to the Hebrew tongue, it greatly matters not.
For this you shall constantly find in Scripture, that where ever this word (
little or least) is attributed unto persons, it is always taken for the
youngest by birth, and so it ought to be here rendered. And in this respect also
Charles Stuart is called a little Horn, because he was not his Fathers first
born, but the younger brother. This word ( little or least) does not therefore
import, that he was least in regard of dominion and power, as some have been
apt to mistake, but least or youngest in regard of birth.

Verse. 10. And it waxed very great,] or it made great the remnant. The meaning
is, that out of those Kingdoms, which were yet remaining to this Horn of
Alexanders Empire, he made great preparations against Egypt in the South, and
Persia in the East, and against Judea the glory of all lands, as it is called,
Ezech. 20. 6, 15. And well may it be here called a remnant. For though
Antiochus Epiphanes was a great Prince, yet about this time the Kingdom of
Macedon (one of the thighs of Nebuchadnezzars Image) was subdued to the Romans,
and made a Province to Rome. So that the brazen Empire of Grecia, stood but
upon one thigh, (as I may say) according as you find it expressed in
Nebuchadnezzars Dream, Dan. 2. 32. His thigh of Brass, in the singular number.
Which does in special relate to these times of Antiochus (as I conceive) who
was indeed a thigh of brass, and greatly annoyed the Church of Christ, as
stories do witness.

Now this Horn greatned the remnant, or made great preparations for war, but
specially against the people of God in Judea, who are called the Host of
heaven. The sad issue whereof is, that he cast some of the Host and of the
Stars to the ground. Which does imply the Apostasy of some eminent ones in
the Church, through the subtle practices of this Prince.

Verse. 11. He magnified himself to the Prince of the Host.] These words hold
forth the inward pride of his Spirit, together with the object thereof. His
inward pride is expressed in these words, he magnified himself. The word here
used, in that (...)
conjugation does imply the great swelling pride of his heart, and the great
thoughts he had of himself. And the object against which he thus magnifieth
himself, is, the Prince of the Host. Whereby you may understand the chief
leader of Gods people in those days, or Christ himself in his vicegerent. And
from him the daily sacrifice was taken away,] our translation reads it by him.
As who should say, by the Horn here spoken of, the daily sacrifice was taken
away. And that is a truth. For the Horn was an instrument of taking away the
daily Sacrifice. But then it would have been more proper to have used a
pronowne of the faeminine gender (...)
, and also it would have agreed with the word Horn, which is of the same
gender. Now since the Prophet uses a Pronown of the Masculine gender (...)
, I conceive it is more properly rendered from him. As if you should say, the
daily Sacrifice was taken from this Prince of the Host, by that Horn. And so
there will be a congruity in gender betwixt the Nown and the Pronown. In like
manner the words following have reference unto the Prince of the Host, when it
is said, the Place of his Sanctuary was cast away. So then the meaning of the
words is this. That by this Horn, this younger Brother, both the instituted
worship of God, was taken away from Christ, and from the Prince of the Host,
and from the people, and the place also of his sanctuary was cast away, unto
the service of Idols. He does not say, it was cast down, as our Translation
reads it: for we know it stood until the days of our Savior, and some years
after. But it was cast away, and converted, or rather perverted, to another use
than Christ had ordained. And this I conceive to be the true meaning of that
phrase.

Verse. 12. And thou O Host shall be given up, because of the daily Sacrifice
with trangressions]. These words contain the reason, why God did permit this
Horn to prevail so far, to the corrupting of his worship. It was because of
the daily Sacrifice accompanied with trangression against Light, as the word
(...)
does properly signify. This reason is expressed by way of threatening unto the
Host. And thou O Host shall be given up. For so I conceive the words ought to
be rendered, and not as our translation reads it, an Host was given him, to wit,
unto this Horn; my reasons are these.

First, The word Host, in all the rest of this Chapter, is spoken of the people
of God, and not of the Militia belonging to the adversary.

2 The word Host is of the Masculine gender, and the Verb given, (if you take
it to be the third person singular) is of the Faeminine Gender, which were in
that language improper, unless the Prophet had intended thereby to express the
Faeminine Spirit of this Horns Militia, which cannot be the Prophets meaning,
nor can it stand with the prevalency of this Horns Militia, which cast the
truth to the earth, and prevailed and prospered. Wherefore I take it to be more
proper, to render the word in the second person singular of the Masculine
Gender, and thou O Host shall be given up. As if the Prophet had spoken to the
chief Captain of the Host, and said, that because of the iniquity of their Holy
Offerings, God would give both thee and them up into the hands of this Horn.
And if you render the words thus, there will be a congruity both in person and
gender betwixt the Verb and the Substantive.

Verse. 13. How long shall this Vision be, concerning this daily Sacrifice, and
this desolating transgression, to give both the Sanctuary and the Host to be
trodden under foot? The matter here inquired, is, how long God will permit the
Sanctuary and the Host, (whereof he had spoken verse. 10, 11.) to be for a
treading, or to be trodden under foot? and let it be carefully observed. For
according to the Question, so must we necessarily understand the Answer to be.
The want of due attention whereunto, has given occasion (as I conceive) to
some godly men, to extend the Answer, from the end of the first Monarchy, unto
the end of the Fourth, which they esteem will amount unto 2300 Years. But let
it be kept in memory (till we come to speak of the next verse.) that the
Question is not, how long it should be from the time of this Vision, (in the
third year of Belshazzar) unto the end of the fourth Monarchy, or to the
beginning of the Fifth? For then we might have expected the answer would have
been proportionable. But that was not the Question which the saints here makes.
His heart it seems was deeply affected with the sad calamities threatened
against the Host, and against the Temple, and against the instituted worship of
God, and therefore he makes inquiry, how long this should continue? Whereunto
the answer is given in the next ensuing verse.

Verse. 14. And he said unto me, until evening morning two thousand and three
hundred, then shall the Sanctuary be cleansed [or justified.] Remember now what
the Question was, how long God would permit this Horn thus to prevail against
the Host, and against his instituted worship and Temple? And here you have a
plain and full solution of the Question, which we may easily discern by the
Angels answer, if we mark narrowly his words. For he does not say, then shall
the Fourth Monarchy end, or then shall the fifth Monarchy begin: but then shall
the Sanctuary be justified or cleansed, which before had been cast away to
Idols, and polluted with the Image of Jupiter Olympius, and with strange
Sacrifices.

Now in this answer let two things be considered, and they will fully clear the
Question.

1 The durance or continuance of time, to give both the Sanctuary and the Host
to be trodden under foot.

2 The end and expiration of that time.

For the first, to wit, the durance of this calamity. It is said, until two
thousand and three hundred evening morning. Which is as much, as if he had
said, in our phrase of speech, it shall continue for the space of two thousand
and three hundred artificial days. I know the Scripture uses not the word
artificial, yet it owneth the distribution of the natural day, into two
parts; The light part, and the dark part thereof, John. 11. 9, 10. Are there
not twelve hours in the day? If a man walk in the day he stumbles not, because
he sees the light of this world: But if a man walk in the night, he
stumbleth, because there is no light in him. And such was the distribution from
the beginning, Genesis 1. 5. And God called the light, Day, and the darkness he
called Night, and the Evening was, and the morning was, the first Day. These
two parts (which we commonly call artificial) added together, do constitute a
whole day of twenty four hours, which we call a Natural day. In sum
therefore the Angels answer amounts to thus much, to satisfy the Saint who made
inquiry, how long God would give the Host, and the Sanctuary to be trodden under
foot? Namely for the space of 2300 artificial days. Which is all one as if
he had said 1150 natural days, or three years and two months. For though in
this verse there be an Ellipsis, or defect, of the Conjunction Vau, or the
Demonstrative Article He, yet in the 26 verse you have a supplement of both.
Where it is said, and the Vision of THAT Evening, and of THAT morning is truth.
It is not therefore rightly translated, 2300 days, as in our new translation,
which has given occasion to some to mistake the Angels answer, and to think
he here speaks of prophetical days. But search we the Scriptures
throughout, and we shall never find the Holy Ghost expressing prophetical
days in that phrase of speech, putting an Evening for a year, and a Morning
for a year. Nor were it proper so to speak, because there is no revolution of
the Sun in twelve hours space. Always when Scripture speaks of prophetical
days, in the Old Testament, he uses the word [Jo^] or day. As Ezech. 4, 5, 6.
Three hundred and ninty days, a day for a year. And forty days, putting a day
for a year. So Dan. 11. 12. Wherefore I conclude, that (since no instance can
be given from Scripture, where Evening and Morning are put for a year, but for
parts of a Natural day) we are to understand the Angel, to speak of 2300
artificial days, distinctly and orderly succeeding one another.

Secondly, For the time of the end, it is expressed in these words, then shall
the Sanctuary be justified or cleansed. As if he should have said; this
justifying of the Sanctuary, does terminate the number of days foretold. And
having the determinate period given, it is as easy a matter (after the
accomplishment) to account backward to the beginning, as it would be to account
forward, from the beginning to the end.

I am not ignorant that some godly men do apprehend these 2300 days to be
spoken of prophetical days or years: and they make their account to begin,
either with the Persian Monarchy, or with the Babylonish Captivity. But I
cannot consent with them, unless I could consent unto such a sense of the
original words, as I can no where find in Scripture. Otherwise I should rejoice
to concur with such worthies, whose praise is in the Gospel, and men whom I
do so highly honor in mine heart, as fellow witnesses.

But let me be excused if I cleave more close to the Scriptures than to them.
Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, sed magis amica veritas. I shall leave every one
liberty to abound in his own sense, till more convincing light shall appear,
which may give just occasion to entertain second thoughts. And for help in this
case I shall leave these Queries upon that interpretation.

Vision, to run backward from the time of the Vision, to seek an Epoch, or
beginning of such an Account? For as much as Visions are representations of
things present or to come, to the eye either of the body, or of the mind; but
not of things past.

Cyrus, let it be inquired, how it can be said of the reign of Cyrus, that the
Host (of Heaven, the Saints) and the Sanctuary, were given unto treading? Could
the Sanctuary (the Temple) be given to a treading in the first of Cyrus, before
it was built? And did not Cyrus, in his first year, command that the Temple
should be built? and how can that agree with the Text, which says, it was
given for a treading? Again, how can it be said of the Host, (the people of
God) that they were given for a treading? Did not Cyrus, in his first year,
proclaim liberty to them? And how can that be called a treading under foot?

Tobiah and Sanballat etc. Artaxerxes, or the cleansing of it in the days of
Antiochus Epiphanes. So that I see not how that interpretation can any way suit
with the words of the Text. And if it be said, the Temple is to be taken in a
spiritual sense, and the cleansing of the Temple also, which cannot be
expected to be accomplished till the end of the Fourth Monarchy, how can that
stand with the Angels words which says, the Temple shall be justified in the
days of one of Alexanders successors, long before the fourth Monarchy had a
Being.

Verse. 17. Toward the time of the end, this Vision will be.] The Angel, that
he might beget in Daniel, and also in us, a right understanding of this Vision,
tells us, that the season in which these troubles should happen, shall be
toward the time of the end What is the meaning of that? Read the 23 verse. and
there it is said, that in the after part of their Kingdom (who succeeded
Alexander) this Horn shall arise, that shall tread the Sanctuary and the Host
under foot, 2300 Evenings and Mornings. Which after part, is in this present
verse called, toward the time of the end, and verse. 19, it is called, the
appointed time of the end.

Verse. 22. But not in his power.] That is, not with the power and might of
Alexander. As if he should say, these four Kingdoms, which stand up after
Alexander, shall not be comparable to him for power. This is spoken of all the
four Kingdoms that succeeded Alexander. But the same words are spoken of that
Horn, which was a King of fierce countenance, a younger Brother, He shall
strengthen himself and shall be a puissant Prince, but not with his power, verse.
24. The meaning is, this Horn shall be a potent Prince, but not comparable to
Alexander. For so I understand the phrase to import in both the verses.

Verse. 24. And shall corrupt (or destroy) the mighty, even the people of
Saints.] That is, by corrupting them he shall destroy them. For the word does
signify both to corrupt and destroy. And how does he corrupt them? Answ. By
peace and tranquillity, verse. 25. granting them a quiet possession of their
outward estates, so be it they will forsake the Lord and his pure worship, to
follow after Idols. This is the constant Spirit of Image-government, to set up
Image Worship of one kind or other, such as suits their own fancies, and their
Government best.

Verse. 26. Shut up the Vision, because it is for many days.] Not prophetical
days or years, as has been showed; but Natural or Artificial days. This
phrase ( many days) has given occasion to some, to apprehend, that the 2300
evenings and mornings, must needs be understood of a longer tract of time, than
so many artificial days and nights, or three years and two months. But let
this phrase of speech be weighed in these Scriptures following. It is written
Lev. 15. 25. If a woman have an issue of blood (...)
many days etc. And 2 Samuel 14, 2. Be thou as a woman that had mourned for the
dead many days. And Deuteronomy. 20. 19. when thou shall besiedg a City many days.
And 1 King 2. 38, 39. And Shimei dwelt in Jerusalem many days. And it came to
pass at the end of three years etc. So that it is apparent from these
instances of Scripture, and many more which might be given, that in
Scripture Language three years are accounted many days: and sometimes also
they are used to express a shorter season. Wherefore this phrase cannot argue
the number 2300 to be the greatest Epoch in Scripture, as some have
apprehended. Nor is it indeed the greatest number of days in Scripture. For
2300 evenings and mornings make but 1150 days, which falls far short of 1260
days in the Revelation, and 1290 days, Dan. 12. 11. and of 1335 days, Dan.
12. 12. But let this suffice to remove away the occasion of stumbling, from
such as have not searched diligently the use of that phrase, Many days.

Verse. 27. And I Daniel fainted and was sick some days,] The sad calamities
that were to befall Gods people did so deeply seize upon the Prophets spirit,
that he fainted and was sick. How long he does not express; but some days.
Afterward, Daniel being Ruler of the Province of Babylon, and continuing in
that place to this time, as has been showed, he rose up, and did the Kings
business, as ruler of the whole Province of Babylon.

Let this suffice to have spoken by way of interpretation of the words, and now
come with me to consider the special characters of this Horn, so much
insisted upon in this Chapter. And the Characters whereby he is distinguished,
you shall find to be in number thirteen.

First, It proceeded out of THAT successor of Alexander, which was the brazen
thigh of Nebuchadnezzars Image, and raged most against the Church of Christ,
and was of longest continuance, to wit, Seleucus.

2 He is not the first born of any of that race, but a younger Brother, verse.
9.

3 He is a cruel Prince, as it is written verse. 23. he is a King of hard
countenance.

4 He is a Prince of deep understanding, verse. 23. understanding dark sentences.

5 He is a subtle politic Prince, verse. 24. through his policy he shall
cause craft to prosper in his hand, etc.

6 He corrupts the consciences and conversations of many, through Peace and
tranquillity, verse. 25.

7 He makes great preparations against Egypt in the South, and Persia in the
East, and against Judea, the glory of all lands, verse. 9.

8 He is a Prince of a proud Spirit, according as it is written verse. 11. he
magnified himself.

9 He opposes the people of God in a special manner, verse. 10, 11. he
magnified himself against the Host of heaven, and against the Prince of the
Host.

10 He profaned the Temple and Ordinances thereof, verse. 11. By him the daily
sacrifice was taken away from the people of God, and he cast away the place of
the Sanctuary.

11 All these things were transacted, in the after-part of the Kingdom of
Alexanders successors, verse. 23. And in the after-part of their Kingdom shall
arise a King of fierce countenance etc.

12 The manner of his death was by some divine stroke from Heaven, and not by
war or treachery, verse. 25. he shall be broken without hand.

13 The durance of this Horns prevalency against the people of God, is
expressed by the certain number of artificial Nights and Days, and the
determinate cloze of that number, verse. 14 unto two thousand and three hundred
Evenings and mornings: then shall the Sanctuary be cleansed.

Now having opened the most obscure places in the Text, and collected the
Characters of this Horn, let every judicious Reader see and consider, whether
they do best suite unto Antiochus Epiphanes, or to the Roman-Civil or
Antichristian state. And let us not hastily condemn the Macchabees and Saints
of that age, who (living whilst things were transacted) applied this prophecy
unto Antiochus Epiphanes, nor Josephus, and after him Tremellius and Junius,
and others, who have done the like. For who can deny, that this Antiochus
Epiphanes descended of Seleucus, whose posterity continued longest, and was
most outrageous against the people of God, of all other the successors of
Alexander? And is it not manifest in stories, that he was younger Brother of
Seleucus Philopater, and son of Antiochus the great? Is it not notoriously know
that he was a most cruel Prince, of deep understanding and policy? Did he not
corrupt and destroy many through Peace and tranquillity? Did not he make great
preparations against Egypt in the South, and Persia in the East, and also
against Judea? Was not he excessively pround? Insomuch that he thought the
very waves should obey his command. Did he not invade Judea? and prosper
through his policy? And did he not pollute the Temple and Temple-worship? And
was not all this done in the latter part of the Kingdom of the Selencidae? And
was not he cut off by Gods own hand, without any hand of man? As for the
durance of this Kings rage, and prevalency, we may gather it very near out of
the story of the Macchabees, though they principally note out the flux of time,
from setting up the abomination of desolation, until the purifying and
cleansing of the Temple, which was exactly three years and ten days, or 1103
days, not giving us the exact day when Antiochus entered the City, yet it may
be probably collected, that it could not be less than 1150 days, which makes
2300 Evenings and Mornings, as Daniel did foretell. And who would not conceive
that this Prince, unto whom all these Characters do so exactly agree, is the
Horn intended by Daniel? Let the indifferent Reader judge.

Now for as much as some good men do take it, to be meant of the Roman Civil
State, or Antichristian State, or both: let me propound these Queries, to be
considered of.

1 How can the Roman Civil State, or the Antichristian State, 1 Quere.
be called in Scripture Language, a younger Brother? according as it is said of
this Horn?

2 How can the Roman Civil State, much less the Antichristian 2 Quere.
State, (which did not arise till many years after that) be said to trample
upon the Saints, and upon the Temple, and Ordinances, in the first of Cyrus,
ere either the Roman Civil State, or the Roman Antichristian State had a Being?
Which yet must be granted, if the 2300 days be counted for years, and that
they do begin with Cyrus.

3 Who can aver, that either the Roman Civil, or Antichristian 3 Quere.
State, shall be broken without hand? whereas the contrary seems rather to be
true?

Thus have I briefly opened this Chapter, and proposed the diverse
interpretations and applications of the same, and so I shall shut up this
subject, with this request unto every one that searches after the truth, to
follow the example of those noble Bereans Act. 17. 11. (when they read various
interpretations of mystical Prophecies;) search the Scriptures whether those
things be so as they are represented, that so your faith may not be founded
upon humane credit, but upon the eternal truth of God.

Even so be it.
Dan. Chap. 9. 23 At the beginning of thy supplications the WORD went forth,
and I come to declare it, for thou art Or [a man] of desires.
desires: therefore understand that word, and consider that Vision.

24 Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people and upon Heb. the City of thy
holiness.
thy holy City, to restrain transgression, and to seal up sins, and to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness: and to
seal the Vision and the Prophet, and to anoint the Or most holy.
holy of holies.

25 Know thou therefore, and weigh thou, that from the going forth of the WORD,
to bring back and to build Jerusalem, unto Or the anointed Prince.
Messiah the Prince, are seven weeks; and sixty and two weeks, (the street and
the ditch Heb. Shall return and be built.
shall be built again, and that in the streit of those times.)

26 And after those sixty and two weeks, the Messiah shall be cut off, but not
for himself: (and in that City and in that Sanctuary God will permit to be
destroyed the people of the Prince that is to come, and their end shall be with
a flood, and at the end of the war, a final judgment of desolations.)

27 And he shall confirm the covenant with many, for one week: and in half of
that week, he shall cause to cease the Sacrifice and oblation, ( making it
also desolate by the Heb The Wing of abominations. Meaning the Roman Army.
Army of abominations, even until the consumption, even the determined
consumption, be powered forth by the destroyer.)


THis sealed Prophecy having been long since accomplished, and by most men
understood to lead us unto the death of our Savior Jesus Christ, I shall not
enter upon any large explication of the words, but briefly as may be, endeavor
to clear up from the words of this Text, and other parallel Scriptures, what
time we ought to account for the beginning and ending of Daniels Seventy
weeks. For wonderful is the policy of Satan to raise up mists, that he may
darken our discerning of a truth which in it self is most clear. In so much as
we are now less able to read the Book distinctly, since the accomplishment
thereof, than good old Simeon was, a little before. The principal reason of
which dimness, I cannot attribute to any thing so much, as our leaning upon
humane writers, which has a secret nature of poison in it to narrow our sight.
So that we are not able to discern things which are easily discernable in
themselves. Wherefore it will be wholesome to vomit up this poison, laying
humane stories a side, and looking wistly at the word of God alone. To the Law
and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because
there is no morning light in them. Let every Christian therefore in these
Knowing times put the question to his own heart, and accordingly, echo forth
an answer thereunto, Whether the word of God alone be not (...).
self-sufficient, as I may say, That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished for every good work? And if so, then what need of humane writers, to
perfect the Scriptures Chronology?

First, Therefore to speak something of the beginning of Daniels The beginning
of Daniels seventy weeks.
seventy weeks

It is most evident from the Text, (as Mr. Tillinghast well observes in his
Knowledge of the Times page 162.) that these seventy weeks of Daniel must take
their beginning from some WORD. Only the Question will still be, what WORD it
is, and by whom that WORD was spoken, from which we ought to begin our account
of Daniels weeks?

I shall first show what WORD it is. Our Translators render it Commandment,
but the Original calls it a WORD. I know we commonly put a difference between
the word of a subject, and of a Prince. We call the one a word, and the other
we call a Command, Edict, Ordinance, or Proclamation. I would not strive about
words. I put not much in letters and syllables. Yet let me say thus much, that
Scripture language is ever best, and fittest for Syons Children. And good it
were for Princes, that they should know, that God makes no more account of
their Commands, Edicts, Ordinances, and Proclamations, than of so many words.
But to speak a little more fully, and directly to the matter of this WORD, what
it is? Or about what it is? The Angel gives a clear answer to that; that it is
a WORD which concerns the return of Gods people, to Jerusalem, to built
Jerusalem. For so run the Angels words, to cause, to return, and to build
Jerusalem. This is the WORD. And this, Ezra calls a VOICE, which Cyrus caused
to pass through all his Dominions, (and put it also in writing,) that
whosoever there was of the people of God, he should go up to Jerusalem, which
is in Judah, and there build the house of Jehovah, the God of Israel, and his
God be with him, Ezr. 1. 1, 3. And Cyrus gives the ground or reason of his
action, The Lord God of heaven has given me all the Kingdoms of the earth,
and he has charged me to build him an house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah.

Quest. And how did Cyrus know this?

Answ. I conceive it to be most likely, that Daniel, who was Ruler of the
Province of Babel, the third person in the Kingdom, and continuing in Babel to
that time (as has been showed before) might have easy access to these great
Princes. And though Darius for his seniority and antiquity of his Kingdom, had
the pre-eminence; yet Daniel understanding by books, to wit, the Book of
Jeremy, that the years of their Captivity were now expired; and by Esaiah, that
this Cyrus was the instrument designed of God for that service, he makes his
application to Cyrus, and acquaints him with the whole mind of God revealed by
Isaiah, and that he should be the man that must grant the Jews deliverance,
and give them authority to build the City, and Temple; leaving great weight
upon the building of the house of God, as a matter of highest concernment,
wherein he most desired the Kings gracious answer, Which done, this holy
prophet retires himself, and goes to God, wrestling earnestly with him, for the
deliverance of his people, and for the building of the City and Temple.
Whereupon God sends his Angel to ascertain him of the grant of his desires,
(and therefore calls him, thou art desires. As if he should have said, thou
have left thy desires with Cyrus, and now also with the Lord, and have
prevailed with both, and therefore gives him that name,) and also to reveal
unto him how long it should be from that day, unto the death of the promised
Messiah.

But to return to the point. Cyrus caused a VOICE to pass for causing Gods
people to return, and build the House of God in Jerusalem. And this is the WORD
of which the Angel here speaks. And of this Jeremy prophesied many years before
Jer. 29. 10. Thus says Jehovah, that after seventy years be accomplished at
Babylon, I will visit you: and there he makes a great distinction. And what
means he by the word visit? The next word tells you. That I may perform THIS
my good word toward you, and there makes a distinction. And what word was that
which he calls THIS my good word? The Prophet in the next words gives answer,
to cause you to return, (says he) to this very place, to this Jerusalem. This
is the WORD, which God put into Cyrus heart to publish, according as Isaiah had
prophesied of him, that he should perform all Gods pleasure: saying to
Jerusalem, thou shall be built, and to the Temple, thy foundation shall be
laid, Isa. 44. 28. The exact time of the beginning of Daniels weeks.


Having showed more generally the time of Daniels weeks, and in whose reign
they began, I shall give a more particular answer. By which you may take a
true estimat of the very nick or season when they began, which was (as the
Angel certifieth Daniel at the beginning of thy supplication, the WORD went
forth. Daniel did not know so much, that Cyrus had published such a voice, till
the Angel brought him tidings. But now says the Angel to Daniel, know thou,
and weigh thou. Had this WORD been to come forth a long time after, when Daniel
was dead, how could the Angel say, weigh thou, know thou? For there is no
work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, Eccle. 9. 10. And
therefore says the Angel, do thou (O Daniel) know it, and do thou weigh the
matter (as Merchants weigh silver in a balance) if thou would understand.
For I assure thee the WORD whereof I speak it is already gone out. And if the
Angel say, it is gone out, yea so soon as ever Daniel began to speak to God,
the WORD went forth, what boldness is it, in any man, to say, it is not yet
gone forth when Daniel saw this Vision, but was to go forth afterward? what
Scripture have we for that?

Darius and Cyrus did both reign at one and the same time, and Daniel seems to
give pre-eminence to Darius, in as much as he dates his time from Darius, and
therefore it may be inquired, from whether of those Kings the word was to go
forth? Chron. 36. 22. and Erz. 1. 1, 3. it will plainly appear, that this WORD
came forth in the name of Cyrus King of Persia, and so fulfilled the word of
the Lord by Isaiah the Prophet.

Daniel, of the going forth of a WORD, to build Jerusalem. And we do not find
any word of building Jerusalem, recorded by Ezra in that WORD or Proclamation
of Cyrus. Ezra, of building Jerusalem, nor is it absolutely necessary. It is
enough that he speaks of building the house of Jehovah, in Jerusalem. For who
would not conclude, that he who was so seriously careful, about the building
of Gods House, would also grant liberty to Jehovahs servants, to re-edify their
own houses? But secondly I answer, that (though Ezra make not mention of that
particular, of building Jerusalem yet) Isaiah prophesied long before that such
a WORD should proceed from Cyrus mouth, saying to Jerusalem, thou shall be
built, and to the Temple, thy foundation shall be laid. And has God said it,
and shall it not come to pass? What is become of our faith, if a company of
poor Historians can turn us besides our path? And thirdly I answer, That as
Isaiah prophesied that it should be; so the Angel tells Daniel, that he no
sooner set himself to intercede with God, but the WORD went forth imediately,
verse. 23. And what WORD was it that went forth? Look to the 25 verse. (where the
Angel does proceed, to show Daniel, what WORD it was, of which he had spoken)
and he says, that it was this very WORD, to cause to return, and to build
Jerusalem. So that if we will believe either Isaiah, or the Angel, Cyrus is
the man that gave out this WORD, that Jerusalem shall be built. Yet suppose
Jerusalem had not been named, nor yet the Temple, (neither by Daniel, nor by
Ezra) save only this one word, to cause to return, it had been enough to
determine the beginning of Daniels seventy weeks. Thus much concerning the
beginning of Daniels weeks. The durance of Daniels weeks.


The next thing to be considered is the durance, which is here expressed two
ways.

1 Collectively, giving us the gross sum, verse. 24. Seventy weeks are
determined.

2 Distributively, dividing the whole into three unequal parts.

The first division is into seven weeks or 49 years, the true distance of time,
betwixt the going forth of the WORD, and the finishing of the Temple, in the
sixth year of Darius, which agrees with the Jews speech unto Christ Joh. 2.
20. forty six years was this Temple a building. Whereunto add one year and a
half from Cyrus Proclamation, until they began Ezr. 3. 8.
to build the temple, and as much more, that the Temple was interrupted, in the
beginning of Ezr. 4. 4.
Darius, and it will make up the just number of 49 years, as the Angel here
speaks. From which time, count 62 years, until Christ was 25 years of age,
according to the Law Number. 4. 3. From which time Christ began to confirm the
Covenant from one week, as the Angel speaks, and to prepare for the full
execution of his office, in his 30 year, current, and then in half of that week
(to wit the latter half) he made the sacrifice and oblation to cease, offering
up himself once for all, in the very close of the same. And thus you have the
total sum, and the integrall parts to agree, and constitute the just number
of 490 years, from the WORD, that went forth from Cyru, unto the death of
Christ.

Now the close or end of Daniels account is twice expressed. The end of Daniels
weeks.


First, When the Angel tells Daniel, in one gross sum, that seventy weeks
are determined (verse. 24.) to end at the death of Christ; as all these
expressions do fully import, to restrain transgression; to seal up sins, to
make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness.
For without blood there is no remission of sins, Heb. 9. 22. We were reconciled
to God by the death of his Son, Romans 5. 10. Therefore it is most clear, that
the seventy weeks did determine at the death and resurrection of Christ: For if
Christ be not raised, our faith is in vain, we are yet in our sins, 1 Cor. 15.
17.

Secondly, The end of these seventy weeks is expressed, when the Angel makes a
distribution of them into parts; allotting the last week unto Christ's
confirming the Covenant, saying, and in half of that week, he shall be cut off
etc. That is, he shall be wholly set apart to the mediators office, during that
half, and in the close thereof, shall offer up himself by death. This half, I
take to be the latter half. And so the account of the particulars does agree
with the total sum, of seventy weeks. Some would have it understood of the
former half of the week, but that will not agree with the sum total; nor can
it stand with truth, for in 69 week and an half, is not 70 weeks. And it had
been as easy, in that language, to have said 69 weeks and an half as to say,
in half of that week. Wherefore I conclude, that those 70 weeks of Daniel, were
terminated in the death of Christ, and neither before nor after. Thus much I
thought necessary to speak of this ninth chapter, in respect of the various
interpretations, which men do give of the Chronologicall part thereof. Which
opens a door to some, to question the Doctrinall part, not only of this, but of
other Scriptures also. For if Scriptures be uncertain or untrue in any respect,
it will infirm the credit of their Testimony in every respect.

I might have added much more, but that I affect brevity, only one word let me
add (which I have pretermitted) to advertise those that are not acquainted
with the original; that in all the Commission granted to Nehemiah (where some
with overmuch confidence do fix the beginning of Daniels weeks) there is not
one word of (...)
Command, (...)
Edict, Decree, or (...)
Proclamation once mentioned. And therefore cannot with any colorable ground
be accounted to be the going forth of that WORD (...)
of which the Angel speaks to Daniel. Wherefore as the Angel commands Daniel,
let us weigh all interpretations in the balance of the Sanctuary.

DAN. Chap. 11. Verse. 1. Now I, in the first year of Darius the Mede: [ stood]
in my station to confirm and strengthen him.

2 And now I will declare to thee the truth: Behold, there shall yet stand up
three Kings in Persia, and the Fourth shall be far richer than all, and by
his strength with his riches he shall stir up all, even the Kingdom of Graecia.

3 And a mighty King shall stand up: and he shall rule with great Dominion, and
shall do according to his pleasure.

4 And as he shall stand up, his Kingdom shall be broken, and shall be Hebr.
Halfed, or divided in halfs.
divided toward the four Winds of Heaven; but not to his posterity, nor
according to his Dominion wherewith he ruled, for his Kingdom shall be plucked
up, even for others besides those.


MY intention is not at this time to insist largely upon this chapter, but only
to show from Scripture how many Persian Kings there were, from Cyrus unto
Alexander the first Grecian Monarch; That men may better judge of the
falsehood, and uncertainty of Grecian Stories, that have forged thirteen
Monarchs, or Kings of Persia, to have reigned after Cyrus. But let the Sons of
Sion, that love the truth, hearken to what God has spoken by the Angel, in the
words of Truth.

Verse. 1. Now I,] These words hold forth to us a description of the Angel that
spoke to Daniel. In the former Chapter, we read that Daniel had a Vision in
the third year of Cyrus King of Persia. And an Angel appeared to him, to show
him what should befall in after times. Now I,] to wit, the same Angel. But what
I, or what Angel is it? Even the Angel that stood to confirm and strengthen
him. To strengthen whom? Not Darius the Mede (for he was at this time dead) but
Cyrus the Prince of Persia, of whom you read in the twentieth verse of the
former Chapter. And when was this Angel first designed to this service, to
attend at the Court of Persia? In the first year of Darius the Mede. And now
you may read the Angels name, for that Angels name was Gabriel, who first
appeared to Daniel, in the first year o^ Darius, Dan. 9. 21. So that it seems,
this Angel Gabriel was designed to attend the Persian Princes Court, and to
order the affairs thereof, even from the first taking of Babylon, during the
continuance of that Monarchy, as the words ( Dan. 10. 20.) seem to import,
where it is said, And when I am gone forth, that is* when I depart from the
Court of Persia, and am discharged from attendance there, then, behold, the
Prince of Graecia coming.

Verse. 2. I will show thee the truth.] Why? did the Angel ever show him any
thing that was not truth? what then does he mean to use this expression?
Doubtless the Angel did foresee, that there would be many false and forged
relations, and stories of these Persian Monarchs, which would trouble the
Chronology of the Scriptures* Now that he might fortify the Sons of Sion,
against such kind of Forgeries, he gives unto Daniel a perfect and true
relation of the Persian Monarchs, that he might leave it upon Record to all
posterity, saying, and now I will show thee the truth; where he makes a great
distinction. Now what is this Truth which the Angel declares to Daniel? Behold
(says he) there shall yet stand up three Kings in Persia. And are these all?
No, there shall stand up a fourth after them, which shall far exceed for
wealth, he shall be far richer than all. But shall there be no more Princes
after Cyrus, but four? Doubtless, if there should have been any more, the
Angel that came to tell Daniel the truth, would not have concealed the same.
But the words ensuing, do intimate that this Fourth was the last, because it it
said, that he by his strength with riches should stir up, or provoke the
Prince of Graecia (to wit, Alexander of Macedon) to his own ruin.

Verse. 3. And a mighty King shall stand up, etc.] These words yield us a
description of this Prince of Graecia, from his valor, and from the greatness
of his Dominion, and irresistableness of his power. His Valor, expressed in
these words, a mighty King. The greatness of his Dominion is expressed in the
next words, He shall rule with great Dominion. His Dominion shall extend it
self far and wide over the earth; and the irresistableness of his power is
employed in the next words, He shall do according to his pleasure. These are as
so many Characters of Alexander the first Prince of Graecia, whereof I have
spoken more at large in the eighth Chapter.

Verse. 4. And when he shall stand up he shall be broken, etc. These words yield
a further description of the Grecian Monarchy, by the death of that puissant
Prince Alexander, and the division of the Kingdom into four, after his death.
But shall this division be made to Alexanders posterity? Or shall they attain
to the like power of this first Prince? Verily no; it shall not be to his
posterity, nor according to his dominion, wherewith he ruled. And to the same
purpose it is said, that four Kingdoms shall stand out of the Nation, but not
with his power, Dan. 8. 22. and if out of the Nation, then not out of
Alexanders posterity, as it is said in this Chapter. Thus you see the great and
observable truth, which the Angel would have Daniel to mind. Now let every
understanding Christian weigh the Angels words, and the words of Greek
Historians. The Angel tells you of a truth, that there shall be but four
Princes in Persia after Cyrus, until Alexander, Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus,
Metasthenes, and other Greek Writers, and others that follow after them, say,
there were thirteen from Cyrus to Alexander, choose you whether you will believe.

Obj. But this place in Daniel does not say, there were four, and no more?

Ans. The Angel says, he came to tell Daniel the truth. And if he told him but
a piece of the truth, what were it less than Jesuitical equivocation, or
mental reservation? which we have no ground to imagine of the holy Angel. And
to what end should the* Angel tell him of four, and no more, if there were
thirteen, as Historians would make us believe?

But secondly I answer; That the Angel does in effect say, there were no more.
For if there were but three after Cyrus, and after those three a fourth,
exceeding in wealth; and if this fourth did provoke the King of Graecia (to
wit, Alexander, as the description does show it to be) who was potent and
irresistible, and overcame the Ram of Persia, as you have it in the eighth
Chapter; then it is manifest there was no more. And the Angel in his whole
relation (considered together) does in effect say, there was no more but four
Princes of Persia, after Cyrus, until Alexander.

These few words I have thought good to add, as an explication of some
Chronological points, for the benefit of such as cannot spend so much time, to
search out the matter themselves; and the rather, because I have met with some
of late that have been led aside, to give too much credit to Human (I may say
profane) Writers.

Daniel having fully declared the sad calamities of the Church under Antiochus
Epiphanes in the eighth Chapter, and the further calamities they should suffer
by the Romans in the ninth Chapter, he seeks the face of God in behalf of his
people three whole weeks of days, in the tenth Chapter. Whereupon God was
pleased to reveal unto him, in this his last Vision, the utmost durance of that
Persian Monarchy under which the people of God should suffer so much. Which
being done, the Lord tells him, what his people should yet suffer in the days
of those Persian Princes after Antiochus Epiphanes, from verse. 14. to the 18.
(...)
describing those Persian Princes by some eminent Characters. As 1 That the
King of Syria in the North, and the King of Egypt in the South, should enter
into a League. 2 That the King of the South should give his Daughter in
Marriage to the King of the North. And 3 That this King of Egypt in the South,
should take away his Daughter from the King of the North, and give her to
another; all which is expressed in the sixth verse. And accordingly you may
read it was effected, 1 Mac. 10. 51, etc. Alexander King of Syria, sent to
Ptolomy King of Egypt to make a League. And Ptolomy King of Egypt in the
South, gave his Daughter Cleopatra in Marriage to Alexander King of Syria in
the North. But afterward, the said Ptolomy took his Daughter from Alexander,
and gave her to Demetrius Nicanor the Son of Demetrius Soter, 1 Maccha. 11. 12.
4 By this means, the Kingdom devolved from Alexander and his Posterity,
according as Daniel had spoken, verse. 6. Neither shall he stand, nor his arm.
That is, neither shall Alexander, nor his Posterity continue to manage the
Government of Syria. And accordingly it so came to pass, as stories manifest.
Thus having given a description of the robbers of Gods people, he proceeds to
show what mischief they should do to the Church, as we may read from verse. 14.
to the 18. Telling the Prophet, that after those troubles are over, and that
Monarchy expired (the Romans succeeding) there shall stand up a raiser of
Taxes, ver. 20. Touching which raiser of Taxes we have an account given us,
Luke 2. 1. where it is said, That Augustus Caesar made a Decree to tax all the
world. Him I conceive to be that raiser of taxes spoken of in Daniel.

After whom Daniel tells us, that a vile person shall arise, verse. 21. (which I
suppose was Nero) who should obtain, or strengthen his Kingdom by flatteries,
or sly and subtle insinuations (...)
(as the word signifies) whereby he gathers a strong part unto himself,
especially of the Soldiery, for that is the usual manner of such cruel
Tyrants, who commonly are fair and smoothspoken men, until they have gotten
themselves into the Saddle. So did Jehu. But when once he was got into the
Chariot, See Jehu* in his proper colors.
lo, he drives furiously, 2 King. 9. 20. much like Phaeton, of whom the Poets
fable, that he obtained of his Father Phoebus the guidance of the Chariot of
the Sun, for one day. But what through his unskilfulness to manage the reigns,
and the unruliness of the Horses, he overthrew his Chariot, and set the world
on fire. The Moral of which is good. This Nero was a cruel Tyrant, and did much
mischief to the Church, and in the days of Vespasian, both the City and Temple
were destroyed. And thus far the Prophet proceeds in this eleventh Chapter
(as I conceive) and no further. For though some good men apply this Prophecy
unto the Roman Civil or Antichristian state, extending the same unto the end of
the fourth Monarchy, yet I cannot see how that can stand with the words of the
text, which say, that the King of the North, and the King of the South shall
have a League. (...)
And the Kings Daughter of the South shall go to the King of the North to make
agreement. Is it credible that the Pope, or Emperor should make a League with
the Turk? much more unlikely it is that they should make inter-marriages,
either with the Turks Daughter, or the Jews Daughter, whether soever you shall
imagine to be meant by the King of the South. As for the Pope (if he should be
thought to be the King of the North) it is not lawful for him to marry. Neither
can it probably be imagined either of the Roman Emperor, or of the Turk.
Wherefore I cannot consent to such an interpretation, but rather adhere to the
former, unto which it does far better suit.

Obj. But it may be said, that the Angel tells Daniel, ( Dan. 12. 7.) that all
these things shall be finished, after a time, times, and half a time, and how
then can we understand it of Jerusalems destruction, which did precede that
time, times, and half a time?

Ans. I confess the Objection seemed to me of weight, until I weighed the
words of the text, and the form of speech. But thus I now apprehend the matter.
One of the Angels asked the man clnathed with linen, which was upon the waters
of the River [ Hiddekel]; how long it was to the end of those Wonders. In which
question (I conceive) is comprehended all Daniels Wonders, as well in the
seventh Chapter, as in the other Chapters following. To which, the man clothed
with linen, by a solemn Oath, gives answer; That the Churches calamity should
continue for a time, times, and half a time. And there he makes a distinction.
But when HE (says the man) shall have accomplished to break the Hebr. To break
the hand.
power of the holy people. By He, I understand Vespasian and Titus, By power of
the holy people, I understand the ruin of that State, and people of the Jews,
which are in Scripture phrase called the Holy people, or the people of
holiness, or consecration. Now when the adversary has thus broken their hand
and power, then shall all those things be finished. All what things? namely,
all those things whereof he had spoken in the foregoing Chapter.

This ambiguity in the answer considered, and that no Epoch was prefixed, for
the beginning of that time, times, and half a time, nor any determinate period
set for the ending of the same, (as it had been done in the former Visions,
chap. 8. and 9. and 11.) this puts Daniel upon a second Querie. Not, when shall
be the end: but, what does that after-part of his Visions mean? whereunto the
man in linen gives answer. That it was a secret to be sealed, till the (...)
season of the end. And none of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall
understand. Namely, when the season of the end shall come, that Christ begins
to draw out his last lines, as I may say, but not till then. But then in the
next words he gives Daniel an Epoch, from whence he may begin the accounts
following (though he had sealed that time, times, and half a time, till
afterward.) The Epoch given, is the taking away of the daily sacrifice, and
setting up of the abomination which makes desolate. Now that you may better
understand what this means, consider that you have these words three times used
in Daniel. First, these words are mentioned, Dan. 8. 13. where the wickedness
of Antiochus Epiphanes is described, in subverting Gods pure Worship, and
setting up the Image of Jupiter Olympius in the Temple. 2. These words are
again used, Dan. 9. 27. and 11. 31. where he speaks of the destruction of the
City and Temple: by the abominable Roman Army, and the total removal of
Temple-worship. For so our Savior interprets that place of Daniel, Mat. 24.
15. Mark 13. 14. Luke 21. 20. and Daniel secretly gives a hint of it, Dan. 12.
7. But, 3 These words are used, Dan. 12. 11. which I conceive to be spoken of
another time, many years after the City and Temple, and Temple-worship were
destroyed. And the man clothed in linen purposely uses the same expressions
as before, to show us, that there should be somewhat of the like nature (as
formerly) but much more Spiritual, that should be the Epoch of the Churches
Spiritual captivity. And what may that be? Ans. For my own part, I conceive it
to be that abominable desolating Idol the Mass, for the living, and for the
dead, joined with intercession of Saints, by which the virtue and efficacy of
Christ's death is made void, which is the taking away of the daily sacrifice.
And this began about the year 383. whereunto add Daniels first number, 1290.
and it will lead you down unto the end of all worldly Image. Government, and
the Churches troubles together, Anno 1673. But if unto that Epoch you add
Daniels second mystical number, 1335. it will carry you (as I apprehend) unto
the time of the New Jerusalems coming down from Heaven, or the perfect
constitution and settlement of Christ's Government all the world over. In
respect whereof there is a special and peculiar blessing promised to such as
live unto that time.

Thus have I briefly given you the application of this eleventh Chapter, and an
explication of Daniels mystical numbers, having not leisure to enlarge upon the
same.

Since I finished this little labor, I met with an old Jesuitical Tenet,
concerning the durance of Antichrists reign, for the space of three years and
an half, newly brought forth, and sent into the world under the Tutelage of
him, whose Government he makes to be the Beasts seventh Head. Concerning which
he Prophesies, that it shall be as large as any (if not as all) the other Six
Governments, but much larger This Prophecy deserves thanks; none of Ahabs
Prophets could have spoken better.
than the Roman. This little stripling (as he calls himself) is bold to throw
one of his Stones at the head of Daniel, or of John, or both. Concerning whom
he says, That though Daniel seems to say, that the Ten Horns or Kings shall
arise out of the Sixth Head, or Fourth Beast, in chap. 7. ver. 23, 24. yet
compared with other Scriptures, it will plainly appear, that they will rise out
of the seventh head, etc. To prove which, he quoteth Rev. 17. 10. where John
does not say that the Ten Horns sprang out of the Seventh Head, nor does Daniel
say, they did arise out of the Sixth Head. What then shall we say? Was Daniel
or John mistaken? or both? Or rather, does not this stripling mistake both
Daniel and John? It is an usual saying, We may guess at the man by his foot. I
only make mention Ex ungue leonem.
of him by way of Caution, to such as meet with him, else I would not so much
as have mentioned his Tenet; the Book is called, A brief Survey of the
Prophetical and Evangelical events of the last times, which seems to be of the
Offspring of Babel; and blessed be he that dasheth her little ones against the
rock.

FINIS.
ERRATA:
PAge 31. l. 20. for Macedon read Egypt. p. 32. l. 17. dele one of the thighs
of Nebuchadnezzars Image, l. 20. instead of stood but upon one thigh, r. stood
upon his two thighs, but more especially upon one brazen thigh.


