An Answer to a Book, Titled, Quakers Principles Quaking: Subscribed by the
name of one Ralph Hale, with an Epistle (so called) to the Reader, subsc^ibed
with the name of one Zachariah Crofton.

A principle of darkness, deceit, and confusion in Ralph Hale, and his Fellow
labourer in Satan's work, Zachariah Crofton, is discovered by the Quakers
principle, and the Quakers principle does stand against the power of darkness,
and all the false principles in the world, them to discover and lay open.

The Book was said to be modestly propounded by Ralph Hale, but in it I found
so many lies, standers, and false accusations, with confused, vain, and
frivolous words, as many of them is not worth mentioning; yet, lest the Author
should boast in his mischief, I shall lay down something in Answer to some few
of them, in respect of the number of them.

Psalm 9.15. The Heathens are sunk down into the pit that they made, in the Net
which they hid, is their own foot taken. A servant to the least in the Household
of Faith, and the least amongst his Brethren, whose name in the flesh is
William Adamsor.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Black
Spread-E^gle, near the West end of Paul's, 1656.

Something in Answer to Zachariah Crofton, and his Epistle, as he calls it.
ZAchariah Crofton, How far art thou from the example of Christ, who when he
was reviled, he reviled not again; but thou have here reviled them, that never
reviled thee, and thine eyes did never see many of those called Quakers whom
thou have reviled, and called them Revilers; Is that the work of a plain man,
that possesses an honest heart, which thou have reported thy self to be one
of, in thy Epistle, as thou call it, but it is both the wisdom and praises
of a plain man, possessing an honest heart, to let another man praise him, and
not his praises come from his own mouth, as thine does.

Priest. And first thou says to the Reader, if he had been in any measure
sensible of the Worlds Age, and time of the Church in which we have our being,
and seriously observant of the Dispensations of Providence suitable to the
seasons, he could not but have seen Gods severity, and Satan's subtilty, as
much as in any Age of the World.

Ans. Zachariah Crofton, In this which thou calls thy Epistle, thou have
manifested thy self that thou have not thy being in the Church which is in God,
but of the Synagogue of Satan, and without God in the world; thou manifest thy
self to have thy being, in that thou vents forth thy venom, and spues out thy
poison in thy words, proceeding from the smoke of the bottomless pit: and if
the Reader do seriously observe thy Epistle (as thou calls i^) he may see a
bitter inveterate spirit of rage and malice lodged in thee, and as much of
Satan's r^ge as possibly can be uttered in so much paper: like that wicked
Tertullus, who said the Apostle was a pestilent fellow, when indeed it was his
own condition; and so it is here with thee, for what thou seems to cast upon
us, it is due to thy self; and if I should say no more in answer to thy Epistle
but this, that what thou would cast upon us, it is thy own portion, yet the
answer were just and undeniable, to all who have the eye of discerning open in
any measure.

Priest. And then thou goes on with an accusation, but have not laid down at
whom thy sting is shot for some space, and then thou begins to push with thy
horns like a cursed Goat, at the Lambs of Christ, who in disdain are called
Quakers; and thou says, Yet in all this has not Gods severity so much appeared
as in the late upstart Quakers, by whom the Devil comes stealing into the
Field, says thou.

Answ. Zachariah Crofton, I do believe that not only thou, but all the
Parish-masters in England may truly say of that people called Quakers, as Ahab
said of Micaiah, You hate them, for they never prophesied good to you, for
keeping up tithes, hire, and augmentations; and Christ now being manifest in
his servants, it is not strange that thou should call him the Devil, it is but
the same title that thy Forefathers the Pharise^^ gave him; and being manfest
in his servants, he does so torment the god of this world in he hi^el^ngs, that
they cry loud for their gains from their quarters, as the manner of the greedy
dogs ever was.

Priest. Yet now to us how do they prevail? Too too much with too too many,
says thou.

Answ. I say yet, for all that your blind eyes cannot see Gods hand in it
lifted up against you Phar^^h like ones, and his divine providence, in carrying
on his own work, though you oppress the seed as much as you can, yet it
increases so much the more, to the glory of God, and the torment of the Beast
in you is begun.

P^iest. They are to be pitied, not hated; they are to be prayed for, not
preached unto; for the Devil that possesses them is such as can be cast out by
no other means save Fasting and Prayer, say thou.

Answ. Zachariah Crofton, If thine eyes were but opened to see how thy own poor
soul lies in the death, thou would have then much cause to take thy pity a
little rearer thee, and pity thy self; for thy pity we disown, I believe it
will prove not worth receiving: and for thy prayers, we do deny them; for the
prayers of the wicked God will not hear; Isa. 1.15. John 9.31. and thou talks
of Fasting, to cast out Devils; I say, what now? Will thou own Fasting? Is it
not superstition with thee? Did thou not term it as superstition when we
fasted, and now it serves thee to make a talk of thy self? But I will tell
thee, if thy prayers and thy fasting will cast out Devils, turn thine eye home
within, and cast out legion the^e first; but I believe thou w^ll but cast out a
few Devils, or none at all; for Christ said, if Satan cast out himself, he is
divided against himself. If thou have an ear, thou may h^ar.

Priest. And thou say indeed, Amongst other grounds of our compassion, this
is not the least, that they enjoy too much liberty, say thou, and thou seems
to be trou^led at it, that men will not show us such pity, as to subject us to
a Bedlam discipline.

Answ. Zachariah Crofton, It seems thy compassion would not afford us our
l^berty, and if thou ^ad as much power in thy hands, as thou seems to have of a
cru^l sort of pity in thy heart, thou would bring us to a Bedl^m Discipline: I
say, if this be thy compassion and pity, let i^ be to thy self, it is fit thou
should be pitied first thy self, seeing thou would take such pity on strangers
whom thou knows not; and if thou chance to take thy lodging in that place where
thou would have us pitied, then remember that God is just, in reaching thee a
taste of Hamans cup; and if God had not put a Bit into thy jaws, and a hook
into thy Nostrils, to draw thee back from thy cruelty, and so limited and
chained the power of the murthe^ing prince of darkness in thee; I pray thee
what height of mischief would thy cruelty have reached unto where it l ghts, if
thou had power to act it, seeing thy compassion and pity would not afford a
harmless and despised people their liberty, but thy pity would subject them to
a Bedlam Discipline? Here thou shows thy self to be of thy old grandfather
Cain, who was active in mischief and murder, a cruel and envi us man, like thy
self; but here thou truly fulfils that Scripture Prove. 12.10. The tender
mercies of the Wicked are cruel.

Priest. And thou vents forth a long Oration of foaming smoaky words, in
reviling the Light, with as scornful Titles as possibly the Devil can invent;
and thou say, The Light drives the soul from every duty.

Answ. I say for the soul, first know what it is before thou talk of its
Daties; and first know thy own duty, to cease from lying, for that the light
drives the soul from every duty, that is one of thy lies; it is darkness that
drives from good duties, and not the light.

Pry. The subjects of it sanctifies no Sabbaths, says thou.

Answ. I say, whether we who are called Quakers, or you who accuse us of
Sabbath-breaking, do more truly sanctify a Sabbath, let all that read these
following words consider: First, Do not your hireling parish-masters on that
day that you call your Sabbath, sell the stuff that they have stolen and
bundled together, I mean their Sermons, as they call them; some say they invent
them by study, but I say they rather gather them by stealth out of old Authors,
and other men^ labors; and so are they that steal the word from their
Neig^b^urs, and say, the Lord says it; and the Lord never spoke to them: And
do not they take fifty pounds, an hundred two or three in the year, more or
less, as they can get, for the work that they generally do on that day? Do they
not make it their Market day to sell their stuff on? Is th^s to sanctify a
Sabbath to the Lord? And do not the people that follow them, and so much cry
them up, think their own thoughts, speak their own words, and do their own
works on that day? Nay, Do not many of them use vain drinking, vain gaming and
sporting on that day? Will they not go to a Steeple-house one part of that day,
and spend the rest of it on their own lusts or labors? Is this to sanctify a
Sabbath to the Lord? And thus both priest and people are profane: And whether
do you believe that Christ suffered, and rose again, by which the worship was
taken from the seventh day, yea or nay? And if Yea, then do thou prove where it
was tied to one day above another again, by any command in Scripture, as a day
in seven; The Apostles held their meeting on the first day of the week, and on
other days of the week, and so do we; what have thou now against us concerning
the sanctifying of a Sabbath? We wait on the Lord in filence, as his Spirit
guides us; and we worship him in Spirit, and as he reveals his word to us, we
speak as his Spirit gives us utterance, both in praises and in prayers to our
God on the day which he has chosen to himself; and so do we celebrate an
everlasting Sabbath unto the Lord our God, on the m^unt of his Hol^ness, where
the day is without night

Priest. Seeks not God at any time in Prayer, says thou.

Answ. I say that is another of thy lies, as they can w^tness who have been at
our meetings.

Priest. Craves not so much as a blessing on their meat and drink, say thou.

Answ. That is another of thy lies, as many can witness who have eaten with us,
though we do not utter words outwardly at all times that we eat, according to
the exp^ctation of some men, whose tongues are at their own or other men's
command, who have not the word immediate from the Lord, but their own invented
words, and so they can utter that when they please; or if another man bid them,
when he please^h, then they can either crave a blessing, or give thanks, as ye
call it; and such craving as this, which stands not in Gods counsel, but in
m^ns customs, fashions, and wills, we do utterly deny; and the example of
Christ we own, whose example we follow in our measures, to the gl ry of his
praises.

Priest. In a word, it throws off every Act of Religion, say thou.

Answ. It seems that the Father of lies is so fully seated in thee, that he
has brought thee to his will, to vent forth thy lies, for this is another of
them; the light keeps all them that are guided by it, in the pure Religion, to
relieve the strangers, widows, and fatherless; and the light keeps them
unspotted of the world, who are guided by it: and the light denies all
hypocrites and liars, like thy self, who has not power over their words, all
whose Religion is vain.

Priest. And thou accusest us, that we reprove the very worship of God.

Answ. Zachariah Crofton, if the worship of God had stood in lying, thou had
been grown very high in it, and that God that gives thee to vent forth these
lies, and his worship we do reprove and d^ny: and the God Truth, and holiness,
and his worship, which stands in spirit and truth, which Christ speak o^, we do
own; but the worship of the god of this world, which stands in men's wills, in
outward forms, times, and customs, observing of days, months and times, of
eating and drinking, and outside washings, sprinklings, dippings, plungings,
and the like outward, dead, helpless, and needless shadows we do reprove, and
do deny them.

Priest. And thou accuses us, that we reprove Prayer, Reading, Hearing,
Receiving of Sacraments, and so forth.

Answ. I say, that ever we reproved the prayers of the righteous, that is
another of thy lies; for we own it both in heart and voice, but the Prayers of
such liers as thou art, and vain repetition of words, we reprove and do deny
them: and for thy saying that we reprove Reading and Heari^g, that is more of
thy lies; for reading of the Scripture, and hearing of them read in the meas^re
of the Spirit that gave them forth, we do own: and for receiving of Sacraments,
for which there is no Scripture, we reprove and do deny it, and return them
back to the Pope who invented many of them; and the true Baptism and the Lords
Supper according to the Scripture we own.

Priest. Even all the practices of Piety they decry, say thou.

Answ. Zachariah Crofton, that is another of thy lies; thou labors hard to get
thy measure full; where did either thou, or any man else, hear any of us speak
against a godly and pious life, but thy practice of lying we do decry: what a
nest of lies have thou hatched here in a matter of fourteen lines compass?

Priest. And whereas thou say they leave all men in the dark what they mean
by their light.

Answ. I say, we mean by the light what John and Christ spoke of it, and the
light which we own and speak of, is the light of Christ Jesus, the everlasting
Covenant of light in him was life, and that life was the light of men; this is
the light which we own and speak of; and though it shines in the darkness, yet
thou natu al man, who loves darkness, and delights in lies, thou do not
perceive the things of the Spirit of God; for the light, if thou love it, it
will lead thee out of darkness, and out of such cursed lying as thou lives in:
and if thou walk contrary to it, it is thy c^ndemnation to condemn thee for
ever from the Lord God, and from the glory of his presence; and though thou now
lives in thy envy and mischief, inventing of lies, yet when the day of thy
trouble comes, then shall thou know what is meant by this, except with speed
thou repent.

Priest. Does the light of Nature give liberty to women to be common
Controulers, and ordinary speakers, says thou?

Answ. Zachariah Crofton, (Whatever) that which thou c^lls the light of Nature
gives, yet God gave liberty to the male and to the female to have dominion over
the Beasts, therefore the female may control the Serpent wherever he is; his
head must be broken by the seed of the woman: and I tell thee, as pure glad
tidings as ever was preached to mankind, that was a living Christ risen from
the Sepulcher, was first declared by Mary unto men, before the men knew it; and
would not that which thou calls the light of Nature, have given liberty to Mary
to speak, then (if it would not) it is nothing but darkness put for light.

Priest. But is not silence the duty imposed, and property adorning that Sex,
say thou?

Answ. For the Sex thou may take it to thy self, for thou talks like a
Sectarian; but for silence, it neither is, nor never was imposed upon all the
Female; Your Daughters shall Prophecy says the Lord: Joel 2.28. I permit not
a woman to speak in the Church, says the Apostle; I say, no more do we, but we
permit Christ, who is one in the male and in the female, to speak in his
Temple, whether in male or in female: and do thou not believe that Christ
shall be formed, as in the male, so in the female: and if so, then who art thou
that would impose the women to silence, when Christ is formed in them? Paul
writ to those women that helped him in the Gospel: those are the self lovers,
covetous, boasters, and proud blasphemers, and house-creepers, that would keep
silly women ever learning, and never come to the knowledge of the truth: see 2 Timothy 2. to 8. and seeing you say silence is the duty imposed on them, see that
you be no more angry with them for not speaking to you, when nothing but your
wills requires it.

Priest. But will not the Heathens reject the Religion which is enforced with
feminine voice, say thou?

Answ. I say yea, the heathens will reject it; that is proved in thee, and many
more of the heathens in England, you both reject and rage against the pure
Religion, with what voice soever it comes; but they who are not heathens, that
knows God, they receive it in due time, though you heathens reject it, and rage
and roar at them for receiving of it.

Priest. But they go from Country to Country, and from Nation to Nation, say
thou.

Answ. I say, is that any thing but what Daniel said should come to pass? Many
shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased, Dan. 12.4. But I
believe the greatest thing that troubles thee, and all the Parish-masters in
England in their going, is this, they are often moved to declare against
hypocrites, and such as seek their gains from their quarters, as tithe, hire,
and augmentations; if they did but cry this up as much as they cry it down,
would they not be more born with by the parish masters? give an honest true
answer.

Priest. And thou say, They cursedly revile, rather then convincingly
reprove.

Answ. I say, that is false, it is the fool that says so, for whose back the
rod is prepared; he has reproof, and terms it as cursed railing; yet if they
did rail, as they do not, thou should not have judged them for it, left whilst
thou judge them, thou condemnest thy self; for have thou not called them
black mouths, possessed with Devils, and the like? Is not this railing language
that thou uses to others? For shame speak against railing no more, till thou
have reformed it in thy self, for thou art inexcusable O man that judge
another, and do the same things thy self, for in that thou judge them, thou
condemnest thy self, Romans 2.1. Read thy portion here, and own it, it is pla^n
enough, and due to thee.

Priest. And thou bids the Reader give thee leave to prescribe him some few
Ru^es for his preservation; and first thou bids him set Reason in its Throne,
and thou talks of rational faculties and powers of discerning, discovering and
determining the things which God and Nature has given him; for obs^rve (fayest
thou) the Devil blinds this eye, and de-thrones this Judge, when he advances
the pretended light.

Answ. I say to the consuming lake, with all the robbers that thou advances
and sets up to judge and determine that which God gives; Art thou setting up
reason, and thou knows not what to judge? Must any thing be Judge but Christ
alone? Is not a^l judgment given to the Son of God? Yea, and cursed thou art
that sets up any thing else to judge and determine the things that God gives:
and for Nature, let that be silent in giving good gifts, good gifts are the
gifts of God alone, there is nothing else gives them, though thou would set up
nature as another giver, and in the naturals thou art, a natural man, and
perceives not the things of the spirit of God, and to thee they are
foolishness, as they were to thy forefathers.

Priest. When you are mad, you may be brought to do any thing, say thou.

Answ. I say we think it not strange that thou should term us as madmen; it
is no more then the Pharisees thy forefathers said of the Apostle Paul, and
Christ himself; and we must expect the same portion from the same generation of
vipers and evil doers, and it is our joy, that with Christ we may suffer and
reign.

Many more of thy reproachful lies and false slanders might I mention; as thy
saying we dis-own the Scriptures, and the like; but thus shall I leave thy
bundle of lies, and reproachful false and vilifying words, and proceed to Ralph
Hales book, and see what stuf is therein, and of what force it is.

RAlph Hale, I have perused thy book over, and in the front, or first words
that I found, thou seems to me very highly to boast of some great piece of work
done by thee, by which the Quakers principles, as thou calls them were like to
be overthrown; Titleing thy Book, Quakers Principles quaking; But now if it
fall out with thee as it did with Haman, thou may blame thy self for it; and
if thy own weapons do cut off the head of thy boasting, then remember what
David did to Goliath.

Hale. And in the Title page thou says, Modestly propounded by Ralph Hale, an
affectionate lover of Truth, Admirer of sincere saving light, etc.

Answ. Ralph Hale, If this be thy modesty in which thou have propounded this
stuff in thy book, thou may yet go and learn what modesty is; for here all may
take notice of thy gross darkness and confusion: Thou sai h thou loves the
Truth, and yet admires of sincere saving light; I say, observe these following
words; Christ said, I am the Truth and the Life; John 14.6. and John said, That
life was the light of men, John 1.4. and Christ himself said, I am the light:
John 8.12. Observe here, Christ said, I am the Truth; and Christ said, I am the
light: and to us this light is sincere, true, and saving, though thou admires
thereof as thou says: Now all may take notice what love thou have to the
truth, that puts a difference between the truth and the light; and says, Thou
art a lover of the one, and yet an admirer of the other: but if thou had loved
the truth, or known it, thou had loved the sincere saving light also, for
Christ is the Truth, and Christ is the sincere saving light: and thou says
thou admires of sincere saving light, but thou art not the first that was of
that generation that were despisers, wonderers, and admirers of Christ, who is
the sincere saving light: Herod thy forefather, and all Jerusalem with him,
were put into as great admiration and trouble as possibly thou can be now, when
they heard of Christ who is the sincere saving light: Repent thou with speed
lest thy end be like Herod's.

But before I go any further, remember that in the 25th page, there speaking of
the Scriptures, to be the Law and Testimony, thou say, what ever pretended
color you put upon it, if it be not Law and testimony proof, I shall give no
credit to it, says thou; Now I say, if that which thou affirms in thy Book
cannot be proved by Scripture, thou should not think much at me for denying it,
and turning it on thee again as false, seeing thou have owned the Scripture as
the Rule and Touchstone to try words by, and except thou be a liar, thou will
give no credit to what thou have affirmed that cannot be proved by Scripture.

And in four pages thou prints the Quakers paper, as thou calls it: and in the
fifth page, where thou speaks of an answer to it, thou arr talking of the
bended knees of thy soul.

Answ. Ralph Hale, here I charge thee to be one that speaks of what thou knows
not, in speaking of the soul; and whether thou speaks good or evil of it, thou
speaks of what thou knows not: and in the Title page of thy book thou say,
they speak evil of what they do not know; take that to thy self, and own it,
until thou can give an account what thine own soul is.

Hale. And thou say thou looks upon it to be very dangerous piece, to break
and rend our selves from the Church of God.

Answ. I say, so do I too; but to depart from hypocrites, and false hirelings,
and such as seek their gain from their quarters, which the Prophet called Dogs,
and such as Christ declared against, who have Greetings in the Market, and are
called of men Masters, I count it no danger to depart from such, but a good
duty, which the Scripture joyneth upon us; for after the Apostle has reckoned
up several evil workers, he says, from such turn away. 2 Timothy 3.5.

Hale. And thou say, thou art able in some measure to d^stinguish between
the Word of God, and God the Word.

Answ. I say, the Father and the Son is one, and the Son of God is the Word of
God, Rev. 19.13. his name is called the Word of God, and the child of God will
give that name to none but the Son of God alone; for the father has given him
a name above every name, Ephesians. 2.9. and whereas thou have said thou art able to
distinguish between the Word of God, and God the Word, and yet have laid down
no distinction how they may know the one from the other by their several
grounds, foundations, and natures, several operations and workings in the
creature, and what difference betwixt them, and how it may be known; I say thou
art but a proud boaster, a sayer, and not a doer; when thou should lay down thy
distinctions, thou puts it off with a shuffle, and talks of the Bible being the
external Word, and such strange words as these, and so says nothing to the
purpose.

Hale And whereas thou affirms the Bible to be the Word of God or the external
Word, as sometimes thou terms it.

Answ. Ralph Hale, why will thou talk of the Bible being the Word of God, or
the external Word, for thou will give no credit to what thou have spoken,
except thou be a liar, for thou have made that null and void by thy own rule in
thy book, that is not law and testimony proof, there is no Scr^pture that says
the Bible is the Word of God, or the external Word; and in the 25. page of thy
Book thou say, if it be not Law and Testimony proof, thou will give no
credit to it: and I say, thou had as good prove thy self a cheat, as yet again
prove thy self a liar.

Hale. And in the 6 and 7 pages thou art reckoning up those Titles that God
gave to his Ministers both of the Law and Gospel, as thou say.

Answ, Ralph Hale, What have such hypocrit^s, dogs, and hirelings as seek their
gain from their qua te^s, to do with those Titles that God gave to his
Ministers that abode in his Doctrine? And what have thou to do to give those
Titles to them that practice the same things that the dogs and hirelings did?
For when Christ found such as stood praying in the Synagogues, and had
greetings in the Markets, he gave them the Title of hypocrites, and forbade
their ways, and the same Spirit will give them that do the same things, the
same Titles now.

Hale. And thou says, May we not conclude with our Saviors own words, He that
hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me?

Answ. Ralph Hale, thou art in a great error or mistake if thou think that
Christ spoke those words to such hypocrites and hirelings as send men about
their quarters to gather them in Calves, and Geese, and young Swine for their
preaching; they were not so swinishly minded that Christ spoke those words to,
they coveted no man's gold nor silver, and if they had food and raiment, they
would be therewith content; but the dogs will never be content, and here take
heed thou have not called evil good, and good evil: remember thou have
denounced a woe in the Title page of thy book, to them that do so; and all who
have an eye may here see that woe meet with thee, and everlastingly it is thy
portion, except with speed thou repent.

Hale. And in the 8 page thou say, thou would gladly know whether we will
acknowledge the whole Scripture to be the Word of God, or no, I mean the whole
Bible, say thou.

Answ. I say, if thou mean that the whole B^ble is the Word of God, I say Nay;
for I do acknowledge no God but one, nor no word of God but one, and Christ is
that Word, the Bible is no more then a true declaration of what it declares;
the Bible ^s a declaration of those words that God spoke, but not the whole
Bible; some p^rt of it is a declaration of those words he devil spoke, Luke
4.3. and 6. the devil said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, etc. and the
divil said unto him, All this power will I give thee: Is this the words of God,
or the words of the devil? And further, if I should say that the Bible were the
Word of God, thou would give no credit to it, except thou be a liar, for there
is no Scripture says so, and in the 25 page of thy book thou say, if it be
not Law and Testimony proof, thou will give no credit to it; for shame do not
m^ke thy self a liar, lest whilst thou goes about to make the Quakers
Principles quake, thou break thy own in pieces.

Hile. And in the 7 page thou said, the ministers work is for the perfecting of
the Saints, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, which is the Church, say
thou.

Answ. I say, if the Ministers work be for the perfecting of the Saints, and
for the edifying of the Body of Christ, then see that thou do not deny
perfection in this life, lest thou leave the Ministers neither time nor place
to do their work in, for the work that the Ministers does, they must do it in
this life: The dead that die in the Lord rest from their labors, and their
works follow them: Rev. 14.13. there is no perfecting of the Saints in the
grave: and for the Body of Christ, which thou say is the Church, it is risen
from the grave, for the Church is in God, therefore see that thou do not leave
the Ministers their work to do after this life.

Hale. And in the tenth page line the 14. thou say, (But you say this Law so
much insisted upon, together with the Priesthood of it, is changed, and the
Commandment disanulled, and this you bottom upon Hebr. 7.12. and 18. say
thou.

Answ. I say here let all take notice, that the very same words that we bear
witness to, that is the changing of the Law and Priesthood, and the disanulling
of the Commandments, and that on which we have bottomed it, as thou thy self
art forced to confess they are plain Scripture words without adding or
diminishing, as they are written in Heb. 7.12. and 18. and here again let all
take notice what Spirit thou speaks from, that by thy enchantment would make it
seem as though the Law and Priesthood were not changed, and the Commandments
not disanulled, except in such sancies and imaginations as thy vain mind can
admit of and so would prove the Apostle a Liar.

Hale. And whereas thou say thou do affirm that Moses, and the Prophets,
and the Gospel are all one in substance, and in effect the very same.

Answ. Ralph Hale, thou do affirm that whereof thou knows nothing but by
hearsay, thou never yet came to Christ, who is the Gospel, and there is no
other Gospel, nor to the Prophets, nor to Moses estate, but thou art between
Adam and Moses, and there death reigns over thee, and if thou might not have
talked of Moses, the Prophets, nor the Gospel, till thou had known Moses to
give a Law against sin, and the transgressor in thee, and the Prophets to
denounce Gods judgments against sin in thee, and the Gospel of peace that
makes free from sin, we had not found so many Scriptures wrested in thy Book,
by adding thy cursed meanings, and the plagues of God must be added to him that
adds.

Hale. And in page 11. line 15. thou say, in respect of order of the
Priesthood it is not changed; with the next words thou confutes that again; for
(says thou) Christ is a Priest for ever after the order of Meschisedec: and in
page 15* two of the last lines thou say, Christ is a Priest not after the
order of Aaron, but after the unchangeable order of Melchisedec.

Answ. Ralph Hale, Is this the modesty that thou talks of in the Title page of
thy book, in which thou propounds this stuff? Thou here confesses that Christ
is a Priest, not after the order of Aaron, but after the order of Melchisedec:
Now let all consider whether the Levitical Priesthood of Aarons order under
which the Law was given to the people, was not changed when another Priesthood
was risen, called by the name of another order, the one being called by the
order of Aaron, and the other by the order of Melchisedec, as in Heb. 7.11.
which thou thy self art forced to confess that Christ is a Priest not after
Aarons order, but after the order of Melchisedec; though before in page 11.
line 19. thou said in respect of the order of the Priesthood it is not changed:
And here all may take notice of thy spirit of consusion, and what saying and
unsaying of a thing thou makes: But when the Leopard is without spots, then
will that nature that thou lives in be without confusion.

Hale. And thou say, Tithes of Divine Right do belong to the servants of
Melchised^chs order.

Answ. I say, if Tithes belongs to the servants, then the Masters have nothing
to do with them, therefore see that you give not them to them that are called
masters; for by thy own rule they do not belong to masters, but servants; and
the servants of Melchisedechs order, who are Ministers of the Gospel, they
neither do, nor never did demand them, but will be content with Gospel wages:
If we have food and raiment, let us be therewith content, 1 Timothy 6.8.

Hale. And thou say, I might instance the Sacraments of old under the Law.

Answ. Ralph Hale, Where is now thy modesty that thou talks of in the Title
page of thy Book, in which thou propounds thy stuff? It is far from modesty to
make lies, and here thou d^st both make and instance lies, for there is no such
thing as a Sac ament ever men ioned in all the time under the Law, therefore
that is not Law and testimony proof, then wilt sure give no credit to it for
shame, lest thou make thy self a liar; and thou must here either prove thy self
a liar, or thy book a cheat; for in page 25. thou say, if it be no^ Law and
Testimony proof, thou will give no credit to it: and here confider whose
principles thou makes to q ache.

Hale. And thou talks of two Sacraments more, and calls them those two
Sacraments that Christ instituted.

Answ. Ralph Hale, thou here again wants that modesty that thou talks of in thy
Title page of thy book, to propound thy stuff in, for here thou have propounded
two lies, and thou cast them on Christ, which is furthest of all from modesty
for thee to belly Christ; for Christ never spoke of such a thing as a Sacrament
in all the Scriptures, but thy grandfather the Pope invented S^craments, and
you plead for a remnant of them; but the Pope and all his Sacraments we do
deny, and the true Baptism and the Lords Supper according to Scripture we own.

Hale. And thou have wrested the Scriptures so long by thy cursed meanings
added to them, to di^prove the Apostle, who said there is verily a disanulling
of the Commandment going before, and he lays down the reason, for the weakness
and unprofitableness th^reo^, H^b. 7.18. ye thou having thy understanding
darkened, thou breaks forth and says, where lies now the disanulling of the
Commandment, except in the sense before mentioned, say thou?

Answ. I say the disanulling of ^he commandment stan^s now in the blood of
Christ, the everlasting Covenant of light, life, and peace, where i^ stood
before thou begun to wrest these Scriptures to thy own destruction.

Hale. For as to the total annihilating, disanulling, or destroying the Law,
our Savior disclaims it in his own words, say thou.

Answ. I say, what cunning crooked turns and ginns the serpent takes in thee,
to smite the innocent with thy tongue! Here thou leaves forth our words, and
mentions what will make for thy wicked purpose, and thou gives an answer to
that; and then say, it is an answer to the Quakers paper: Was there such a
word in all that p per, as that the Law is destroyed? Will thou suffer the
Devil forge his lies upon thy heart, and then make thy self his servant to cast
them upon us by his and thy Divelish enchantments? Did Christ ever disclaim the
changing of the Law and Priesthood, or the disanulling of the commandments
going before? and that was the thing we spoke of, and not the destroying of the
Law, as the paper it self in thy book printed stands a witness against thee.

Hale, And thou say the Ministers of the Gospel are servants of
Melchisedechs order.

Answ. Ralph Hale, Ministers of the Gospel be servants, then that is one clear
mark by which they may be known from those hypocrites, dogs, and hirelings that
have greetings in the markets, and are called of men Master: Does this make the
Quakers principles quake, or it cuts your own principles down, let all judge?
That this is the thing that the Quakers do affirm, that the Ministers of the
Gospel should not be called masters, but should be servants; Therefore see thou
write the Priest of Leverpool, Master Fogge no more in thy Books, lest thou
shame him.

And thou pleads, That Tithe of Divine Right belongs to the Ministers of the
Gospel.

Answ. Ralph Hale, That is the thing that thou have yet to prove, I deny it.

Hale. And thou say, the way, form, and kind in which the Ministers wages
ought to be paid, is not so clear from the New Testament as from the Old.

Answ. I say, the way, form, and kind in which the Ministers wages ought to be
paid, is as clear from the new Testament, as Tithes was from the old; but the
greedy Dogs and hirelings will not be content with the wages that Christ
appointed to the Ministers of the Gospel: Is it not written, Provide neither
gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses, nor scripps for your journey,
neither two Coats, nor shoes; for the workman is worthy of his meat. Matthew.
10.9. and 10. Luke 10.7, 8. Eat such things as they give, for the Lab^urer is
worthy of his hire: And into whatsoever City ye enter, and they receive you,
eat such things as is set before you. Thus you see that the hire or wages that
the Lord appointed, was to eat, and be satisfied, as before mentioned, they
should not provide aforehand, but as the Lord appointed them, yea to a coat or
shoes, they were not to go beyond his appointment, but to be content with
sufficiency for the present; therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your
life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your Body, what ye
shall put on. Mat. 6.25. and verse 28. Why take ye thought for raiment?
Consider the Lillies of the field, etc. and verse the 30, 31, and 32. O ye of
little faith. Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? Or what
shall we drink? Or wherewithal shall we be clothed? For after all these things
do the Gentiles seek; and so forth. Thus we see the Ministers wages ought to be
paid, set down by Christ himself; and methinks Christ's own words should take
place with thee; but indeed it is the Prophet said, the Dogs will never have
enough, Isa. 56.10, 11. but tell me if this wages that Christ appointed for the
Min^sters of the Gospel, had been of a greater value, or a greater proportion,
and had exceeded tithes in proportion, as far as tithes exceed a sufficient
maintenance of food and raiment, do thou not believe that those called
Ministers in England would have pleaded up the maintenance that Christ had
appointed, as highly as they now do Tithes, and have denied Tithes, as clearly
taken away, except they could have had both? Let all consider this.

Hale. So then, we see it pleased the most wise God, whose is the earth, and
the fullness thereof, to appoint such a proportion as the tenth part, both
before the Law, and under the Law, and never after expressly did take it off,
says thou.

Answ. I say, to that which thou calls before the Law, I shall answer thee in
due time, if God will; and that which thou call under the Law, I say God did
not appoint it for the Priests only, but for a due preparation f^r meat and
drink for the strangers, widow, and fatherless, and the Levite, because he had
no inheritance among the rest of the people, he was not to be forsaken, but to
eat and be satisfied, as well as the strangers, widows, and fatherless; Deuteronomy.
14.27, 28, 29. and in Mal. 3.10, it is again clearly proved, that tithes was
appointed for a due and full how Christ not only forewarned his Ministers that
they should not possess gold nor silver, but also forewarn them that they
should not provide beforehand for food and raiment; and we find them as truly
observing it: If we have food and raiment, let us be therewith content: 1 Timothy
6.8. and the workman is worthy his meat, says Christ; Is not here a clear way,
form, and kind, in which preparation for meat in the Lords house; Bring ye all
the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in my house, says the
Lord; and the sons of Levi who receiv^d the office of the Priesthood, they
might by that commandment take tithe of the people according to the Law,
whilst that Commandment was of force, but this does not make that the
Ministers of the Gospel should t^ke tithes, and contrary to that commandment or
custom in those days, purloyn it to their own ends, and spoil, defraud, and
oppress the poor strangers, widows, and fatherless, by tyranny, cruelty, and
oppression, and then creep into their particular houses, and live like fed
hoggs, of that which poor men labors for in the sw^at of their brows, and
sometimes with thin coats, and slender diet, and truly the Priests of England
have exceeded their forefathers, all the false Prophets, dogs, and hirelings
that ever went before them, in tyranny, and abominable o^pression, in sueing
men at Law for Tithes, and sometimes valuing the thing near to twice the worth,
and then take treble damage, according to that unjust valuation, and se^ze upon
their goods, and take them away upon that unjust account, which is contrary to
the just Law of the Nation: This was done by Priest Whithed for one amongst the
rest, priest at Halton in Lancashire, near Lancaster, and haling men's bodies
into Prison, and the like savage Tyranny as was never done by any of the false
Prophets their forefathers, and thus lives the hirelings in England, instead
of feeding the poor with Tithes, they spoil the poor for Tithes: now the
Priests under the Law were to eat and be satisfied, even so has the Lord
ordained, that they that preach the Gospel, should l^ve of the Gospel, for the
workman is worthy of his meat, Mat. 10.10. And, have we not power to eat and to
drink, says the Apostle 1 Cor. 9.4. and again, it is written in the Law of
Moses, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn: Now
we know, and I hope so do you all, that the manner of that ^x^mple of the Ox^s,
that he should eat end be satisfi^d, and not to have a great deal more then is
need ul, to spoil and lie by him, whilst the rest of the exen were l^ke to
st^^v^ with want; I speak this by way of comparison, I know the Apostl s spoke
for the Mi^isters s^ke only, and I (...) so do you all, that their mouths might
not be ^^sled or straightened, to eat and be satisfied, and have a sufficiency for
fo^d and ^ayment: I pray you see this c mparison of the Ox^^ Thou shall not
muzzle the mouth of the Ox, etc. and compare it with other Scriptures, and you
shall prau^ly see, that Gods minis^ers that he appointed to wait on his
service, were only to have a s^fficiency for food and raiment, and were t^ be
^herewith satisfied and content; and you shall find that the Tithes were
appointed for a due preparation of meat in the Lords house, and the greatest
part for the maintenance of the poor strangers, widows, and fatherl^ss, and
the Levi e, because he had no inheritance with the rest of the people, he was
not to be forsaken, but to eat and be satisfied. Now I say, compare that of the
Ox, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox, compare it with 1 Cor. 9.7. Who
plants a Vin^ard, and eats not of the fruit hereof; or who seeds a flock and
eats not of the milk of the flock? and ver. 4. Have not we power to eat and
drink? and having food and raiment, let us be therewith content; 1 Timothy 6.8.
compare th^se with Deuteronomy. 14. and the 29. The Levite because he has no part nor
i^heritance with thee, and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow,
which are within thy gates, shall come, and shall at, and be satisfied; Thus
you see, that all along both under the Law and Gospel, Gods ministers were to
have a sufficiency for food and raiment, and were therewith to be satisfied and
content: and here in Deuteronomy. 14.26. the Levite was to eat, and he was then to be
satisfied: Observe these words, Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which
preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel; and having food and raiment, let
us be therewith content, says ^he Apostle: But I s^y the dogs will never be
coatent, for they will never have enough, says the Prophet, Isa. 56.10, 11.
and if a man should throw all the meat that he had amongst many dogs, they
would fall out about it. I pray you see what your Priests do about Viccarages,
Parsonages, and the like gains which they seek from their quarters, do they not
fall out about them? and it is no new thing to be troubled with such greedy
dogs as seeks their gains from their quarters, it is as old as Isaiahs
Prophecy, proveable; and I say, he that takes more then food and raiment for
preaching, he is out of the example of the Gospel Ministers, and in the example
of the dogs that Isa speaks of, and so one of them se^king gain to himself.

Hale. And thou says that God appointed the tenth part to be paid under the
Law.

Answ. So did God appoint outward Circumcision under the Law.

Hale. But God appointed the tenth part to be paid before the Law, says thou.

Answ. I say, that ever God appointed it before the Law, that is left to thee
to prove where, and when, and by what rule or command he appointed it; and I
say, God did not onl^ appoint Circumcision, but he gave Abraham an express
command not to neglect it, he nor his seed after him, in all their generations:
And the uncircumcised man-child, whose flesh of his foreskin is not
circumcised, that soul shall be cut off ^r^m his people, he has broken my
Covenant says the Lord, Genesis 15. from the tenth to the fourteenth, and this
you can well agree to, that the outward practice thereof is taken out of the
way, blotted oat, and nailed to the Cr^ss; for this would bring you little
gains from your quarters, but Tithes you say must needs of Divine Right be kept
up but if it be not for filthy luc^^s sake, let all honest hearts consider.

Hale. And thou affirms that tithes, or the tenth part, was never expressly
taken off.

Answ. I say Tithes are as fully taken off, and it is as provea^le as the
worship is from the seventh day, and as outward Circumcision is taken off to
all that believe that the Lord Jesus Christ suffered for man's redemption, and
role again the third day; for one and the same Christ that finished and took
off the one, he finished and took off the other at the same time, for says the
Apostle, Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances, and nailed it to his
Cross; Col. 2.14. and having abolished in his flesh the enmity even the Law of
Commandments contained in ordinances, Ephesians. 2.15. and again, If ye be dead with
Christ from the rudiments of the world, why as though living in the world are
ye subject to ordinances? So we see that the handwriting of ordinances is not
only blotted out, and nailed to the cross, Col. 2.14. and the law of
commandments contained in ordinances abolished, Ephesians. 2.15. but the Apostle so
clearly disclaims all outward dead ordinances, that he demands of him a
question why they would be subject to ordinances? Col. 2.20. so it is clear to
all who do not make themselves wilfully blind, that the ordinance of tithes, as
well as other things is blotted out, taken off, and the practice of them clean
given over, either receiving or demanding of them, till the Pope brought them
up again for the maintenance of Prelates, Priests, Jesuits, Monks and Friars and
now the hirelings cries loud for them.

Hale. Besides this, Abraham in whose loins Levi was, paid Tithes to
Melchisedec before the Law was given, says thou.

Answ. I say Abraham freely gave a gift to Melchisedec, and he might have kept
it ungiven, without breaking any command of God for any thing that we read of,
and seeing thou have appealed to that free gift, first see the cause that
brought it to pass in the outward, and do thou begin in order as tithes came to
M^lchisede^, and let the Priests of England have no tithes, till tithes come to
them as it came to Melchisedec. First Abraham had been at the pursuit and
slaughter of them that had spoiled the Country, and he brought back the people
and the spoils, and Melchisedec d^manded no tithes, but came to bring a gift
and he blessed Abraham, and Abraham pleased to give him such a proportion as
the tenth part of the spoils only at that one time, and why might not Abraham
have kept all the spoils to himself if he had pleased? or why might he not have
given all the spoils to Melchisedec if he had pleased? and if he had given
Melchisedec all the spoils, would you have made that a pattern for the Priests
of England to take all their crease in England? What might the rest of the
people have had then? and if this of Melchisedec be the order that you would
make a rule for the Priests to receive tithes by, you must rather expect them
from the Soldiers, and such as go forth to pursue and slay the enemies, and
rescue the people and spoils, and bring them ba^k, then to expect them from
Farmers, Husbandmen, and such like: Melchisedec received not tithes of the
yearly increase of Farmers and Husbandmens estates, but a free gift out of the
spoils that was taken in a fight, and that only at one time; and if you do but
stick to this order, when any spoil is brought back in England, as Abraham
brought them back, if the Priests then come and bring a gift, and a blessing,
as Melchisedec did, and keep in Melchisechs order, and demand no more tithes
then he did, then if any man give them a gift, as Abraham did to Melchisedec,
whether they give them the tenth part, less or more, for any thing I know, they
may receive it without offense; I do not speak a free gift when it is freely
given, but we speak against such as seeks after gifts and rewards, and when
they cannot have it freely given, they will compel men to give in, or else they
will take it by fore; it is such as these that we speak against.

Hale. And when thou have raked through the Scriptures to prove (if thou could)
that Tithes is due to the Ministers of the Gospel, but cannot find one example
in the Bible where any of them did either receive or demand tithes, thou art at
last so driven from chamber to chamber to hide thy shameful Argument, that at
last thou flies to the muckiest hole of all; and say, Now if any be not yet
satisfied in this point, I refer him to the labors of a learned Divine in his
time, to wit Bishop Hall, who in a little Treatise of his called Practical
cases of Conscience, does at large resolve this great controversy about tyths,
says thou.

Answ. Ralph Hale, All who have the eye of discerning open in any measure, may
here see what a poor shameful shuffle thou makes, and what a shameful end thou
have brought thy shameful Argument to at last, that is driven out of all
Scripture, and cannot find one example in it all, but flies to the Bishop cases
for a refuge to hide thy deceit with, in pleading for Tithes: I pray thee, Was
not Bishops voted down long since by many in England, and some of them put to
death for the unjust couses that they made and maintained? and are thou now
pleading the Bishops cases up again, that thou may gee a refuge among them, to
hide thy deceitful cases in pleading for Tithes? the Bishops made cases more
for their own ends, then for Conscience sake; and woe to you that makes cases,
to compel men of tender consciences to do things contrary to the light of
Christ in the Conscience, if you could.

Hale. And from page 20 to the 25. thou art wrangling to and fro about
perfection, and it seems thou knows not what thou would make of it: and in page
21. thou say, I shall now proceed to the direct answer of your question, to
wit, whether perfection be attainable in this life, yea or nay, you say it is,
I say it is not, say thou.

Answ. Ralph Hale, Where is now thy modesty that thou talked of in the Title
page of thy book? What a wrangling, and j^ngling, and cavelling; What saying
and unsaying of a thing thou makes here? Did thou not say in the 7. page line
14. that the Ministers work is for the perfecting of the Saints? and now thou
say that perfection is not attainable in this life: I pray thee where must
the Ministers perfect the Saints if not in this lif^? Art thou one of those
that holds a Purgatory? Thou begins to smell very like the Pope, in that thou
say perfection is not attainable in this life; and yet confesses that the
Ministers work is for the perfecting of the Saints.

Hale. And then thou say, Perfection is not attainable in this life, except
we take along with us these following limitations.

Answ. Ralph Hale, Thou have here again unsaid what thou said before; for
before thou said (without if or and) plainly, that perfect on is not attainable
in this life, and now thou grants a possibility of attaining to it in this
life, if we would take along with us thy limitations, which indeed is nothing
else but thy vain fancies and imaginations, without either ground or foundation.

Hale. And in page 25. line 2. thou say indeed, that Christ is perfection
itself.

Answ. Ralph Hale. How will this agree with thy former assertion, to wit, That
perfect on is not attainable in this life? Do thou affirm that Christ is not
attainable in this life, for thou say Christ is perfection it self? now I
say, If Christ be perfection it self, and if perfection be not attainable in
this life, by this thou makes void all laboring and striving to attain to
Christ in this life; who said, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heav^e
laden, and so you that are without perfection in this life, you are without
Christ in this life, by thy own confession.

Hale. And thou say, Who-ever thou art that boastest of standing upon the
feet of thy own perfection, I say unto thee in the name of the Lord, if thou
stand at all, thou stand by Faith: Be not high minded, but fear; say
thou.

Answ. Ralph Hale, When will thou cease from this secret sl^ndering, and
cunning fly ginns that thou have to utter thy deceitful and hard speeches
against us in? for I see the Devils drift in thy words, is to present us to the
world as they that boasted of their own perfection, and all such boasting and
boasters we do deny, both in word and thought, and before Gods Judgment seat
do I stand justified in this thing; and when the Book of Conscience is opened,
thou shall find this true; and then shall thou, with the rest of Cains and
Ishmaels brood, receive a just reward for all your hard and scornful speeches
against us: And the perfection which we own, is the perfect righteous glory of
God in Christ, manifested in the creature, which is attained unto, and enjoyed
by the faith of the Son of God in the light abiding, and not else, therefore
unknown to thee; and all self righteousness and perfections we do utterly deny.

Hale. And thou reckons up four perfections one after another in the 21 and 22
pages: First, Thou say there is an imputative perfection. Secondly, There is
perfection in part, say thou. And thirdly, There is a comparative
perfection. And fourthly and lastly, There is an absolute perfection say
thou. And three of them thou will acknowledge to be attainable in this life,
and the fourth unattainable. All which I shall by the assistance of God make
clear by Scripture, and that very briefly, say thou.

Answ. Ralph Hale, Here again thou wants that mod^sty that thou s^eaks of in
the Title page of thy book to propound thy stuff in, for here thou was more
brief and hasty, then e^ther modest or wis^, in saying thou would make it cl^ar
by Scripture that there is four perfections: I say there is no Scripture that
spe^ks of four perfections, thou may prove it as soon as thou can, and by what
thou can; for if there be four perfections, they are more then we own, or ^ver
spoke of, or ^ver knew of, by three of them; and thou say that three of them
is at a n^ble in this life: and when we say there is but one perfection
attainable in this life, you are angry with us, and deni^s it, and some will
say it is blasp^emy, yet in thy modesty have propounded three for your selves:
I say, those three strange perfections that thou talks of, shall be for your
selves, for we own no perfection but one, and that is the perfect righteous
glory of God in Christ Jesus, the everlast^ng covenant of life, light, and
peace, given by the measure of the gist of Christ the light, and manifest in
the creature, to the glory of the praise of God, and the least measure of that
is perfect, and what is perfect is absolutely perfect, according to the measure
of the gift of God, and the gift of God is absolutely perfect, and there is no
image or likeness to be made of perfection; he that calls any thing else
perfection, is an Image-maker, and a Wizard.

Hale. And in page the 22. thou say, There is an absolute perfection, when
the members shall be made like Christ our Head, when we shall be glorified
together with him, when these vile b^dies shall be made like his glorious body,
say thou; but I say, observe these following words, when all the remainders
of corrupt nature shall be consumed in Gods furnace (I mean the grave, say
thou.)

Answ. Ralph Hale, Here let all take notice that thou have affirmed that
perfection is not attainable till all the remainders of corrupt nature shall be
consumed in Gods furnace, and let them take notice that thou say thou means
the grave: I say, here we smell the evil factor of the Pope in thee, and by
this thou lays open and plain your secret sub^le masked pop^ry, which you hold
up; and truly thou have dealt more plainly and honestly, then the old Serpent
will do in many of you, in that thou have told us of a furnace, in which the
remainders of your corrupt nature must be consumed, before that you can be
perfect, and say thou means the grave: for ^ere thou have fully unmasked
Antichrist and the Pope in you, that he begins to appear in his own colors,
and it is no marvel if you deny perfection in this life, that hopes for a
furnace in the grave, to c^nsume the remainders of your corrupt nature in; but
I pray thee how far lies that furnace that thou talks of in the grave from the
Popes purgatory? and what difference between them? and whether it is not the
same, yea or nay? though thou would color it over with another name put upon
it, and so if it were possible thou would deceive the very elect with it; but
is that furnace that thou talks of in the grave the power by which thou will
make the Quakers principles so to quake, that thou so highly boasts or in
Titleing thy book Quakers principles quak^ng? But if whilst thou have gone
about to make the Quakers principles quake, I say, if that while thou have not
brok^n thy own in pieces, let all who have the eye of discerning consider it.

Hale. And whereas thou talks of Christ your head, and you his members, for
thou say, when we the members shall be made like Christ our head.

Answ. Ralph Hale, Thou may own the Pope for thy head whilst thou talks of a
furnace in the grave; and for Christ, thou have put him at a great distance
from you, in that thou say Christ is perfection it self, and yet says
perfection is not attainable in this life; here by thy own words Christ whom
thou say is your head, and thou say he is perfection it self, and you
members must never meet together whilst you are in this life; Thus thou have
put a great distance between Christ and you, in that thou say Christ is
perfection it self, and yet says, perfection is not attainable in this life.

Hale. And in page 25. thou art talking of a full answer to our paper.

Answ. Ralph Hale, if thou will answer it fully, when will thou answer that
part of it about the Priests, that if they will take tithes, they should feed
the poor strangers, widows, and fatherless with them; but it was the practice
of Judas who was a thief, and betrayed Christ, to plead hard for something to
put in the bag, but he cared little for the poor; it seems no more do thou;
and truly Judas seemed to have more honesty then we find in thee; for he said,
the oyn^ment might have been sold, and given to the poor; but thou have not so
much as once mentioned that the Priests should seed the poor with the Tithe,
but have all to the hirelings.

Hale. And in page 26. thou art talking of the Saints assemblies, and a place
where God has promised his more especial presence, the Church of God, the
pillar and ground of Truth, say thou.

Answ. Ralph Hale, for the Saints assembl^es, let them alone, thou have nothing
to do with them, thou must first come out of the Pop^s opinions, there was
never none of the Saints that hoped for a furnace in the grave, to consume the
remainders of corrupt nature in; thou, and all that does so, are of the Popes
Assemblies; and for the Church of God, it is in God, 1 These. 1.1. and that is
not the steeple-house, nor any other limited place set up in the will of man:
and for the pillar and ground of truth, what have thou to do to talk of it,
thou know nothing of it, thy pillar and ground is the pillar and ground of
deceit, who talks of a furnace in the grave.

Hale. And thou say it is truly desired of all Gods people, that there were
no corruption in your Churches, as thou calls them.

Answ. Ralph Hale, How came thou to know that G^ds people desired it, except
some of them have told thee so? for there was never none of Gods people that
talked of a furnace in the grave, as thou do.

Hale. And thou say there will be Tares amongst the wheat, and it is the
Lord of the Harvest his Decree, that they shall grow together till the Harvest.

Answ. Ralph Hale, of the most wicked and cursed Tares that cumbers the wheat,
thou have manifested thy self to be one, in that thou talks of a furnace in the
grave, and thou that knows not and sees not the Harvest come, thou a^t that
cursed and blasted Tare, on which the mildew is fallen; and from henceforth
shall thou find thy withering and decay, except with speed thou repent.

Hale. I shall be far from judging any of you, says thou; and again, I judge
you not, say thou.

Answ I say, that is a subtle Curr that will bite when he fawns; and if thou
do not judge us to be such as have broken and rent our selves from the Church
of God, and the Body of Christ, if thou do not judge us to be such, why do
thou term us to be such in thy Book? Is not this double deceit and hypocrisy
that is lodged in thee? First to judge us unjustly and falsely, and then to say
thou will not judge us? But it is the manner of an old Sophister, to cover that
in himself, and lay it on others, which he is mo^^ guilty of himself.

Hale. And in page 27. thou say, Thou desires that we may be careful to try
the Spirits, whether they be of God or no; for many false Spirits, as well as
false Prophets, are gone out into the world, say thou.

Answ. Ralph Hale, a more false Prophet then thou art, and a more false Spirit
then thou speaks from, can scarce be gone forth into the world, in that thou
talks of a furnace in the g^ave, a^ all may re^d in thy Book, page t^^ 22. and
seeing thou have bidden us Try the Spirits, we have tried thine, and we fi^d it
to be a false popish Spirit, and therefore we shall take heed of thee.

Hale. Thou say thou heartily wishes that we may return and join our selves
to the Communion of the Saints in the Public Ordinances of God, that we may
have a sweet fellowship and communion with the Father and tho Son, as ever we
had before your going out from us, say thou.

Answ. Ralph Hale, both thee, and all that are in fellowship with thee in thy
popish opinions, who call your selves saints, and are not, and your communion,
and your fellowship, and your public ordinances, as you call them, and your
Father, and that Son that leads you to hope for a furnace in the grave, I do
deny, both you and them all; for that Father is the Father of lies, and that
Son is the Son of perdition, and those Ordinances are dead, and carnal, and
popish, that leads you into such things.

Hale. And with which I will conclude, say thou, If either you, or any man
or men teach otherwise, and consent not to the wholesome words of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine which is according to godliness, let him
pretend as much humility as he can, he is proud, knowing nothing, but doteth
about questions, and strife of words, whereof comes envy, railing, evil
surmisings. 1 Timothy 6.3, 4.

Answ. Ralph Hale, if t^ou might have mentioned Timothys words no more then
thou had lived in Timothys life, thou had been as dumb as those dogs that
Isaiah speaks of; and I pray thee see how Timothys words meets with thee, who
ta^ks of a furnace in the grave; is that according to the wholesome words of our
Lord Jesus C^^^, and the doctrine which is according ^o godliness; or is it
according to the Popes Doctrine? H^re be thy own Judge, and let shame stop thy
mouth.

And now I say to ye all in and about Liverpool, and elsewhere, to the light of
Christ, turn in your minds to that in the conscience, which shows you sin and
evil, and check^ and reproves you in secret, for the evil of your ways, to th t
take heed, that by it you may be guided up to God, from whence the light comes,
as you tender your everlasting salvation; and if you neglect this, when the day
of your trouble comes, in which you cry woe and alas, then remember that you
were forewarned in your life time, to that in your consciences do I speak, the
light which comes from the Lord Jesus Christ, and lighte^h every man that comes
into the world, which is the Saints guide and teacher to guide them up to God,
and the sure word of Prophecy, to which they are to take heed; and if by it
you be guided, it will lead you up to the Lord Jesus Christ, and this is the
way to salvation, the light, and there is no other way to salvation but Christ
the light; and if you walk contrary to the light, then the light is your
condemnation; and to you all this is the Word of Truth, witnessed by that in
all the consciences shall it be, when the Book of Conscience is opened;
Remember this, and whilst you have time prize it.

W. A.

The End.

