depiction of a handshake between two arms emerging from clouds Profits.

Pleasures.



A Treatise of FRVIT-TREES Showing the manner of Grafting, Setting, Pruning,
and Ordering of them in all respects: According to diverse new and easy Rules of
experience; gathered in ye space of Twenty years. Whereby the value of Lands
may be much improued, in a short time, by small cost, and little labor. Also
discovering some dangerous Errors, both in ye Theory and Practice of ye Art of
Planting Fruit Trees. With the Alimentall and Physical use of fruits.
Together with The Spiritual use of an Orchard: Held forth in diverse
Similitudes between Natural and Spiritual Fruit Trees: according to
Scripture and Experience. By RA: AUSTEN. Practiser in ye Art of Planting

birds-eye view of a well-ordered garden, with trees laid out geometrically
around a central flower area; there are figures at work and at leisure; in the
corners are representations of gardening tools and implements A Garden enclosed
is my sister my Spouse: Thy Plants are an Orchard of Pomegranats, with pleasant
fruits: Cant: 4:12:13 I: Goddard sculp:


Oxford printed for Tho: Robinson 1653.

To the Worshipful SAMVEL HARTLIB Esquire My much Honored Friend.
I Am not unmindfull (worthy Sir) under what engagement you stand upon mine
account, to the Public; In the late Treatise of improvement of Lands, by our
deceased friend Mr Blithe, which you were pleased so freely to undertake for
me; And which was renewed again, in the Design for Plenty.

According to my duty therefore, I have endeavored to answer your (and others)
expectation, in this my ensuing Discourse of Fruit Trees.

It is agreed on all hands, That this work of Planting Fruit Trees (through
the blessing of God) is of vast Profit, where it is diligently, and skilfully
undertaken.

Mr Blithe in his Book, discovers the great Improvement of Lands; some to a Five
fold, some to a Ten, and some to a Twenty fold value: And the highest way
there mentioned, is by Planting Fruit trees: As may be seen at large, Page
262, 263. etc. of his Work.

And in your Legacy of Husbandry, it is accounted a great deficiency in
England, that we have no more Fruit Trees Planted, which would be a chief
means to enrich this Commonwealth, in many respects; And in particular, with
such a Commodity as that we should not need to bestow our moneys for French
Wines, or the like having Liquors, (Cider, Perry, Cherry-wines, etc.) as good,
or better, made of our own fruits: As it is there observed.

If men would Plant Fruit Trees, not only in Gardens, but also in many of their
Fields and Hedges; This course (after some years) might save the expense of
many Thousand Quarters of Malt, yearly, in the Nation. And many Thousand
Loades of Wood, and other Fuel, in making Malt, and as much (it may be) in
Brewing Beer. And many thousand Acres sowed yearly with Barley, might be sowed
with Bread-corne, or turned into Pasture-grounds, by reason of the abundance of
those most healthful Liquors, Cider and Perry that might be yearly made,
Besides great store of Wood, would be got for Fuel, by the Prunings of the
Fruit Trees, and Old Trees past bearing, with spetiall Wood for Joyners, and
many other purposes.

This likewise might be one chief way (among others) for employing and setting
on work, very many Poor People, The thoughts of the diligent tend only to
plenteousnesse. Prove. 21.5.
(in Enclosing, and preparing Grounds for Planting, and many other Works)
(according to the late consultations of the Parliament) whereby they might
maintain themselves, and profit others, in stead of burthening of them.

Yea: hereby would accrue to the Poor (and the whole Nation) many great
advantages, in several respects: First, a Freedom, and deliverance of
multitudes from Idleness, Beggary, Shame, and consequently, Theft, Murder,
and (at last) the Gallows.

Secondly, Positive advantages; Meat, Drink, Clothing, Riches, and Profits,
to themselves and others.

If the higher powers (whom God has set up to design, and labor for the
welfare, and prosperity of his People) would please to make a Law, (there being
Laws of a thousand times less consequence) for the Enclosure and Plantation,
of some of the Wast, and Common Grounds, Whereof there are many Thousand Acres
in this Nation, (such as are most fit for Improvement, according as is largely,
and with wisdom and judgment, set forth in the late Treatise entitled, Bread
for the Poor; And in another Treatise, entitled A Design for Plenty:) there
would (by the blessing of God on our Labors) be Bread indeed for the Poor,
and Wine too; Yea, Riches, and Lands of Inheritance, to those who are not now
worth a Groat.

For in divisions, and enclosures of Wast, and Common Grounds, (by Persons
appointed for that purpose,) why should not the Poor have their share, and
proportion, as well as their rich Neighbors, and that to them, and their
heirs for ever; yea, let the Poor be first provided for.

Are not these the times of the Gospel prophesied of Esaias 49.19, 20. When the
Wast and desolate places shall be inhabited; The people of God being multiplied
(as in these our days they are, more then in former times) they now say to
Authority, as verse. 20. The place is too strait for us, give place to us that
we may dwell.

Many of the Wast and Common Grounds (being enclosed) might be improved unto
far greater advantages, then now they are (both as to the Lords of the Wastes,
and others claiming interest in them) for the increase of Cattle, both in
Number and greatness; our breed of Horses might then be fit for War, whereas
now the Commons starve and spoil them, as to such service: And all sorts of
Corn, Fruits of Trees, Timber, Fuel, Hemp, Flax, and many other Profits,
might be multiplied, whereby the Nation would abound with all outward
necessaries for it self, and the overplus to transport to other parts, for the
enriching and strengthening of this Nation, still more and more; in stead of
sending out our Moneys and Commodities for supplies from them.

And hereby this Nation might become able (under the hand of God) to support it
self, and help to uphold others also, who are friends to us, and be a terror
to all those that contend with us.

An eminent person once said of this Nation, that it is a very Garden of
delights, and a Well that cannot be exhausted: What then would it be, did it
abound with goodly Fruit Trees, and other Profits, where now are barren Wastes:
Might it not then be called another Canaan, flowing with Milk and honey, of
which it is recorded, that there were Fruit Trees in abundance. Nehem. 9.25.

The more obstructions we have from Foreign parts, the more need we have to
labor diligently for all necessary, and useful things, within our own Nation,
that we may be able to subsist without the help of others: so that this work of
Planting Fruit Trees, for improvement of Lands, is fit to be carried on as
well, (if not much rather) in these times of War, as in times of Peace.

Upon all which Accounts it is my humble desire, That you (Sir) who have
labored, and done so much already for the Public, would still be pleased to
be assistant, and isntrumental for the promoting and setting on foot, the Work
of Planting Fruit Trees in this Nation, more then in former times: According as
is set forth in your Legacy of Husbandry; The Design for Plenty; and other of
your Published Treatises, tending to general Profit, and the great
encouragements in this work which I have (from time to time) received from
you: for all which I shall be still ready (thankfully) to acknowledge my self

Your very much engaged Servant RA: AUSTEN.

To the Reader.
THere are extant many Treatises and Histories of Trees and Plants, showing us,
the Kinds, Forms, Natures, and Virtues of them: some likewise teach us the
manner of Propagation of Fruit Trees, their Sowing, Grafting, Setting,
Preservation, and Ordering: But most of these Authors speak in an unknown
Tongue to the plain English Husbandman, (whose encouragement and direction, I
shall herein much endeavor) Only some few small pieces have been offered to
him which he may understand, but very much defective in many necessary, and
principal parts of the Art of Planting Fruit Trees: And not only so, but
likewise (some of them) are full of dangerous and hurtful instructions, and
things notoriously untrue, as shall particularly appear in the ensuing
discourse. See page 78.

So that a plain, sound, Experimental work upon this subject, has been much
wanting in this Nation.

The Art of Planting Fruit Trees is (among Ancient Authors) called Husbandry,
being it is one part of the Husbandmans work: Quid sit Agricultura. vid. page 6:
though in many parts of this Nation Husbandmen have little skill in it, their
labor being chiefly Tillage of the ground for Corn. But this is a part of
the Husbandmans work as well as that, yea: and the chiefest, and worthiest
part: Adam in time of his Innocence was employed in this part of Husbandry
about Fruit Trees, as is showed page 12.

But when he had sinned, he was put away from this work to till the ground, a
lower and inferior labor. Gen 3.23. The Lord God sent him forth from the
Garden of Eden, to till the Ground.

We see likewise the Scripture calls it Husbandry, Noah is called an Husbandman
when he planted a Vineyard Genesis 9.20. God (blessed for ever) is called an
Husbandman, for that he pruneth, purges, and orders his Mystical Vine-tree
the Church, Ioh. 15.1. So that I shall keep the phrase throughout the Work.

I have seen (I suppose) the best Works, both of Ancient, and Late Writers
upon this Subject, and have learned from them what I could, for accomplishment
of this Art, and have observed the practice, and experiments of many from time
to time, concerning it, and have improved them to my own advantage.

And likewise I have set my self to the Practice of this work for the space
of Twenty years, and more: endeavoring to find out things of use and profit,
by Practice and Experience, that I might speak upon better and surer grounds,
then some others who have written upon this Subject, for Experience guides, and
informs Reason in many things, in which (without Experience) it would often
err. Some who have taught this Art of Planting Fruit Trees, have been in it
(I conceive) only Contemplative men, having little, or no Experience in it: so
that in many things they have erred, and that grossly, as shall appear in due
place.

L. Ba. Advanc. Lear.
A Learned Author says, The writings of speculative men upon active matter (for
the most part) seems to men of experience to be but as dreams and dotage: And
that it were to be wished (as that which would make Learning indeed solid and
fruitful) that Active men would or could become Writers.

Study, and Practice (by degrees) frame new Arts, and add to the old: Virg.
Geor.
Per varios usus Meditando extunderet Arts: paulatim. Experience is called the
Perfecter of Arts, and the most sure, and best teacher in any Art,
Contemplation and Action are the two Legs whereon Arts run stedily and
strongly, and the one without the other, can but hop, or go lamely: They are
the two Eyes wherewith men see natures secrets clearly, but the one alone
discernes but dimly: And hence it follows that some who were only
contemplators of nature without experience, and would needs adventure to write,
and give instructions touching the Practique part of this Art of Planting
Fruit Trees, have in many things (as the aforesaid Author says) presented us
with smoke instead of the lucide flames of light: They have indeed showed us a
comely and beautiful body, painted according to Art, but yet livelesse and
without a spirit, And have offered us shells and husks instead of kernells.

But now, speculation and Action, are as Soul and Body united, which laboring
together, work out both Profit and Pleasure: many advantages to our selves
and others. When Speculation and practice, Art and Nature, are matched
together, they are pregnant and fruitful, but the one alone, wanting a meet
helper, what fruits can it bring forth: Experience (as a Philosopher says) is
the Root of Art: and it may well be so called, from whence springs a numerous
multitude of new Experiments: for from one Root, or single Experiment, (though
perhaps a poor and mean one in it self) if thoroughly weighed with Reason and
judgment, may arise many rich and rare inventions: And it is most true, which
the Lord Bacon says to this purpose: As through a small hole, or cranny, a man
may see great Objects, so through small and contemptible instances, men may see
great Axioms, singular secrets of nature. Men will labor hard, and a long time
in some labors full of hazard and danger, and perhaps unjust too, and all for
a little profit: but here, in this employment, men may with a little labor, in
a short time, without hazard or danger, and that justly, obtain great, and
many profits, and those with Pleasures superadded.

Works, and labors, which have in them but a vain, and unprofitable
pleasure, are approved but only of some sensual persons, And such labors as
have but only Profit, and do not ease the pains with some Pleasantness in
them, are yet harsh, and disliked of many, but such as yield both Profit and
Pleasure, are universally liked and allowed of all, according to the Poet.

Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci. Either of these is the better,
because of the other joined with it, when they run along, hand in hand, the
Profit is the more, because of the Pleasure, and the Pleasure is more, because
of the Profit.

Now therefore: That men may obtain yearly a plentiful harvest of Profits
and Pleasures, I have endeavored to remove whatsoever might hinder, and have
laid down some Arguments of encouragement to set upon, and prosecute the means
to obtain them, discovering the best way I can find out, how they may be
gotten with most speed, and kept with most security.

If any man think the Divine, and Humane Arguments (preceding the work) to be
needless, because generally men know, that Planting Friut-trees is a very
profitable work, none doubt it.

I Answer, Some know it by experience many others do not.

And although men are convinced of the profitablenes of the work, yet there is
need of some quickening Motives to it; And I know none more pervalent then those
taken from Profits, and Pleasures; considered in so great and so many
respects: espetially if we take in the Spiritual part, unto which the Arguments
may be as properly referred, as to the Natural.

Or if any account the Arguments too large, conceiving the Porch to be too big
for the House.

It is Answered: such a Judgment arises from a mistake, for the whole Work
(following the Arguments considered together, both the Natural, and Spiritual
part, is but one entire Treatise, as in the Title Page is expressed: And besides;
the work (as yet) is not finished, There is (it may be) as much behind, which
in time I hope will be perfited. Accept of what is made ready at present, which
as it may be profitable to some in respect of Encouragments and Directions in
the practice of the Work, so also I desire it may be a means to stir up
others to do some thing in the like kind for Public Profit.

There are many good wits exercised about Toys, and Trifles: some men bestow
excessive Time, cost, and Labor, about mere shadows, and well deserve
Marshalls Motto, Turpis est difficiles habere nugas.
Et stultus labor est ineptiarum. L. 2. Epig. 86.



While they might in the mean time, by the study and practice of this art, (in
searching out many hidden secrets of nature and experiments) much advantage
themselves, and many others, both in respect of Temporalls, and Spiritualls. An
ancient Author says, Not he that knows many things, but he that knows
things Fruitful is Wise.

This Art is a full Storehouse, out of which may be brought both Meat, Drink,
and Money, it is a rich Mine, without bounds or bottom, out of which we may digg
Profits and Pleasures great, and many, and worthy the study, and labor of the
most wise and Learned.

The good of this Employment, both in the Theorique, and Practique part,
spreads it self over all places in the World, to all persons in the world,
from the Cradle to the Grave, from the beginning of the World, to the end of
it; so that no work can be more universally good than this.

Now therefore seeing there is so much profit, and advantage to be received
from this employment of Planting Fruit Trees both in Temporal, and Spiritual
respects, Let us set about it, and labor in it, either with Body or mind, or
both, That thereby the Glory of God, and Public Profit (together with our
own advantages) may be promoted.

The blessing of God go a long with us, and give the increase in all our
labors, and prosper the works of our hands.

This is my Advice to men, and Prayer to God. Who am

Thine in the best Services RA: AUSTEN.

The Analysis.
PRofits of Planting Fruit Trees in Corn, and Pasture grounds, the best way of
improvement of Lands. p. 1.

Objections concerning Planting Answered 1. Coldness of the Country. p. 4. 2.
Robbing Fruit Trees. p. 4. 3. Long expectation of Fruits. p. 5.


The praises of Fruit Trees and Art of Planting. 1. From Ancient Authors p. 6,
7. etc. 2. From Modern Authors p. 6, 7. etc.


Eight divine Arguments of the dignity, and value of Fruit Trees, and Art of
Planting. 1. Argument; Adams employment in Innocence. page 12. 2. Argument;
Fruits were the first food given to man. p. 12, 3. Argument from examples. p.
12, 13. etc. 1. God blessed for ever. 2. Noah. 3. Abraham. 4. King Uzziah. 5.
King Solomon. 6. Susanna. 7. The Jews. 8. Our Savior Christ.
4. Argument from Similitudes. p. 14, 15. etc. 1. Esaias 5.1, 2. My beloved had a
Vineyard in a fruitful hill. 2. Psalm. 1.2. Like a tree planted by the Rivers
of Waters. etc. 3. Ioh. 15.1. I am the true Vine, and my Father is the
Husbandman. 4. Romans 11.17. If some of the Branches were broken off. etc. 5.
Cant. 4.12, 13. A Garden enclosed is my Sister my Spouse. 6. Rev. 22.2. There
was the tree of life.
Fifth Divine Argument from Gods withholding them in displeasure. p. 16.
Instances 1. Exodus 9.25. Hail brake every tree of the Field: etc. 2. Amos 4.9.
I have smitten your fruit trees: etc. 3. Joel. 1.12. The Vine is dried up, the
fig tree languisheth: etc. 4. Deuteronomy. 28.39. Thou shall plant but shall neither
drink of the Wine nor gather the Grapes.
Sixth Divine Argument from Gods promising, and giving the^ in Mercy. p. 16, 17.
Instances 1. Ier. 29.5. Plant Gardens and eat the Fruit of them. 2. Amos 9.4.
They shall plant Gardens, and eat the fruits of them. 3. Neh. 9.25. They took
strong Cities Vineyards and Olive-yards and Fruit Trees in abundance. 4. Ezekiel.
34.27. And the Tree of the field shall yield her fruit, etc.
Seventh Divine Argum. from two commands 1. Tit. 3.4. Let ours also learn to
maintain good works for necessary uses. p. 17. 2. Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are lovely, of good report, etc. page 18.
Eight Divine Argument from Gods special Charge to preserve fruit trees above
all other Trees Deuteronomy. 20.19. Thou shall not destroy the Trees, being Trees for
Meat, for the Tree of the Field is man's life. page: 19.




Four Humane Arguments of the dignity of Fruit Trees and Planting from the 1.
Presidents of the greatest Persons page 20. Cyrus King of Persia. Philometrus
Kings of Asia. Heronius Kings of Asia. Archelaus King of Asia. Attalus King of
Asia. Evax King of Arabia. Avicen King of Arabia. Telaphanus. Antonius Pius.
Elizeus. Numa. Sportanus. Alcinous. Mithridates the Great. Alexander the Great.
Solomon King of Israel. And many others.
2. Praises of All People. page 21. See Instances of many. p. 6, 7, 8. etc. The
Third humane Argument from Profits. 1. To the Estate 1. In respect of
Housekeeping 1. In Meats. page 21. 2. In Drinks. page 21.
2. In respect of Sale 1 Fruits in their kinds 22 2. Wines made of the^ 22

2. To the Body 1. In respect of health 1. By moderate exercises. p. 22. 2.
Fresh Aires. p. 23. 3. Pleasant Odors. p. 23. 4. Wholesome meats. p: 24.
2. In respect of long life. 1. By operation upon the spirits through the
Organs of the Body. Ear p. 35. 36, 27 etc. Touch p. 35. 36, 27 etc. Smell p.
35. 36, 27 etc. Sight p. 35. 36, 27 etc. Taste p. 35. 36, 27 etc.
2. Through the Affections of the Mind Hope page 25. Joy p. 26. Admiration. p.
27, 28. etc.


3. To the Mind 1. In respect of knowledge Natural p. 32. Moral p. 32.
Spiritual p. 32.
2. In respect of Affections. 32.
4. To the Name 1. In this life, by Gifts and Benefits. p. 33. 2. After death,
by Fruit Trees as living Monuments.
5. To others 1. To the Poor Friends or Enemies. 34. 2. To the Rich Friends or
Enemies. 34.

The Fourth Humane Argument from pleasures. 1. To the Ear 1. By sweet tunes of
singing Birds. p. 35. 2. By gentle motion of boughs, and leaves. 35
2. To the Touch 1. By cool fruits boughs and leaves. 36. 2. By cool fresh
Aires. p. 36.
3. To the Eye 1. By decent forms of Trees, Allies, walks, Seats, and Arbors.
p: 36. 2. By curious colors of Blossoms, Leaves, and Fruits. p. 36.
4. To the Smell 1. By fresh Earth dug up. p. 37. 2. From Blossoms, and
Leaves. p. 38.
5. To the Taste 1. From ripe and raw Fruits. p. 38. 2. From Dishes and Drinks
made of them. p. 39.




A Caution in the use of Earthly blessings No Earthly thing to be enjoyed
properly, but used only. p. 41. Difference between using, and enjoying of a
thing. page 42.


The Nursery in it consider 1. Sowing 1. Seeds of Fruits 2. Stones of Fruits 1.
The time. p. 44. 2. The manner. p. 44.

2. Weeding and Watering the young Plants. p. 45. 3. Transplanting them in
Autumn. p. 45. 4. Inoculating, or Ingrafting them. p. 46.


In Grafting observe: 1. Time of Grafting 1. General time: the Spring: p: 46.
2. More special, in respect of different kinds: p. 46.
2. Instruments for the Work: p. 46. 3. Manner of the Work three ways 1. Of
small Stocks. p. 53. 2. Of great Stocks. p. 53. 3. A middle sort of Stocks. p.
53.
4. Choice of Grafts 1. As they fit several Stocks. p. 53. 2. In respect of
good hearing kinds: see particulars: p: 53, 54, 55. etc.



In Inoculating observe 1. The time: page 50. 2. The Buds 1. In respect of
growth. p. 50. 2. In respect of kinds. p. 50.
3. The Stocks 1. The small, and young: p: 51. 2. Those full of sap: p: 51.
4. Unbinding the Buds: some sooner some later. p: 51.


In Transplanting observe: 1. The time: Early removing best: p. 60. 2. Pruning
1. The Roots of Plants: p: 61. 2. The Branches of Plants: p: 61.
3. Manner of setting 1. Standards 2. Wall-trees
In respect of 1. Deepnes. 61 2. Distance. 62 3. Order. 63.



In Pruning cut 1. Wall-trees 1. In Summer. p. 64. 2. In Winter. p. 65.
2. Standards 1. All dead Boughs. p. 65. 2. All superfluous living boughs. p.
65.



Order the Roots 1. In opening them. p. 65. 2. In laying fit soyles to them. p.
66.


Diseases insident to Fruit Trees 1. Mossinesse 2. Barke-bound 3. Canker 1.
Causes p. 67, 68. 2. Cures p. 67, 68.



Mischeifes insident to Fruits: by 1. Caterpillars Remedies thereof. p. 68, 69.
2. Antes Remedies thereof. p. 68, 69. 3. Eare-wigges Remedies thereof. p. 68,
69. 4. Snailes Remedies thereof. p. 68, 69. 5. Wasps Remedies thereof. p. 68,
69. 6. Birds Remedies thereof. p. 68, 69. 7. Winds Remedies thereof. p. 68, 69.


The use of fruits 1. The Alimentall 2. The Physical
Use of 1. Apples. p: 70. 2. Pears. p. 72. 3. Quinces, p 73. 4. Cherries. p.
73. 5. Plummes. p. 74. 6. Aprecotts. p: 75. 7. Peaches. p. 75. 8. Mulberries.
p. 75. 9. Figgs. p. 79. 10. Grapes. p: 57. 11. Medlers. p. 76. 12. Wallnutts.
p. 77.



Errors discovered in the 1. Theory 2. Practice Of the Art of Planting. p. 78.

In the Theory are three sorts. 1. Instructions hurtful and dangerous. 1. To
Graft the first Spring. p. 79. 2. Not to prune Roots. p. 79. 3. To use Treble
Grafts: p. 80. 4. To use Grafts swelling: p. 80. 5. To remove the Clay: p. 80.
6. To underprop Grafts. p: 80. 7. To mix things in Grafting: p: 80. 8. Not to
plant against a Wall. p: 8. 9. To Plant on Hills. p. 81. 10. To set Stones a
foot deep. p: 82. 11. To set Budds on knobbs of Stocks. p. 82. 12. To set
Appletrees 20 foot asunder. p. 82. 13. To remove in Winter. p. 81, 12.
2. Instructions for effecting things impossible to be effected by the means
prescribed; and other things impossible to be effected by any means. 1. To mix
diverse kinds of Fruits. p: 83. 2. To chang the species of Fruits. p. 83. 3. To
make Fruits have good Tastes. p. 84. 4. To make Fruits have good Colors. p: 85.
5. To have Nutts without Husks. p. 87. 6. To have Early and Late Fruits p. 87.
7. To have Fruits with Inscriptions on them. p. 88.
3. Assigning wrong causes to effects. 1. That Grafting causes early bearing,
and makes Fruits better. p. 88. 2. That Grafting in the Old of the Moon
causes barrenness many years. p. 90. 3. That Sap descends from the Branches
to the Roots and works several effects. 90

Errors in Practice of the Art of Planting are. 1. Transplanting Trees in
Winter. p. 94. 2. Planting Trees too near together. p. 94. 3. Planting Trees
unfit for the Country. p: 95. 4. Choosing the greatest Plants. p. 95. 5.
Setting Trees without disbranching: p. 95. 6. Planting Trees in worse mould: p:
95. 7. Setting the Graft and Stock smooth on the out side: p: 95. 8. Grafting
long, or forked Grafts. p. 96. 9. Suffering Fruit trees grow like Timber Trees.
p. 96. 10. Giving too much nourishment to Fruit Trees. p: 96. 11. Nursing up
Quince-trees without Grafting, or Inoculating. p. 96. 12. Pruning off too many
shootes from Wall-trees. p. 96. 13. Not Pruning the Roots of Plants: p. 97. 14.
Breaking off Budds before Grafts grow. p. 97. 15. Grafting Seed Plants before
removing. p. 97.

A Table showing the Principal things Contained in the Natural part of the
ensuing Work.
HOW to prepare Ground for a Nursery, and to sow, and set Seeds, Stones,
Kernells etc. page 44. Preserve Seeds from Mice, and weed them pa. 44. Remove
the biggest Seed-plants by themselves, and the least by themselves p. 45. Small
Plants grow surer, and faster then great Plants. p. ib. January: the best Month
to graft, Cherry, and Plum grafts p. 46. Grafts may be kept in mould many
weeks p. 46. Necessary Instruments for grafting. p. 46. Several ways of
graftings; that of Packing on is most sure, and easy, less hurt to the
graftes; and stocks, then in the cleft. p. 47. To join the inner sides of the
stock, and graft, is a special Rule in grafting. p. 48. The thickest grafts
are (for the most part the best p. 49. Choose grafts from the best hearing
Trees. p. 49. Unbind grafts in due season, and strengthen the grafted place. p.
49. Prune off all side branches of grafts that are for standards; and preserve
only one straight shoot. p. 40. Time to Inoculate is about Midsummer, yet some
Buds sooner then others p 50. Inoculate Buds in to fit stocks. p. 51. Unbind
buds in due time, 52. To transplant stocks inoculated, ere the Buds spring
forth, is the surest way for growing. p. 52. The leaves of the buds to be
inoculated, must be cut off immediately. p. 52. Mark stocks inoculated to know
the kinds. p. 52. To choose right kinds of grafts, and Buds, and to set them on
fit stocks is (above all things) most necessary in this Art p. 53. Crabstocks
special good (if not the best) to graft any Apple grafts upon. p. 54.
Peare-stocks are best for Peare-grafts. p. 55. Juice of the black heart, and
great bearing Cherry; special good to make Cherry Wine, or to color Cider to
make it as Clarret wine. p. 55. The dryest Plumms, (as the Mussle, Damazeene
etc.) are the best. p. 56. The white Peare-Plum stock, a special kind to
graft, or Inoculate upon. p. 56. Mix not Plums with Cherries in grafting: they
hold not long. p. 56. Aprecot-Trees are propagated by the bud only, not by
grafting. p. 56. Inoculate buds from the best bearing Trees, and upon stocks
full of Sap. p. 57. Nutmeg peach, one of the best especially in respect of
bearing. p. 57. The great Blew Figg comes to perfect ripenes with us, if set
against a South wall p. 57. Vineyards formerly in England. p. 58. The Parsley
Vine, and White Mukadine, bear store of good fruits with us. p. 58. Portingall
Quince the best kind p. 59. Black Mulberry Trees, bear abundanly. p. 59. Choose
the fairest Walnuts, of thinnest shells, and good bearers; to set. p. 59. Graft
old Trees if bad bearers, or bad fruits. p, 59, Arbors of Fruit Trees, better
then of Privet etc. p. 60. Begin to Transplant betime; diverse advantages by it.
p. 60. Break off the leaves of Plants when taken up. p. 61. Cut the ends of
all the Roots smooth, before setting p. 61. Set not below the soil, yet deeper
on dry ground then on moist p. 51. In setting Trees observe a fit distance, see
the advantages thereby. p. 52. Put some good mould next the Roots of Plants in
setting. 63. Ordering Plants the first year of setting, is of special
concernment. p. 63. Suffer not the maine branches of wal-trees to rise upwards,
but spread them on the sides of the wall. p. 64. Wall-trees must be Pruned and
Ordered both in Summer and in Winter. p. 94. Error in pruning Waltrees; Cutting
off too many shoots. 65. Prune oldtrees about October, or November. p. 65. Bare
old trees at the roots about October, and lay some good soyles to them. p. 66.
Piggions dung, Henns dung, Blood of Cattle, or the like, is special good to
cause Trees to bear well. p. 66. Mowing of Orchards is exceeding hurtful to
fruit trees, but suffering Cattle to lie among them is very profitable. p. 66.
Moss on Fruit Trees, caused by coldness and barrenness of the ground. p. 67.
Cut off the Branches of Trees Barkbound. p. 67. Cut out the Canker of
Fruit Trees. p. 68. Destroy Catterpillers in breeding p. 68. Preserve the
Fruits from Ants, Erewiggs, Snayles, Wasps, Birds, and winds as much as may be.
69. Cider made of Fruits newly gathered, and also when they are mellow, how to
make it. p. 70. Preserve Cider from Air p. 70. Cider boiled with Spices is
very Cordial. p. 70. Color Cider with the Juice of Mulberries, great bearing
Cherry etc. p. 70. Cider in Bottles, sunck into a well, will keep good many
years. p. 71. How to keep Apples. p. 71. Apples help concoction. p. 71. They
are profitable in hot diseases, and against melancholy, the plurisie etc. p.
72. Apples are singular good to cure the Strangury, and other diseases
proceeding of the difficulty of making water, see how ordered. p. 72. Pears
are more nourishing then Apples. p. 72. A wine of pears, not inferior to
French wines. p. 72. Cider, and Perry, Cordial Liquors, profitable for health
and long life. p. 73. Quinces, Cordial fruits and of manifold uses. p. 73. How
to keep Quinces a year or two. p. 73. Cherries breed good blood in the body.
The sharp are best. p. 73. A pleasant refreshing wine made of Cherries, more
fit for Summer then hot wines p. 74. Cherries boyld in brothes, and drinks,
good for hot, and feuerish bodies. p. 74. Kernels of Cherry stones break the
bladder-stone. p. 74. Cherries strengthen and stir up appetite to meat. p. 74.
Plummes cast out chollericke humors, and are good in hot diseases. p. 74. The
infusion of dried Aprecots, is profitable in sharp feavors. p. 75. Peaches
cool, and keep the belly soluble, eat them (as all other fruits) moderatly,
and drink a Cup of wine after. p. 75. Wine of Mulberies: a small Quantity of
Juice will color White Wind, Cider, Perry etc: and makes a pleasant sauce. p.
74. Juice of Mulberies, good against a sore mouth, or throat, they styre up a
languishing appetite. p. 76. Figgs nourish much, and breed store of blood are
accounted restorative, they help an old Cough (boiled with Isop) many other
purposes p. 76. Medlers fortify digestion, stay vomiting and loosnesse of the
belly kernells (with parslely roots etc.) mightly drive out stones, and gravel
from the kidnyes. p. 77. Walnuts help digestion, with other things they resist
poison, green Walnuts distilled, preserve against the Pestilence. p. 77.
Errors discovered concerning the Art of Planting: first in the writings of
some: secondly in the practice of others, see the particulars. p. 79, 80, 81,
82. etc.
Planting of Fruit Trees, The best way of Improvement of Lands.
THE Profits of Orchards and Gardens, are very well known to many in this
Nation, so that the things I hold forth to men, are not doubtful, and
questionable whether advantages will arise or not, when they have bestowed
their time, and labors about them, but Profits are as certain (by the
blessing of God) if men labor in them, as a harvest of Corn in Autumme, when
the husbandman has plowed, and sowed, in the spring or other season.
Worcestershire, Herefordshire, Gloustershire, Kent, and many other parts in
this Nation, can sufficiently evidence the Profits of Orchards, and fruit trees
in the fieilds, and hedges: And those good Common-wealths-men, who have written
of the Improvement of lands, have all agreed, that this is the highest way of
improvement of any other.

Mr Blithe in his Book entitled, The Improver improved, (a work doubtless of
singular use,) has asserted, That Planting Fruit Trees at such a distance as
they cannot reach, when they have attained largest growth, they do advantage
the Land, even in respect of Grass, (although the common prejudice against
Fruit Trees in feilds is, that they spoil Grass) as that some Land not being
worth above 10s, or 13s 4d. an Acre, the Grass ( by planting Fruit trees
regularly upon it) was afterward worth 30s, or 40s, or 50s an Acre, And the
Fruits upon the Trees may yield some 3l, some 5l, Or some 6 or 8l an Acre; See
Page 262. of his Book.

And that in Kent, Essex, Surrey, Middlesex, and those parts, some Land that
was not worth above 6 or 8s the Acre, was by Nurseries of young Trees,
planting, and ordering of them, in certain years brought to be worth 20l an
Acre, and some 40 or more.

And further, he affirms, that some Orchards in those parts are worth to
grase Forty, or fifty shillings or 3l an Acre, and are so let to Tenants: And
the fruits of those Trees seldom yield so little, as Double or treble the
worth of the Grass, many times five or six fold, or more, see Page 263. of his
Book.

It may (perhaps) be objected: That Fruit Trees so planted make grass (under,
and about them) sower, that it is not so pleasant, and good for Cattle, as some
other, where no Trees are.

It is Answered: Although it be not so pleasant altogether, as that where
there is no shade of trees, yet other advantages do more then make amends. Its
observed that such Grass is earlier in the spring then upon other grounds, and
that such grounds bear more, when its cut for hay, or if pastured it keeps
more Cattle, then Lands of like quantity not so planted: And besides, in a hot
and dry summer, there is grass under, and about Trees, when its burnt up in
other grounds.

My advice is therefore (all these Profits and advantages considered) that men
set themselves diligently to this work of Planting Fruit Trees, for improvement
of their Lands and Estates. Not only, that they plant good Orchards and
Gardens, but also that they Plant round about their feilds, and in their Corn,
Pasture, and hay grounds, the fruit trees at a large distance one from another
20 yards asunder, and that they suffer no branches to spread, within two yards
from the ground, that so they may be out of the reach of Cattle, and may not be
troublesome to workmen in plowing, sowing, reaping, and other works.

If the Plants are fair straight ones, of two yards high, or thereabouts, and
fenced about to preserve them from Cattle at the first, (with some stakes or
the like) they will in a few years preserve themselves, and will need but
little labor about them afterward as long as they live.

And hereby men may reap every year two harvests, (from one, and the same
piece of land) the one of Corn, the other of fruits of trees, and the latter
(when trees are grown larg,) (probably) will be the greater.

And in this respect this way of improvement of Lands, is much better then
other ways of profit; because in getting Corn, or raising profits by any
other ways of improvement, men must of necessity, bestow much money, time, and
pains about them, every year, which eats up a great part of their profits,
but in Planting fruit trees, the worst is at first, after a few years, they
yield great profits, with little cost and labor. So that as was said
fruit trees in a few years, with small cost, and labor; will double, and
treble, the value of Lands, and after many years, the advance of Profit will be
manyfold.

Objected, That if all should plant, then such great profits could not be made,
every man would have of his own.

City, or town, what a number of people there are, who have no Lands at all,
not so much as a piece of ground belonging to their house, and many others but
very small quantities, these will be buyers of the husbandmans fruits, and the
wines that he makes of them.

And let us say what we will, or can, there is many that have Lands which they
might Plant, and improve to an exceeding great value, who will yet be idle, and
slothful, and object with Solomon's sluggard there is a Lion in the way,
something, or other that hinders: yet these men when they see fruits, will be
as eager for them as any others, and therefore willbe very good Chapmen, to buy
the Fruits of the diligent husbandman.

Objections and Discouragements Concerning Planting Answered.
BEfore I enter upon the work it self, it will be convenient to Answer some
maine Objections, to remove discouragements about this work of Planting
Fruit Trees that have kept off many from this profitable employment, and may
still hinder them unless removed. And then I will give some encouragements to
it from Divine, and Humane Arguments and Testimonies.



Northern Countries lie in a more cold Clymate then Worcestershire
Herefordshire and those fruit Countries, yet I doubt not but that if they were
as diligent in planting Fruit Trees in the North parts, as men are in these,
they might have store of good fruits: so that some Cautions be observed in the
nature of the Trees: Its true: Cold Countries are not so fit for choice and
tender fruits, as warmer Clymates, but there are diverse kinds of hardy fruits,
both Apples, Pears, Cherries, which yearly experience shows endure cold, and
come to perfection, in cold springs when many other kinds are spoiled. Let such
kinds therefore be sought for and Planted: And besides: those good husbands in
those parts, who are diligent in Planting fruit trees, have fruits answerable.





And I advise, having made a good fence about the Orchard, keep therein a lusty
Mastiffe or two; that will not be charmed in the night time, and the terror of
them would keep most from adventuring upon such an Occasion,

Secondly: some that have good Orchards watch their fruits. If a man keep 2, or
3, or more servants, they may watch in their turns, its no great matter, if you
consider for what time only it is necessary, which is but from the time that
fruits come to be worth getting, till they be ripe: and that is not long: And
consider: it is in a pleasant season of the year, the pains and charge would
be but little to the profit: we see men are vigilant and diligent much more
then this would require upon far less advantages.

3. But there is a third means to keep Orchards from being robbed, which I
esteem best of any other, It is this: I would have every man (that has land)
to plant some fruit trees for himself, that so they may not be thieves to
their neighbors: and let those that have much fruit; spare a part to them that
have but little, or none of their own, and be no niggards but liberal to their
neighbors: And this bounty will bring a double blessing, first from God to
increase the fruits; secondly from men not to deminish them.

But I heartily wish that such as make but a sport of robbing an Orchard, would
but consider the affliction, and terrors of conscience that seized upon good
Austen, See the second Book of his Confessions. Chap 4.
for this very sin of robbing an Orchard, which he was guilty of before his
conversion: he confesses it with much grief, and aggravates it with noe less
then ten circumstances, crying earnestly for mercy and pardon: Ecce Cor meum
Deus meus, ecce Cor meum, quod miseratus es in imo abyssi. etc. When God lets
loose the least sin to fight against a man and but to show it self in its
proper shape, it will terrify the stoutest heart: A wounded spirit who can
bear?

Objection greater then the former: Men usually say, should we plant
Fruit Trees it would be so long ere they come to perfection, and bearing
fruits, that our hopes would faint, before we could see profit of our labors,
perhaps they would not bear fruits of Sixteen or Twenty years growth.

(By the blessing of a divine hand that still attends honest labors) we may
receive Profit and Pleasure from them in half Twenty years, yea in half that
half, yea in less then in five years: sometimes the third, sometimes the
second year, (of many kinds of fruit trees) after Grafting: Experience proves
it, though we must know, the fruit cannot be much, while the trees are so
small, of particulars: yet a multitude of such trees will afford a multitude of
fruits: A Cisterne of water is but a multitude of drops.

So then; that Fruit Trees may be planted and come to bearing fruits in 5, 4,
or 3, years, or sooner, the means is showed at large in the ensuing work. So
that I hope this grand discouragement (which has so long and so generally kept
men from this profitable work) will be removed.

Now (as I promised) I will lay down some Excitements, and Encouragements to
the work of Planting fruit trees.

Many large works have been composed by Ancient Authors for the Instruction of
the husbandman in this his principal work: And they have given this employment
many and great commendations and praises, and it is accounted by them the
chiefest of all earthly employments, because of the many Profits and Pleasures
that come by it.

And because it shall appear what Opinion and esteem they have had of this
course of life, and with what Praises they have set it forth, I will give you
the particular expressions of some of them in their own words; And then give
the sum of what they have said to the plain husbandman, and others, that else
could not understand them.

The Praises of the Ancients concerning the Husbandmans course of life in
Planting Fruit Trees.
Agricultura quid sit,

MIHI videtur nihil aliud esse Agriculturam quam inspecta Plantae natura and
Coeli and terrae eiidoneum cultum tribuere, and (ut ita dicam) coelum cum terra
maritare, vel societatem perquirere Coeli and terrae ad Arbores: Sed quum
Coelum nullo modo queat flecti, oportet ut sedulus Agricola situs varietate
utatur, ut Coelo facile Planta associetur.

Agricolae ad duas metas intendere debent, ad utilitatem, and voluptatem.
Agricultura est Ars quae docet usuram cum terra facere. Inter omnia enim quae
utilitatem simul and jucunditatem pariunt, ut ambiguum sit utilitatisne an
amaenitatis plus habeat. Variis fructibus delecteris, non te^pore uno, sed
diversis alio renascente, alio decidente, ut unusquisque ex industria
jucunditate te afficere sataget: Rami fructibus onerati pondere incurvantur, ac
se infra decumbenti offerunt.

Asspice curvatos Pomorum pondere ramos:
Vt sua quod peperit vix ferat Arbor onus.
O quam dulcissimum est fructus ex Arboribus quas sevisti, inseruisti, and
coluisti, propriis manibus colligere, and Amicis, agnatisque jactabundus
largiri. Est and alia in Arboribus delectatio, Avium scilicet modulatio, ac ex
variorum multitudine dulcissimus efficitur concentus: Auresque cantibus
demulcent suis: Aves canoros garrulae fundunt sonos: Et semper Aures cantibus
mulcent suis.

Theophrastus Hortum juxta aedes collocavit, quem moriens testamento
Philosophantibus reliquit: Democritus Abderites prope hortum Cellam habuit.
Palemon Atheniensis in hortis docebat Laidis Cyrenei in hortis schola fuit,
August.
quos Attalus Rex aedificavit. Quid enim hoc opere innocentibus vacantibus, and
quid before magna consideratione prudentibus; quid majus mirabiliusque
spectaculum est, quam cum positis seminibus, Reges and Imperatores summosque
Magistratus non puduit Hortensia colere: propriis manibus.
Plantatis surculis, translatis Arbusculis, insitis malleolis, tanquam
interrogatur quaeque (vis radicis and germinis) quid possit, quidve non possit,
unde possit, unde non possit; cum rerum natura humana ratio quodammodo loqui
potest quid in ea valeat numerorum invisibilis interiorque potentia: quid
extrinsecus adhibita diligentia, and in ipsa consideratione perspicere: quia
neque qui pla^tat est aliquid neque qui rigat, sed Deus qui dat incrementum.
Mira est and inexplicabilis horti commoditas: nam si necessitatem considero
Agriculturae tanto est humano generi emolumento; ut ea carere nullo modo
possis; si utilitatem, inter primas non postrema, aut quaenam illi poterit
comparari: si voluptatem dignitati commistam, ea est excellentia etc.

Much more they speak in praise of this work, which here (for brevitie sake)
I shall omit.

Now that the husbandman (and every one) may understand what has been said by
these Authors, and others, I will give more plainly the sum of all.

They define husbandry to be an Art teaching men lawful usury with the earth,
And that it seems chiefly to be the searching, and finding out the nature of
Plants and Trees, and of the Heavens and the Earth, and then to give unto
Plants fit place and ordering; according to the nature of the Soil and
Climate; And, (as they say) to marry and match together Heaven, and earth, or
to procure a society, and near fellowship between heaven and earth, for the
increase and benefit of Trees and Plants: But seeing that the heavens can by no
means be bowed, or brought nearer to us, therefore it must be the skill, and
diligence of the husbandman to place and set his Trees in such sort that the
heavens may give their influence and warmth, for increase and refreshing of
them: Husbandmen ought to make Account of two harvests yearly, the one of
Profit the other of Pleasure, for when a man has done what is necessary for
his life, and thence proceeds profit; besides all that, great Pleasure springs
from that Profit: and what greater pleasure can there be then that which is
Accompanied with Profit. Now of all estates of life the husbandman may chiefly
challenge this to himself, yea it is questionable whether the Profit or
Pleasure of his life be the greater: God when he would make the life of man
Pleasant unto him, he put him into an Orchard or Garden of delights, that he
might labor therein with pleasure of mind: There a man is delighted with
variety of Fruits of Trees, not in one season only, but in diverse seasons of
the year, some young and springing forth while diverse other kinds are ready
to fall with ripeness. So that a man does even busy himself with the choice
of such varieties. The Boughs burdened with the weight of Fruits, do bow to
thee, and in a lowly manner offer their Fruits as the Poet notes.

Behold the bending Boughs, with store of Fruits they tear.
And what they have brought forth, (for weight) they scarce can bear.
Oh how sweet and pleasant is the fruit of those Trees which a man has Planted
and ordered with his own hand, to gather it, and largly, and freely to bestow,
and distribute it among his kindred and friends.

Yea it is a delight to hear the pleasant tunes, and singing of Birds which
with their variety of notes, make a sweet harmony and concent, and much please
and allure the sense: So the Poet, Melodious Ditties chirping Birds indite.
Whose pleasant songs, our ravished ears invite.


Theophrastus planted an Orchard close to his dwelling house, which when he
died he left to students and lovers of Philosophy and wisdom, Democritus, had
his Chamber near to a garden. Many Philosophers have taught their scholars in
Orchards and Gardens.

What work is more innocent then Planting of Fruit Trees, Augustine,
and what more full of high speculations to wise men then it is: What is more
wonderful to behold then (in sowing seeds, in planting sprigs, in removing
young Trees, in grafting new shoots or grafts) as it were to ask and demand
with a man's self what by the nature and virtue of the Roots and branches may
be done, or what may not be done, for what reason it may be done, or not done
(seeing the nature of things may after a sort be declared by reason) what of
many things is of force, and effect, by an invisible and inward power, and
nature, what diligence is outwardly to be used, etc. In which consideration and
search, we may see and understand these things. Yet for all that, neither he
that Plants is any thing, nor he that waters, but God that gives the increase.

They account this course of life free from many mischeifes, and and vexations,
that necessarily attend other affairs: great and many cares, and troubles are
found in honors, and high places, but this course of life, about Orchards and
Gardens, is full of sweet rest, honest business, and modest pleasures, which
many famous and learned men have had recourse unto for refreshment after study
and other labors: It is full of honest profit and gain, and brings and
administers all necessaries, here a man enjoyes pleasant quietness and
tranquillity of mind, which is seldom attained by those that follow
State-Imployments: This is worthy the exercise of wise men, of good men, of
learned men, of Kings and Emperors: they have taken great delight in the study
and practice of these things: This course of life is far off from
covetousness, and even tied and married to all Offices of love, and
friendship: This is a quiet and pleasant life, worthy to be preferred before
all honors and dignities: This culture of the ground, and planting and
ordering of Fruit Trees, Occasions search and inquiry into many secrets
profitable to men, which brings unto them ample satisfaction yea the excellency
and worthiness of Husbandry is surpassing, it excells all other Arts, and
appears as the Lady or Mistress, they as Servants attending her. Many of the
Ancients have largely declared to us the nature, and use of Plants and Trees
before all other living creatures. The profit of a Garden of Fruit Trees is
wonderful, and cannot well be declared. And if Antiquity can add any
nobleness and worth to a thing, what employment then before this, what more
ancient then the labor of the Husbandman, Husbandmen are called Honest and
good men, because of their innocent and just life. Cicero esteemed it best of
all other labors, nothing more rich and profitable, nothing more delightful,
nothing more worthy a generous spirit then it: In former times those that were
honored and carried in triumph, they were not honored with Gold, Pearls, or
other such precious things, but with the Boughs and Branches of Trees. And in
their Games and exercises, who so got the Prize were crowned with Branches of
certain Trees, as the Olive, Palm, etc. Such as got the Conquest and victory
of their enemies were crowned with the Laurel, which was to them a sign of
Victory. And in their feasts they gave Crowns and Garlands of Leaves, and
Branches of trees in token of mirth and pleasure: Besides, if this labor
receive honor from the persons that have been conversant in it, then it is a
kingly Art, See the worthy Acts of Cyrus King of Persia. Ezra 1.1.2.3. etc.
and chiefest of all other, Cyrus King of Persia (who had all the Kingdoms of
the earth given to him) was diligent and most exact in the handling of it: He
planted Orchards and Gardens of Fruitt-rees with his own hand; which when
Lysander saw, he admired to see the excellent and singular order, and
disposition of them: saying, O Cyrus, right blessed shall all men call thee,
because to thy dignity, and Crown thou have joined this care, and course of
life.

Telephanes tilled the ground and planted Trees among his subjects Elizeus
Spartanus planted spacious and large Orchards, and used therein to feast and
Banquet with his children and friends. Kings, Emperors, and highest powers
were not ashamed to perform the works belonging to an Orchard with their own
hands: Diverse Emperors of Rome had Gardens of Fruit Trees, and performed the
works therein with delight: Of this, See Sir Rich: Barkley of the felicity of
man. page 162.
Dioclesian Emperor of Rome after he had reigned Twenty years, betook
himself to a private life and Planted Orchards and Gardens with his own hand,
wherein he took such delight that he could not be entreated to take upon him
again the Government of the Empire: Solomon (the wisest of all Kings) had
Orchards and Gardens of Fruit Trees, and took pleasure in them, and spoke of
all Trees from the Cedar even to the Shrub.

Mascall sets out this Art with admirable praises, he says among all sciences,
and goodly exercises for men, there is none do more refresh the spirits, nor
cause more admiration in the effects of Nature, or is more profitable for man's
life then is the skill of Planting and Grafting. Many great Lords and Noble
Personages have left their Theaters, and goodly exercises, and have given
themselves to Planting and Grafting, and such like employments, and have
commended nothing more then this employment. The Senators, Dictators, and
Consuls of the Romans have commended Planting and Grafting to be one of the
most flourishing labors in the world for the Common wealth. Yea they did so
much esteem it, that they did hang Tables thereof in diverse places, never
thinking the time more aptly spent then in Planting and Grafting. Many worthy
and learned men both ancient and of late days have written for their Country
and Commonwealth of the fruitful Art of Grafting and Planting.

M. Bolton says, Vineyards, Orchards, Gardens, and such enclosed Plats, are
(as it were) the Flowers, Stars, and Paradises of the Earth.

And the Lord Bacon ( in his Essaies page 266.) says Gardens are the purest of
humane pleasures, the greatest refreshments of the spirits of man: without
which Buildings and Palaces are but gross handiworks.

Thus have I showed (briefly) what some of the Ancients, and some late writers
have said, and esteemed of Fruit Trees, and of the Husbandmans course of life,
and employments about them.

I will now say something more of the dignity and value of Fruit Trees, and of
the Art of Planting from Divine and humane Arguments and Testimonies, and after
that I shall enter upon the work it self.

Though it be absurd for a man to commend himself, yet he may commend his
Calling, and profession: Paul would not boast of himself, yet says he Rom:
11.13. I magnify mine Office. Suffer me therefore (for Encouragment to all in
the work,) to say something in praise of Fruit Trees, and of the employment
about them, it being a work so full of Profits and Pleasures in the life of
man: The works of God are laudable, and have a Dignity upon them, and ought to
be taken notice of, praised, and admired, not for themselves, but for the
Author, that he through, and by them, may have the more praise. Psalm. 111.3.
His work is worthy to be praised, and had in honor.

Arguments of the dignity of Fruit Trees and Art of Planting.
Divine Argument of the dignity, and value of Plants, Fruit Trees, and the Art
of Planting may be this.

It was Adams employment in his innocence to keep, and order the Garden of
Fruit Trees, Genesis 2.15. And the Lord God put him into the Garden of Eden to
dress it, and to keep it.

God, who is wisdom it self, saw that a Garden of Fruit Trees was the meetest
place upon all the Earth, for Adam to dwell in, even in his state of
perfection: And therein assigned him an employment for his greater delight, and
pleasure: so that this employment, as it is ancient, so it is honorable.

De Genesis ad Lit: Li. 8.
Augustine is of opinion, that this dressing of the Garden, was as well an
exercise of the hand, as of the mind, not with toylesomenesse and trouble, but
with delight, and pleasure. Non erat laboris afflictio, sed exhileratio
voluntatis, quum ea quae Deus creaverat, humani operis adjutorio, Laetius,
feraciusque provenirent, unde Creator ipse uberius laudaretur. That things
created in the Garden, by his labor, might be made more fruitful, and God
thereby have the more glory.

The second Divine Argument is this.

Plants were the first animate bodies that God created: And fruits of Trees
were the first food that was given to man, and for ought we read, the only food
he then had.

And God said, behold I have given you every herb bearing seed, which is upon
the face of all the Earth, and every Tree in which is the fruit of a Tree
yielding seed, to you it shall be for meat, Genesis 1.29.

Divine Argument is from examples in Scripture of Planting Fruit Trees, and of
the use of Orchards and Gardens.

Example. Diodat. exp. Sir W. Rawley hist. part. 1 Ch 3 Aug. de Civit. Dei l.
13. c. 24
First: God (blessed for ever) planted an Orchard, or Garden of Fruit Trees,
Genesis 2 8. And the Lord God planted a garden Eastward in Eden, and there he put
the man whom he had formed.

God planted a fruit garden; That is, as good Authors agree, Hecaused a parcel
of ground to bring forth Plants and Trees most exquisite and useful for man,
and enriched that place with more fruitfulness and beauty, then any other part
of the Earth, and called it EDEN, that is, a place of Pleasures.

And at this day, Sir W. Rawley 1. Book, 1. part Chapter 9.
this Region of Eden (afterward called Mesopotamia) is exceeding fruitful,
being in the best Climate 35 degrees from the Equinoctial, and 55. from the
North Pole, in which Climate the most excellent fruits, Oils, Grains, etc.
are found.

Genesis 9.20. And Noah began to be an husbandman, and he planted a Vineyard, Or
as some conceive, he began to prune and dress the plants that were set before
the Flood, and to order them that they might yield their fruits.

Genesis 21.33. And Abraham planted a Grave in Beersheba, and called there on the
name of the Lord, the everlasting God.

Of the fitness of these shades by Arbours, Seats, and close walks, in
Orchards for contemplation, and private exercises, I shall speak hereafter.

Vzziah delighted in this employment 2. Chro. 26.10. Vzziah had husbandmen and
dressers of Vines in the Mountains and in Carmell, for he loved husbandry.

This King reigned a long time in Jerusalem over Judah, fifty and two years.

Solomon a great, and wise King Eccl. 2.4. took pleasure herein, (and though
we may not follow him in any immoderation, and excess, yet there is a lawful,
and warrantable use of these delights Verse. 4.5. I made me great works, I
builded me houses, I planted me Vineyards, I made me gardens, and Orchards, and
I planted in them Trees of all kind of fruits.

Orchard and Garden, we have the example of the Mirror of Chastity, Virtuous
Susanna. It was her custom to work in a garden, as we see in the History verse.
7.8. Susanna went into her husbands garden to walk, the two Elders saw her
going in every day, and walking.

Israel (by a special command from God) made use of Arbours and shady places,
in their great Feasts: Nehem. 8:14.15. It was published and proclaimed in all
their cities, and in Jerusalem saying, Go forth unto the Mount and fetch Olive
Branches and Pine Branches and Myrtle branches, and Branches of thick-Trees, to
make Boothes, So they made these Boothes upon the Rooffes of their houses, and
in their Courts, and in the Court of the house of God, and in the streets; and
they sat under these Boothes and there was very great gladness.

Orchard, or Garden, we have the example of our blessed Savior, whose custom
it was to walk in a Garden, Jo. 18. 1. When Jesus had spoken these words he
went over the Brook Cedron where was a Garden; into which he entered with his
disciples, we see he often came to this Garden, for Judas observed it was his
custom to go to it. v. 2. Judas knew the place, for Jesus often times
resorted thither with his disciples.

Divine Argument of the Dignity, and value of Fruit Trees, and art of Planting,
is from the frequent use of Similitudes between the Church of God and
Fruit Trees, and between our Savior and Fruit Trees.

Fruit Trees bear the figure and resemblance of many high and great Mysteries
held forth to us in Parables, Tropes, Allegories, which represent Moral, and
Spiritual things. under the shape and figure of these corporeal things.

Similitude is between the Church and a Vineyard: Esaias. 5.1.2. My beloved had
a Vineyard in a very fruitful Hill. verse. 2. And he fenced it, and gathered
out the stones thereof and planted it with the choice Vine etc: And he looked
that it should bring forth grapes etc.

Prophet David uses the Similitude of a fruitful tree to express the
Condition of a Godly man. Psalm: 1.3. He shall be like a Tree planted by the
Rivers of Waters, that brings forth his fruit in due season, his Leaf also
shall not wither and look whatsoever he does it shall prosper. So again Jer:
17.8. He shall be as a Tree planted by the waters, and that spreads out her
Roots by the River, and shall not see when Heat comes, but her Leaf shall
be green, and shall not be careful in the year of Drought neither shall
cease from yielding fruit.

Similitude our Savior uses to express the Condition of his Church drawn
from the Vine. Jo. 15.1. I am the true Vine and my Father is the husbandman:
every branch in me that bears not fruit he takes away, and every branch that
bears fruit he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit, as the Branch
cannot bear fruit of it self except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye
except ye abide in me, Verse 4.

Similitude is between Natural and Mystical Grafting, Rom: 11.17. Concerning
the calling of the Gentiles, and rejection of the Jews for a time. If some of
the Branches be broken off, and thou being a wild Olive tree were grafted in
amongst them, and with them partakest of the root and fatness of the Olive
tree, Ver. 23. And they also if they abide not still in unbelief shall be
grafted in, for God is able to graft them in again, Verse. 24. For if thou were
cut out of the Olive tree, which is wild by nature, and were grafted (contrary
to nature) into a good Olive tree, how much more shall these which be the
natural branches be grafted into their own Olive tree.

Church is figuratively and by Allegories described by Solomon in his Songs,
Chap. 4 12.13. And amongst other figures and resemblances there used, one is
taken from an Orchard or Garden of Fruit Trees. A garden enclosed is my sister,
my spouse. Thy Plants are an orchard of Pomegranates, with pleasant fruits. And
again, the Church compares Christ to a fruit-tree, Chapter 2.3. Like the
Apple Tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons: I
sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my
taste.

Savior Christ in the description of Spiritual Paradise Revel. 22 2. In the
midst of the street of it, and of either side of the River was there the tree
of life, which bore twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her fruits every
month, and the Leaves of the Tree were for the healing of the Nations. And
again Chap. 2.7. To him that overcommeth I will give to eat of the tree of
life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God.

Concerning Similitudes between Material and Mystical Fruits, see the
Observations.
Divine Argument may be this.

God has threatened to withhold his blessing in these things, if we do not
obey him, and has in displeasure often deprived men of the same for their
disobedience, which proves them to be of value and worth: for when God is
displeased with a people, or particular persons, and will show it by some
correction, that he may bring them to repentance, he does it not by
withholding, or taking from them some small matters, that they can easily spare
without grief or trouble, for that would work no effect, but by withholding
or depriving them of something that is precious, and dear to them, the want, or
loss of which, will sad the heart: which course God has observed with people,
concerning these particular blessings. As apeares.

1 This was part of two of the ten Plagues, wherewith Egypt was punished,
Exodus 9.55. The hail brake every tree of the field. And as the Prophet David
has it, Ps 78.48. He destroyed their Vines with hail, and their Mulbery trees
with frost: and Psalm: 105.33. He smote their Vines also, and Fig Trees: and Ex:
10. 5. Locusts did eat all the Fruit of the trees which the hail had left.

2 Secondly, Among the signs of Gods displeasure against Israel: this is one,
Amos, 4 9. I have smitten your Fruit Trees, etc. yet have you not returned unto
me, says the Lord.

3 Thirdly: The Prophet calls to mourning, Joel, 1.12. For, The Vine is dried
up, the Figtree languisheth, the Pomegranate tree, the Palm tree also, and the
Apple tree, even all the trees of the field are withered, because joy is
withered from among the sons of men.

4 Fourthly: God in displeasure for sin tells them, Deuteronomy. 28.39 4. Thou shall
plant Vineyards and dress them, but shall neither drink of the wine, nor
gather the grapes for the worms shall eat them. Thou shall have Olive trees
throughout all thy coasts, but shall not anoint thy self with Oil: for thine
Olive shall cast her fruit: And God bids Moses tell the people, if they would
not obey, their land should not yield their increase, neither should the trees
of the land yield their fruits. The like again, Zeph, 1.13. Amos 5.11. Esaias,
17, 10. Hosea, 2.12.

Divine Argument may be this.

God has promised these things as blessings to such as obey him, and from time
to time performed it: Not to be looked upon as things of light, and trivial
consequence, but to be considered as strong engagements to obedience. When God
has been well pleased with a Nation, or particular persons he has often
showed it (among other tokens of his love) by multiplying the fruits of their
trees, encouraging them to plant Fruit-gardens, and promising his blessing
thereon. As we see.

1 God (by his Prophet) encourages his people in Babylon to build, and to
plant, Jer: 29.5. Build ye houses, and dwell in them, and plant gardens and
eat the fruits of them.

2 And in the promise of their return, this was one of the blessings God would
bestow on them, Amos, 9.14. And I will bring again the captivity of my people
Israel, and they shall build the wast cities and inhabit them, and they
shall plant Vineyards, and drink the wine thereof, they shall also make
gardens and eat the fruit of them.

3 Thirdly, When they came into Canaan that pleasant land, this is mentioned as
one of the blessings, Neh: 9.25. They possessed houses full of all goods, wells
dug, Vineyards and Oliveyards, and fruit trees in abundance.

4 And among the showers of blessings (as the Prophet calls them) this is one,
Ezekiel: 34.27. The tree of the field shall yield her fruit. And Ezekiel: 36.29. I
will multiply the fruit of the Tree. The like of many other places, Mal:
3.10.11. Joel. 2.21.22. Levit: 26.3.4. Esaias 65.21.22. Levit. 19.23. etc.

And thus much of the sixth Divine Argument from the promises of God, and
performance of them, in these things to his people.

Divine Argument of the Dignity and value of Fruit Trees, and the art of
planting, is from two general commands given by the Apostle Paul, which though
they mention not these things in explicit and plain terms, yet they are
commended to us by plain and clear implication, and deduction: for as out of
general promises we may draw, and deduct particulars, and make applications
from them; So also from general commands and directions.

The first Command is that of Paul in his Epistle to Titus Chapter 3.14. Let ours
also learn to maintain good works for necessary uses, that they be not
unfruitful: here is a general Command, out of which one particular may be
derived for the present purpose. The Apostle here, by Good works, means good
works as they are toward the maintenance of the Commonwealth, or a particular
Family with necessary commodities and useful things, as Honest Trades, and
imploiments, as the Margent renders it.

Now it is clear, this work and employment of Planting Fruit Trees, is a good
work for necessary uses, seeing the life of man may by it be maintained with
so many necessaries belonging to it: See Profits of an Orchard,

This being so, the Apostle (then) bids us learn to do it, as if he should
say, get some skill in it, and be doing, then uphold and maintain it.

The second general Command is that which the Apostle writes to the
Philippians, Chap. 4 8. Whatsoever things are True: whatsoever things are
Honest: whatsoever things are Just: whatsoever things are Pure: whatsoever
things are Lovely: whatsoever things are of Good Report: if there be any
Virtue, if there be any Praise, think on these things.

Now it is easily for a man to speak of many particular Employments, which
have upon them the Characters and Marks here mentioned: but of all of them, I
know not one (except Divine Employments) that has these Marks so clearly
stamped upon it, as this Employment of the husbandman in Planting Fruit Trees.
This employment answers exactly to the Apostles Rule, as it were face answering
face in the glass: for what particular labor is more honest, more just, more
pure: more lovely: of better Report: what has more Virtue, what has more
Praise then it: See what has been said in the Praise and good report of it,
and the rest of the Properties, at large: already mentioned.

Now this being so, then we ought to follow the Apostles Command: If there be
any Virtue, if there be any Praise (says he) think on these things. The words
are very Emphaticall: whatsoever, and if there be any praise. His meaning is,
whatsoever the work be, though mean in the eye of the world, yet, if there be
but any one of these Characters and Marks upon it, it is worthy to be
follovved, then how much more when it has them All, and that so eminently, as
that every eye sees them. Think on these things, says he, first, to search out
what works and employments are marked with these Characters: and then, think
on such to like, and choose them, to set about them, to follovv them, and make
such things our professions for the praise of God, and profit of men.

And so much for the seventh Divine Argument.

divine Argument, is from Gods command for the preservation of fruit trees: He
lays a special charge upon men for their safty and preservation, as we see,
Deuteronomy: 20.19 20. When thou shall besiege a city, long time in making war
against it, to take it, thou shall not destroy the trees thereof, by forcing an
Axe against them, for thou may eat of them, and thou shall not cut them
down, to further thee in the siege, for the tree of the field is man's life,
Verse: 20. Only the trees which thou know that they be not trees for meat,
thou shall destroy, and cut them down, and thou shall build Bulwarks against
the city that makes war with thee until it be subdued. Although this
Scripture may be taken in an Allegorical sense, as signifying to us Gods care
of Mystical Fruit Trees, his people: being Trees of righteousness of the
Lords planting: yet the same may also be taken in a litterall sense, and as
some godly men conceive, is a positive binding Law even at this day.

We see God ingeminates, and repeats his charge to preserve the Fruit Trees,
being trees for food, and nourishment of man's life, they must not be destroyed,
though it were on so great an occasion as to further the siege against their
enemies. He leaves other trees, such as are not trees for meat, such as bear
no fruits, to be cut down and destroyed, as they have use for them in the war,
but they must not spoil, nor meddle with the Fruit Trees.

I have discovered these Divine Arguments of the dignity, and value of
fruit trees, and the art of planting, to stir up, and encourage men to so good
a work, to a work of so great, and many advantages to the Commonwealth.

And because Humane Arguments, are likewise prevalent with men, observe them
also for further encouragement.

The first Humane Argument 1. Humane Argument.
of the dignity and value of Fruit Trees, and the art of planting is from
Presidents, or Examples of wise and learned men, of great and good men in
former ages, who have practiced this Art.

Examples either in Virtue or Vice, are powerful with men, (especially
Examples of great ones) Brevius iter per exempla, quam per praecepta. Its much
easier to prevail with people by Examples, then by Precepts, or Rules. And if
Examples of great ones, even in things evil, are so powerful, as they are
with most men, how much more then should they be prevalent in honest, and
virtuous things: so that herein is a double inducement, the Example, and the
Virtue: here is a twofold Argument concurrent and met in this employment of
planting fruit trees: Presidents, and those of the highest; Philosophers,
Kings, and Emperors. Secondly, Virtue, and that of the chiefest Nature that
secular Employments have in them.

So then observe some Examples recorded by ancient Authors in this employment
of planting Fruit Trees.

Pog. Florent.
Plures excellentis doctrinae viri, and Philosophandi studio, etc. Many famous
and learned men (says he) studious in Philosophy, have delighted in this
course of life, and found therein abundance of pleasure, and contentment.

Joan. Bap. Port.
Si dignitas Agriculturae accedit ex iis qui eam tractaverint Regalis Ars and
dignissima erit. If the dignity and esteem of this Art may be drawn from
those who have been conversant in it, then it is a Kingly Art, and chiefest of
all others Reges and Imperatores summosque Magistratus, etc.
Cyrus King of Persia. Philometrus King of Asia. Heronus King of Asia.
Archelaus King of Asia. Attalus King of Asia. Evax and Avicen: Kings of Arabia.
Solomon King of Israel Telaphanus. Antonius Pius. Elizeus. Numa. Sportanus.
Alcinous. Mithridates the great. Alexander the great. Dioclesian, Emperor of
Rome, And many others.


Kings, Princes, Roman Emperors and the highest powers on earth, have not
disdained to perform the works of an Orchard with their own hands, and taken
delight therein.

Mascall says: Many great Lords and Noble personages, have left their
Theaters, and goodly exercises, and have given themselves to Planting and
Grafting, and have accounted nothing of higher commendation.

The second Humane Argument 2. Humane Argument.
of the dignity and value of Fruit Trees and the art of planting, is from the
praises of ancient and late writers, and the suffrage, or general consent of
all people.

Works and employments that have the praise but of some persons only, we cannot
conclude the worth and dignity thereof from such praises, because self and
sinister ends may sway in the minds of such: but those employments that have
the Praise of all, and where there is a concurrence, and consent of minds in
all people in the praise thereof, (of the Good, as well as the bad, of the
Learned as well as the unlearned, of the Wise, as well as the unwise) these
probably are good and virtuous.

Now this art and employment of planting Fruit Trees, has the joint and
unanimous consent, not only of the greatest persons of the world, but likewise
of all persons in the world, there is none has ill will toward it, none has
any thing to say against it, but all, without ecception, give it their good
word and speak in the praise of it.

If men do but speak of it, they will commend it, and say, its a goodly
employment, its both a pleasant and profitable work, its good for a
Commonwealth, it enriches whole Countries, to this purpose men usually speak
of it: what ancient and late writers have said in the praise of it may be seen,
page 8, 9, 10, etc.

And for the second Humane Argument thus much.

The third Humane Argument 3. Humane Argument.
of the dignity and value of Fruit trees and the art of planting is Argumentum
ab utili, from the Profits that are received thereby.

Let us see then what Profits may be had from an Orchard or Garden of
Fruit Trees.

Profits arise from an Orchard many ways: 1. In the Family.
one way is to a man's Estate: and that in two respects: first, in respect of
housekeeping, and provision for his family all the year.e

Secondly in respect of sale.

Such as have good Orchards know by experience that they are very profitable
for meat, and drink all the yeare-long, many good dishes they make of Fruits,
and many wholesome and pleasant drinks, Syder, Perry, Cherry-Wines, etc. which
are not barely nourishing but have other special properties, they moderately
cool and refresh the spirits in heat of Summer; and besides they keep the body
from gross and superfluous humors, and carry down the seeds of diseases,
which else would lodge and grow in the body, and at length spring out to the
prejudice of health.

Of the healthfulnesse of these Liquors, See the use of Fruits.

2. For Sale.
Secondly, Fruit Trees are profitable to the Husbandman in respect of sale of
the fruits, when a man has more then he can spend in his house, especially to
such as live near some great Town or City, where they have vent at pleasure.
The Poet saw the Profits of an Orchard when he said Non illi deerat, quod
pauperis exigit usus,
Interdum locuples a paupere multa petebat.
The Orchard does with fruit the poor supply,
With which he does the wealthy gratify.


The Profits of an Orchard once come to good perfection (does exceed the
profits of Corn (upon like quantity of ground) many times over. As has been
computed and set down by those that (I suppose) well knew the value of both.
And touching Profits to the Estate thus much.

2. Profitable to the body.
Secondly, An Orchard or Garden of Fruit Trees, and Employments about the same,
is profitable to the body, first in respect of health: secondly in respect of
long life.

1. In respect of Health.
What is a greater earthly blessing then perfect health of body, some have said
valetudo est summum bonum: Health is the chiefest earthly good thing: what will
not men do for health: they will set body and mind and all on work for health:
they will part with friends, house and lands, silver and gold, and all for
health.

Now health is preserved: first, by moderate and seasonable exercise, in the
Orchard the labor that preserves health must not be too violent, Hist. Life
and death p. 412. and 269.
it must be but ad ruborem, non adsudorem, as some advise: to bring the body to
a temperate and gentle heat, not to immoderate sweating.

The Lord Bacon advises to exercise causing rather perspiration then sweating,
and says further, that an idle life does manifestly make the flesh soft and
dissipable, but robust exercise, so it be without overmuch sweating, and
weariness) makes it hard and compact, which advances health.

Secondly, Health is preserved by fresh and wholesome Airs which in heat of
summer is found in Arbors, Seats, and Walks in the garden of Fruit Trees. The
aforesaid Author tells us the air in summer is predatory and hurtful through
the heat of the sun, and therefore ought (as much as may be) to be excluded
from the body. Now there is no fresh wholesome airs, and cool shades to be
found any where in summer season, better then these in the Orchard, or garden
of Fruit Trees so the Poet Opaca prebent arbores umbracula,
Prohibentque densis fervidum solemn comis.
Green Canopies the shady trees us lend
Against schorching sun, boughs thick, whilst they extend.


Thirdly, Health is preserved, by pleasant and wholesome Odors, and perfumes
found in the Garden of Fruit Trees, all the spring and summer, by digging the
Earth, and from the Leaves and blossoms of Trees:

Lo: Ba: tells us, the vapors of fresh earth by digging, condense and refresh
the spirits. Hist Life, and Death page 207 and 208.


And that Leaves of trees falling toward the middle of Autumn, yield a good
refreshing to the spirits.

But the most pleasant and wholesome Odors, are from the blossoms of all the
Fruit Trees, which having in them a condensing and cooling property are
therefore, not simply Healthful, but are accounted Cordial; chearing and
refreshing the Heart and vital spirits.

Now the spirits (as this Author observes) are the Masterworkemen in the body,
Hist. Life, and Death, page 183. and 410.
and as the uppermost Wheel which turns about the other wheels in the body,
and therefore whatsoever is Healthful and refreshing to the spirits, works
(powerfully) good effects in the body: And that speedily and suddenly: as the
Author says Vapors and Affections work compendiously upon the spirits. Hist.
Life, and Death. page 236.


Of the Healthfullnesse of Odors see more at Large, in the title Pleasure of
the sense of smell in a Garden:

Fourthly: Health is preserved by wholesome meats and drinks all the year from
the Garden of Fruit Trees.

The spirits of the body in summer stand in need of cooling and condensing, and
what meats and drinks more proper for that purpose then dishes and drinks of
the fruits of an Orchard. They are both Alimentall and Physical: they cure
diseases and preserve health: discharging the body of the beginnings, and seeds
of many diseases.

2. In respect of long life.
Secondly: A Garden of Fruit Trees is profitable to the body in respect of Long
life.

How much have men valued long life, in all ages of the world, what strange
courses have some taken to extend their life to a great length: some have lived
in Caves and Rocks, and sequestered themselves from society with men, and
betaken themselves to a strict Monastical course, that they might stretch out
their life, and be said to live.

Yea amongst Christians who though they desire to be dissolved and to be with
Christ. Yet in some respects long life is to be accounted a blessing, and is
set before us as an encouragement to obedience: as we see Deuteronomy. 32.47. The
fear of the Lord is your life, Prove. 10.27. Prove, 9, 11, Ps, 91, 16.
and through this ye shall prolong your days. And Prove. 3.1.2. My son keep
my Commandments for length of days, and long life shall they add to thee:
the like in many other places. Now I say: An Orchard or Garden of Fruit Trees
is profitable to the body for Long life: and that in several respects.

All these four last mentioned means for Health, the same likewise conduce
and are profitable to long life: wherein lies another part of their excellency
and worth: for as the Lord Bacon observes: Hist L D. page 179. and 180.
some things are profitable for an healthful life, but are not good for long
life, but all these conduce as well to long life, as to health: so that
Moderate exercise, 2, fresh Airs. 3, pleasant Odors. 4. Wholesome meats and
drinks, (which are all had in an Orchard or Garden of Fruit Trees, are (also)
all profitable to long life.

Hist. L. D. page 183. and 414.
The foresaid Author says: The spirits are the master workmen of all the
effects in the body, and therefore in the intention of long life ought to be
first placed.

So then: whatsoever works upon the spirits for their refreshing, and vigor,
is profitable to long life.

The operation upon the spirits, and their waxing fresh and vigorous, is the
most ready, and compendious way to Long life. Hist. L.D. page 235.
Now an Orchard or Garden of Fruit Trees, and employments therein, work upon
the spirits for their refreshing two ways, First by the Organs of the Body.
Secondly, by the Affections of the Mind.


Touching the first, The operation upon the spirits through the Organs of the
body, see at large in the pleasure of the five senses.

Concerning the operation upon the spirits by the Affections of the mind, I
shall here speak, and mention only three Affections of the mind which work
powerfully upon the spirits, conducing to long life.

One Affection of the Mind which works effectually upon the spirits for Long
life is Hope. 1. Affection Hope. Hist. L.D. page 224.


The Lord Bacon says Hope is most beneficial of all the Affections, and does
much to the Prolongation of life: if it be not too often frustrated, but
entertaineth the fancy with an expectation of good, therefore (says he) they
which fix and propound to themselves something as the mark, and scope of their
life, and continually, and by degrees, go forward in the same, are for the
most part long lived, and Hope is as a Leafe-joy which may be beaten out to a
great extension like gold.

Now the diligent Husbandman in this art of planting Fruit Trees, has good and
sure grounds for Hope, not only from many Promises in the word, but likewise
subordinate grounds from Reason and Experience. This Hope is sown with the
seeds of his Fruits, and springs up with them, and so from year to year his
Hope grows and increases with his Fruit Trees: He says before him, and
considers what great Profits and Pleasures are coming toward him, he sees by
experience, what a plentiful harvest of Profits and Pleasures others receave
from Orchards and Gardens of Fruit Trees, which are as fuel, or food to
nourish and feed Hope, and hold it in strength and vigor, and when he begins to
receive Profits and Pleasures from his Fruit Trees, these refresh Hope, and
make it grow from strength to strength with his Fruit Trees, and thus from
year to year Hope is continued and increased, and all this while the spirits
are refreshed, as Hope is refreshed, and are kept thereby vigorous and strong,
and in a pleased temper and condition, and being the Master-workmen in the
body, or first wheel (as the Author says) they work upon all the parts of
the body, for Prolongation of life.

And so much concerning the operation upon the spirits by Hope.

2. Affection. Joy.
Another Affection of the mind which in this employment works upon the spirits
for long-life is Joy.

The foresaid Author says: That this Affection of Joy works so powerfully on
the spirits, Hist L. D. page 221.
that some great Joys coming suddenly, and unexpectedly, do overmuch
attenuate, and diffuse the spirits. But now there is no danger of the suddenness
of Joy in these things, whereby to raise and overmuch diffuse the spirits, for
such things as cause Joy in the employment of planting Fruit trees, are
expected and waited for, and Hope prepares the way for Joy. Joy is a clear
shining beautiful affection, and rises some degrees higher then Hope: Joy in
the use of earthly things is lawful in its season there is a time to rejoice, as
well as a time to mourn, And there is a lawful joy in harvest, in gathering
in the fruits of the Earth, Esaias 9.3. It is commanded and allowed of God: Deuteronomy.
12.16. Thou shall rejoice before the Lord thy God in all that thou put
thine hand unto. And again, Deuteronomy. 16.15. Because the Lord thy God shall bless
thee in all thy increase, and in all the works of thine hands, therefore thou
shall surely rejoice. A Christian may rejoice in the Lord, in the use of
earthly blessings. And in this employment of Planting Fruit Trees there are
many grounds and occasions of rejoicing: The joy of the Husbandman is not a
flash and so away, but it is a settled and habitual joy: and is renewed from
time to time, which is the very thing the aforesaid Author speaks of, in giving
instructions concerning Long-life. This life (says he) (as much as may be) is
so to be ordered that it may have many renovations, Hist. L.D. page 228.
and the spirit by continual conversing in the same actions, may not wax
dull. Page 232
And again. One thing above all is grateful to the spirits, that there be a
continual progress to the more benign, and no doubt (says he) it furthereth
Long life, Page 164.
to have all things from our youth to our elder age, mend, and grow to the
better.

Now this employment of Planting Fruit Trees is above all humane arts, most
suitable to these Rules: whereby this Affection of joy is kept fresh and
vigorous, which also keeps the spirits cheerful and lively: for herein are
many renovations, and a continual progress to the more benign, and things
mending and growing to the better. Joy is continually renewed from year to
year, yea, in diverse seasons of the year, there are fresh and new joys.

In the spring of the year joy springs afresh in beholding the seeds, and
young Grafts and Plants spring forth vigorously and strongly. And the buds and
blossoms breathing forth precious and pleasant Odors, rejoice and delight the
inward and outward senses, promising a plentiful Harvest of Fruits in Autumn,
and all the Summer long joy is cherished, with cool fresh airs, singing of
Birds, sight of abundance of Fruits, burd'ning all the Trees, delighting the
Eye with their beautiful forms and colors, and in Autumn joy is renewed
again with a rich and plentiful Harvest of Fruits. And all the Winter long
joy is nourished and fed with a free use of all the Fruits, and Wines, and
Delicates made of them. So here is a succession of joys, one following on the
neck of another, whereby the spirits are still kept in a cheerful temper, and
condition, and so work powerfully on the grosser parts of the body conducing to
Long-life.

Concerning the lawfulness of rejoicing in earthly blessings, with a Caution:
See afterward.

Another Affection of the Mind which (in this employment) works powerfully
upon the spirits for Long life is admiration. 3. Affection Admiration. Hist. L.
D. page 225.


The Lord Bacon says: Admiration and light Contemplation, are very powerful
to the Prolongation of life. This affection ascends a step higher then the
other two, for as joy rises higher then Hope, so Admiration higher then joy.

It is our duty to Admire God in his works, which is a step higher them
simply to praise him: when we look upon the works of a skillful Artificer and
commend it, it is for his credit, but when we admire, and wonder at it; this is
a higher commendation. The holy Prophet would have us search out, and wonder at
the works of God, Ps. 111.2. The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all
them that have pleasure therein, Ver: 3. his work is honorable and glorious,
and he calls us to this duty of admiration: O come hither and behold the works
of God, how wonderful he is in his doings! Ps: 111.4. He has so done his
Marveilous works that they ought to be had in remembrance.

Now in this Employment of planting Fruit Trees, are many things to be seen,
and understood to cause admiration, which works effectually upon the spirits
for Long-life.

Baptist: Port. speaking of the wonderful effects of Grafting, says, Lib. de
Cult. and Insitione. Chapter 17
it is an admirable Art, and the chiefest part of the husbandmans work.

Artem infitionis admirabilem esse ac totius Agriculturae nobilissimam partem,
voluptuosam, utilem, etc. When he considers the strange effects of Grafting, he
falls a wondering, O mira insitionis potestas, etc. And Mizaldus speaking of
grafting, says, Insitionis open artificiosa, multa ad stuporem usque miranda
fieri: many things may be done even to admiration.

Austin wonders at these things. Quid majus mirabiliusque spectaculum est, quam
cum positis seminibus, plantatis surculis etc. In exiguo grano mirabilior,
praestantiorque vis est etc. What more strange things are to be seen in
Nature, then in sowing seeds, setting, and grafting young plants, and such like
works. In a small seed there is a wonderful and admirable power and virtue,

Many strange things may be found in this employment.

admiration to consider that a huge and mighty body, (the biggest of all bodies
whatsoever that have life) does arise of a small kernel or seed, that that
seed should contain in it (virtually, or potentially) a great Tree, with all
the properties of it, and retain its nature exactly in every particular.

Admiration to see goodly, wholesome, and beautiful fruits, come forth of
rough, and crooked Trees, especially to observe the manner of their coming
forth, the care that nature takes to secure and preserve the seed of the Fruit,
with the Buds, Blossoms, Skin, and substance of the fruits, with the Core,
Stones, or shells, and also with the leaves of the Trees.

Admiration, to consider that the nature, and properties of a great tree, are
enclosed, and lie in every small twig, yea, in every Bud of the tree, even in
the least Bud, yea in the Root of that least Bud, which Bud being set on a
small Plant (according to Art) will grow to a Tree in all respects like to that
whence it was taken.

Admiration to consider how many several substances are made of one simple
substance for of the Sap of Trees is made the Bark, Wood, Pith, Leaves, Buds,
Blossoms, Stalk, Fruit, and Seed.

Admiration to consider that Grafts or Buds, set upon Wild stocks, such as
naturally bring forth sower, harsh, and naughty fruits. And though the Grafts
and Buds, be nourished by that harsh and different sap, and receive all their
substance, and grouth from it, that yet these Grafts, and Buds should retain
their own natures, and not be altered into the nature of the stock whereon they
grow, but have power to digest, change, and assimilate this harsh, and sower
sap into their own sweet and pleasant natures, and bring forth fruits
accordingly.

Admiration to see little small Plants (of but two years old) and some but of
one year, if grafted) to hang full of fruits, and to be able to bear them
forth to their natural bigness, and goodness, and notwithstanding make a
large and sufficient grouth the same year.

Admiration to see the busy and industrious Bees to gather Honey even from the
flowers, or blossoms of bitter Almond-trees, and other flowers and Plants that
to our sense, are bitter, and unpleasant.

Admiration to see very many, and very great fruits hang upon only one small
and slender twig. L.B. Hist. L.D. page 85.
A great Author notes it for a strange thing, that all the nourishment which
produces (sometimes) such great fruits, should be forced to pass through so
narrow necks, as the stalk of the Fruit.

But may it not be accounted a more strange thing to see five or six, or more,
fair and large fruits to hang upon a slender twig little bigger then the
stalk of each particular fruit growing on it.

Admiration to see one Tree hang full of different, and several kinds of
fruits, as an Apple Tree withal, or many kinds of Apples or a Cherry tree,
with all or many kinds of Cherries so of other kinds of trees. To see one tree
hang full of fruits different in their Forms, Colors, leaves, and Blossoms,
which may be done by Grafting, or Inoculating, so many several kinds of Buds,
or Grafts upon one tree.

Admiration to stand upon a Mount in the midst of a fair large Orchard in the
spring time, and to behold round about a multitude of several sorts of
Fruit Trees, full of beautiful Blossoms, different in their shapes and
colors, ravishing the sense with their sweet Odors, and within a while, turned
into fair and goodly fruits of diverse Colors and Kinds, the fruit trees
gorgeously arrayed with green leaves, and various colored fruits, and with so
many precious Jewels, and Pearls.

And thus much touching the operation upon the spirits in order to Long-life,
by these three Affections, Hope, Joy, Admiration.

Thirdly: This employment of planting Fruit Trees is profitable to the mind.
3. Profitable to the mind.
First in respect of Knowledge. Secondly in respect of Affections.

1. In knowledge.
This work is profitable to the Mind by storing it with variety of Objects,
and profitable Notions both Natural, Moral, and Spiritual.

How variously does Nature discover it self in planting, grafting, budding,
blossoming, and bearing Fruits. So that such as are studious in the search of
the secrets of Nature, may observe the process, and course thereof in manifold
respects about these things.

And multitudes of Experiments may be drawn out for use and profit. If men will
but join Contemplation, and Action, Study and Practice together, they shall
find (even in this one Volume or book of the Orchard) many useful and
fruitful Lessons, for temporal and spiritual advantage. See the observations.

2. In affections.
And as the employment is profitable to the mind in respect of Knowledge: so
also in respect of Affections, by offering many fold Divine Meditations, by
occasion whereof the affections of the soul may (with the help of the spirit)
be raised and turned into a spiritual temper.

How fitly does the Garden of Fruit Trees offer unto us that most profitable
and fruitful Meditation of our first fall and original sin, whereof we were
all guilty in such a Place; even in an Orchard or Garden of Fruit Trees: in
which Meditation our affections should work to lay our selves low in our own
eyes, to abhor our selves: and to exalt God, and abundantly to joy in the
infinite and boundless mercy of God in Christ, in that he took pity on poor
Man, when he was fallen, but passed by the Angels when they were fallen, (
Creatures by creation more excellent then Man) and left them in an
irrecoverable state of misery. But in the same place, even so soon as we had
sinned, promised us a Savior, and when the fullness of time was come, sent him
into the world. In consideration of these things, our Affections of Love to joy
in, and Admiration of God should be enlarged, and boundless. O the height and
depth of the Mercy and Justice of God, toward the Angels Justice, but toward
us Mercy. What can we render unto the Lord for this his infinite mercy? Now
seeing he looks for nothing but Love and Praise, let us begin it here, that we
may hold on to all eternity.

Fourthly: Planting fruit trees is profitable to the Name 4. Profitable to the
name.
of the Planter. Fruit Trees are living, lasting monuments, and bear up, and
perpetuate the Name of him that planted, and labored about them both while he
lives, and in generations after. A late Author says, that Apple trees and
Peare-trees (and some other kinds of Fruit Trees) on good land, and duly
ordered, will last 800 or 900 years.

What earthly thing is better then a good Name. Solomon tells us Eccl: 7.1. A
good name is better then precious ointment: and again, Prove: 22.1. A good name
is to be chosen before great riches, and loveing favor is above silver, and
above gold: One says, L.B Not. Hist. page 258.
The best temper of minds desire a good name, and the lighter, popularitie,
and applause.

A good name is not only to be desired, but to be highly prised, and to be
reckoned the chief of earthly blessings, not only for the beauty of it, but
also for the permanency of it, it abides when friends, riches, life and all is
lost.

One way to gain, and keep a good name is by Gifts and Benefits: the worst
temper of minds are won, and held by Gifts and good turns, it is natural to
all creatures to love those that do them good. Now who can so easily give so
great, so many, and so acceptable gifts as the husbandman that yearly nurseth
up multitudes of Fruit Trees, and has store of pleasant fruits, wines, and
delicates made of them. While he lives he bestows young fruit trees, fruits,
and many acceptable gifts out of his Orchard, and being dead, his Orchards,
Gardens, and Fruit Trees live, and flourish, and occasion a remembrance of his
Name, for many ages after him.

And secondly, as Gifts and good turns, gain a good name, so also to be
conversant and employed about works for the Public and general profit of a
Commonwealth: such works produce the same effect.

We know, all labors and employments that bring both Profit and Pleasure, are
approved and praised of all, though the advantage be but to a private family,
how much more when they are for a Commonwealth.

And besides this Moral Consideration, God has promised the great blessing of
a good name to them that are conversant in good employments, Rom: 13.3. Do
that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same, Rom: 2.10. Glory,
honor, and peace, to every one that works good, upon the Jew first, and also
on the Gentile.

So then, the work of Planting Fruit Trees is profitable to the name of the
Husbandman both while he lives, and in Generations after him.

Fifthly, An Orchard or Garden of Fruit Trees and the employment about them is
profitable to others: 5 Profitable to others.
First in the present times: Secondly in time to come.

This profit to others is by bestowing our fruits on friends, and neighbors,
and such as want. For though God require not to himself (as formerly) the
first of all the fruits of all trees, year by year, Nehem. 10.35. Yet God
requires year by year, when he bestows all upon us, that we should give a
part to himself again, that is, to his poor members, that want them.

This is the way to obtain a blessing upon all our labors. Deuteronomy. 15.10. Thou
shall surely give unto him (that is unto thy poor brother) and thine heart
shall not be grieved when thou give unto him, because that for this thing the
Lord thy God shall bless thee, in all thy works, and in all thou put thy
hand unto.

A Gift to the Poor is a gainefull Gift, for by it a man becomes Creditor to
his Creator. Prove: 19.17. He that gives to the poor lends to the Lord, and
the Lord will recompense him. Eccle: 35.11. The Lord recompenceth, and will
give thee seaven-times as much.

Likewise the fruits of an Orchard are profitable to others that buy the
fruits, the Buyer having good and profitable Commodities for his money, has
profit thereby, as well as the seller.

Yea, This labor is profitable to others in time to come, Qui serunt Arbores
alteri seculo prosunt. After ages receive much profitt: also When our selves
and others, have received our full portion of profitt then fruit trees are left
to Children, and posterity to receive Profit many Generations after.

And this much touching the Third Humane Argument, from the Profits that are
received from a Garden of Fruit Trees.

The fourth Humane Argument 4. Humane Argument.
of the Dignity and value of Fruit Trees and the Art of Planting is Argumentum
a voluptate, from the Pleasures that are received thereby.

Pleasure is called sal and condimentum vitae. The salt that seasons all things
to us. In all that a man has pleasure in it, is that which makes it acceptable.
Pleasure (as one says) is the Good of every thing, and a pattern of Heaven.

Now, we find pleasure in an Orchard or Garden of Fruit Trees suitable to all
the Senses of the body. And here is a mixture of pleasures with profits: for
diverse objects of the senses are both pleasant and profitable: this employment
is richly furnished with both.

And as I have showed some particulars wherein profit consists: so likewise I
will show some particulars wherein pleasure consists in the use of a Garden of
Fruit Trees.

Each sense has its particular pleasure.

First for the sense of hearing.

It is a pleasure to the Ear to hear the sweet notes and tunes of singing
Birds, 1. Pleasure of the sense of Hearing.
whose company a man shall be sure to have in an Orchard, which is more
pleasant there, then elsewhere, because of other concurrent pleasures there, a
Consort of Music is more pleasant then upon a single Instrument. The Poet
took notice of this pleasure, Aves Canoros garrulae fundunt sonos,
Et semper Aures cantibus mulcent suis.
Melodious ditties chirping Birds indite,
Whose pleasant songs, our ravished ears invite.


And besides, something more this sense may receive from an Orchard (though it
have least share of pleasure therein of any of the senses) by hearing the slow
motion of Boughs and Leaves. by soft and gentle aires, sometimes (as it were)
with a kind of singing or whistling noise, which will easily induce a sweet and
pleasant sleep in summer time (if a man be disposed) in some close cool Arbor,
or shady seat.

Secondly the sense of Touch may have Pleasure 2 Pleasure of the sense of Touch.
in an Orchard from the cool fruits, and leaves of Trees, smoothing and
brushing the face therewith, which is refreshing and cooling in heat of Summer.
But this sense receaves Pleasure chiefly by the shade of Trees in summer time.
Cool refreshing Airs are found in close Walks, Seats, and Arbours under and
about the Trees, which keep off the burning heat of the sun.

Yea, they do not simply keep off the heat of the sun, but likewise much
cool the air by its contact of these cool bodies, Trees, Fruits, and leaves;
cool fresh airs in heat of summer are sought for, and are not only Pleasant
but exceeding profitable, and healthful to the body. Hist L.D. page 241.
Here Profit and Pleasure meet and embrace each other. And hereto agrees the L.
Bacon, who says, exclusion of air is profitable to Long-life: for air is
predatory to long-life through the heat of the sun, and ought (as much, as is
possible) to be excluded from the body. Now what better place is there, to
exclude the heat of the sun from the body in summer season, then amongst the
shady trees, Arbours and Walks in the Orchard?

L.B. Hist. L, D. page Ca. 11 Page 425.
It Is laid for a ground, That condensing the spirits in their substance is
available to long-life, which (he tells us) is done most effectually by cool
airs. Refrigeration or cooling of the body from without is above all things
necessary to long-life.

So then; the Pleasure this sense receives from a Garden of Fruit Trees is to
be much esteemed.

Thirdly. The sense of sight, partakes of Pleasure 3. Pleasure of the sight.
in an Orchard, in beholding the exact Order in Planting of the Trees, their
decent forms, the well composed Allies, Walks, Seats, and Arbours therein:
Not. hist. p. 2 24
for order and curious forms of things much delight the sight: of this see L.
Bacon at large.

Likewise, the sight is delighted with pleasant and delicate Colors of the
Leaves, Blossoms, and Fruits, that show themselves in great variety, Curious
Colors, especially the Color green is accounted helpful to the sight.

Fons, speculum, Gramen, Oculis sunt alleviamen:
Green grass, clear glass, and fountains pure
Refresh Eyesight, long to endure.
Here again Profit and Pleasure meet.

And as foul and odious objects presented to the sight, cause a dislike in the
spirits, that they retire and shun such objects, See L. B. Not. hist. page 199.
so e contrario verum, the contrary holds in delightful and pleasant objects
of the sight, the spirits thereby are delighted. He says, Nas. hist. p. 224
Objects of the sight, as coming into a fair Garden, or into a fair room,
richly furnished, and the like, do delight and exhilarate the spirits much.
The beautiful flowers of various colors, amongst the lovely Bloomes of trees,
and Plants, what a glorious show will they make.

Flores nitescunt, discolore gramine,
Pinguntque terras gemmeis honoribus.
Gay flowers waven with discolored grass,
With rich imbroidered Robes the earth compass.
Is it not a pleasant sight to behold a multitude of Trees round about, in
decent form and order, bespangled, and gorgeously apparelled with green
Leaves, Bloomes, and goodly Fruits, as with a rich Robe of imbroidered work, or
as hanging with some precious and costly Jewels, or Pearls, the Boughs laden,
and burdened bowing down to you, and freely offering their ripe fruits, as a
large satisfaction of all your labors.

Aspice curvatos pomorum pondere ramos,
Vt sua, quod peperit, vix ferat Arbor onus. Ovid.

The laden boughs with weight of Apples crack,
And Trees to bear their burdens strength do jack.
Fourthly, the sense of smell, 4. Pleasure of the smell. Hist. L.D p. 207 p.
208.
may likewise have its share of pleasure in a Garden of Fruit Trees. L. Bacon
says, the smell of new and pure earth, excellently refreshes the spirits, he
says, a certain great Lord, who lived long, had every morning, immediately
after sleep, a clod of fresh earth laid under his nose, Not hist. Cent. 9. page
210.
that he might take the smell thereof, and again, Good earth newly turned up,
has a freshness and good sent. And that the Leaves and branches of some trees
are odorate and sweet. He says likewise, Not. hist. Cent. 6 page 136.
that the Leaves of Trees falling toward the middle of Autumn, yield a good
refreshing to the spirits. And that the Moss of some Apple Trees has an
excellent sent, and is used of Perfumers.

But chiefly The Pleasure this sense meets with is from the sweet smelling
blossoms of all the fruit trees, which from the time of their breaking forth,
till their fall, breath out a most precious and pleasant odor: perfuming the
air throughout all the Orchard.

Not. hist. Cent. 4 page 102.
The same Author observes: That the most Delicate Smells are from those Plants
whose Leaves smell not, and amongst other things he mentions Bloomes of
Apple Trees.

Not. hist Cent. 9 page 210. Hist. L.D. page 295.
And in another of his Experiments, he says, that generally those smells are
most grateful and pleasant, where the degree of heat is small, for those
things do rather woo the sense, then satiate it. And prefers cool smells
before hot for comforting of the heart.

Now: The Bloomes of Apple Trees, Peare-trees, Cherry-trees, and such like,
have small degrees of heat, and therefore the Odor is pleasant and wholesome.

And besides the pleasure of this perfumed air, it is also very profitable,
and healthful to the body. Here again, Profit and pleasure, meet and embrace.
An Odores nutriunt, is a question amongst Philosophers, some hold sweet
perfumes nourishing, doubtless they give a great refreshing to the spirits,
and whatsoever delights, and cheeres the spirits is without controversy, very
advantageous to the health of the body, for the spirits are the chief workers
in the body, from which proceed all, or most of the effects wrought in the
body, good or bad, according to the temper of the spirits.

Sweet perfumes work immediately upon the spirits for their refreshing, but meat
and drink, by ambages and length of time: sweet and healthful Airs are
special preservatives to health, and therefore much to be prised.

Is the Curative part of Physic so worthy, and excellent, as the preservative
part? Its better to stand fast, then to fall and rise again.

Now, a sweet perfumed, fresh, wholesome Air (which is chiefly found in Gardens
of Fruit Trees) is greatly available to that purpose, as well as pleasant to
the sense.

5 Pleasure of the Taste.
Fifthly: the Sense of Taste has its pleasure in an Orchard. This sense meets with
pleasure at all times of the year, from the fruits of an Orchard. The pleasure
of the other senses are to be had, but at some seasons of the year only. This
sense has pleasure from all sorts of ripe, and raw fruits, besides meats, and
drinks and many dainties made of them. The ordinary food they afford all the
year, and the more delicate for Banquets, are also good and healthful to the
body, as well as pleasant to the taste. Here again, pleasure and profit meet
and embrace, so the Poet: Hortus salubreis praebet corpori cibos,
Oblectat Hortus, avocat, pascit, tenet.
The garden to the body, gives sound and healthful meats,
The Garden pleases most, draws, holds, and feeds with delicates,


In the heat of summer, what place is fitter for the table, then some sweet
shady cool Arbeur in the Garden. And what meats better befitting that time of
the year, then some dainty dishes made of the cool fruits of the Orchard. At
which time cooling and refreshing the spirits from within, and without by cool
Airs, and cool meats and drinks, is most advantageous for health and
long-life: for these are the chief means (at that season) to keep the spirits
in a fine pleasant equal temper, yea some fruits have higher virtues ascribed
to them then barely to nourish, some Apples are accounted Cordialls: Avicen
says, Lib. 6. Ca 569
that both the tart and pleasant Apples strengthen the heart, and to such as
are troubled with hot infirmities, they are a singular help. Confortant Cor,
proprie odorifera, dulcia, and acetosa, etc.

L. Bacon reckons Peare-maines among cool Cordials.

So then: Hist. L.D. page 298.
when Fruits are not only healthful but also pleasant to the taste, there is a
double worth in them.

Consider now what has been said for the Pleasure of the Senses; And if it be
so acceptable to have the pleasure, though but of one sense, what will it be
when there is a concurrence and meeting of all together, which may be had in a
Garden of Fruit Trees: so the Poet.

Non desit Hortis, and voluptas maxima,
Multisque commixta modis jucunditas,
Tribuit colenti multiforme gaudium.
There wants not in Gardens great pleasure to the mind,
And outward senses many mixed pleasures find,
They yield unto the Artist Joys of diverse kind.
Profits.
We see what a plentiful and joyful Harvest of Profits and Pleasures may be
yearly reaped from an Orchard or Garden of Fruit trees.

Here Is Profit of diverse kinds.

Estate: and that in two respects. First, in respect of housekeeping, with
meats, and drinks all the year.

Secondly, in respect of Sale, either the fruits in their kinds, or Syder,
Perry, and wines, made of them.

Secondly, Here Is Profit to the body, and that in two respects. First in
respect of Health, by moderate exercise, fresh-Aires, pleasant Odors, and
wholesome Meats, and drinks.

in respect of Long life, by operation upon the spirits through the Organs of
the body, the Ear, Touch, Smell, Sight, Taste, and through the Affections of
the mind, Hope, Joy, Admiration.

Profit to the Mind. And that in two respects, First in respect of knowledge,
Natural, Moral, Spiritual, Secondly, in respect of Affections.

Profit to the Name, and that in two respects, first in this life, by Gifts,
and benefits, Secondly after death by Fruit Trees as living Monuments.

Profit to others, and that in two respects, first to the poor, friends, or
enemies, in the present times; secondly, to posterity, or future ages.

Here Is likewise Pleasures Pleasures.
of diverse kinds.

Ear, and that in two respects, first, by sweet tunes of singing birds:
secondly, by gentle motion of Boughs, and leaves.

Pleasure to the Touch, and that in two respects, first, by cool fruits,
Boughs, and Leaves: secondly, by cool fresh Aires.

Pleasure to the Eye, and that in two respects, first, by exact, and decent
forms of Trees, Alleyes, Walks, Seats, and Arbours: secondly, by curious
colors of the blossoms, Leaves, and fruits.

Pleasure to the smell, and that in two respects: first, from fresh Earth
dug up: secondly, from the Leaves, and Blossoms.

Here Is Pleasure to the Taste, and that in two respects: first from ripe, and
raw fruits. Secondly, from dishes and drinks made of them.

Some employments as they are Profitable in one respect, yet they are
unprofitable in another: yea perhaps are full of hazard and danger: either to
the state, body, mind, or name, but this employment preserves, and is
profitable to all these. Some employments are pleasant to one sense, but not to
another, perhaps unpleasant, and hurtful: but in this there is an Agreement and
consent of Pleasures to all the senses.

And as there is a mutual consent and concurrence of all the Profits among
themselves, and of all the Pleasures among themselves, so likewise there is a
mutual consent and concatenation of the Profits with the Pleasures one
embracing another, one supporting, and upholding each other.

Five ways of Profit, each of them in two respects.

And five ways of Pleasure, each of them in two respects.

Here Is Profit and Pleasure running along hand in hand, meetly matched
together, being the most rich and beautiful King and Queen in all the world.

Thus having showed the great Praises that are given to this Art of Planting
Fruit Trees, and some Divine and Humane Arguments of the Dignity and value
thereof and likewise the Profits and Pleasures that are received from an
Orchard or Garden of Fruit Trees, I think it meet to give a Caution
concerning temporal Profits and Pleasures.

It Is true; A Caution in the use of Earthly things.
We have liberty to seek earthly Profits and Pleasures in our Callings and to
rejoice in them, but yet with care, and circumspection: and with due regard to
Circumstances.

There is a Rejoicing in Earthly blessings which God allows to us. Deuteronomy:
26.11. Thou shall Rejoice in every good thing which the Lord thy God has given
thee. And Deuteronomy: 12.16. Thou shall rejoice before the Lord thy God in all that
thou put thine hand unto: and again Deuteronomy: 16 15. Because the Lord thy God
shall bless thee in all thy increase, and in all the works of thy hands,
therefore thou shall surely Rejoice: And when our ways please God he says:
Go, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart Eccl: 9.7.
Solomon says Eccl: 5.18. Behold: that which I have seen, it is good and
comely for one to eat and to drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labor
that he takes under the sun, all the days of his life, which God gives
him, for it is his portion: and Chap. 2.24. This I saw, That it was from the
hand of God.

No doubt we may use these, and other earthly blessings with Rejoicing: but all
the danger is, least we take too much liberty herein, and break beyond our
bounds.

These Profits and Pleasures, being multiplied in the Garden of Fruit Trees, we
had best beware of reaching after them too earnestly: Latet Anguis in Herba, A
subtle serpent lies hid among these pleasant slowers, and seeks to bite us by
his temptations, who has as much or more malice, and policy now, as formerly
against our first Parents, whom he deceived in a Garden of Fruit Trees.

Men may become Idolaters ere they be aware, and so are many, even among
Christians: in worshipping Profit, and Pleasure, Setting up these two for their
household Gods. The Prophet tells us, Ezekiel: 14.3. Men set up their Idols in
their heart, and give that to them which is due only to God.

The difference between using and enjoying a thing De doctrina Christi lib. 1.
We may easily mistake between the use of earthly blessings, and the enjoyment
of them.

Austin tells us, no earthly blessings are properly to be Enjoyed but used
only: Res aliae sunt, quibus fruendum est, aliae quibus utendum, illae, quibus
fruendum est, beatos nos faciunt, istis quibus utendum est, tendentes ad
beatitudinem adjuvamur, and quasi adminiculamur, ut ad illas, quae nos beatos
faciunt, proveniamus. There are some things (says he) which are to be enjoyed,
others to be used; those which we ought to enjoy make us happy, such as we
ought to use only, are those whereby we are furthered, and are as succors, aids
and helps, to bring us to those things which may be enjoyed and make us happy.

He tells us then, whom, and what we may enjoy, Fruendum est Patre, and filio,
and Spiritu Sancto. Beatum est ad tale bonum provenisse, quo amplius non
potest. The Father, the Son, and blessed spirit are to be enjoyed. And its
true blessedness to attain to that good, which is the highest.

So then: God only is to be enjoyed, and the good things of this life only to
be used, as helps and furtherances unto God. We had need therefore take heed of
falling in love with Earthly things: The foresaid Author tells us the danger of
it. De doct. Christ. lib. 1.
Si eis quibus utendum est frui voluerimus, impeditur cursus noster, and
aliquando etiam deflectitur, ut ab his rebus, quibus fruendum est, obtinendis
vel retardemur, vel etiam revocemur inferiore amore praepediti: Et si
amoenitates itineris, and ipsa gestatio vehiculorum nos delectarent, conversi
ad fruendu^ his quibus uti debuimus nollemus cito via^ finire, and perversa
suavitate implicati alienaremur a Patria cujus suavitas faceret beatos. That
is: If we fall to enjoying of such things as we ought but only to use, we are
thereby hindered in our course, and many times even turned out of it. And as to
the obtaining of those things which we ought to enjoy (by the love of earthly
things) we are called back from them, and much retarded, and stopped in our way
to them. And if the Pleasures and Contentments of the journey and the carriage,
by which we are conveyed over much please and delight us, then we turn to
Enjoying of those things which we ought but only to use, and therefore are
unwilling to come to our journies end, and are entangled in corrupt delights,
and brought thereby to be estranged from the Country, the sweetness and
pleasure whereof makes blessed.

We see then, when God gives us blessings largely, and gives us leave to use
them freely, we are in danger to forget him: We had need therefore to set a
watch, or guard upon our hearts, least Profits and Pleasures steal it, and
keep it to themselves. But what a shame is it we should have fewest thoughts of
God, when he is most mindful of us. And that we should fall so much in love
with the Token, that we forget Him that sent it.

And now: having answered the doubts and discouragements that have hindered some
from entering upon this part of the Husbandmans work; The Art of Planting
Fruit Trees, and showed the great esteem that all men have of it, and the
value, and dignity thereof from Divine and Humane Arguments, what a rich
confluence of Profits and Pleasures are (from time to time) brought unto us by
it, with a Caution in the use of these things.

What remains, but that I also discover how we may obtain our desires herein,
by what means the work may be done, with most speed, and best effect.

I shall first speak of a Nursery of young Plants, Of the Nursery.
and show the manner of sowing of Kernells, or Seeds of Fruits and their
preparation and ordering (by grafting and Inoculating (for transplanting into
Orchards, Gardens, or Fields: (although some may plant an Orchard a more speedy
way, to buy young trees ready grafted, or to plant stocks of diverse years
grouth, and after they have grown a year or two, to graft them.)

I shall set down all these things as briefly as I can, so that withal I make
them plain to the intelligent Reader, laying down the most material, and
essential things concerning this Art (For long and tedious discourses about
things that may be comprehended in few words, (as many use) they do often
mislead men, so as it is not easy to see the most material things concerning
their subject, or what they drive at, whereas a breife, and plain discovery of
them may better be comprehended, and remembered.

1. First then: Let there be a Plot of ground (more or less) dug up about
the time when Fruits are ripe, and let all the Grass, Weeds, Roots, Stones,
etc. be clean picked out, and the ground cast into Beds about a yard broad, and
spaces between about a foot in breadth, to pass between them, to sow, set,
weed, etc. And then procure Kernells of Apples, Pears, Crabs, Cherry stones,
Plum stones, and the seeds of diverse kinds of Fruits, and these may be set, and
sowed, from the time that the fruits are ripe, until the spring (except in
frost) in this manner.

How to sow, and set, seeds, stones, kernels etc.
Having made the Beds level with a Rake, sprinkle the seeds upon them, all
over, each kind by themselves, and set, or sow the stones by themselves, then
take a spade, and turn in the seeds, and stones about a handful deep, and
after rake them all over, and (that none may be left uncovered) sift some small
mould with a Sive, all over them: and so let them rest all winter.

And carefully observe that Mice devour not the seeds in Winter, if you
perceive it, set Traps, and lay Rats bane to destroy them.

In the Spring or Summer, let them be weeded from time to time, clean, and if
the weather be dry, let them be watered now, and then, and they will make a
growth the same year according to the strength, and goodness of the ground
wherein they grow. Plants coming of seeds or stones, are far better then
Suckers from Roots of Trees, although such are good and useful for stocks also.

Draw Plants of Seeds.
In Autumn when they have done growing, let the biggest of them be transplanted
into other Beds of ground prepared for that purpose, thus: Let the ground be
dug, and cast into square Plots, or long Plots, as you will, and said level
with a Rake, then set the young seed Plants therein in this manner. Having cast
up the Borders handsomely on each side, stretch a Line from one side to the
other: then take a Setting-sticke (that is, a hard piece of wood about a yard
long, with a handle at the top, and made sharp at the end, or pointed with
iron) and thrust it into the ground half a foot, or a foot deep, (according to
the length of the Roots) close to the line, and make holes all along from one
end of the line to the other, about half a foot, or more, as you will: And
having prepared the seed Plants, by cutting off all the side Twiggs, and the
ends or bottom of the Roots, set them in order in the holes to the top of
their Roots, and close the mould about them: Draw the biggest first, and set
them by themselves, and the least by themselves. Then take up the line, and
stretch it again, about a foot from the other Plants, and make holes, and
prune more seed Plants, and set them as before.

Then take up the line, and stretch it again, a foot and half from the Plants
last set, that there may be a convenient space of ground to pass between to
weed the Plants, and to Graft and Inoculate them (being grown fit.) And having
made holes, and pruned the Plants, set them as before.

And thus set the Nursery throughout, and many of these will be ready after one
year to Inoculate, and after two years or three, to Graft.

Now for those that were left upon the Beds where the Seeds were sown, the
largest being drawn as before, Rmove all seed Plants.
they may grow there a year longer, and then be transplanted, or else may be
removed at the same time; be sure to transplant all young seed-Plants, for by
that means they get good Roots, which of themselves thrust down one single
Root, for the most part. And being grown a year, or two after Inoculating, or
Grafting, they are fit to transplant, to make Orchards, or into Fields, and
Hedges, at a competent distance, as shall be showed when I speak of setting
Trees.

Thus men may in a few years prepare multitudes of Young Trees for themselves
and others, to give, or sell as they please.

It is good likewise to procure Crab-stocks from the woods and wast grounds,
which being grown a year or two, may be grafted, and either grow where they
were first set, being fit places, or transplanted elsewhere.

The smaller these or any other Plants are when they are removed, the better
they grow: Small Plants grow surest.
so that it is a great Error in men to choose the greatest yong-trees to
transplant into their Gardens.

Its true: the greater they be the better, were they to grow still in the place
without removing, but the removing of great Plants is more dangerous to them
then to small Plants: Experience proves this sufficiently to the loss of many
a good Plant.

Now for the manner of Inoculating and Grafting these Plants, being thus
prepared, The time of Grafting.
and grown fit.

First concerning Grafting: wherein we must consider the time: February and
March (usually with most) are the too chief Months for Grafting, but we may
begin sooner, and its best so to do, especially with Cherry, and Plum-Grafts:
If the weather be open, without frost, in the beginning of January, or in
December. Yea I have grafted some (with good success) in November, and sooner,
but in the beginning of January we may begin, if frost hinder not. And such as
have multitudes to engraft must needs begin early, else they will want time.

Grafts of Cherry and Plum-trees must be grafted soonest, because they bud
soonest. And be sure to begin with them, ere they begin to Bud forth, and then
with Peare-trees and Apple Trees.

How to keep Grafts.
Grafts of any kind may be gotten and kept many days, or many weeks, the cut
ends, or the one half in length, being covered with mould, or they may be
Grafted immediately, so soon as they are gotten; Graft none but those of one
years grouth, only the last years sprout, the fairest, and thickest are best,
They may be carried many miles, being bound up close (from end to end) in a hay
band, or better in a Box of Mould, or their ends stuck in clay.

Instruments for Grafting.
That this work may the more effectually be done, we must have fit Tools, and
Instruments for that purpose: First a good sharp-knife, and strong, to cut off
the top of the stocks. A neat sharp-saw, to cut off the head of some stocks
which are grown too bigg for the knife: also a little Mallet and wedg to
cleave the bigg stocks, a small Penknife, to cut the Grafts, (as I shall show
anon) and keep it very sharp for this purpose only; There must be likewise
Clay prepared with hors-dung, well mixed together, as Mortar, as much of the
one, as of the other, and Rushes, or strong, soft Flaggs to bind together the
Graft, and the Stock. With a small hand-basket to carry the Grafts in, with all
the Instruments for the work.

Manner of the work.
Having these things in a readiness, the time being come, go to the Stocks that
are ready (small or great) And those that are small (about the bigness of ones
little finger (which are of a competent bigness, and we loose no time in
making use of them) Graft them in this manner.

If they be Cherry-Stocks, or Plum-Stocks to make wall-trees of, graft them
low, within half a foot, or less of the ground, but if they be for
Standards, then Graft them an Ell, or yard and half high: thus.

Cut off the top of the stock in some smooth, straight place, The first way of
Grafting, called slicsing or Backing on.
that may be answerable to the straightness of the Graft, when set on; Then
prepare the Graft thus: observe which side is straightest at the bottom, or
biggest end, that so it may fit the straight part of the stock when set on:
Then cut one side only of the Graft, down a slope, about an inch, and a half
long; either from the knot, or seame, if the part below it be smooth, and
straight, or else from a Bud, and cut through the Bark, at the top of the
cut-place, and make it like a shoulder, that it may rest just upon the top of
the Stock, but cut not this shoulder too deep, (only through the Bark, or
little more,) but cut the Graft thin at the bottom of the cut place, yet leave
on all the Bark on the opposite side, make this cut smooth, and even from the
top of it to the bottom, without dints, or ridges, (which is of special
concernement) that so it may be sure to join close to the Stock. The Graft,
being thus prepared, then go on to prepare the Stock further, lay the cut part
of the Graft upon the straight side of the Stock, and measure just the length
of the cut part of the Graft, And (with a knife) take away so much of the Bark
of the Stock, but cut not any of the wood of the Stock, then lay the cut-side
of the Graft, upon the cut part of the Stock, and let the shoulder of the Graft
rest directly upon the top of the Stock, so that the cut-parts of both may
join even, and smooth, all along, and so bind them together close, with some
strong Rushes or Flaggs, then Clay them, lay on every side, and an inch above,
and as much below, some of the Clay prepared as before, close it above, and
below, and on every side, and that is all that needs to be done for that time.

Let not Grafts be too long; Four, or five, or six Buds, above the stock, is
enough, the top may be cut off, if the Graft be long: this I account the best
way of Grafting, for diverse Reasons.

Secondly there is another way of Grafting small Stocks, 2. Way of Grafting.
such as are but just as bigg as the Grafts, you mean to set on. And those
Stocks, are prepared thus: the top being cut off over against a smooth
straight place, as before, the Bark of it must not only be cut, but also the
Wood, quite through to the back side of it at the top, directly like as the
Graft is cut (as was said) in length as much as the cut part of the Graft, the
manner of cutting the graft for this, is the same with the former; then lay the
cut part of the Graft upon the cut part of the Stock, and let the top of the
Stock (even the very bark of the outside) be directly under the shoulder of
the Graft, that so the cut parts both of Graft, and Stock, may join, and
answer one another, from the top to the bottom, and so bind and Clay them as
before.

Thirdly: there is another way of Grafting Third way of Grafting.
generally practiced, though not so sure a way as the two former: and yet a
better way for great stocks, for none but small stocks are capable of the two
former ways, it is thus: Those Stocks that are large (three or four inches in
compass) must be cloven, the tops being cut off in a straight smooth place,
cut the roughness of the top smooth with a sharp knife, then knock in a strong
knife or chissell, a very little beside the pith, and if it be capable but of
one graft, then be sure to cleave it on that side that is smooth and straight,
if it be fit for two, then be careful to choose both sides smooth, being cloven
with the knife, and a wedge of Box, or other hard wood knocked in, to keep it
open (then prepare the Graft, or Grafts) you mean to put in, cut both sides of
the Graft a slope down from the knot or seam, or else from a Bud, about an
inch, or little more, shoulder both sides of the Graft, as was said of one
side, for the other sort of grafting, and make it thin at the bottom. Let the
outside of the Graft be somewhat thicker then the inner side, unless the stock
be very big, if it be so great as to pinch the Graft much, then make the inner
side of the Graft thicker, that so it may preserve the outside from being
pinch't too much.

And in setting in all Grafts into the cleft, observe this for a most special
Rule, A special Rule.
to join the inner side of the bark of the Graft, to the inner side of the
bark of the stock, that the sap may more easily come out of the Stock into
the Graft to feed it, for the main current of the sap is between the bark and
the wood. And regard not the custom of many Grafters, in setting the outsides
even and smooth, not considering the insides, their success is according to
their skill, for the most part. We know the Bark of a big stock is much thicker
then the bark of a slender graft, and if the outsides be smooth, and even, the
insides must needs be uneven.

But I say, to join the inner sides of both barks together, all along the
cleft, is the Principal thing in Grafting of such big stocks.

The Grafts being thus placed in the Stocks, and the wedg pulled out, then Clay
them close on every side, an inch above the top of the stock, to the bottom of
the Cleft.

In choosing Grafts, choose not those that are very small, Choice of Grafts.
and slender, they commonly fail; but take the fairest upon the tree, and
especially those that are fullest of Buds.

Graft every Cyence into its own kind: as all kind of Apples together, and also
on Crabstocks (which is the wild Apple) Pear-grafts, on wild Pear-stocks, and
the like of other kinds: join not contrary, or different kinds, they never come
to perfection: as Cherry grafts on Plum-stocks, or the like. Experience makes
it manifest to be but lost labor, they will grow (it may be) a year, or two, and
then die.

And in choice of Grafts, Observe the best bearing-trees.
be sure to consider what Trees (of all kinds) are the best bearers, some kinds
seldom miss, and some other kinds (though good fruits) seldom hit, and
therefore, take information from those persons, that know (by experience) the
nature of the Trees in this regard, and accordingly chose, or refuse, Grafts
from them. Observe the like in choice of Vines: The Parsley Vine of all other
is best for these parts.

Such Grafts as are bound (as is said of the two first ways of Grafting) must
be unbound after a certain time, Unbind Grafts:
when they have well closed with the Stock: about Midsommer (or before) they
will be fast enough upon the Stock, so that they may without danger, be
unbound: but if they be not unbound the band hinders their grouth: and besides
the winds (when the grafts are grown big, and bushie) will break diverse of
them unless they be unbound, and also by some means supported, and strengthened
in the grafted place, which may be done, by tying a small stick to them, a
little above, and as much below the place, where it is engrafted; but before
you thus bind the stick to strengthen the Graft, put a little Clay round about
the engrafted place (being unbound) it will cause the sap sooner to cover the
head of the stock.

After Grafts have had their full growth the first year, Prune young Grafts.
they must be Pruned, such as need Pruning: As for wall Plants its noe matter
of how many Branches they spread, more the better: but for those that are
Grafted low, and yet must be made standards, leave only one shoot, the
strongest and biggest shoot, and cut off all the rest, and let not that
straight shoot begin to spread, till it be an Ell long at least, rather more,
and then let the Branches spread, and enlarge themselves.

And from year to year, prune off those shoots, and branches as are
superfluous and grow too near one another, and preserve only such as are fit to
make the Tree of a comely form. And if any spire up, and shoot too strongly
upwards in the middle of the Tree only, and spread not sufficiently (as is
often seen in Peare-trees and some other trees) cut off from time to time,
those strong shoots in the middle, and still preserve the outmost branches, for
all fruit trees ought to spread as much as may be, so that the branches hang
not too near the ground.

And so much concerning Grafting, and also Pruning while they are young Plants.

I shall now speak of the other work whereby Fruit Trees are increased.
Inoculating, or putting a small Bud into a stock, which (as to the effects of
it) is the same with Grafting, but differs much in the season, and in the
manner of the work.

The time for Inoculating Buds Inoculating Buds.
is about Midsommer, a fortnight before, and a fortnight after is the chief
season: though. Some Plants (full of sap) may be done afterward with good
success.

That this business may be done to good purpose, it must be considered whether
the Buds which we mean to get, are sufficiently grown or not, they must not be
too young and tender: and we shall find that some kinds of Trees have Buds
ready sooner then others. As the Aprecott especially, and those that shoot
strongly. Let then the biggest and strongest shoots be cut from the Tree, that
have grown since the spring, to that time, and cut off the top of the shoot,
(all these Buds that are too small and tender and also cut off the Leaves of
the other about a quarter of an inch from the Bud, and by that part left, we
hold the Bud, being taken off the Branch: but leave not on the whole leaf and
stalk, as some do, for the air (by means of the leaf) extracts and draws
out the sap of the Bud in a short time, and so spoils it. Observe the kinds.


Then go to the Plants you intend to Inoculate which must be like (as to the
general kinds) with the Buds that you intend to set on: as Aprecot Buds, and
other Plum-Buds on Plumstocks that are wild stocks: the White Pear plum stock
is accounted the best to inoculate Aprecot buds on, or other choice Plums, it
being a Plant full of sap: and in choosing Buds, or Grafts, be sure always to
cut them from those kinds that experience shows are good bearing Trees.

Now in setting on the Bud, first make a cross cut upon some smooth place of
the stock, (if it be for a wall-tree, then half a foot, or thereabouts from
the ground) and from the middle of the cross cut, make another straight down,
about an Inch long, or something less, only through the Bark, and with the end
of a Penknife, raise up the bark on both sides, as much as to let in the small
Bud, then make have to prepare the bud (for a man must be quick at this work,
else the Air, by sudden drying the Bud, and the cut part of the stock will
much hurt:) Cut the bark on both sides the Bud, and about a quarter of an inch
above, and as much below the bud, and let that end which is to be downwards be
a little sharp, that it may more easily go down, between the Bark, and wood
of the stock, and throw away the bark on the opposite side, then with a Quill
the one half cut away, or a Pen of steel, (made thin for the purpose) take
off the Bud and bark, and be sure there be the root of the Bud in it, if there
be a little hole in the middle of the bud within, then the root is not there,
throw away that bud, such will not grow, but the Bud being well taken off, then
hold it by the stalk of the leaf, as before was said, and put it carefully
between the bark and the wood of the small Plant, prepared as before, and let
the top of the bud join close to the cross cut, then bind the bud with a soft
Rush, that is strong, bind it close to the stock, especially in the middle
(where the Root of the bud lies) and so let it rest.

After a certain time the Buds must be unbound, Unbind buds in due time.
and some sooner then others; some stocks grow more in a week then some others
in a month.

Now if this work be done early in the year before Midsommer, upon young
stocks very full of sap, these may be unbound about 14. or 15. days after, or
a General Rule may be this, when a stock is so grown as that the band about
the Bud, does much straighten the Bud, which may be seen by the swelling of the
Plant above and below the Bud, then the band must be cut and taken off. But
those that are done near the end of July or after, will not need unbinding so
soon. Now after unbinding you may see which Buds take hold of the stock, and
which do not, those that are good, are fast upon the stock, and appear in
their natural colors as when they were set on, those that do not hold, will
have lost their color, and (it may be) withered and dried.

Such as are good, meddle no more with them till the Spring, then cut off the
stocks an inch or two above the Buds, Cut off stocks above the Buds.
so the Buds will spring out and grow according to the strength of the stocks.
And in Autumn after they may be transplanted, or if you please such Buds may be
transplanted the next Autumn after inoculating, which is the surer way for
growing. And when these Buds have grown one year, then cut off the stock
close to the buds, and they will cover the head as Grafts.

How to carry Buds.
If Buds be not ready at hand but must be fetched many miles in that hot time,
then special care must be taken in the carriage of them. Thus: Being cut from
the Tree, cut off the tops of the Branches, and the leaves near the Buds as
before, then bind them together, and wrap them in fresh Leaves or Grass to
keep them cool, and they will keep good two or three days, but yet make all
the have that may be to inoculate them.

Mark the Stocks.
Having Grafted or Inoculated Stocks: make one Letter or two upon the stock
below the Graft or Bud (whereby to know the kind of the Fruit) and if any be
stolen they may thereby be known, being found again. Its done with the point
of a Penknife, cuting through the bark, the form of a Letter, or any other
figure, whereby to know the kinds of fruits. And so much for Inoculating Buds
of Fruit Trees.

Directions in the choice of Grafts and Stocks.
The choice of right kinds of Grafts, and Stocks, and the joining of them
together according to their natures, is so necessary, and some observations
about them are so essential to the work of profitable planting, that except
they be known, and practiced, men loose much of the profit they might have, if
rightly observed.

A few special directions in any Art, though consisting but of few lines,
containing the Principles and essential parts, are better, and more to the
advancement of the Art, then great Volumes upon the same subject when men (as
many do) rove about upon unnecessary things, and strange fancies without any
solid grounds, beside the life of the business. If men miss the Principles
and essentialls of an Art, they discourse of it to little purpose.

So also in the practice: and therefore it has many times fallen out that some
men having labored much and spent much time, and cost, in Planting
Fruit Trees, yet their labors have not succeeded well, because there has been
mistakes in some principal, and very material things; either the Trees have
not grown well, or if prospered, and come to a large grouth, yet they have not
borne Fruit well, which has been a great discouragement, not only to
themselves, but to others who have seen it.

Now among all Observations about this Art of Planting Fruit Trees, I know none
of greater moment, or more essential to the profitable proceeding in it, then
the Choice of right kinds, and the joining of Grafts, Buds, and Stocks fit for
each other. I shall therefore mention some particulars of the Twelve kinds of
Fruit Trees which I have made choice to speak of, and show which I account most
profitable, and best to propagate and increase, and how they fit several
stocks when the Cyences are to be Engrafted.

First concerning Apples: Of Apples.
In the choice of Apple Grafts we must consider not only the goodness of the
Fruit, but also, whether the Trees be good bearing Trees naturally: whether
such as have known them diverse years, can say by experience they bear well,
but many look not after this so much as what kind of fruit it is, In respect of
goodness. And thence it comes to pass, that some men having store of fair,
large Fruit Trees, they have but little fruit from them. Therefore let the
generality of Fruit Trees (both in the Orchards and in the Fields) be of right
kinds in respect of bearing, as well as in respect of goodness of the fruit,
and then for variety, there may be some of other kinds of good and choice
fruits though they bear but few, and seldom.

And for particular kinds of Apples I commend the Sommer-Pearemaine, and the
Winter Pearemaine, not only for special fruits, but also for good bearing
kinds. So likewise the small Pippin, a good Apple, and a great bearer. The
Harvey Apple is a very choice fruit, and the trees bear well. The Queen Apple
is a great bearing fruit, and good: So the Gillofloure. Many other kinds might
be named, that are special good fruits, and great bearing kinds, and some
persons prefer one kind, and some another. But the great and general Rule in
this, and all other kinds of Fruits, is, to take Grafts from those Trees which
are known by experience to bear store of fruits, and good, and to multiply
these as much as may be.

As for Stocks fit for Apple Grafts, I account Crab-trees, better then sweeter
Apple Trees to Graft on, because they are usually free from the Canker, and
will become very large Trees, and I conceive will last longer then Stocks of
sweeter Apple Trees, and will make fruits more strong, and hardy to endure
frosts, and cold weather in the spring time: yet it is good to choose stocks of
some pleasant Apples, to graft some choice fruit upon. Because that the stock
has some small influence upon the fruits to make them more delicate, if grafted
upon a choice stock. Although notwithstanding the graft may be said to Govern,
as is showed at large.

2 Of Pears.
As for Pears there are multituds of kinds, as well as of Apples, some
preferring one kind and some another, and one and the same fruit is called by
several names, in several places. A late Author says he is persuaded there
are 400. or 500. several kinds of Pears. Now therefore; it is a point of
wisdom to choose Grafts from the best bearing kinds, although (it may be) not
so delicate to eat as some others. I know none but they are very useful, and
profitable.

The Winsor Pear is accounted one of the best with us, some kinds bear not
well, but some others do, therefore observe the former Rule. The summer
Burgamet is a choice fruit, and the Trees bear well.

But for a costant bearing kind. I know none better then the Catherin pear,
but they must be quickly spent, for they are no lasting fruits: a man having
great store, may make excellent Perry of them. For they have a pleasant juice.

The Greenefield Pear is an excellent Pear, and will last indifferent well,
and is a great bearer.

There is a Pear they call a choke-Peare, which is accounted a special kind,
for Perry, although the Pear to eat, is stark naught, and therefore men may
adventure to plant the Trees in the fields and hedges, and need not fear
stealing of the fruits. I advise (for that reason) to plant many of the Trees,
on purpose to grind the fruits for Perry. M. Parkinson says the Perry of
these pears is scarce discerned from wine, neither by taste nor color, after
it has been kept certain Months.

The best kind of stocks to graft Peare-grafts upon, are such as come of the
Seeds or Kernells of Pears. I know no difference amongst these, but all good
to graft upon. And I utterly dislike grafting these fruits upon White thorn,
or upon any kind of stocks beside Peare-stocks. The fruits are naught (having
a hard and stony core) if grafted upon a Thornetree.

There are many kinds of Cherries, 3 Of Cherries.
The Flanders-Cherry is most generally planted here in England, and is a great
bearing fruit. there are two sorts of them, the Early, and the late Flanders;
the early is almost as soon as the May-Cherry, it follows close after, and
then the late Flanders-Cherry upon that. The May-Cherries are tender, the Trees
must be set in a warm place, upon some south wall, or morning sun, but the
Flanders both kinds bear well in Orchards, and feilds at large, both kinds are
very good, and good bearers.

The black heart Cherry is a very special fruit, and a great bearing fruit; and
doubtless exceeding proper to press for wine, either to drink of it self,
or to mix the juice with Syder to give it a color, as Clarret-wine. it being
of a deep red, and a small quantity of it, will color a gallon of Syder or
white wind. There is a Cherry we call the great bearing cherry, of M. Millen.
It may very well be called the great bearer, for the Trees seldom fail of
great store of fruits, although in a cold, and sharp spring. It is something a
tart fruit, of a very deep red, almost blackish, when full ripe. The juice is
very proper to color Syder, Perry, White Wind, or the like.

This kind of fruit is most fit for cold Countries in the North-parts, and
although it be not altogether so pleasant as some other Cherries, by reason of
the tartness of the juice, yet let men know that sharp Cherries are accounted
more wholesome then the sweet. And such as plant Trees of this kind may have
good store of Fruits, when others (it may be) want, who have none of these
Trees.

Concerning Stocks fit for Cherry-trees, I account the black Cherry stock the
best, to graft any kind of Cherry upon. Yet some say the red Cherry-stock is
best for May-Cherries. But the black Cherry stocks are goodly straight Plants
and full of sap, and become greater Trees then the red Cherry-trees.

4 Of Plums.
There are very many kinds of Plums, many more then of Cherries. I esteem the
Musle Plum one of the best, being a fair large black plum, and of an excellent
relish, and the Trees bear abundantly. The Violet, and Premorden plum-trees,
are very great bearing trees, and the fruits pleasant, and good. The
Damasco-Plum is a good fruit, and the trees bear well.

Many other kinds might be named, very good plums; some approve of one kind,
and some of another, but the dryest plums which part from the stones, are
accounted best.

Plum Grafts must be grafted, or inoculated upon Plum-stocks, not upon cherry
stocks, or any other kind of stocks, that I know. The White Peare-plum stocks
are accounted the best, and the Damson stocks the worst, as being dry stocks:
so that Grafts cannot take, nor thrive upon them. Those stocks of plums which
have large leaves, and full shoots, I account the best.

Graft not Plum grafts upon cherry stocks, nor cherries upon Plums, as some
prescribe: different kinds will not agree together.

5 Of Aprecocks
Though Aprecocks are (in the general) accounted Plums, yet because of the
excellency of the fruit they may be spoken of by themselves. I know but few
kinds of them, but some I know to be far better bearers, some are larger then
others, and some sooner ripe then others. All good fruits. There Is one kind that
is a very great bearer, and a fair large fruit, observe then those Trees that
usually bear well, and get Buds from them at the season to Inoculate, as is
showed p. 50. for these must be propagated only by the Bud, not by grafting. I
account the White Peare-plum stocks the best to Inoculate Aprecock Buds upon,
although they may be done upon other Plum-stocks with good success, if they be
good juycie stocks, able to give large nourishment, for Aprecock trees require
much nourishment. I shall join the Nectrine with the Aprecock although another
kind of fruit. The best kind that I know is the Roman red Nectrine. But it is
very hard to be propagated: as for Grafting, none take that way, and but few
with inoculating, which I concieve is the reason it is the dearest of all
Plants with us. The yellow, and green Nectrines are much short of it in
goodness.

The White Peare-plum stock, (though accounted the best for any plum, yet I
find) is scarce good enough for this fruit to be inoculated upon it, though
some do indifferent well.

But I hold it best to inoculate the Roman red Nectrine upon the Branch of an
Aprecock which before has been Inoculated upon a good Plum-stock, that it may
give not only a larger, but a finer nourishment then ordinary Plum-stocks can
do.

Of Peaches 6 Of Peaches.
there are diverse kinds: I know by experience the Nutmeg, and Newington Peaches
to be excellent tasted fruits, and very good bearers, especially the Nutmeg
Peach, which makes amends for the smallness of the fruit: but the Newington
Peach is a very large, and gallant fruit.

These require choice Plum-stocks to be inoculated upon, as the White Pear
plum stock, or else stocks coming of Peach stones.

I know but one kind of Figs 7 Of Figs.
that come to ripeness with us in England. The great Blew-fig, as large as a
Catherine Pear. The trees grow in diverse Gardens in Oxford, and bear their
fruits to perfect ripeness, it ordered as they should be. The trees must be
set against a South wall, and be spread up with nails, and Leathers.

These trees are increased from the Root of the old tree; draw up the small
suckers, and plant them, or the cuttings of it will grow, as of a Vine tree.
These need neither inoculating, nor Grafting.

Some Authors affirm that there have been Vine-yards in England in former
times, though they be all destroyed long since. 8 Of Grapes.
Diverse places retain the name of Vine-yards still. At Bromwell Abbey in
Norfolk: and at Elie in Cambridg-shiere: what else is the meaning of these old
Rimes.

Quatuor sunt Eliae; Lanterna, Capella, Mariae:
Et Molendinum, nec non dans Vinea vinum.
Englished thus: Four things of Elie Town much spoken are,
The Leaden Lanthorn, Mary's Chapel rare,
The mighty Milhill in the Minster field,
And fruitful Vineyards which sweet wine do yield.


And doubtless men might Plant Vines with good success, to make good wine
even with us. There are many kinds of Vines, but I know none so good, and fit
for our Climate as the Parsley Vine, we see by experience yearly it bears
abundance of fruits, unto perfection. And whosoever would plant Vines in
England, I think he cannot meet with a better kind then the Parsley Vine, both
for bearing, and goodness. The Fox Grape is a fair large Fruit, and a very
great bearer, though not of so much esteem as diverse others.

The Red and White Muskadine Grape, is an excellent fruit, and if the Vines
grow upon a South wall, and be well ordered, they bear store of good fruits.

I know but two sorts of Quinces, 9 Of Quinces.
the English and Portingall Quince. The Portingall Quince, I esteem as the
better, both for bearing, and use. These are increased from the Roots of old
trees, Suckers must be drawn up, and set in the Nursery, or in other convenient
places, which being grown up, must be Grafted with some grafts from old bearing
trees, but the custom is (for the most part) to nursse them up without
grafting, and so ordered they are long ere they come to bear fruit.

Therefore I advise to Graft, or Inoculate them, with Grafts or Buds from old
bearing Trees.

There are two kinds of Mulberrie-trees 10 Of Mulberries.
with us in England, the Black, and the White. As for the White I never saw
any of its fruit, they very seldo^e bear any with us. But the Black
Mulberry-tree never fails of fruit after it is grown up. These Trees are not
increased by Grafting, or Inoculating, but by Cuttings from the Branches, or
sides of the Trees: Cut a Bough off, as big as a man's arm, and after cut it in
small Truncheons, or pieces a yard long or more, lay these in the ground a foot
deep, only the one end out of the ground a hand breadth or two, or thereabouts,
and keep the earth moist with some good fat water from a standing Pool, or
Dunghill, and clean from weeds, and the first or second year usually these
pieces spring up with several shoots, all which may be cut off with some small
Roots, and Planted at a fit distance, and the old Root will yearly send out
more, which may either be cut off as before, or else bowed down, and laid in
the earth, on one, or several sides, which will take root and multiply
abundantly, and in a few years be fit to be transplanted.

These kinds of Fruits are of least esteem with us, 11. Of Medlers.
yet some like them well being ripe, and almost rotten.

The Trees are increased by Suckers from the Roots, and need not Grafting, nor
Inoculating, but if the Fruit be small, then get some Buds or Grafts from those
Trees which bear large Fruits and Inoculate or Graft upon small Plants, or
upon the small Boughs of great Trees. According to directions given.

Walnut-trees are propagated from the Nuts, 12. Of Walnuts.
which may be set from the time of ripeness, until the spring, an Inch deep
or little more, and afterward transplanted, and set at a very great distance
24: or 30 yards asunder: for they are very large spreading Trees.

Be sure to choose of the best Nuts to set, the fairest nuts, and thinnest
shells, and good bearers.

Thus much (briefly) concerning the best bearing Trees, and how they are
propagated.

As for those Fruit Trees which bear but little, or no fruits, Graft old
Trees, if bad bearers.
by reason that Grafts and Buds were not chosen from good bearing kinds,
wherewith they were engrafted, I advise (by all means) to Graft, or Inoculate
such again, though great, and old Trees, such whose boughs are as big as a
man's hand-wrist, or smaller, may be cut off, and grafted in the Cleft, with a
cupple of good Grafts, of good bearing kinds; but such Branches, as are very
great, I should rather cut off a convenient height from the ground, a
slope-wise, that no wet may rest upon the top, and then after a year, or two,
to graft the small Shoots or Branches that are put forth, or some of them; this
is a better course, then to graft such great Branches, for that moisture will
get into the top, and rot the Branches, and perhaps the Body too, ere the
Grafts can cover such great heads.

As concerning Arbors, Seats, etc. in Orchards and Gardens, I advise men to
make them of Fruit Trees, Make Arbors of fruit trees.
rather then of Privet, or other rambling stuff, which yields no profit, but
only for shade. If you make them of Cherry trees, Plum-trees, or the like,
there will be the same advantage for shade, and all the Fruits superadded.

All that can be objected is, that Fruit Trees are longer in growing up, then
Privet, Virgin-Bower, or the like, whereof Arbors are commonly made. It is
answered. Though Fruit Trees are something longer in covering an Arbor, then
some other things, yet they make sufficient amends in their lasting and bearing
fruits.

Of Transplanting Trees.
I shall now give some Rules concerning Transplanting young plants, after a
years grouth, or more, whether Inoculated or Grafted.

The time for this work (in general) is in Autumn, when trees have done
growing, and that is diverse weeks before the Leaves fall. Stay not (as the
custom is) till November, or after, before you transplant, for the best time
is about the later end of September, but because some trees are ready for
Transplanting sooner then others, observe this Rule.

Immediately after Plants have done growing, its best to transplant them. And
when they have done growing may be seen by the top, or end of the Plant, the
top of the Branches will be closed, or shut up, and no more small Leaves will
appear, as in those that have not done growing.

Early Removing best.
Its a great advantage to remove plants be time, for such grow a while after in
their Roots before winter, and thereby not only preserve themselves in winter,
but also make some preparation against the Spring: which those removed in
winter cannot do Stay not therefore till the Leaves fall ere you remove,
although they may be removed then with good success, but it is not so good at
that time as before.

The time of removing being come, and the place prepared for setting them
again, then be careful in taking up the plants, dig round about them, and
take off the mould from their Roots, if it be a small plant it may be drawn up
easily, the mould being taken away, if it be great, and the Roots spread much,
then they may be cut about half a yard from the body of the Plant, and the
greater it is, the further off cut the Roots: and so draw it up: and break off
all the Leaves the first thing you do, for the Sun and Air (by means of
them) extract the sap of the branches.

The next work is to prune the Roots and branches, Prune the roots.
as they need. All the ends of the Roots must be cut smooth, and most of the
small strings, or fibra's cut away, that so the mould may close to every side
of those that are left, and new strings may put forth at the cut place: and
leave not all the Roots (as the custom of some is) it much hinders the grouth,
the mould cannot possibly be made to close about all of them being many, as it
may about a few.

Likewise if the Plant be of 3 or 4 years grouth or more, Prune the Branches.
some of the Branches must be cut, and say not as many do, her'es a fair tree
already, why should we cut away any part of it? but they must be content to
loose some of the Branches, else they are in danger to loose all: for removing
of great Plants, is a great check to nature, and if a few Roots cut short (as
they must be when removed) be put to feed many and large Branches, they will have
but slender and poor nourishment, not sufficient many times to preserve life,
much less to make a large grouth.

But if Plants are very small (of a year or two years grouth) you need not
cut the Branches, except such as cross one another or grow too nigh together,
but cut off the ends of the Roots of all, because if cut, many small strings or
fibra's shoot out at the cut place, which draw nourishment for the Plant, which
without cutting would not.

Plants being thus prepared, Set not plants too deep.
the next thing is to set them again in the ground. If the soil be dry they
must be set so much the deeper, yet take heed of setting below the good soil.
In low and moist grounds set not so deep, as in that which is dry. The hole for
the Plant being dug, set in the Root prepared as before, and cast in the
smallest, and best mould next to the Roots, and see that the small mould run
between all the Roots, to that end, stir and shake the Plant, that there may
not be any hollow place where the mould falls not, and being filled up, water
the Plant that the mould thereby may settle close about all the Roots, and so
let it rest.

If the Plants are fair large Plants, in danger to be shaken by the winds,
then knock down a stake close to every one, and tie the Plant to it with a
hay-Band, or some other soft Band.

Distance of setting.
As concerning distance in setting young trees I conceive Ten yards is little
enough between Apple Trees, and Peare-trees, in ordinary soil. And if men have
ground enough to plant, and good soil, I should rather prescribe to Plant them
16, or 20 yards asunder for both Trees and fruits have many great advantages,
if planted a good distance one from another.

(As for Wall-trees they may be planted 5 or 6 yards asunder.)

The 1 Advantage.
Such are freed from frettings, and gallings, that happens to Trees that brush,
and crowd one upon another, whereby not only the Buds, Blossoms, and Fruits,
are rubbed and broken off, but also sometimes the Canker thereby breeds and
destroies boughs, and Branches.

The 2 Advantage.
Secondly (when Trees are planted a fair distance asunder) the sun refreshes
every Tree, the Roots, body, and branches, with the Blossoms, and Fruits,
where by Trees bring forth more fruits, and those fairer and better.

The 3 Advantage.
Thirdly. If Apple Trees and Peare-trees are planted 16. or 20. yards asunder,
much profit may be made of the ground, under and about the Trees. Ye may plant
Gooseberries, Rasberries, Currants, Strawberries, Roses, Flowers, and all sorts
of Garden stuff, commodious as well for sale, as house keeping, which cannot
be if Trees be planted near together, as the custom is in most places, the
ground being cold and shady by the Trees. Besides the trees would have
advantage by frequent digging and stirring the earth about their Roots from
time to time in setting these things.

The 4 Advantage.
Fourthly. When Trees have room to spread as before, they will grow very large
and great, and the consequences of that will be, not only multitudes of Fruits,
but also long lasting; and these two are no small advantages, besides all the
former. And men are mistaken when they say, the more Trees in an Orchard the
more fruits, for one or two fair large trees, which have room to spread, will
bear more fruits then six or ten (it may be) of those that grow near
together, and crowd one another.

It is a very great, and almost a general Error, the Planting of Fruit Trees
too near together, especially as to Apple Trees, and Pear Trees; as for
Cherry-trees, plum-trees and the like, they need not be planted half the
distance I speak of, 5 or 6 yards in distance is usually enough, and 8 yards,
if the ground be special good: for all trees grow much larger in some soyles,
then in others.

Concerning Order in setting Trees, Order in setting Trees.
though it be not essential to a good Orchard, yet if men stand upon it, they
may measure out a square plot of ground (more or less) by a line, and then
measure the distance that must be between every tree, according to the kinds
that are to be planted, and according to the goodness, or nature of the soil
as has been said. And having measured exactly the square plot, and the
distance of the Trees, then set the four corners first, then fill up the
square plot, on all the four sides, with plants, ordered as before, and so go
on to fill up all the other places in the Plot, exactly by Line, or by eye, if
there be four or five persons to assist in the work. And by this means the
Trees will stand in Rows every way. This square once planted, though but small
at first, may be enlarged every way, as the ground permits, or else the Orchard
may be drawn out in length, and yet the Trees stand in a right Line every way
by this means. A special rule in transplanting.


In setting all sorts of Trees consider what soil they came out of, whether a
fat, and forced soil (as diverse of the Nurseries about London) or some
ordinary natural soil. If they came out of very good ground, then procure as
good or better, if it may be had, though but a little: to lay next to their
Roots when they are set again. This should always be observed. To Plant Trees
in as good or better soil being removed, as that out of which they were taken.
For every thing in nature advanced to the better, it is grateful, and
beneficial to it, but if it be carried to the worse, it is a check, and
repulse to nature, and such a one, as that if it be in any great degree, it
either much weakens it, or quite destroies it. Therefore choose Trees out of
natural soyles, and the worse, the better for the Trees, but if they must be
had out of rich soyles, then be sure to procure some (more or less) of as
good, or better then that out of which they are removed, to lay to their Roots,
when set again.

For want of observing this course, many hundred of good plants have been lost
from time to time. The well ordering of young Plants the first and second year
of planting, has an influence upon them many years, which if neglected then,
the labor, and diligence of many years after; cannot countervaile it, the
ordering of Cattle while they are young, either makes or marrs them, so of
Trees, and other things in some proportion; after they have well taken Root
the first and Second year, they will then grow in ordinary soyles, the great
danger is at first planting.

Concerning Wall-trees: Wall-trees.
the Aprecot, Peach, Nectarine, Vine-tree etc. these and such choice
fruit trees, must be planted upon a South-wall, if it may be; The best next
that I account the East-wall, and the West not so good, the North-wall is
nothing worth, as having no advantage by the sun as the other.

These trees being set (as before is said) they must be plaisht, or spread upon
the Wall, being young, (and so from year to year as they grow greater) with
Nails, and Lethers. And as they grow larger, cut only some of the superfluous
Branches, and twiggs in the middle part, but cut not the utmost sides or top
Branches, until they be spread as large as they should spread and be sure to
lead the maine, and biggest Branches, along the sides of the wall, both ways,
and suffer them not to rise straight up as naturally they will, but correct
nature by art.

Prune Wall-trees.
Wall-trees being grown as large as they may be permitted, must be Pruned from
year to year; first in Summer, secondly in Winter. About the end of June, or
middle of July the Aprecot-trees (especially) will have put out many large
shoots, 1 in Summer,
some of which must be cut off, and others spread up to the wall, where there
is room for them, Tie up as many as you can conveniently with Lethers, and
Nails; and cut the rest off, that will not so well spread to the Wall, then
with a pair of sheeres, or hook, or sharp pruning knife, cut all the forepart
of the Trees even, and smooth, as may be, and so cut, and spread the branches
as that the fruits, (which by that time will be grown toward their bigness)
may have the sun to refresh, and ripen them.

2 In Winter.
Secondly toward the beginning of October, (or so soon as the Leaves are fallen
off) the branches that cross one another or are not well placed, may be
rectified; or any of the great boughs, which are grown old, and have but few
small branches upon them may be cut off, which must not be cut off in Summer
time, lest that too great, and sudden obstruction of sap, kill the whole tree.
But the cutting of the small Branches in Summer, is some small check, and stop
to the sap, and hinders the excessive rising of it at that time, which else
would spend it self in large superfluous branches, and so rob the fruits: And
besides, as that cutting conduces to the fairness, and early ripening of the
fruits, so also it causes multitudes of Branches, and Buds for blossoms the
next Spring, but this winter Pruning is chiefly for the well ordering of the
branches that could not be well placed (by reason of the Fruits and Leaves in
Sommer-time) and for the cutting off of greater Branches, when need is.

It is a great error amongst some, who suffer all the young, Error in Pruning.
and large Shoots to grow as much as they will, all Summer without cutting, and
then in Winter they usually cut all or most of them quite off from the trees,
and preserve only the old stumps, or biggest Branches of the trees, and by this
means in the middle part of the Tree, and near the Root, there are few, or no
young Branches, to be seen: Whereas they should preserve the young Branches to
spread up against the wall, until it be full of small Boughs. And then some
young Shoots (every year) may be cut off in Summer, as before.

And in cutting away Branches, be sure to take those away that grow the
straightest out, and will not so easily be bowed to the Wall, as the other: And
preserve branches as low, and as near the ground as may be, and cause them to
bend, and grow straight along the sides of the Wall both ways; and suffer not
the biggest Branches to rise straight upward, as (commonly most do,) but nail
them downwards.

As for great Trees in the Orchards, Fields, Hedges, Pruning old standard-trees.
etc. they must be Pruned from year to year, as need is, in October,
November, or thereabouts: observe to cut off the superfluous Branches, such as
cross one another, and such as grow too close, so as the Sun cannot well
come about the bearing Branches: Leave no dead Twigges or Branches; and scrape
off the Moss that is upon the Body, and great Branches.

Opening the Roots is profitable to some Trees, Ordering the Roots of old Trees.
especially such as grow upon dry, and barren grounds. In October (or there
abouts) take away the Earth round about the Roots, a yard broad, or more, and
so leave the Roots bare, and open all Winter; that the Rain, Snow, beams of
the Sun, etc. may refresh the bottom Roots, and make the ground better: At
Spring fill up the holes again.

Also to lay Pigeons dung, Hens dung, Sheeps dung, to the roots (or the like
stuff, that is very hot, and fertile,) will much help the Trees, and make them
bear store of fruits; Vines, or other Fruit Trees.

So also of Lees of Wine, the washing of strong Beere-Barrels, Blood of Cattle,
dead Dogs, Carrion, or the like, laid, or put to the Roots of Trees, when
opened (as before) is found very profitable unto fruit-bearing.

But in case the soil about the Roots be over fat, and fertile, it may hinder
bearing, for it will cause Trees to shoot forth great large shoots, and to send
forth broad Leaves, and but little fruit: if so, then take away some of the
fertile soil, and put in, instead, sand, or cole ashes, or any stuff that is
barren, that it may dry up, and abate some of the too full feeding that the
Trees had, and so cause fruitfulness. Though Meat and Drink be never so good,
and wholesome, yet excess hurts the body.

And further observe: That Mowing of Grounds yearly, where Fruit Trees grow,
is exceeding prejudicial to Trees in respect of bearing (unless the soil be
exceeding fertile) But pasturing of Orchards, and Grounds where Fruit Trees
grow, is observed to be of great advantage to their prospering, and bearing
Fruits. When Cattle are suffered to lie, and pasture under, and about the
Trees, they much benefit the Roots, by their warmth in sitting, and by their
soil, which soaks down among the Roots, and is a great refreshing to them, as
has been found by clear Experience.

Therefore permit Cattle (if it may be convenient) to lie, and pasture, under
and among Fruit Trees (after they are grown strong, and out of their reach)
save only at those seasons when Fruits are ripe, because rubbing against the
Trees would shake down the fruits, and spoil them. And it were better they did
not rub against the Trees at any time, for in that respect they may do hurt,
therefore set Stakes or Posts about the Trees for the Cattle to rubb against,
whereby the Trees may be preserved.

And concerning Transplanting, Pruning, and Ordering the Roots of Trees, thus
much. See further, Errors in Practice.

Diseases incident to Fruit Trees.
Fruit Trees are subject to diverse Diseases. Baptist. Port. says, De cultu and
insit. l. c. 35.
Affliguntur Plantae omnes, veluti Animalia, diversis morbis. All Trees or
Plants are afflicted with diverse Diseases as sensible creatures. And therefore
we should apply our selves to Cure them, not for pity to the Trees (as the
indulgent compassionate Manichees) but for our own profit.

I shall (at present) mention only three Diseases that sometimes happen to
Fruit Trees. Mossinesse, Bark-bound, and Canker.

Concerning Mossinesse of Fruit Trees, the way to cure that (and other
Diseases) is to take away the Cause, sublata causa, 1 Mossinesse.
tollitur effectus. If the spring be stopped, the streams cannot run. Some to
cure this, only scrape off the Moss, not endeavoring to take away the Cause,
so that in a few years they are as bad again, that is but like endeavors for
cure of the Toothache, or Gout, or the like, with some outward applications
(which though they may give some ease for a while, yet they strike not at the
root, they remove not the Cause, and therefore they return again. So that it
must be considered what the Cause of Mossinesse is, sometimes it is caused by
over coldness of the ground, as in waterish, and clay grounds, likewise by
Barrenness of the soil.

If it be Coldness through moisture, then use all means to lay it dryer, by
trenching the ground: or if it be Clay-ground, then bring in some warmer soyls
to mix with it, as Sand, Ashes, Sheeps-dung, Pigeons, or Hens-dung, or the
like: If the soil be too barren, then help it by mixtures of good soyles,
round about the Roots.

But withal take away the Moss that is already upon the trees, in this
manner; after Rain rub it off with a Haire-cloth: else scrape it off with a
piece of hard wood in the form of a knife.

Another is the Barke-bound disease: 2 Bark-bound.
This exceedingly hinders the growth of trees: it makes them live lingringly
and poorly: This happens when there is but a dull, and slow passage up of sap,
and in small quantity, either by reason of barrenness of soil or want of due
culture, to the Branches, therefore if the soil be barren it must be mended,
and likewise some of the Branches cut off, and the rest scored down all along
to the Root, through the bark, on each side, with some cross cuts, and nicks
in the bark: let this be done in the spring time, and the sap will arise more
plentifully.

Another disease is the Canker, 3 Canker.
natural to some, but accidentally happening to others by bruises etc. This
hurts many, and spoils some. To cure it, cut it out, if it be upon the body,
or great Boughs of trees, and then cover the place with clay mixed with
horse-dung and cut off the small Branches that are dead, but withal endeavor
to stop the fountain, and cause of it, (being a sharp and virulent sap) by
laying Cole Ashes, or ashes of burnt wood, Nettles, Fern, and such like
vegetables to the Roots, but if the Trees grow upon gravel ground they will
hardly be cured, without altering the soil in a great measure.

Secondly, concerning Mischiefs incident to Fruits: 2 Mischiefs incident to
fruits.
by Caterpillars, Ants, Erewigs, Snailes, Wasps, Birds; and cold, and strong
Winds.

In the spring time Caterpillars 1 Caterpillars
breed (and devour many buds, blossoms, and young fruits, especially in a dry
season:) of the Dew and Leaves (as one says) when the East Winds blow much,
which causes that moist and slimy matter to vivifie. L. Bac not. hist. page
182.
They breed also (as is observed) of the Spawne of Butterflies. Now how to to
destroy them. I know no better way then to pluck off those leaves which have
the Cobwebs made upon them, (in which they breed) and tread them under foot,
for one of them contains multitudes.

And for those that escape, being upon the Trees, some smoke them with straw
or such like, which makes them fall off. They may be destroyed also by
squirting water up into the Trees among the Boughs, which washes them off.

Secondly, Ants 2 Ants.
and Pismires, hurt Fruits, multitudes creep up into some Trees, and eat the
Fruits. Therefore seek out their hills where they breed, and lie, and power in
scalding water, amongst them till they be destroyed.

Or else anoint the bottom of the Trees near the Root with Tar round about,
that so these little thieves may be taken Prisoners by sticking in it.

Thirdly, Fruits (growing ripe) are sometimes eaten with Erewigs. 3 Erewigs.
One way to destroy them is by setting Ox hoofes, Canes or any hollow thing
near the Roots of the Trees, and among the Boughs, upon the ends of sticks,
and they will creep in, and lie there, then take off these hoofes quickly, and
shake them into a boule of water, or crush them with your foot upon the ground.

These Creatures do most mischief to Wall-trees, 4 Snailes.
especially upon old walls. Pick them off betime in the morning and destroy
them. But if you keep the wall well pointed with lime, that they have no
harbor there, and the Roots clean from weeds you will not be much troubled with
them.

Another mischief incident to fruit, 5 Wasps.
is by Wasps and Hornets sometimes, some find out their nests, and are so bold
as to destroy them there, by scalding water, or some other way. Another way to
destroy them is by hanging Earthen Pots half full of water in Trees, dawbed in
the innerside with honey, and they will leave the fruits and fall to the honey,
and having sucked of it, they fall into the water, and perish. This way destroys
multitudes.

Birds also spoil Buds and fruits: 6 Birds.
the Bul-finch and Lennet in the Winter time and Spring eat up multitudes of
Buds of Cherrie-trees, and Plum-trees, which are prepared for blossoms and
fruits, being ripe they peck and eat many: You may destroy them by setting
lyme-twigs (with baits) in the Trees, and kill some with a Piece or Cros-bow,
and hang them in the Trees? Also Clack-Mills may be set in diverse places in the
Orchard which will affright them.

But the greatest mischief incident to fruits is by cold winds: and Frosts in
the spring time, and by strong winds in summer, 7 Winds.
and Autumn: which shake off the Fruits: against the hurt of cold winds, and
frosts, wall-trees may be covered, for a certain time while they are knitting
(being exceeding tender) and great standard trees may be smoked in knitting
time, setting on fire some moist straw, (or any thing that will make a smoke)
under, and among the Trees.

Also against strong winds, the Orchard must be defended (if it be possible)
with some high Trees, on the North, East, and West, sids, or so planted that
they may have houses, hills, or something, or other, to break off these winds,
from the Fruit Trees.

So much concerning Diseases, and Mischeifes, incident to Fruit Trees, and
fruits: with their Cures, and Remedies.

The Alimentall and Physical use of Fruits.
Fruit Trees being Planted, and duly Ordered to fruit-bearing, then comes the
joyful Harvest, the End of all our Labors: And then we make use of all the
Fruits for our greatest Profit, and because some have ways to order fruits for
advantage, which others know not of, I think good to say something concerning
the use of fruits, in respect both of their Alimentall, and Physical Use.

First concerning the use of Apples. Of Apples.

When Apples are ready they may be Disposed of Diverse ways, some for Syder,
others for Sale, others for daily Dishes to the Table.

Syder is usually made of such Apples as are moist summer fruits, some are fit
to make Syder so soon as they are gathered, others may lie a certain time to
mellow, as they use in some places, whereof most excellent Syder is made if the
Apples are taken when they are just ready, and fit to eat, being the crude, or
raw spirit is then digested. How to make Syder.


The Apples being ripe, gather them, and being clean picked from Stalks and
leaves, grind them in the Mill, or pownd them small in Trows of wood, or stone,
then strain them, and tun up the Liquor, immediately, and let it not stand
as some do, it loses spirits: And having filled a Vessel great, or small,
take Clay, and lay it round about the Tun hole, not to stop it up, but make
it hollow round about, to contain so much Syder, as that (when it has done
working) the Vessel may yet be full, put in a small quantity of Mustard, to
make it work the better, and when it has done working then stop it up
presently, very close, and it will keep better then if the Vessel were not
full.

In drawing of it, give it no more Air then needs must.

If you hang diverse kinds of Spices (bruised) in the middle of the Vessel, in
a thin Linen Bag, they give the Liquor an excellent relish: put it not in,
till the Syder have done working.

If you boil Syder (with spices) newly strayned, such will be cordial; you
may color it with juice of Mulberies or Rasberies, or of the
Great-bearing-Cherry, and make it like Clarret-wine.

How to keep Syder.
Syder may be kept perfect good many years if (being settled) it be drawn out
into Bottles, and well stopped with Corks and hard wax melted thereon, and bound
down with a Packthred, and then sunk down into a Well or Poole, or buried in
the ground, or sand laid in a Cellar.

Before you gather Apples to keep, let them be ripe, How to keep Apples.
which may be known by the color, and by the seed, cut some of them, and if
the seed be turned brown, or somewhat black, such may be gathered; gather
them in a dry day, pull them one by one, and put them into Baskets lined with
woollen cloth, that they bruise not. Carry them into a Loft or upper Chamber,
and lay them on Mats or Boords, not on Plaster, or Clay Flowers. Lay them
thin, not on heaps, as some do, let the windows, and holes on the South side
be all shut up, but open especially upon the North side, in dry days, that the
air, and winds may dry up their superfluous moisture. Lay every kind by
themselves, and pick out all the Leaves, and such as rot, from time to time.
Turn them sometimes, and in Frost cover them with Mats, Straw, or the like.

If Apples offend any through wind, eat with them Ginger, or other Hot spices,
or Carroway seeds, Fennel seeds, or the like. Hist: stirp. l. 3. page 777.
So Dodonaeus: Quorum malignitas vel aromatis, vel aliis corrigi potest.

Apples are prepared for the Table, all the year long many ways (I shall not
need to speak of particulars) and are pleasant and healthful to the body.

Dulcia poma minus frigida sunt, Dod on hist. and l. 3. p. ibid.
ac humida alimentum conferunt amplius quam caetera poma. He says, Pleasant
Apples are less cold and moist, and afford more nourishment then others.

Concerning their Physical use. De Aliment. facul. l. 2. p. 20.

Gallen ascribes heat to some kind of Apples, he speaks of their Physical
property in relaxing the belly, and says the acid and acrid perform this:
but with some difference. Haec cum calefactione, Illa autem cum refrigeratione.
The Acrid do it with heat, the other with cold. Sweet Apples relax the belly
more then other kinds. A good Author says, every sweet thing detergeth and
relaxeth And therefore Pears (which are generally more sweet then Apples)
loosen the body more then Apples.

Apples also help Concoction. So Gallen, D Alim. facult. l. 2.
post cibum statim dare ipsa, etc. taken after meat. Nonnunqua^ autem cum pane,
ad ventriculum and stomachum roborandum eaten with bread they strengthen the
stomach. So Avicen: confortant debilitatem stomachi. L. 2. c. 569


Galen says pleasant Apples are profitable in hot diseases. Saepe in morbis
afferunt praesidium: So Matthew: Pomum coctivum non solum sanis competit, sed
etiam aegris: He says they are Cordial to persons in hot diseases: Calidis
cordis affectibus succurrunt. Being roasted, In Com. pr. l. Dioscor.
and eaten with Rosewater and Sugar; and that the pleasanter kinds are helpful
against Melancholy, and are good against the Plurisie, if roasted and eaten
Glycyrrhizae succo, and saccharo, mirifice juvant. With juice of Liquorice, and
sugar, morning and evening two hours before meat, they wonderfully help.

Observe one special Physical property more of Apples, set down by a Learned
and experienced Author. These be his words.

Ger. Herb. page 1270.
The pulp of roasted Apples four, or five (if Pomewaters) mixed in a wine,
Quart of fair water, labored together, and drunk at night last, within an
hour, does in one night cure those that piss by drops, with great anguish,
and dolor, the strangury, and all other diseases, proceeding of the difficulty
of making water, but in twice taking, it never fails in any: also the running
of the Reins: which I have often proved, and gained thereby both Crowns, and
credit. So the Author.

Of Pears.
Concerning Pears: Lib. 2. de A liment. fa. p. 20.
Galen says they have like properties with Apples, and what is said of Apples,
if we attribute the same to Pears, there needs nothing anew to be said of
them, Quae de Malis diximus, si ad Pira transtuleris, nihil erit quod nos de
ipsis novum dicere oportet.

Avicen says: Lib. 2. chapter 548.
sedant Choleram, they mitigate Choler. Hist. stirp. 3.
Dodonaeus commends them above Apples, for their nourishing property: Alimenta
Pira omnia amplius and copiosius quam Mala conferunt.

So Li. 2. Chapter 548.
Avicen: Humor eorum plurimus, and laudabilior est, humore pomorum.

Pears make an excellent Wine being well ordered. A late Author says we might
have wine of Pears and other of our Fruits, Ma. Rust.
not inferior to French Wines. And another tells us, that a famous Physician of
his time was not content to equal them with Wine of Grapes, but preferred them
before it in every thing.

I need not tell Herefordshire, and Worcestershire men, the good properties of
Perry and Syder, they know by experience it is both Alimentall and Physical,
that it is profitable not only for Health, but also for long life, and that
Wines made of the best kind of Apple, and Pears, is a spetiall Cordial,
chearing and reviving the spirits, making the heart glad, as wine of Grapes.

And it has been observed that those who drink Syder and Perry daily, or
frequently, as their common drink, are generally healthy persons, and
long-lived.

And that it will beggar a Physician to live where Syder, and Perry, are of
general use.

Quinces are special fruits, and of manifold use, Of Quinces.
not only for daily nourishment, but also for Physical respects, either of
themselves, or mixed with other fruits. Matthiolus commends them both for
meat, and medicine, boiled with honey. Com: in lib. 1 Dioscor: page 201.
Ex melle tantum and Cotoneorum carne confecta, tam ad cibi quam medicamenti
commodum.

So Rovilius: Hist: plant: lib. 3. page 290.
And that many dainties for Banquets are prepared of them: Multa ex Cydoniis
malis parata ex iis sectis and diutius in aqua elixis donec tabescant etc.

There are diverse ways of making Marmalade of Quinces, which is known to be a
good Cordial. strengthening the Stomach, and Heart, both of the sick, and sound.

Galen says being made with Honey it will last seven years, De Aliment.
facul: lib. 2. page 20.
and loose none of it is properties, diu duret, si quis ipsum cum melle coctum
asservare velit, post annos septem invenimus nihil in qualitate immutatum.

Dodonaeus says: they bind strongly, of their own nature; Hist: stirp: lib.
3. pap. 784.
and stay vomiting. Valde astringunt, ventriculum roborant, vomitum sedant.

Quinces may be kept good a year or (as some have said) two years, thus: put
them in a Barrel, cover them with Penny Ale, and once in 10 or 12 days draw
it off, but stir not the Quinces, then put in fresh Ale again, from time to
time, this is accounted far better then usual Pickle. Others keep them thus:
Boil the parings and Cores of Qinces with salt and Ginger, and in this pickle
they will keep diverse Months, A late Author says there is no fruit in this Land
of so manifold use as Quinces.

Cherries are a healthful and pleasant fruit, Of Cherries. De Not. stirp chapter
64. lib. 1.
Ruelius says Cerasa bonum succum creant, they breed good humors in the body;
so another: bonum sanguinem generant.

Dodoneus accounts the tart, and sharp Cherries best, Inter Cerasa optima sunt
acidula.

There is a pleasant and refreshing wine, made of Cherries, in Countries where
they have great store, both of their Lyquor only: and the same mixed with
Grapes. Wis maturis admiscentur, and deinde vinum ex his paratur gustatu
gratissimum: Doubtless Cherry wine in summer is a pleasant and healthful
lyquor, more proper for that season then hot wines.

Cherries boiled in brothes, and drinks, give a pleasant relish, and are good
for hot, and feverish bodies. And in Countries where there are great store
their custom is to eat their breakfasts of Bread, butter, and Cherries.

The School or Universitie of Salerne, gives them great commendations, and
tells us diverse commodities they afford: Cerasa si comedas tibi confert grandia
dona,
Expurgant Stomachum, nucleus lapidem tibi tollit,
Et de carne sua sanguis eritque bonus.
By eating Cherries great good does arise,
To such as use them, for the learned wise
Say, that they purge the Stomach, and beside
The broken stones and kernels have been tried,
To break the bladder-stone, breed wholesome blood,
To fat and feed the body they be good.


Another says, they increase and comfort the Liver, and that the tart and
sharp close the mouth of the stomach, and make the better and speedier
digestion.

Com: in l. 1. Dioscor. page 198.
Matthiolus says: Omnia refrigerant, roborant, and tibi appetentiam excitant,
ideoque febricitantibus, ac sitientibus facile conceduntur a medicis Germanis.

All Cherries do cool, strengthen and stir up appetite to meat, and
therefore they are readily allowed by the Germane Physicians to such as have
feverish, hot, and thirsty diseases; other Authors say the like which for
brevities sake I omit.

Of Plums.
Matthiolus says, Pruna bilem dejiciunt, proinde ea utiliter, medici ad febres,
aliosque biliosos affectus reddant. Plums cast out choleric humors, Com: in
l. 1. Dios. p. 216.
and are good in fevers, and other choleric and hot diseases.

A late Author says, out of damsons and other sweet Plums, may be made a
drink not inferior to some good wines, and abundance of Aquavitae.

Schol. Sal. says:

Infrigidant, laxant, multum prosunt tibi Pruna:

Plums cool, and loose the belly very kindly:

No way offensive, but to health are friendly.

Many good dishes for the Table, and delicates for Banquets, are made of Plums,
with honey, and sugar, to use all the year, and profitable both for the sick
and healthful.

Gallen accounts Aprecocks, better then Peaches, Of Aprecocks De Facult. Ali
men. l. 2. p. 20.
Non in ventriculo, ut illa corrumpuntur: because they are not so soon
corrupted in the stomach. Avicen says, Infusio siccorum confert foebribus
acutis: The infusion of dried Aprecocks, Can. l: 2. c. 146.
is profitable in sharp fevers. Matt. tells us, that the Oil of the Stones,
is very profitable to anoint the heat, and swelling of Ulcers, and Sores, and
Pains in the Ears. And that the oil mixed with wine, and drunk, drives
stones and gravel out of the bladder and kidneys; and helps the collicke.

They are ordered many ways and all pleasant to the Body, Of Peaches: L page,
80. and:
and healthful.

Dioscor. says, Persica mala stomacho utilia sunt, alvum quoque bonum
praestant. Peaches are good for the stomach, L. 2. ^ 571: Not hist. p. 15.
and keep the belly soluble: so Avicen: Matura sunt bona stomacho.

Lonicerus says, Persica mala in ardentibus faebribus sumi possunt. Peaches
may be eaten in burning fevers. L 15. c. 12. and l: 23. c. 7.


Pliny comends Peaches as much as any fruit even for the sick, with wine or
Vinegar, Poma Persica innocua expeti aegris, utilioraque cum vino aut aceto,
etc:

Peaches eaten moderately (for so we are to use all fruits) are no doubt
profitable to cool and loosen the belly, especially for hot constitutions, but
with all take the advice of scho: Sal: Persica cum musto, vobis datur ordine
iusto: take a cup of wine, or strong drink with them.

Some make a drink or wine of Mulberries as Albert: Of Mulberries. De veget,
and Plant. c. 26. p. 157. De not. stirp. c. 102. p 265.
Magnus tells us: De Moris fit potus, qui Moretum vocetur. A spoonefull or 2:
of this will color a quart of white wine or Syder. Ruel: says, succus siccato
pomo expressus, multum obsoniorum sapori confert, and miram gratiam commendat:
the juice of Mulberries, pressed out, and dried, and put into meats, gives them a
very pleasant taste and relish.

The Juice of Mulberries is known by experience to be a good remedy for a sore
mouth, or throat, such as are perfectly ripe relax the belly, but the unripe
(especially dried) are said to bind exceedingly, and therefore are given to
such as have Lasks, and Flixes. Dodonaeus says they stir up a languishing
appetite, especially in hot bodies, appetentiam calore languentem excitant.

Can. l. 2 c. 498.
So Avicen: appetitum cibi faciunt. They are used by Apothecaries for many other
purposes.

Of Figgs. Not. hist. l. 3. p. 800. Com. in l. pr. Dios. p. 230.
Figgs are said to nourish much, and to breed store of blood. Dodonaeus
preferres them above other Fruits in respect they nourish very much: Alimenti
amplius quam caeteri praebent: So Mat. Ficus and uvae inter fructus autumnales
principatum obtinent.

We have a sort of Figgs that come to perfect ripeness in England, which are
eaten (being newly gathered) with Pepper, Salt, and Bread, and may be dried to
last all the year. And (doubtless) nourish exceedingly.

Lonicerus says: Naturam confortant. Dioscor: commends them as profitable to
those who have lost their color by long sickness.

Li. 23. c. 7.
Figgs according to Pliny are restorative, and the best thing that they can
eat, who are brought low by languishing sickness and on the mending hand, they
help (as another says) an old continual Cough (being boiled with Hysop and
drunk) also Obstructions, and other faults of the Lungs. Scho: Salern: commends
them for diverse things: Scroba, tumor, Glandes, Ficus cataplasmata cedit.
Junge papaver ei, confracta foris tenet ossa.
Kings Evil, Swellings, Kernells,
Figgs by a plaster cure:
Add Poppie to 't,
Then broken bones it sets them sure.


Of Medlers. Hist. stirp. l. 3. p. 789.
Condiuntur hi cum saccaro, aut melle (as Dodonaeus) quo modo apparati ori, ac
palato grati sunt. Ordered with honey, or sugar they are acceptable and pleasant
to the taste, they fortify digestion, and preserve the humors from
putrefaction. They stay vomitings and loosnesse of the stomach or belly. De Al.
facul. l. 2. p. 21.
Valentius astringunt, proinde ventri fluenti cibus est utilissimus: as Gallen:
Another says: Mespilorum ossicula in pulverem contrita calculos e renibus
valenter pellunt. The kernells bruised to dust, and drunk in liquor (especially
where Parsley roots have been steeped) do mightily drive out stones, and
gravel from the Kidneyes.

A late Author says Medlers are singular good for women with child, seeing
they strengthen the stomach, and stay the loosnesse thereof.

Another says, they are very effectual for women with child against abortion.

A late Author says the profit of Wallnuts Of Wallnuts.
is infinite: They are usually eaten after meals to close up the stomach, and
help digestion. And according to Avicen, recentes sunt meliores stomacho. Bread
or Biscuit may be made of the meal being dried. Can. l. 2. c. 501.
The young nuts peeled are preserved, and candid for Banqueting stuff: and
being ripe the Kernells may be crusted over with sugar, and kept long.

Avicen says: Juglans ficubus, Can. l. 2. c. 501.
and Ruta medicina omnibus venenis: Wallnuts, with Figs, and Rue, is a
preservative against all poison.

Schol: Sal: reckons Wallnuts for one of the six things that resist poison.

Allia, Nux, Ruta, Pyra, Raphanus cum Theriaca:
Haec sunt Antidotum contra mortale venenum.
Garlic, Rue, Pears, Radish, Treacle, and Nuts:
Take these, and then no deadly poison hurts.
Mithridates the great: Plin: not. hist. l. 23. c. 18.
his preservative was (as is recorded) Two Wallnuts, two Figs, 20 leaves of
Rue, and a grain of Salt stamped together: which taken, no poison that day
could hurt him.

Green Walnuts about Midsommer distilled and drunk with vinegar, are accounted
a certain preservative against the Pestilence.

The milk of the Kernells (as Almond milk) does cool and refresh the appetite
of the languishing sick body.

So much for the Alimentall, and Physical use of Fruits.
Errors Discovered.
HAving showed some profitable Instructions in this Art of planting
Fruit Trees, I think it convenient likewise to discover some Errors that I find
both in the Theory, and Practice of it, that men may take heed of them.

Let not men think that Ancient and Learned Authors have discovered all Truths:
or that all they have said is truth: they are but men and have their Errors:
Humanum est errare: quandoque bonus dormitat Homaerus, as one says, Non est
pro magno habendum quid homines senserint, Agust. de civ. Dei, l. 19.
sed quae sit rei veritas. It Is not any great matter what men have thought, but
what is the truth of the matter. Quid ad nos qui potius de rebus ipsis judicare
debemus? What is it to us what men say, who ought rather to judge of the things
that are spoken. Adv. of Learn. l. 1. p. 45.
Oportet edoctum judicare: as L. Bac. says. Men that are taught must not
resign up their Reason to their Teachers, but judge of what is said.

Some great and Learned Authors have asserted very weak things, and altogether
untrue. L. Bac. says concerning them, That the writings of speculative men
upon active matter, seems to men of experience, but as dreams and dotage.
Indeed they go about to build Castles in the Air (as the Proverb is) for as a
building cannot be set up without a foundation, so neither can effects be
produced without Causes: Nullus effectus datur sine causa. They tell us of many
great and desirable things, but when they come to discover the Causes, and
means whereby they must be effected, these are (many of them) weak and
childish: and which (I suppose) proceeded from them upon their first
apprehensions without waighing them in the Scale of Reason, Adv. Learn. p. 154.
or trying of them by the Touchstone of Experience. And as the L. Bac. says
These high and vaporous Imaginations, instead of a laborious, and sober enquiry
of truth, do beget hopes, and beliefes in themselves, of strange and
impossible shapes.

Not: hist: p. 165.
And elsewhere he says. The Causes and Axioms of some ancient, and modern
writers, are so full of Imagination, and so infected with old received
Theories, as they are mere Inquinations, (or defilements) of experience.

And these he ranks amongst the discredits of Learning, he says: Advanc. Lear.
l. 1. p. 32.
Many things have been rashly (and with little choice or judgment) received,
and registered, as appears in the writings of diverse Authors, which are every
where fraught with forged and fabulous reports, and those not only uncertain,
and untried, but notoriously untrue, to the great derogation of Natural
Philosophy, with grave and sober men.

I shall therefore discover some of these Errors (according to my
apprehensions) as they concern this Art of Planting. Fruit Trees, that
inexperienced persons may not be deceived by them.

And afterward show some Errors in the Practice of this Art, that they may be
avoided.

I shall divide the Errors in the Theorie (or contemplative part) of this Art,
into three sorts.

Instructions hurtful and dangerous.

Instructions for effecting of some things impossible to be done by the means
prescribed: and others impossible to be effected by any means.

Assigning wrong Causes to Effects.

For the first.

Graft the next Spring after remove.

This I say is a dangerous Instruction, because Stocks removed have so great a
wound and repulse by removing only, that they cannot well bear another so
soon after, so great as Grafting would be: Therefore let stocks removed grow a
year, or two before Grafting, Reason, and Experience is clear enough in this.

Theophrastus giving instructions for Planting, says: Take away none of the
Roots for it is a foolish thing to loose those roots we have, that we may get
new.

This is a hurtful and dangerous Instruction, for except many of the small
strings, and roots be cut away, and all the ends of the great ones, they will
not put forth new Roots, as they will if cut, and multitude of roots hinder the
mould from closing on every side of every Root, as it ought to do, therefore
some must be cut away, and the ends of all that are left; Experience prove this
sufficiently.

Columella giving instructions for choice of Grafts, this is one, Columel. lib.
de Arboribus cap. 26.
surculi sint bisulci. Let Grafts be double, or forked. So Ruelius.

This is a dangerous and hurtful instruction, because forked, or double or
treble Grafts, most of them dye, and those that live grow poorly, not a fifth,
or sixth part (it may be) so much as single and short Grafts.

Bapt. Port. giving Instructions for choice of Grafts, says, we must take
surculos pregnantes and turgentes: Grafts full and swelling with sap. This is a
bad Instruction: For Grafts should be taken before they swell with sap, for it
is a repulse to Nature to cut them after sap stirs in them: neither will such
take hold on the stock so soon as those which are indigent, and needy of sap:
therefore let Grafts be cut from the Tree, before sap stir in them.

When Grafts put forth, take away the Clay: for Clay rather keeps moisture then
drought, save a little in the hole. This is a hurtful Instruction: for sap
will not cover the head of the stock, nor close up the clefts on both sides so
soon without Clay, as with it, Clay is as salve to a wound, which heales it up:
and it rather keeps out moisture, then otherwise, if well closed, and also
preserves from dry winds, sun, and other annoiances, therefore keep on the
Clay a year or two, till the head of the stock be covered and the cleft healed
up.

When the Grafts have well put forth, underprop them, else wrap them one within
another, and tie them with wood amongst, for fear winds break them. This is a
very hurtful and dangerous Instruction, for all these ways do fret, and gall,
the bark and (it may be) breed the Canker, And besides, it hinders the young
grafts that they cannot spread into an handsome form: this course brings a
certain mischeife to prevent an uncertain: winds hurt but few, except they be
very top-heavy, if so; then cut some of the branches till they be grown
stronger below, able to bear the Top.

Glue into the place of Grafting, to glue together the two substances, or
sprinkle Sugar, Cynamon, or sweet liquor, that the fruits may retain the taste.
This is a hurtful Instruction because liquors (or any other substance put
between the stock, and the Graft, do hinder, (if not spoil) the joining of
stock and Graft, but if this might be done without hurt either to stock, or
Graft, yet would it be no way effectual for the End proposed.

Plant not against a wall, because a Tree cannot be so long lived nor grow to
the bigness it else would do.

This is a hurtful Instruction, because many kinds of fruittrees, As the
Aprecock Peach, Nectarine and diverse other trees, will bear little, or no
fruit, except they be planted against a wall: And though it be granted, that
Trees planted against a Wall will not be so large as if planted from the Wall,
Yet I suppose its better to have, a few small trees, that bear store of great
fruits; then store of great Trees, that bear but a few small fruits.

Columella giving Instructions for removing Plants says. Mala aestiva,
Cydonia, sorba, pruna, L. 1. de Ar: pa: 490.
post mediam hyemem usque in Idus Febr: serito: Pyros Autumno, aute brumam
serito: Plant the Summer Apple, Quince, Service-tree, and Plum-tree, after
winter, in february: but Peare-trees before winter.

This is a hurtful instruction, as to the first part: for Trees should be
planted in Autumn, as has been said, and there is the same Reason why the
Summer Apple Tree, and the rest, should be planted before winter, as is for
Pear Trees, see at larg: page 60, etc.

Let the Orchard be seated on some hill top, rather then on plain grounds, for
they have better Air, and better prospects, and also contain a greatter
number of trees then plain grounds.

This is no good Instruction: for Orchards on low and plain grounds have many
advantages of those on high grounds, for the soil of plain, and low grounds
is commonly more fertile then hill tops. Secondly, low grounds are more safe
from Winds then hills, by reason of other trees planted to secure the Orchard,
and by hills, houses or other shelters: hill tops can have no defense. As for
prospects on hill tops, men do not plant Orchards for prospects, but for Fruits.

And as for good Air, I suppose there is better Air (especially at some
seasons) in the Orchard on plain grounds, then on hills, for in Blooming time,
winds would deprive us of the sweet air on hill tops, but on plain grounds
the air is more calm, And the perfume of the Blossoms stays within the
Walls, as within a perfumed Chamber.

Set the stones of the Peareplum a foot deep in cold ground. This is a hurtful
and dangerous Instruction. For stones of any Fruits in any ground, put a foot
deep, are rather buried then set, for a man should nere see more of them. But
set stones of any fruits not above two inches deep, rather some thing less.

Instructions for Inoculating: says, Take off the bark just upon some Bud, or
knob, and set the other Bark thereon. This is a hurtful Instruction: for if
the Bud to be inoculated be set upon another Bud of the stock, then the
Inoculated bud cannot possibly close, unless the root of it be out, and if
the root be out its spoiled that way: The Author that talks thus had never any
experience in the Art of Inoculating. For Buds must be set upon the smoothest
part of the stock, that they may be sure to close.

Set Apple Trees Twenty foot asunder. This is a very hurtful and dangerous
Instruction, and the practice of it hinders men of multitudes of Fruits, We
see that in most Orchards, Trees are planted too near together, it may be six
or seven yards asunder, which is too near together: I conceive 10. or 12 yards
or there abouts, little enough for the distance of Apple Trees in ordinary
soil: but in very good ground 16. or 18. yards or more, for we see by
experience that upon good ground and well ordered they will go near to touch
one another at 10: or 12: yards, or a greater distance: And that a few
Apple Trees having room enough to spread will bear more fruits, then five
times so many, being crowded one upon another, where they have not room to
spread. And besides, those fruits they bear cannot come to perfection, neither
in bigness, nor ripeness, for want of the sun which cannot come about them
when the Trees are planted so near together, as the Author speaks of.

If you do remove Cherry-trees, ye ought to remove them in November, and
January. This is a hurtful Instruction: For Cherry-trees and other kinds of
trees, ought to be removed about the end of September or sooner, very many
especially Cherry-trees may (with most advantage) be removed in August: And
this is a General Rule for removing them, and all other Trees whatsoever so
soon as they have done growing in the Branches, they may be removed. And some
have done growing at the beginning of August, or sooner, others, a Month, or
Five weeks after, others not of two Months after: but the sooner they are
removed after they have done growing in the branches the more advantage they
get against the spring, by growing a while after in the Roots before winter.

Thus much for the first sort of Errors: Instructions hurtful and dangerous.

The second sort are, Instructions for effecting of things impossible to be
done by the means prescribed, and others impossible to be done by any means.

Didymus tells us how we may mix diverse kinds of fruits, and thereof make one
new kind: Accipienda sunt duo diversi generis sarmenta, eaque scindenda per
medium, etc. The Instruction is too large to show it verbatim: this is the
sum. Two Grafts of diverse kinds must be cut through the midst, and the two
halves bound together, which must be set in the earth, and watered till they bud
forth.

Another to the like purpose, Bind the Grafts of a Peach-tree, and of a
Nut-tree together, and the fruit will be half Peaches and half Nuts: And
again he says: Bind the Grafts of a white Fig Tree, and a black together,
and plant them, and the Figs thereof will have the flesh on the one side white,
the other black.

Rara avis in terris nigroque similima Cygno. If men can but make the Swanne
and the Raven breed together, they may have a strange kind of Foul, a black
Swan it may be, which may as soon be done, as to make these fruits mix.

These, and the like Instructions are ridiculous, fit to be passed over with a
Jest, but if men require a serious answer, it is given (truly) by Sir Fr.
Bacon, in his Not: Hist: He says, Cent. 5. page 119. 100.
Such Grafts will put forth their several Fruits without any commixture in the
fruit. No doubt they will, if it be possible for two half grafts (so used) to
grow, we see by continual experience a small Bud of a Graft (no bigger then a
grain of wheat) will keep it is own nature against a fair large stock, of
another kind.

Albert. Mag: he says: Lib. sepa. veget cap. 1
Laetamen est unum eorum quae praecipue Plantam mutatur a sylvestritate in
domesticationem. Manure (or good soil) is one of those things which changes
wild plants, into a mild and pleasant nature. This cannot be done by any
means. Different kinds of fruits, as they will not mix one with another, by
the means newly mentioned: so neither will they change into another kind.
Lord Bacon tells us: It is the seed (of any kind of Creature) and the nature of
it, that locketh and boundeth in the Creature that it does not expatiate, or
change from one kind to another. The seed of every fruit retayneth strictly,
the nature of the fruit of which it came which will not be changed by any
means.

second sort of Errors is this:

De Natura and viribus Ar: Fo: 7.
Lonicerus gives an Instruction for procuring fruits with an excellent
Aromatique and spicy taste: it is this: Arborem ad medullam usque scindito, and
ligni part execta, aromata quae volueris inserito etc he says: Cut a Tree to
the pith, and part of the wood being cut out, put in such sweet spices as You
think good, then daube the hole with Clay, after lay the branches of the young
plant in the Earth, that by its moisture and fatness the Branches may unite,
then bind together the young twigs that spring from them so that there may be
made one fruit or branch of diverse, and the fruits coming thereof retain the
taste of the spices.

Another whose Book (he says) is published by authority gives this
Instruction:

To have colored Apples, with what color ye shall think good: Ye shall
bore a slope with an Auger, in the biggest part of the body of the Tree unto
the midst thereof, and then look what color ye will have them of, first ye
shall take water, and mingle your color therewith, then stop it up again,
with a Pin: and wax it round about. Ye may mingle with the said color what
spice ye list, to make them taste thereafter: Thus ye may change the Taste, or
color of any Apple.

Another says: To have Peaches of savor like Musk; In Grafting put into the
Cleft a Grain of musk: and to have the Taste like Roses, put into the cleft
dried Leaves of sweet Roses.

Another late Author says: with a Chysell cut up the bark of a Tree round
about, and anoint the bark within with powder of Cloves, or Nutmegs, then set
it on again, and stop it, close which wax round about, and within thrice
bearing it shall bring a fair Muscadell fruit which ye may Graft and they
shall be all after, Muscadell fruits:

This Author says further. To have all stone fruit taste as ye shall think
good, lay the stones to soake in such liquor as ye would have them taste of.

Diverse others speak to the like purpose.

These are strange fancies, merely imaginary things: neither Reason nor
Experience dictate any such. They are not only invalid, or of no power at all,
to effect what they propose, but are also Hurtful and dangerous to the Trees,
and Grafts; But if they might be done without danger, yet are they not able to
work any such effects as are promised, For it is not possible such small
proportions as they speak of, should communicate and transfer their virtues
through all the parts of the huge and vast bodies of trees, and to multitudes
of Fruits, much less that they should do this for many years, and least of
all that the Grafts (cut from these Trees) should retain these virtues, being
set on other stocks.

May it reasonably be said, That a Mess of sweet and pleasant meat, nay only
a Bit of such meat given to a Child of tender years, the same will retain
the virtues, and strength of such meat, all his life time, yea will transfer
the virtues of it to his children after him; when every one knows the strength
and virtue of the best meat or drink (though taken in great quantity) is
soon over, and spent, and that it is a continued daily supply, that does
uphold and maintain the body in good state and condition.

We have no reason to believe that the virtues and strength of any dainty dish
will continue so long with us, as Elia's Morsel of meat did with him, which
yet was but forty days, and that was a Miracle too: how much less reason
have we to think it will last many years.

Is there not I say as much reason for this as the other. Admit it were
possible that a small quantity of sweet spices should transfuse and
communicate its properties to all the parts of a tree, yet it would not
continue long in it, but it must be a continued, and daily supply of such sweet
things, as must work that effect, if possibly such a thing may be, by any
means. Creatures retain those properties that are fixed, and radicated in
them by nature, according to their innate and intrinsicall form, but easily,
and quickly cast off such as are adventitious and accidental, as these things
are.

Another of the second sort of Errors, is this, Not hist fol 6.
Lonicerus gives an Instruction to produce colored fruits: Ramo Cerasi (sive
alterius Arboris) scisso ad medullam, Lazurium aliumve colorem inserito, sic
eundem fructus refert. that is, put into the bough of a Cherry-tree (or any
other tree) cut to the pith, the Azure stone (which is partly green and partly
blew) or any other color which are means to color the fruits of such trees.

De not. stirp. c. 96.
Ruelius says, Non desunt qui sub Arbores Rosas serant, sic rubra Poma dari
promittunt. Some set Roses under fruit trees, and say by that means the trees
will bring forth red fruits. So Democritus: Si voles rubrum habere: obtinebis,
Rosis purpureis sub arbore consitis.

The same instruction is given by a late English Author.

Another says, to have colored Peaches, we should color the kernells within
the stones, and the fruits will be of the same color.

The same Author says, to have Red Apples, put the Grafts into Pikes blood.

We see here their prescriptions for rare colored fruits, which are as far
off from truth or Reason, as the former concerning fruits of an aromatique or
spicy taste, for the things are not only dangerous if tried, but if it were not
so, yet are weak, and invalid toward the working of any such effects. Because
color is an accident, cleaving to some substance and as the substance is
dissolved, and converted into another body, then it loses its accidents,
which it had before, as color, shape, etc as a piece of cloth, wood, or the
like, being burned, rotten or otherwise dissolved, does loose its color, or
other accidents, that it had before it is change. And colored Meats, eaten and
turned into flesh, blood, and spirits, loose their colors, taste, etc. So the
juice of the earth, if it be white, black brown, or any other color, yet when
it is drawn by Roots, for instance: Carrots, then it is turned into a Yellow,
or Reddish color, or if drawn by Turnups, it is then converted into a white
color, though it were a quite contrary before.

So also of Liquors, (or other things of delicate colors) being converted into
the substance of Trees, Fruits, and Leaves, they loose their former colors,
though never so glorious, and beautiful. And if great quantities of colored
liquors, or other substances cannot produce colored fruits, how much more
impossible is it that a drop, or two, of any colored thing should do it, or
only coloring the kernells (as he speaks of:) which could not become trees of
many years after. It Is clear, that fruits convert the substances they draw
into their own natures, and receive little or no alteration, unless by a
constant, and continual supply from year to year. Concerning setting
Rose-trees under other Trees, to produce colored fruits, it is one of the most
ridiculous conceits that I have read, what is it that should work the effect:
may it be imagined that the Trees can see the Red-Roses as Jacobs sheep did the
Rods in the water, Genesis 30.37.
and so bring forth fruits according to the same color, can any man apprehend
so much as a color, or shadow of a Reason for it?

Another of the second sort of Errors is this:

Affricanus gives an Instruction to procure Walnuts without husks: Nuces nudas
and sine putaminibus edent Juglandes etc: Walnut tres (he says) do bring forth
bare nuts without husks, if the husk and shell be broken, and the kernel
taken out without hurt, and wrapped in wool, or fresh Vine leaves, that the
kernels may be preserved from Ants, or other things, and then set in the earth
again. Florentine affirms the like of Almonds, if ashes be sprinkled in the
holes where they are set. So another late Author: not only of Wal-nuts and
Almonds, but of all other shell fruits.

Were it not a wonderful sight to see Wallnuts and all Nuts, to grow without
husks, we know the Nuts of themselves have no stalks, and how then should they
grow upon the Tree without husks to enclose them. What is it that should work
this strange effect: is it because the kernels are put into the ground without
shells, and for that the tree springs from the kernels only; Do not all Trees
spring from the kernells only, though set with their shells, the husk and
shell, contribute nothing at all toward the Tree, they open for the kernel to
spring out, and then rot themselves.

Another of this second sort is this:

If you graft a late fruit on an early stock, the fruit will be early, and if
you Graft an Early fruit upon a late stock, the fruit will be late. As if
says he) you graft Apples, on Mulbery-trees, you shall have fruit all summer,
even till November. And that if you graft a Plum-tree, on the Nut-tree, the
husk will be like the Nut-huske, but within it will be a Plume. Or if you graft
a Plum (or any other fruit) on the Fig Tree, the fruit will grow without
Blossoming.

These things cannot be; for contrary kinds will not grow together, as the Plum
tree and Fig Tree, or Plum-tree, and Nut-tree, but if different sorts would
agree, and grow together yet these effects would not be, because Grafts do
always rule, and keep their own natures, page 100.
or alter very little. L. Bac: in his Not. hist. says plainly: these are
imaginations and untrue, because (says he) the Cions overrule the stock quite.
So again page 97. which Experience confirms.

second sort of Errors is this: Democritus (as one affirms) gives an
Instruction for procuring fruits with Inscriptions, and ingravings upon them,
in any figure or shape.

To this purpose: Open the shell of an Almond, and write upon the kernel what
you will, and wrap it in paper, and set it in Clay mingled with swines dung.

A late Author says, Steep the stones of Peaches two or three days and then
open them, and with a brass pen write on the rind of the kernells after put
them again into the stones, and wrap them about with paper, or parchment, and
plant them, and the fruit will be written, and engraven. Is not this an odd
conceit: that writing upon the kernel, should produce fruits written or
engraven. A man (no doubt) with as good success may ingrave, or write upon the
shell or husk of an Almond, or other fruit, as upon the kernel, or if he will
upon the paper or parchment, in which it is inwrapt: for the Rind of the
Kernel contributes nothing to the tree or fruit, but opens (as the Husk or
shell) to let out the inner part of the kernel.

But if a man desires to have fruits with inscriptions and engravings, he must
take another course prescribed by a Learned Author, Lo: Bacon, Not. Hist. page
128.
(upon better grounds) which is, by writing upon the fruits with a needle or
bodkin, when the fruits are young, and as they grow bigger, so the Letters will
grow more large and graphicall.

Concerning the second sort of Errors thus much, it were easy to mention many
more as idle as these, but I shall not trouble my self, nor the Reader with
them at present: only I say in the general, let men take heed of such things
asserted by Authors, as have neither Reason nor Experience to uphold them,
least they spend their money, labor and time about them, and instead of
profits and pleasures, find discouragements, and trouble.

The third sort of Errors are, Assigning wrong causes to effects.

Error is this, some have conceived, that Grafting is the cause of early
bearing of fruits, and does much better all fruit. Albert: Lib. 5. Cap 8. de
veget. and Plant.
Mag: says, it is better, propter digestionem Succi in nodo factam: because of
the digestion of the sap in the knot.

So also Cressentius: and adds: De Not: Plant. Lib. 2. page 87.
and iste nodus facit diversitatem omnem, quae est in Malis, and Pyris, and
caeteris fructibus: The knot, (which is between the Graft and the Stock) makes
all the difference which is found in Pears, Apples, and other fruits: Lib de
Cult. and Insit.
Bapt. Port. likewise ascribes all to Grafting: He says, Trees coming of seed,
Longa est expectatio ad fructuum productionem: Insitio vero in aliquibus eodem
Anno producit. Trees coming of seed, are long ere they bear fruit, but being
Grafted, some kinds bear in a year or two. So also Columella Lib. de Arbor.
page 490. Not. Hist. page 97.
Lo. Ba. wanted some experience in this point, who says, There is no doubt,
but that Grafting (for the most part) does meliorate fruit: and again,
Grafting does Generally advance, and meliorate fruits above that which they
would be, if they were set of kernels, or stones. The Cause (says he) is
manifest, for that the nourishment is better prepared in the stock then in the
crude earth.

I say herein these Authors assign a wrong Cause to an effect: for simply
Grafting contributes nothing at all to the early bearing of Fruit, nor to its
goodness. But the Cause is In the Nature of the Grafts: if they be Grafts cut
from bearing trees, and of good kinds, they bear fruits in a year or two, but
if they be Grafts from young unbearing trees coming of seed, such Grafts will
not bear the sooner for Grafting, it is not simply grafting, I say, nor the
knot (as the Authors speak of) that makes trees bear one year, one day, the
sooner, for if so, then grafts from young unbearing trees, coming of seed,
grafted in the same manner, and upon as good stocks, as other grafts from old
bearing trees, they would bear fruits the one sort as soon as the other: but
it is otherwise: so that the Cause lies not simply in grafting, but in the
Nature of the grafts:

Neither does Grafting make fruits (at all) the better, otherwise then as you
choose grafts of a good kind, for we know Grafts rule, and keep their own
Natures. And the Cause is not well assigned by the Author who says: it is for
that the nourishment is better prepared in the stock, then in the crude earth:
for we know the Branches of an ungrafted tree, receive sap not immediately from
the crude Earth, but from a stock or body, as well as the branches of the
Grafted tree: the stock of the Grafted tree, is a wild stock, and of the same
nature, as is the stock, or body, of the ungrafted tree: they are both alike,
and the concoction and nourishment in both, is alike, and the Cause being
alike, why is not the effect alike. Its plain: this is not the Cause but the
Cause is in the Graft not in the stock, Not hist. page 109. and p. 115.
though the nourishment be never so well concocted in the stock: and the fruit
is not made better, or worse, simply by grafting: The Author asserts this truth
plainly elsewhere: the graft (says he) overruleth the Stock: and again: the
Grafts will govern: that is: they keep the Nature and properties of the trees
from with they were gotten:

Another of the third sort of Errors, is this.

Cause why trees bear not fruit in a few years after grafting is, because
they were grafted in the old of the Moon: for (says he) so many days as the
Moon is old when you graft, so many years will the Graft be ere it bear
fruit.

The Cause is here mistaken: for the Moon has no such influence upon
fruit trees, as to withhold their fruits in this manner: men (we see by
experience) graft in all seasons of the Moon, and find no such difference in
the bearing of the trees: The chief Causes of unfruitfulnesse of trees, are
when they are not fit for the Country where they are planted.

Secondly: when the Grafts are chosen from young unbearing Trees: thirdly.
Repletion, or overmuch nourishment:

Fourthly: Coldness, or overmoistnesse of the ground:

Fifthly: frosts, or cold winds in the Spring.

Thirdly: Another of the third sort of Errors is this.

Many conceive that sap in Trees does descend from the Branches to the Roots,
which causes several effects; as falling of the Leaves, goodness of the
Roots of diverse Plants for use etc: but the Cause of these Effects is
mistaken, for Sap in Trees never descends, but always ascends, And Leaves of
Trees fall in Autumn, not because sap descends from them, but because Sap
ascends not to them sufficient to nourish, or feed them any longer.

And if Roots are best in Autumn, that is not Caused by descent of Sap, but
for that the Body, and Branches of a Tree in Autumn, draw but a small quantity
of Sap from the Roots, and the Roots even then draw sap for the Earth, and
increase upon it, and are well stored with sap after the Branches have done
increasing: and there the sap rests cheifely, at that season.

Some who hold descending of sap may (perhaps) confirm their Opinion from
small springs of the Roots of Plants when they are removed in Autumn. Its
true: The Roots of Plants set in the beginning of September (or about that
time) do spring forth a little at the cut ends of the Roots, before winter,
not because Sap descends from the Branches to them, for though all the Branches
are cut off before setting, (as sometimes they are,) yet the Roots will spring
then, because some degree of heat (proportionable to that purpose) is, at that
season, in the top of the earth by reason of the immediate foregoing summer,
so that Plants set while this heat lasts, they will germinate, and spring
forth in their Roots before winter: (the husbandman knows in this season, it
is best to sow his Wheat and Rye:) And also because the Sun (as yet) has an
influence sufficient to make seeds, and Roots of Plants to spring forth, which
toward December it has not, being then too remote from us, so that it is not
descending of Sap that Causes these effects.

The learned Lord Bacon did not well consider this point, who supposed a
descention of sap in Autumn, Not: hist. p. 111. and 94.
speaking concerning setting a Bough in the ground prepared by disbarking for
that purpose, says, the Cause why it will soon after be a fair Tree, may be
this, the baring of the Bark keeps the sap from descending toward winter:
here is a wrong Cause assigned to an effect, for it is not the supposed keeping
up of the Sap (by that means he speaks of) that Causes such a Bough to grow
the better, but the cause is for that such a Bough, by disbarking, has got
some small Roots, or strings, (or at least some roughness or knobs capable of
Roots,) in the passage up of the sap, whereby (being set) it will become a
Tree in certain years.

This Opinion of descention of sap in Trees is an old Error, of many years
standing, and is radicated in the Minds of most men, many using it as a
Similitude to illustrate some spiritual thing, as if it were a real, and
undoubted truth, whereas it is but a weak, and groundless conceit, and
contrary to Reason and experience. I will therefore lay it open more plainly
and prove, and demonstrate the Truth concerning the motion of sap in Trees.

Sap in trees allwaies moves upwards, and it is contrary to the Law, and course
of nature for sap to descend, Natura nil agit frustra, nature does nothing in
vain: Now it were a vain work in Nature to cause Sap to ascend, up into the
Branches, to descend again to the roots, the Roots send sap to the Branches,
and not the Branches to the Roots, when it once comes into the Branches, it is
converted into Wood, Bark, Leaves, Fruits, etc, Whence is all that great Bulk,
and body, which we see a Tree arise to in a few years; if sap should descend
one while, as it ascends another, it would follow, that as a Tree increases by
ascension of sap, so it would decrease by its descension.

This may be more clear if we consider the Cause why sap in Trees stirs, and
ascends, and also why it rises not after such a time to make any grouth. When
the sun in the spring of the year by degrees draws nearer to us, then sap
in Trees begins (by its heat, and influence) to move, to swell, and open the
Buds, and to cause the Branches to shoot forth, which increase by it all the
summer: and as the sun (by degrees) draws nearer, and grows hotter, so the
sap (by degrees) increases, and rises more plentifully, and when the sun is
nearest, then Trees are fullest of sap,

Now observe: As by the vicinity, and neernesse of the sun (which is by
degrees) the sap is increased by degrees, so likewise, by the suns
remoteness, and absence (which is also by degrees) in his going back again,
the sap is also diminished by degrees, that is; ascending less and less in
quantity, until the sun be gone so far from us, and the heat, and
influence of it be so weak, that it works not to cause sap to rise up whereby
the branches may increase any longer, and then the Branches, and Buds of Trees
are all at a stand, and grow no more, until the next spring. And at that time
the Leaves loose their beauty, and fall off, because sap rises not up to them
sufficient to feed them any longer, but only so much as to preserve life in the
Tree I would feign know (of those who hold descension of sap) what should cause
it descend, for, Nullus effectus datur sine causa: there can be no effect
without a cause, they cannot say that as heat causes it ascend, so cold
causes it descend. Cold never causes sap to stir, but to stand, or move
slowly. Cold is of a condensing nature, and does constipate, and fix, rare and
fluid bodies: but if sap of its own nature would descend, yet there is none in
the Branches at that season of the year, that they can spare, but all that has
ascended in the summer is converted into the substance of the Tree, its Leaves,
and fruits.

And further: To prove this more fully, and clearly, by a plain undeniable
Argument. If there be a continual ascension of sap, then there is no
descension, but there is a continual ascension, therefore no descension.

To prove the Minor Proposition: That there is a continual ascension of sap in
Trees.

The Sun and Air continually draw sap, and moisture out out of Trees, and
other Vegetables, as the Lord Bacon and others conclude, and as may be made
appear by Reason and Experience: We know, if Branches and Twigs of Trees,
being cut off, and laid aside in the sun, and air but for a few days, they
will be contracted, and wrinkled, the air draws out the sap and moisture, and
such having no supply of sap from the Root, they quickly wither. Now know also;
that the sun, and air have the same operation upon the living Branches and
Twiggs; drawing sap, and moisture out of them likewise, but they are not
contracted and wrinkled as the other, because there is a continual supply of
sap from the Root, as well in winter, as in summer: which keeps them in their
full dimensions without wrinkling, or contracting.

Further observe: to prove this. If we remove Plants in September, or about
that time (the pretended season of descension of sap) and let them lie out of
the earth a day or two, we shall find, that the sun and air will (in that
short time) have sucked, and drawn out sap and moisture from the Branches, so
that they will be apparently shrunk, and contracted. (I have seen some
Branches so much wrinkled, that I questioned whether they were dead, or alive.)
But after the Plants have been set certain days, so much sap will be
ascended as will again have filled up the wrinkled, or contracted bark, so
that it is evident and apparent hereby, that some small quantity of sap has
ascended into the branches since their setting, and if so, then its clear
there is no descension of sap, can any thing move contrary ways at one time?
And if we graft in November and December (the very dead time of winter) the
grafts have some small supply of sap even then, else the sun and air would
spoil them, by daily sucking out their moisture, were there not a supply of
sap from the Root, sufficient to keep them alive until the spring. Its
manifest then from what has been said, that sap in Trees ascends as well in
Autumn, and Winter, as in Summer, so much as to preserve life in Trees, by
supplying what is extracted by the Sun and Air: so that it may be concluded
there is no descension of sap; unless men will hold that a thing may move
several ways, upwards and downwards, at one and the same time, which is a
contradiction, and impossible in nature.

Thus much concerning the three sorts of Errors in the Theory of this Art.

First: Instructions hurtful, and dangerous.

Secondly: Instructions for effecting some things impossible to be effected by
the means prescribed, and others impossible to be effected by any means.

Thirdly: Assigning wrong Causes to effects.

I will now discover some Errors that I find in the practice of this Art of
Planting Fruit Trees, that they may be avoided.
ONE Error in Practice is this: Many remove their Trees in winter, 1 Removing
trees in winter.
or near the spring, whereas they ought to remove them in September, or
thereabouts. Many Plants are ready to remove in the beginning of August, and
before, which if done, such have a great advantage of those removed in winter
or near the spring, for trees removed betimes in the year, grow in their
Roots before winter, and so make a fair preparation against the spring: And
this is a General Rule, for Transplanting all trees. To remove so soon as
they have done growing in the branches, which may be known by the top, or ends
of the branches, if the tops be closed and shut up, they may be removed without
danger, though it be in August, or before, which is no small advantage to them.
See page 60.

2 Planting trees too near together.
Another Error in Practice, is Planting trees too near together: This is a
great and general Error, many think, the more Trees they have, the more
fruit: but a few having room enough to spread will bear more fruits then
many, crowded one upon another as the custom is, and fruits will also be
better when the sun may come round about the trees. I account 10 or 12 yards a
competent distance for Apple Trees and Peare-trees, upon ordinary soil, but if
the ground be special good, then give them the more room: for Cherry-trees,
Plum-trees and such like, 7 or 8 yards is a convenient distance.

3 Planting trees unfit for the Country.
Another Error is this: Many Plant Fruit Trees unfit for the Country where they
plant them, Their care is chiefly to choose Grafts of the best kinds and fair
Plants to look upon, not considering so much, whether such kinds will prosper,
and bear fruits well in those Clymates, and places where they plant them. And
hence it is often, that many who have fair and goodly fruit trees, have very
little fruit from them. It is an excellent Rule to choose those kinds of
fruits, which we (or others) find by many years experience, to be good
bearing trees, in those parts nearest to us: although the fruits be not
altogether so good as some others.

4 Choosing the greatest plants.
This is another Error: Many men when they procure Fruit Trees to plant an
Orchard, they (most commonly) desire the greatest and fairest Plants. Hoping
such will be trees the soonest: Whereas great Plants many of them dye, and
others live very poorly, but small Plants removed live generally, and thrive
more in 2 or 3 years, then great ones in 6 or 7: for removing great plants is
a very great check to nature, such as many times its not able to recover.

5 Setting trees without disbranching.
Another Error in practice is this: Men generally leave too many branches on the
Trees they plant, and will by no means have the Branches cut off, unless a
few it may be, whereas for want of disbranching plants, they loose branches,
body, roots, and all. If they will plant great plants, they must disbranch
them, small ones need not.

6 Planting trees in worse mould.
Another is this: For the most part men neglect to plant their young trees, in
as good or better soil, then that from which they are removed. They fetch them
from Nurseries about London (which are generally of very fertile soil) and
plant the^ (it may be) in ordinary, or poor soil, and thence it is that many
of them die, or grow weakly: Whereas they ought to lay special soil (the best
they can get) next to the Roots which having taken hold, and being well rooted
in the ground, they will by degrees, thrust their roots, and grow well in that
which is worse.

7 Setting graft and stock smooth on the outside.
Another is this: Some in grafting take care to set the Graft and stock even and
smooth on the outside, not considering that the bark of the stocks are (for the
most part) thicker then the bark of the grafts. Whereas they ought to take
special care to set the inner sides of the barks together, (which is the
chiefest Rule in Grafting) because there is the chief current of the sap.

8 Grafting long, or forked grafts.
Another Error is this: Grafting long, or forked Grafts: commonly the longer
Grafts are, the less they grow, and the shorter they are cut, the longer they
grow in a year.

9 Suffering fruit trees to grow like Timber trees
Another is this: Many let their Fruit Trees grow straight up very high, before
they spread into boughs, and they are rather like Timber trees for building,
then Fruit Trees, for bearing Fruits:

Whereas they ought to cut off the Top while the Plant is young, about an Ell,
or a Yard and half from the ground, that so the Plant may spread, and enlarge
it self, and one Tree well ordered in this respect for spreading, will have as
many small boughs (and consequently will bear as much fruit) as three or four
(it may be) of such Trees as run spiring up a great height without spreading.

10 Giving too much nourishment to fruit trees.
Another Error is this: some give too much nourishment to fruit trees Letting
some fat water (it may be) run to the Roots or lie too near them, or else by
pouring, or laying some fertile substance to their roots, when there is
(sometimes) more need to deprive them of their too fat feeding, which causes
them to luxuriate, and spend their strength in great and large shoots, and
broad leaves, and blossoms, and leave off bearing fruits: Nourishment to
Fruit Trees ought to be moderate, as to other Creatures.

11 Nursing up Quincetrees of seed.
Most men nurse up Quince-trees of seed, or slips from the roots, and seldom or
never Inoculate or Graft them, as they do other trees, whereby they loose
their fruits many years, which they might gain by Grafting or Inoculating of
them. And when (after a long time) they do bear: yet their fruits are not so
good (if the trees come of seed) at their first bearing, as grafts would bring
being cut from old bearing Trees.

12 Pruning off too many shoots from Wall-trees.
Another Error in practice, is this. Many in pruning Aprecot-Trees and other
Wall-trees, they prune off most of the fresh young Branches of the last years
shoot, and preserve the old and big branches, suffering them to run up a
great part of the wall, without small twigs, or branches. Whereas they should
still from year to year, preserve the small shoots, nailing them up to the
wall yearly (all or most) from the lowest part of the Tree, to the top, and
leave no part of the wall void of branches, and cause the branches to spread
along the sides of the wall both ways, and not suffer them to run upwards
too much.

13 Grafting seed Plants before removing.
Another Error amongst some is this. They graft young Plants that came of seed,
in the place where they were sowed, (before they have been removed, whereby
they would get good Roots) And hence it follows. That such thrust down a
single Root, or two (commonly) into Clay, Gravel, or moist ground, etc. which
root or roots, draw bad nourishment, and thereby hurt the Trees and Fruits, and
in case any of them be removed afterward (being grafted) they want good Roots,
for that they were never removed (being young) to get good Roots.

14 Not pruning the roots of Plants.
See how to order them, page 45.

Some also when they transplant young Trees they usually set them with all
their Roots, whereas the Roots of all Trees transplanted, ought to be pruned:
See how: page 61.

15 Breaking off Buds before Grafts grow.
Another Error is this: Many break off all the Buds upon the stocks that are
engrafted, before the Grafts put forth, which endangers both Stock and Graft.
For Buds upon the stocks shouldbe let alone, all, or most, until the Grafts
have put forth and be able to draw up sap, and then break off all the Buds
below the Grafts, that they may have all the sap.

Concerning Errors in practice thus much.

And so I have done (at present) with all the particular Mysteries concerning
the Ordering of Fruit Trees, and Fruits.

Hereafter I may communicate more, as God (who instructs the Husbandman to
discretion, Esaias 28.24, 25, 26.
and teaches him) shall discover them to me. None shall ever (in this life)
know all the secrets of Nature in this Art or any other, but yet (by means of
time, and diligence) we are still finding out new Experiments.

THE

