PLAIN DEALING OR A Fair Warning TO THE Gentlemen of the COMMITTEE FOR UNION:
IN A LETTER Intended to ALDERMAN FOVLKS, To be Communicated unto them
accordingly at Gurney House, or elsewhere. Written by a Friend to the
Parliament, City and Kingdom, and for their Vindication, is now published to
the World.

MATH. 18. 7. ^o unto the world, because of offenses: but it must needs be that
offenses come: but woe unto that man by whom the offense comes. Printed in the
first Year of the Agitators Reign, MDCXLVII.

PLAIN DEALING OR A Fair Warning TO THE Gentlemen of the COMMITTEE FOR UNION.
Gentlemen,
THat this meeting may prove effectual by Gods blessing to the end pretended,
even a sweet union between the godly, and a happy Composure of this unhappy
difference; I thought it my duty to give you (as briefly and plainly as I can:)
that which I conceive, must necessarily be debated in order to this union: and
were not Religion, Gods cause, the Kingdom, nay three Kingdoms so nearly
con^^^ned, I would have been silent for my brethrens sakes, for whom it (...)
me at the very heart. But it may be remembered, the fathers dangers made the
dumb child to speak, you know there is no sore can be thoroughly cured, but it
must endure some smart; if this sore be not skilfully handled, and thoroughly
cured, it may prove fatal to the Gospel, throughout all Europe; and in truth,
whatsoever specious pretext to the contrary, a perpetual farewell to Englands,
Irelands and Scotlands Common Right and Freedom For do not Soldiers usurp the
Parliaments authority, which is one fair step to it? and for the Ministry,
they will be preachers; Rome may keep their Jesuits at home these will do their
work for them if God prevent not.
; whatsoever Mr. Estwick is pleased to say, I am confident his own Conscience
tells him, The Gentlemen he accuses for promoting a new War, and his
inveighing against the City Remonstrance, Declaration, and all the late
Carriages of the promoters thereof, is really from a deep sense of their duty,
and the danger, this Parliament was in by the Armies disobedience, whose
proceedings all along since, does sufficiently justify, and make manifest, and
whether or no the fundamental Laws of the Land be not now subverted, and the
very being of Parliaments struck at, when the Army has not only refused to
obey the Parliament, but contrarily has forced obedience from them, both in
voting and unvoting, and has taken upon them to judge the case of the Kingdom,
nay, to be the Parliaments Judges, and to require Reasons of their votes, to be
given them, or such as they confide in, as appears by that Declaration of the
18, of June, and Parliament like, to receive the Countries Petitions, set up a
The Junto or Mock Parliament at Putney.
General Counsel against the Great Counsel of the Land undertake to do that
there, only proper to Parliaments; vote down the Kings negative voice, the
House of Pears, set periods to Parliaments, give Rules and Directions to
Parliaments. I would I could not add that bold faced Treason, when they
declared the Parliament to be no Parliament. In a word, as they have divided
the Parliaments, so have they Fomented and Promoted all the divisions in the
Kingdom, that shakes the very foundations of this Commonwealth; what exceeding
Is there not juggling in the Kings being found at the Ifle of Wight. I wish his
person be not st^l in danger; and that we knew the Truth.
Juggling has bin in the Army from the beginning, and also, withal the world
besides: Absolon like to steal away the hearts of the people, and to cozen and
cheat them out of their very understandings, to the betraying of themselves,
the Parliament, even to the indangering the ever having more Parliaments? What
strange and undutiful expressions? What slander and Reproaches? Nay, what
treasonable speeches and actions has bin attempted against this Parliament?
Was not the Kings taking from Holdenby disowned by the Army since owned, upon
very great pretenses of loyally and duty to him, but what performances all the
world may now see by his Majesty's present escape for the safety of his person,
as well as by the attempts of the Agitators If you see them shot to death for
their attempts upon the King, Parliament and City, then I hope al will be well,
no as bad as ever without Peter's Repentance; even among the head Officers, who
sin in that also; is it not as just for the Agitators to disobey their Officers
as for them to disobey the Parliament.
, to Impeach him without any Authority or Countenance of the Parliaments; and
such other attempts upon the Parliament and Ministry of the Gospel, that if
Absolon were now alive to act his Treason, it might well enough pass among the
Crowd, for Common Right and Freedom Was not the Petition disowned since owned?
Was not their disobedience disowned with a great deal of fained sorrow, since
owned with a great deal of real Joy; does any man know what to make of the Army
now, one piece of it is for Paul, and other for Apollos, and an other for
Sephaes, but all out of order, all disobedient to the Parliament, ever and anon
professing that the Parliament is not yet for their turn; so that the truth is,
and I think all the world can never make it out, that there is any thing to be
said for them, but that whilst they were obedient, God honored them to be
Instruments to this poor Kingdom; which very service makes me pour out many a
prayer to God, to pour upon them the spirit of Repentance and Obedience,
without which I much doubt of any good by your meeting: for when God comes to
enquire after all those things, I am afraid he will charge upon the Armies
disobedience, the new What is your own Child turned a Monster that you are
ashamed to own it.
War you talk of, the accusation of the Imprisoned and banished ones, the
renting and tearing in piec^s the Parliament, the City, the whole Kingdom, nay
3, Kingdoms, the hinderers of Irelands Relief; promoters of the Famine, both of
bread, and of the word of the Lord, and of all the sad Consequences we fear may
follow: So that the Subject or matter that tends to a godly union in my opinion
will be speedily to make a Religious Retreat, if nature prevail so with you that
you cannot own the new War, yet let grace be so predominant as not to continue
to charge it upon those you know are The Lord Mayor, Aldermen, the Members of
both Houses, and diverse others occused of High Treason or Misdemeanors.
innocent, set at liberty all those Gentlemen, most of which I know you have
had such signal Testimonies of their faithfulness to this Parliament, that as I
am confident, Treason will not stick by them, so the several footsteps of Gods
providence ever since has given strange Commendation to their endeavors, as if
God would have the world to see, that they then did but attempt to do their
duty: Put both Houses and the City into the same posture they were in, when you
first meddled with them, and then know, that there is much doubt too, whether
unity and uniformity be not twins to live and dye together. I am persuaded
there is many great Officers of the Army in ^ool blood, could heartily wish
themselves where they were when they begun, but they are now in a snare, and
Subject to many Temptations: yet I hope their ^^genuity is such, that though
ambition bids them go on, that they will Remember they have not so learned
Christ; and the further they go the more misery they will run themselves into;
for I am confident, without Repentance, God will bring them to a s^^ reckoning,
at last: and indeed Gentlemen: how can a true Israelite, a true English man,
dispense with his duty? Nay can England, that has obleiged it self by so many
Solemn Vows How y^u have k^pt the Covenant let your consciences speak, that
have not only ^uffered the privileges of Parliament to be b^^ken, but have
broken them your selves. Do not your own consciences check you if they do defer
not Repentance, un^avel and und^ what you have rashly done; for I hope you see
what it is to let the golden (...) of Government loose, and if you be real
converts leave juggling.
and Covenants, to preserve the Parliament, when so apparently it is
endangered? were not the 11. Members fain to leave the Parliament, or else they
would turn them out by force? Did not the Parliament Vote six days one after
another, That, that was a Parliament the Army Voted was none; and would, as I
think, have Voted so til this day, could we say they were not now under a
force? But I believe the last great turn given to the Parliament by that 1000
Horse, commanded by Major Desborough into Hide Park (to execute that dreadful
Declaration or poisonous purge, of which the Parliament has never yet
recovered, and was such a blow to the Gospel of Jesus Christ and to these three
Kingdoms ^^ cannot yet be paralel'd) will require a thorough REPENTANCE: And
though we cannot see all the plots and designs of men, yet God knows all the
present juglings of this Age; and we have had so much experience in all the
transactions, since this unhappy difference, as to say, surely this putting of
the Army thus out of joint is to try the skill of some or other. But, I hope,
the Gentlemen that press an Union upon that ground, will see a providence in it,
and say of their policy, all is uanity: and that surely by this division in the
Army, God minds us of our disobedience, and that we should trust God more in
his ordinary way of providence: and let Parliaments alone with the settling of
Church and State, as only proper to them: And if the Soldiers act without, or
in opposition to their Officers: is it not Lex Talionis? Is it not the bitter
fruit of their own rash Councels and Actions? Believe it, all the would, that
observes the Army, may with good reason conclude, that they are gone so far,
that they now resolve only to depend upon their own strongth for Indemnity:
their own Papers do more then intimate as much: if so then, what good issue of
this meeting can be expected without some better encouragement from that party:
but some kind of acknowledgment, or s^bmission or something akin to it? And
indeed, what ever is pretended that seems to be their aim, if Master Estwick
spoke their Meaning at the last Meeting; and if so, ^hen know that an ungodly
Union cannot hold; for if you could out-reach or out-wit men, its to no
purpose, for God will laugh you to s^orn and have you in derision; as its good
to forget on all sides, so its dangerous to countenance any of the late
passages since this difference, or to comply while they have power to drive on
their own designs To be sure they have not power to defend King, Parliament and
Kingdom, as appears by the Kings flight at their confession and practice daily.
Do not the Gen^ral Counc^l drive one way and the Agiltators another ^^ the best
Lie, Genesis Cromwell can do is but to obstruct their treason, which they choose to
suffer in h^^es of a better opportunity to act it; and its well known have no
small Party, and are in a desperat^ c^^dition.
. It would be too tedious to give you a taste of all the bitter fruit of the
Armies disobedience: but in one Paper they take Liberty of Conscience, to
desire the punishment of those Gentlemen that out of conscience, and in
obedience, left the Army: And M. Estwick more then intimated, that he greatly
desired an Union between the Parliament and City, only some particular
Gentlemen should lie under the guilt of a new War; of whose innocence, by this
time, I presume he cannot be ignorant: but that self defense, which he is
pleased to call a new War, I am fully satisfied, had been the only way to
preserve the Parliament, City and Kingdom from all those dangers both felt and
feared, had they not by their craft and subtilty, sown so much division among
the godly, that we thereby were in danger of a common Enemy. To conclude, so
long, I am confident* as a counsel of Agitators is set up to oppose the great
Counsel of Parliament, and we humble not our selves for it, there is little
hopes of an Union; nay it is a great dishonor to our English Nation, a hissing
stock and byword in all Countries. Can you read, without trembling, the Case
of the Army, and Call to the Army, the Diurnal, and several other Papers, what
danger our Religion is in, what dishonor is cast upon our God, what Heresies
and Blasphemies are fomented and maintained, what Hypocrisies in reference to
Ireland, what double dealing in reference to England. Witness their own
Relation of his Majesty's escape or retirement; indeed they have as many
several designs as they are parties in the Army; and all tend to a New War, if
hiding or driving of King, Parliament and Religion our of the Kingdom will do
it, under the notion of Peace and Truth or common Right and Freedom. What
indeavoring to charge their own treasons What difference between private
tampering now and Sir Io^^ ^^thans treasons or is there liberty for saints to
act what was treason as they say in the 11. Members or any elle? or is this the
way to peace to keep the Parliament in the dark, or if they will see to putout
their eyes? this Machivil an polcy will never restore Englands peace surely its
neither the victory over the Agitators, nor the General Council, nor any other
select number of officers in the Army but the Armies obedience to the
Parliament, and the freedom of Parliament and application of both Kingdoms to
his Majesty that's likely to procure a firm and lasting peace
and mischiefs upon other men's shoulders; all which together with the present
necessity of settling the King and Kingdom, relieving Ireland, easing the
Kingdom of those unnecessary, Taxes, as Free quarter and all other charges upon
the poor Country* occasioned by the Armies disobedience; I say, as all these
Calls for Fasting and Prayer, and for humbling our selves to a happy speedy
Union; so shall it also be the daily prayer and sincere endeavor of

Yours and the Kingdoms humble and faithful Servant, A. T.

ENglands sickness, Irelands dying, and Scotlands sad Complaints
Are from our ^rethrens mischiefs we thought to be the Saints.
Our Religion and Liberty the glory of this Nation,
Is through their disobedience brought near to desolation.
And without our God step in to stop their persecution,
We may expect at last, the Parliaments dissolution*
And ^nstead of King and Parliament, the Pillars of this kingdom
Have Community and parity for Common right and freedom.
But that sincere Repentance may be their Resolution.
God give them grace, and pardon too, and send a good conclusion

FINIS.

