The Christian Moderator: The Second Part; OR, PERSECVTION FOR RELIGION
CONDEMNED; By the Light of Nature. Law of God. Evidence of our own Principles.
WITH An Explanation of the Roman Catholic Belief, concerning these four
points: Their Church, Worship, Justification and Civil Government.

JAMES 2. 12. So speak you and so do, as they that are judged by the law of
liberty; for they shall be judged without mercy, that have showed no mercy.
Mill hominum species, and rerum discolor usus, per me equidem sint omnia
protinus alba. Whereunto there are new Additions since the Octavo was Printed.

Printed for H. J. 1652.

Persecution for Religion condemned, etc.
IN the precedent part of this discourse, I have demonstrated (according to
that light which the Lord Christ has infused into my Soul) how much Coercency
in Religion is repugnant to the Law of Nature, and, by many evident and
unanswerable Texts of Scripture, showed, how displeasing it is to God, how
improper to advance the power of godliness, and how extremly disaggreeable to
the sweet Spirit, which guided our Lord Jesus in the propagation of his Gospel.
And after in the same little Treatise I proceed to prove (by the express words
of the Parliaments and Armies Declarations) that the great Principle wherein we
glory, and which we have so long fought to establish, is a perfect
Gospel-freedom, and absolute deliverance of the Conscience from all Tyranny and
oppression.

Which discourse as I composed in all humbleness of spirit, and afterward
offered to the gracious Redeemer of our Souls, who gave me strength and power
to finish it to his glory: So I find not only my self (for which I humbly
thank the bounty of my God) confirmed in my former judgment, but others in
some measure convinced in theirs, of the unreasonablenes and sin of
Conscience-Persecution.

Concerning which pious and modest temper of mutual forbearance, I shall only
add to what I have mentioned in the former part, this plain and familiar
Observation, That as the surest mark of a tender conscience in our selves, is a
tender spirit to others, so the most infallible sign of a hard and stony heart
in our breasts, is when we slit in pieces and shipwreck the Consciences of all
that touch upon us: But praised for ever be the Name of our God, who still
proceeds to guide and illuminate his chosen, graciously disposing them neither
to presume upon themselves for their knowledge, nor be cruel against others
for their ignorance, but humbly adore and wait upon the Divine Providence in
the disposure of all things: which fills my soul with exceeding joy, when I
consider it to be the general sense of all the truly godly and well-affected in
this Nation, that no quiet and peaceable Christian be deprived of the chief
content and comfort of this life, which certainly consists in a real and
impartial, yet unoffensive liberty, to serve his God according to his
conscience. Many Petitions I could here cite in affirmance of this Truth, from
several Provinces of this Land; but I shall trouble the Reader only with these
two, the first was presented to the Parliament upon the six and twentieth of
March 1649. from the county of Leicester, wherein, though I were none of the
Subscribers; yet I did, both by my self and friends, promote it what I could,
as conceiving the requests of it, both just and reasonable; it bore this Title,

The humble Petition of diverse well affected of the County of Leicester, in
behalf of themselves and the Nation, ANd the seventh. Article or branch of the
Petition was this. 7. That every one may enjoy the just freedoms to worship God
according to his word, without any Coercive or restrictive courses to the
contrary.

The Petition being read, the Gentlemen that presented it were called in, and
Master Speaker, by Order of the House, gave them hearty thanks, etc.

And on the 2 of April following, a like Petition was presented, entitled, The
humble Petition and Representation of several Churches of God in London,
commonly, though falsely, called Anabaptists, which was also graciously accepted
by the House, according to the Merit of so conscientious a suit, and the
justice of so glorious a Parliament.

At which time we happily began to shake off that intolerable burden of
Isachar, the Presbyterian government, which has bin since in a good measure
effected, through the blessing of the Lord Christ, and pious care of his
instruments, the Governors of this Commonwealth.

In so much as no persons of what society or persuasion soever in this Nation,
are at present persecuted for their Conscience only; or difference in outward
worship, but the Papist, whom I am therefore (according to that Principle of
charity which absolutely commands my spirit,) obliged to make the chief subject
of this discourse.

In order to which performance, I have since the writing my former sheets)
often waited upon God in humility of spirit, and endeavor to inform my self,
as much as I could of the truth, and particular manner of their sufferings, and
to that end have sometimes purposely attended at Haberdashers hall, to hear
their Cases pleaded, where though I suffered some persecution from the crowd
and noise of that place, yet far more was the grief of my mind to behold so
many distressed suitors, whose countenances were made sad by the fear of a
fatal Order for their impoverishment. But before I proceed to any of those
particulars, I must (at least in my own judgment) clear the Papists obstinacy
and non submission to the present government, wherewith they were by some
accused, as a sufficient ground of all their punishment; from which imputation
I shall easily deliver them by transcribing a copy of their Petition, which
they have with much diligence and humble importunity, addressed to very many
Members of Parliament, professing to wait only the happiness of an opportunity
to present it to the House, and being a Paper at least 5 or 6 months old, and
delivered to so many persons, with whom I have the honor to be acquainted, it
fell by chance into my hands, having I confess of late entertained a
particular delight and recreation to pass some part of my time in such
curiosities.

To the supreme Authority of this Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth
of England. The humble Petition of the Roman Catholics.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners have long waited some happy leisure, when there might be
a hearing allowed them of their many sad pressures, the weight whereof has
sunk them so ruinously low, that they are utterly disabled to discharge their
many debts, make the least provision for their Children, or relieve themselves,
reduced to extreme necessities.

That even such of your Petitioners, as are sequestered for Delinquency, have
still comforted their sorrows with this hope, that at the last they should
certainly be received to mercy; since the general VOTES for Composition of the
17. of March 1648. seem clearly to imply them capable thereof, when the Rules
concerning them should be agreed upon.

That now the wisdom of the Parliament applying it self to establish the people
of this Commonwealth in a quiet and settled condition, your Petitioners take up
an humble confidence, that they alone shall not be excluded from so universal
a benefit.

And therefore humbly pray, that the Laws and proceedings concerning them may
be taken into consideration, and such clemency and compassion used toward them
by Composition or otherwise, as in the judgment of this honorable House may
consist with the public peace, and your Petitioners comfortable lie ving in
their native Country.

And they further humbly pray, that it would please the Parliament to vouchsafe
them the permission of clearing their Religion from whatsoever may be
inconsistent with Government, which will assuredly be done to full
satisfaction, if there may be a Committee appointed by this honorable House,
on whom they may have the privilege to attend.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.
THis to my sense bears it self with so much respect and submissiveness in the
style, that it can no ways be interpreted misbecoming the duty of good and
peaceable subjects; and for the matter of the Petition, it seems to my eye so
reasonable, that I cannot believe, but after a little patience, till other more
general affairs afford the Parliament leisure, it will certainly receive a
satisfactory and relieving Answer; Especially since not only such Papists,
whose moderate delinquency leaves them some hope of mercy, nor such who for
preservation of their lives, were forced to fly into the late kings Garrisons,
without ever acting any thing against the State, but even the most innocent,
who all this while have sat still under so many pressures, and never were
charged with other accusation, than their Religion, yet all freely and humbly
submit in this Petition to the absolute pleasure of the Parliament for Rules of
Composition, and this (as to the single Papist) for an offense, which in no
other society of Christians in this Nation is accounted any crime at all, being
merely their different judgment in Religion; a proceeding, wherein certainly
we shall use too much severity, and partiality, if we make it not only
unpardonable, but unredeemable.

In the close of their Petition they humbly beg the favor of an opportunity to
satisfy the Parliament in the point of consistency with Civil Government, which
being the chief Objection that (without passion) can be made against them,
surely we should not take offense, at their most diligent applications, and
utmost endeavors, to deliver themselves from so destructive a charge, laid
upon their Religion.

In order to which performance, (it seems) diverse Papists of considerable
quality, unanimously agreed upon this following Explanation, to declare and
witness to the world, the perfect consistency of their Religion, both with
civil society, joining also in the same paper, the like expressions of their
Belief concerning some few other points, which they were informed to be more
obnoxious to exception, than the rest; As the under-valuing of holy Scripture,
and over-valuing the authority of the Church: Invocation of Saints and Angels,
and worship of Images; and above all, the proud opinion of Merits: This paper
they drew up as a preparatory to a more full and perfect clearing of their
Faith from those prejudices and misunderstandings, which ordinarily men of
different persuasions entertain, especially, in Controversies about matters of
Religion.

The Paper, containing certain Doctrins of the Papists, and by them delivered
to diverse persons of quality for their particular satisfaction.
WE believe the holy Scriptures to be of divine inspiration and infallible
Authority; and whatsoever is therein contained we firmly assent unto, as to the
word of God, the Author of all Truth.

1. I. 2 Pet. 3. 16.
But since in the holy Scriptures there are some things hard to be understood,
which the ignorant and unstable wrest to their own destruction; we therefore
profess (for the ending of controversies in our Religion, and settling of peace
in our Consciences) to submit our private judgments to the judgment of the
Church, represented in a free General Council.

2. II. 1 Timothy 1.
We humbly believe the sacred Mystery of the Blessed Trinity, one Eternal,
Almighty, and incomprehensible God, whom only we adore and worship, as alone
having Sovereign dominion over all things, to whom only we acknowledge as due
from men and Angels, all glory, service and obedience, abhorring from our
hearts, as a most detestabbe sacrilege, to give our Creators honor to any
creature whatsoever.

And therefore we solemnly protest, that by the prayers we address to Angels,
and Saints, we intend no other then humbly to solicit their assistance before
the throne of God, as we desire the prayers of one another here upon earth, not
that we hope any thing from them, as original authors thereof, but from God
the fountain of all goodness, through Jesus Christ our only Mediator and
Redeemer.

Neither do we believe any divinity or virtue to be in images, for which they
ought to be worshipped as the Gentiles did their Idols, but we retain them with
due and decent respect in our Churches, as instruments, which we find by
experience, do often assist our memories, and excite our affections.

3. III. Romans 3. 24
We firmly believe, that no force of nature, nor dignity of our best works can
merit our Justification, but we are justified freely by grace, through the
Redemption that is in Jesus Christ.

And although we should by the grace of God persevere unto the end in a godly
life and holy obedience to the Commandments, yet are our hopes of eternal
glory still built upon the mercy of God, and the merits of Christ Jesus.

All other merits (according to our sense of that word) signify no more, then
actions done by the assistance of Gods grace, to which it has pleased his
gooodness to promise a reward; a Doctrine so far from being unsuitable to the
sense of the holy Scriptures, that it is their principal design to invite and
provoke us to a diligent observance of the Commandments, by promising heaven
as the reward of our obedience. 1 Timothy 4. 8. Godliness is profitable to all
things, having the promise of this life, and of that which is to come, And,
Rom, 2. 6. God will render to every man according to his deeds, to them who by
patient confidence in well doing seek for glory and honor, and immortality,
eternal life. And again, Romans 8. 13. If you live after the flesh you shall dye,
but if through the Spirit you mortify the deeds of the body, you shall live.
And Heb. 6. 10. God is not unjust to forget your work and labor of love, which
you have showed for his name, etc. Nothing being so frequently repeated in the
word of God, as his gracious promises to recompense with everlasting glory the
faith and obedience of his servants; Luke 6. 38.
Nor is the bounty of God barely according to our works, but high and
plentiful, even beyond our capacities; giving full measure, heaped up, pressed
down, and running over into the bosoms of all that love him.

Thus we believe the merit or reward ableness of holy living (both which
signify the same thing with us) arises not from the self-value even of our
best actions; Luke 17. 1^
as they are ours, but from the grace and bounty of God; and for our selves we
sincerely profess, when we have done all those things which are commanded us,
we are unprofitable servants, IV. Exodus 20. Mat. 19. Eccles. 12. 13.
having done nothing but that which was our duty; so that our boasting is not
in our selves, but all our glorying is in Christ.

4. We firmly believe, and highly reverence the Moral Law, being so solemnly
delivered to Moses upon the Mount, so expressly confirmed by our Savionr in the
Gospel, and containing in it so perfect an Abridgement of our whole duty both
to God and man.

Which Moral Law we believe obliges all men to proceed with faithfulness and
sincerity in their mutual contracts one toward another, and therefore our
constant Profession is, that we are most strictly and absolutely bound to the
exact and entire performance of our promises, made to any person of what
Religion soever, much more to the Magistrates and Civil powers, under whose
protection we live whom we are taught by the word of God to obey, not only for
fear, but for consci^nce sake; and to whom we will most faithfully observe our
promises, of duty and obedience, notwithstanding any dispensation, absolution,
or any other proceedings of any foreign power, or authority whatsoever.

Wherefore we utterly deny and renounce that false and scandalous Position,
that Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, as most uncharitably imputed to
our practices, and most unjustly pinned upon our religion.

These we sincerely and solemnly profess, as in the sight of God, the searcher
of all hearts, taking the words plainly and simply in their usual and familiar
sense, without any equivocation or mental reservation whatsoever.

THese expressions concerning four of the most offensive points, wherein the
Papists differ from us, have I confess given me a great and unexpected
satisfaction; And though I remain in the same mind as to the erroniousnesse of
many of their Tenets, yet I see we may easily be too passionate in the degree
of detesting any different opinion, since every error is not presently to be
censured, as an unsufferable abomination; and too severe in the degree of
persecuting the dissenters from our own judgments, as if they were unworthy to
breath the same air with our selves.

Certainly, many Protestants, who quietly enjoy a just and unmolested freedom,
approach very near to the first assertion of the Papists, whilst some both
writers and discoursers, profess to submit their private judgments
unappealably to a truly-free General Council, that she might once have an end
of all strife and contention about matters of Religion; others refer themselves
without further instance to a Provincial Assembly of Divines, and very few but
will prefer the judgment of the Supreme authority of this Nation, before their
own particular sense, readily conforming to that Declaration which the
Parliament shall hold forth to be the true meaning of the Scripture: So that
almost every one agrees in the acknowledgement of an external authority to
decide such Controversies, as arise out of the different interpretation of
their faith upon the Churches sleeve, and yield a blind obedience (that is
without appealing any further) to her determination.

And for the second Branch, I am sure many Protestants continue still those old
customs of baring their heads when they come into a Church, nay of bowing at
the name of Jesus; Practices that ly open to the greatest part of those
objections, which our more godly and conscientious penns make against the
Papists, in the question of Pictures; yet I hope there will never be the least
thought entertained of imposing penalties upon the private and unscandalous use
of any such Ceremonies: Rather let us apply our endeavors to open their eyes
with a mild and gentle hand, than beat them out with the club-fist of the Law.

But when I reflect upon the third conclusion in the Recusants Paper, I am,
astonished to consider how Education with a little mixture of Passion or
interest makes every slight distemper amongst Christians (which of it self were
easily curable) so desperate, that it often becomes irrecoverable, and
endangers both the health and life of Christianity. Surely in many things we
strangely mistake one another. I profess sincerely, I should be so far from
seizing on the Estate of a Papist, for refusing that part of the Oath of
Abjuration, wherein he is compelled to renounce the Doctrine of merits, that I
am resolved to suffer a thousand deaths, rather then abjure so great and
manifest a truth, according to the sense wherein they explain themselves, or
affirm so great and manifest an Error, according to the sense wherein we
explain our selves. For when we censure the Doctrine of Merits, we understand
by that word our deserts, as they exclude the merits of Christ, and abstracting
from the Covenant God has been pleased to make with us in his Son, and in that
sense we justly condemn all opinions of Merit, even of the best works, as
presumptuous and Luciferian; But I now see when the Papists affirm that good
works are meritorious, they include both the promise of God and the merits of
Christ Jesus, and in effect when all is summed up, it amounts only to this,
That God has graciously promised, and will faithfully keep his word, to reward
all those with eternal life that believe in him, and obey his Commandments,
In this sense the Papists hold mercifulnes to be meritorious, or available to
salvation, because the Scripture says, Blessed are the merciful for they
shall obtain mercy. Matthew. 5. 7. In this sense the Papists hold patience in
affliction to be meritorious or available to Salvation, because the Scripture
says, Blessed are they who are persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs
is the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5. 10. And this (as I am informed by very
understanding men amongst them) is the real truth of their Doctrine concerning
good works, which in my judgment differs nothing from ours, but only in the
unsavory and proud-sounding word merit.

The last Cause of the Papists Note, which I have transcribed, is so full and
satisfactory, that if they will be as good as their words, I shall neither fear
to have such neighbors, nor need any Magistrate fear to have such Subjects.

And to prove their trustiness and fidelity, in the observance of their oaths,
I cannot imagine a more evident demonstration, then that they make a conscience
of what oaths they take. He that swears any thing without distinction, may
justly be suspected to be as false to men, as he is fearlesse of God, whereas
no clearer argument can be alleged in the behalf of any, that they intend to
keep all the oaths they take, then this, that they will not take all the oaths
you offer; surely if the Pope or their own consciences could give them this
extravagant privilege, to be bound by no oath, they might without difficulty
take any, and if they were allowed by their Religion to swear any thing,
certainly they are all worse then mad, if they do not immediately post away to
Haberdashers hall, call for the oath of abjuration, swallow it down quickly
without any chewing, and so save at least 50000 l a year in a morning.

In the late Kings days, many Papists were smartly punished for not taking the
oath of allegiance, none for observing it, nay I have heard some
Papist-Delinquents argue for themselves, that the utter ruin, which now
endangers their whole estates, proceeds solely from their performing to the
late King that service which he called alleagiance, and this is yet a higher
proof of their fidelity in their promises, since they adventured with so much
hazard to keep that oath in subgance, which they refused with almost as much
hazard to take, because against their conscience in some circumstance.

And now let any one judge indifferently, whether they that firmly believe all
the holy Scriptures of the old and New Testament, worship and adore only one
God, rely upon Jesus Christ for their sole Mediator, and profess it their duty
to observe the commandments of the Moral Law, may not reasonably be suffered
to live in their native country with the peaceable enjoyment of their
consciences in their private houses, especially those who will quietly submit
to cautions and restrictions, as the commonwealth shall require for prevention
of scandal, or disturbance of the public peace.

Besides I am persuaded a far less liberty will oblige the Papists than
content any other, because hitherto all liberty has been wholly denied to them,
and wholly allowed to every one else, so that they will gladly receive as a
mercy and favor, what others challenge as a right, and their affections being
once purchased at so cheap a price, as a little private exercise of their
conscience, free from the fright and smart of penalties, I am confident they
will neither be such fools as to forfeit their liberty, nor so ungrateful as
to forget them that gave it; since out of all our histories not one example can
be assigned, that they ever offered to move the least sedition, in a time when
they enjoyed but half the liberties of freeborn English men.

Therefore I shall close my thoughts upon this Paper, with a short and free
conclusion, which I conceive abridges in few words the whole difficulty betwixt
subject and Superior; The Magistrate that protects any sort of people in his
Dominions, may justly require their service, and safely rely upon their
obedience but if he persecute them, whether Protestants or Papists, he will
soon find, that as he may violently force their compliance, he can never
prudently rest upon their affections.

But I must here beg leave to be dispensed with in my promise of ending this
period, till I have added this observation, How many Modern Authors of good
account amongst us, have positively held forth to the people (as an
unquestionable truth) that the Papists by their Principles, are not obliged to
keep faith with Heretics? and I must acknowledge I was once of the same
opinion concerning them, principally relying upon the credit of Mr. James
Howell, an ingenious traveller in most of the Popish countries, which makes me
the more wonder, that he should take such an erroneous opinion upon trust, and
assert it in Print near the end of the first part of Dodona's Grove, where he
says, That one of the Canons of the last great Council, (which must needs be
the Council of Trent) was that, Haereticis non est tenenda fides, The esteem I
had entertained of that Authors ingenuity permitted me not to acquiesse to some
Recusants verbal denial of this, assertion; but (for more assured
satisfaction in so important a point) I took the pains to peruse some of their
best writers, and found them unamimously agree, that faith is not only to be
kept with Heretics, but even with Turks, Jews and Infidels, and that
indispensably: neither could I find one tittle to that purpose, in any Canon or
Session of that last great Council, (as he calls it) but to the contrary; For
both in the fifteenth and eighteenth Session, the Council says expressly, that
whosoever shall violate the least point of the public faith, given for the
security of all Protestants, that should repair to that Council, should be
subject to those penalties, quas jure divino and humano aut consuetudine
hujusmodi salvorum conductuum violatores incurrere possunt, absque omni
excusatione, aut quavis in hac part contradictione. By which it evidently
appears that the Council supposed, as a thing known and certain, that
whosoever should violate his faith promised to Heretics, was not only
punishable by humane Laws, but even by the divine Law it self.

And certainly if it had been my unhappiness to have done any sort of
Christians so much wrong in public, my conscience (coming afterward to be
better informed would oblige me to a public reparation; for though we use no
such confession, as the Papists practice, yet the Law of natural reason binds
us to as punctual an observance of restitution, as any Papist whatsoever, and
that even to Papists themselves, when we do them any injury.

But for a final dispatch of this point concerning the Papists indispensable
obligation of performing their promises, it was my fortune to light upon a book
of one Paul Layman a German Jesuit, and an Author of great esteem amongst the
Casuists ( who treating of dispensations lib. 2. tract. 3. cap. 12.) sets down
these words, Dico quarto, Si Catholici cum Haereticis publicum faedus ineant,
non potest per authoritatem Pontificiam s^lvi aut relaxari. If Catholics enter
into any public contract with Heretics, it cannot be dissolved or dispensed
with by the Popes power. And some few lines after proceeding upon the same
question, he pronounces downright, Absolute negari debet id (viz remissionem
foederis) a summo Pontifice fieri posse; it ought absolutely to be denied, that
it is in the power of the Pope to absolve from such contracts. And again, Fides
publica haereticis data inviolabiliter and sine ullo dispensationis remedio
servanda est, quamdiu ipsi servare parati sunt: Public says given to
Heretics ought inviolably and without dispensation to be observed, so long as
they are ready to perform their part. And concludes that even Jesuits as well
as other Doctors hold the Popes power to be limitable, and not so almighty as
the world usually believes concerning them. The same doctrine is repeated in
the abridgement of Laymans book entitled Compendium Moralis Theologiae Pauli
Layman folio 265.

The Papists have given so much satisfaction by their Petition and other
Papers, but much more by their submission to, and peaceable demeanor in this
Commonwealth, as it is now established; I must appeal not only to the
Parliament, and that great instrument of our freedom my Lord General
Cromwell, but to all conscientious men, whether these Papists may not
reasonably hope so much mercy, as not to be by penalties debard the private
exercise of their consciences, with their doors shut, and such other cautions
and circumstances as the State shall be pleased to ordain for regulation of
Soul freedom; since it is evident that Christian liberty may be lawfully
governed, though it be also as evident that it cannot lawfully be taken away,
so that every peaceable spirit have liberty enough, and yet the licentious
Liver not have too much.

Such moderate and orderly freedom might charitably be allowed to the quiet
Papists from persons that afford far more advantages to far more dangerous
enemies the Scotch or rigid kirkists, who have several times engaged against
us in open field, and by many plots and secret contrivements endeavored as
much as in them lay) to subvert the present government, yet after so many
victories obtained against them, and the reducing of the greatest part of their
country to the obedience of this State; The Ministers (as says a Letter of the
21 of Febr. 1651. from an officer of our army at Edinborough) are violenly bent
their own way, and preach damnation to all complyers with us in any thing.

And let any indifferent person read the strange proceedings of the Presbytery
of Aberdeen against Sir Alexander Irving, Lord of Drum published in the
Diurnall 26 Ian. 1651. he will ( I am confident) highly applaud that ingenious
letter from an eminent Officer of our Army, and dated at Edenborough the 21 of
the same month, and published in the next weeks Politicus, which has these
very words. You would wonder to observe the strange pride and proceedings of
the kirk Clergy, the ingredi^nts of whose constitution admit of many more
grains of gunpowder, then you shall find in any Jesuits in Christendom; so
that if they be not closely looked unto they will set all on fire again.

And in another letter dated 12th of April 1652. from Dalkeith in Scotland and
printed in the next weeks Diurnall, is this excellent observation; Believe it,
all our other Enemies are tame beasts to the high Presbyter, and yet with the
winding and turning of a religious pretense, and an artificial zeal against
Heresy; he will like a tame Snake (if not warily avoided) get into your bosom,
etc.

Continually every week come fresh and loud complaints from our friends and
Officers in Scotland of the stubbornness of a certain froward and resty party
in that Nation.

Yet notwithstanding the pertinacy and malice of these kirkists, such of them
as have not appeared in actual arms against us, are so far from being
sequestered, that many of them enjoy great places of honor and benefit under
our government. And such is the States mercy toward them) that the
Commissioners for settling the affairs of Scotland by their Declaration of the
21 Feb, 1651, grounded upon the Declaration of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, have expressed a particular regard and indulgence to
the whole Nation, in these words, That such Ministers whose Consciences oblige
them to wait upon God in the Administration of spiritual Ordinances, according
to the order of the Scottish Churches, with any that shall voluntarily join in
the practice thereof, shall receive protection and encouragement from all in
authority, in their peaceable and unoffensive exercise of the same: as also
others, who not being satisfied in Conscience to use that form, shall serve and
worship God in other Gospel way, and behave themselves peaceably and
unoffensively therein.

And we do lastly declare, That all Merchants, tradesmen, and handicrafts men,
not having in Lands or goods above the value of 500 l. sterling, and all other
persons not having in Lands and goods above the clear value of 200 l. sterling
(not being prisoners of war or soldiers of fortune in Commission) who shall in
pursuance of the said Declaration live peaceably, and yield obedience to the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England exercised in Scotland, shall not
only be freed and discharged from all forfeitures and confiscations of their
Estates for any thing formerly done by them in reference to the wars, but he
received into the protection of the Parliament, and enjoy such Liberties and
immunities, as also such Leases and grants of confiscated and forfeited Lands,
as upon consideration of their respective qualities and deserts shall be
thought fit, etc.

In the first Branch of this Declaration such a Conscience security is held
forth as (according to my soul) ought not by the Laws of Christ be denied to
any peaceable Christian, and I extremely rejoice in the Spirit of our Governors
for so noble and charitable a proceeding, yet I plainly see, that they to whom
this favor is allowed, are both different from us in the Principles of their
Religion and opposite to us in their National affection; whereas a far lesser
mercy is denied to our own kindred and allies, to our own conntrey men born to
the sam freedom with our selves, who have in a much less measure offended in
matters of hostility, nay diverse of them not at all, who yet would be content
and thankful for a small part of that favor which the Parliament so
bountifully bestows upon strangers.

By the second Branch very many of that Nation, who have been in actual arms
against us, and perhaps wounded or flain our friends in open battles, will
receive an immunity (for 500 l. Sterling is a great estate in Scotland;)
Whereas many of our own Country, who never lifted up hand against us, have two
parts of their estates with rigor sequestered, and that without so charitable a
distinction, as to free the poorer sort, whose estates are of less value then
500 l. For our merciless Sequestrators have tripartited even the day laborers
goods and very house-holdstuff, and taken away two Cowes, where the whole stock
was but three.

Passages observed upon Cases depending at Haberdashers Hall.
I Must confess, I had not so much time to spare, as I could have wished, yet
for some weeks I attended at Haberdashers Hall for better satisfaction: but to
make a full discovery of all the proceedings there, is beyond the level of my
discourse: I will only promise in what I say, not to exceed the bounds of truth
and modesty. The present Commissioners, who are seven in number, for ought I
could discern are civil persons, and most of them apprehensive of others
sufferings, but seem to say in many hard cases, that either their Instructions
or Commission binds them up from being able to give relief, or the obligation
to the Oath they take will not permit them. To show the tenderness and
compassion, which otherwise (I am persuaded) their consciences would carry them
forth to practice, since most of the Suitors that come before them appear so
miserably ruined, that the very distressednes of their condition is motive
enough to incite the mercy of their Judges, especially, their crime being only
the refusal of an Oath, which they solemnly profess is against their
consciences, and I am sure is against our Laws; And truly as often as I reflect
upon the strange severity of that Oath, my soul goes forth in pity toward
them that are concerned in it; since even their thoughts are not free, but an
absolute force laid upon the most inward cogitations of their hearts, and
themselves compelled to condemn themselves by accusations wrested out of their
own mouths.

Upon the ceasing of the former Committees authority, these 7. (which now sit
Judges of Delinquency and sequestrations) were empowered about 25. Jan. 1649,
since which time they and their subcommissioners in the several Counties have
made many discoveries both of delinquents and Papists estates, either not
before sequestered, or not compounded for at the full value, but I observed that
they who were sequestered or had their rents or goods unduly taken from them, in
the time of the former Committees for Sequestrations, how unjustly soever,
could not be relieved by these Commissioners, nor any other power, but by the
Parliament it self.

It was the Case of Mr. Robert Knightley a Recusant only, a great part of whose
Mansion house in Essex was pulled down to repair the Fort at Tilbury, for which
he petitioned at Haberdash^rs hall in December. 1651, to have satisfaction out of
the 2 sequestered parts of his own lands there. But in regard it appeared to be
done before Ian. 1649, the present Commissioners answer was, they had no power
to relieve him.

And in all other Cases upon Appeals, where it appears, that rents have been
unduly received to the States use for 7 or 8 years last past, in wrong to the
true owner of the lands; These Commissioners in such case make restitution
only from Jan. 1649; And for money, goods, or personal estate unduely seized
or sequestered before that time, they make no restitution at all.

This seemed strange to me; for by the same rule, if the present Commissioners
should sequester half the lands and goods in England right or wrong, and then
be displaced and new Commissioners established, who have no power to review and
consider the acts of their predecessors, in time we may all come to be
sequestered, and yet be without appeal, except to the Parliament, who have too
many public obligations to spend their thoughts in particular businesses.

On the 11th of Feb. 1651, there was heard the case of one Mr. Parker, the Lord
Morleys only son, about 14 years of age, he petitioned for maintenance out of
his fathers sequestered estate, but because it was suspected the child might
incline to his fathers Religion, who is a Papist, it was denied him, unless he
might be taken both from Father and Mother, and committed to the government of
a mere stranger, which was ordered accordingly, and the poor pittance of 100 l.
per ann. only allowed him, out of his own and fathers estate.

In Feb. 1651. Mr. James Hanham of the West Petitions the Commissioners at
Haberdashers Hall to this effect, that he had never acted any thing against the
Parliament yet two parts of his estate were sequestered with such rigor for his
Recusancy, that he could not possibly subsist with necessaries by the remaining
thirds, when Taxes and other charges were deducted: That he was therefore
constrained to borrow 50 l. upon Bond, and having disbursed 15 l. of the money,
it seems the Sequestrators got notice that the Petitioner had somewhat in his
house worth a new Sequestration or review, as they call it, thereupon they
search his trunks, finding the remaining 35 l. pull out the guilty bag, and two
parts of it they sequester into their own pockets, to the use of the
Commonwealth, and for relief therein Mr. Hanham appealed, but found no redress
at present, more then Order for the sub-Commissioners in the Country to
examine the business and certify, etc. At the return of whose Certificate, I
leave the Petitioner to expect his doom.

On the 31 of March, 1652. the Petition of one Hamond or Ammot was read, to
this effect, That the Petitioner did never bear Arms nor assist the Enemies of
the Parliament, yet his estate had lain under sequestration ever since the year
1645. and not one penny allowed him for his maintenance. That the Petitioner,
being a Recusant, did in the time of the late war continue at his own house, as
long as he could without apparent danger of his life, but considering how
obnoxious even the most peaceable of his religion were to be affronted and
ruined, by the daily mischiefs they received from some disorderly Soldiers,
and especially seeing one of his neighbors (a Recusant) slain at his own door,
the Petitioner did then and not before, fly for protection to a Garrison of the
late Kings, without acting any thing in the least kind against the Parliament.
And therefore humbly prayed he might have a fifth of his estate and the arrears
allowed him to buy bread. But it not appearing to the Commissioners that he had
wife or children, their answer was, they had not power to grant him any relief.

Nor do I believe this man's Case to be singular; for I am well satisfied, that
a great part of those Papists, who are sequestered as absolute Delinquents, were
never in actual arms against the Parliament, but only fled to the Enemies
Garrisons for shelter, yet no qualification or difference in punishment is
hitherto allowed them, which would be to my understanding very just and
reasonable; since who ever did observe the fury and rage of most of our Common
Soldiers (at the beginning of the late troubles) against many of that party,
will easily conclude the Papists had reason to distrust their own personal
security amongst them. And for instance I remember an Officer of my
acquaintance under the Earl of Manchester told me, that at their taking of
Lincola from the Cavaliers, in the year 1644. he was an eye witness of this
Tragedy. The next day after the Town was taken, some of our common Soldiers in
cold blood (meeting with Mr. Price of Washingley in Huntington shire a Papist)
asked him, Art thou Price the Papist? I am (said he) Price the Roman Catholic,
whereupon one of them immediately shot him dead.

In the same month of March there happened at this Hall a very hard case,
which was of a maid servant (whose name I do not remember) but her Petition was
to this effect. That her Father and mother both died when she was but sixteen
years of age, and being very poor, they left the Petitioner only some old
clothes and a little household stuff, in all not worth above five or six pounds,
after whose death the Petitioner, being an Orphan betook her self to service,
and having served seventeen years for the annual wages of seven nobles, the
Petitioner had by her frugality increased her small patrimony to twenty pounds,
which being placed in the hands of A. B, and of late discovered to be the
Petitioners money, and the Petitioner a Recusant, she prayed that they would
take the sad and disconsolate condition of a poor orphan into their charitable
consideration, whereby the extremity of the Law might be qualified to so
merciful a temper that she might not be utterly ruined, by losing in a moment
for her conscience, what she had been so long in gathering by the sweat of her
brows. But the Commissioners (though perhaps otherwise willing) concluded they
had not power to give her any relief more then the bare thirds, unless she
would take the oath of Abjuration, a thing as far at least above her
understanding, as it can be against her Conscience.

If it be unreasonable, (as many well affected seem to urge) that the Ministers
who do or at least should perform some spiritual office for the good of the
Soul) should tithe a tenth part of the Husbandmans labor: How much more
unreasonable is it, that a poor silly maid servant should thus merely upon the
account of Conscience, be sequestered of two thirds of that, which by many
years labor, she had gained and reserved as a support against the necessities
of old age.

On the 16 of April 1652. The Case of Mistress Church of Essex, a Recusant, was
heard, whose Petition spoke to this effect, That her late husband in his life
time settled a Lease of Muck-hall (or such like name) in Essex of considerable
value upon her in lieu of Joincture, for diverse years yet in being, and was
held of the late Dean and Chapter of Paul's that Alderman Andrews or Mr.
Nathaniel his son, had bought the Reversion of those Lands at Gurney house, and
since taken a Lease for seven years of the Commissioners for sequestration in
Essex of the whole present possession, without the Petitioners consent or
knowledge, and without any regard to her thirds; and that the said Mr. Andrews
having now possession of the whole estate, had demolished the Petitioners
Mansion house, and did refuse to pay the Petitioner her thirds, whereby she was
driven to a necessity of wanting bread, being a distressed and friendlesse
widow of almost 80 years of age, she therefore prayed her thirds, and the
arrears, and that the said Lease might be annulled, etc.

The first was charitably granted, but as to the Lease and what her thirds
should be, she was left to the mercy of Mr. Andrews, who I fear does forget
what the Father of mercies says in Jeremy 22. 3. Execute judgment and
righteousness, and deliver the spoiled out of the hands of the oppressor, and
do no wrong, do no violence to the stranger, and fatherless, and widow, etc,
And in Matthew. 23. 14. Woe unto you Scribes, and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye
devour widows houses, and for a pretense make long prayer; therefore ye shall
receive the greater damnation.

That which in this Case did most exact my observation, was, That Mr. Andrews
(a person of quality) should make use of his power against a poor widow, and
should be present, and openly avow the taking of her estate over her head; with
so little regard to the thirds, which is allowed her by the Act of Parliament,
and so much to his own benefit, without which, it is like he would not have
taken it, and with which the Petitioner must needs suffer.

From Haberdashers Hall give me leave to make a step into Moorefields where on
the 19 of May 1650 being the Lords day, Rich. Ledsam and one Led bealer, two
Pursivants apprehended Robert Segar, a poor old decrepit man, upon a supition,
(and 'twas but a suspicion) that he had been at the Spanish Ambassadors at
Mass, upon this bare surmise the poor man was searched, and in his pockets
they found an old prayer book, whereupon he was carried before a Justice of
Peace, and committed to the Gatehouse at Westminster, where he lay in the
common Goal till the Quarter Sessions in Jan. 1951. being full 20 months,
without any charge or proceedings against him, and that Sessions was acquitted
by Proclamation, through the mercy of Justice Scobell, but he is still detained
prisoner, (this being now April 1652,) by Mr. weeks the keeper of the Prison,
for the rent of his lodging, for which the keeper demands 14 pence a week
beside Fees, and yet (as I am credibly informed) the old man lay on the boords
in the common Goal, and had no other pillow for his head, but a hard stone,
for which he must now pay more then he is worth, or continne in Prison, being
86 years of age.

And now I am at the Gatehouse I shall give you the supplement of a like sad
story mentioned in the 21 page of the first part of this Moderator, concerning
a great bellied Gentlewoman, committed to Prison on the 24th of June 1651. her
name upon enquiry I find was Delavall, an Englishwoman, but her Husband a
Frenchman; she was committed also to the Gatehouse, and with much importunity
got leave by Petition to go out upon bail till she was brought to bed, but was
an actual Prisoner full 7 Months of the 12; which is prescribed by the
Statute, and a fine of 100 Marks stood charged upon her, till she was relieved
by the late gracious Act of General Pardon and Oblivion, (An Act that no less
obliges all the People of this Nation to forget their private injuries, then to
remember the public mercy of the Parliament) and all this poor woman's
sufferings merely grounded upon a bare supposition, that she had been at the
then French Agents in Long acre at Mass, without so much as one witness, that
there was any Mass said there at all, it being the truth of the Case (if I may
believe their most serious Protestations) that they were only at their other
private devotions.

But to return to Haberdashers Hall. I perceived in my observations there, that
besides the cases before recited, it was a familiar thing to see Papists I mean
single Papists, without the adjunct of Delinquency) outed of the possession of
the two sequestered thirds of their estates, by any stranger, that would offer
in the box but 12 pence more then the owner; which has made diverse owners
strain themselves to give more rent to the State, than they could possibly make
of the two parts, rather than be outed of the possession of their ancient
patrimonies, and some of them have assured me, that it happens very often, that
neighbors either through covetousness or revenge (for who can live so
innocently as to procure no enemy, at least so happily as to have none,) set
themselves to outvy the owners, and then recompense the loss they have in the
great rent they pay, by misusing the Lands they hire in despite of the owner.
Besides many times when the proprietors have with much charge and long
attendance obtained Leases of the two parts for seven years in the Country in
pursuance of the Act of Parliament, after improvement of their estates by good
husbandry, they are again outted, and their Leases made void at this Hall,
under pretense of the want of some formality of Surveyng, posting, boxing or
the like, which it seems the instructions from these Commissioners do hold
forth to those below, yet those instructions are not made public, whereby the
parties interessed might be advised how to proceed regularly and certainly in a
business that so much concerns their subsistence.

Nor are the Recusants permitted to sell any of their Lands by Fining for the
two parts, though for payment of their just debts, nay though they should be
willing to transport themselves beyond the Seas; by which disablement to sell
or Morgage the least pile of grass they possess, many well affected suffer
much prejudice, by non-payment of their true and ancient Debts, but diverse of
the Papists are thereby driven to such extreme necessities, that they have
exposed their bare Thirds to Sale; though I perceive few Purchasers will meddle
therewith, unless upon very disadvantagious terms to the Seller, because the
Purchasers say, they are sure to contract a charge and trouble to themselves by
their attendance at this Hall: For in such Case, if the Papist can gain the
favor to have his Thirds partitioned from the other two; yet (as I heard it
argued) the State might, when he had sold such divided part, or by good
husbandry improved it, evict it from him, and assign him another Thirds of the
same Lands, that perhaps has been wasted by ill Tenants; For I found this much
complained of among the Petitioners, that the Sequestrators or such strangers
to whom the two parts are often demised, rarely or never bestow any money on
repair of the two thirds, but take the Rents as long as the house or Land will
yield any; which is one reason why such Customers many times out-bids the
owners for the renting of those two Thirds; the owners being always careful
to keep up the houses, and direct their Husbandry to the best advantage, and
embetterment of the Lands.

Others I observed to complain much of the long attendance, and great charge
they were at in gaining their Thirds, and an allowance of their Mansion houses,
and of the many and malicious false accusations, that Informers were permitted
to bring in against them: As (if I mistake not) I overheard some of the
Solicitors say, that the Lady Saint John's, or her Husband Mr. Arundell, had
been accused for Delinquency five or six several times, and still cleared it.
Witnesses have been often suborned to false accusations, and yet when the Party
injured (after long attendance and expense) has cleared himself of the calumny
and consequently proved the malice of the informer, no reparation would be
allowed for so dangerous a slander; insomuch that upon the whole matter I have
heard a Recusant (with tears in his eyes) profess seriously, that so much
attendance and charge was required in getting their Thirds, and such continual
fears and vexations attended their condition, that if he could by manufacture
or any other honest calling get a livelihood, he should easily resolve to let
his third part go after the other two.

The Commissioners themselves (sitting in a treble capacity, First for
compounding with Delinquents, Secondly for Advance of money upon the fifth and
twentieth parts, and thirdly for Sequestrations) can only spare Wednesday
mornings, for hearing Petitions upon Sequestrations, and commonly there is not
a Committee which must be at least four of the seven Commissioners) till after
ten of the Clock, by which means they can scarce afford two hours in a week for
the dispatch of that employment. So that whenever a suitor delivers in his
Petition, it is usually a full month, if not six weeks before it comes to be
heard in course, and a great part of this time he must attend, and perhaps
retain Council several days before his business will be heard.

These complaints, (for ought I could possibly be informed) are not only true
but far short of what this sort of people suffers; which so much the more
afflicts my Soul, by how much I consider the sufferers to be Christians and
Natives of England, and the entire cause of all their sufferings to be only
their unsatisfaction in certain points of Religion; a thing that is altogether
out of their own power, and absolutely depends upon the good pleasure of Gods
holy Spirit.

I omit to speak of the sub-Commissioners for Sequestrations in the several
Counties of this Commonwealth, as having hitherto had little means to inform
my self of their several proceedings, and considering them obliged to pursue
the Instructions they receive from those above; only this I can say of some of
them, whom I have conversed with, that they seem to grant, that Sequestration
of Papists Estates, upon the sole account of Religion, is not in their opinion
warranted by Gods Word, but rather the contrary; And yet these men continue
their employments, which I fear will expose them to the censure of
worldly-minded and avaritious selfe-seekers: And I pray God that whilst they
charge others with Idolatry, they be not found guilty of it themselves, Ephesians.
5. 5.
since the Scripture says expressly, That a Covetous man is an Idolater.

But it being apparent that the Oath of Abjuration is the wrack which torments
so many Consciences, I did therefore in the former part of this Discourse
propound some Quaeries upon that Oath, And shall now humbly add, (as not
improper for this subject) what the before mentioned Sir Alexander Irving
lately said, in answer to Master John Rue, Moderatour of the Presbytery of
Aberdeen, concerning constraint of conscience, and enforcing Oaths: his very
words are these. I do acknowledge that which you say concerning Oaths, that
God is honored by them; yet that must receive some limitations, or else it
would prove very false, they must be taken in Judgment, in truth, and upon
necessity: Now I appeal to your own Consciences, whether ye have observed these
Conditions in your urging so many dreadful Oaths upon this miserable Nation
these years bypast, not only in the Covenant, but in your solemn League with
your Presbyterian brethren of England, whereby ye enforced all men to swear to
establish by Arms, that Tyranny there, as ye had done here: how many have ye
enforced (by threatening and Execution of your Kirk censure, and the severity of
the Civil Law, following upon them, depriving men of their Estates) to swear
and subscribe to all ye enjoined or could invent, albeit ye know them to be of
far contrary Judgments, wherein ye did imitate that feigned and false Mother,
who before Solomon was contented to have the Child divided, whereby her
Hypocrisy was found out by that brave Prince: by which means ye have made this
Nation guilty of perjury, besides many other heinous sins: I wish to God you
had remembered, or would yet remember, how much you cried out against the
Tyranny of Bishops, (when they were urging some of your number, who were
refractory to Episcopacy) that there should be had some regard to tender
Consciences, which were of another Judgment, But so soon as ye had got the
power into your hands, neither Minister nor Lord, Man, Woman, or Child, was
spared, nor any regard had unto them, whatsoever quality or condition they were
of, all were forced not only to obey you, but (which is the greatest tyranny
over men's Consciences) they were made to swear, that they thought, as ye would
have them, albeit to your own knowledge many thought the contrary, etc. The
whole Answer, which bears dare, 20 Jan. 1651. is worth the reading, and is
Printed in the Diurnall, Numb. 118. I pray Christ a great part of the same
arguments may not be turned against us, for enforcing this Oath of Abjuration
so positively against men's Consciences.

And since we all say, that we abhor to violence and force any ones Conscience
farther then to secure the public peace, and that only as necessity shall
really appear, and not upon any Voluntary or Counterfeit pretense, I cannot see
how the taking of this Oath avails to make a man, either a better Neighbor, or
a better Subject. I cannot see that the Parliament confides any more in those
whom they have frighted to take it, nor any places of trust committed to them
in reward of their conformity, and indeed there is less reason, in my opinion
to rely upon such as are involuntarily drawn to an outward compliance, then
even those that stand out their Sequestrations, as being more exasperated
against us by our severe proceedings, since there can be no greater cause of
resentment and hatred then the remembrance to have been compelled by us
publicly to swear against their Consciences, unless their Judgments be
really changed, and then all penalties to enforce them are superfluous, which
leads me the direct way to this clear conclusion that such Oaths are always
either absolutely pernicious or altogether unnecessary, if against the inward
Judgment, damnable; if according to it, useless.

Since then the receiving such an Oath against the Conscience is the highest
degree of perjury and spiritual murder of the soul, let us sadly consider,
how disadvantagious to the work of the Lord, and scandalous to the eyes of men
it will be, for us to fill up our Congregations with such unsanctified Members:
The ingenious Author of Mer. Poli^i^us, (Numb. 99. page 1554.) has an
admirable Discourse upon this Subject. If we seriously reflect ( says he) upon
the design of God, in bringing Christ into the world, we shall find it was to
set an end to that pompous administration of the Jewish form, that as his
Church and people were formerly confined within the Narrow Pale of a particular
Nation, so now the Pale should be broken down, and all Nations taken into the
Church. Not all Nations in a lump: nor any whole Nations, or National Bodies
to be formed into Churches: For his Church or people now under the Gospel, are
not to be a body Political, but Spiritual and Mystical: not a promiscuous
confusion of persons taken in at adventure, but an orderly collection, a
picking and choosing of such as are called and Sanctified, etc. Not a company
of men forced in by commands and constitutions of worldly power and prudence,
but of such as are brought in by the power and efficacy of Christ's Word and
Spirit. For he himself has said, My Kingdom is not from hence; My Kingdom is
not of this World, etc. And therefore that hand which has hitherto presumed in
most Nations, to erect a power called Eccclesiastick, in equipage to the
Civil, to bear sway, and bind men's Consciences to certain Notions ordained for
Orthodox upon civil penalties, under color of prudence, good order,
discipline preventing of heresy, and advancing of Christ's Kingdom; and to
this end has twisted the spiritual power (as they call it) with the worldly
and secular Interest of State; this (I say) has been the very right hand of
Antichrist, opposing Christ in his way, whose Kingdom, being not of this
world, depends not upon the helps and devises of worldly wisdom. Thus that
excellent Pen. And a quick-sighted and judicious member of Parliament, in my
hearing, being made acquainted (as with a supposed grateful news) that some
indifferent Christians, (who profess amongst their old acquaintance no real
satisfaction of Conscience, but only a design to save their Estates) had
taken the Oath of Abjuration and conformed, said; Truly our purchase therein is
very little, and the Papists loss, much less.

In confirmation of this assertion, I may here cite the case of Mr. Anthony
Roan, who was executed at Vsk in Monmouth sheire on the 4th of April 1650, for
poisoning his Wife; This Gent the very hour before his execution, made a
public confession to this purpose; That he had been bred a Roman Catholic
from his infancy, and continued in that Religion till some two or three years
before his death, when, being overcome by an unhappy necessity of preserving
his family from beggary, he forsook the Belief of his own Soul, and went to
Church to save his Estate; after which, (the Devil taking advantage upon him in
this disturbance and anxiety of Spirit) he confessed that he had fallen into many
great Sins, but denied the guilt of that horrid crime of poisoning his wife,
for which he was condemned to die; delivering further with a kind of
confidence, that if he had had the grace to have continued constant in his
Religion, he believed he had never so highly transgressed the Commandments of
his God, nor come to so unhappy an end. And openly declared (with much seeming
repentance) that he dyed in his old Religion.

Certainly this is a sad consequence of wresting the inward persuasion of poor
Souls from that Belief, which their own Conscience tells them is truth, thereby
making them less careful of their salvation, and their honesty and credit of
less repute, even with those, who force them to this change, For the heart of
man is so frail and deceitful, that it seldom is drawn by violence from those
principles, which it has long been used to esteem and practice, but becomes
slack and negligent in what concerns the other World, and by degrees very often
wholly insensible of any thing, but sensuality.

UPon the news not long since, of some Papists taking the Oath of Abjuration,
and frequenting the public places of meeting, I conceived my self
sufficiently furnished to answer a certain old saying, which a Recusant of my
acquaintance used often to repeat in my hearing, that SANGUIS MARTYRUM EST
SEMEN ECCLESIAE: This upon all occasions he applied the sufferings of Papists,
both here in England, and ten thousand miles off in Japan, in which two Islands
have of late been sharper persecutions, (said he) for matter of Religion, then
in any other place of the world; This he continually insisted upon, as a
Sovereign remedy for all his sorrows, nor could we ever beat him from his last
hold, wherein he fortified himself, SANGUIS MARTYRUM, etc. nay more, he
sometimes ventured to affirm with strange assurance, this assertion, that this
Church increased and prospered still, even whilst it was actually under the
greatest pressures, that his Church was, as the Palm tree, the heavier weights
are laid on, the more it flourishes.

I having gotten this advantage by the late coming in of some Papists to our
Religion, went presently on purpose to my Recusant to put him to the question,
and as it were a little triumphing, demanded what he thought now of his old
Latin Proverb (in which he had formerly seemed to place so much confidence)
and whither the Palm tree did not sometimes break a twigg by laying on so many
weights; To which he replied with a little suddenness and Choler, That some
dead, or Canker-eaten Branches, as they can bear no weight, so they can bear no
fruit, even whilst united to the Stock and much less after their division: But
soon recovering himself to his usual temper, he calmly, yet earnestly
undertook, that as there have been at least twenty Priests put to death in
England since the beginning of this Parliament, merely upon the account of
their Religion or function, so he could name a far greater number of persons
of quality, who have in this same space of time reconciled themselves to the
Catholic Union. When I urged him to the proof of this assertion, he
immediately delivered me a list of twenty Priests, who during these late
revolutions had been hanged, drawn and quartered either for taking orders
beyond Seas, or exercising them on this side the Seas, and with all promised
(upon the allowance of a little time for recollection) to furnish me with a
Roll of some names, who have lately declared themselves Catholics,
undertaking, if he was deceived in any name, to recompense such Error, with
the interest of two for one, unless he might be dispensed with upon the
inconveniency of discovering those, who can no longer live unruined for their
Religion, then they are unknown to profess it.

The PRIESTS executed in several places since the Year 1641. were these;
Mr. William Ward. Mr. Raynolds. Mr. Roe. Mr. Edward Morgan. Mr. Bullaker. Mr.
Holland. Mr. Heath. Mr. Francis Bell. Mr. Ducket. Mr. Corbet. Mr. Morse. Mr.
Phillip Powell. Mr. Peter Wright.
Executed at Tyburne. Mr. Lockwood. Mr. Caterick.
Executed at York. Mr. Green, Executed at Dorchester. Mr. Barlow. Mr. Reading.
Mr. Whitaker. Mr. Thompson
Executed at Lancaster.
Besides, Master Tho. Vaughan (after very hard usage aboard Capt. Moltons Ship)
soon after dyed at Cardiffe in South- Wales.

Mr. John Goodman. Mr. Henry Myners. Mr. Peter Wilsford. Mr. John Hamond. Mr.
Colman. Mr. Rivers, etc.
Dyed Prisoners in the Common-Goale at Newgate since the year 1641.

Besides diverse who are now continued in prison.

Now I humbly thank the Lord Christ, there was only one of these Priests whom
I mentioned in the first part of this Discourse put to death, since this Nation
was established in the present Government, and I wish from my Soul, that his
life had also been spared; since my obligations to this Commonwealth and the
present Governors thereof are such, that I am bound every day to offer up my
sighs and prayers to the Lord, that no blood of any peaceable Christian be
spilt for the only difference of judgment in Religion: for certainly whosoever
shall practice such cruelty, will be called to a strict and rigorous account at
the judgment of the great Day.

But proceeding to require of my Recusant the performance of his word con-
certain the late Converts he so much gloried in, I merrily threatened him, that
if he observed not his promise, I would presently not only suspect some secret
evasion in him, but cry out against all Papists as juglers and equivocaters, or
else, I being an Heretic, no Faith was to be kept with me, and though the
present matter be of a trivial consequence, yet we know the Welshman stole
Rushes to to keep his hand in ure.

He first seriously redeemed his word by delivering me this following
Catalogue, and then merrily answered by jesting, with wonder at my hardiness,
how I durst stay in London, since the last letters from Amsterdam discover so
dangerous a plot intended by the Papists and Cavaliers against this Town, they
have these many Months held a secret intelligence with all Engineers and
Mill-makers of Holland, and hired them forthwith to prepare a thousand such
Engines as we use to quench scare-fires, and these Van Trump (who has been a
long time Popishly affected, and a rank Cavalier ever since he was Knighted)
undertakes to bring up so privately to the very Bridge, that in one night they
may be planted all along the River, and drown even Paul's it self, by squirting
all the water in the Thames upon the City. Now if you ask a Papist whether he
know of any such conspiracy, he will presently cast about in his thoughts to
retrive some mental reservation, and then down right deny that ever he heard
any such thing. But to return from this feigned Story of the Recusant to the
real History of his new Proselites, amongst whom he reckoned these following:
But pretended prudentiall reasons to excuse his concealment of many others.

1. The Countess of Denby. 2. The Lady Kelimekin. 3. The Lord Cottington. 4.
Thomas Vane, Doctor of Divinity. 5. Hugh Paulin De Cressy, one of the late
prebends of Wyndsor. 6. Sir Marmaduke Langdale. 7. Sir Francis Doddington. 8.
Sir Theophilus Gilby. 9. Mistress Bridget Feilding. 10. Doctor Baily. 11.
Doctor Cosen only Son. 12. Dr. Goff, entered into the Religious order of the
Oratorians at Paris. 13. Master Peter Gule of Balliol College in Oxford. 14.
Mr. Richard Nicolls Bachelor of Divinity of Peter-house Cambridge. 15. Mr.
Richard Crashaw, Master of Arts of Peter-house Cambridge, well known for his
excellent Poems. 16. Master William Rowlands of Exeter College, in Oxford. 17.
Captain Thomas Cook. 18. Master Edward Barker of Caius College, Cambridge. 19.
Master Temple. 20. Master Osborne, etc.
I must ingenuously confess, I knew not well what answer to make the Papist in
this point, but still to express my dislike of such persecution even of any
sort of Christians: And am very confident, that were they treated more
mercifully and invited to come to our spiritual conferences, (which my
Recusant told me he would not at any time refuse, were it only to discourse in
an amicable Christian way the points in difference between us) we should gain
more of them to us or at least hinder the growth of their Religion more, then
any tortures of body or Sequestrations of their Estates are like to do.

Nor is it reasonable to exact from such as dissent from us any other kind of
presence at our exercises, then to propose their difficulties in a modest and
peaceable way, and pariently to hear our answers, without expecting they should
presently join with the Congregation; for that were to oblige them, to profess
before they are satisfied, and practice before they know what it is they do;
Whereas the Scripture commands us first to try all things, and then hold fast
that which is best.

Some, who have not only the form but the power of Godliness in this Nation,
have of late in order to the advancement of Christ's Kingdom) been induced to
move and endeavor a re-admittance of the Jews amongst us, in hope to be happy
instruments in their conversion, which the Scripture holds forth in the II to
the Romans. And why shall we not also (upon like grounds of Christian Charity)
endeavor the conversion of all other people of different persuasions in point
of Christianity, by being merciful unto them, as our heavenly Father is
merciful. Luke 6. 36.

But nothing so afflicts my Spirit, as to consider the cruel gripes we give
the Papists, in respect of the light hand, which the Turk himself bears over
his Christians; To which purpose I shall here humbly offer an exact Parallel of
the Papists sufferings in England, to the condition of the Christians in Turkey.
First clearing one easy objection, whereat some godly people seem to scruple;
They think the Papists here suffer for some other fault, and not only for
difference of judgment in Religion, which is an evident mistake; for if their
burdens be not laid on for their different judgments, why are they taken off,
when they conform and become indifferent in their judgment? why should their
receiving the Oath of Abjuration deliver them from all penalties and
Sequestrations, if those penalties and Sequestrations be not inflicted upon
them, merely for holding some opinions, which that Oath obliges them to
renounce. Others even of the best affected have often in my hearing affirmed,
that certainly that Oath was only intended as a means of discovery, for the
Magistrate to know, in whom he may confide; But why then is it used so much
beside their supposed intention? or what need of annexing any penalty, which
sure is the greatest hinderance of discovery; For were there no danger in being
a known refuser of that Oath, few would be so diligent in concealing
themselves, lest they should be known to refuse it. Nor indeed is this Oath
ever offered to any upon the single ground of diffidence in their affections to
the present Government, but only to such as are suspected of Popery.

But to return to the comparison I began to mention between the state of
Papists in England, and of Christians in the Turks Dominions, I find by the
best information I can gather, the great Turks manner of bearing himself to his
Christian Subjects to be strangely more temperate and less accusable of
cruelty or covetousness, then we Christians use to one another; for as our
travelers unanimously relate the whole annual fine that any Christian pays
the Grand Signiniour upon the score of Religion, comes to no more then a
Zecheen, which is less then our Angel.

And yet what ever we can object against our Papists, the Turk may with at
least as much reason charge upon his Christians; Some Ancestors of the
Christians heretofore have taken up arms, and conspired with Forraigners about
the established Government of their Country; and yet the Mohammedan (whom we so
much abominate as tyrannical and barbarous) can forgive the posterity of such
undeserving Parents, and let them live quietly under so small an annual
tribute for their Religion. Whereas our selves (whom we so highly commend for
Christian meekness and charity) can never forget the Crimes of a few Papists,
never give over punishing the Children for the faults of the fathers.

The Christians under the Turk, cannot certainly be free from suspicion of
being disaffected to their Magistrate, both upon former practices, and the
Principles of their Religion; yet rests he satisfied with disarming them, and
excluding them from all Offices of Trust, and places of Importance, to the
Interest of Government. Whereas we are so far from contenting our selves with
such prudentiall cautions for our security, that we proceed to seize upon the
best part of their estates, which in a short time must of necessity reduce them
to absolute ruin and desperation: And yet there is one considerable ground of
suspicion altogether unapplyable to the Papists of England, which is, that the
Turk came from a strange Country, to invade at once both the Empire and
Religion of the Grecians; whereas the Papists are all Natives of this Land,
born with the same title to the common Liberties, that our selves have, and for
Religion they only stand peremptory in their old way, professing to be
altogether unsatisfied concerning the Reformation we hold forth unto them: In
which Case it is certainly a more Christian and pious method to settle a way of
instruction for them to save their souls, then to labor so much in drawing up
new instructions for our Sequestrators to ruin their estates.

Nor do the Turks insist upon that common objection, That Christians no where
suffer Turks, and therefore no reason they should tolerate the Christians, as
tasting more of womanish spite and revenge, then manly nobleness and
gallantry: How would these unhappy misled souls exceed us Christians in
moderation toward such as are otherwise minded, if they had read that Golden
Rule of our Savior; that we should render good for evil.

But the inhumane practice of the Turk in taking away so many Children from the
Christian Parents is extremely cruel and detestable, though as Sir Henry Blount
(a person both completely learned, and perfectly civil) observes in his voyage
to the Levant, when that Custom was first introduced, many politic reasons
might be alleged to excuse (not justly) so wicked tyrannical an institution,
if he could have so much as excused his wicked and tyrannical usurpation; The
Christians being very numerous, and by a barbarous stranger newly deprived of
the Dominion of their Country; All which circumstances naturally increase, and
heighten the suspicion of an Usurper, whose sight was certainly far less sharp
then his sword, if he did not clearly see that his new conquered Subjects might
perhaps for a time want an opportunity, but neither will, reason nor strength
to attempt, by his expulsion the just Recovery of their own liberties.

But since the affairs of Turkey are so established that the Musselman has no
longer any jealousy of the Christians those unnatural cruelties of plundering
the Parent of his Child are altogether laid aside, and the Christians permitted
to purchase with a small Fine a dispensation, and every one now enjoys this
comfortable liberty, as they give their Children birth, so to guide their
education.

Not one of these considerations, but argues in favor of the present Papists
amongst us; Not one of these exceptions are they obnoxious to, their number
being small and inconsiderable, their posture naked and disarmed, and the door
long since by other powers shut against them, to all advantages in the Nation:
by which means they have neither so much disobligation to the present
Government, nor any possibility to work the least disturbance of its peace.

And therefore, however upon the first Reformation it was necessary to take a
sharp and resolute course for diminution of the Papists power, yet since they
are reduced to so low and weak a condition, that we cannot handsomely even
feign a danger from them, it is become now unnecessary, and consequently (by
our own maxims) unlawful to continue the same penalties upon them: No other
cause being truly sufficient to justify our punishing others, but a true
necessity of preserving our selves.

And these I conceive may be by the reasons, why the Papists have of late made
their addresses to these Gentlemen, that are appointed by Parliament for
regulation of the Laws, building their hope upon this ground, that as the
causes of so great severity against them are ceased, the sad and ruinous
effects may no longer be continued; And certainly they could not have chosen a
more proper way to obtain relief, than the applying of themselves to the
Committee, it being compounded of persons, whose abilities bear an excellent
proportion to the greatness of the work they have undertaken, having in one
half year seen further into the defects of our Law, and the excesses of its
practice, than many ages formerly have been able to discover, and whose
integrity is so remarkable, that in the short space of a few months, they have
designed a perfect reform of more Errors, than many Ages formerly have been
willing to search into. So that as their Charity has already provided a
favorable course of mercy for the poor, their extreme industry and sincerity
promises a speedy settlement of an equal and impartial course of justice for
all others. To this Committee the Recusants presented these two following
Papers, the first of which began with this Title.

The Honoura^le Committee for Regulating the Laws is most humbly desired by
the Catholic Recusants to take this Schedule of the Penal Laws against them,
into their just, serious and favorable consideration.
1. THE second refusal of the Oath of Supremacy punished as high Treason, 5
Eliz. 1.

2. To maintain or extol Authority in the Sea of Rome, the second time, high
Treason. 5 Eliz. 1.

3. To obtain or put in ure any Bull from Rome, high Treason. 13 Eliz. 2.

4. To persuade or reconcile, or to be reconciled to the Roman Religion, High
Treason. 23 Eliz. 1 and 3. Jac. 4.

5. For Jesuit or Priest made by authority from the Pope, to come to remain in
the Kings Dominions, high Treason. 27 Eliz. 2.

6. So for remaining in a Seminary six months after Proclamation, and afterward
returning, high Treason. 27 Eliz. 2.

1 For concealing of a Bull or other Instrument from Rome, or Reconciliation
offered, punished as misprision of Treason. 13 Eliz. 2.

2 To maintain, or conceal those who persuade, or are reconciled to the Roman
Religion, misprision of Treason. 23 Eliz. 1.

1 To receive, relieve, or comfort Jesuit or Priest, knowing him to be such
alone, punished as felony. 27 Eliz. 2.

2 To refuse to abjure the Realm, being commanded, or to return without
License, Felony. 35 Eliz. 1, 2.

3 To go and serve a Foreign Prince, having not before taken the Oath of
Alegiance, and entered bond not to be reconciled to the Roman Religion, Felony.
3 Jac. 4.

1 The first refusal of the Oath of Supremacy is punished as in case of a
Praemunire, which imports a forfeiture of all Lands and Goods, imprisonment for
life, and a deprivement of the benefit of the Law. 5 Eliz. 1.

2. To set forth, or defend power spiritual in the Sea of Rome, Praemunire. 5
Eli. 1.

3 To bring or receive any Agnus Dei, Crosses, Pictures, or such like from
Rome, Praemunire. 13 Eli 2. 2. 23 Eliz. 1.

4 To aid any person who has put in ure any Bull from the Sea of Rome,
Praemunire. 13 Eliz. 2. 23 Eliz. 1.

5 To send, or give relief to any continuing in Colleges, or Seminaries beyond
Praemunire. 27 Eliz. 2.

6 Refusal of the Oath of Alegeance upon the second tender, Praemunire. 3 Jac.
4. and 7 Jac. 6.

1 For not discovering of Priests made beyond the Seas, imprisonment. 27 Eliz.
2.

2 Upon indictment of Recusancy by Proclamation, imprisonment. 29 Eliz. 6.

3 For refusal to go to Church, or to be present at the reading of the
Common Prayer, imprisonment without bail. 35 Eliz. 1.

4 Those that are not able, or fail to pay their forfeitures, are to be
imprisoned; until payment, or conformity. 23 Eliz. 1.

5 Women Covert imprisoned for refusal of the Oath of Alegeance. 3 Jac. 4.

6 For non-payment of twelve-pence for every Sunday, imprisonment. 3 Jac. 4.

7 Woman Covert convicted for Recusancy imprisoned till her husband pay ten
pounds a month, or a third part of his Lands. 7 Jac. 6.

8 Standing excommunicated for Recusancy, House may be broken up for his
apprehension. 7 Jac. 6.

1 Those who shall forbear to come to Church, by the space of twelve months,
bound to the good behavior, with surety in the Kings Bench. 23 Eliz. 1.

1 Every Recusant is confined to five miles compass for life. 23 Eliz. 2.

2 To ten miles distant from London 3 Jac. 5.

3 Not to come into the house where the King, or his Heir apparent is. 3 Jac. 5.

1 For absence from Church Service every Sunday 12d forfeited. 1 Eliz. 2.

2 And for every Holiday, twelve-pence forfeited. 3 Jac. 4.

3 For absence from Common Prayer every month, twenty pounds forfeited. 23
Eliz. 1. and 3 Jac. 4.

4 For default of payment of twenty pounds a month, all Goods, two parts of
Land, and Leases forfeited. 29 Eliz 6. and 3 Jac. 4.

5 At the Kings election to take or refuse twenty pounds a month, or to take
two parts of the Recusants Estate. 3 Jac. 4.

6. All Copy hold Lands of Recusants forfeited. 25 Eliz. 2.

7 The forfeitures of the Ancestor charged upon his Heir being a Recusant. 1
Jac. 4.

8 A conformed Recusant forfeits for not receiving the Sacrament, according to
the Service Book, the first year twenty pounds, the second year forty pounds,
the third year, and every year after, sixty pounds. 3 Jac. 4.

9. To the Presenter out of the Recusants goods forty shillings forfeited, 3
Jac. 4.

10. For every Recusant sojourner and servant, ten pounds for every month
forfeited. 3. Jac. 4.

11. Two parts of Dower or Ioynture of a married woman forfeited, 3 Jac. 5.

12. Coming to Court, an hundred pounds forfeited. 3 Jac. 5.

13. For not baptising children according to the Service Book publicly within
a month after their birth, an hundred pounds forfeited. 3 Jac. 5.

14. For marrying otherwise then by a Minister, an hundred pounds forfeited 3
Jac. 5

15. For burying out of the Church or Churchyard 100 l. forfeited. 3 Jac. 5.

16. For sending Children beyond the Seas without license 100 l. forfeited. 1
Jac. 4.

17. For maintaining a Scoolmaster not going to Church or allowed to teach, for
every month ten pounds forfeited. 23 Eliz. 1. and 29 Eliz. 6.

18. And forty shillings per diem forfeited by the Schoolmaster and Recusant
that keeps him. 1 Jac. 4.

19, All Goods and Lands during life, for breach of confinement forfeited 23
Eliz. 2. and 3. Jac. 5.

20. The like forfeiture for going or sending Children beyond the Seas to be
bred in Popery. 3 Car. 2.

21. For residing within ten miles of London, 100 l. forfeited. 3 Jac. 5.

22. For practicing any Function expressed in the Statute of 3 Jac. 5. a
hundred pounds forfeited. 3 Jac. 5.

1. Disabled to reverse indictment, for want of form or other defect. 3. Jac. 4.

2. Disabled from the practice of several Functions whereby to gain their
livings, viz. from practicing Common Law, Civil Law, or being a Steward,
Attorney Solicitor or Officer in any Court; From practicing Physic or being an
Apothecary; and from bearing any Office in camp, troop or band of Soldiers, or
in any Ship, Castle or Fortress. etc. 3 Jac. 5.

3. By the wifes Recusancy, the husband disabled from public Office or charge
in the Commonwealth. 3 Jac. 5.

4. By marrying otherwise then the Church of England allows, the husband
disabled to be tenant by Courtesy, the wife disabled to have Dower, joyncture
free, banks, or any part or portion of her husbands goods. 3 Jac. 5.

5, Disabled to sue or prosecute Actions, to present to a Benefice, to be
Executor, Administrator, or Guardian. 3 Jac. 5.

6. Children sent beyond the Seas without license are disabled to take benefit
of gift, conveyance, descent, or devise. 1 Jac. 4 and 3. Jac. 5.

1. Notwithstanding these forfeitures, Recusants are loss subject to
Ecclesiastical Sentences. 23 Eliz. 1. and 3 Jac. 45.

By the greatest part of pecuniary forfeitures, they are subject to grievous
vexations of Informers. The Statutes of double Subsidies, considering their
other payments are exceeding ^eavy.

Besides all these Laws, the late Ordinances of Sequestration upon refusal of
the Oath of Abjuration, by which, two third parts of all their estates real
and personal are forfeited. 1 April 1643. and 19 August 1643.

An Oath made by the Presbyterians, and intended only for the time of war. An
Oath by which we are forced to accuse and condemn our selves without any legal
proceedings or witness against us. An oath by which we are punished, not for
publishing any opinion to the disturbance of others, but only for believing;
which is to accuse and condemn men for the thoughts of their hearts. An oath
that contains in it matters of highest difficulty, yet are young and ignorant
persons, and even women without the least preceding Instruction, equally forced
to take it, or punished for refusing it.

And in the Instructions to the Sequestrators 22 October. 1643. they are charged
to seize and secure the Estates of all such persons, whom they suspect to be
within the reach of the Ordinance, and so leave them to the after-Game of
clearing themselves as they can; which is to punish before the Trial, nay even
before Answer of the accused.

In company of this long Roll of penal Statutes (made in former times upon
particular occasions) they presented also certain Arguments to induce a
mitigation of those Laws, so frightfull even in number, but far more harsh and
churlish in their Nature; upon the head of which second paper was this
Inscription.

Some few Motives, why Roman-Catholiques should not be forced out of their
Consciences by penalties imposed upon them merely for Religion.
ALL persecution for Religion is clearly repugnant to the principles of
freedom, 1. Principles of the pre^ent go^ernment.
so often and solemaly declared by the Parliament and Army, and now universally
received by all the Moderate and well-tempered people of this Nation: Nor can
it agree with the duty of any peaceable spirit, to distrust the performance of
so charitable a promise.

Many and evident texts of Holy Scripture (even according to the interpretation
of the more conscientious Protestants) expressly condemn all compulsion upon the
conscience, 2. Scripture.
recommending mildness and charity, as principal perfections to a Christian
Magistrate.

Besides these, Catholics have many considerations to be reflected on of a
more particular advantage to their Condition.

THe Crime imputed to them is only their continuance in that Religion, 1.
Ancient and quiet ^ossession.
which the whole Nation (till this last age) universally professed, ever since
its conversion from Paganism; And though time precisely considered, make not a
Religion true, yet certainly it may pretend to a fair title of exempting it
from persecution.

The Principles of their Religion are under all Governments the same, 2.
^nchan^eable.
and in their nature absolutely incapable of change; so that the Magistrate
once rightly informed of their Doctrine, and satisfied by promise of their
fidelity, may rest secure, that no danger can arise from them by innovation.

Since the points in controversy are generally thought not clear, 3. Education.
but difficult, especially by such in whom education (if it were no more) has
fixed a strong apprehension of the reasonableness of their cause, it would
appear severe (if not unreasonable) to force them by penalties to any new way,
or altogether restrain them from continuing in their old: Persuasions of that
kind, as by degrees they sink into the heart, so gently by degrees they are to
be removed.

Since they seriously and constantly profess, 4 ^atisfacti^n in their Religion.
that after all their prayers to God, and diligent reading of his Word, they
cannot find the least satisfaction in any other Religion, but that their souls
enjoy a perfect peace and serenity in their own; it seems very unsuitable to
Christian charity, either to compel them to a Religion, where their Consciences
cannot live in repose, or restrain them from a Religion, wherein only they
find comfort here, and hope for salvation hereafter.

Since all the signs and makes of tender Consciences are most apparently
discernable in Roman Catholics, 5 Tender Consciences.
they cannot but hope, the charity and indulgence universally held forth to
tender Consciences, will not universally be denied to them; they all suffer for
their Consciences an impoverisht and afflicted life, and many of them a cruel
and ignominous death; and can any rational and unpassionate person see so much
suffering for Conscience, and say the Sufferers have no Conscience?

As for Religion, it allows no vice or licenciousnesse against the Moral Law
(the proper subject of the Magistrates care) but strictly requires a Religious
severity against the corrupt inclinations of nature, and a Conscientious
observance both of the Law of God and Man.

Not one of all the Nation, 6 Even the most disaffected have Liberty.
how different soever in Religion, how disaffected soever to the quiet of this
Commonwealth, but enjoyes (by its allowance and protection) a perfect quiet
for his Conscience, only the Roman Catholics, though they have generally
taken, and punctually kept the Engagement, are singled out to misery and ruin,
merely upon the account of Religion.

Yet cannot all the heavy pressures they have so long endured make them lay
down their hopes to be at last relieved, especially from those, who profess
themselves not only bound by the light of Nature to deal with others, as they
would be dealt with themselves, but by the Law of Grace, even to render good
for evil.

The causes of imposing penalties upon Catholics, 7 Causes of punishing
ceased.
being now wholly ceased, they humbly hope it cannot be thought too great a
boldness in their duty to petition a re-admittance to the Common rights of
freeborn English men; since there is neither any Catholic Competitor for the
Crown, nor any such detestable conspiracy, as some few of their Religion have
been formerly guilty of: So that there remains no other charge, but that of
Conscience, to exclude them from the full enjoyment of the privileges of their
Native Country.

No question can be made of the fidelity of their Engagement, 8 Their Fidelity.
who esteem the keeping of an Oath sacred: and what stronger testimony can be
given to the world, than that of Catholics in freely offering up their
Estates to seizure, and their persons to all the inconveniences of a
persecuted life, rather than against their consciences dissemblingly to swear
one Oath; for could they with the Popes dispensation, or their own mental
reservation (which they are charged to be still furnished with their own
advantage) abjure the doctrine they believe, there remains nothing now to
distinguish them into that sad and miserable condition they are reduced to.

Were all burdens taken off from the Consciences of such as shall engage to
live peaceably and unoffensively in their Country, 9 Advantage^ at home and
abroad.
this Nation would rather improve its security at home, since coercence in
matters of belief has always been the chief cause of our troubles: And for
abroad, the same reason that begets a conceit of danger from the Catholics
correspondence with Foreign Princes, will convince a benefit, if by mercy they
be obliged to employ their credit in the service of their Benefactors.

Reasons why Composition is preferrable before Sale.
AND now we beg pardon humbly to offer up to the consideration and Compassion
of the iadifferent the most afflicted condition of many Catholics,
Compounding more beneficial to the State.
whose lands are now designed to be sold for their Delinquency. Most of which
in the beginning of the late War (seeing themselves unprotected by the Parl.
and exposed to the plunder of the then Soldiery) fled into the Kings Garrisons
to save their own lives, without taking up Arms to offend others. And even
they who actually engaged for the King (the sole disposal of all penal Laws
being in his power) were owners both of their lives and fortunes merely at his
pleasure, and yet notwithstanding so great a Plea for their excuse, as the
Supreme Law of self-preservation, they are all ready humbly to submit to
Composition: A proceeding which they hope will be condiscended unto, since it
is as well apparently more beneficial to the State, as less destructive to the
Compounders: for,

After all just claims and true debts allowed, and the vast expenses of
Surveyours, and other Officers deducted, the clear profit that arises upon
Sale, is, by experience, founded to come far short of what was expected. And
this after a tedious controversy about the allowance of encumbrances, very
chargeable to the Suitors and altogether unprofitable to the Commonwealth.

Besides Catholics are generally Tenants only for life, and as generally
subject (before the late troubles) to very many engagements really and
unavoidably charged upon their estates, unless such encumbrances be allowed,
thousands of well-affected people will be disappointed of their just debts.

Whereas by setting Rules for Composition, a greater sum may be raised, and
every one immediately bring his money into the public Treasury, without any
further charges, delay, or trouble, either to the Commonwealth or Compounders.

The Compounders will have a stronger Obligation to live quietly hereafter,
both by the fine they part with, and the estate they retain, advancing so much
to purchase their peace, and having still something to lose, if they break it.

The State will by this show to all the World, that they seek only the security
of the Government establish, and not the ruin or utter extirpation of any
private family.

These Motives and Reasons I have both seriously thought upon in my own spirit,
and often conferred about with others, and after all my endeavors I find them
so reasonable and satisfactory, that I confess they have not only moved my
Bowels to a compassion of such sufferers, but truly even to a zeal of their
relief, so far I mean, as that they, who neither disturb the public Peace of
the Commonwealth, nor refuse their Contributions to maintain it, should no
longer be compelled by Oaths and sequestrations to act against their
consciences.

Besides, these diligences of late used by the Papists, in order to the
obtainment of relief from the Committee for Regulation of the Laws; they
prepared also certain Proposalls, with intent (as I understand) to present them
to the Committee for Propagation of the Gospel, but being called into the
Country by an urgent and importunate occasion, I am disabled to give any
farther account concerning their Proposals, not knowing either how they were
accepted, or indeed whether they were actually offered, and therefore can only
furnish you with a faithful Copy of the Paper it self.

To the Honorable the Committee for the Propagation of the GOSPEL: The humble
Proposals of the Roman Catholics.
1. SInce all compulsion upon the Conscience is clearly against the principles
both of Parliament and Army, as appears by the Parliaments Declaration in
answer to the Scotch Commissioners, 17 Feb. 1648. in these words:

As for the truth and power of Religion, it being a thing intrinsecal between
God and the Soul, and the matters of faith in the Gospel, such as no natural
light can reach, we conceive there is no humane power of coercion thereunto,
nor to restrain men from believing what God suffers their judgment to be
persuaded of.

Amongst the Proposals of the Army, 1 Aug. 1647. this was one, That all
coercive power, and all civil penalties for non-formity, be wholly repealed,
and some other provision made against such Papists as should disturb the
public peace.

And since by the experience of Germany, Poland, Switzerland, Holland, France,
etc. The Consistency of diverse Religions under one Government is evidently
proved, as well where the Protestant commands the Roman Catholic, as where the
Roman Catholic commands the Protestant.

It is humbly offered.

That no penalty be imposed upon any, professing the Gospel of Christ, merely
for difference of judgment in matters of Religion.

2. The public use of all Churches, and the entire benefit of
Church-endowment, being wholly submitted to the disposure of the State.

It is humbly offered.

That no person, believing in Christ Jesus, and living peaceably, and
unoffensively, be by any penalty restrained from the quiet exercise of his
conscience in his private house; observing therein such rules as the State
shall think fit to appoint for preservation of the public peace; A practice
which by long experience in Holland is found both satisfactory to the people,
and secure to the Governors of the Commonwealth.

3. Since the Law of God is so far from allowing any penal sentence to be
grounded upon the enforced Oath of the party, that it expressly forbids any
offense whatsoever to be tried by the single testimony of one witness, Deuteronomy.
19. 15. Mat. 18. 16.

It is humbly proposed.

That no Oath be exacted of any person, compelling him under forfeiture of
life, liberty, or estate, to swear against his Conscience, or to accuse and
condemn himself, especially in matters that concern his inward belief.

4. Since in all Religions there are still found some scandalous livers, and
that our Savior pronounces the Woe against him only, by whom the scandal
comes, Mat. 18. 7. Luke 17. 1.

It is humbly proposed.

That who ever shall offend against the Orders of so mild and Christian a
settlement, may be severely censured, but that others (though of the same
judgment in Religion) be no farther made subject to the punishment, then proved
guilty of the crime.

In stead of my opinion concerning these four proposals of the Papists (because
to my sense they carry in themselves both their own evidence and justification)
I shall beg the Readers permission to set down a particular conceit, which I
have often observed to be very well relisht by all that have examined it. That
doubtless there is no way more suitable to the first Principles of all Reformed
Churches, no way so probable to satisfy all Consciences, as not to impose any
other obligation for proof of conformity, than this profession to believe the
holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be the Word of God, and to live
according to the precepts plainly contained therein, this acknowledgement to be
expressed in general terms without descending minutely to particular questions,
which has certainly been the chief cause of so many Controversies and
Divisions in the World.

And now I humbly appeal to the honorable and religious Committee for
Propagation of the Gospel, Whether the sweet Spirit of the Lord Christ (who
gave his Apostles no further power, than to relinquish such as refused to hear
them) be reconcilable to the former practices of the high Commissioners, or
the present practices of our Sequestrators; 2 Timothy 4. 24.
Whether, when the great Apostle Paul prescribes the servants of the Lord to
forbear, and in meekness instruct those that are contrary minded, he should be
thus cros-interpreted, that the Estates of those who are contrary minded, be
first secured or forborne, and then after a time quite taken away, to instruct
them in meekness, or how to bear patiently the loss of the vain and
transitory riches of this world.

And now I humbly appeal to the honorable and learned Committee for Regulation
of the Law, whether (since all those penalties which the rigorous humors of
former ages have, under pretense of zeal, imposed upon the Conscience, are
either by disuse forgotten, or by express Act of Parliament revoked) the
Papists alone should still be continued under the same severities, nay their
burdens increased by the strange method of the new proceedings toward them,
their Consciences being not only punishable to the Common way of indictment,
but compellable even to accuse themselves by the new Presbyterian Oath of
Abjuration, against the known Principles of the ancient and reverend Laws of
this Land.

And now with an humble confidence, I appeal to the renowned Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, whether in this general Jail-delivery of the
Conscience from the tyranny and oppression of the Prelates, the consciences of
Papists alone, ought still to be kept in prison? Whether, when all the fetters,
which the Rigid Kirkesmen had bought up in Scotland, are broken in pieces just
as they were locking them fast about our Consciences in England, the
Consciences of Papists alone ought still to be continued in chains? Whether,
when all the Societies professing Christ Jesus, and living obediently to the
Magistrate, and peaceably one with another, are protected in the quiet and
unoffensive exercise of their Consciences, the Papists alone should be forced
under the penalty of so great a ruin, not only to profess, but swear against
their Consciences? A course that in a short time will unavoidably bring them
either to absolute beggary, or, which is worse, to hypocrisy, or, which is
worst of all, to perjury.

All the people of this Nation look upon you as their common father, all
promise themselves liberty and protection under your government, (though some
may justly be excluded from sharing in the Government.) Were there in my family
one child that professed to find satisfaction in the way of the Papists, and
lived dutifully to me, and lovingly with with his brethren, I should account it
a great unnaturalness to deprive him altogether of his portion, much more of
that which he has received from the bounty of any collateral kinsman, or
acquired by his own particular diligence and improvement; And though some
Papists have heretofore been truly chargeable with heinous crimes against their
Country, yet why should our justice overreach to condemn all, for the offenses
of a few? if they have formerly abetted competitors to the Crown, why should
the punishments so long outlive the fault? certainly the Offenders being
dead, their trespasses should rather be buried in their graves, and not like
Ghosts walk to affright and pinch their children.

It is time we should now mix a little mercy to allay the fumes of so much
justice, which otherwise will not ascend to the Almighty's Throne in the odor
of sweetness.

It is time we should begin to imitate the pattern, which our merciful God has
set before us in his own practice, when he commanded the destroying Angel to
sheath his sword, with this compassionate Motto, It is enough.

It is time we should begin to answer the bounty of our God, who has so freely
given us the blessings of 10 thousand Talents, Mat. 18. 23. 1 Kings 19. 11, 12.
by freely forgiving our Fellow Servants the small sum of 100 pence. Let us
invade, or storm the Consciences of our brethren; For the Lord was not in the
great and strong wind that rent the Mountains, and brake in pieces the Rocks:
Let us not shake the inward peace of any quiet and unoffensive Christian; For
the Lord was not in the Earthquake: Let us not kindle in our hearts a
devouring flame of uncharitable zeal; for the Lord was not in the fire: but let
us compose our affections to the soft and gentle key of love, and mutual
forbearance; for the Lord was in the still small voice. Let us always attend
to this still voice of the Lord, speaking with us, do as you as you would be
done unto; let us always attend to this small, but sweet voice of the Lord,
Mat. 5. 44.
calling upon us, love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute
you, that you may be the children of your father which is in Heaven; for he
makes his sun to rise on the evil, and on the good, and sends rain on the
just, and on the unjust; for if you love them which love you, what reward have
you? do not even the Publicans the same? and if you salute your brethren only,
what do you more than others? do not even the Publicans so? be you therefore
perfect, as your father which is in Heaven, is perfect.

POSTSCRIPT.
IT was the will and providence of the Lord (to whose dispensations as well of
Justice as Mercy we must resign our little intersts) to call me suddenly into
the Country upon a sad and mournful occasion, which utterly defeated my purpose
of reviewing these few lines: And therefore, after my humblest submission of
them to the judgment of the Supreme Authority, I am encouraged to presume the
Courteous pardon of the Readers, especially if (since it is truly a kind of
death to me to live out of London) he will please to consider this as a
posthumous Pamphlet, containing the serious though indigested thoughts of

Will. Birchley.


