A cup for the City, AND Her ADHERENTS.
For thus says the Lord, I will even do with thee as thou have done, which
have despised the Oath, and broken the Covenant. Ezekiel. 16.59. Who make
mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth nor in righteousness. Isa. 48.1
For thus says the Lord, Woe to the bloody City: Ezekiel. 24.9. For I will call for
a sword, Eze. 38.21 And my sword shall be bathed in Heaven, it shall come down
upon the People of my Curse to judgment. Isai. 34.5. For behold in the hand of
the Lord there is a Cup, and the wine is red, and full of mixture, and all the
wicked shall wring out the dregs thereof, and shall drink them. Psalm. 75.8.
Plague

Famine

depiction of knife and cup

And they shall drink, and be drunk, and spue and fall, and rise no more,
because of the sword that I will send among them. Ier. 25.27. Collected by
Henry Adis, Prisoner in Tower chamber of the Fleet by an Arbytrary Power.

He that is in the Field shall die by the sword, and he that is in the City,
Pestilence and Famine shall devour him. Ezekiel. 7.15. Printed in the Year,
MDCXLVIII.

FOr thus says the Lord, Ezekiel. 24.6, 7, 8
Woe to the bloody City, to the pot whose scum is therein; 7. For her blood is
in the midst of her: 8. That it might cause fury to come up to take vengeance.
Therefore, Hab. 2.^
because thou have spoiled many, all the remnant of the people shall spoil
thee, because of men's blood: And for the violence of the Land, of the City,
and of them that dwell therein. Isa. 33.1
Woe to thee that spoylest, and thou wast not spoiled: and dealest trecherously,
and they dealt not treacherously with thee: when thou shall cease to spoil,
thou shall be spoiled: and when thou shall make an end of dealing trecherously,
they shall deal trecherously with thee: Isa. 48. 1, 2, 4
who make mention of the God of Israel, but not in Truth nor in
Righteousness. 2. For they call themselves the holy City, and stay themselves
upon the God of Israel. 4. But I know that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is
as an iron sinew, and thy brow as brass. Therefore, thus says the Lord Ier. 4.6
I will bring evil from the North, and a great destruction: and Eze. 24.9, 10.12
I will make the pile for fire great: 10. Heap on wood, kindle the fire,
consume the flesh, for they shall be for fuel to the fire: Woe to the bloody
City, 12. for she has wearied her self with lies, and her great scum went not
forth out of her, her scum shall be in the fire: Job 24.13
For they are of those that rebel against the light, they know not the Truth:
Hos. 10.2, 3
Their heart is divided, now shall they be found faulty. 3. For now they shall
say we have no King, because they feared not the Lord. And Luke. 19.14
his Citizens hated him, and sent a Messenger after him, saying, we will not
have this man to reign over us. O City, Prove. 31.29
Many daughters have done unworthily, but thou excellest them all. For it is
found that this City of old time has made insurrection against Kings, and
that rebellion and sedition has been made therein: Hab. 1.2
and there are that raise up strife and contention, for they are Romans 1.31, 32
without understanding, covenant-breakers, without natural affection,
implacable, unmerciful: 32. who knowing the judgments of God, that they which
commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure
in them that do them, Ezekiel. 16.59
Therefore will I deal with them as they have done, which have despised the
oath, and broken the Covenant. For Hos. 10.4.
They have spoken words, swearing falsely in making a Covenant.

For thus says the King, They have vowed to honor me: And thus says the
People of the Land, They have sworn and protested our Laws and our Liberties.

Hos. 6.7, 8.
But they like men have transgressed the Covenant, there have they dealt
trecherously with me; For it is a City of them that work iniquity, and is
poluted with blood: Psalm. 14.1.
They are corrupt, they have done abominable works, there is none that does
good: For Psalm. 14.4.
I looked on my right hand and beheld, but there was no man that would know me,
refuge failed me, and no man cared for my soul: Job 19.7.
Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I am not heard; I cry aloud, but there is no
judgment: For t I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand,
and no man regarded: Yea Romans 10.21,
all day long have I stretched out my hand to a rebellious and gainsaying
people; Titus 1.16.
They profess they know God, but in works deny him, being abominable and
disobedient, and to every good work reprobate.

For Genesis 49.5.7.
Simeon and Levi -- are brethren, instruments of cruelty are in their
habitations. 7. Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for
it was cruel. Psalm. 71.4.
But deliver me O Lord, out of the hands of the wicked, out of the hands of the
bloody and cruel man: Job 1^.9, 10, 12, 13, 15, 17.
For he has stripped me of my glory, and has taken my Crown from mine head.
10. He has destroyed me on every side: 12. His Troops come together and encamp
round about my Tabernacle. 13. He has put my brethren far from me, and mine
acquaintance are utterly estranged. 15. They that dwell in my house count me
for a stranger, I am an alien in their sight; I called for my servant, but he
gave me no answer. 17. My breath is strange to my wife, though I entreat for
the childrens sake of mine own body. Ier. 51.34.
Thus has he crushed me, he has made me an empty vessel, he has swallowed me
up like a Dragon, he has filled his belly with my delicates, he has cast me
out. For Psalm. 31. 11, 12, 13
I am a reproach among all mine enemies, but especially among my neighbors,
and a fear to mine acquaintance. 12. I am forgotten as a dead man out of mind,
I am like a broken vessel. 13. For I have heard the slanders of many, fear was
on every side, whilst they take counsel together against me to take away my
life.

But Psalm. 14^.^.
I cried unto the Lord and said, Thou art my refuge, thou art my portion in the
land of the living. Ier. 51.38.
Therefore, thus says the Lord, I will plead thy cause, and take vengeance for
thee: Psalm. 6^.^^.
That thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies. Psalm. 4^.1^^.
Hear this all ye people, give ear all ye inhabitants of the world, both low
and high, rich and poor together. For thus says the Lord, They shall roar
together like Lions, Ier. 51.38, 4^.
they shall yell like Lions whelps. For 40. I will bring them down like lambs
to the slaughter, like wolves with the goats. Ier. 4^.1^.1^.
As in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, and the neighboring Cities
thereof, 15. For lo I will make thee small among the Heathen, and despised
among men: Mic. 6.16.
That I may make her a desolation, and the inhabitants thereof an hissing;
Prove. 2.13, 14.15
Who leave the paths of uprightness, to walk in the ways of darkness. 14. Who
rejoice to do evil, and delight in the frowardnes of the wicked; whose ways
are crooked, and they froward in their paths. Psalm. 25.1^.
For they are many, and they hate me with cruel hatred. Mat. 15.14.
They are blind leaders of the blind: Amos 3.10
For they know not to do right; Psalm. 82.5.
They know not, neither will they understand.

Though S. Peter advises that we 1 Pet. 2: 17.
Honor all men, and love the brotherhood; that we fear God, and honor the
King And though S. Paul persuade, Rom, 13.1, 2, 4, 5, 7.
That every soul be subject to the higher Powers, for there be no powers but of
God; The Powers that be, are ordained of God: 2. Who so therefore resists
the Powers, resists the Ordinance of God, and he that rsiesteth, shall
receive to himself damnation; 4. For he is the Minister of God to thee for
good: But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; For he bears not the
sword in vain: For he is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon
him that does evil. 5. Wherefore we must needs be subject, not only for wrath,
but also for Conscience sake. 7. Render therefore to all men their dues,
Tribute to whom Tribute is due; Custom to whom Custom; Fear to whom Fear;
Honor to whom honor. 1 Pet. 2, 13, 14
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake: whether it be
to Kings as supreme; 14. Or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him,
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. 1 Timothy ^.1, 2, 3
I exhort therefore that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions,
and giving of thanks be made for all men. 2. For Kings and all that are in
Authority; that we may lead a Peaceable and quiet life in Godliness and
Honesty. 3. For this is good in the sight of God. Our Savior who out of his
own mouth also gave this charge, saying, Mat. 22.21.
Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are
Gods. Mat. 7.12
And whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even unto them, for
this is the Law and the Prophets.

Yet they Psalm. 58.4^5
like the deaf Adder that stops her ears, 5. will not hear the voice of
these charmers, charm they never so wisely. Ier. 9.10
The word of the Lord is to them a reproach, they have no delight in it: Mark
4.15, 16
For so soon as they have heard it, Satan comes immediately and takes away
the word that was sown in their hearts: 16. Or the cares of the world and the
deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things, entering in choaketh the
word, and it becomes altogether unfruitful. Ier 5.21
Hear now this, O foolish people, and without understanding, which have eyes
and see nor, which have ears and hear not. Numb. 30.1, 2
This is the thing the Lord has commanded, If a man vow a vow unto the Lord,
and swear an oath to bind his soul with a bond, he shall not break his word, he
shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth. Yea, Eccles. 5.4,
5, 6
when thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it, for he has no pleasure
in fools. 5. Better it is that thou should not vow, then that thou should
vow and not pay. 6. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, neither say
it was an error. Deuteronomy. 23.23
Therefore that which is gone out of thy lips thou shall keep, and perform even
a free will offering as thou have vowed. For Psalm. 15.1, 4, 5
Lord, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy Hill? But
4. He that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks the Truth
in his heart. 5. He that swears to his own hurt and changes not: who so does
these things shall never be moved.

Ier. 5.23
But this people have a revolting and a rebellious heart, they are revolred:
Therefore, Prove. 1.24, 25, 26.27, 28
because I have called, and ye have refused, I have stretched out my hand, and
no man regarded. 25. But ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would have
none of my reproofs. 26. I will also laugh at your calamity, I will mock when
your fear comes, when your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction as
a whirlwind; when desolation and anguish comes upon you. 28. Then shall they
call upon me, but I will not answer. Hos. 4.9.
For I will punish them their ways, and reward them their doings. Ezekiel. 20.37,
38
And I will cause you to pass under the rod: 38. And I will purge out from
amongst you the rebels, and them that transgress against me: Prove. 10.7
For the name of the wicked shall rot, says the Lord. Ier. 4.5
Therefore cry, gather together and say, let us go into the defenced Cities:
Then Zeph. 3.1
woe to her that is filthy and poluted, to the oppressing City, For Hos.
10.13.14
ye have plowed wickedness, ye have reaped iniquity, ye have eaten the fruit of
lies; because thou have trusted in thy way, in the multitude of thy mighty men.
14. Therefore shall a tumult arise against thy people, and all thy fortresses
shall be spoiled, as Shalmon spoiled Bethardel in the day of Battle. Ier.
6.2^.^^
For behold a people comes from the North Country, and a great Nation shall
be raised against thee from the sides of the earth; they shall lay hand on bow
and spear, they have no mercy; their voice roareth like the sea, they ride upon
horses set in array, as men of war against thee. Dan. 11.7
And shall enter into the Fortress of the King of the North, and shall deal
against them, and shall prevail: Isa. 10.6
To take the spoil, and to take the pray, and to tread them down like mire in
the street: For they have forsaken me says the Lord.

Therefore, 1 Chronicles. 34.24
Behold I will bring evil upon this place, and won the inhabitants: For Ier.
23.39.40
I will utterly forget you, and I the^ forsake you, and the City that I gave to
your fathers, and (...) out of my presence. 40. And I will bring an everlasting
reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame, which shall not be forgotten. Ezekiel.
^^.13.14
For in thy filthiness is leudness, because I have purged thee, and thou wast
not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have
caused my fury to rest upon thee. 14. I the Lord have spoken it; it shall come
to pass, and I will do it: I will not go back, neither will I spare, neither
will I repent: according to thy doings they shall judge thee says the Lord:
Isa. 5^.^.
For your hands are filled with blood, and your fingers with iniquity, your
lips have spoken lies, and your tongues have muttered perverseness. Isa. 65.1^:
Therefore will I number you to the sword, and you shall bow down to the
slaughter. Eze. 35.6.
As I live says the Lord God, I will prepare thee unto blood, and blood shall
pursue thee, seeing thou have not hated blood, even blood shall pursue thee:
Psalm. 55.^.
For I have seen violence and strife in the City; Psalm. 74.^.
The earth is full of the habitations of cruelty; Ezekiel. 9.5.
The land is full of blood, and the City is full of perverseness. For Isa.
1.21.22, 23, 24.
how is the faithful City become an Harlot? it was full of judgment,
righteousness lodged in it, but now murderers. 22. Thy silver is become brass,
thy wine is mixed with water. 23. Thy Princes are rebellious, and companions of
thieves, every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards. 24. Therefore,
thus says the Lord, the mighty One of Israel, Ah! I will ease me of mine
adversaries, I will avenge me of mine enemies. Io^^ ^.^.
Then shall they run to and fro in the City, they shall run upon the wall,
they shall climb upon the Houses, they shall enter into the windows like
thieves; For Amos ^.^
I will deliver up the City and all that is therein.

This will I do Ezekiel. 5.14
in the sight of all that Pass by: Then shall they say, Zeph. 2.15
This is the rejoicing City, that dwelt carelessly, and said in her heart, I am,
and there is none beside me; every one that passes by, shall hiss; and wag his
head. Ezekiel 21. 4.5
For thou art become guilty of the blood that thou have shed, and thou have
caused thy day to draw near: Therefore have I made thee (...) reproach unto the
heathen, and a mock unto all Countries 5. Those that be near, and those that be
a far off shall m^^^ thee, which art infamous and much vexed. For Ier. 1^.2^
I will (...) ^^ver thy skirts upon thy face, that thy shame may appear.

Destruction comes, and they shall seek peace, Ezekiel. 7.25, 26.
and there shall be none: For mischief shall come upon mischief, and rumor upon
rumor; Deuteronomy. 32.25.
the sword without, and terror within, shall destroy both the young man and the
virgin, the suckling also, with the man of gray hairs. Isa. 9.17, 18, 19, 21
For the Lord has no joy in their young men, neither will he have mercy on
their fatherless and widows; for every one is an hypocrite and an evil doer,
and every mouth speaks folly. 18 For wickedness burns as a fire, it shall
devour the briars and thorns. 19. For through the wrath of the Lord of Hosts
the land is darkened, and the people shall be as fuel to the fire, no man shall
spare his brother. 21 Manasseh against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasseh,
and they together shall be against Judah: For all this his anger is not turned
away, but his hand is stretched out still. Ier. 46.12
For the Nations have heard of thy shame, and thy City has filled the land,
for the mighty men have stumbled against the mighty, and they are fallen both
together. Therefore Luke 12.52, 53.
from henceforth there shall be five in one house divided, the father shall be
divided against the son, and the son against the father; the mother against the
daughter, and the daughter against the mother: Ier. 13.14.
And I will dash them one against the other, the father and the son together,
says the Lord. Mat. 10.36.
And a man's enemies shall be them of his own household.

Eze. 22.2, 7, 9, 12
Will thou judge the bloody City? yea, thou shall tell her all her abominations.
7. In thee have they set light by father and mother; in the midst of thee have
they dealt by oppression with the stranger; in thee have they vexed the
fatherless and widow: 9. in thee are men that carry tales to shed blood, in the
midst of thee they commit lewdness: 12. in thee have they taken gifts to shed
blood, and thou have greatly gained by extortion, and have forgotten me says
the Lord. Mic. 7.2, 3, 4.
For the good man is perished out of the earth, and there is none upright among
men; they all lie in wait for blood, they hunt every man his brother with a
net. 3. That they may do evil with both hands earnestly. 4. The best of them is
as a briar, the most upright is sharper then a thorny hedge. For Ier. 9.2.
they be all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men: Isa. 1^.125
That make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproves
in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of naught. Ier 6.28, 30.
they are all grievous revolters, walking with slanders, they are brass and
iron, they are all corrupters. 30. Reprobate silver shall men call them. Ezekiel.
22.13, 19 20, 21.
Therefore I have smitten my hands at thy dishonest gain which thou have made,
and at thy blood which has bin in the midst of thee: For thus says the Lord
God, because thou art become brass, 19. Therefore will I gather you, 20. As
they gather silver, and brass, and iron, and lead, and tin into the midst of a
furnace, to blow the fire upon it, and to melt it. 21. So will I gather you,
and blow upon you in my fury, and will melt you. Lev. 26.16.
This also will I do unto you, Ier. 34.18.
which have not performed the words of the Covenant which ye made before me.
Lev. 26.16.19, 20, ^7.
16. I will appoint over you terror, 19. and will break the pride of your
power. 20. And your strength shall be spent in vain. 37. For ye shall have no
power to stand before your enemies. Numb. 20.10.
Hearken now ye rebels, Ier. 7.12.
Go to my place which is in Shilo; where I set my name at the first, and see
what I did to it for the wickedness of my people Israel: Ier. 25.29.15, 16
For lo I bring evil upon the City that is called by my name, and shall ye be
utterly unpunished? ye shall not be unpunished; for I will call for a sword,
15. For thus says the Lord, Take this wine-cup of my fury at my hands, and
cause all the Nations to whom I shall send thee to drink it. 16. And they shall
drink, and be moved, and be mad, because of the sword that I will send among
them. Hos. 1^.6.
And the sword shall abide on their Cities, and shall consume the branches, and
devour them, because of their own counsels. Prove. 12.6.
For the words of the wicked are to lie in wait for blood: Ier 25.27.
Therefore thou shall say unto them, Thus says the Lord, drink ye, and be
drunken, and spue, and fall, and rise no more, because of the sword that I will
send among them, Amos 9.2, 3, 4.
Though they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand take them; though they clime
up into heaven, thence will I bring them down. 3. Though they hide themselves
upon the top of Carmel, 4. Thence will I call for a sword, and it shall slay
them: And I will set mine eyes upon them for evil, and not for good. For there
shall be Ezekiel, 7.15.
the sword without, and pestilence and famine within, He that is in the field
shall die by the sword, and he that is in the City, famine and pestilence shall
devour him, and Amos 9.1
he that flees of them, shall not flee away: Hos. 7.12, 13.
For when they shall go, I will spread my net over them, I will bring them down
as fowls of the heaven. 13. Woe unto them, for they have fled from me,
destruction upon them, for they have sinned against me: Therefore Ier. 8. 13.
I will surely consume them, says the Lord: Ezekiel. 38.18.
For my fury shall come up into my face, Ezekiel. 5.13.
and I will cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will be comforted when I
have accomplished my fury in them, says the Lord. Judge. 5.31
Even so let all thine enemies perish, O Lord: And let all the Godly, Innocent,
and Oppressed People of the Land say Amen.

The AVTHOR to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
BY the composing of this Tractate, happily thou may suppose me to be what thou
art not like to find me: Therefore these are to let thee know, that I strike
not at persons, but vices; Nor do I so plead for the greatest, as to overlook
the faults of any; For I assure thee, (if occasion be offered) that out of the
same Magazine of sacred Truth, I shall choose out arrows of all sizes, fitted
for the misdemeanors of all, of what degree soever; even from him that draws
water, to him that sits upon the Throne: the which (now I am so near) I
shall be bold in the words of that wise Solomon to say, That it is an
abomination for Kings to do wickedness, for the Throne is established in
righteousness. Prove. 16.12. And if a Ruler hearken to lies, all his servants
are wicked. Prove. 29.12. And the Prince that wants understanding is a great
oppressor. Prove. 28.16. And when the wicked bear rule the people mourn. Prove.
29.2. And he that oppresses the poor, reprocheth his Maker. Prove. 14.31. And
the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men. Romans 1.18. For the day of the Lord comes that shall
burn as an Oven, and all the proud, and all that do wickedly, shall be as
stubble, and the day that comes shall burn them up says the Lord, that it
shall leave them neither root nor branch. Mal. 3.1. For Tophet is ordained of
old, yea for the King it is prepared. Isa. 30.33. (if he be unrighteous,) For
God is no respecter of Persons; but in every Nation he that fears him and
does righteousness is accepted of him. Acts 10.34, 35.

This also can I tell the people, That Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft,
and stubborness is as iniquity and idolatry: And our Apostle tells us, that
there be no Powers but of God, who so therefore resists the Powers, resists
the Ordinance of God; and they that resist, shall receive to themselves
damnation. Romans 13.1, 2. Therefore avenge not your selves, but rather give
place unto wrath; for vengeance is mine, and I will repay it says the Lord.
Romans 12.19. For it is righteousness that exalts a nation, but sin is a
reproach to a people. Prove. 14.34. Therefore woe to them that call evil good,
and good evil; Which justify the wicked for a reward, and take away the
righteousness of the righteous from him. 24. Therefore as the fire devoureth the
stubble, and the flame consumes the chafe, so their root shall be rottenness,
and their blossom shall go up as dust; Because they have cast away the Law of
the Lord of hosts, and despised the word of the holy One of Israel. Isa.
5.20.24. From whom I have this my Commission, To rebuke my neighbor, and not
to suffer sin upon him. Lev. 19.17. With this caution also from the Apostle in
1 Cor. 9.27. That I be careful that whilst I admonish others, I my self become
not a reprobate. Thus earnestly wishing and desiring all in their several
relations to mend one, I shall leave thee to the protection of the Almighty,
who alone is able to work in every one both to will and to do of his own good
pleasure, and rest

Thine and every true Christians to his Ability. HENRY ADIS.


