A Fannaticks Letter Sent out of the DUNGEON OF THE Gate House Prison OF
WESTMINSTER: TO ALL His Brethren in the three Nations at liberty; and also in
the several Goales and Dungeons therein, that are under all the Principles of
the Doctrines of Christ, Heb. 6. 1, 2.

By HENRY ADIS, a Baptized Believer, undergoing the Name of a Free-Willer; and
also most ignomineously by the tongue of Infamy, called a Fannatick, or a mad
man.

Gal. 5. 1. Stand fast therefore in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made you
free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of Bondage.

LONDON, Printed by S. Dover for the Author, and are to be Sold at Booksellers
Shops, 1660.

A Fannaticks Letter Sent out of the DUNGEON OF THE Gate House Prison OF
WESTMINSTER, etc.
Dearly and well beloved Brethren in the Lord,
IT is the desire of my Soul, that Grace, Mercy, Truth, Peace, Love,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness and Temperance, to you be multiplied,
with all long-suffering and knowledge.

Brethren, When I enter into a serious consideration of what the flock of God
gone before endured in their days, not only by cruel Mockings, Deridings, and
Evil Speakings, but also by Whipings, Imprisonments, Buffettings, Banishments,
and painful Deaths, Patiently, Cheerfully, Readily and Willingly; And all this
that they might keep a good Conscience toward God, in order to their producing
his Glory, and their own Eternal good.

I say, The serious consideration of this, is that which does much encourage
me, notwithstanding the many difficulties of this our day, to take up a
resolution, to go on in my Christian progress by Divine assistance, and not to
look back, lest with Lots wife, I become a standing Monument of Gods
everlasting Displeasure; and therefore, these are earnestly to desire you also
in Gods Fear, to persevere in that Path, and to run swiftly toward perfection,
in that race you have already made some progress in, beginning at Heb. 6. 1, 2.
And so cheerfully to pass through this valley of Tears; for he that runs,
obtains not the Crown unless he strive lawfully, 2 Timothy 2* 5. Let us
therefore so run that we may obtain, 1 Cor. 9. 24. Let us labor hard to get up
Sions Hill, having a single Eye to Gods Glory; In which narrow way, you must
expect the Hedges to be lined on both sides, with multitudes of Amalakites,
shooting out their Arrows, even bitter words, whose Teeth are as sharp as
Arrows, and their Tongue a sharp Sword, Psalm. 57. 4. Who whet their Tongue
like a Sword, and bend their Bow to shoot those Arrows, even bitter words,
Psalm. 64. 3. who are ready to say with those in Jer. 18. 18. Come and let us
smite him with the Tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words; to
whom let me beg you in Gods Fear; as you tender the Honor of the Gospel, and
the Reputation of your Master; King Jesus, whom (Jew-like) they so Mock, Scoff
and Jeer at, not to render to them evil for evil, nor reviling for reviling;
but contrariwise bless, knowing that you are thereunto called, that ye should
inherit the Blessing; for he that will love Life and see good days, let him
refrain his Tongue from evil, and his Lips that they speak no guile; let him
eschew evil, and do good, let him seek peace and ensue it; for the Eyes of the
Lord are over the Righteous, and his Ears are open unto their Prayers; But the
Face of the Lord is against them that do evil; And who is he that will harm
you, if ye be followers of that which is good? And if ye suffer for
Righteousness sake, happy are ye; and be not afraid of their Terror, neither
be troubled, but sanctify the (Lord in your Hearts, and be ready always to
give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the Hope that is in
you, with Meekness and Fear, having a good Conscience; that whereas they speak
evil of you as evil doers, they may be ashamed, when they shall falsely accuse
your good conversation in Christ; for it is better if the Will of God be so,
that ye suffer for well doing, then for evil doing; for Christ also has
suffered for sin^^^ the Just for the unjust, Psalm. 3. 9. etc. Therefore let us
look unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who for the joy that was
set before him, endured the cross, and despised the shame, Heb. 12. 2. Who is
the Captain of our Salvation, and was made perfect through sufferings, Heb. 2.
10. Who was led as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before the shearer
was dumb, so opened he not his mouth, Acts 8. 32. For even hereunto were ye
called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example that ye
should follow his steps, who did no sin, neither was guile found in his Mouth;
who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not,
but committed himself to him that Judges Righteously, 1 Pet. 2. 11, 12, 13.
Therefore seeing we have taken his yoke upon us, let us learn of him who is
Lowly and Meek; and we shall find rest for our Souls, Mat. 11. 29. And let us
not think to be above our Master, for if they have called the Master of the
house Beelzebub, how much more them of his household? And if they have so done to
the green Tree, what will they not do to the dry Tree? It is enough for the
Disciple to be as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord; And therefore let us
consider what Legacy our Master has left us, who says, That in the World we
shall have tribulation; for behold says he, I send you forth as sheep in the
midst of Wolves, be ye therefore wise as Serpents, but harmless as Doves; But
beware of men, for they will deliver you up to the Counsels, -- and they will
scourge you in their Synagogues, and ye shall be brought before Governors, and
Kings, for my names sake, for a testimony against them and the Gentiles; And ye
shall be hated of all men for my names sake, Mat. 10. 16. 18. 22. Yea, the time
will come, that if they shall kill you, they will think they do God good
service; and Christ has spoken these things, that we should not be offended,
John 16. 12.

Therefore in our patience let us possess our Souls; And blessed is he that
shall not be offended in him; for our light afflictions which are but for a
Moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory;
whilst we look on the things which are not seen, and not on the things that
are seen, for the things that are seen are Temporal, but the things that are
not seen, they eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 17.

And although no chastening at the present seems joyous but grievous, yet
nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable Fruit of Righteousness, unto
them that are exercised thereby, Heb. 12. 11. And were it not (that to the
rejoicing of my soul) I heard that your Joy is full, as well in Newgate,
White-Lyon, Maydstone, Alisbury, and in all other Prison-Holes, as it is
super-abounding in the dark Gate House Dungeon with us; I should then have
desired that the Hands hanging down, and the feeble knees should have been held
up and strengthened; but seeing I hear that Faith is every where upon the Wing,
and that the Omni-present God is pleased to visit us in all our Prison-holes,
with the incomings of his comforting Spirit, even to joy unspeakable and full
of Glory: I shall conclude with our Apostle, and say, and that upon a good
account to, that by the good hand of our God upon us, I see it is given unto us
in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe, but also to suffer for his name
sake; And herein we have cause to joy and rejoice in the Lord, who by the
incomings of his Spirit, has supported both you and us in this Trial, so as
that we can with his people of old, joy in tribulations, knowing that
tribulations works patience, and patience Experience, and Experience Hope,
and Hope makes not ashamed, because the Love of God is spread abroad in our
Hearts. So that we can with our Apostle upon a good account say, that, Though
we are troubled on every side, yet not destressed, we are perplexed, yet not in
despair, persecuted but not forsaken, cast down but not destroyed, always
bearing about in our Body the dying of the Lord Jesus Christ; for we which
live, are always delivered unto death for Jesus sake; And therefore let every
soul of us, in singleness of heart, eye Gods Glory in our present sufferings,
and take up that good resolution of our aged and faithful brother Paul, Acts
21. 13. And say (if thereto called) that we are willing in the behalf of
Christ, not only to be bound and lie in bonds, but also to die for his Name
sake.

And this is that which is the rejoicing of my soul, that in the midst of these
Sufferings, both by you and us, I cannot hear of one man of our Society, that
is found an evil doer in what is charged upon us, as to plotting, contriving or
undermining, or in any Act of hostility in disturbing the Peace of the Nation;
for herein we can safely and upon a good account appeal to our God, the
searcher of all hearts, and can with confidence and boldness, in the
faithfulness of our souls, to the faces of the greatest of men, affirm and
say, We are not guilty of what we are charged withal, and that we are oppressed
in Judgments, and are injuriously torn from our callings and Families, and
most barbarously penned up in Prison-holes; and my self and some others of our
Society, thrust into a damp, dark dirty Dungeon, without either Light or Air,
Bed or Bedding, first nine, and after twelve of us together, scarce able to lie
down one by another; being thus used, not for what we have done, but for what
we are; nor for what is found in our Houses, as to Arms or Ammunition: And that
you may be satisfied in a measure with the truth of what my Sufferings are and
have been in this juncture of time, in this our cruel leading into captivity; I
shall lay down something upon the account of report, and also upon the account
of Action. And as for false rumors raised upon me, I was reported to say, That
I hoped to wash my hands in the Kings Blood; this was raised by one Hopping
Jane, commonly so called, a notorious drunken swearing person, whose common
conversation is, to go ranting, raving and singing like a Bedlam along the
streets, (to the admiration of those that know her not) pulling and haling
Gentlemen as they go along the streets, to get money of them, to buy Ale to
drink the Kings health; and this was reported that I should say at my shop
door, on Wednesday morning, the ninth day of the eleventh Month, vulgarly
called January, 1660. when I was not down my stairs in the shop all that
morning, as I proved by three Witnesses to the French Papish Fencer, that
carried me away, for saying these words after he, and they that were with him,
had searched my house for Arms; the which words, or any other tending to that,
or any such horrid and wicked tendancy, God the searcher of all hearts knows, I
never entertained so much as a thought of in the least; and for my tongue to
utter that which never came into my thoughts, seems to me a very strange
thing, the which she her self has since said to my Wife, before some that
heard her words, as to that particular, was not so.

It is also further reported by others far and near, That I my self, that said
Wednesday night, had killed one of the Constables Watchmen; when I was in
custody as is aforesaid, by nine of the clock in the morning, and was that
night with some forty more upon the main Guard at White Hall, and was sent on
Thursday morning to the Gatehouse Prison Dungeon, where I now am.

And further, it is commonly reported, that in my house when it was searched,
There were several Arms and Ammunition found, with Barrels of Gunpowder; and
that there was a Barrel of white Gunpowder left at one Mr. Horses house in
Stannop- street, a Coach-maker, to be conveyed to me; When in truth I had no
Arms at all, nor any manner of Powder; but was so far from any such thing, as
that I can boldly affirm it in the presence of God, that I have not had, nor
carried so much as a defensive Weapon this fifteen or sixteen years.

And in 1659. I declared against the acting with the Carnal Weapon, and pleaded
the unlawfulness thereof, as by the said Declaration, in the end of my
Fannatick's Mite cast into the Kings Treasury, is evident. More I might say as
to Matter of Report, but I shall forbear and let you know, that my house was
searched nine several times, twice before I was taken into Custody, and seven
times after I was in Custody, and six times of that seven in one night, and by
several parties; So that I may say as to the malice of men, I am set up as
their Mark to shoot at, although my Actings toward them are innocent and
harmless.

For I know nothing on my part as a Cause of it, unless in my Fannaticks Mite,
my bearing my Testimony against the Abominations of the Times, in saying what I
say therein, as to the madness of the rude Multitude; And in the revived and
daily continued Acts of Folly in Stage Plays, and the many bitter Oaths and
Execrations uttered by unlawful Game-Players, and in the abominations of Dammy
and Debauched Bawdy-houses, the foul detestable shame of a Christian Kingdom;
or in what I say in Page 49, 50, 51. of that Mite, in that Use of Examination
to the Nation, Considered as a Nation; Or at my downright and single-hearted
Conclusion of my Epistle therein to the KING Dedicated; Or in my After-Writing
to the KING, in that I give Him some REASONS, why I could neither Swear nor
Fight for Him: If these, or any thing of this kind, Causes them thus to become
mine Enemy, because I tell them and Him the Truth; if it be this that renders
me vile in their Eyes, I must let them know in the words and Resolution of
David, and say, If this be to be vile, I according to the Ability received,
shall be yet more vile.

But I shall proceed to Discover to you what was Acted, as to Searching my
House, and by what manner of Persons, that so you may be sensible, whither we
are Posting, if they were legally Commissionated.

The Second time that my House was Searched, was by one John Gosling, a known
Papist, and Servant to Mr. Hillyard an Apothecary in Long-Aker, who beyond his
Commission (if he had one) carried away (he and his Party and Confederacy,
Captain Wharton and others) near 30 of my Fannaticks Mite, and got Two
shillings in Money of me, pretending it for the Soldiers. And about a Week
after, Captain Wharton and another of them, came and took forcibly out of my
House, Two more of my Books, demanding more; which he would have had, had there
been any ready.

And the next time that my House was Searched, was when I was taken into
Custody, and that was by Mounseir Lawrence an Italian, a Papist, who keeps a
Fencing School in Sta^nnop-street.

The next was by Mounseir De la Mane, a Frenchman, and a known Papist, living
in Long-Aker, a Gilt-Leather man.

The next time, or Another time, by one Mr. Kirbey, a Cloth-Drawer, in our own
street; a known Papist also.

And another time by Anthony Welsh, a limping Porter, living in Mr. Roberd's
Celler, in Drury Lane, near Russel Street; whose horrid Oaths, Execrations and
Debauched Actions, both to us, to Mris. Whitaker, Richard Day, and others, do
bespeak him to be no better than an Athiest.

And as if all these Actions and Reports, were not enough to render me and you
sufficiently odious to the view of the World, the weekly News-monger, Falsely,
Injuriously, and most Ignomineously in his weekly Pamphlet, has Branded us
with that most Stigmatical Title of Traitors.

To whom I would give this Christian Caution, that for the time to come, he
take a special care of venting and inventing Lies, lest the Lord Christ say One
day to Him, as once He said to some of Abraham's fleshly Seed, John 8. 44. Ye
are of your father the Devil, and the works of your father ye will do; he was a
Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the Truth, because there is no
Truth in him; when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own, for he is a liar,
and the Father of it; And therefore I would have him further to consider the
shame of it, for as the Lip of Truth shall be established for ever, so the
lying Lip is but for a moment, Prove. 12. 19. And as a Righteous man hates
lying, so a wicked man is loathsome, and comes to shame, Prove. 13. 5.

And if we may believe the wisest of men, he tells us, that he that hides
hatred with lying Lips, and he that utters a slander, is a Fool, Prove. 10. 18.

And farther, I would have him consider the great danger of it; for first,
lying Lips are an Abomination to the Lord, but they that deal truly, are his
delight, Prove. 12. 22.

Secondly, These six things the Lord hates, yea, seven are an Abomination unto
him, a proud look, a lying Tongue, and Hands that shed Innocent Blood, an Heart
that devises wicked Imaginations, Feet that be swift in running to Mischief, a
false Witness that speaks Lies, and him that sows Discord amongst
Brethren, Proverbs 6. 16.

Thirdly, It will exclude him Heavens Glory; For without are Dogs, and
Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters; and whosoever loves
and makes a Lie, Rev. 22. 15. For there shall in no wise enter into it any
thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works Abomination, or makes a Lie,
but they which are written in the Lambs Book of Life, Rev. 21. 27.

But the Fearful, and Unbelieving, and the Abominable, and Murderers, and
Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall have their
part in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second
death, Rev. 21. 8.

But leaving the man to consider of his wicked action, in suffering his Pen to
run to that excess, that causes men to raise false reports upon the Innocent;
I shall in love to his soul, earnestly desire him to set himself upon the
effectual work of Repentance, that so he may make his peace before he go hence
and be no more; that when time shall be no more, he may then have a well-being
with him, who gives a being to all beings, in that Kingdom that shall never
fade away; the which that you my Brethren and I may make sure, let us work out
our own Salvation with Fear and Trembling, and let us not be slothful, but be
followers of them, who through Faith and Patience, inherited the Promises, Heb.
6. 12. And let us be found in Gods Way, doing Gods Work, being Fortified with
Christian Courage and Boldness, following the footsteps of the flock of God
gone before us, not at all fearing what man can do unto us; for this is the
requirement of our Lord and Master, Mat. 10. 28. Who says, Fear not him that
can kill the Body only, and afterward can do no more, but rather fear him,
that after he has killed the Body, can cast both Body and Soul into Hell, I
say, Fear him: And in his Fear, let us be found in well-doing, endeavoring as
much as in us lies, to see that the Peace and Welfare of the Nation be
secured; For if every man's particular interest be involved in the General Good,
then it stands every particular man in hand, to study the Good, Peace, Safety
and Welfare of the whole.

To this end, let us take the advice of our Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. 3. Even as good
Soldiers of Jesus Christ, to endure hardship, and take to us the whole Armor
of God, that we may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all,
to stand; let us stand therefore, having our Loins girt about with Truth, and
having on the Breast Plate of Righteousness, and our Feet shod with the
Preparation of the Gospel of Peace; above all, taking the Shield of Faith,
wherewith we shall be able to quench all the fiery Darts of the Wicked; and
take the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of
God, praying with all Prayers and Supplication for all Saints, Ephesians. 6. 13.
etc. and for all men, for Kings, and all that are in Authority, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
yea, for our very enemies, and all that hate us, Mat. 5. 44. and of them that
persecute us, let us cry out, and say, in the Words of that Holy Martyr and
Brother Stephen, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge, Acts 7. 60. and in the
Words of our Lord and Master, John 13. 13. the Captain of our Salvation, Heb.
2. 10. our Elder Brother, Heb. 2. 11. Let us cry out and say, Father forgive
them, they know not what they do, Luke 23. 34.

And thus being furnished with the Armor of Righteousness, on the right Hand,
and on the left, 2 Cor. 6. 7. Let us behave our selves manfully, fighting the
Lords Battle, even to the resisting unto Blood, striving against sin, Heb. 12.
4. striving together for the Faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1. 27. not for the
Wealth, Pomp, Pleasure, Pastimes, Preferment, Power nor Dominions of the Earth;
neither in the behalf of our selves nor others, no not in the behalf of our
Lord and Master King Jesus, to set Him up as King; For though I do really
believe that Jesus Christ shall Personally Reign, yet his Kingdom is not to be
set up as some would have it; For the seventh Angel Sounded, and there were
great Voices in Heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this World, are become the
Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, and He shall reign for ever and ever,
Rev. 11. 15.

For the stone that was cut out of the Mountain without hands, that smote the
Image on the Feet, became a great Mountain, and filled the whole earth, Dan. 2.
35. And this was the confidence of that Holy Man, Job 19. 25. For says he, I
believe that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the last day upon
the earth: So also says the Prophet, Zech. 14. 4. For his Feet shall stand in
that day upon the Mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem, on the East; and
verse 9. And the Lord shall be King over all the earth; in that day, there
shall be one Lord, and his Name one; and his Dominion shall be from Sea to Sea,
and from the River, even to the ends of the earth; for he must reign, till he
has put all enemies under his Feet; the last enemy that shall be destroyed,
is Death, 1 Cor. 15. 25, 26. Yet this Kingdom shall not be set up by force of
Arms, neither shall his Servants prepare it for him, but he for them; for so
says he himself, John 14. 2. In my Fathers House are many Mansions, And I go
to prepare a place for you; And I will come to you again, and receive you to my
self, that where I am, there ye may be also. And therefore he spoke unto them a
Parable, because he was nigh to Jerusalem, and because they thought that the
Kingdom of God should immediately appear. And a certain Nobleman, went into a
far Country; to receive for himself a Kingdom, and to return, Luke 19. 11, 12.
So that he shall give the Kingdom to them, if we may believe himself; for says
he, Fear not, little Flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you
the Kingdom, Luke 12. 32. And I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has
appointed unto me, that ye may eat and drink at my Table; in my Kingdom, and
sit on Thrones, Judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, Luke 22. 29.

But we are yet in the Kingdom of Christ's Patience, and not in the Kingdom of
his Power; for if we may believe himself, he tells us, John 18. That his
Kingdom is not of this World; for this is Esaus Kingdom; And so says the Lord
to Esdras, For when Jacob and Esau were born unto Isaac, Jacobs hand held fast
the Heel of Esau; for Esau is the End of this World, and Jacob is the Beginning
of that which is to come, 2 Esdras 6. 8, 9.

And indeed this is Esau, or the evil ones Kingdom; for Satan is the god of
this World; And so says our Apostle, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. If our Gospel be hid, it
is hid to them that are lost, in whom the god of this World, has blinded the
Minds of them that believe not, lest the Glorious Light of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ should shine unto them; and so says the Devil to Christ, Mat. 4, 8, 9.
when he set him upon an high Mountain, and showed him all the Glory of the
World, and said unto him, All this will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me. And the Lord Christ is so far from reproving the falsehood of it, as
that he says, John 14. 13. The Prince of this World comes, but he ha^h no
part in me, and John 16. 11. The Prince of this World is Judged. And to
evidence that Antipathy, that there is between these two Kings Kingdoms, and
the Subjects thereof, the Apostle queries with those that had engaged for that
King and Kingdom, when they were fighting and quarrelling for the things of a
Temporal Kingdom, From whence (says he) comes Wars and Fightings among you,
come they not hence even of your Lusts, that War in your Members? Ye Lust, and
have not, ye kill, and desire to have, and cannot obtain; ye Fight and War, yet
ye have not, because ye ask not; ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss;
ye Adulterers and Adulteresses, know ye not, that the Friendship of the World
is emnity with God; Whosoever therefore will be a friend to the World, is an
enemy to God, James 4. 1. etc.

And because ye are chosen out of the World, therefore the World will hate you,
yet that hatred is not to be requited with hatred again, but with Love and good
Works, according to Mat. 5. 44.

So that no Acts of Violence or Hostility, is to be found in the hands of
Canaans Subjects, but they are patiently to wait for the coming of Christ.

For so persuades our Apostle, Be patient, brethren, unto the coming of the
Lord; Behold, the husbandman waits for the precious fruits of the earth, and
has long patience for it, until he receive the early and latter rain: be you
also patient, stablish your Hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh,
Jam. 5. 7. And although we are redeemed with the Blood of the Lamb, and are
made Kings and Priests to God, and to Christ, and shall Live and Reign with
Christ a thousand Years, Rev. 20. 4. 6. Rev. 5. 10. yet we ought to have no
Acts of violence found in our hands to procure or set it up; but this is the
mistake between those that are so eager to set up Christ's Kingdom by Violence,
and undermining of States and Governments, and us that expect it, and yet can
act no Acts of violence: They expect him to Reign Spiritually in his People;
and we according to the Scriptures, do look for him to come and Reign
Personally with his: They look to have Dominion, Power and earthly Authority by
him, and to have their Judges restored as at the first, and that on this side
the Grave; whilst we wait for a Manifestation of Christ from Heaven; at which
appearance we do expect, and that upon a Scripture account, that those that
fall asleep in the Faith of Jesus, shall then appear with Jesus; and that them
that are then found in the Actual Faith of Jesus, shall live together with them
with Jesus, 1 These. 4. 14. When that same Jesus which was taken up into Heaven,
shall so come in like manner as he went into Heaven, Acts 1. 11. For behold, he
comes with Clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also which piersed
him, Rev. 1. 7.

In which patient waiting of ours, we must expect, according to the saying of
our Apostle, That we must through many tribulations, enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Acts 14. 22.

Our Lord and Master was pleased to strip himself of Glory, and became obedient
to that ignomineous death of the Cross for our sakes, to bring us to Glory, and
shall we then grudg for his sake, to go by the Cross to inherit that Glory?

O my Brethren, in Gods Fear consider what ye do, turn not your backs upon
Jesus Christ, but as ye have set your hand to the Plow, so look not back; for
if any man draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10. 38. And
whosoever will deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which
is in Heaven, they were his own Words, Mat. 10. 33. in whose Mouth there was
sound no guile; who also tells us, That the time will come, that if they kill
us, they will think they shall do God good service, John 16. 2.

And seeing we do at this day both see and feel so much in order to the
fulfilling of this Scripture, in this juncture of time, wherein iniquity does
so much abound, and that the love of many do wax cold; Let us consider in Gods
Fear, what our work is in this our Day, that so we may be sound doing Gods
Work, in Gods Way, although it be to the loss of our Liberty, Goods, yea and
Life and all, rather than lose all to eternity.

And therefore for my part, I shall resolve, God assisting me according to the
ability received, to make use of that Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of
God, to the hewing down of all Iniquity, Transgression and Sin, both Root and
Branch, as near as I can in all, (and to speak Scripture Language) from him
that sits on the Throne, to him that grindeth at the Mill and draws Water:
And to endeavor such a Reformation in all, as that God may build up the
Nation, and make our Land as it is now, abounding in all excess of riot, to be
as one day it shall be said of Jerusalem, even a Praise of the whole Earth; And
if in this I am looked upon to be vile, I shall by Divine assistance, resolve
to be yet more vile; and shall first begin this work at Home; and now I speak
of Home, I shall begin to look Home, and as the Husbandman and the Merchant,
take the time of their best leisure to make up their Inventory; So shall I, for
being haled from my lawful employments, having little else to do in my Dark,
Dolesome, Drowsy, Damp Dungeon, I shall see what I am worth, that so I may set
my House in order whilst I have time; for Age tells me, I cannot live long,
and almost every day an Alarm for death is sounding in mine ears, Tear me and
Ram me, Sink me and Dam me, telling me, some to my Face, and others behind my
back, That I am not long lived, and that I must suddenly prepare for Death,
because of my Judgment, notwithstanding the Kings Word passed to us from Breda
and since, For a peaceable enjoying our Meeting upon our good behavior, the
which I shall bid defiance to any man that can say, it was ever tainted; I have
therefore set Pen to Paper, and have added this my Inventory, the which happily
may seem impertinent in this place, yet I judge the conclusion may be very
comfortable; and as the Husbandman and Merchant, so shall I; the Husbandman
making his Inventory, which we will suppose thus,

Imprimis, Hay Barns empty, and Hay-stack-Roomes railed round, with Corn Barns,
and Graineries empty, swept and garnished, in which there is nothing of

l. s. d. any considerable value.

But that which will make a mends for all, is,

Item, in the Harvest Crop, abundance of Hay, to the raising of Stacks, and
filling the Hay Barn and Lofts; and of Wheat, Rye, Barlie, Oats, Beans and
Pease, to the filling the Barns and Graineries, having increased some thirty,
some sixty, and some an hundred fould, with the multiplicity both of Summer and
Winter Fruits, both of the Orchards and Cherry Grounds, with the abundance of
Wall Fruits, and Fragrant-Flowers, sweet Herbs of all kinds appearing, like the
Hour of Plenty; together with the sweet increase of that little, yet profitable
Creature, the Be; the which being added to the fore part of the Inventory,
being as aforesaid, not of

l. s. d. any considerable value.

Does in the whole amount to,

l. s. d. a good considerable sum.

And the Merchant, when he makes his Inventory, he does it at his best
leisure, when the Venture is out-bound; the which we will suppose this,

Imprimis, Two or three large vast Warehouses, empty and neatly cleansed, only
in one Corner two or three empty Casks, with some odd Pack-cloaths and Cording;
And all

l. s. d. not worth setting down.

But Item the return of the Venture, a gallant, lusty stout tall Ship, of a
vast burden, deeply laden, and well manned, in-bound at the Havens* Mouth,
ready the next Tide, being a spring and a fresh smart gale of Wind, filling the
Fore Sale, the Top Sale, the Sprit Sale, and the Mizen, running before the
Wind, like the Post that sides for his Life, the Ancient flying, and the Pilat
for the safe convey of the Vessel carefully instructing the Steers-man at the
Helm, as occasion serves, with a Star-bord, Lar-bord, Port, Steady, Loof,
Non-neer; and the Master Gunner and his Mate fiering, to the rejoicing the
Heart of the Owner, 13. 17. 19. or 21. great Guns, the Seamen and Mariners
with all speed, striking and furling their Sails, coming to Anchor, and making
to Shore, to liver the Ship, being Richly Laden with the best and choicest
Indian Trade, and being home bound, coasting from one Country to another Port,
being enriched with the choicest and best Commodities of those Countries and
Havens, by which means, though the Inventory, as to the former part of it,
amounts to

l. s. d. no great matter.

Yet the return of the Venture so supposed, as aforesaid, does raise the total
sum to

l. s. d. hundreds thousands ten thousands.

Thus we see the Husband-mans Harvest, and the Merchants Return after their
patient waiting, makes a mends for all.

Therefore by the way, a Word to my Brethren, that are already in Prison, with
my self, and those that do every hour expect the same measure to be met to
them; and that not upon the account of any real mis-actings found or known,
either by them or us, as by Plotting, Contriving or Undermining the present
Government; but only and alone, because we desire and endeavor to keep the
Testimony of a good Conscience, and to prove Faithful and Loyal to our Head and
Sovereign, our Supreme, our King, our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, whose Laws
teach the best Loyalty to our Earthly Kings, and purest love to our Princes,
nay to our very enemies.

I say to my Brethren Imprisoned, and the rest yet at Liberty, I shall give the
advice of the Spirit, recorded in James 5. 9. 10. Be patient therefore Brethren
unto the coming of the Lord; behold the Husbandman waits for the precious
Fruits of the earth, etc. Be ye also patient, stablish your Hearts, for the
coming of the Lord draws nie; and let us not be weary in well doing, for in
due time we shall reap if we faint not, Gal. 6. 9. the which reaping time is,
that which fills up my Inventory, and will make a mends for all, and raise my
total Sum to a considerable value; For as I am a Trades man, my Estate as to
Temporals, amounts but to a small value; as,

Imprimis, My Household Goods and wearing Apparil, being very little, and very
mean, and therefore of

l. s. d. very little worth.

Item, In my Shop and Warehouse, what is left by the hand of oppression; is,

l. s. d. scarce worth valuing.

So also as I am a Christian, my condition in gross is this, not

l. s. d. worth setting down.

Imprimis, My footsteeps watched, and my Actions weighed by an unjust weight
and balance, and mete by a false measure, by which means is produced false
Reports, Opprobious Speeches, cruel Mockings, Scoffings, Jeerings and
Deridings, false Accusations, and Evil Surmisings; and my whole Trade
Heaven-wards, Arraigned, Judged and Condemned as utterly Lawless and unlawful;
and my Commodities sent me from thence, Counterfeit and Carnal, Adulterated and
Abominable, Sinful and Schismatical, Wavouring and Unstable, Whimsical and
Giddy, Fantastical and Fannatical, Formal and Faithless, Papal and Profane;
by all which it may evidently appear, that as to my present Estate and
Condition among men, I have

l. s. d. very little comfort.

And to speak in the Words of our Apostle, If in this Life only we had Hope in
Christ, we were of all men most miserable; but now is Christ risen from the
dead, 1 Corinthians 15. 19, 20. And therefore,

Item, In the Resurrection Day, They that have done good, shall arise of the
Resurrection of Life, John 5. 39. For if we have been planted into the
likeness of his Death, we shall also be in the likeness of his Resurrection;
And Christ being raised from the Dead, dies no more, Death has no more
dominion over him, Romans 6. 5. 9. So also is the Resurrection of the Dead, it is
sown in Corruption, it is raised again in Incorruption; it is sown in
Dishonor, it is raised in Glory; it is sown in Weakness; it is raised in
Power; it is sown a Natural Body, it is raised a Spiritual Body. And as we have
born the Image of the earthly, so also shall we bear the Image of the Heavenly,
1 Cor. 15. 43, 44, 49. And thus shall we be recompensed at the Resurrection of
the Just, Luke 14. 14. This shall we have after we have lived in Reproach,
Infamy and Ignomy; This shall we have if we Worship not the Beast, nor his
Image, neither Receive his Mark in our Foreheads, nor in our Hands; though we
have been Villified and Undervalued, Railed at and Reproached, Buffetted and
Whipped, Banished or Imprinsoned; nay, though we shall lose our Lives, provided
it be only for the Witness of Jesus, and the Word of God, we shall have our
part in the first Resurrection: And blessed and holy is he that has Part in
the First Resurrection, on such the Second Death shall have no Power; but we
shall be Priests to God and to Christ, and shall Reign with Christ a Thousand
years, Rev. 20. 4, 5, 6. For he must Reign till he has put all Enemies under
his feet: And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall also the
Son himself be subject unto him, that put all things under him, that God may be
All in All, 1 Cor. 15. 25, 28. For it is a faithful saying, That if we be Dead
with him, we shall also Live with him; if we Suffer, we shall also Reign with
him, 2 Timothy 2. 10, 11.

Therefore, Item in the Harvest Crop, abundance of Plenty, for in due time we
shall Reap if we faint not: And whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also
reap; for he that sows to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption; but
he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting, Gal.
6. 7, 8, 9. And he that goes on weeping, bearing precious seed, shall
doubtless come again and bring his Sheaves with him; For they that sow in
Tears, shall reap in Joy, Psalm. 126. 56. Thus Weeping may endure for a Night,
but Joy comes in the Morning. In the Morning of the Resurrection, Sorrow and
Mourning shall vanish away as the dew before the Morning Sun; for God shall
wipe away all Tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, nor
sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for the former things
are passed away, Rev. 21. 4. And the Lamb that is in the midst of the Throne
shall lead them unto living Fountains of Water; and God shall wipe away all
Tears from their Eyes, Rev. 7. 17. Yea, He will swallow up Death in Victory,
and the Lord God will wipe away Tears from all faces, and the Reproach of his
People shall be taken away from off all the earth, for the Lord has spoken it;
And it shall be said in that Day, This is our God, we have waited for him, and
he will save us; this is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and
rejoice in his Salvation, Isa. 25. 8, 9. For in his Presence is fullness of Joy,
and at his Right Hand are Pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11.

Thus our Present Sufferings are not worthy to be compared with that Glory that
shall be revealed in us, Romans 8. 18. For our Light A^^^i^ions, which are but
for a Moment, works for us a far more Exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory,
whilst we look at the Things that are not seen, and not on the Things that are
seen; for the Things that are seen are Temporal, but the Things that are not
seen they are eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 17.

And now my Brethren, seeing it is so, that there comes so much, and such great
benefit to us by our Sufferings, let us Cheerfully go on in Gods Way,
continuing Faithful to the Death, that so we may attain the Crown of Life: And
let us follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes, though to the Cross, that so we
may attain the Crown, we shall be great Gainers by it: And if we make that Use
of our Sufferings that God intends, our Faith, our Patience, our Joy, our
Love, our Peace, and all will be tried, strengthened, and much bettered. And in
Conclusion we shall reap the benefit of it, so as that we shall have cause to
say with his Servant of old, Psalm. 11 9. 75. I know O Lord, that thy Judgments
are right, and that thou of Faithfulness have caused me to be troubled. And
again, By our Afflictions we shall Evidence our selves to be Sons and not
Bastards; For whom the Lord loves he Chasteneth, and scourges Every Son whom
he Receives; If ye endure Chastening, God deals with you as with Sons; For
what Son is it whom the Father Chasteneth not? But if ye be without
Chastizements, whereof all are partakers, then are ye Bastards and not sons,
Heb. 12. 6, 7, 8.

God is now Preparing a People for himself; and as Persons are to be fitted;
hewn and squared for the building of God, before they can be fit matter for
his Building here, as they must be lively Stones before they can be duly put
into his building, the Church; so he is now trying his Stones for his Heavenly
Building; he now sitting as a Refiner and Purifier of Silver; And is now Trying
the Sons of Levi, and shall Purge them as Gold and Silver; and he that is not
now found Gold, Silver or Precious Stones, will be Consumed, his outside
Formality will be proved to be Hypocrisy: He that now has not Oil in his
Vessel will walk in the Dark, for Profession is almost out of fashion, and he
that now has not Habakkuks Faith will not stand: He that now finds out a
by-way to Deny Christ, will not be found Worthy of him; now the Day will try
him; he that would not leave his Lust, his Pride, his Vanity, his Hunting
after his Profit, will now Evidence himself who he was; For Two men walking
together, and a Third following them as a Servant, it is hard to guess whose
Servant he is; but when they part, the Servant will follow his own Master:
Christ and Reputation, Credit or Fame have in this Nation walked hand in hand a
long time together; but now they are parting, it will suddenly now be Evidenced
whose Servants Professors are: And the Master without all question will Pay
them their Wages; the Lord is now Dealing with his People, as once Constantius
dealt with his Subjects: And would King Charles the Second have done so, he
would have had far better Attendants, then now he has.

In the Ecclesiastical History, Eusebius Pamphilius in his First Book of the
Life of Constantine, in his Twelfth Chapter, speaks to this Purpose; THat the
Magistrates in every Province, by the Command of the former Tyrannical
Emperors, did cruelly and grievously Oppress the Christians, and brought them
to Martyrdom, in so much that Godly Men were very scarce; At which Constantius,
the Father of Constantine, was much troubled; who when he came to Succeed in
the Empire, and having a desire to try his Courtiers (says the story) he began
to contrive a strong and Admirable Plot; for he Granted Free leave to all his
Officers, and Men of Dignity, to offer Sacrifices unto Devils; and yet to give
their Attendance in Court, and keep their Places; And those that would not
perform those accursed Sacrifices should be banished the Court and dismissed
his Service: Whereupon his Courtiers being divided into a double Faction,
presently Discovered their Minds and Affections: And many were the number of
Idolaters; whereupon this worthy Constantius Discovering his own Plot, he
Reproved those that were fearful and desirous to keep their Places, Approving
and Commending the other for their Constancy in Gods Cause, Rejecting the
Idolaters as Traitors to God, and not worthy of his Service: For how (said he)
can they be Faithful to me their Emperor, who have Revolted from their God? So
that he presently Banished them from his Court, and made those that were
Approved to be Constant in giving their Testimony to the Faith, near Officers
unto him for the Securing of his own Person, saying, That such men were to be
accounted as his most familliar Friends, and to be esteemed of more then great
Treasures. Thus we have briefly Uncharacterized the Father of Constantine by the
Actions of his Life, by which any one may clearly discern that God gave him
prosperous Success in his Affairs, and gave him a different Heart from his
Predecessors: For having a long time performed many virtuous and royal Actions,
at length having suppressed the Superstitious Adoration of their Heathen gods,
he acknowledged the only true God, Governor of all things; And strengthened his
Family by keeping Religious men to Pray for him and his; and spent the residue
of his Life with great Commendations in Peace and Tranquillity, living without
Troubles, or being troublesome, which the Vulgar account a great Happiness; So
he Governed his Wife, Children and Family very quietly and peaceably all the
time of his Reign; and Devoted them and himself to the Service of God, so that
his Royal Palace seemed to be a Religious Temple, in which there were Holy and
Religious men, that offered up their Incense of Prayers for the Emperors
safety, even then when among the Heathen it was a dangerous thing to be called
a Religious man, or one that served God.



And all the harm I wish King Charles the Second is, that he were but a second
Constantius, that he had such a Court, and such a Guard, such a Ministry and
such a Magistracy, such a Nobility and such a Gentry, such a Yeomandry and such
a Peasantry; that all from the highest to the lowest were such as truly feared
God and hated Covetousness, that every Relation might Act so faithfully toward
their God, and each to other in Love, Peace and Unity, that the God of Peace
might take a delight to dwell amongst us, when all abomination ( Babylon like)
might be cast into the Sea of Forgetfulness.

And seeing such a People would make so happy a Prince: O Friends! let us hold
fast our Integrity, that so we may be a blessing to our Prince here, and obtain
the blessing hereafter.

For they that shall be with the Lamb are such as shall be found Faithful, and
Worthy, and Chosen, for they are Virgins, and have not defiled themselves with
Women, they have not intermingled themselves with the Abominations of the great
Whore, nor her Adulterous Brood.

And if we will have one like the Son of God, Comforting and Supporting,
Walking with and Refreshing us in that hot Furnace of Affliction that is
Heating for us; let us with Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, keep close to our
God, and let us not be careful to Answer the desires of men, Dan. 3. 25. but in
all Humility let us patiently Suffer under them, in so doing our Comfort will
be great, though our Sufferings be many; yea though our lives lie at stake, and
we also lose them; yet if our Saviors words be true, we shall find them; for
if we with our Apostle do fight the good fight of Faith, we may expect to lay
hold of Eternal Life; This is a faithful saying, For if we suffer with him, we
shall Reign with him; but if we Deny him, he will also deny us, 2 Timothy 2. 12.

And therefore let us take up a Resolution to follow him in this our Day, in
singleness of Soul, and in our Innocence, That we may be Blameless and
Harmless; the Sons of God without Rebuke in the midest of a Crooked and
Perverse Generation, among whom shine ye as Lights in the World, Phil. 2. 15.
giving no Offense in any thing that the Ministry be not blamed; But in all
things Approving our selves as the Ministers of God in much Patience, in
Affliction, in Necessities, in Distresses, in Stripes, in Imprisonments, in
Tumults, in Labors, in Watchings, in Fasting; by Pureness, by Knowledge, by
Long-suffering, by Kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by Love Unfeigned, by the Word
of Truth, by the Power of God, by the Armor of Righteousness, on the Right
hand and on the Left; by Honor and Dishonor, by evil Report and good Report,
as Deceivers and yet True, as unknown and yet well known, as Dying and behold
we Live, as Chastened and not Killed, as Sorrowful yet always Rejoicing, as
Poor yet making many Rich, as having Nothing yet possessing all Things, 2 Cor.
3. For ye see your Calling Brethren, how that not many wise men after the
Flesh, not many Mighty, not many Noble are called; but God has Chosen the
Foolish things of the World, to Confound the Wise; And God has Chosen the Weak
Things of the World to Confound the Things that are Mighty, and Base Things of
the World, and Things that are Despised, has God Chosen; yea, and Things which
are not, to bring to naught the things that are, that no Flesh should glory in
his presence. And seeing it is so, my Brethren, I shall Earnestly Desire you in
the words of our Apostle, That you also who are Troubled, rest patiently with
us when the Lord Jesus shall be Revealed from Heaven with his Mighty Angels in
flaming Fire, taking Uengeance on them that know not God, and that Obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting
Destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power,
when he shall come to be Glorified in his Saints, and to be Admired in all them
that Believe, because our Testimony among you was Beleeded. So that as you have
Cause to Joy in us, so we have great Cause of rejoicing in you, that we yet
stand fast in one Faith; And the Churches of God have Cause to Glory in you for
your Patience and Faith in all your Persecutions and Tribulations that ye
endure, which is a manifest token of the Righteous Judgment of God, that ye may
be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which we also suffer, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
And thus, if any of us suffer as Christians, let us not be ashamed, but let us
glorify God on this behalf.

As for you, my Brethren, that are of Kent, and other Places, who have all your
Livelihoods, and some of you all that you could be Trusted for; as you are
Servers in of Stores and Officers in Ships, and Seamen, and Laborers in the
several Yards appertaining to Shipping, my trouble is great for you, to hear of
your deplorable and sad Condition, in that Officers make such use of your
Tenderness of Conscience in that you cannot Swear, so barbarously to use you,
Refusing to let you have Supplies for the Relieving your poor Families; yet be
of good Comfort, and Roll your selves upon the All-sufficient God: For mine own
part I cannot but be a fellow Feeler of your sad Conditions, for the Case is
mine own, with one that is too Great for me to deal withal, and for more then I
am worth; but wait we upon God, and in his due time he will Relieve us.

And therefore let us Comfort our selves in the Lord, and here what the Apostle
speaks, James 5. 1. who says, Go to now ye Rich men, weep and howl for your
Miseries that shall come upon you, your Riches are Corrupted, and your Garments
Moth-eaten; your Gold and Silver is corrupted, and the Rust of them shall be a
Witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were Fire: Ye have heaped
Treasure together for the last Days; Behold the Hire of the Laborers which
have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, Cries, and
the Cry of them which have reaped are entered into the Ears of the Lord of the
Sabbath: Ye have lived in Pleasures on the Earth, and been Wanton; ye have
nourished your Hearts as in the Day of slaughter, ye have Condemned and Killed
the Just, and he does not resist you: Be Patient therefore Brethren unto the
Coming of the Lord.

And Consider, that there is one in Power in Heaven above them; and one in
Earth that is his Vicegerent entrusted under him, and set up by him, to be a
Terror to evil-Workers, and a Praise to them that do well; who in due time may
be made acquainted of it, and give a Remedy in it.

In the mean time, my Beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the Work of the Lord, for as much as ye know that your labor is
not in vain in the Lord.

To Conclude, I shall impart unto you my Resolution freely, and shall let you
know as to my present Condition, though I am in a Dungeon, yet I had rather be
there, ( as through Mercy I can say I am with a clear Conscience) then be in
the Kings Palace with a clogged Conscience; For mine own part I with others
have had Tenders of Liberty upon Engaging as others did; the which we dare not
do least we ensnare our selves; for now we are as to our Meetings, in this
Condition, we have yet the Word of a King for the quiet Enjoyment of our
Meetings, the which we had from Breda, and since Confirmed to some of our
Friends by verbal Expressions, as well as in the Act of Oblivion, and in his
Declaration for Ecclesiastical Affairs, and that upon Condition; which
Condition is not yet, nor (God assisting) never shall on our part be broken:
For as we have Publicly Declared our selves in former times under the other
Powers, to be a Peaceable People, and utterly against both Swearing and
Fighting, as by my Declaration annexed at the End of my Fannaticks Mite is
apparent, the which through Mercy I shall Resolve rather to Die, then in the
least to violate; And here some men are ready to say as once the Brethren of
David did to him, who Queried the Reason of David's forwardness in the Work of
God; Whose Answer was, Is there not a Cause? 1 Samuel 17. 29. So must I say at
this Day, Is there not a Cause? Is not the Israel of God now Defied by the
Great Goliahs of our Times? Therefore I must say as once Jeptha did in another
Case, Judge. 1 1. 35. I have opened my mouth to the Lord, and I cannot go back:
And when I am Solicited and Persuaded to betray the Cause of Christ, and break
his laws by Complying with Engagements and Oaths; I must say as once that
Servant of the Lord said, Nehem. 6. 11. Should such a man as I take Sanctuary?
Should such a man as I Betray and break the Laws and Cause of Christ? I that
have been Evil spoken of by the Separation for SEPARATING from the Separation,
though I have never been Condemned justly by the Separation for any such
Separation; I say, If such a man as I, should now seek to secure my self after
all my Separation, I should be the most abominablest Person in the World, and
might Justly be Condemned with the World.

I know that by what I have said, I must set up my self more publicly for a
Mark to be shot at: yet I must Discharge my Conscience as to what I have been,
and what I am; that so I may not be thought either better or worse than what I
am: and if therein I become nothing as to my Earthly Being, yet I matter it
not, so I keep a good Conscience void of Offense, both toward God, and toward
Man: And if in the Innocence of my Soul I perish, I perish: And I shall rather
choose to Perish a Thousand times, then in the least (knowingly) either to
violate the least Law of God, or Betray the Cause of Christ, or do any thing
that may Dishonor the Gospel of Christ, or cause his Name to be Evil spoken
of: And although there be such a Charge (as I hear there is given) to have such
a special Eye to me; I know not for what, unless for my good Advice to the
King: yet it shall neither force me to Violate my Conscience, nor Forfeit my
Liberty as to our Meetings; but I shall Patiently bear my Imprisonment till the
Lord shall in his Mercy Release me; Hanging yet upon the Kings Word to be made
good to me, and the rest of our peaceable Judgment, who are falsely Accused,
and some of us unjustly Imprisoned, and to the wounding of our good Names as
Traitors.

Yet I say again, I shall Resolve (God Assisting me) to continue, faithfully
waiting upon God in his own Way, in the Integrity of my Soul, Because better is
the Poor that walks in his Integrity, then he that is Perverse in his Lips,
and is a Fool, Prove. 19. 1. For the Integrity of the Upright shall guide them,
but the Perverseness of Transgressors shall Destroy them, and the Righteousness
of the Upright shall direct his way, whilst the Wicked shall Fall by his own
wickedness, Prove. 11. 3, 5. And thus whilst the Just man walks in his
Integrity, his Children are Blessed after him, Prove. 20. 7. The Premises
Considered, It shall be the desire of my Soul to go on waiting upon God,
Earnestly begging in the behalf of the King and his People, That there may be
such a Right Understanding of things, that Justice be so duly Administered, as
that the Righteous be not as the Wicked, nor the Innocent as the Guilty, lest
the Cry of the many Oppressed Families come up into the Ears of the Great and
Just JEHOVAH, that Sin-Revenging God, who is of a more purer Eye then to behold
Iniquity, so as to approve of it, or those that act in it.

Thus having given you an Account both of my Innocence and Integrety, both what
I am, and what (by Divine Assistance) I shall Resolve to be, notwithstanding
the noysomness of the Place I am in, and the Hardships that I, and those that
are with me, do undergo therein; our Livelyhoods chiefly depending upon our
daily handy Labors, being torn from our Callings, and Families, tied up from
getting our own Bread, and brought into worse then an EGYPTIAN Bondage, and
Contrary to the Law both of NATURE and NATIONS; who though we are the Kings
Prisoners, yet we have not (as I said before) neither Beds nor Bedding, Meat
nor Money, nay, not so much as a Drop of Water but what we are forced to
purchase with our Money; the which if we have not, nor Friends to bring them to
us, we must in reason inevitably perish, the which notwithstanding, though we
undergo, yet I shall Resolve still to endure, rather then set my Hand to Folly,
either to Violate my Conscience, by breaking the least Law of God, or in the
least to Give my Consent to the making my self Guilty by Paying Traitors Fees,
which is double Fees, or any Fees at all, seeing I am not Guilty of what I am
laid in for; but shall Resolve to go on in my Christian Progress, as a
Christian ought to do; and shall desire to wait upon God in Prayer and
Supplication for such a Right Understanding of things, as that the Evil Doer
only may be Punished, and that the Meetings of the peaceable People of God,
according to the Kings Promise, may be still Continued; Praying for the King
and his People, although at present my Professed Enemies, And to Remain till
Death,

Your Faithful Brother and Fellow Prisoner for Christ, HENRY ADIS.
From my Close Constraint, The Kings Courtesy, For my Christian Counsel, The
Gate House Dungeon; Damp and Dark, Void of Light, Darker then Night; Once a Den
for Thieves, But now a House of Prayer; My Contented Castle, Till Christ Clear
me.
THE END.

