A WIFE, NOT READY MADE, BUT BESPOKEN, BY DICUS the Bachelor, and made up for
him by his fellow Shepherd TITYRUS.

In four Pastoral Eglogues.

The second Edition: Wherein are some things added but nothing amended.

All Husbands that do laugh or weep,
Read over this before you sleep;
Here Is virtue in each line and letter,
To make both good and bad Wives better:
But they that are resolved for none,
Were better let this Book alone,
Lest seeing here the good of Wives,
They change their Votes for married Lives.
LONDON, Printed for A. R. 1653.

TO My Honored Good Friend Sr Robert Stapleton.
THou that enjoyst the happiest life
That ever mortal lead with Wife,
Who so in goodness does transce^d,
She neither needs nor can amend:
Were I as thou, sure I should fear
That I my Heaven on Earth had here,
And that which is a sadding story,
Must bide as long in Purgatory:
To thee, this Wife will needs address
To mediate her a Patroness,
For well she knows thou do excel
In knowing more than she cantell,
And that of Females thou art Master,
And wilt trust none to be thy taster.
Of thy great Learning none makes doubt,
Thou them within know as without,
The greatest Scholars ever deign
The Sonets of a Sheephards Swain.
R. A.

Lectori Caelibi. To the single Reader.
THou with this Wife in Bed may lie
Yet not commit Adulterye,
And though twice twelve empanneld men should find
Thee guilty, and thy Judges be inclined
To hang or head thee, for a sinful fact
Thou shall avoid the fury of the Act:
In Curia rectus thou may boldly stand
From dread of Whip or burning in the Hand;
Abandon Her, she will be well content
To wave her right and claim to Aliment;
Nor can the Remedies the Law affords
Against force and Rape or wresting from her words
She Will not Inflame the pimping Tailors score,
To make her such a wagtayl as Jane shore.
Like Act of Pardon penned with finest skill
She is a Wife and no Wife at thy will;
A Hochos Pocos tide with such a noose
Thou at thy pleasure may play fast and loose;
Behold her well, she favors at a glance
That specious Self-denying Ordinance.
J. H.

The two married Shepherds T. and D. to R. and G. Batchelours.
YOu both secure in harbor sit,
And smile at our experienced wit:
Who plead at Bar before our Wives,
For Liberties and quiet lives:
Such Bliss did only Jove obtain,
That Greeks and Trojanes on the plain,
From Idas top, did fighting see,
In far less danger there, than we.
You move above in single spears,
And sport with jealousies and fears
Of married folks, and household care:
Your flocks the better surely fare.
The single man no weather feels
But rising, in the night, all seels,
To's dearest Lambs does duly look,
Bears he a Tinned or Silver Crook.
Sweet Milk and Honey is his diet.
His Physic true content and quiet,
A soup of Cider or brisk Perry
Will make his heart all blithe and merry:
And going to his dreadles nest,
Finds nothing there to break his rest,
But on a Couch of moss and leaves,
All worldly Cares and thought deceives.
His sleep as sweet as short: his dreams
Of flowery banks, or silver streams,
Thence early up, in open air
He leads his flocks through pastures fair,
Where crystal brooks soft murmuring
Invite his Heart to sleep or sing
With Quiristers, in neighbor groves,
Who there recount their mutual loves.
You Batchelors live merry lives,
But we will not change, that have good Wives.
IF he that has charactered out a Wife,
Might see her practique part thus drawn to life,
He could not but with shouts and acclamation,
Prefer thy practice to his contemplation:
So do thou branch her out in every line,
That only thou deserve she should be thine:
Oh! were thou single now, and free, as I,
No woman, should thou ask, could thee deny;
So powr'fully have thou their cause defended,
And highly, as they well deserve, commended:
Such goodness thou descri'st in woman kind,
As never any could before thee find.
G. H.

To the Courteous READER.
BE thou yoa'kd or single man,
Show her fellow if thou can,
One may chance seek all his life,
Yet not find out such a Wife,
May her Parallel be shown,
Take her Reader for their own.
DICUS

A WIFE.
The first Eglogue.
Speakers: Dicus, Tityrus. Dicus. GOod Tityrus! what shall I do?
I love, yet am afraid to woo,
Such freedom is in single life,
I dread the yoaking with a Wife;
For now I revell, sing and play,
Go where I list each Holiday,
Laugh, caroll, pipe: thus blithe and merry,
I to my Lambs sing Hey down derry:
But if I once turn married man,
Then say or do I what I can,
All is too little her to please,
I fain would wive, yet live at ease;
I hear some married men, that say,
That wives will brow-beat all the day,
At night within the curtains preach,
And men must learn what they do teach;
Against this how may I provide?
They best can teach us that have tried.

Tityrus. If she within the curtains chide,
My head within the sheet I hide,
And either to my prayers fall,
Or on the Musing Sisters call,
To help me sing, or else to weep,
Till in the end I fall asleep:
Then Great Apollo in a Dream,
Forbids me strive against the stream;
By stirring I much dust may raise,
The lowering Mornes prove fairest days:
Good Hous-wives when their pot boils over,
To cool the Broth take off the cover,
The simple make it seethe up higher,
By laying fuel on the fire.
Thus sweeten I a married life,
And when I wake behold my Wife
As kindly falls within mine Arms,
As if she never meant me harms.

Dicus. This Counsel only they can follow,
Who are acquainted with Apollo,
But many Husbands find a shrow,
That never did Apollo know,
Nor ever supped at the Well
By which the Musing Sisters dwell.

Tityrus. Why! Dicus they may fail to pray,

Dicus. That Is for the night: But how by day?
Must I demean to stint all strife,
With whom I must spend all my life?

Tityrus. Indeed it is the depth of skill,
To lead a Woman by her will:
For sure there is no other way,
But let them have their Do and Say.
The Art is to incline them so,
They may aright both Say and Do.
Else do I know no other fence,
But use the Buckler Patience.
A man may offer with the Waster,
But it is not good to strike the Master
At School; and it is the Scholars end
To learn no more then how to fend.

Dicus. If thus it be with married life,
It Is best to be without a Wife.

Tityrus. Thus Husbands say, yet marry seven,
As some by Crosses come to Heaven:
The wrecked Merchant under Lea,
A second venture makes to Sea;
And I have heard some Husbands tell,
That they of Wives do like so well,
Of which they one by one had store,
That they could wish as many more.
What cause has Dicus then to doubt them?
That sees so few can live without them.

Dicus. Sure now I think the greatest blame
In men thus women to defame:
Their goodness he knows best that tries them,
But to be good no man denies them.
They sure are good by night or day,
At bed or board, at work or play,
To follow, or to go before,
Abroad, or else within the door;
Things are they which men still have need on,
But they are best of all to breed on:
The worst Wives are not so ill wrought,
But they are good, though good for naught:
Men err when they would have them all
Just like their looks, Angelical,
(And yet we read of Angels pride)
She is a ribbe of thine own side:
That which is pure in her, lo she
Derives from Heaven, the rest from thee.

Tityrus. Faith Dicus, now thy Fate I see,
Thou soon a married man wilt be.
This Tale among the Gossips tell,
And they will like thee all so well,
(For to be praised all rejoice)
That thou of Wives must have thy choice.
But look to it well, thou art of age,
Prove not like sullen Bird in Cage,
Forbear thy meat, and loathe satiety,
And long again for free variety.
Oh! be not like the Fish that plays
About the Leap, in love with Gays,
But soon as he is in, would fain
Get out but never can again.

Dicus. If so, I shall not be alone,
To thee I Will never make my moan.

Tityrus. Nor t'any else, if thou be wise,
As thou have got, so keep thy Prise;
Look ere thou leap, complaining after
Will with thy friends breed naught but laughter.
An honest, cheerful, constant life
Will better both thy self and Wife.
But we met here this morning soon,
And now my shadow says it is noon;
At Bed nor Board, if thou will marry,
Thou must not make thy wife to tarry.

Dicus. This is the only way to teach,
When men will practice what they preach.
How glad am I of this good hap,
To see thy Precepts in a Map.
What Is here in colors, to the life
I Will practice when I have a Wife.
Farewell: I feel my stomach chime,
With Melibe it is dinner time.

The second Eglogue.
Speakers, Dicus, Tityrus. Dicus. NOw Tityrus, I try and find
A Wife agreeing to my mind;
My joys reflected doubled are,
She shareth half my Grief and Care,
In what she joys, I joy no less,
Thus double we our happiness.
In all things we communicate,
And come I early home, or late,
She always ready has to fit
Me with some sweet warm dainty bit.
I find it now the only life,
To be thus wedded to a Wife.
Lo, I do get, and she does spare,
Abroad I, she at home takes Care,
A married life's a Hav'n of bliss,
Which who wants, half himself does miss;
My veins now fresher blood do breed,
I with a better stomach feed.

Tityrus. It is a Rule observed of all,
Take off the Common to the Stall
A Beast, and he will better thrive,
As Bees best gather in a hive.
Good Dicus, boast not yet too soon,
It is with thee but Honey-Moon:
When I to School went, then a child,
My Master first was gentle, mild,
Yet after he would soundly pay
Me four or five times in a day:
We men like fools are pleased with change,
And at the first new Wives are strange;
Fierce Mastifs that at home will fight,
Abroad will neither bark nor bite;
Weak Cocks away the stronger chase,
Till they be wonted to the place.
Thou never shall her Nature know,
Till she with thee familiar grow.
Then may thou find true old complaints,
Some wives look like, that prove no Saints.
Before the Sun comes round about,
Thy certainty may turn to doubt,
And Hymen now so frolic grown,
In other Posture may be shown.

Dicus. For mine own part I do not fear,
My Wife will hold out all the year:
For certain she is straight and right,
The same at morning, noon and night.

Tityrus. I wish she prove to thy desire,
That all our Wives may her admire,
For sure most Wives are like the Moon,
That alters Morning, Night, and Noon,
She never does from changing cease,
But is in Wanes, or in Increase;
Yet let it not to thee seem strange,
Thou feel'st not sensibly her change:
Thou see not shadows how they move,
Till Motion plain it self does prove:
Observe her well, thy wife will clear
This Paradox within the year.

Dicus. Thou find'st such faults in married life,
I wonder why thou took'st a Wife.

Tityrus. Sure even as thine, it was my Fate,
And now Repentance comes too late,
Some manage can the curstest Dog,
The Ape makes merry with his clog,
The Haggard proves best once reclaimed,
And mettal'd Horses rightly tamed.
I freely for my part protest,
Of all I know mine likes me best,
And I should take it for a curse,
To make a change, and have a worse.
And truly, not to be her debtor,
Not one of twenty has a better:
Yet for her sake I cannot strain,
To say it is fair when it does rain;
Before I Amo can decline,
All Well breaks up, the Sun does shine.
Fate never good haps by handfuls brings,
From out the bad we pick good things.

Dicus. Oh now thou cogg'st for fear or favor,
We Will bind thee to thy good behavior:
It much does go against my mind,
To hear least ill of woman-kinde:
Delights of youth, for Middle-age
Companions, Nurses for the Sage!
So necessary are all good Wives,
Not one amongst a hundred thrives
Without them; They preserve at home
Whatsoever from abroad does come.

Tityrus. Some call them tackled Ships and Barges,
Some as they count them Bills of Charges;
Some the Armies Baggage, Stuff and Tents,
Most useful, yet Impediments;
And they that on their tongues dare jest,
With Aesope call them worst and best.
In fine, all scruples to remove,
The Best and Worst are as they prove.

Dicus. Mine proves already passing well.

Tityrus. You me another Tale may tell
Some twelvemonth hence, God give you joy,
And ere that send a goodly Boy.

Dicus. Which being weaned, the Summer after,
God send me like my Wife a Daughter.

The third Eglogue.
Speakers, Battus, Dorus. Dorus. GOod day, my Friend, how frolic do thou
fare?
Fresh cheerful Gallant free from worldly care,
As thou were beaverd up with Ale and Cakes,
And fed with healing Flesh of Indian Snakes,
Wedlock abates the flesh, and fills the purse,
Sure thou have got a Loving tender Nurse.

Battus. My Wife so she may keep the Purse,
Is sure a sweet indulgent Nurse,
And for me every Meal provides,
Twelve Dishes with good Sauce besides,
Four Fowl, four fruit; and four of Fish,
Come fuming on her Chafing Dish;
Her Woodcock, Bitter, Quail and Rail,
No season of the year do fail;
Her Carps, her Gudgeon, Lump and Pout,
She carves to all the Board about;
Her Fruit as Fish are ay in season,
Crab, Medlar, Artichoak, Small Reason,
Besides Green Sallets neatly dressed,
Of which she Pursline likes best;
And though I with such cheer am fed.
I often go supperlesse to bed:
Where she for me alone unshown
Preserves a warm bit of her own,
To take for my best health and ease,
Even, Morning, Midnight, as I please;
And if I Flesh refrain, her zeal
Boils up for me a Salmon-Peal:
Me trust, this is a true Relation,
No Bachelor has such accommodation.

Dorus. Sure thou do live a gallant Lord-like life,
With such a curious Cater, Cook, and Wife;
Who raw, boiled, baked, she still with so small costs
Provides, and never fails to rule the Roast:
I could not think a Shepherds Swain were able
To furnish with such rarities his Table.

Battus. Batchelors get exceedings now and then,
But not such constant Meals as Married men,
They seldom have them in due time and place,
Or to them, after, or before say grace,
Fall to My Friends, be merry, do not spare,
You Will find few married men have better Fare;
Who for his Friend prepares a costly Feast,
Himself harms more by half then good his Guest.

Dorus. If as thou say this be a Husbands diet,
Give me a dinner of green Herbs with quiet,
I better like one dish with single life,
Then all these choicest dainties with a Wife.
An Herd-boys life precedes a Ladies Page,
Give me full Flight, I hate a gilded Cage.

Battus. Ploughmen prefer their Pudding to a Banquet.
The Sow you well know what before a Pan-cake;
Bachelors have good things but often misguided,
A Wife is neat and never unprovided:
Besides you take your Meals most what by halves,
And boast that change of Pasture makes fat calves:
But certain it is a Beast thrives best of all
Put off the Common to the several:
A good Wife surely is a greater treasure,
Then all the choice and costly Dames of pleasure.

Dorus. And I esteem my Phillida with measure
Above her thou do count so rich a treasure:
Yet let it not my Friend to thee seem strange
Men are as Women often given to change,
A bone of Fish makes Flesh a better meal,
The changes always is the sweetest peal;
A Perch or Gudgion pulled up by my hook
Tastes sweeter then a Pullet from the coop;
A Rook scarce fledg taken new out of the neast
Eats tend'rer then a Pheasant at a feast:
It Is good advice to young men given to tarry,
And to an old man not at all to marry:
Certes my friend 'twould vex me to the life,
A Cuckold to be made by mine own Wife,
Whereof I by the Courtesy must stand
Seized for my term of Life as of her Land.
Wives are as Haggards, which Men lure at ease,
But they will come in or lie out as they please:
We must be always subject to their check,
And if we will stand in grace must come at beck;
Not sit up late at night not rise too soon,
Must sure come home at dinner just at noon,
Which hour she keeps, as Cynthia firm and steady,
That is as soon as she is up and ready.
If she Recuse, to Church she must not come;
If she will to Church he must not stay at home;
And if the Fit or humor on her come,
She Will neither go to Church nor stay at home:
One bed holds both so long as they be One:
If out, the whole house too streight's for her alone.
When it is her pleasure to go out and play,
New clothes must on and all keep Holy day;
And when she home returns I Will do her right,
She Will make her maids sit up and work all night.
If thou alone into thy Study look,
She must come in and be thy only Book;
To be mine Almanac I well could bear,
So should I have a new one every year.
We of a certain Man do read, but no man
Did ever tell us of a certain Woman;
Yet this I do advertise all good fellows,
To shun the fainting Fit they call the yellowes,
For which (besides it Men objects to scorn)
Wives know no cure but drink out of a Horn.

Battus. Upon my Oath our Justice without hearing,
For this would bind thee to thy good abearing,
His Wife for not reforming such a fault
Will never trust him more to grind her malt:
Now fie I am ashamed to hear thee preach
Of things which are so far above thy reach;
Like our Jack-daw, who when his News do fail
To his good Dames does on his betters rayl,
Clay lands breeds whitest wheat so you it till,
That Wife is good that is not extremely ill;
Thou talk of Robinhood, thou do not know
Nor ever yet shotst shaft out of his bow,
Why should thou thy great Grandams Daughter snib,
Thou molded art of dirt, she of a rib,
Themselves their Husbands and their meat they dress well,
Worst you can say, They are the weaker vessel;
Some praise, some blame the^, much adoe's about the^.
Few men can well live with them, none without the^.

Dorus. Let me this story for our Teacher borrow,
To tell it at our meeting place to morrow;
For though he by the whole hour can homely pray,
He little or nothing to his Text can say:
Set prayer he abhors as works of merit,
And method is too costive for his spirit;
This matter's to his purpose who contrives
To be a powrefull man with all your Wives:
But lo the Sun clad in a scarlet gown
Looks biggest at us at his going down;
The Birds that early with his light arose,
Do wanting use of eyes their eye lids close.

Battus. If Sun sets in a cloud we shall have rain;
Look all our flocks are scattered on the plain.

Dorus. Sweet Battus, prove it fair or rainy weather,
Lets fould our flocks though not our heads together,
I Will home and sleep in cottage void of strife.

Battus. And I in th'Arms of my sweet loving Wife.

Dorus. To morrow I will come and see her Feast,

Battus. And welcome in good earnest or in jest;
But if thou would continue in her favor,
See thou be constant to thy good behavior.

Dorus. But what if I bring Tyterus along?

Battus. He can us sing a pastoral sweet Song.

Dorus. In youth he could both caroll, dance and play,
But with his head, his wit begins to gray;
Like skillfull Lech his Patient he can please,
Yet be in open war with his disease:
Malignant humors purged by golden Pill
Improve a Wife by giving her her will.

Battus. When his Grand-master Melibaus died,
His Freaks and Frolicks all were laid aside.

Dorus. Such mirth is most extremely good at Feasts,
Some Fools are cured by precepts some by jests:
His labors vain against the stream that strives,
Good Husbands only know to make good wives.

The fourth Eglogue.
Speakers, Battus, Dorus, Tyterus. Battus. THis Morn my Wife and I did rise,
Before the Stars set in the skies.

Dorus Which made Aurora blush so red,
To see Sun up and she in Bed:
This mornings redness certainly declares,
This heat ere night will melt in Floods of tears;
But whilst our Flocks are feeding here is a bowr,
In this fair Oak will shelter from a shower,
Whilst Tyterus whom I have brought alang,
Delights our Ears with Pastoral and Song.

Tyterus. In younger years (which I remember still)
I once lay flumbring on Parnassus Hill,
Where surely I a sounder nap had taken,
Had I not been with hideous noise awaken;
I thought of Wolves, but proved close by the (...),
Fierce Mastifs full of jealousies and fears:
Upon fresh trail they bellow out like thunder,
And all within their dint like lightning plunder;
They cry in Kirk and State for Reformations,
Thereby to make ours their own Habitations;
They this pretend for good of all our Lambs,
Devouring all our Kiddys with their Dams;
God on the dwellings has his justice shown,
They that did covet ours have lost their own;
May never such devouring greedy hounds
Uncoupled be again on English grounds:
Be's name to all posterity a scorn,
That first up to this hunt did wind his Horn.

Dorus. What this to thee? these stirs far North were made,
Thou Tyterus laist safe here under shade.

Tyterus. It is my nature, I more inly groan,
For others sufferings, then at mine own:
My bowels yern, my heart within does bleed,
To hear the will brought on them and their Seed.

Dorus. I feared at first, thou out of discontent,
Had shot thy Bolt against present Government.

Tyterus. I loathe to make my Governors a mark,
No gentle dog will at his Keeper bark,
They certain that above the Stern do steer,
Great Atlas burdens on their shoulders bear,
I envy not the States that highest be,
Let me enjoy my self and conscience free;
The Powers that are, be by the Heavens ordained,
And none but by that Power can be maintained:
They feed my Lamb from Wolves and Tigers, I
Can scarce preserve them from the Fox and Fly;
These and the like so heavily me press,
For Muse scared never put on comely dress;
I brake my Pipe, forbear my Lute to string,
So as in tune I have forgot to sing.

Dorus. Yet Tyterus to ymp the wings of Time
Thou happily remember may some Rimes
In praise of Wives, for thou have married three,
For Battus two, too many, three for me,
He has but one, and would learn how to use her,
I none, and therefore fain would learn to choose her.

Tyterus. We old men most ambitious are to tell,
Of what in youth we think we have done well,
Then give me leave to tell you mine own Story,
Not for mine own but for the praise and glory
Of all good Wives; who from what I relate
May take a Pattern mine to imitate:
Most edifying Stories are the Lives
Of Saints and Martyrs, so of all good Wives;
I being young and of my self inclined
To add a second body to my mind,
First by the Eyes was caught, then by the Ears,
For that admired sweet consort of the spears,
To Hers fictitious was; an Angels voice
In Ivory case did even my soul rejoice;
A Western gale blew me on this good hap
Jove never showered gold in a softer lap.
Our wooing was not long, mine and her friends,
Our fancies had disposed to self same ends,
So I soon that great Kesars fortune run
I came, I saw her and was overcome.
No sooner I enjoy her but I find
Her beauteous outside was unto her mind
No other then a prison, which the rays
Of Light Celestial all within begays,
To hear her talking was a miracle,
Yet all she uttered was an Oracle;
With sweetest graceful looks she all would teach,
A good Divine she was yet would not preach;
So pious that mine heart began to faint,
Fearing I for a Wife had got a Saint.

Battus. Is It strange some Wives should be good Preachers seen?
This Land was lately by a Maiden-Queen
In peace maintained full forty years and more,
So Sheba, Carthage, Swedes; and many a score;
Your Abbesses do catechize and preach,
Their Nuns as them rare works and manners teach.

Tyterus. Such Halcyon days nere were nor shall be seen,
As in the Reign of that most glorious Queen.

Dorus. No fear of that I often have heard it said,
She-Saints abroad do prove best wives in Bed;
Your strictest Matrons upon such a motion,
We Will cool in zeal and lay by their devotion;
I for most certain will relate a Story,
One took a Sister by the Directory,
Whose Brother dying and she left his Heir,
He wedded her by Book of Common Prayer;
By which is plainly given to understand,
Less danger is in losing Wives then Land.

Battus. Fie Dorus, thou art much too blame to clatter,
And tell a Story nothing to the matter;
It argues them of spite and insolence,
To interrupt the good Wives Evidence.

Tyterus. She free obedience offered me as Head,
I her all Honor at my board and bed;
She wholesome meat, not costly, made my diet,
My Coat was even a Paradise of quiet:
When amongst the shepheardesses she was seen,
All justly her adored as their Queen:
She as dear Sisters them did use and call,
And in sweet humbleness out-went them all;
When in a round they sat them down to sing,
She treble was and Diamond in the Ring:
My Coats chief Ornament by day by night,
The golden Candlestick whence issues light;
If ought she saw in others worth her heed,
She practiced, and her pattern aid exceed,
For she not only knew but practiced all
The graces grown in her habitual.

Battus. If she transcended so in word and deed,
Why is she gone and left none of her breed?

Tyterus. Heavens would not so much for one mortal do
As give him such a Wife and Children too,
A loss not portable, but that we plain
Discern our loss was her immortal gain;
The God of Life when he did her deny
A power to live, most willing made to die.

Dorus. Fie fit thou art too serious once I win,
I heard thee tell then on a merry pin,
Of managing young Colts and younger wives
By gentle handling; who with either strives,
Against their will, if they at their first taming,
Get but a trick is difficult reclaming;
When thou had got within the Stable door,
Thy Colt, thou first his Saddle laidst before
Him in the Manger, then did it on set
To make him proud, ere thou presumest to get
Up to his back, thou clawd'st him on the breast,
And often clap't and coak'st him on the crest,
And to secure from kicking would not fail,
To stroke and softly pull him by the tail;
When thou had manned him then thy foot
Before thou mount often in the stirrup put:
Yet foftly, lest him suddenly surprisng,
Thou should provoke to kicking back or rising;
Thus up thou without stick or spur would prove,
How with thee as one body he could move,
And fitting sure and easy in the Saddle,
Thee jots no more then in a Couch or Cradle,
And prancing under's load takes as great pleasure,
As thou to ride, so thou put on with measure:
So of a kitten teach a Cat to play,
She will be loving to her dying day.
But feed an old one that thou did not hatch,
She Will churlish grow and by the fingers scratch:
That Wives well learned in tongues thereby became
More crafty, as young Foxes bred up tame,
And therefore all young Shepherds did advise,
To take no Maids from th'Universities,
Which Scholars did with so much Logic fill,
They would by Syllogisms maintain their will,
Nor heir to Land, for they will by their own
Revenues make their will and pleasure known;
Such Emblems home applied, would edify
Us and our Wives,

Tit. apply't thy self, not I;
Such were the Observations of my youth,
Which now I see are taken up for truth,
To sport with Muses I do often take leave,
The miseries of old age to deceive,
An ounce of mirth when I the time can spare,
Is better then a pound of grief and care.

Dorus. This of thy second wife, how proud the first?
Then all for better taken were and worst,

Tyterus. That which at first her friends and she did fear,
Was manifest to us within the Year;
A Hectic Fever her denied of breath,
She was unparellel'd in Life and Death.

Battus. What of thy third?

Tit. My Friend it is not the Fashion,
To praise the 'live with Funeral Oration,
Her heart I ought bedew with double tears,
As she with me has doubled both their years;
If fates require that I shall stay behind her,
I shall commend of her then as I find her,
Neat, prudent, frugall, bountiful and grave:

Battus. Sure thou intendest a fourth wife to have.

Dorus. Soft Bat. For Tityrus I Will undertake,
He Will never wed another for her sake;
But lo the Sun comes to his Zenith nighest,
And least appears now he is mounted highest:
But I believe it with thy wife is noon
Her dinner's dressed betime she rose so soon.
Come Tityrus thou must see her daily Feasts,
Where we shall find more dishes far then guests.

Tyterus. Two dishes are a plentiful repast.

Dorus. There will be more then thou can wish to taste;
But lo, I Westward see the Welkin lowrs,
Before thy wife has dined there will be showrs.

Battus. It Is not the first time I have thus been wet,
Make haste, the Dishes on the Board are set.

Dorus. Great Pan himself had never such a dinner,
Prepared him at the charges of a spinner;
She comes, let us first salute this comely Bride,
Then Tityrus shall sit down by her side:
We with our mirth will make thy Cottage ring,
So will we make this dinner for a King.

Some of Tityrus's Songs then sang by Dorus.
A Mandee to Grammar Scholars.
1 TO them that truly Learning prize and love,
I wish each twig,
Sweet as a Fig,
The Ferula as soft as kidskin glove.
2 In time of Seed no cost or labor spare,
Who sows cheap,
Shall never reap
Things admirable excellent and rare.
3 One hour in in youth well spent may go for two,
When we grow old,
Our Studie's cold;
The things we learn in youth, in age we do.
4 Loaves heavy prove that rise not in the Dough:
Flowers in the prime,
In far less time
Then they in Summer or in Autumn grow.
5 Look but before you plainly shall descry,
Honors attend
On them that spend,
Their youth in sacred Muses company.
6 When they that follow worldly vain delight,
In folly spend,
What Heavens do send,
And set in mists of sad obscured night.
7 Hence younger Brethers by their studies raise,
Their Houses name
To Height of fame
And build brave Monuments of lasting praise.
8 Which The Elder finding ready built to hand
Their Genius please,
In Sloth and Ease,
Or waste in pride and riot, Goods and Land.
8 Wherefore to him that truly Learning loves,
In stead of twigs,
I wish sweet Figs,
For Ferula's perfumed Kidskin Gloves.
To his little Valentine.
A Pair of Gloves of Lamb-skin leather fine,
I will bestow upon my Valentine.
Who is as mild and gentle as a Lamb,
For why? she sucked no other from her Dam;
As white and clear as Lilly of the Valley,
Apt to delight, to leap, to bound, to dally,
How like a Lamb, she only does not creep,
And there is good hope she will never prove a Sheep;
For so she should degenerate from her Mother:
To such, if thou be wise, sue, to none other.
To his Mistress.
AS I in me, my Mistress fair did see,
A picking Pipridges, my heart then free
She stole away: Ah! knew she what she did?
Picking and stealing is by death forbid.
To the same.
WHen I my love to Myra tell,
She answers always well, well, well;
That you can speak well I do know,
But I Would fain learn how you will do.
A Song.
APocryphal are Stories not the Lives,
Of valiant Judith and Susanna chaste;
They have and shall be Paterns for good Wives,
So long as any Womanhood shall last.
No name like Sarah's is so dignified,
By Moses in his world-creating Story,
He tells her Beauty, Tomb, what age she di'd,
Obedience to her Lord her greatest glory.
But none The Almighty does so much regard
As his meek Handmaids Virgin-lowlinesse,
By whom He for His people that prepared,
For which all Generations shall Her bless.
Rebecca, Leah, Ruth, Vriah's Wife,
Were silver Pipes for to convey the Seed
To this Conduct, whence sprang the Lord of Life,
Whose bruised heel should break the Serpents head.
All Stories read over and over again,
You Will find more women bad then good of Men.
The Pride of Scholars is to prove good Readers,
The Crown of Women is to be good Breeders.
A Suitor to his Mistress.
A Strea that left Earth to Heaven to flee,
Is now come back and Fair enshrined in thee,
Not to return, but stay and on me shine,
Enrich me thus, and all the world is mine:
Regard a mortal whose faint soul aspires,
Enlightened by the Beams celestial fire;
(Compelled to be thy Convert) but to look
His Lesson over in thy sweet Beauties Book:
Oh't be my Heaven on Earth, may I obtain
Under thy Scepter this my highest aim,
The Golden Ball will prove lead to my gain.
An Epitaph.
THis Widow true to only one man's side,
Might from her body count before she di'd
More Scions then be days in longest year,
This Honywood did all these Hony-suckles rear.
His own Epitaph.
Haec suprema Dies sit mihi prima quies.
Lord let this last be my first day of Rest.
A Pair of Turtles. Viz. Two Elegies on the Deaths of EDMUND ALLEYN Esquire,
Son and Heir to Sir Edward Alleyn of Hatfield in Essex, Baronet, and MARY his
Wife, left by him with Child, and died soon after her Delivery.
The first Elegy.
THe times of War and Peace this difference have,
In Peace Sons Fathers follow to the grave;
In War the Father mourns for the Son,
Here Peace and War do both agree in one.
And surely Tears more plentifully fall,
At Childrens then at Parents Funeral,
By which man's frailty's manifestly shown,
Who wail not others losses but our own:
For why should we with grief our hearts molest
For them who quite from cares now live at rest,
Or plain the shortness of their living day,
Who unto Heaven have found a nearer way;
And setting later out do on us gain
With running, like Ahimaaz by the Plain?
They that with diligence will heed their ways,
Attain their Journeys end in fewer days
Then he that by his often diversions spends
Much precious Time, in worlds delight and friends,
Or makes in his Inn a longer stay,
Whereby his Reckoning larger grows to pay.
If here on Earth we ought to lay up store
For Heaven, that our good deeds may go before,
What comfort will it be at our latter end,
When Children we before us thither send,
Who sitting by their sweetest Saviors side,
Us Mansions there, as we them here provide,
Or rather enter on the habitation
Provided for us, ere the worlds foundation:
Oh! what can add to their felicity,
That see their Sons preferred before they die
To higher states, then wishes can advance
An endless glorious rich Inheritance?
Of which the Joseph.
Son of Jacobs greatest glory
Was but a Type, this lasts, that is transitory.
In life thou never envied'st him content,
Then do not his last happiness lament,
Who would not change his state one hour to get
The wealth and honor of a Baronet!
Beleev't thy Son is only gone before,
Thou him must follow, he will return no more.
Then like that good old man thy soul revive,
Thou have enough, thy Son is yet alive,
Angels.
Heavens Chariots shall thee bring to Goshens plain,
Where thou shall living see thy Son again.
The second Elegy.
WHat many ancient Histories relate
Of Turtles constant love unto their Mate,
She did exemplify, and plainly prove,
There is no life in living, but in Love.
The miss whereof made her so much deplore
Her Turtles loss, who only went before:
Whom willing she had followed to the Tomb,
But for the Treasure left her in the Womb,
Which had it perished by such a cross,
The world at once had suffered too much loss.
Now, like another Phoenix of his seed,
She first another like her self does breed.
Long did thou look, and longing wish to move
Up to thy Loadstarre, which thou eyd'st above,
But could not rise so high, till thou were light,
Then up to Heaven to him thou take thy flight,
As pure Steel needle ardently does move
To Lodestone, wherewithal it is in love.
Why should thou thus go out before thy date,
And leave us to bewail thine early Fate?
That all our gain such Virtues to have known,
Turns loss so soon to see them from us flown:
As Vines best Clusters soonest off are pulled,
And purest Gold from out the dross is culled;
So often the choicest Mortals in their prime,
May seem hence snatched away before their time.
But such fair Clusters on Heavens board are served,
The Gold to bear Gods image is preserved.
We here our sorrows breathe out to be read,
That she in them may live, when we are dead,
Who living well deserved she might die never,
And by her dying here, to live for ever.
Though both were short and sudden, her example
In Life and Death is as a Volume ample,
Where all may read aright to live and die,
And follow her to true felicity.
But why speak I of Death? her Bodies frame
Is only turned to dust, her virtues fame
Like fumes of burning Cedar does ascend,
And savor sweetest in her latter end.
Ay let her blessed memory remain,
To see if Wives hereafter can attain
To her perfection: And these sabled Rimes
Be paterns for good Wives in following times.
Thrice happy they that lay Corruption down,
To gain that rich incorruptible Crown,
Which them does more assuredly attend,
Who like her live, and dying like her end.
And let one Tomb their ashes here contain,
Who lived and loved as sure to meet again.
They in the fair and in the stormy weather,
Do fly, cry, die, and lie together.
Our Days are likened to a Tale that is told.
Which long and tedious grow as men grow old,
The younger shorter tell: If Death once strike,
The long and shorter Tales close both alike.
I care not whether long or short I tell,
So I can hit it right and end it well.
FINIS.

