AN ADMONITION GIVEN Unto Mr. SALT MARSH: WHEREIN His great Sin in writing
those Pamphlets Entitled, A New Quaere, Smoke in the Temple, Groans for
Liberty, etc. Is plainly laid open before him, and charged upon his Conscience.
Where also among other things spoken of, the Calling of the Ministers in the
Reformed Churches, is proved to be according to the Word of God.

2 TIMOTHY 3.7. Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
Truth.

2 PET. 2.18, 19. For when they speak great swelling words of vanity, they
allure through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that
were clean escaped from them who live in error. While they promise them
liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption: for of whom a man is
overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage.

Cypriani Epistol. 52. Antoniano Fratri. Quod vero ad Novatiani personam
attinet (frater Charissime) de quo desiderasti tibi scribi quam haeresim
introduxisset, scias nos primo in loco nec curiosos esse debere, quid ille
doceat, cum foris doceat. Quisquis ille est, and qualiscunque est, Christianus
non est, qui in Christi Ecclesia non est. Jactet se licet, and Philosophiam,
vel eloquentiam suam superbis vocibus praedicet; qui nec fraternam charitatem,
nec Ecclesiasticam unitatem tenuit, etiam quod prius fuerat amisit.

Imprimatur,

Ja: Cranford.



Printed at London by John Dever and Robert Ibbitson, for Ralph Smith, and are
to be sold at his shop at the sign of the Bible in Cornhill. MDCXLVI.

THE PREFACE:
THE occasion of Printing this following Discourse is this: The Reverend and
learned Author upon the coming forth and perusal of some of Mr. Saltmarshes
Pamphlets, being much offended and grieved at them; sent him in a private way
this Admonition, taking special care, that as it should safely come to his
hands, so to let him have notice where he might return an Answer back to the
Author, if he had pleased: Now the Author having waited almost four Months
for an Answer from Mr. Saltmarsh, and hearing nothing from him, but on the
contrary, since he sent him this Admonition, Mr. Saltmarsh, going on in
Printing other things of the like nature, as a Book Entitled Reasons for love,
unity, and Peace, with pretended Answers to Mr. Gataker, Mr. Ley, Mr. Edwards,
Mr. W. it is thought fit to make public this private Admonition, which had it
done any good upon him, and brought him to repentance, had never been published
to the world: But those who sin openly, and being admonished, go on yet more,
ought to be rebuked before all, that others may fear and learn; And if this
public Reproof does Mr. Saltmarsh no good neither, he may expect to be more
sharply dealt with, that he may learn not to blaspheme.

AN ADMONITION GIVEN UNTO MASTER Saltmarsh.
Master Saltmarsh,
ALthough I have no acquaintance with your person, yet by some of your
writings, I think I can discern somewhat of the frame of your Spirit; and
though I cannot well conjecture what use you will make of that which I purpose
to express toward you in love to your Soul; yet I think it my duty at this
time, in this manner to admonish you, that sin may not rest upon. You know
the Commandment of our God does oblige me to this, Levit. 19.17. And our
Savior does confirm the same in cases of offense between brethren. Matthew.
18.15. Now I must declare unto you in true simplicity, that your ways of
dealing with your Brethren are very offensive unto me; and I conceive that you
are bound in Conscience, to give me some satisfaction in that which I shall
propose unto you; either by acknowledging and mending the dangerous error of
your ways; or else by rectifying my judgment in the apprehension which I have
of it.

The thing then is this, that finding you a Preacher of the Gospel as you call
your self; and meddling with the controversies of the time about
Church Government to give Counsel therein to the State what to do; you follow
no Rule of edification, but venture boldly upon all the Ways of destruction,
and savor nothing of Charity; in dealing with your Brethren of the Ministry;
but endeavor to make them every way contemptible unto the world by injurious
and false aspersions; and to provoke their Spirits to invitation and disputes
against you, by a disorderly and quarrelsome way of writing against them. I
take no delight (God is my witness) as you seem to do (in your public
Writings, with a kind of insultation over a whole Assembly of Divines); to lay
this charge (in a private way) upon you; but it is a grief to me to express
it, that I should find any that calls himself a Minister of the Gospel of
Christ, liable unto such faults; and so far out of the way, which Christ's
Spirit (the anointing which you so much speak of) does teach his true
Disciples to walk in. Well then, that I may ease my self upon you, of the
grief which you have occasioned, to the end that the Lord may be merciful
unto you, to incline you (if it be possible) to take away the cause thereof; I
shall truly and faithfully let you see whence it does arise, and how your
proceedings have begotten it in me.

I have seen heretofore a little Tract of yours which you call a New Quaere
concerning Church Government, wherein you endeavor to persuade the State to
keep it in an Unsettlement: that Tract, in the aim which you have in it, and
the way you take to insinvate it, with many fallacies in Divinity fit to
entangle the weak, and with many Principles of corrupt, sensual, and worldly
State-Policie, fit to stir up and confirm Envy and Pride in the hearts of
earthly men that have power in their hands; did not a little sad my spirit,
when I read it; and had thoughts to have spoken to you about it, when I was at
London; but the opportunity was not offered, and so I left off the thought of
it, chiefly when I found that some body answered it.

But now being out of London I meet in the Country with another Tract, of a
far worse nature, (if worse may be) then that was; concerning the Divine Right
of the Presbytery, whereof I shall speak unto you plainly, and in all true
love, my thoughts, if perhaps God may be pleased to open your eyes, to see the
snare wherein you are caught by Satan, to be his instrument, to tempt all men,
to all manner of disorders, to disturb this distracted State, and bring it to
Rvine, which I beseech God in mercy to prevent. For truly the way which you
have taken, and wherein you proceed with a great deal of confidence, provoking
others to follow you and to answer you in the same kind; if it should be
entertained on all sides; can produce nothing but the Gall of bitterness, and
destruction in the end. For if ye bite and devovre one another; ye are in
danger to be consumed one of another says the Apostle. Gal. 5.15. Therefore he
is careful to Teach men, that suppose they live by the Spirit of Christ, to
set themselves to walk also in the Spirit, from ver. 16. till the end of the
Chapter, showing that he who endeavors to walk in the Spirit, shall not be led
away to fulfill the lusts of the flesh, because such as are Christ's, have
Crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, and are not desirous of
vain glory, by provoking one another, or envying one another; as (in all that
I have seen of your writings in this kind) you are fully and strongly bent to
do; and that under a kind of pretense of zeal for Religion and Moderation:
when as, in effect I meet with none that uses more devouring words then you
have done; or that applies them with more cunning to deceive, and to work
mischief in the minds of men. Pardon these expressions, they are not words of
passion to reproach, but of compassion to warn you of the Spirit by which you
are led; that you may reflect upon your self, and take heed unto your way; and
not excuse the matter, with colorable pretenses. For what although some
Antagonists have set themselves to discover the shameful nakedness of your
Brethren unto the world; and to grate upon the sores that are painful, rather
to warn others of a danger, then to recover these that are the cause of the
danger, from the error of their ways? I say; what although some have done
thus; and have not dealt with the men of a dissenting judgment as with
Brethren, overtaken in a fault; to restore them in the Spirit of meekness:
should you therefore that pretend to be spiritual, suffer your self to be
provoked by them to follow the same way of irritation; to increase the fuel
of wrath; and inflame the Spirits of men whom you judge carnal and destitute
of the anointing? Suppose they deal uncharitably with those that you stand
for; is it therefore lawful for you or expedient to the cause of Religion, or
advantageous for your own aim, to deal as uncharitably with them, or rather
more injuriously? you that affect so much the Spirit, and plead for love;
should you be overcome with evil, to recompense evil for evil, and not
rather study to overcome it with good? recrimination is no just defense; and
chiefly with such a kind of reproachful accusation as you make use of; and in
such away of applying it as you are fallen upon: for if your accusations be not
only railings, but falsehoods; and if you apply them to the unsettlement of all
men's affections toward each other; namely to stagger the weak of all sides
and incense the strong of each side to their utmost endeavors of strife; if (I
say) this be so; then let me entreat you to reflect upon your self, and
consider what use Satan makes of your tongue and pen for his ends; for if you
are not afraid to write in public that which I see under your name; I may
without uncharitableness, imagine, that your tongue in private will not spare
to walk through the earth in a more desperate path, perhaps then I can, or
will admit into my thoughts, of him whom I do esteem a brother, therefore, as to
a brother, for whom I am sollicitous (I speak it in the right of Christ) let me
entreat you (before I come to the particulars which I purpose to lay before
you, from your writings) to take heed to your speaking; It is incident to men
of nimble wits, to speak freely, to plot designs, and uttering them, to set
themselves or others upon the acting thereof; and I am afraid it may be made
some part of your employment, to work the divisions of this State and Church
to the height by private contrivements; if your spirit in your more secret
walking, be not otherwise affected toward your Brethren, and tempered toward
the public Peace; than it appears unto me to be in your public counsels
and writings: whereof now to discharge the grievances which I have against you
at them (I should have said rather against them unto you); I will give you a
distinct and particular acount; and lest I should seem to complain without a
cause, or take upon me toward you more, then I would have you to do toward
my self in the like case: therefore let this be said once for all all, Cursed
be he that does the work of the Lord deceitfully: or that under the Color of
Christian love, in such a case does seek any other advantage then the gaining
of his Brother to a clear duty in the Gospel. If then I shall err in
judgment (for who can presume to be without error) I desire you to rectify my
mistakes, with the same affection whereby I offer my self now to discover your
mistakes unto your Conscience, beseeching the Lord in mercy to let you see the
danger of them, for your good, and the preservation of others that may be
endangered by them, and wrought upon to follow your footsteps.

First it is a grievance to my spirit to find a specious promise in the title
of your Treatise, stirring up an appetite to taste of some ripe fruit of
tenderness, which my Soul desires in all these Controversies, when as in the
Treatise it self, I can find no cluster at all of comfort or refreshment. And
therefore I have cause to cry out with the Prophet Mich. 7. Woe is me for I am
as when they have gathered the summer frvits as the Grape-gleanings of the
Vintage: there is no Cluster to Eat, the good man is perished; they all lie in
wait for blood; they hunt every man his neighbor with a net etc. If then you
will ease me of this grief I pray you show me where the Brotherly tenderness
is, and that sweetness which Master Bachiler commends your Treatise for. If it
be no where but in page 8 and 9. where you propound for the Parliament that all
sides may enjoy their liberty in their judgment, as now they do which is in
strife and contention for it, with all manner of contrivements to make their
practice according to their judgment, prevalent against each other; if this be
all, what the better will the State or Church be for this Counsel? What love
will this beget? Will it not rather in the unsettlement of all relations and
bands of mutual edification and of orderly proceedings (which should prevent
offenses, which beget murmurings and disputes) leave the Reins loose unto all
men to run riot one against another; and in a Carnal way pleasing themselves
(as you I conceive have done in this Treatise) they will not care whom they do
displease. I did truly expect some lenitive and mollifying cataplasme or
ointment to abate the inflammation of our pains and sores; and behold a cold
water sprinkled upon them only on the outside to make them burn more
vehemently and ache more inwardly, and harden the boiles that the corrupt matter
may never be purged out. If you had either used some arguments convincingly
pressed home, to provoke men to that love which Christ requires in us all, and
to that forbearance in love which might tend to the healing of breaches: or if
you had propounded some equitable ways of Treating between the parties to
come to a better understanding and reconcilement of differences: or if you had
showed how the distemperat execesses of passionate men on all sides, might be
without violent courses (which may reflect upon the Consciences of tender and
weak ones) taken away; I would have relished some sweetness in your spirit, or
some tenderness toward your Brethren. But in very deed your spirit (if I can
see any thing in the disposition of spirits, (1 Cor. 4.6.) is contrary to the
Apostolical rule (even there where your tenderness does lie) puffed up highly
for one against another and if your conclusion of the Treatise, wherein you
declare the aim you have in writing should be believed as well as the title; it
will appear that the title of tenderness is a mere flourish and bait to
allure a simple soul to swallow a hook: for you profess in plain terms
that you write to provoke others to show their strength against you, as in a
matter of high concernment; and your self being a man (forsooth) that regard
neither an University nor a Pulpit; neither a Doctor nor a Teacher of these
Reformed Churches, as if they were all inferior unto your anointing; because
some of them have not much more then Art and Habit. What do you mean by this?
Does this proceed from a sweet fountain? Can there be tenderness toward a
brother, without humility in ones self? And can such unsavory provocations,
in such high terms, stand with true inward humility? Only by pride comes
contention says, Solomon Prove. 13.10. And the Apostle James. 4. tells us, that
wars and fightings come from our lusts; Look then to your aim, and see what
it lusts after; and in what manner your spirit does express that lust which
it has; and then tell me from your Conscience, whether your lust is not to
envy and to strife? And if it be clearly by your own words found such; do not
boast too fast of your anointing; and do not lie against the Truth of your
aim with a pretense of tenderness: for though you lay no claim to Arts nor
Habits; yet the wisdom by which you are led in this matter descends not from
above but is earthly and sensual. Which I grieve to see, and wish that you
would lay it to heart to be humbled before God for it, that he may be merciful
unto you, and give you indeed that anointing, which you seem to boast of; for
not he that commends himself, or can discommend others, is praise worthy; but
he whom God commends, by giving him the spirit of wisdom unto sobriety, in
thinking of himself, and unto charity, and meekness in dealing with others:
which I wish you from my heart henceforth.

The Second Grievance is, the insulting over your Brethren of the Assembly in
your Preface to them; by triumphing over them as Humbled from that height
wherein you seem to intimate that they thought themselves set; what do you
here gain either for their edification or your own? and by reproaching them
with a fault of going beyond their bounder; I am afraid, as you intend not to
heal any thing in them, but to exalt your self alone, to be equal to them
all, in your own imagination; so perhaps in depressing their estimation to the
magnitude of your self; you may have a worldly end, to please some that seek
pretenses against them. I leave this to the Consideration of your Conscience,
whether I have not cause to suspect some such thing, where so much of worldly
respect to greatness, and in order to that, such Self-love is expressed in so
high a degree, as to despise all their judgments in comparison of your own.
Who is ignorant, that as laying too much weight upon the voices of Synods or
Assemblies of men; there has been or may be, a Mystery of Iniquity; but will
you deny that there has not been or may not be, as great, or a greater
Mystery of iniquity, in that Spirit, which does extol it self above the
spirit of the Prophets, when it ought to be subject thereunto? whereunto if you
(who boast your self so easily in vanity) are not in danger to be tempted, I am
much deceived: therefore it will be your wisdom to look in humility to your
standing, lest you be also tempted, seeing you think that a whole Assembly of
men, of greater abilities then you self, may come to fall.

The Third Grievance to my Spirit is this; that you are not afraid to inform
the world of many Untruths to the prejudice of your Brethren, that they may be
disrespected in their Ministry.

And the Fourth Grievance, is this; that you have a peculiar Artifice in the
Application of your accusations to exasperate men's spirrts with hatred against
your Brethren, beyond any man that I have known.

Under these two heads I comprehend all the particular Grievances which are in
the whole Treatise, which is nothing but a bush of thorns which scarce can be
touched any where without a prickle: and if your spirit can bring forth none
other fruits (which I hope by repentance it may) your end will be sad; for you
that can kindle so much fire in other men's spirits; must needs have a great
deal of fuel within your self, which you will do wisely to cast out
betimes, lest you taste of the fruit of your own doings and your backsliding
reprove you when it may be too late.

I shall endeavor only to point at matters briefly; and to ease my spirit of
the burden which you have laid upon it; I shall rectify your mistakes; and
show what should have been done for edification in truth; if your aim had
been upright and to gain your lawful end if you had followed a commendable
course:

Under the third head of grievances, I rank all the Untruths wherewith you
asperse your Brethren: and by the untruths I mean all the false positions in
matter of Doctrine, which you father upon them; either as their own or such as
they are bound to make good; and all the false Assertions which you lay as
grounds of truth to be received by all; that they in their Ministry may be
vilified; and all the injurious inferences whereby you misreport their meaning,
in their Petition to the Houses.

1. Here you tell us that they pretend a Right to the Ministry, by virtue of
that Ordination only, which is derived by a Personal succession from Bishops,
and so upwards to the Apostles without interruption: and from this false
supposition of your own, which you father upon them as their position, you
spin out a great many absurdities, which you will oblige them to make good; or
to be guilty of. This is the matter of page 1 and 2.

Secondly, Then you oppose the Nature of their Congregational Eldership to
their Classical and Synodicall; and upon unsound grounds, which you assert as
truths; calling the Constitution of their Elders, and of the extent of their
Congregations, into question; you labor to bring a disrespect upon them, and
this is the matter of page 3. and part of page 4.

Thirdly, Because they pretend Art to have such an immediate Call as the
Apostles had, but have only an ordinary measure of gifts, you infer from
thence that they have no right to challenge Church Power to themselves, or to
allege and apply the Scriptures giving that power to Ministers, unto
themselves: and this you insist upon, page 4. 5. 6.

Fourthly, You traduce the purpose and the end of the Constitution of a
National Assembly and make it formidable to a State, and no loss then
Antichristian. page 7.

Lastly, your inferences upon the heads of the Petition, are the vilest and
most injurious misrepresentations of their meaning that any can devise; to make
them be thought proud and intending to exalt themselves above the Parliament,
to make them guilty of mis-interpreting the National Covenant; and to make
them wholly dependent in all their Administrations upon the State, or else to
be thought absurd in petitioning the removal of the Commissioners, and this is
the substance of your page 11, 12, 13, 14.

These things are nothing else but a mass of Untruths, and false
representations of matters tending only to stagger the Simpler sort and to
gratify the enemies either of that Church-Constitution; or else of all
Religion that by the dissolution of that frame of Government they may be able
to sin without Control, and do what they will,

Now that any who calls himself a Preacher of the Gospel, should set himself
thus to tradvce these whom he calls Brethren: to the end that their Ministry
may become contemptible, is a sad matter unto me: both in respect of the
Gospel which thereby is made unprofitable unto many: and in respect of these
that are wronged, and him that does the wrong. But that I may not seem to
delight so much in the aggravating of wrongs as in the rectifying of them: I
will Charitably suppose that you have erred partly through ignorance; and
partly through heat of passion in all these mis-representations of matters: and
not against the light of your Conscience, and through pure Malice. For although
there is a spirit of Malignity in our corrupt nature leading us to wrest things
to the worst sense, which concern those to whom we seek to insult over: yet I
hardly can think that any who is not a reprobate and void of all Conscience;
can wittingly and willingly against his own knowledge set himself thus to be
injurious unto his Brethren in the profession of the Gospel; to make them
Universally odious and despicable in the Ministry. Therefore I think it only
an error of judgment in you heightened with passion, to take advantages against
them, to exalt your self over them, and make them despicable. And to Remedy
this evil, I will give you my true sense of these things which are alleged
wrongfully by you to their disreputation; that your mistake may be rectified.

I say then that the Reformed Church in these and other parts, which has
received the light of the Gospel since the discovery of Popery does hold
that the true Ordination of Ministers does not depend upon any Personal
Succession of Men, but upon the appointment of God: who has given by the
Manifestation of his Truth, gifts unto his Church which are to be administered
therein by the Office of the Presbytery, which has a power to propagate it
self; for the continuance of the work of the Ministry in this world. If then
since the Apostles times there has been a Church; that is a Company of true
Believers in the world, always extant; (whether visible or invisible to the
world, that is not material; all hold that the Church is always visible to it
self) we must acknowledge that to that Church the gifts of the Spirit have
never been wanting therein: and if the gifts have never failed, there has
always been a Power in the Eldership of that Church to administer the same
unto the members thereof; by verue of Gods Commandment. 1 Peter 4.10, 11. As
every man has received the gift, even so, minister the same one to another as
good Stewards of the manifold grace of God. If any man speak let him speak as
the Oracles of God, if any man minister, let him do it as of the ability
which God gives. From this Commandment we learn that God has always in
his Church Stewards of his grace; and that he does give unto them an Ability
to minister the same. This ability is partly inward in the property of the
gift, partly outward in the property of the Office, by which it is to be
administered unto the Church in an orderly way: and that the orderly way of
administration may not fail in the house of God (for God is the God of order
and not of Confusion) no man is to take the Office unto himself, but he is
honored therewith who is called thereunto by God as Aaron was Hebr. 5.4. Now
the power of calling in an ordinary way, is by the Office of the Eldership in
the Church, and not by any Personal Succession: For it is the Eldership that
gives Ordination by the imposition of hands. 1 Timothy 4.14. and where the Office
is established, it may and ought to be propagated by these that are entrusted
therewith toward others that are fit to Administer the same unto others also
that there may be a perpetual continuance thereof: for so the Lord has
appointed. 2 Timothy 2.2. We say then, that the Lord has never left the world
without some true Ministers of the Word; by their Ministry of the Word, Faith
has been begotten; and with Faith the gifts of the Spirit sent forth; and
where the gifts have been, the Administration thereof has also been by
virtue of an Office residing in those to whom God does give ability: if then a
Minister of the Reformed Church be called unto an account of the Right which
he has unto his Office; he will give this proof of it: That in a true Church
of God, according to his appointment, after trial, and manifestation of his
gifts and graces, found fit for edification; he was called, and by these that
did Administer in that Church the Office of the Eldership, was in an orderly
manner ordained and dedicated with Prayer and imposition of hands unto God, to
have a lot and part in his Service: and they justly reject from the Society of
that Office all such as come not in by this orderly and ordinary way; nor ought
they to admit of any; or acknowledge him to be a Steward of the Mysteries of
God, who is not thus called by the Eldership of some true Church.

If you knew this to be the true meaning of the Reformed Churches, and did
nevertheless run out upon the Cavills you have in your first and second
page, you are much to blame; but if you knew it not; you should have made
enquiry; and not have condemned your Brethren upon a false presupposall: the
Ministers of the Low Countries and of France are not ordained by Bishops; and
none does question their Calling to the Ministry.

As for the Congregationall, Classical, and Synodicall Presbyteries; if they
be Rightly Constituted and met together in the Communion of Saints for their
mutual edification in love, they all stand a like by Divine Right; for if the
Eldership of one single Congregation has a right from God to determine that
which is fit for its own edification within it self; it cannot be denied but
the Elderships of many Congregations joined together have the same right:
whatsoever they have Single; they cannot lose Conjoined, but their Right is
rather strengthened by their union. And what you speak of a Prudentiall
Judicature, is but a Cavil: All Churches have a right from God to judge of all
affairs Prudentially for their own building up in love by the Rules. 1 Cor.
14.26, 40.

Then to the exception which you make against Elders as Constituted by the
countenance of an Ordinance of Parliament, and not by the Apostolical
Scripture-Rule; I say that their constitution to be Officers in the Church is
only from the Apostolical Rule and the Parliament-Ordinance is but an outward
accidental concurrence and help to the settling of them by the Rule; therefore
this is nothing, but a Cavil in like manner. So is also that which is called a
Parishionall Congregation, nothing else but a Circumstantiall outward boundary
of a certain number of people, in which a Spiritual Congregation is to be
settled according to the Word; and therefore this is another Cavil like unto
the former. And as for the Assembly in this Extraordinary way of Reformation;
it is a necessary help in the Communion of Saints for Counsel and Advice to
maintain the Unity of the Spirit amongst Brethren in the bond of Peace; and
their Convocation by the approbation of Parliament, is but accidental to the
Right which the Ministers have to come together to do things for mutual
edification, and to determine among themselves their ways of orderly
proceeding in love.

We confess that the Primitive Elders and Apostles were immediately and more
eminently qualified, then these that are now in place, but we say also that
the different measure of gifts makes no essential difference in the nature of
the Administration; there is but one Faith, and one Spirit, and one Body, the
anointing of all is the same; and every member is bound in his place, according
to his Office, Romans 12.4. to supply to others that gift for the Administration
whereof Ephe. 4.16. the whole Body by Christ's Ordinance and under him is fitly
joined together and compacted: that God may be glorified in all things by Jesus
Christ. If we believe in the Word of the Apostles, we have Communion with
them, and are bound to follow them in all the Ordinances of worship, and of
mutual edification. 1 Cor. 11.1, 2. The Corinthians were no more privileged
to this than any Company of true believers are now; therefore it is but a mere
Cavil to tell us, because we have not such a degree of the anointing, that we
may not Administer the Ordinances; according to that degree and measure of
gifts which we have: there is a promise that if we be faithful in little we
shall be set over much. If we believe truly we have a right to all the
Ordinances by the Word; and all Offices and Officers in their Administrations,
are warranted thereby (...) edify their fellow members within themselves,
without any depe^dance upon any extrinsecall power: and although they ought to
do this; and to do it as by the ability which God gives; yet they cannot
pretend to any infallibility in their Administrations, whether of Doctrine, of
Worship, of Government, or of Censures, but in humility as under the Direction
of the Word, they make use of their gifts till God bring them to the Stature of
a Perfect man in Christ; and that they may come to this perfection they stand
joynted and compacted with their Brethren in the Communion of Saints, and
think it not safe or lawful for them to disjoynt themselves, as I understand
you have done; from such as call upon God out of a pure heart; and are grounded
in the same Truth of Faith with them, and are united to the same God and Father
by the same Covenant of Grace in Christ: from such you have separated your
self, and are now become a Cavillator and wrangler against them, seeking by
all means of railing and false imputations to disturb their Peace, and make
people disaffected toward them: for which sin if you repent not, you will
become a wandering Star, and never settle for ever: from which judgment I
beseech the Lord to preserve you: for I fear that you are on the way of
loosing your hold of the Scriptures, as well as of the Truth of Love to the
Brethren. When men once take a liberty to do all things that their own
Spirit does lead them unto by passion, and boast withal of the Spirit and
anointing, and despise others in comparison of themselves; and do not study to
show from the Scriptures that light which God has manifested unto them for the
instruction and direction of others to recover them with love and meekness
from the ways of error; but insult over them, and trample upon them for their
defamation and destruction, (I say) when men are thus acted by Satan; they are
in a dangerous condition.

Concerning a National Assembly we say that it has no power but in matters
of Spiritual concernment; and that the Divine Rights which is in all the
particular Churches by an aggregation of strength is Contracted in it, and
therefore is the true supreme Judicature in matters of difference amongst
Brethren: yet according to the Word, and by the Word, and through the
manifestation of the will of God, the judgment is Authoritative and not
otherwise: and you but Cavil and play the Politician to flatter Statesmen,
for some ends of your own, when you labor to stir up a jealousy in the
Parliament against the Authority of a National Assembly: their Spheres are so
far different in nature, their ends so distinct, their Principles so far
distant; and the Manner of their pro^^eding in dealing with those that relate
unto them, so quite oppsit; that (...) they will not purposely go out of their
ways they cannot entrench upon one another borders of Power, but each is
under God immediately within it self, over all its members; and one is mutually
subordinate to another according to his Will: the Ecclesiastical Persons are
under the Civil Judicature in matters of this World; and the Civil Persons
are under the Ecclesiastical Judicature in matters of the World to come; but
you confound all these Relations, and either ignorantly or wittingly for some
ends, will heed this distinction of Powers, committed to each in their
several Administrations under God; the one for the inward, the other for the
outward man, which ought no more to be at variance in a State then Soul and
Body in one and the same Man in their facultties and operations upon their
distinct Objects. Here you show the railing disposition of your mind, when you
parallel the National Assemblies of all the Reformed Churches (against all
evident experience of their behavior to the contrary; and against the clear
light of their Doctrine whereby they Challenge no interest in the Government of
worldly matters) with the Papal and Antichristian Power, which has exalted it
self above all that is called God on Earth, and in Heaven also.

The inferences which you make upon their Petition are such as truly deserve
none other observation but this; that it is an untruth which you say at the
beginning of every inference; namely that you may infer from their words that
which you do infer, for I say that you may not make evil inferences and
misconstructions of any man's meaning from his words; if they can bear any
better sense then you can put upon them to his prejudice, may you be injurious
and uncharitable to your Brethren? May you accuse them of wicked intentions
against their clear professions? if you may do this, what may you not do? I
pray you look to your self what liberty you take: you pressed to be in a
Spiritual liberty; but look now whether in using your liberty thus, you give
not an occasion to your flesh, to sow the seed of divisions of Complaints of
murmurings and disputes, and of all evil affections against your Brethren.

Therefore the last grievance which I shall offer unto you to Consider in your
way, is, the Artifice which you use to exasperate the Spirits of men by a
misconstruction even of the best things which are in them to the worst sense;
with so much boldness and variety of applications, and in such a
Tautologicall way to beat it upon the imaginations of Earthly men; and to
intricate the thoughts of the simple, that it is a great matter of sorrow, to
see you so busy in a perverse zeal to sow dissension amongst Brethren. You
build upon your own false supposalls and inferences, a kind of Method to
instruct people in the ways of opposition; wherein It will not trace you
because it is tedious and unprofitable, and needless to show you all the
deceitful windligs of your Spirit; to which you give an unlimited liberty to
entangle men by fallacies. I shall rather represent unto you what in your case
if you had been zealous for the Truth and not for deceiving, and leading men
out of the way; you should have done. Hearken now then, and consider, you that
talk so much of Truth. All The Truth which we should aim at, and bear
witness unto, one toward another; is either of Doctrine or Practice: The
Truth of Doctrine is the Testimony of the Word and Spirit, whereby God has
revealed himself and the things belonging to Christ and his Kingdom, unto us:
that by this knowledge we might receive all things pertaining to life, and to
Godliness. The Truth of Practice is that upright and sincere dealing with
others in God for their good according to our best knowledge of the things
which we would desire to have from them in the same kind. The means to make
this Truth of both kinds effectually profitable to our selves and others, is
to endeavor that which the Apostle exhorts us unto, Ephesians. 4.15. Namely to
speak the Truth in Love; and the effect of this endeavor will be, that which
he does promise, there shall follow thereupon, Namely to grow up in all things
into him, who is the Head, even Christ. Thus then whether it be a matter of
Doctrine or of Practice whereunto we are to bear witness; if we desire
thereby to grow up within our selves, or to build up others into Christ (which
is the only warrantable aim we can have) we must apply our minds to speak
the Truth in Love, and to do the Truth in Love; For the original words (...)
contain the sense of both in one expression. If then this is the Rule by which
we should walk in all things, that we may approve our Consciences to God as
his true servants, and enjoy Christ by walking after his Spirit in all things:
then we must never suffer any humane and worldly aims to sway our thoughts,
to speak or act, that which may tend only to satisfy our own or other
peoples humors; but before we undertake a business toward others, whether
the concernment be private or public, we should settle the affections of
Truth, and discern the way of uttering them in Love, to gain these with whom
we deal, to some duty of godliness, wherein they and we may grow up in
Christ. Now then to apply this Spiritual Method of proceeding to your Case,
let us State the Question which you make, and consider how you should, and I
would have proceeded, if it had been my Case; to desire a Resolution for my
self or others in it.

The Question is Concerning the Divine Right of the Prebyteriall Churches to
judge themselves of the scandalls of their Members according to the Word of
God; whether yea or no it does belong unto them? I would have set down this
Quaere distinctly, as a Doubt: and then would have sought out a way, to resolve
my self without partiality only for love to the Truth in it: and to this
effect I would have looked upon the frame and constitution, with the Doctrine
and Practice of the Churches which are called Presbyteriall: and set down
truly all that I should have found substantially material in them for their
own being; or distinctively observable to difference them from other
Churches. Then in the second place I would have made inquiry of their true
meaning of that which they call a Scandal in a Member, and of that which is
called Judging within themselves of Scandalls. And lastly of that which is
called a Divine Right, whereunto they pretend in this act of judging, and when
I should have satisfied my self in this inquiry so far as I could attain;
if then I had judged them to be in an error either of Doctrine or Practice
hurtful to the Kingdom of Christ, and to their own and others interest
therein; I would have taken a resolution to deal with them in Truth and
sincerity to reclaim them from that error; and answerable to such a
resolution, would have declared unto them my aim in dealing with them; and
desired them to weigh, and seriously to consider the doubts which I had
concerning their Pretense of a Divine Right, persuading them to lay down the
plea thereof. And if in their ordinary Practices to maintain and get
possession of this Right I should have observed things destructive to the
glorious Gospel of Peace, or to the edification and true liberty of their
Brethren, I would with all zeal and true affection have warned them of the
danger, and laying the fault clearly before them on the one side, I should have
labored to cause them to see the duty which God requires of them on the
other: and so commended them to the Grace of God; having discharged my
Conscience toward them. And thus I have at this time discharged my Conscience
toward you: and I have endeavored to walk within the compass of my Rule in
considering you and your ways, and in dealing with you freely and roundly to
pull you out of the fire; so I shall desire you to deal with me by the same
Rule, and if in this matter of grief, which your unruly dealing has
occasioned; I have exceeded in a Word of censure too sharply here or there
perhaps; I shall desire you not to take it in the worst sense: I have not much
time to spare from some other employments, and therefore in the grief of
spirit, and being in haste with-all to dispatch these thoughts unto you; I may
easily have failed in some words: for in many things we fail all, says the
Apostle James 3. (not excluding himself) and he that offends not in a word,
he is a perfect man; therefore I must plead for a Charitable construction of
all my expressions; and the rather, because the former part of this letter to
you is already sent to London, before I could deliberatly review it, as I
might have done if time would have given me leave; nor have I any Copy of that
which is gone, which is at least three parts of four; but I hope the friend to
whom it is sent will keep a Copy thereof for me; and will not (I know) do
any thing in the divulging of these things to your prejudice: but will
faithfully concur with me in this aim of your edification.

I pray you look not upon matters in appearance, but look upon them in the
Truth: set your self to be a Servant of the Truth, in Love; by provoking all
men unto the love which Christ requires of us; and not to the wrath which our
passions (by conceiving of things according to their worst construction) may
waken in others; to trouble them and increase their sin: Remember, that the
wrath of man does not fulfill the righteousness of God: and if your zeal be
a wrathful zeal rather to find out faults, and make them odious, then to
amend and heal the breaches of our spirits; you will be so far from doing
good to those with whom you deal, that you will not only make them less
corrigible; but you will make your own side worse, by being out of all patience
against them: for the Method that you follow, as it is pleasing to the fancy of
flesh and blood; so it cannot but work upon those that are ignorantly zealous,
(and that give credit unto your assertions) most violent and distempered
commotions, against those whom they imagine to be so hateful to God; and so
injurious to the public and to all their Brethren, as you make them, and if
they be not so hateful indeed as you make them; what judgment, you may
expect; and reward, for judging of others unjustly, in the day of Accounts; I
leave you to consider: It is very good to mind often that we shall give an
account of all our idle words: and that by our words we shall be judged: and
by our words we shall be condemned. The Lord teach us his fear in all
things, and grant, that before all keeping, we may keep the ways of our heart
from double aims in spiritual matters: not to look a*squint unto the worldly
designs of States, or great-Ones; to serve their turns with our indevours.
Do not inquire who I am, you may come to know me in due time; look upon me,
as I do upon you, in your Writings; I never saw your face to my knowledge, and
perhaps you will never see mine: I desire to know no body after the flesh; take
you only notice of that which I am to you in the spirit,

Your Friend, for Christ's sake, willing to serve you, M.W. J.D. S.B.
April 24. 1646.
Postscript.
SIR,
IF you shall think fit to return any Answer to these things, which I have
offered to your consideration; you may inscribe your Letter with the letters
which express my name, in the foregoing subscription; and you may be pleased
to send it to the place, which he that does bring this unto you, shall name:
and from thence it will be safely addressed to me: Thus again, I rest

Yours, as before, M.W. I.D. S.B.

FINIS.

