The Spiritual use of an Orchard, or Garden of FRUIT TREES.

Set forth in diverse Similitudes between Natural and Spiritual fruit trees,
in their Natures, and ordering, according to Scripture and Experience.

The second Impression; with the Addition of many Similitudes.

By RA: AUSTEN, Author of the first part.

Hos: 12.10. I have used Similitudes by the Ministry of the Prophets.

Jer: 17.8. He shall be as a Tree planted by the waters, and that spreads out
her Roots by the River, and shall not see when heat comes, but her leaf shall
be green, and shall not be careful in the year of drought, neither shall
cease from yiedling fruit.

Rom: 11.23. And they also, if they abide not still in unbeleife, shall be
grafted in, for God is able to graft them in again.

Joh: 15.1, 2. J am the true Vine, and my Father is the husbandman. Every
branch that bears fruit he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit.

Cant. 2.3. Like the Apple Tree among the Trees of the forest, so is my
beloved among the sons. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and
his fruit was sweet to my taste.

OXFORD, Printed by HEN: HALL, Printer to the UNIVERSITY, for THO: ROBINSON.
M.DC.LVII.

Aug: 2. 1656.
Imprimatur;

JOHAN: OWEN, Vice-Can:
Oxon:
A Preface to the Reader.
HAVING in the first part of this work spoken at large, concerning the ordering
of Natural Fruit Trees, in all respects, and of the great Profits, Pleasures,
and Advantages that arise thence; I shall now consider Fruit Trees upon another
Account; and endeavor to make some Spiritual use, and improvement of them.
And this should be our care, as to all creatures which we have to do with, upon
all occasions: according to the example of our Lord, and Savior, whose use it
was to spiritualife Natural and Moral things, when he conversed with us in
his bodily presence, as we see frequently in Scripture. When the Pharisees
spoke of washing their hands before meat. Matthew. 15.20. Christ instructs them
(thereupon) about spiritual defilements; when the woman of Samaria came to
draw water, Christ tells her of living water, Joh. 4.10. When his disciples
brought him Meat, he tells them he had meat they knew not of, it was meat,
and drink to him to do his fathers will, Jo. 4.34 When the man spoke of having
his inheritance divided Luke 12.13. our Savior (thereupon) instructs him, and
others at large, to beware of coveteousnesse, and worldly cares: when the
multitude followed him having eaten of the Loaves, Jo. 6. Christ thereupon
counsels them to labor for the meat that perishes not, for the bread of
life, Joh. 6.26.

And many spiritual things he illustrates by Similitudes from Natural things:
as we see Matthew. 13. (and many other places) from Scede, Tares, Mustard Seed,
Leaven, a Treasure in the Field, a Pearl, a draw net etc. So should we make a
Spiritual use of Natural things; and so turn Earth (as it were) into heaven.

When we have gone through all the works and labors to be performed in the
Orchard, and have received thereby a rich recompense of Temporal Profits and
Pleasures in the use of the Trees and Fruits, we may (besides all that) make a
Spiritual use of them, and receive more and greater Profits and Pleasures
thereby. Men are not wont to stint themselves at wordly Profits, but why are
they not willing to receive all kinds of Profits, or why are they not willing
to receive the greatest, and best? should a man choose, and prefer a
Glasse-beade or Toy before some Precious, and Rich Jewel, would he not be
censured for a foolish man: how much more foolish, and unwise is he that seeks
after Temporal Profits, and neglects Spiritual, and Eternal? therefore be
careful to make a spiritual improvement of fruit trees.

The World is a great Library, and Fruit Trees are some of the Books wherein we
may read and see plainly the Attributes of God, his Power, Wisdom, Goodness
etc. and be instructed and taught our duty toward him in many things, even
from Fruit Trees: for as trees (in a Metaphorical sense) are Books, so
likewise in the same sense they have a Voice, and speak plainly to us, and
teach us many good lessons.

The Lord Bacon says, God has two great Books which we ought to study, his
Word, and his Works: the one discovers his Will, the other his Power.

The Apostle says Romans 1.20. The invisible things of him from the Creation of
the World are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made,
even his Eternal Power and Godhead.

The Creatures of God are to be studied as Books, for in them we may read the
Attributes of God and observe some small resemblances, and dark shadows of
his infinite Excellencies, and Perfections; they are seen Per speculum
Creaturarum: They who cannot read a line in any Printed Book, may read many
good lessons in the Book of the Creatures.

Fruit Trees though they are dumb companions, yet (in a sense) we may discourse
with them: The Saints soul exalting humiliation. p. 87. et p. 205.
The works of God speak to the mind as his Word does to the Ear. Mr Boulton
says Our Eyes (Especially on the Sabbath day) ought as little Bees fall upon
several objects, and from them (as from so many Flowers) gather honey, and
bring it into the hive; That is, sweet, heavenly, wholesome Meditations for
magnifying the Creator in all his Attributes.

Fruit Trees and other Creatures do truly (though without an articulate voice)
Preach the Attributes and perfections of God to us; And we may read divine
Truths in them, as in a Book consisting of words and sentences; the Creatures
of God (according to their natures) speak out the praises of God, Ps. 145.10.
All thy works praise thee O Lord, and among them Fruitful Trees, 148.9.

Things without sense or life, have a voice, and speak to us, Ps. 19. The
Heavens declare the glory of God. verse. 3. Their voices are heard in every
language, or Nation. and verse. 4. Their words go to the ends of the World.

So that not only rational and irrational, but even Inanimate Creatures have
a voice, and speak loudly to men, and it is our duty to learn their language,
and hearken to them.

All Creatures (as a holy Man says) have a teaching voice, they read us
divinity Lectures of divine Providence.

We must be content to stoop to their way and manner of teaching, as the
Egyptians and others in former times, who were instructed by Characters and
Hyeroglyphiques, by something represented to the eye, Notions were conveyed to
the understanding.

Dumb Creatures speak virtually and convincingly to the mind, and Conscience.

If we make use of Creatures to serve our turn only in reference to our
outward man, we make not half that use of them as we ought, we should study
the Creatures and learn from them, to bring us nearer the Creator. Climbing up
by them, as by steps, or stairs, till we ascend to the highest Good.

How much of the goodness and excellencies of God do Fruit Trees show forth
when they (in their seasons) flourish with Leaves Blossoms and Fruits;
especially considered not only as they appear beautiful to the eye, but also
with all their inward beauties and perfections, their virtues, and uses in the
life of man? Both in Alimentall and Physical respects; but most of all, as
they are Similitudes and bear the figure, and resemblance of many high and
great Mysteries in the Word of God: the Analogy and resemblance is very near
in many things to the most noble visible Creature MAN. Fruit Trees bear the
Figure and resemblance of what is of highest esteem with God, his People, his
Jewels, his Adopted Sons, yea of his Natural Son, as we frequently find in
Scripture.

Likeness and resemblance of inferior Creatures to those above them, does
ennoble, and put some dignity upon them, according to the degree of likeness.
Now what Creatures bear resemblance to man in so many respects as Fruit Trees?
see the Observations page 1. 2. etc.

De Genesis ad Lit. Li. 15.
Austin speaking of the marvelous effects of Nature that appear in Seeds,
Trees, and Fruits, says they wonderfully manifest the Attributes of God,
therefore he exhorts us to search into them: Ex ipsis Operibus Dei indagare
conemur; consideremus ergo cujuslibet Arboris pulchritudinem in robore, ramis,
frondibus, Pomis etc. Let us (says he) inquire into the works of God, and
consider the beauty of a tree in the strength boughs, leaves, and fruits; he
says it is wonderful to see so great a body rise of so small a seed, which
seed has in it the whole Tree, with the Leaves, Fruits, and Seed, for the
propagation of the kind; not in their bulk, and dimensions, but Virtually, as
a Cause producing all these.

Illud germen ex semine, in semine ergo illa omnia fuerunt primitus, non mole
corporeae magnitudinis, sed vi potentiaque causaliter. For, In exiguo grano
mirabilior praestantiorque vis est, quia valuit adjacens humor commixtus
terrae. In this small seed there is a great and wonderful virtue, which shows
it self being cast into the earth, which then rises up into a body, and
spreads it self into boughs, and Branches, Quid enim ex Arbore illa surgit,
aut pendet, quod non ex quodam occulto Thesauro seminis illius extractum atque
depromptum est?

What rises, or grows upon the Tree that is not brought, or drawn out of the
seed, as out of a certain Storehouse, or Treasury?

Fruit Trees discover many things of God, and many things of our selves, and
concerning our duty to God. We enquire of, and discourse with Fruit Trees when
we consider, and meditate of them, when we search out their virtues and
perfections which God has put into them, when we pry into their natures, and
properties, that is speaking to them.

And when we (after a serious search) do make some use and result of what we
see in them, when we collect something from them concerning the Power, Wisdom,
Goodness, and Perfections of God, or our duty to God, that is the Answer of
the Fruit Trees; then Fruit Trees speak to the mind, and tell us many things,
and teach us many good lessons.

Our Considerations of them are the Questions we put to them, and the
Inferences or Conclusions, are their Answers. Those are the Lessons they teach
us.

Of this see Mr Caryl his Exposition on Job. chap. 12.

Job tells us of many Masters, Creatures of which we may learn, chap. 12. The
Beasts, the Fishes etc. and ver. 8. Speak to the Earth and it shall teach thee
etc. or (as it is interpreted) ask every slip or sprig that grows in the
Earth, and it shall teach thee. Natural, and visible things are shadows to us
of Spiritual, and the Spirit of God from things sensible, and visible, raises
our minds to things spiritual, and invisible.

The Ancients were skilled in this kind of Learning, in teaching by
SIMILITUDES, and one of them observes, that God sent us the Book of Nature,
before he sent us the Book of the Scriptures.

The People of God in the beginning of the World were without the Scriptures
for many years, and they read many things in the Book of the Creatures.

Isaac went to meditate in the Feilds Genesis 24.63. And no doubt learned many
Lessons from the Creatures.

And when the Church had some part of the Scriptures, yet were they instructed
for the space of two thousand years together by Similitudes, for what was all
the old administration, but shadows, or Similitudes of things to come, all
shadowing out Christ, and the things of Christ? So the Apostle tells us Heb. 10
1. The law having the shadow of good things to come; and Heb. 8.5. The example
and shadow of heavenly things: and Heb. 9.23. The Similitudes of heavenly
things. All their Services and Ceremonies were Similitudes of heavenly, and
spiritual things, whereby they were taught, and instructed.

Teaching by SIMILITUDES is the most plain way of Teaching, and makes dark
things more clear to the Understanding, and best to be retained in the Memory.
Our blessed Savior (the great Prophet and teacher of his Church, who spoke as
never man spoke) he taught much by SIMILITUDES in his own person; and before
his coming in the flesh, by his Prophets, as we see Hos: 12.10. I have used
Similitudes by the Ministry of the Prophets: so we find in Esaias, Ezekiel, and
the rest.

One says, as Windows are to a house, so are SIMILITUDES to a Discourse: they
both let in light to see and discern things that otherwise would be obscure.

Fruit Trees are a TEXT from which may be raised many profitable Doctrines, and
Conclusions, which may be proved by Scripture, and Experience.

Now therefore; seeing many things may be learned from Fruit Trees for
Spiritual profit; I shall set down some Observations which I have made upon
them, discovering the Nature, and ordering of Natural, and Spiritual
Fruit Trees, in diverse SIMILITUDES, according to Scripture, and experience,
speaking of most particulars very briefly.

As I have planted many thousands of Natural Fruit Trees for the good of the
COMMONWEALTH, so also I have taken some Spiritual Cyences, or Grafts from
them (I mean several Propositions drawn from Observations in Nature, which
are some what branched forth into Boughs, and twiggs) and bound them up and
sent them abroad for the good of the Church of God: And if men will but accept
of them, and be content to have them engrafted in their own Gardens, (their
hearts and minds) by the Husbandmans watering of them by his Spirit, they will
grow, and blossom, and bear much good fruit, here and for ever.

Fruits of Faith, Love, Joy, Peace, and other Fruits of the Spirit, Bunches of
Grapes, For the feeding, and refreshing of our Souls as we travel through the
Wilderness, and the increase of our Glory hereafter in Canaan to all Eternity.

Which Improvement the Great Husbandman grant unto Thee, together with

Thy Servant in the Lord, RA. AUSTEN.

To my dear Friend and Brother in the Lord Mr. R. Austine the Author of the
Treatise of Fruit Trees.
SIR,
THE benefit my self and others have received from your godly society and
Gospel conversation heretofore may be argument enough for us thankfully to
embrace your pregnant similitudes and Gospel observations. I must confess I
am bound to bless the Lord, for the acquaintance and familiarity I formerly
had and still have with you: I seldom came to your garden but you made your
trees speak something of Christ and the gospel; your custom was to present
your Christian friends and visitors with such clusters of gospel grapes which
you now send abroad to the world.

Its admirable to see what spiritual improvements you have made of your
Nursery: the Reader (if he have senses exercised to relish and distinguish)
will soon taste the sweetness of your spiritual fruit, especially
considering.

1. Pares cum paribus facillime con jungantur.
That you take your rise from such things as are obvious and familiar to every
man's Capacity, which may easily set the minds of the Readers on work upon Jesus
Christ; duoilla nos maxim movent: similitudo, and exemplum: Cic: 3. de Orat.
The creatures all speak thus Qui fecit me propter te, fec^^ te propter se.
Bernard.


2. Its wonderful to see so much Gospel gathered from natures Twiggs: The
natural voice of the creatures tell us that God is, As Aristotle and Galen
report: but none ever made the creatures (in so plain, and familiar a manner)
speak of Christ before.

I must acquaint the Reader, that here is in your Similitudes gospel profit
with soul delight and pleasure. The spiritual Reader is here taught how to
meet with Christ amongst the Myrtle Trees.

Sir, we must all give you thanks for your pious explication of natures Dicta
enim Hieroglyphica apud Aegyptios sacra quaedam monumenta sculptis animalium
figuris significantia. Macrob. Satur. lib. 1.21.
Hieroglyphics; whereby you have made the creatures speak plain. Its gospel
wisdom that must make your young plants to bear such apples of gold. Do men
gather grapes of thorns or figs of thistles? says Christ. No: naturally they
will not yield such kinds of fruit, but here are spiritual grapes from natures
wild trees, that's admirable.

3. The Reader may observe that you make the dead to speak as well as the
living: Joh. 15.2.6. Mat. 15.13. Luke 13.7.
I mean your withered and unprofitable plants which you cast out of your
Nursery yields most profitable observations. The Lord will have a time to root
out every tree, and cut off every branch which bears no fruit: not a body
only but sap, not leaves but fruit which the Lord likes in professors.

4. Your varieties of spiritual fruit may exceedingly please the godly Reader;
men's minds naturally are much delighted with variety: all the similitudes in
the world will not reach to that fullness and variety of fullness which is in
the Lord Jesus Christ; we read Revel: 22.2. of a Tree that bare twelve manner
of fruits: which Tree is Christ, Mr Diodati.
says a Reverend man in his pious Annotations.

Its a mystery to the world that Beleivers should bring forth variety of fruits
to Christ, and yet receive all manner of fruits from Christ; Romans 11.36.
of him and by him and through him (and therefore to him) be all things: Our
life is hid in Christ as the root; our graces are all from him, Coll. 3.3.
our sap, fruit and all: therefore its observable what your drift is. As
Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles were wont to send men to Trees, Consider the
Lillyes how they grow.
Fruits, and Plants for divine considerations, now least men should fix too
much here, you strive to fetch the minds of the Readers off from them all to
Christ again, and especially by the same way. The good Lord open our eyes that
we may follow on in your path; that as we have all felt the misery following of
our eating the forbidden fruit, we may eat now of this Tree of life. So prays

Sir, Your very loving Friend and Brother in the Lord J. F. A Minister of the
Gospel.
December. 24. 1656.
To the READER.
THE blessed God has a special work to do in the world, in which he imployes
his faithful servants, and such oftentimes as are (in comparison of others)
but as Babes in Christ; when such as the men of the world esteem the only wise
men, are rejected of the Lord. God for his own glory is pleased to stain the
pride of men to pull down such as lift up themselves, and attribute that glory
to themselves which is only due to God; and exalts such as are of low degree,
Luke 1.52, 53. such as see, and are heartily affected with their own
emptiness, and insufficiency, and are enabled to role themselves on God, for
wisdom, and strength to do his work faithfully. God has for the most part
made use of Instruments to bring about his great designs, and interests, both
in Church and State: such as have been scorned, and contemned by ungodly
learned men, who reject the precious truths of God, because God sends and
imployes such of his servants to dispense them unto men, that have not such
humane learning, Titles, and degrees as themselves, the only things in a
carnal Eye, but poor, low things in a spiritual Eye, in comparison of the
teachings of the spirit of God. I know, and do freely grant, that Human
Learning is a most choice and excellent gift, when it is sanctified in any
person, and that which God has made use of in his servants sometimes to carry
on, and promote his great works, and interests in the world: And I do greatly
honor such gracious learned men, as improve their grace and learning for God;
and such persons as have a low esteem of Learning, and speak slightly of it,
or of Learned men because such, I dare affirm such men speak evil of that
which they understand not. I am no enemy to Humane Learning, as some in the
University have affirmed, and possessed others in the Country with the same
opinion of me, my practice can witness; for it is well known that I spent
many years in the University and Country, to obtain a little, that I might be
the more serviceable to God in my generation; and I find that that which the
Lord has given me, is very useful unto me in the work that I am called unto
by God, and men. But I shall entreat, And do earnestly desire some Learned
men, both in the University and Country, seriously to consider, whether or no
they do not greatly, and apparently abuse their Learning.

First, In preferring it before the Spirit of God, and the saving knowledge of
Christ.

Secondly, In having higher thoughts of themselves than of others, who it may
be, are more Holy, and Humble, and have more of the teachings of the Spirit of
God than themselves.

Thirdly, In despising, and contemning their Persons, Sermons, Books, Prayers,
and Discourses, because they have not so much Humane Learning as themselves.

Fourthly, In discouraging, and hindering such servants of the Lord as desire
to improve their Graces, and gifts for God, endeavoring to commend the Lord
Christ to others for their salvation.

Fifthly, By endeavoring to prejudice the minds of men against such, who yet God
imployes in the work of the Ministry.

Sixthly, In boasting of their Parts, and Learning, and resting thereon,
forgetting God who gave it.

Seaventhly, In neglecting to use their Learning for that end for which God
bestowed it on them.

Consider: has God given you larger opportunities, and greater helps, and
advantages than others, that you should be more idle, and unfruitful than
others? the Lord awaken you, and make you zealous and active for your Master in
this time of need, (many places have been a long time destitute of godly able
Preachers) that when he shall come he may say unto you, well done good and
faithful servants, enter into the joy of your Lord.

Concerning the Author of the following Observations, and Similitudes, what
ever Carnal men, or the pride of Spiritual men may object (as who that is
zealous, and active for God, can escape the censures of some men) it evidently
appears to me, that the Spirit of God has carried him on in this work. Reject
not the work because it is not done by a Public Minister of the Gospel, for
many private experienced Christians have been (in this way) very profitable to
the Church of God; These are the last times, wherein God fulfills his great
Gospel promise, in pouring out his Spirit upon all flesh; and those whom God
intends for any special service, he prepares them for it by some special
preparations. I have seen a large particular Relation, composed by this Author
of God's dealings with him for many years together; wherein it appears, that
God began betime with him, early, even the first hour of the day: And he has
been exercised with many Temptations from his youth up; having passed through
the spirit of bondage early in the morning, and by degrees came to close with
Christ, and to attain a comfortable assurance of his interest in him: But
afterward, even about the middle of the day (upon the spirits withdrawing and
God's hiding of his face for some gracious ends) he fell into a long, and sad
desertion, passing through the valley of the shadow of death, the pains of
hell gat hold upon him, and that in an extraordinary way and measure; But God
(by degrees) lifted him up out of the deep Pit, out of the Mire, and Clay, and
set his feet upon a Rock, and has put a new song into his Mouth, and made him
active for God in his Generation.

As for his following Labors, I doubt not but God will make them very useful,
and profitable to the people of God: what is more helpful to the
understanding, and remembering of Spiritual things, than plain, and pregnant
SIMILITUDES, of things which we are daily conversant with? (all these being
also enlarged upon by him and improved to spiritual ends, and advantages.)
What was all the old Ceremonial Law, for many hundred years, but teaching the
People by SIMILITUDES, Tipes, and Ceremonies, which were all shadows of things
to come? Heb. 10.1. The spirit of God used SIMILITUDES by the Ministry of the
Prophets Hos. 12.10. yea; the great Prophet of the Church frequently used
SIMILITUDES in his teachings; and Ministers of the Gospel in our days find
them very useful, and profitable in their teachings.

Wherefore (Reader) I recommend the following Observations, and Similitudes to
thy use; Praying that the spirit of God may engraft every truth into thy heart,
and cause it to grow, and bring forth much good fruit, to the glory and praise
of God, and thy own everlasting good.

STEPHEN FORD, Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in CHIPPIN-NORTON.

Propositions Shadowed out unto us by Observations in Nature, and Cleared by
Scripture and Experience.
1. GOd from all Eternity made choice of what Spiritual Plants he pleased, to
Plant in his Garden the Church, and refused others page 1. 2. The dispensations
of God toward weak Christians, are more gentle, than toward such as are
strong p. 3. 3. Many Spiritual Fruit Trees bring forth fair, and Specious
fruits to Observation, which yet are unpleasant to the Husbandman p. 5. 4.
Persons joined in any Relation, they have comfort, or affliction together
according to their natures p. 6. 5. God calls his People (for the most part) in
youth, and more rarely when they are old p. 8. 6. When the Spirit of God
withdrawes, then Mystical Fruit Trees cease growing, their Leaves and Fruits
fall, and they endure sore conflicts for a time, but at the return of the
Spirit, they are restored to former comforts with advantage p. 13. 7. Generally
those persons who are excessive, and most curious about the forms of Duties,
have least of the power of Godliness p. 18. 8. By the fruits of Spiritual
Trees, we may conclude the Nature of the Trees p. 20. 9. Some persons flourish
with a profession for a time, but in the heat of affliction they fall off p.
22. 10. We should bend all our desires, and endeavors that the best gifts,
graces, and Fruits, may especially increase p. 23. 11. While the Spiritual
part in us acts, and grows strongly, the fleshly part acts but weakly: so
also, if the flesh be strong, the Spirit is weak p. 26. 12. The more closely a
Christian walks with God, the more steadfast he is, and more free from
Spiritual enemies p. 28. 13. Corrupt nature abides in believers as long as
they live, and is but in part subdued by grace p. 29. 14. It is not any outward
excellencies, but the Image of God upon the Soul, that is the glory of a person
p. 30. 15. There is a firm, and constant union between Christ, and every
Believer p. 32. 16. University men ought (in convenient time) to go forth into
the service of the Church, and Commonwealth: except some choice persons fit
for government of the Societies p. 33. 17. Saving grace, or the Divine nature
in Believers, abides in the Soul for ever: But common gifts, or graces may be
lost p. 37. 18. God is well pleased with Zealous, and active Instruments in his
Works: But men of dull, indifferent spirits, he (often) lays them aside, and
puts others in their stead p. 39. 19. The commotions, troubles, and confusions
in the Church of God, will end in the settlement, peace, and glory of it p 41.
20. Believers by ingrafting into Christ, do live in him, and he in them, and
are thereby made one with him p. 43. 21. All believers have a likeness, and
resemblance of one another, in the Image of God upon their souls p. 45. 22.
Those whom God purposes to bring hereafter into his celestial Paradise, he
prepares them for it here, in this life p. 47. 23. Grace in the hearts of
believers is not suddenly strong, but strength is gotten by degrees p. 49. 24.
Discoveries of the love of God to souls prepared for Christ, does hasten their
closing with him p. 51. 25. A sinners repentance, and closing with Christ,
causes joy both in Heaven, and Earth p. 54. 26. There is a sweet fellowship,
and communion between God, and his people, God delights in them, and they
delight in him p. 56. 27. Who, or whatsoever hinders the enlargment of the
Church of God, he will certainly, (and sometimes with great anger,) take out of
the way p. 60. 28. The constant enjoyment of the best things from God, (through
corruptions) makes them less noted, and esteemed p. 63. 29. Our life, growth,
strength, and all our spiritual Acts, are from Christ p. 65. 30. Humble
Christians bring forth far more, and fairer fruits, than such whose spirits
are lifted up p. 67. 31. Jesus Christ, and his people (though multitudes of
distinct persons) are so united, as that they make but one body p. 69. 32. As
we have our life, and all from Christ, so we are continually receiving new
supplies from him, but can add nothing to his infinite perfections p. 71. 33.
The dispensations of God toward his Church are contrary to the judgments of
most people in the world p. 73. 34. Those who have not the Sanctifying Spirit,
and grace of God in them, are unfit for the work of the Ministry; such bring
more prejudice than advantage to the Church of God p. 76. 35. None but
engrafted Trees grow in Gods Orchard the Church page 83. 36. Those fruits of
spiritual fruit trees which are harsh, sharp, and bitter, are (for the most
part) more profitable than such as are mild, and pleasant p. 84. 37. Those
persons are not like to bring forth good fruits in old age, who labor not for
them in the time of youth p. 86. 38. Those who do not act for God, they act
against him p. 87. 39. God expects greater returns of duty from some persons
than from some others, and neglect thereof provokes God against them p. 88. 40.
It is not the multitude, nor exactness of performance of duties, that God
accepts, unless there be sincerity, and right ends in doing thereof p. 90. 41.
The smalest measure of true grace in any person can never be extinguished, but
will certainly grow up to perfection p. 92. 42. God has more dishonor by the
sins of Professors, than by the sins of others p. 93. 43. Conversion in
youth is not so apparent as in elder years p. 95. 44. The great persons in the
world, who are in Christ, are but few in number, in respect of the meaner sort
p. 96. 45. Although beleivers are shaken by the winds of temptations, yet they
cannot be overturned, because they are fixed upon Christ p. 97. 46. Sinful
thoughts, and motions in the soul are most easily suppressed at their first
rising p. 98. 47. The instructions of one Godly person, sometimes, are
effectual (by the Spirit) to the implanting of many into Christ p. 99. 48.
Persons ingrafted into Christ, do naturally bring forth good fruits p. ^^ 49.
There are but a few Godly persons in the world, in comparis of the number of
the wicked p. 102. 50. The works of formal Hypocrites are (in many things)
very like the works of true Christians page 103. 51. Some Persons are wrought
upon in part (in some things) like to those that are ingrafted into Christ, who
yet never attain to be really united to him page 104. 52. The meanest person
in Christ, brings forth better fruits, than the most accomplished unregenerate
person in the world page 105. 53. Christ is continually ready to communicate
strength, and refreshings to his people, and all defects thereof are from
themselves page 106. 54. By diligent use of the means of Grace, Christians
attain great advantages, with through neglect (or slight using means) would
be lost. page 108. 55. Frequent Acts in things Good or Evil, beget Habits, and
make all such works easy to us page 111. 56. Afflictions, and whatsoever
befalls the People of God, the same works advantage to them page 113. 57. God
(for the most part) uses means, and ordinary men, and means, for effecting
of the greatest works in the world page 114 58. The Prayers, Sermons, Writings,
Discourse, and Works of some Godly men, are much more spiritual than of some
others page 118. 59. Regenerated persons have three great enemies, one inward,
and two outward, the Flesh, the World, and the Devil page 119. 60. The people
of God in their conversion (for the most part) go through many straits, and
difficulties page 121. 61. When the People of God bring forth good fruits, God
himself does praise, and commend them page 122. 62. Persons by Regeneration,
have a great change wrought in them page 123. 63. The several Gifts and Graces
in believers, are wrought by the same spirit page 125. 64. There are exceeding
many, and great profits, and pleasures found in the Church of God page 126. 65.
The Church of God is encompassed, and preserved by God himself page 129. 66.
When God does purge a Nation, or place, from persons, and things that are
offensive to him, and brings in his people, and worship, ^^ad thereof, this is
an evident token that God intends to dwell there page 130. 67. The free love,
and care of God is as much toward his people in the meanest outward condition,
as toward those who are most eminent in the world page 136. 68. Believers who
daily walk with God, having the light of his countenance, and constant
communion with him, such are abundantly fruitful. page 138. 69. God does not
only engraft his people into Christ, but orders them in all other respects
also, to make them abundantly fruitful page 140. 70. The graces of believers
increase daily in strength whereby they are more, and more able to resist
spiritual enemies page 142. 71. Many persons of a low rank, and but of
despised parts, do yet bring forth more profitable fruits than many others
eminent in gifts and outward respects page 144 72. God will not allow an idle
person, but expects every one should be profitable in his place page 146. 73.
The life of man is very uncertain, some die in Childhood, others in youth,
others in old age, and in the room of these others arise page 148. 74.
According to men's Principles, such are their actings; and their reward
according to both page 149. 75. Spiritual fruit trees ingrafted into Christ,
are many ways profitable in their generations page 152. 76. The most
spiritual actings of believers taste of corrupt nature, which notwithstanding
are acceptable unto God page 154. 77. There is a continual combat between
Grace and Nature, in every regenerate person, but grace prevails page 155. 78.
Some believers are (by advantages) more fruitful than others, and at some more
than at other times page 156 79. God bears with the failings, and
imperfections of his people, and is ever ready to take notice of, and commend
the good that is in them page 158. 80. Trees of the Lords planting bring forth
fruits seasonably page 161. 81. The godly are profitable not only one to
another, but the wicked also fare the better for them page 163. 82. When men
are slow in the duties of obedience, God is patient toward them, and in the
use of all good means waits for their fruitfulness page 164. 83. Unregenerate
persons (of themselves) cannot come to Christ, nor bring forth one good fruit
page 166. 84. Some Christians chiefly pursue some particular duties, belonging
to them, and neglect others page 168. 85. While persons remain in an
unregenerate state, all the means of grace is unprofitable to them page 170.
86. Christians by walking holily, and fruitfully, they bring much honor to
God, but if otherwise dishonor page 171. 87. The same things which are
blessings to the Godly, are curses to the wicked; because of their different
Principles page 172. 88. The best of Gods Children are guilty of many sins,
and infirmities in their conversations page 174. 89. Carnal persons are as
forward, and zealous in the ways of sin, as (usually) the godly are in the
ways of holiness page 176. 90. The Conditions of the people of God are much
different, yet God cares for them all page 178. 91. True and faithful
Ministers of the Gospel, do diligently look into the state of their people,
and deal with them accordingly page 179 92. God discovers a special care
of, and love unto those of his people, whose Judgment and ways concur with
his design in their generation page 183. 93. God is a long time in calling the
Gentiles; and implanting them into Christ, according to his purpose and
promises page 187. 94. External Uniformity in the Churches of Christ, is of
small account with him, in respect of Unity and spiritual worship page 191.
95. God (many times) makes use of wicked, and unregenerate persons, for the
preservation, and good of his own children page 197. 96. God (in his infinite
wisdom, and goodness) observes the fittest times, in all his dispensations
toward his people page 199. 97. Jesus Christ gives forth as constant a supply
of all grace to the meanest of his people, as to those who are most eminent
page 201. 98. The people of God bring glory to him, profit, and edification to
the body of Christ in diverse respects; according to the diversity of the Gifts,
Graces, and operations of the spirit of God in them page 2^2. 99. There is a
continual secret supply of strength from Christ to every believer in time of
desertion, and temptation; to preserve them from total falling away page 205.
100. True Christians do communicate of their good things, as freely to the
poor as to the rich page 207.
THE SPIRITUAL USE OF A GARDEN of FRUIT TREES.
The first Observation in Nature.
THE Husbandman makes choice of what wild Plants he pleases, to bring into his
Orchards there to Graft, and order to fruit-bearing from year to year. He
leaves other plants in the Woods and waste grounds, he lets them alone, and
meddles not with them, but takes and leaves these, or those, as pleases
himself.

This is a Similitude of the State of Spiritual Fruit Trees, and shadows out
unto us this Proposition.

That God from all eternity made choice of what Spiritual Plants he pleased,
to plant in his Garden the Church, Proposition Shadowed.
and refused others.

God in his eternal decree chose some persons, and refused others, as his word
clearly manifests: he chose some wild plants (here, and there a few) to plant
in his Orchard, to order to fruit-bearing, and let others alone to grow wild,
and bring forth their natural fruits, and this upon his own free will and
pleasure, without any foresight of faith, repentance, good works, or any thing
in us: This the Apostle shows Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us in him before the
foundation of the world: Verse: 5. according to the good pleasure of his will:
before they had done good or evil, Romans 9.13. I have loved Jacob, and hated
Esau. and Jo. 13.18. I know whom I have chosen.

And our Savior tells us, Joh. 15.16. I have chosen you, and ordained you,
that ye should go, and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain.

The Husbandman lets other Plants alone to grow wild, without the wall of his
Orchard. Many wicked men, and women in the world which were passed by in his
decree, and therefore are not brought into his Church, nor Ingrafted into
Christ, who (in their generations) bring forth sower, bitter, and poisonous
fruits. Romans 9.18. He has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will
he hardneth. That is: He gives grace to those whom he has chosen, and denies
it to others, leaving them to themselves.

Esaias. 61.3.
The Consideration of this should be a strong and continual motive to all those
who have made their Calling, and Election sure (being persuaded upon good
grounds that they are Trees of righteousness of the Lords Planting) to praise
and admire the free grace of God, who has chosen them to be his adopted
children, ingrafting them into Christ, and planting them in his Garden, to
bring forth pleasant fruits to himself.

We were all of us wild Plants, as bad by nature as the worst in the world, and
God has made choice of us, and left others: How should this make us admire his
rich, and free grace in Christ to us, and to show forth his praise in our
Conversations? The Apostle tells us this is the very end wherefore we are
Chosen: 1 Pet. 2.9. Ye are a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy
nation, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the praises of him who
has called you out of darkness into his marvelous light.

There was no moving Cause why the mystical Husbandman should make Choice of
us rather than of others, as there is of material Plants The Husbandman looks
upon their straightness, and fitness in other respects (it may be) wherefore
he chooses them before others. But the mystical Husbandman has all the
grounds and Causes of choice within himself, Ephesians. 1.5. according to the good
pleasure of his will.

Let this therefore teach us, and stir us up to bring forth all free grace in
choosing of us. And although we cannot recompense the Husbandman, or make him
the richer by our fruits, yet we may please him, and honor him thereby. Herein
is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, Joh, 15.2.

The second Observation in Nature.
THe Husbandman does order his young fruit trees with more tenderness, and
gentleness, then such as are strong, and well grown trees, because such
(while they are small, and tender) are in more danger of breaking, and brusing,
and other hurts, then they are afterward. So that besides the great Wall, or
Common fence about the Orchard, he makes a more special fence, with Bushes,
Stakes, or the like, about each of them, and gives them more choice
nourishment, by often watring them with good water that they may grow, and come
on the faster.

This is another Similitude, and shadows out unto us this Proposition.

That the dispensations of God toward weak Christians, Proposition Shadowed.
are more gentle, then toward such as are grown strong.

The mystical Husbandman has Plants of several degrees, and ages, in his
Nursery and Orchard, and according to their capacities he deals with them:
there are Children, Young men, and Fathers in Gods Family, 1 Ioh. 2.12.13, 14.
the Children are ordered with more tenderness, than the elder sort, Esaias.
40.11. He shall gather the Lambs in his Arms, and carry them in his bosom,
and shall gently lead those that are with young. He uses them gently, with
great tenderness. So again, Hos. 11.1, 3. When Israel was a child I loved
him, Verse. 3. I taught Ephraim also to go, taking him by the Arms, I drew them
with cords of a man, with Bands of Love, I was to them as they that take off
the Yoke from the Jaws, and I laid meat unto them. God used them as a loving
Father his children, or as a tender Nurse uses her young infant. He gives them
Milk while they are Babes, and stronger meat when they are better grown, as
we see 1 Cor. 3.2. I fed you with Milk, and not with Meat, for hitherto ye
were not able to bear it. Heb. 5.14. Strong meat belongs to them that are of
full age.

So also God in correcting his weak children, deals with them according to
their strength, as is made out in that Similitude Esaias: 28.27. of the
Husbandmans dealing with his Corn. The Fetches are not threshed with a
threshing instrument, neither is a Cart^ wheel turned upon the Cummin, but the
Fetches are beaten out with a staff, and the Cummin with a rod.

roughly and harshly, but gently with them; He will not quench the smoking
flax, nor break the bruised Reed: but improve, and nourish weak beginnings
is his children. Esaias. 42.3. even as a Nurse cherishes her children. 1 These.
2.7. that they may increase toward perfection.

weak, in all good beginnings: Romans 15.1. Such as are strong, ought to bear
with the infirmities of the weak, And to comfort the feeble minded, and to
support the weak, 1 These. 5.14.

The third Observation in Nature.
There are many wild Fruit Trees in the Woods, waste grounds, and hedges, that
bear fair, and beautiful fruits to look upon, both for bulk and color,
and yet are very harsh, sower, unpleasant fruits; the husbandman takes no
delight to eat of them, although they are useful for some other purposes;
these are but wild un-grafted trees, and their fruits are accordingly.

This is another Similitude, and shadows forth unto us, That,

Many Spiritual Fruit Trees bring forth fair, Proposition Shadowed.
and specious fruits to observation, which yet are unpleasant to the
Husbandman.

There are very many men in the world, being eminent in Learning, Gifts, and
Parts, who can perform many works very exactly, they can Pray, Preach, and
compose works, etc. and these things to the Observation of most, very
excellently, gaining thereby great commendations from many, and (it may be)
admiration from some, and yet these very Fruits, to the taste of the
Husbandman, are very bitter and unpleasant, though they may be some way
serviceable, and useful to his Children, and servants, yet he himself, is not
delighted with them, because they are from ungrafted trees, such as are wild
and Corrupt by Nature, the Principle from which they proceed is Corrupt, and
that makes the fruits corrupt.

Who did works to the observation of men, more fair and specious, then the
Pharisees? and yet these their fruits were stark naught: they were but painted
fruits, fair to a carnal eye without any good taste or relish: Luke 16.15. Lu.
11.39.

Let none content themselves with outward performances in the worship of God,
though never so fair, and unreproveable to the Principles, to the frame of the
spirit, to the spring, from which any works flow, and examine whether they be
streams from the Divine Nature, or from common gifts and parts in the soul,
whether they be shoots springing from the spirit of Christ, as from the Root,
or from a Natural Principle, drawn out by some external Causes, and self
ends; for though they are never so plausible and beautiful in the eyes of men,
they may be deformed in the eyes of God, and fruits altogether unpleasant to
him.

Many things that are highly esteemed among men, are abomination in the sight
of God: Luke 16.15.

Gifts, and Parts, their great and famous actings in the world: did they but
see, and had they hearts to understand, and consider that bitter, and poisonous
Root, Original corruption, which stains, and spoils all their Fruits, their
high conceits of themselves, and their Actings, would be much abated.

They are but apples of Sodom, Splendida peccata, glorious sins: for while
the Tree is corrupt, the fruit is so, Math. 7.18.

The fourth Observation in Nature.
WE find by Experience That Grafts, and stocks joined together of contrary, or
much different Natures, will not grow, nor thrive together; if they be joined
in Grafting, either the Graft grows not at all, or else very poorly, and
weakly, and in a few years decays, and dies; But if the kinds of Trees are
joined together according to Rules of Nature, and Art, then they thrive
together vigorously, and bear fruits plentifully.

This is another Similitude of the state of Spiritual Fruit Trees, and
shadows out unto us this Proposition, which also concurres with the word, and
experience.

Proposition Shadowed.
That persons joined in any relation, they have comfort, or affliction together
according to their Natures.

This is certain, in Nature, Morality, and Divinity, That so much as things
differ in their Natures one from another, so great is the degree of dislike one
of another: And so near as they are in their Natures, and properties, so great
is the degree of complacency and love, one of another. Likeness is both the
Cause, and the Bond of Love.

This is seen in all visible Creatures, many Instances might easily be brought
to show it. Likeness in Natures, Manners, Customs, begets Love, and distance
in these causes dislike, and sometimes Hatred. 2 Cor. 6.14. What Fellowship
has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what Communion has light with
darkness etc? which Questions include Positions.

This should teach all who intend to enter into the state of Marriage, to look
well to their choice, that it be upon good grounds, and not for worldly
advantages in the first place, as most do, and match a Soul to the Earth,
between which there is no likeness, nor proportion: Neither are they to look
so much at likeness in the more low, and inferior respects, as Person, age,
birth, friends, Riches, etc. (though care is to be had in these) as to that
great likeness, in Natures, Manners, Habits, and Principles of the Mind, for
these are the springs, and the ties of Love, therefore be not unequally yoked
together 2 Cor. 6.14. The sad experience of many thousands may be a sufficient
warning to others.

If that Love flows according to the likeness of natures, then increase of
Grace, to have the Image of God more and more renewed and drawn more lively
upon our souls, because the more like we are to God, by having his Image, in
the Graces of his Spirit, the more shall we find the love of God toward us,
and the more will our Love be toward God: the stream of the love of God will
flow more strongly into the soul, which will be Rivers of pleasure unto it:
God will then delight in the soul, and the Soul will then delight in God, and
this Communion will be heaven upon earth.

The fifth Observation in Nature.
THe husbandman is careful to Engraft his Trees while they are young he then
forms, and fashions them by Pruning, and ordering of them; for he knows when
they are grown strong, and big Trees, these works cannot be done so easily,
if at all it be possible, therefore he sets about them while they are
young-trees.

This is another Similitude of the state of Mystical Fruit Trees, and holds
forth unto us this Proposition.

Proposition shadowed.
That God calls his people (for the most part) in Youth, and more rarely when
they are old.

It is observed by Experience, That God works that great work of Repentance,
and Conversion of a sinner, from darkness to light before old age, generally,
and for the most part: Most commonly in youth, or full strength.

How seldom has it been seen that an old person turns to God, having served
Satan, and his lusts all his youth, and time, till old age.

God forbid that I should limit the boundles, and infinite Mercies of God, but
may it not be said in this Case, as of a Rich man, his difficulty of being
saved: Matthew. 19.24. It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a
needle, then for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God.

O how hard is it for an old habituated sinner, to turn to God, and forsake
his old ways, and customs.

Such are settled on their Lees, and frozen in their dreggs, and are past
feeling, their hearts are hardened, and consciences seared with a hot Iron,
Custom in sin, has deprived them of all sense of sinning, they cannot cease
from sin, 2 Pet. 2.14. As soon may the Blackmore change his skin, or the
Leopard his spots, as old customary sinners learn to do well, Jer. 13.23.

They being old ungrafted Trees, growing upon the stock of corrupt Nature, its
a thousand to one but they shall grow there, until the Axe be laid unto their
roots to cut them down, and they be cast into the fire, not to be consumed,
but to burn for ever.

God gives men warning before hand, and tells them he will not accept of them
hereafter, though they knock at the Gate of Mercy, it shall be shut against
them, if they will not now accept of Mercy. Prove. 1.24, 25. Because I have
called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded etc:
ye shall call, but I will not answer, I will laugh at your calamity, and mock
when your fear comes etc: The sinner being an hundred years old shall be
accursed, Esaias. 65.20.

This calls to all Spiritual young Plants, to labor (by all possible
Engrafting into Christ, performed Now in their youth. Now to be willing to be
under the discipline of the husbandman, who offers, and desires to form, and
fashion their minds, according to the shape, and Mould of his holy word. Now
therefore hearken to his voice while it is called to day, lest ye be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3.13. The work (as to us) is more
easily done Now in youth, then it will be hereafter; The Twiggs of the corrupt
stock of sinful Nature, are yet but small, and slender, Udum and molle lutum
es; nunc, nunc properandus and acri Fingendus sine fine tota. Pers. sat. 3.
and will more easily be cut off, then when they are grown old, and strong. The
Mind will bow, and bend more easily in youth, to the Rules of the husbandman,
then it will hereafter.

Things are learned in time of youth, with ease, which in old age are
difficult, or impossible. There is an impossibility (in respect of the Laws of
nature, of altering the habits (in time of old age) either of Body, or Mind.

Its true: With God all things are possible, Quo semel est imbuta recens
servabit odorem testa diu; Hor.
but we are to expect the usual and ordinary dealings of God, and not to
neglect the meetest seasons, and means, for effecting our greatest work, in
hope that God will do it in the most difficult times, because all things are
alike easy to him.

Now because this is a thing of infinite, and everlasting consequence, and of
greatest importance (of all other things whatsoever) to us; And that all may be
stirred up to seek after this one necessary thing, to be engrafted into
Christ, in time of Youth, I will lay down a few Considerations as motives to
it.

1. The great Lord of Heaven and Earth, that gave us a being, 1 Consideration.
Gods Command.
our breath, our time, all that we have, he requires our youth to himself, and
commands every one to give their first, and their full strength to him, he
would have their Virgin Love, before they be vitiated, and defloured by the
Creature, Eccl. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, while
the evil days come not. As under the Law God commanded them to offer in
sacrifice Young Creatures, Bullocks, Rams, and Lambs of a year old, young
Pigeons, etc. And the Levites (being his portion) must be numbered from a Month
old, and upwards, to signify to us under the Gospel, that God requires the
beginning of our strength in his service, Mica. 7.1. My soul desires the
first ripe fruits.

2 Consideration. Uncertainty of Gods call, or acceptance afterward.
2. If Youth slight God, and refuse to harken to his call, and command, it is
uncertain whether he will call them afterward, 2 Timothy 2.25. If God
peradventure will give them Repentance.

He that calls to men, to day if you will hear his voice, has not said, to
morrow, or hereafter I will call again: Nay God has said the contrary. Prove.
1.24. Because I have called, and ye refused: I have stretched out my hand, and
no man regarded etc. I also will laugh at your calamity, and will mock when
your fear comes.

3 Consid. Difficulty and bitterness, of Repentance if delayed.
3. The longer the work of conversion and ingrafting into Christ is delayed,
the more difficult the work will be, it is more easy in youth, then it will
be afterward. While the Twiggs and sprouts of corruption are but young and
slender, they are more easily cut off, bowed down, or kept under, then they
can be when they are grown old, hard, and strong. Who can bend an old strong
tree? how hard is it to root up a tree of many years growth, and that in a
great and firm Rock? Such are the sprouts of corruption in the root or rock of
corrupt nature. The oftener sins are repeated, the deeper impressions they
make in the conscience, although small in themselves, Gutta cavat lapidem, non
vi^sed saepe-cadendo.

Light, and small drops of water, falling often make an impression, even in a
stone: What then will many great, crimson, and scarlet sins do? Many
youthful sins of a high nature, break the bones in repentance.

4 Consid. Shame of coming in so late.
4. Though it be not a shame to come to God in old age, yet its a shame for a
man that he came no sooner. Is it not a shame for a Soldier to run from his
Commander, and fight against him all his youthful time, while he has
strength, and abilities, and to come in old age (when he is lame and decrepite)
and offer his service? Is it not a shame for a man to give his strength, and
marrow to the Devil, and offer the dry bones to God?

What a shame is it for a man to begin to learn his Letters, and to spell at
spectacle years? To offer the blind, the lame, and the sick, in sacrifice,
will it be accepted? Mal. 1.8. Offer it now unto thy Governor, will he be
pleased with thee, or accept thy person, says the Lord of Hosts?

5. Such as hearken unto Gods call early, 5 Consider. Clearer evidences of the
love of God.
and in the spring of their years, have usually most honor from God, and
clearer manifestations of his love than others: such who give God their spring
time, their Virgin years, they usually know more of the mind of God, and of
the Love of God than others. Samuel was called of a Child, 1 Samuel 3. and gave
God his spring time, and God manifested himself evidently to him, he had many
and clear manifestations of the love of God.

The Prophet Jeremy, Chapter 1.6. was called and sanctified from the womb, and God
revealed clearly his love to him, and care of him; and intimately acquainted
with God.

God wrought upon the spirit of Joseph, and ingrafted him young twigg, when he
was but seaventeene years old, he brought forth good fruit, for he could not
endure the the ill doings of his brethren, but told his father of it, Genesis
37.2. And we know what a darling Joseph was, not only to his earthly father,
but also to his heavenly father, who honored him more then all his brethren,
and revealed many great secrets unto him. He had not only tastes, and draughts
of the love of God; but rather streams and rivers of it flowed in upon him all
his life time.

Obadiah, a man recorded in Scripture for one fearing God, and that from his
youth, he was a choice, and singular man in his days, greatly, 1 King. 18.12.
And the love of God toward him was seen in his love to God and his people in
a time of great danger, in preserving, and feeding of them: for none can show
forth clear evidences of the love of God, but those who are greatly beloved of
God.

The Prophet Daniel was a Young man, when he began to fear Dan. 1. and God
showed him manifold clear evidences of his love: God gave him knowledge and
skill in all Learning, and wisdom, and in all visions, and dreams, verse. 17.
He had clear revealations of the love of God in his Prayers, and Praises to
God, immediately by his spirit, and mediately by an Angel, who was sent to
tell him that his prayers were heard, and that he was a man greatly beloved.

Prophet David, of a young Twig was ingrafted into Christ: and he made God his
trust from his youth, Ps. 71.5. Being taught of God from his youth, verse. 17.
and thereby made a man after Gods own heart: And whoever had sweeter communion
with God (and consequently clearer evidences of his Love) then he expresses in
his Psalms.

John the Baptist, who was filled with the Holy Ghost, and sanctified from the
womb, a greater Prophet was never borne than he, Luke 1.15.

John the beloved Disciple, began to follow Christ Early in his youth; and
Christ revealed secrets to him more immediately than to the rest of the
Disciples. He leaned on his breast, and lay in his bosom, he attained to a
full assurance of the love of God (which is the Consideration I here hold
forth) it is frequent in his Epistles, We know we are of God, 1 John 4.13, 14.
and 5, 19, 20. 1 John 3.14, 24.
We know we are in him, we know we are translated from death to life, etc. We
know, we know, we know, many such passages of assurance he mentions.

If Christians desire to enter into Heaven, while they are on earth, this is
the way, even to get into Christ early, as soon as may be.

So we see such as are Ingrafted into Christ, while they are young the love of
God is more clearly, and evidently discovered to them, and secrets from God,
are revealed to them (usually) more than to others.

6 Considerat. Greater measures of grace and glory.
And lastly: Such as are Ingrafted into Christ early, in the spring of their
years, Such commonly attain large growths, and measures of grace, if they
live long, and enjoy means, and helps suitable: A small measure of grace,
though but as much as a grain of Mustard seed. If a man begin with it betime,
and husband it well, according to the Counsel, and wisdom of the spirit, will
improve, and grow in many years, to a large measure, their Brook will become a
River, and their River will become a Sea.

Every Act of grace adds something to the habit, so that the habits of grace
are mightily confirmed by their frequent operations. Such when they come to be
old Disciples, strong men in Christ, fathers, they have strong consolation,
full assurance. Their graces increase from strength to strength, from glory to
glory, by the spirit of the Lord. 2 Cor. 3.18.

And the more their Afflictions abound, the more are their graces increased,
being improved by the spirit of God: and consequently the greater glory is laid
up for them in the life to come, 2 Cor. 4.17.

Now let it be considered. What infinite advantages arise to a Christian by
Early beginnings, and setting forward in the ways of God betime; the
Privileges are exceeding great, and many.

These things may be great Encouragements to all young Plants to labor for
them.

The sixth Observation in Nature.
WE know at the end of Summer (the suns influences being withdrawn in a
great measure) Fruit Trees cease growing; their fruits, and Leaves fall off,
and decay, and during the time of winter, are shaken with winds, pinched with
Frosts, and cold weather, and seem (to those that cannot well judge of them) to
be even as dead, which yet when the spring of the year comes, the spirit, and
sap (that is naturally existing in them all winter) is refreshed again by the
heat of the sun that then approaches: the branches again begin to bud, and
by new supplies from the Root grow forth, and bare store of wholesome fruits.

This is another Similitude, and shadows out unto us this Proposition. (Which
also concurres with the word, and experience.) That

When the spirit of God withdrawes, Proposition shadowed.
then mystical fruit trees cease growing, their leaves, and Fruits fall, and
they endure sore conflicts for a time, but at the return of the spirit, they
are restored to former comforts, with advantage.

As the sun is the efficient cause of life, and growth in natural fruit trees,
and all Vegetables, so is the spirit of God the efficient cause of motion, and
growth in all spiritual fruit trees; while the spirit is sensibly present, and
works in the soul, there is motion and growth, budding, blossoming, and
bearing fruits: but when the spirit withholds, and withdrawes, when this sun
goes afar off, (as to his sensible workings, and effects) and hides his face,
then the fruit trees are at a stand, and have no power in themselves to grow,
or bear fruits. The Lord is a Sun unto his people, Ps. 84.11. and the face of
this sun is sometimes clouded, and hid from them, and is as if he were afar
off, Esa. 54.7. For a small moment have I hid my face.

The Church complains in the time of this spiritual winter, Cant. 5.6. My
beloved had withdrawn himself and was gone, When this Sun is afar off, and
clouded, then follows a dark, and gloomy time: Lam. 3.1. I am the man that
have seen affliction by the rod of his wrath: he has led me, and brought me
into darkness, and not into light. I remembered God, and was troubled, I
complained, and my spirit was overwhelmed, Ps. 88.16. Thy fierce wrath goes
over me, thy terrors have cut me off. Ps. 38.8. The Church in this long, and
sharp winter (the sun being a far off) complains bitterly, and is almost in
despair, Esaias. 49.14.

This is a woeful state, the greatest of all miseries on this side Hell, even
the want of the light of Gods countenance to him that has sensibly enjoyed it
a long time together, and instead thereof to have the terrors of God fight
against him, and make immediate impressions upon the soul; yet so it is with
some of the servants of God for a time.

Former Evidences are then of no more strength, than the strength of meat and
drink is to the body, after a long time of fasting, when the body has been
shut up in prison, and almost starved for want of food.

Its true indeed: former Evidences might something uphold in the sense of
present distress, if the soul were sure they were undoubtedly true, and
sound; because we know true grace once received cannot be lost: but there lies
the doubt, and the ground of fear, and distrust, he calls all former Evidences
into question, and perhaps (at some times) concludes against himself, that all
are nothing, because of present feelings of the contrary.

I know a man who (about Ten years ago) was cast under this Temptation, and
had Experience of this woeful state, and condition, he lay in it for the space
of Seventeene or Eighteen Months, or thereabouts.

Having early, in his youth (even the first hour of the day) passed through
the pangs of the new birth, and spirit of bondage, and afterward enabled to
lay hold on Christ by faith, and by degrees, got up to a comfortable well
grounded confidence of the love of God in Christ, wherein he walked chearefully
many years together, yet afterward (even about the middle of the day,
according to the Prophets computation Psalm. 90.10.) the Sun was clouded, and
the spirit, and sap suspended, so that (by degrees) he lost not only the sense
of the light of Gods countenance toward him, and the sight of the graces of
his spirit, but questioned all his former Evidences of his interest in Christ,
and (especially at some times) even gave all for lost.

And notwithstanding the daily use of all spiritual means, he still fell
lower and lower, more and more fears and terrors increased in him, which were
made more sharp and heavy, by many outward afflictions, great crosses, and
disappointments at the same time, which befell him in reference to his body,
name, outward estate, Calling, friends, and relations, every one of which was a
sore affliction, single and of it self: notwithstanding all came upon him in a
short space, and that not long after great (and more then ordinary) spiritual
comforts, and evidences of the love of God in Christ: which though they might
have been some ground to have upheld the soul from sinking so low yet by
degrees, were all weak and of no power to uphold, amidst such a throng; and
present sense of heavy, and lasting Temptations as were upon both his inward,
and outward man, but by reason thereof the immediate succeeding desertion was
the more sensible, and took the deeper impression; As a man that falls suddenly
from a high and eminent Condition of outward comforts, into great misery, and
want, the sense of his present misery, is therefore the more pressing.

In this sad and dark time, he labored (by Prayer, Fasting, help of friends,
and all ways of humbling himself) to get comfort, and support, but still it
was h^d from him, he was (by degrees) cast down very low, and brought even to
despair, in-somuch that at some times, through the violence of Temptations, and
apprehensions of the absence, and loss of God, he cried out, and roared as a
man in torment of body, that had had some, disease, or burning in his Bowels:
At some times when he heard the word preached, such terrors seized upon him,
that he had no rest, neither in body nor mind; he could neither sit still, nor
stand still, nor rest in any posture, fearful injections thronged in upon
him, and such woeful apprehensions of an undone Condition, were, at those
seasons especially, represented to the mind, that he was not able to express
the horror of them.

And after a certain time of the absence of the Spirit, in the feeling
workings of it, and sense of the graces; Corruptions, at sometimes more
especially, grew strong, Passions and murmurings against the righteous
proceedings of God with him (and Corruptions also of other Natures) brake forth
from time to time, which were a sting to all other Miseries that befell him,
and which were, being improved, and strongly set on by Satan against him,
grounds and foundations of the most fearful apprehensions that came into his
mind. The enemy pleading it against him, and that from many grounds of Such as
these, Heb. 6.4. It is impossible for these who were once enlightened, etc. and
2 Pet. 2.20. The later end is worse with them then the beginning.
Scripture misapplyed, that no child of God did ever fall into the like, and
laboring to persuade him that no one guilty of the like should possibly ever
recover out of such a state.

This was a long and tedious winter, in which seldom any sun, or stars
appeared to him, and then but dimly, and soon clouded again: the soul was,
for the most part, filled with storms, and tempests, sad apprehensions of many
present evils, and fears of more, and greater to come upon him: The particular
passages of which Condition, might be related at large, were it convenient.

But the Lord has said, he will not contend for ever, neither will he be
always wrath, lest the spirit fail before him: He corrects in measure. At
length the sun of righteousness began to arise with healing in his wings, and
to cast some beams of light into his dark soul, which increased more and
more unto the perfect day. As he fell by degrees, so by little and little,
after a time, in the use of means, he was raised up again, and restored to
former comforts, with great and many additions and advantages.

The Lord put a new song into his Mouth, even praises and thanksgivings unto
his God; Let the father of mercies and the God of all Comforts be for ever
praised, for he comfort those that are cast down, when they cry unto him in
their troubles, he delivers them out of their distress, he brings them out
of darkness, and out of the shadow of death, and breaks their bonds asunder.

O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the
wonders that he does for the Children of men.

Now therefore: Seeing that a winter of desertion may come; Let by giving all
diligence to make our Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. To lay up
Treasures in heaven. Now in the time of plenty, to store up against a time of
of famine, to gather now in Summer against a spending time in Winter: Now to
gather Evidences, and sure grounds of the unchangeable love of God toward us,
to make sure of our interest in Christ, that so we may be able to fight, and
conquer, and to stand in the evil day, and having done all to stand, Ephesians. 6.13.

This also may comfort all those that are in this case, who find Sun is
withdrawn, and gone a far off: Let them (in the use of all good means) wait
and tarry the Lords leisure, he will certainly come in his time, Esaias. 50.10.
Whosoever walks in darkness and has no light, let him trust in the name of the
Lord, and stay himself upon his God; for the Sun will again shine forth and
refresh such a soul, and though comfort and deliverance tarry, yet wait for
it, it will surely come, it will not tarry, Hab. 2.3.

The word, and promises, and the Experiences of performance to others, are sure
grounds of hope; Esa. 54.7. for a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with
great mercies will I gather thee, in a little wrath I hid my face from thee for
a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the
Lord thy Redeemer.

The time is at hand when it shall be said to these weather beaten fruit trees,
the winter is past, the rain is over, and gone, the Fig Tree puts forth her
green figgs, the Vines with the tender Grape, give a good smell, Cant. 2.11,
13.

Then shall they Bud, and blossom, and bring forth abundance of Fruits
pleasant to the husbandman, And shall say unto him, Let my beloved come into
his Garden; and eat his pleasant fruits, Cant. 4.15.

They shall daily bring forth the fruits of Praise, Love, and obedience which
he will like, and accept of.

The seventh Observation in Nature.
Fruit Trees that bring forth the fairest and most beautiful blossoms,
Leaves, and shootes, they (usually) bring forth the fewest, and least fruits;
because where Nature is intent, and vigorously pressing to do one work
(spending its strength there) it is at the same time, weak about other works:
but distinct, and several works of Nature, in moderate and remiss degrees,
are all promoted at the same time.

This is another Similitude, etc: whence we learn; that,

Proposition shadowed.
Generally those persons who are excessive, and most curious about the Forms
of duties, have least of the power of godliness.

There are some who (wanting sincerity) lay out their thoughts, and endeavors
about the outside of duties, they will be as forward, it may be, as any, about
the external parts of worship, who have nothing of the truth of Grace in them:
Much formality, little, or no sincerity.

The Pharisees were excessively careful about the outside of Gods worship: Mat.
6.2.5.16. In Preaching, Praying, fasting, giving Alms etc. their care was
mainly to make clean the outside, to carry things fairly to the world, that
they might have the praise of men: broad Phylacteries, long Prayers, exactness
in tithing Mynt, Annis, and Cummin, Strictness in observing the Sabbath, and
outward Ceremonies, but where was sincerity all this while? they had the form,
but wanted the power of godliness. These were but Leaves, buds, or blossoms,
but no Fruits, they were not profitable to them, as to Eternal advantages.
Mat. 5.20. Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes,
and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven.

So it was among us of late years; bowing at the Name of Jesus, and Communion
Table, Surplesse, Common Prayer etc: these and such like were pressed with all
eagerness, and strictness.

The body of Religion was large, and monstrous, but without a scule, or if any,
it was Lean and feeble.

These kind of persons are like the Indian Fig Tree that Pliny speaks of,
which had Leaves as broad as Targets, but fruits no bigger then a Bean.

Let every one take heed of this, and not suffer their spirits, and lesser
moment, and neglect the greater.

This is a foul fault among us at this day, some men stand more about the
forms of worship, than about the power of it; they look so much after the
way, manner, and circumstances, that they almost loose the substance; things
which are but as husks, or shells to the Kernels, or as Leaves in respect of
fruits.

Some others labor more for Gifts, then for graces, for humane Learning, than
for holiness: All these are guilty of the same folly, as those who take more
care about the shape, and fashion of the Garment, than the health, and
soundness of the body: Or (to use the Metaphor in hand) they bring forth
Leaves, instead of fruits, and so are unprofitable trees, liable to Gods
displeasure, and cutting down every moment: and also to be accounted (by
discerning Spirits) to be such as have little, or nothing of The power of
godliness.

The Eighth Observation in Nature.
THe Fruits of trees discover plainly of what kind the Trees are: the Leaves
and blossoms (especially of some kinds) may deceive us, but the fruits cannot
deceive us, but discover manifestly of what Nature the trees are.

From this Observation we learn: That

Proposition shadowed.
By the Fruits of Spiritual Trees, we may conclude the Nature of the Trees.

The ways, and Conversations of men discover what their Natures are: If men of
discerning Judgments will but exactly observe, and try the Actions of others,
they may (by degrees) conclude from what Principles they act.

Its true indeed: from the Actions and ways of some persons, a man cannot
easily conclude this; vices in some are clothed in the habits of Virtues,
howsoever of some others this is more clear. The work of grace in the hearts
of some is so clear, and apparent in their lives, and Conversations, that if
men will but judge according to Scripture rules, the work will be manifest: So
on the other side concerning Profane, and scandalous persons, a man may without
breach of charity conclude such persons to be (at present) in the gall of
bitterness, and bond of iniquity.

And though Formal Professors may for a time deceive us, by their Leaves, and
blossoms of good words, shows, Professions, Forms, and outward Observations
(Wolves may have on Sheeps clothing) Yet if we taste, and observe their fruits,
after a time we shall know them, Mat. 7.16. by their fruits ye shall know them,
So again, Lu. 6.44. Every tree is known by his own fruit.

fruits, by the word of God: for thereby will be comfort to them that fear
God: they may have continual grounds of rejoicing when they observe their
fruits to be good, to be such as the husbandman calls for, and approves of; they
may thence conclude that they are Trees of the Lords planting, Engrafted Trees,
and this is a ground of joy indeed, to know our names are written in heaven.
And here also will be grounds of conviction to unsound Christians; for by a
certain knowledge of the Fruits, they may have a certain knowledge of the
Trees. And therefore, let such (seeing, and considering their bad fruits) give
themselves no rest, until they find the nature of their fruits changed,
whereby they may conclude, that the nature of the tree is also changed.

Proposition, may be a special means to support, and satisfy the spirits of
Gods people who are in a doubting condition, and question the truth of their
graces; for let such consider, that hereby they may receive the best
satisfaction that believers can possibly receive, (next unto the immediate
testimony of the spirit of God) to look upon, and try their fruits by the word;
for fruits are infallible evidence of the nature of the Tree that brings them
forth. Therefore observe; if these, and such like fruits are brought forth, the
Tree is certainly good, an ingrafted tree. If there be fervent desires,
pantings, and breathings of the soul after God, delight in the word, and
ordinances, Love to God, and his people, secret goings out of the soul after,
and closing with spiritual things, disliking and hating corruptions, and
whatsoever is against the mind of God, and opposing of it, with a rising of
spirit against it, with zeal, and indignation; if there be a secret joy, and
cherfulness in the spirit when things go well with the people of God, when
holiness, and the power of godliness is like to be set up, promoted, and
encouraged, and sin suppressed: if the spirit be stirred to pray against the
dominion, and power of wicked and unregenerate men, not only such as are
profane, but also such as are but morally honest, yea though they be
accomplished with the utmost of natural and moral endowments, prising and
preferring sincerity and holiness in any person, before all gifts without
grace.

These fruits (I say) are real and infallible evidences of a good tree, of a
Tree ingrafted into Christ, and that soul that finds them in it self, (if the
spirit of God shine upon them, and show them) may as certainly conclude upon
the truth of grace there, as if an Angel were sent from God to tell such a
one, that he is beloved of God.

It is as possible in nature, for Thorns to bring forth Grapes, or Thistles,
Figgs, as for a Bad tree (a person out of Christ) to bring for h these fruits.
Let not such souls (therefore) so dishonor God, wrong themselves, and
gratify Satan, as to question the truth of grace in themselves; but rejoice
evermore, because their names are written in heaven. Hereby we know we are
translated from death to life, because of these fruits, 1 John 3.14.

The Ninth Observation in Nature.
THe branches of fruit trees if cut off, and stuck in the ground, they will (in
the spring) bud and blossom, and be as forward as the boughs that grow upon
the stock, or root, and will seem to grow, but when the sun draws near, and
the weather grows hot, these boughs begin to decay, and wither, they cannot
endure heat, they within a while, show that they want a root.

This is another Similitude of the state of spiritual fruit trees, and
shadows out unto us this Proposition.

Proposition shadowed.
That some persons flourish with a profession for a time, but in the heat of
affliction they fall off.

Many Christians will flourish with a profession in the time of prosperity,
when many showers of blessings, and outward comforts fall on them: but when the
hot sun of troubles, and afflictions begins to scorch, and the dewes and
rain of temporal blessings are taken away and withheld, then they show
themselves to be but as Boughs stuck in the ground, and without roots, which
bud and blossom, but can bring forth no fruit.

These are they spoken of in the Parable. Luke 8.13. The seed that falls upon
the Rock springs up as well, it may be, as that on the good ground, but when
the sun grows hot, it scorcheth it, and it withers. Mat. 13.21. He has no
root in himself, but endures for a while, and in time of persecution he is
offended.

Such the Apostle speaks of 1 John 2.19. They went out from us, because they
were not of us etc.

This shows us the end of Hypocrites, formal professors, who root in Christ:
such as are not really ingrafted into Christ, they will certainly fall away at
last, none can persevere, but by being in Christ, Job. 27.10. Will he, the
Hypocrite, always call upon God. Every plant which my heavenly father has not
planted shall be rooted up. Mat. 15.13.

This being so, it should make every one give all diligence to be Boughs stuck
in the ground without roots, or branches of the true Vine, Joh. 15.5. Such as
are really ingrafted into the true Vine, the hottest sun of persecution can
never hurt them, the gates of Hell shall not prevail against them. Such shall
be as a Tree planted by the waters, that spreads out her roots by the river,
and shall not see when heat comes, but her leaf shallbe green, and shall
not be careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding
fruit, Jer. 17.8.

The Tenth Observation in Nature.
We seek for the best kinds of fruits to engraft in our Orchards, we are
careful, and diligent with much labor, cost, and time, to obtain the most
useful, and most profitable fruits; though we take some pains for ordinay
kinds, yet we especially desire the best fruits.

From this Observation we are taught: That

We should bend all our desires, and endeavors, that the best gifts,
Proposition shadowed.
graces, and Fruits, may, especially increase.

The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 12. There are diversities of gifts wrought by the
same spirit, all of them desirable and profitable, but some are more profitable
than others, which he exhorts us to look after, and desire especially, Verse.
31. Covet earnestly the best Gifts.

There is a precellency, and greater worth in some Fruits than in some others,
1 Cor. 13. I will show you a more excellent way. And Phil. 1.10. That ye may
approve things that are excellent or (as some read it) things that differ.
Follow after charity, and desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may
prophecy, 1 Cor. 14.1. And verse. 12. For as much as ye are zealous of
spiritual gifts, seek that ye may excel to the edifying of the Church. He
preferres one grace before another; And now abides faith, hope, and love,
these three; but the greatest of these is love. 1 Cor. 13.13.

This reproves those who content themselves with the lowest, and strive not
after the best, and chiefest. Many having gotten some competent abilities, they
go on in a formal way, running in a round, or Circle, making little, or no
progression at all, no increase, or growth. Yea, sometimes for want of
exercise, and improvement of their Gifts, they loose what they had, and become
very Drones, and Dunces.

best gifts, graces, and spiritual fruits, that so we may apply our selves to
gain, and increase them especially.

First then: Such are best, as are most useful and profitable to our selves
and others.

Profit and edification, is the great end why the spirit of God gives gifts, 1
Cor, 12.7. The Apostle valued those gifts most, which were most for
Edification. 1 Cor. 14.19. I had rather speak five words with my
understanding, that by my voice I might teach others, than 10000 words in an
unknown Tongue. Knowledge, Tongues, humane Learning, and Parts, are little
worth, unless they be used to edification. What then shall we think of those
men who use them for ostentation, and to gain admiration?

Secondly: If we find any gift, grace, or spiritual fruit commended to us in
special and particular in the word, such has the highest commendation that
possible can be, as the gift of Prophecy above other gifts, 1 Cor. 14.1.
Desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophecy. Which is a gift to
be able publicly to expound the word of God, Diod. Annot.
and to apply it to the edification of the Church.

And of Graces, Love is the chiefest, 1 Cor. 13.1. Now abides Faith, Hope, and
Love, these three; but the greatest of these is Love. And 1 Pet. 4.8. Above all
things have fervent love among your selves So for Meekness of Spirit, God
himself commends it to us in particular, for a most special fruit, 1 Pet.
3.4. The ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, is a thing with God of a great
price.

Thirdly: those graces wherein we most resemble God the father, and Christ,
such are most excellent, as Love, Mercy, Humility: we are called upon (as might
be showed at large) to imitate the father, and the son, in these things
especially; What is more sweet and amiable in the Conversations of men, than
Love, Mercy, Humility? these are Graces, and fruits of highest esteem both
with God, and men.

Such as hold forth Truths in public, should bring forth the best Fruits: in
expounding, and applying the word, they ought to lay open those truths that are
most suitable to Persons, times and occasions, and decline other things of
lesser moment: and (in particular subjects) to bring forth those things that
do most naturally arise from the word, according to the genuine sense of it,
without straining, or wresting, (there being such infinite variety of matter)
that it may be as the first, and purest Liquor of Grapes, (or as life honey)
that runs without strayning, which is (by far) the best.

Men should stand most upon the Essentialls of Religion, and Christianity: How
to get an interest in Christ, and then how to improve it: to grow in grace, to
subdue Corruptions; how we may get, and maintain a constant, habitual
Communion with God.

And for our Meditations, Speeches and Actions we must still look at the best,
if there lie many, and various duties before us, and all cannot possibly be
done, we ought to set our selves to consider, and find out which are most
convenient, most necessary, most profitable, and best, And accordingly apply
our selves thereto: and not to go (hand over head) to any of them, upon this
ground, for that it is a good work, it is our duty, for so perhaps we shall
neglect a more excellent, and more profitable work, and miss of the best, and
choicest fruits.

The Eleventh Observation in Nature.
WE find by experience that after a plant is engrafted, both the Graft and the
stock will shoot forth, and if the Graft grow vigorously, and strongly, then
the shootes of the stock are but weak, but if the shoots of the stock break
out strongly, then the Graft grows but weakly, therefore the husbandman takes
pains often to cut off the shoots that grow upon the stock, that so the graft
may grow the better.

This is another Similitude of the state of Mystical Fruit Trees, and shadows
forth unto us this Proposition. That

Proposition shadowed.
While the Spiritual part in us acts and grows strongly, the fleshly part
acts but weakly: So also, if the flesh be strong, the spirit is weak.

In all persons Regenerate, there are two Natures the one contrary to the
other, the Spirit, and the flesh, the new man, and the old man, the Divine
Nature, and Corrupt Nature: these two Natures abide in us, and act in us so
long as we live, in this earthly Tabernacle: and they strive one against the
other, so that it is the care of the husbandman, and is, or should be our
continual labor, and business to strengthen the spiritual part against the
fleshly part.

We find by Experience, That while the spiritual part acts lively, and
strongly, the Carnal part is down; While it is by the Spirit of God, raised
up to a high pitch, and enlarged with delight, and joy in God and Communion
with him in Meditation and Prayer, then all the while Corruptions are low, and
weak, and (as it were) subdued.

The Apostle tells us what we must do to keep down Corruptions: Gal. 5.16.
This I say, walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh. While the soul is in a spiritual frame, and has clear apprehensions
of the love of God in Christ: then it is active and lively in all the ways of
God, Luke 11.21.
though the flesh, be as a strong man Armed; yet when this spiritual man,
(that is stronger then he) rises up, and bestirs himself, he is able to bind
him, and keep him under, and rules in the soul, until there be an abating,
and slacking of his spiritual strength, and then the flesh will soon discover
it self, and stir, and act, as temptations, and occasions arise: and then on
the other side, the Spiritual part acts but weakly, it is down, low, flat,
wanting life and power, during such stirrings, and workings of the flesh. Romans
7.23. I see a Law in my members warring against the Law of my mind, and leading
me captive etc.

This should teach us often to observe, and take notice of the actings of our
spirits, of the frame and temper of them, 1 Use.
whether the stock or the Graft, bud the faster, what shootes the soul puts
forth, of what kind, what the motions of our souls are, whether holy and
spiritual, or carnal, and earthly: cutting off these, and preserving, and
cherishing those.

If we were watchful daily, and took pains with our spirits to keep them up
in a spiritual frame, in Communion with God, then (by degrees) the shootes,
and growths of the spiritual part, would become strong, and the shootes of the
flesh weak and feeble.

O that this were well weighed and practiced by Christians! it is the very
life, Spirit and power of godliness, thus to walk with God, in communion with
him: hereby we are enabled to do, and suffer all things for God, and to
resist, and keep under the flesh and all Enemies: This is the life of our life,
and heaven upon Earth.

The twelfth Observation in Nature.
THe nearer the Branches of a Tree are to the Roots, the faster, and firmer
they are, and more free from tossing and shaking by the winds; Such grow more
fast and steady. And the farther off the Branches are from the Root, the more
loose, and unsteadfast they are, the more they are waved, and tossed by the
winds, and motion of the Air.

This is another Similitude of the state of spiritual Fruit Trees, and
shadows out unto us this Proposition. That,

Proposition shadowed.
The more closely a Christian walks with God, the more steadfast he is, and
more free from spiritual Enemies.

Every Mystical Fruit-tree that bears good fruit is Ingrafted, or implanted
into Jesus Christ, the Root, and Stock, from whence all the spiritual sap,
and life, is drawn and derived, whereby the Branches grow and bear fruit.

And experience shows, the nearer the Boughs and Branches are unto the Root,
the closer we walk with God, the more Communion we have with the father, and
with his son Jesus Christ, the more fixed stable, and unshaken we are.

When the soul is a far off from Christ: it is carried, and tossed about,
with diverse, and strange conceits, and Opinions, doubts, fears, troubles, and
temptations, is moved this way, and that way, as the top branches of a Tree
with the wind.

The Prophet David walked with God, and kept close unto him, Psalm. 16.8. I
have set the Lord always before me, he is at my right hand, I shall not be
moved, therefore he says, his heart was established, and would not shrink,
but was enabled to insult over all Psalm. 46.2. I will not fear though the
earth be moved, etc.

As this shows us the happiness of those who walk with God, so also we may
hence see the miserable Condition of those who are out of Christ: they being a
far off from Christ, the whole frame of their soul is unsettled, they are like
the raging sea that cannot rest: Esaias. 57.20. their Condition is as was said of
Reuben, Genesis 59.4. unstable as water.

James. 1.8. They are unstable in all thoir ways: because a far off from
Christ.

Let this stir us up to a watchful, and circumspect care in our close to
Christ: Such as walk closely with God, live in another sphere, in a higher
Orb, than the common world, though they live with them: And notwithstanding
there be Commotions, and stirs, and turning of the world upside down, yet in
the spirits of these, all is calm, and quiet, their hearts are fixed and
unmoved: they fear not evil tidings, Psalm. 112.7, 8. because their hearts are
fixed, trusting in the Lord, Psalm. 15.5. They are as Mount Syon that cannot be
removed, but abides fast for ever.

The thirteenth Observation in Nature.
IN Material fruit trees the sower Nature of the wild Plants that are grafted
upon, does still continue in the stock, or root, and is not taken away, or
lost by Engrafting, it is only restrained, and kept under by the Graft. The
Nature of the Graft is predominant in the Tree, and overrules in bringing forth
fruits, according to its own kind, (although with some small degree of the
sower Nature of the stock mixed with it) And the two Natures of the Graft, and
stock continue mixed together, so long as the Tree lives.

This is another Similitude of the state of Mystical Fruit Trees, and shadows
forth unto us this Proposition.

That Corrupt Nature abides in believers as long as they live, Proposition
shadowed.
and is but in part subdued by grace.

Corruption of Nature though it be not cast out, yet it is by degrees, more and
more subdued, restrained, and kept under, Romans 6.6. The old man is crucified
with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, it is destroyed as to the
ruling power of it, but not as to the being of it.

The spirit of God working Principles of Grace, or the Divine Nature in the
soul does curb, restrain, and (as it were) bind Corrupt Nature, which of it
self is as a strong man armed, but when a stronger than he comes, he binds
him and keeps him under, Luke 11.21. Not that he casts him out, as a
Landlord, that turns out an old Tenant, when he puts in a new one: The
Apostle complains of it, Romans 7. I find a law in my members warring against
the law of my mind, etc. The experience of all Believers proves this
sufficiently.

unclean bird in our bosoms, this grand enemy of God, Of all the Arguments of
humiliation, this is the greatest of all, this comprehends all.

We should admire the infinite love of God to us, that notwithstanding
Corruption of Nature, has delight in his people.

David, Solomon, and the most holy men, how then does it concern us to watch.

increase of grace, for as that grows, Corruption wastes, or is kept under.

The abiding of Corruption in us, should make us long for the glory that is to
be revealed, when there will be a full deliverance from Corruption of Nature,
and all the effects, and consequences of it.

The Fourteenth Observation in Nature.
IT is not the tallnesse, nor largeness, nor any outward beauties in
fruit trees, that makes them valued, but it is their Natures, and properties in
bringing forth good fruits.

This teaches us: That,

Proposition shadowed.
It is not any outward excellencies, but the Image of God upon the soul, that
is the glory of a person.

Whatsoever has any likeness or resemblance of God, is beautiful, and has a
glory upon it, and by how much nearer it draws to God in likeness so much
more glorious it is.

Grace or Holiness makes Creatures beautiful and glorious, in the eyes of God.

Israel was chosen to be an holy people unto the Lord, Deuteronomy. 7.6. and this was
their glory, Deuteronomy. 26.18. they were high above all nations, in praise and in
name, and in honor, etc. This was their wisdom and understanding, and praise
in the sight of the Nations, Deuteronomy. 4.6. They said of them, surely this great
Nation, is a wise and understanding people, etc. This was their beauty, their
glory, Deuteronomy. 10.21. He is thy praise, etc. A hoary head is a Crown of glory:
but when? Even when it is found in the way of righteousness, Pro. 16.31. Yea
This spiritual wisdom in a young head, is a Crown to it. Prove, 3.5. All the
things thou can desire are not to be compared unto her.

This shows us the blindness, and darkness of unregenerate holiness, or the
Image of God; Nay, who rather account it a disparagement: They esteem no more
of this glory, then they did of our Savior, the Lord of glory, who in a
carnal eye had no form, nor comeliness, no beauty in him that they should
desire him, Esaias, 53.2. These persons glory in their shame, and are ashamed of
that whith is true glory.

Oh Let us labor after this glory, which is more to be desired then gold, yea
than much fine gold, Ps. 19.10. That which the world glory, is but a shadow of
glory to this. This excelling that infinitely more, then the light of the sun
excels the light of a Candle, or of a Glow-worme: This is the Dyamond in the
Ring, the Jewel in the Casket, the Treasures in the field, to buy which a wise
Merchant will sell all that he has.

The fifteenth Observation in Nature.
In Material Fruit Trees there is a close, and firm knot between the stock,
and the graft, whereby they are joined fast together, and made one body; which
knot, and conjunction continues, and holds fast, as long as the trees live.

This Observation shadows out unto us. That There is a firm and constant
union between Christ, Proposition shadowed.
and every Believer.

All believers are implanted, or ingrafted into Jesus Christ, the true Vine or
Stock, and by this ingrafting there is a firm knot, or tie between the stock
or root, and the Branches, which holds for ever, Romans 6.5. We are planted
together, etc. and Romans 11.24. We are grafted contrary to nature into a good
Olive Tree. So also, 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joined to the Lord, is one spirit.
This union, or true-loves-knot, is made by the spirit on Christ's part, and by
faith on ours, wrought by him.

Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Acts 9.4. Yea they strike at the very
face of God, and at the most tender part, Zech. 2.8. He that touches you,
touches the Apple of his eye. So that God will certainly preserve his people.

Relations and ties to Christ that possibly can be: 2 Cor. 6.16. 1 Pet. 2.9.
Jo. 15.14. Jo. 20.17. Romans 8.17. Can. 4.7. Ephesians. 3.30.
As branches to the root or stock; as a peculiar people to a faithful God: As
friends to Christ; as Brethren to Christ; as Heirs and Co-heires with Christ;
as children to a father, as a wife to the husband; as members to the head.

And this Union once made is sure for ever.

Privileges of this union, that so we may enjoy the sweetness of it; Walking
with God, light of his countenance, communion with the Father, and with his
son Jesus Christ, etc.

joined to Christ, what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy
conversation?

The sixteenth Observation in Nature.
Fruit Trees are not to be permitted to grow old in Nurseries, but being
ingrafted and prepared (in certain years) for Orchards, and fields, ought to
be transplanted; save only some few, here and there one, of the best kinds,
whereof to gather grafts for the young plants.

This shadows out unto us: Proposition shadowed.
That

University men ought (in convenient time) to go forth into the service of the
Church, and Commonwealth, except some choice persons, fit for Government of the
Societies.

As Material nurseries are for the increase and multiplying of Fruit Trees,
where they are prepared (in certain years) for Orchards and fields: So
Universities, or Mystical Nurseries, are for the instruction, and discipline
of youth, that they may be useful, and fruitful Trees, when transplanted
abroad into the Church of God.

If Fruit Trees in a Nursery (where there are such multitudes in a little
compass) were permitted to grow there many years, they could not possibly
spread, nor enlarge their Branches, whereby they might bear store of Fruits,
but would fret and gall, and rub off the Bark, Blossoms, and fruits, of one
another.

So neither is it possible for multitudes of Students in a University to
spread, and show forth their gifts and abilities in Preaching, or otherwise
(for benefit of others) as they may do abroad, where every man may exercise
every day, or as often as he pleases.

Secondly: Fruit Trees in a Nursery must not grow there, being ready for
transplanting, because such hinder many other small young plants, which might
be brought into the Nursery, to be ingrafted and prepared, if the great ones
were transplanted.

So ought it to be in Universities; For unless the ancient Students (having
had a convenient time to fit themselves for public employments) do remove,
many hopeful young plants will be kept out, which otherwise, if brought under
the discipline of godly Governors, and ingrafted, will (in due season) bring
forth much good fruit.

Thirdly; If Fruit Trees (after they are prepared in the Nursery for
fruit-bearing) be removed, and transplanted abroad into several Countries,
many may partake of their fruits, they will be profitable from year, to year,
which cannot be, if they be kept still in the Nursery.

So if University men (having obtained Gifts and Graces) go forth, and
exercise their Talents in the Church of God, many may have profit, and
advantage by them, who otherwise cannot.

Besides these Reasons, the word requires that able, and useful men should go
forth into the Church of God, Luke 10.1, 2. Our Savior (as a Master, or
governor of a great Society) having disciplined, and taught his Disciples, and
made them fit for the Ministry, he sent out Threescore and ten of them at one
time, having sent Twelve not long before, Luke 9.2. And because the harvest is
great, and there is need of Laborers, we ought to pray the Lord of the
Harvest, that he would send forth more, Luke 10.2.

But such as are fit, and yet unwilling to go, may be asked sharply, by way of
reproof, why stand ye here all the day idle Mat. 20.6. Many stand idle in the
Market place, while they might, and ought to go, and labor in the Lords
Vineyard.

Having a Talent, or more, they must one day be called to an account what use
they have made thereof, and if they have not well employed them, nor gained by
them, they will make but a sad reckoning, Mat. 25.19. the Lord comes and will
reckon with them.

Inference hence is in every man's eye, that such whom it concerns, do
consider what their duty is in this regard, and accordingly apply themselves.

It is my humble advice, with all love; Let not any now (as too many in former
times) having gotten Fellowships in Colleges, account them as twere their
freehold for life, having accommodations to set up their rest, and say its
good being here, what can I expect better, if I go forth, as though self,
were all a man should aim at.

If any man be offended, and object, why should I meddle thus far: I answer, I
am within the bounds of my Orchard, and the subject at first proposed: Not only
to treat of Ordering Material Fruit Trees, but also to make a spiritual use
of them, where I judge the Similitude apt, and pregnant: I am a friend and no
adversary in speaking the truth in Love.

The Husbandman having purged his Nursery, and planted therein many choice
plants (ingrafted into the true Vine) he expects better fruits there, than
former ages have afforded. And it may be spoken to the honor of the
Husbandman, and of the Reformation hitherto carried on by him) that there are
pleasant and wholesome fruits brought forth by many Trees of righteousness of
his planting Oh that it might be said, Esaias. 61.3. Jer. 2.21. Ho. 10.1.
there are no Wild Vines among them, bringing forth sower, and bitter Grapes,
or empty Vines which bring forth fruit unto themselves. That the adversaries of
the truth might not have occasion to charge any, especially such as have the
name of godly persons, with Pride, high carriages, earthly mindedness, and
such like gross corruptions, which are the fowlest Blots that can light upon
Professors, and bring most dishonor to God, to his Gospel, and to themselves.

If men in these places have sincere, and right ends in their eye, and pursue
them accordingly, even the interest of our Lord Jesus Christ in the increase of
his kingdom, As they may thereby bring much honor to God, happiness to
themselves, edification to his Church, So also the same is the right and ready
way to establish, and perpetuate Universities.

Therefore take my counsel, and not mine, but the Apostles, 2 Timothy 1.6. stir
up the gift that is in thee; and again, 1 Timothy 4.4. Neglect not the gift that
is in thee.

Such as have Talents whereby they may profit the Church of God, ought to
employ them for that purpose, according as God has fitted them.

It is true indeed; Some able men in Universities, as godly Tutors in every
College, besides Governors, may be as profitable to the Church of God there,
as if they went forth, but this reaches not the generality of men in such
places. Therefore the exhortation may be seasonably carried on: I know the best
men had need of stirring up to their duties.

And that this may willingly be embraced, Consider what need there is of
faithful, able, and painful Teachers abroad in every Country: The Harvest
truly is great, and such laborers are but few: Multitudes, Multitudes of
people, lie in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, and would it not
be a glorious work, to be isntrumental in turning them from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan unto God: yea; and the work also will make
such Instruments glorious, Dan. 12.3. They that be wise, shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness, as
the stars for ever, and ever.

I shall say no more: verbum sat sapientibus, there are a world of
Encouragements to this work, rewards, and wages are in it, besides infinite
Treasures laid up for them to all Eternity.

Governors in Universities ought to take special care that men go forth, who
are fitted for public employments, and not to leave it to their wills, and
pleasures; for although some are carried out by the spirit, and spiritual
Principles, to spend, and be spent in the work of the Lord, yet some others
(even good men) give way to selfish, carnal Principles, and neglect it:
Therefore Governors ought herein to follow Christ's Example, and to by making
Orders, and Rules in the several societies for that end; and not to walk (in
this great respect) by statutes made in dark, corrupt times; Is it likely such
should be meet Rules for these Gospel times, these times of light, and
Reformation?
send them forth to preach Christ.

It be asked whither shall they go? it Answered, to preach the Gospel to
every creature; to all mankind; wheresoever it is wanting: For if they are
Ministers of the Gospel, a necessity, lies upon them to preach it, 1 Cor.
9.16. yea, woe unto them if they preach not the Gospel, whether they have a
settled maintenance or no: If they be faithful herein, then Christ whose work
it is, will certainly see they have all necessaries ministered unto them: As
the earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof so all hearts are in in his
hand too; which he turns as he pleases. Men's hearts shall be opened to them,
not only to receive and take in the word which they bring, but also to give out
of their substance, and to assure them of it more certainly, then they can be
by any other means: But when men lie still neglecting the Lords work,
watching for an advantage, to get some great place, worth so much by the year,
this (as it makes such persons low, and cheap, even in the eyes of good men,
and reflects upon the whole Ministry in the eyes of the world; so also this
renders the labors of many, fruitless and insuccessfull; it being a just, and
righteous thing with God to leave such to themselves and their carnal ends.

And as to those persons who have been long in Universities; and are not fit
for any public employment either in Church or Commonwealth, having misspent
their time, and improved in nothing but in Corruptions; these ought to be cast
out, as unsavory salt, or removed as unprofitable, unfruitful trees, out of
the Nursery that so there may be room for other hopeful young plants to grow,
and thrive in their places, to be profitable Instraments in their generation,
And if Governors have not sufficient authority to send forth the one, or to
cast out the other, they ought to obtain it, where it may be had: Otherwise
the great and maine end of Universities can never be attained, neither can
Governors who neglect to do this, be able to make a good account unto God in
this matter, which will shortly be required of them: Give an account of thy
stewardship, for thou may be no longer steward.

The seventeenth Observation in Nature.
Fruit Trees never loose their innate or natural properties, but they, abide
in the Trees, as long as the trees live: They may (and sometimes do) loose all
adventitious properties such as they have by the Art, and industry of men, but
they never loose their Natural; All the skill, and power of men, cannot rob
the Trees of their Natural properties without the destruction of the Trees.

This is another Similitude of the state of Mystical fruit trees and shadows
forth unto us this Proposition. That. Proposition shadowed.


Saving grace, or the Divine Nature in believers, abides in the soul for ever,
but common Gifts, or Graces may be lost.

When God gives any soul to Christ there is then a Marriage between Christ and
that soul: Now the Bonds and Laws of Marriage, hold and are in force, so long
as the parties live.

The Covenant, between God and his people is a well ordered covenant, sure, and
steadfast, 2 Samuel 23.5.

Grace in Believers, is a spiritual nature, or the Divine Nature: And if that
all natural living Creatures retain their Natural virtues, and properties,
so long as they live, how much more shall the soul, (which is a spiritual
substance) hold and keep those spiritually Natural properties, habits and
inclinations, that God fixes in it.

Holiness, is a Divine Nature, or new Creature which God puts into the Souls
of Beleivers, and in respect of duration) is like unto the Author of it, who is
Eternal.

We are kept by the power of God, through faith, 1 Pet. 1.5. And as God is the
Author of faith, so also he is the perfecter of it, Heb. 12.2.

All the Attributes of God, are engaged for our perseverance in grace; he is
faithful, who also will do it, 1 These: 5.23, 24.

I will put my fear (this new Nature) into their hearts, and they shall never
depart from me, Jer. 32.40. they shall never loose it, neither shall their
enemies take it from them, either with power, or policy, it is impossible.
Mark. 24.24. If it were possible they shall deceive the very Elect, implying,
it is not possible.

Multitudes of other Scriptures might be brought to this purpose; but I study
brevity throughout all the work.

But now: such as have but Common Spiritual Gifts may, and do fall away; These
make a Profession for a time (for some self, and sinister ends) and after a
while fall off, and come to nothing.

They are as a Bough stuck in the ground without Roots, that for a while in the
pleasant spring, will bud and Blossom, like other boughs, (upon living Trees)
but in the heat of summer, it withers and dies; see Observe. 9.

Many have excellent natural parts, in respect of their apprehension,
understanding, Memory, utterance etc. Much Learning, skill, and acquired
abilities, and may be able to Preach, Pray, discourse etc. much better, then
many of Gods people, they may be enlightened, and taste of the heavenly Gift,
they may receive the word of God with some liking of it, and in some things
conform unto it; And yet (by degrees) may loose all, or most of these things;
for all these, if no more, come short of true grace, or holiness, they are
common to the Reprobate, as well as to the Elect. They went out from us,
because they were not of us. 1. Joh: 2.19. such are as the stony ground,
Matthew. 13.21. the seed springs, and dies soon after.

Principles, what they have received, whether true, and saving graces, or but
only Common Gifts, and Graces, lest with the foolish Virgins, that had Lamps
but no Oil, they be such out of heaven, when they expect to enter in.

Hence we may see the folly, and weakness of those who labor more for
spiritual gifts, then for saving graces; some men cost, time, and labor, for
accomplishments in humane Learning, and Moral abilities, which may be all
lost, then they do for the wisdom of God, and his Image, which abide in the
soul for ever. Is not this Esau like, who preferred a Mess of Pottage, before
a blessing?

How shall any be able to excuse such men from gross spiritual folly,
blindness and want of Judgment, who prefer things wherein Satan excells
them, before those things which make men resemble God?

Surely, there is no clearer Evidence of darkness of mind, then for men to
labor more earnestly for Gifts than for Graces, for things that perish, then
for Eternal Treasures.

The nineteenth Observation in Nature.
THe husbandman has use for many Tools, and Instruments, about his works in
his Garden of Fruit Trees; and if any of them grow dull, and unserviceable for
which ends they were appointed, if his knives, sawes etc. (after often
whetting, and filing) will not cut, but become blunt, and dull tools, he lays
them aside (or perhaps sometimes in displeasure, throws them aside) and makes
use of some other Instruments that have an edg: He very much approves of sharp
Tools about his works.

This shadows out unto us. That,

God is well pleased with zealous, and active Instruments in his works;
Proposition shadowed.
But men of dull, indifferent spirits, he (often) lays them aside, and puts
others in their stead.

God the Great Mystical husbandman has great works in hand in his Garden the
Church: Joh 5.17. My father works hitherto, and I work: And though he can
do all his works with a word of his Mouth, yet he is pleased to make use of
many Instruments, in carrying them on.

Now God does very much approve of Zealous, and active instruments in the works
he sets them about;) their zeal being guided with wisdom, and Judgment) Jehu,
because he was Zealous and active for God in destroying Ahabs house, God
established him, 2 Kings 10.30.
and his posterity, in the Throne, unto the fourth generation: But Saul, an
eminent Instrument (and set up by God himself) yet neglecting to do the Lords
work thoroughly, (which was in his power to do) God said him aside in
displeasure, and set up David (a zealous and active Instrument) in his stead,
to carry on the works he had to do.

And Eli, (though a good man) and an eminent Instrument in the hand of God, yet
when he grew dull, and wanted edg, viz: zeal to suppress the wickedness of
his sons, and to honor God in his Office, God was exceedingly displeased
with him, and threw him aside [in respect of making use of him any longer] and
chose another in his stead. 1 Samuel 3. But how well was God pleased with
Phinehas, a man of spirit, and zeal for God? God himself stands up for him,
and commends him, Phinehas and his sons were established in the Priests
Office, Numb. 25.13. He shall have it, and his seed after him, even the Covenant
of an everlasting Priesthood, because he was zealous for his God.

God cannot abide indifferency and luke-warmnesse in matters concerning his
honor, and the interest of his son, which he himself is jealous for: a
dull, flat, indifferent spirit in these things, is loathsome to God, he cannot
bear it, Rev. 3.16. Because thou art lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold, I
will spew thee out of my mouth.

Men that act not for God, they act against him, Luke 11.23, He that is not
with me is against me.

diligent and active Instruments in the designs of God: acting according to
the directions, and leadings of his Word and Providence.

The advantages will be, not only the honor of God, in the enlargement, and
establishment of the kingdom of Christ, but also the honor and establishment
of such Instruments. God will still delight to employ them in his great works,
Numb. 25.13,

The nineteenth Observation in Nature.
THe Husbandman in Autumn and Winter, is Pruning of his trees, and boughs and
branches are scattered up and down all the parts of the Orchard. He is then
digging up the earth, and baring the Roots of trees, transplanting some, and
setting others in their rooms, and doing many other works which make the
Garden lie rough, and unhandsomely; But all these works tend to the greater
beauty, pleasure, and profit, in the garden afterward in the spring, and
summer.

This Similitude shadows out unto us this Proposition (which is cleared by
Scripture.)

That the Commotions, troubles, Proposition shadowed.
and confusions in the Church of God, will end in the settlement, peace and
glory of it.

God has a great work to do in the world, and is now about it, even in our
days; He has said, he will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and
the dry land; That he will shake all nations, and the desire of all Nations
shall come, Hag. 2.6.7.

When were the Heavens, and the Earth, and the Sea, so shaken as they have been
of late years? who knows not of the overturnings, and great alterations, that
have been among us both in Church and State? It is God that changes the times,
and the seasons, it is he that puts down one, and sets up another, and
all these things are but in order unto the glory of his Church: Yea he will
still shake, and overturne the Nations until he has established, and settled
his son Christ, Lord and King over all the Earth: This is his great design
now in hand.

Thus says the Lord God, remove the Diadem, and take off the Crown, this
shall not be the same, exalt him that is low, and abase him that is high, Ezekiel.
21.26.

I will overturne, overturne, overturne it, and it shall be no more, until he
come whose right it is, I will give it him.

Christ alone has right to reign, and God has promised him the Heathen for
his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for his possession, Psalm.
2.8.

And such as oppose him, and stand out in rebellion against him (though they be
Kings and Monarch's) and say we will not have this man to reign over us, he
will break such with a rod of Iron, and dash them in pieces like a Potters
vessel, Psalm. 2.9.

Christ now meets with opposition in coming to enter upon his kingdom, and
thence are all the stirs, commotions, and confusions among us; but he will at
length prevail, and the government shall be upon his shoulders, and of the
increase of his government, and peace, there shall be no end, the zeal of the
Lord of hosts will perform this, Esaias. 9.7.

His Kingdom shall at length be established upon the tops of the Mountains,
and be exalted above the hills, Mica: 4.1. And after he has rebuked the strong
nations of the earth, and brought them into subjection, Then they shall beat
their swords into plowshares, and their spears into Pruning hooks, and shall
learn war no more, but they shall sit every man under his Vine, and under his
Fig Tree, and none shall make them afraid, for the mouth of the Lord of hosts
has spoken it. Mica. 4.3, 4. and again, Esaias. 32.18. My people shall dwell in
a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places.

Let all take notice of the great design that God has in hand, in the
enlargement of the kingdom of his son, and establishing him in it, and
beware they be not found fighters against God. And though men contrive, and
bend their strength against God, yet will he carry on his work, and they shall
be broken, Esaias. 8.9. Associate your selves, O ye people, and ye shall be
broken in pieces, Gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces.

Church of God, which has been long oppressed and kept under by the enemies
thereof. For surely the time of deliverance is near.

As by the budding and blossoming of the Fig Tree, and all other Trees, we know
that the Summer is near: so the terrible shaking of the Nations declare that
the redemption of Gods people draws near (these being the last days) The day
of the Churches deliverance (from under the power of Antichrist) has dawned,
Esaias. 60.1. Arise, and shine, for the light is come, and the glory of the Lord
is risen upon thee. Whereas thou have been forsaken, and hated, so that no man
went through thee, I will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many
Generations: Verse. 15.20. The Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the
days of thy mourning shall be ended.

The twentieth Observation in Nature.
THe graft and stock of the fruit-tree, are so joined together, as that they
are the one within the other, and so made one entire body. The Graft is within
the Stock, in respect of its substance (the stock incloseth some part of it)
And the Stock is within the Graft, by its sap, and moisture giving nourishment
to it, whereby it thrives and brings forth good fruits: So they being joined,
and one within the other, are made one body or substance.

This Similitude shadows out unto us. Proposition shadowed.
That Believers by ingrafting into Christ, do live in him, and he in them, and
are thereby made one with him.

This truth is clearly held forth unto us in Scripture; It is a great Mystery,
not understood, or comprehended by any natural man, and better understood (in
our own spirits by experience) than expressed to others. The Apostle says 2
Cor. 4.16. Ye are the Temple of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell
in them and walk in them. And 1 John 4.16. He that dwells in love, dwells
in God, and God in him. Believers dwell in God the father, and in Christ, and
in the spirit; and God, and Christ, and the spirit dwell in them. As the spirit
is in Beleivers, so they are in the spirit, Gal. 5.25. If we live in the
spirit, let us also walk in the spirit. Gal. 2.20. I live yet not I, but
Christ lives in me.

And now; 2 Cor. 13.5.
by this spiritual or mystical union between God and his people, they are
made one with God: Not to be understood as some have said, That every believer
hereby is God, and so advance themselves above what is meet. It is true
believers are made one with Christ, 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joined to the Lord
is one spirit, and Ephesians. 4.4. There is one body, and one spirit.

And it is the prayer of our Lord Christ (which is certainly heard) that his
people, with his father, and himself may be one. Joh. 17.21. That they all may
be one, as thou father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in
us. v. 22. And the glory which thou gave me, I have given them, that they may
be one, even as we are one, 23. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be
made perfect in one.

What a wonderful mystery is this, that Believers should be united to, and
made one with God, as the Father, and the Son are one? Not in respect of
partaking of his essential and incommunicable properties which Creatures are
incapable of but in respect of reality and truth: Believers are as truly, and
really joined, and united to Christ as the Branches of a Tree are unto the root.

As the Stock and the Graft are really joined together, and are one within the
other, and made one body, so are Believers really united to God, God dwelling
in them, and they in God, and are made one spirit with him through Christ, 1
Cor. 6.17. He that is joined to the Lord is one spirit. And again, 1 Cor.
12.13. By one spirit we are united, etc.

live in God, and God in them, and that they are made one with him. This shows
us their safe Condition, notwithstanding the malice, and power of all their
enemies. They shall never be able to prevail against Gods people, or to hurt
them. As the hills are about Jerusalem, so is the Lord round about his people:
Psalm. 125 2. The Mercy, he wisdom, power, love, and faithfulness of God
compasses them about, for they live in God. This is the Hedge that was about
Job: Chap. 1.10. Thou have made an hedge about him, and about all that he has:
so that Satan could not touch him without leave.

2. From hence we may gather: That believers shall be sure to presevere in
grace unto the end: for they live in God, and from him they receive all
supplies of grace. Seeing Christ is risen up, and dies no more, believers, that
are in him as really as the graft in the stock, they shall be fed, and
nourished by him continually, as the stock feeds, and nourishes the Graft: the
Root is never dry, but still gives sap to the branches, both in winter, and
summer: so Christ is the true, and living Vine, the Root and stock filled with
all the fullness of God, out of which we all receive grace, for grace, and are
nourished with this living Sap unto Eternal life. Joh. 4.14. Springing up unto
Eternal life.

This Union, and Oneness between us, and God the father, and holy, and a
Gospel Conversation, such as becomes our Relation. Seeing these things are so,
what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy Conversation? Let us
therefore strive to be holy, as God is holy, and perfect, as our heavenly
father is perfect: Seeing that we are so near to God, and live in God, we may
by eying, and beholding of him, be more, and more changed into his Image, and
likeness, from one degree of glory to another, 1 Cor. 3.18. and so be more,
and more partakers of his divine Nature: and thereby daily have more Communion,
and fellowship with him (as two friends bring for the most part together, are
intimately acquainted, and familiar with each other) This is the top Privilege
of beleivers on this side heaven, we should therefore bring forth fruit
answerable to the spirit, and sap that we receive from Christ our stock, and
Root, whereon we grow, into which we are implanted.

The twenty first Observation in Nature.
Fruit Trees of the same species, or kind, are all like one another; They
resemble one another in their Natures, and in their shape, Color, Leaves,
Buds, Blossoms, and fruits; So that they are clearly differenced hereby from
other kinds: men know them to be such, or such kinds of trees, and of one kind,
by their likeness one to another.

Hence we learn. That

All Believers have a likeness, Proposition shadowed.
and resemblance of one another in the Image of God upon their souls.

The Image of God is the same upon all believers, and differs not, but only in
the degrees of it, upon some it is more beautiful, and glorious, then upon
others, yet the same in respect of the qualities and Nature of it. All have a
love, and liking of all the objects of love, as they are discoverd, and made
manifest: And also there is in the souls of all believers, an hatred, or
dislike of what is contrary to God, and to that spiritual or divine Nature in
them, as the spirit of God discovers such objects to their understandings. And
the Cause of all Controversies, and difference in Judgment amongst Gods people,
is not from any difference in their spiritual nature, for that is the same in
all, but from different degrees of light, and manifestations in particular
things: some are more renewed, and changed in the spirit of their minds and
have more of the Image of God, and are more purged from Corruptions then
others, and thence it is that all cannot comprehend things alike, yet is their
a likeness, and resemblance in their Natures, there are the same actings, and
movings of soul, the likenings, and lustings after holy and spiritual things
(in some measure or degree) in one, as in another: in weak, as in strong
Christians: A Child has the same Members, and is of the same Nature, as a man
at full growth; So the Spiritual Man.

God has promised to put this likeness upon his people Ier. 32.39. I will
give them one heart, and one way. God will make all of them hate the same
things: all the detestable things where they come, Ezekiel. 11. verse. 19. I will
give them one heart: The Multitude of them that believed, were of one heart,
and of one soul. Acts: 4.32.

a true Touchstone of an honest heart; such as have a real love, and liking of
spiritual things, Those whose hearts secretly close with the people of God,
because they are his, and heartily join with them in their most spiritual,
holy walkings, disliking, and opposing (from a Principle within) things that
hinder the work of grace, and kingdom of Christ, they may certainly conclude,
they are of the Elect of God, because they are like, and of the same stamp with
the rest of his people.

like, and resemble one another, are of one and the same nature, properties,
and dispositions, also they have all one God, one father, one savior, one
spirit, one and the same portion, and inheritance. Likeness, and resemblance
(in Natural, Moral, and spiritual things) is a ground of Love, and Union.

The two and twentieth Observation in Nature.
THe Husbandman prepares (in his Nursery such wild Pants as he intends to
bring, and plant in his Garden: He plants none in his Orchard, or Garden (where
they are to grow a long time) but such as are first ingrafted, prepared and
grown fit for that purpose in the Nursery.

This shadows out unto us: That

Those whom God purposes to bring (hereafter) into his Celestial Paradise, he
prepares them for it here, Proposition shadowed.
in this life.

The Whole Earth is Gods great Nursery, where he has Plants growing of all
sorts, and ages, some newly sprung up, wild, and unmanured, others well grown,
Engrafted, and prepared, for the heavenly Canaan, whom he is daily removing,
and transplanting thither: preparation for this Garden of God, is absolutely
necessary. Now there is no preparation of wild Plants for a Garden, without
Engrafting; all the Culture, pruning, dressing, or ordering the husbandman can
use, is to no purpose, without Engrafting, either of Natural, or spiritual
plants, Jo. 3.3. Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of
God. As to the wild Natural Plants there is a new Nature added by Engrafting,
so there is also a new Nature, the divine Nature, put into the soul, by
Regeneration, or Ingrafting into Christ, without which there can be no
preparation for glory.

The Apostle speaking of the glory above (and that the saints groan earnestly
for it,) says, God fits them and prepares them for this state of glory: 2 Cor.
5.5. He that has wrought us for the self same thing is God God squares, and
works these spiritual, lively stones, for the spiritual building, as a Mason
hewes, and squares the stones he intends for a Material building. Or (to keep
to the similitude in hand) the husbandman prepares the Plants he intends to
Plant in his Garden, ere he remove them thither. Col. 1.12. Giving thanks to
the father who has made us meet to be pertakers of the inheritance of the
saints in light.

As there are vessels of wrath fitted to destruction, so also, there are
vessels of mercy prepared unto glory. Romans 9.23. This people have I formed for
my self: they shall show forth my praise Esaias. 43.21. There is an absolute
necessity of this preparation, because (might it be supposed as a thing
possible, that a natural man should come to heaven, it would be but even a
burden to him; he would have no joy, no rest, nor contentment there; for all
things there are contrary to his Nature: now nothing pleases, but things that
are according to our Nature: therefore God prepares his people, by giving them
another Nature, the divine Nature, which is sanctification, or holiness.

God fits, and prepares his people for glory, by Convincing them of their state
and condition by Nature, showing them a way, and means of getting out of it,
even by laying hold on Christ by faith, closing with him upon the terms of
the Gospel, The Spirit of God unites them unto, and (by faith) ingrafts them
into that fruitful living stock Jesus Christ, without which none can be
prepared unto glory. And after this Ingrafting, the Husbandman goes on to
prepare his Plants, by Pruning, dressing, and ordering of them, by means of
Ordinances, Afflictions, Temptations, dispensations of providence, and workings
of his spirit in all these; whereby he brings them to further degrees of
Sanctification, until they have attained their measure, and are fitted for
glory.

Carpenter should take Trees newly cut down, rough, and unsquared (boughs and
all) and put them into a Building, as that God should bring souls to glory
(the body being cut down) which he has not fitted, and prepared for glory:
Therefore if thou can not (upon some good grounds) satisfy thy self that
God is in a way of preparation with thee, let not thine eyes sleep, neither
the Temples of thine head take any rest, until thou find some good evidences
of this thing. And let such as find, and know, they are prepared for glory (by
Engrafting into Christ, Calling, Sanctification etc. Rejoice in the Lord
always, because their This is a clear evidence our Names are written in
heaven, when the Law of God, (according to the New Covenant) is written in our
hearts, that is, when there are inclinations, and dispositions in our hearts
according to the word, when there is a new Nature, Holiness, or
sanctification, in some measure.
Names are written in heaven, they being prepared for it, shall certainly be
brought unto it.

The three and twentieth Observation in Nature.
Natural Fruit Trees increase by little and little every year, they are not
suddenly great, and large trees, but they increase by degrees, every year they
grow bigger, and larger every way, by the culture and diligence of the
husbandman, and influences of heaven, until they attain their full growth.

This shadows out unto us the state of spiritual Fruit Trees, in this
Proposition.

That grace in the hearts, of Believers is not suddenly strong, Proposition
shadowed.
but strength is gotten by degrees.

Grace is compared to a Grain of Mustardseede, which though it be very small,
yet by degrees it grows very great Mark. 4.31. It is like a Grain of
Mustardseed, which when it is sown in the Earth, is less then all the seeds
that be in the earth, verse. 32. but when it is sown it grows up, and
becomes greater then all herbs, and shoots out great Branches etc.

The inclinations, and new dispositions which the spirit of God begins to
work in the soul, they are then but very weak, and slender, scarce (it may
be) to be perceived, but afterward they are more sensible; it is as Corn
sowed in the field (our Savior holds it forth by that Similitude Mark. 4.28)
which brings forth, first the blade, then the Ear, after that the full corn
in the Ear. Corn (we know) springs up at first very small and slender, and
scarcely to be distinguished from Grass; so the first springings of Grace in
some are so small, that they are scarce to be perceived, nor are they easily
distinguished from Moral virtues.

The word of God is compared to seed, Luke 8.11. the seed is the word, etc.
Now the spirit of God, being the efficient Cause, or worker, As the husbandman
casts seed into his ground which he has prepared for that purpose, so does
the spirit cast, or put the word into the heart, he causes it to fasten, to
take hold, and to make impression in the heart and conscience of believers, and
there he waters it, and causes it to grow, he makes it take effect, and to
work according to the Nature of the word.

And of this seed the New man is borne, 1 Pet. 1.23. being borne again, not
of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God. etc.

A Child newly borne, is not presently a Man, but he grows up by little, and
little; God has Children, young men, and fathers in his great family the
Church, believers of several ages, some weak, and some strong.

faith to be a full persuasion of the love of God, which is only applicable to
some strong, well grown Christians, and not to the weak: In the discovery of
the Characters of Grace, such are often held forth, as whereto none attain but
the elder, and stronger sort of Believers, which are stumbling blocks, and
grounds of Temptations, and doubts to the weaker. Paul should be made a
Pattern in this case: 1 Cor. 3.2. I have fed you with milk, and not with
meat, for hitherto ye were not able to bear it.

I shall be stronger. And be sure to eye Christ all along, having once got a
sight of him, though thy sight be but weak, and dim, yet take heed of loosing
it, and strength will come from Christ: often acting of faith upon Christ, will
increase and strengthen the Principle, or habit of faith. Though thou art not
able to lay fast hold upon Christ with the hand of faith, yet if thou can but
touch him, as it were, but with the little finger of faith, virtue will come
from him, to refresh thy soul. Daily study the Promises of the New Covenant,
and ye may draw Milk out of those Breasts of Consolation, which will feed,
and strengthen all the Graces. 1 Pet. 2.2. As newborn Babes, desire the
sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby.

But some souls Object against themselves that they do not grow, after long
use of the means, they find little, or no growth in Grace: It may be Answered,
sure thou art mistaken: for those who often complain of the want of growth,
which is their grief and burden, certainly such souls do grow. Their
clearer sense, and sight of Corruptions, with bewailing of them, is a plain
Evidence of growth: compare what thou find now, with what has been
aforetime, and it will be more visible. Fruit trees, nor Branches cannot be
seen to grow, yet compare their breadth, and bigness now, with what they were
aforetime, and their growth will be manifest.

The four and twentieth Observation in Nature.
We see by Experience, that Grafts do sooner, and more generally, take hold of
the stock, receive sap, and life from it, in a mild spring, when there is
calm warm weather, gentle showers, and now and then some warm gleames of the
sun, then they do in a cold spring, when there are many Frosts, dry, harsh,
East winds; such a season keeps back most Grafts, and hinders their springing,
and shooting forth, as they would do in calm weather.

This is another Similitude etc. and shadows out unto us this Proposition: That

Discoveries of the Love of God to souls prepared for Christ, does hasten
their closing with him.

When a soul lies under convictions for sin, and apprehensions of the wrath of
God for it, the great thing is then, how to make such a soul to close with,
and lay hold on Christ, whereby only he shall have true peace, and so proceed
unto growth, and bearing fruits. Now if such a one live under a harsh Ministry
where the Law is frequently thundered out against sinners, with little mixture
of the Gospel, or if he meet with passages in books, which naturally beget
fears, or converse with unskilful friends, who (through ignorance of such a
condition) will be apt to censure (as Jobs friends) and lay on more load upon
his spirit, such a one hereby may be kept a great while from closing with
Christ; and resting on him by faith: Whereas clear discoveries of the
kindness and love of God in Christ, of readiness to receive, and bid welcome
such a one, is the most likely means, to bring the soul to close with Christ.
When the 3000 were pricked in their hearts at Peter's Sermon Acts 2. the Apostle
encourages them with good words, and assurance of entertainment, and
acceptance, and thereupon they believe and rest on Christ: So when the Jayler
was struck with terrors, Paul immediately encourages him to believe, and he
forthwith closes with Christ, Acts 16.31. When a soul is wounded and bruised
with the sight of sin, and apprehensions of wrath, then the soft Oil, or Balm
of the Gospel should be powered in, Esaias. 35.4. Say to them that are of a
fearful heart, be strong, fear not, behold your God will come with a
Recompense, he will come and save you. This is the very Office of Christ, and
his Ministers. Esaias. 61.1. To preach glad tidings to the Meek, to bind up the
Broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the
Prison to them that are bound, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord,
to comfort all that mourn etc. Now the reason hereof is, because souls lying
under apprehensions of wrath for sin, their doubt is mainely of Gods
willingness to save them, they know not his Will in the thing, therefore to
labor to convince them of his Love, of his willingness, and readiness to
receive, and save sinners that come to him by Christ, is the great business in
case of distress and doubting.

duties of the Law to such in order to settlement and peace; some are ready
still (in such Cases) to tell the party distressed in conscience, you must
walk strictly, take heed of Sin, give not way to corruptions, not so much as
any motions or stirrings of them within, and be diligent in all duties of
hearing the word, reading, meditation etc. and so put them on the duties of the
Law, or Covenant of works, whereby to get peace, and acceptance with God,
making God appear as a hard Master, and thereby lay one burden upon another,
in stead of easing of them; Whereas the sweet refreshing Promises of the
Covenant of grace, the infinite Love of God in our precious Lord Jesus Christ,
should be laid open, and held forth clearly to such a weary soul; that such a
one might see the great works of fulfilling the Law, and satisfying divine
Justice, done to his hand, in case he lay hold upon and, close with Christ by
faith; This is the ready way to settle such a soul, to make the Graft take
hold of the stock, from which it may receive life.

This the Apostle shows us by a plain instance, Gal. 3.2. Received ye the
spirit by the work of the Law, or by the hearing of faith? as if he should
say, ye know this course was taken with you, before ye believed: The doctrine
of free grace was preached to you, ye heard that Justification came not by the
works of the Law, but by faith in Christ; even so it is now.

Secondly, Souls thus in distress ought to harken to, and receive offers of
grace when they hear them made, and not to to close with Christ. If thou think
to get thy heart into an humble, melting frame, and temper, and to subdue
Corruptions, and then to close with Christ, thou will but deceive thy self,
that is not the way; but seeing thy want of Christ and thy sinful undone
condition without him, and a true desire in thee to get out of it, and to be
sanctified as well as justified, to be saved from sin, as well as wrath: let it
be the very first thing thou do to venture on him, and close with him,
accept of his love, and do but touch him by faith, and thou shall find thy
self healed of all thy spiritual diseases, but without this course
(notwithstanding all thy own strictness, and endeavors in duties) thou will
find thy self to be worse and worse.

The five and twentieth Observation in Nature.
THe Husbandman having labored, and taken much pains about Engrafting his
Plants, when (in the spring) he sees they begin to bud, and shoot forth, when
he (observing of them) perceives they have closed with and taken hold of the
stock, he is glad of it, this is a ground of rejoicing to him, he is very well
pleased to see the good success of his labors about his Fruit Trees.

This discovers to us: That

A sinners Repentance, and closing with Christ, causes joy both in heaven and
Earth.

The Lord, the great husbandman is always at work, laboring to draw souls
to Christ, by all ways and means; And his sub-husbandmen the Ministers of the
Gospel, and all his people (one way or other) do labor in the same work,
they are Co-workers, fellow laborers with him in this great Gospel work: Now
when they see their works and labors have good success, they rejoice, and are
glad.

1. The people of God rejoice when they see unregenerate persons come in to
Christ, because they are renewed themselves, and it is natural for every
Creature to be glad of, and rejoice in its like. Secondly; they rejoice at the
conversion of others, because they love God, The Reason,
and Love is always glad at that which pleases, and makes for the beloved:
God has honor hereby, and therefore they rejoice.

Secondly, the faithful Ministers of the Gospel rejoice at the conversion of
souls, not only upon these accounts, but also because they are more
immediately concerned in it, it is their proper work and business, to win
souls to Christ: Now when they see the success of their Labors they say as
the Apostle, 3 Epistle of John 4. I have no greater joy then to hear that my
Children walk in the truth.

So the Apostle Paul, 1 These. 2.19. what is our hope, our joy, our Crown of
rejoicing, are not ye etc? v. 20. For ye are our glory and joy. Thirdly: The
good Angels also rejoice when sinners turn to God: This our Savior tells us;
Luke 15.7. I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner
that repents etc. verse. 10. There is joy in the presence of the Angels of God
over one sinner that repents.

Fourthly, God the father, son, and spirit rejoice at the Repentance of
sinners. The spirit (to speak after the manner of men) is said to be greived
with sin, when souls reject his motions, so on the contrary when they hearken
to him, he is well pleased. Our Savior having taught his disciples, and
brought them to understand, and receive the things of the kingdom of God he
rejoiced, Luke 10.21. In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit etc. Also we see
how God the Father is well pleased when sinners come in to Christ, this is at
large made out unto us in the Parable of the Prodigal, Luke 15.20. the father
seeing his son returning to him, how glad is he of it, he ran to meet him,
and fell on his neck and kissed him: then there was Music, and dancing and
feasting, etc. all this is but to let us know how welcome a soul is to God
when it returns from its wanderings: Esaias. 65.19. I will rejoice in Jerusalem,
and joy in my people, and Zepth. 3.17. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is
mighty: he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy; he will rest in his
Love, he will joy over thee with singing.

O what encouragement is here unto sinners to come in, and close with Christ by
faith! they shall be welcome, freely welcome, and not only so, but heaven and
earth will (as it were) ring with joy at their coming in: It will not be only
matter of joy unspeakable and full of glory unto themselves, but also it will
be joy to others: Men and Angels, yea the blessed God himself (speaking to our
apprehensions) is said to rejoice at it. Now therefore be wise in this thy day,
stand not out one Moment longer; will thou not accept of a Crown and kingdom
when it is offered thus freely? if thou will not, then know for a certainty,
that God who now tells thee he will be glad of thy coming in) will laugh at thy
destruction, and mock when thy fear comes. Pro. 1.26.

Secondly: Let all the people of God labor in this glorious work of winning
souls to Christ, that so Jerusalem (the redeemed of the Lord shall return,
and come to Zion with songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads, they shall
obtain joy, and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. Esaias 35.10.

This is a Touchstone for those who profess, and pretend an growing, and
increasing in the addition of Members to his Church? Does it refresh thy spirit
to see and hear that holiness, and the power of godliness gets rooting in
the hearts of many in the world, that Jesus Christ is received, and multitudes
close with him? why then this is a sound and sure evidence and ground that
thine heart is upright with God, that thou have an interest in Christ, and art
thy self ingrafted into him.

But if it be an indifferent thing to thee what others do in this respect,
whether they come in or no; if they do not, thou art not moved, it grieves
thee not to see men reject Christ freely tendered in the Gospel, nor if they
receive him, and close with him, neither art thou glad of it, thou do not
rejoice in it. If the habitual frame, and temper of thy spirit be thus, I dare
boldly affirm it, thou have not closed with Christ thy self as yet, thou art
not yet ingrafted into him, therefore consider thy ways, and make have to get
into Christ, delay not a moment longer.

The six and twentieth Observation in Nature.
AS the Husbandman takes pleasure in his fruit trees, so they Inanimate
Creatures are said to rejoice, when they perform Natural Acts vigorously. The
sun rejoices to run his course. Ps. 19.5. The hills, and Valleys (when
abundantly fruitful) they laugh and sing, Ps. 65.^3. Proposition shadowed.
(in a sense) take pleasure in him: He delights to walk among them, and
converse with them by meditation; searching out their Natures, and virtues, for
Profits, and advantages, he takes pleasure in their shade, (in heat of summer)
and in their wholesome fruits in their seasons: And the fruit trees also may be
said to take pleasure in the husbandmans watering, dressing, and manuring;
discovered by their increase, strong, and vigorous shootes, pleasant Blossoms,
and multitudes of fruits from year to year.

This is another Similitude etc. and shadows out unto us this Proposition. That

There is a sweet fellowship, and communion between God, and his People, God
delights in them, and they delight in him.

Believers stand in the nearest Relations to God that can be, As a peculiar
people unto God 1 Pet. 2.9. As children to a father, Romans 8.17. As friends to
God the father, and Christ, James 2.23. John 20.17. As Branches to the root,
or stock: as brethren to Christ, as heirs and co^heires with Christ: As a wife
to the husband; as members to the head, 2 Cor. 6.17. Io. 15.14. Cant. 4.17.
Ephe. 3.20. In all which there is a wonderful union, and neerenesse set forth
between God and his people, wherein there is delight, and Communion.

The Apostle John speaks this for himself, and others, he tells us what their
Experiences were in this: 1 John 1.3. That which we have seen, and heard,
declare we unto you, that ye also may have Fellowship with us, and truly our
Fellowship is with the father, and with his son Jesus Christ. The people of
God they walk with God; Now can two walk together, and not have Communion,
Genesis 5.22.6.9. 2 Cro. 7.17.
and Fellowship one with another? Surely there are many intercourses, and
sweet passages between friends when they walk together: There are Questions,
and Answers, resolving of doubts, and Communications of secrets between
intimate friends as they walk together. Nay there are not only these Relations
(mentioned) and a friendly walking together with God, but there is also a
Co-habitation, or dwelling together with God, yea more: there is an
In-dwelling: God dwells in his people, and they dwell in him: So that here is a
ground of Communion indeed: 2 Cor. 6.16: I will dwell in them, walk in them:
And Jo 1.4, 16. He that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him. As
the spirit is in believers, so they are in the spirit Gal: 5.25. Here then must
needs be communion, and fellowship. From these Relations, and neerenesse to,
and union with God, springs this Communion, which includes love, joy, and
pleasure on both sides: unspeakable love flows from God unto his people: yea,
God takes pleasure, and rejoices in his people. And they return Love to God
again, they also take pleasure, and rejoice in God: the scripture is
plentiful in these things: Ps. 147.11. The Lord takes pleasure in them that
fear him: so again, Ps. 149.4. The Lord takes pleasure in his people: and
Zeph. 3.17. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty, he will save, he
will rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest in his love he will joy over thee
with singing. Here is the mighty God taking pleasure in his people, rejoicing
with joy, and singing, resting in his love, the believing soul. This joy is
not the joy of ordinary friends, but of those of nearest relation, the husband,
and the wife, and that (too) at their espousalls: Esaias. 62.5. As the Bride
groom rejoices over the Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee.

Seeing there is such a fellowship between God, and his people, what an
invitation, and encouragement is this to all to come into this Garden the
Church of God? such who weary themselves in seeking for content, and pleasures
in the empty things of the world, may come hither, and be satisfied: O say not
we shall loose our pleasures if we turn to be precise, and religious, then
farewell delights, and joy, then we must embrace sadness and Melancholy,
instead of our delights. O consider how much thou art mistaken that judge
thus: taste and try, and thou will find it otherwise. Thy pleasures now out of
Christ, are but shadows of Pleasures, and there is nothing but bitterness
attending them: these are real, and substantial pleasures, unspeakably more,
and better in the measure, and nature of them, and yet they are but tastes, and
beginnings of Eternal joys and satisfactions. All the ways, and walks in
this Communion with God, are ways of pleasantness, and all the paths are
peace, Prove. 3.17.

Here thou may walk, or sit under the great Appletree Jesus Christ, and be
refreshed with his shade, and fruits: Hear what the Church says and come to
her, Ca. 2.3. I satedown under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was
sweet to my taste: yea, here is wine to the fruits to make up a complete
Banquet: v. 4. He brought me into a Banqueting house, where are mixed wines,
and wine of the Pomegranate, Prove. 9.2. Cant. 8.2. If thou delight in feasts,
and Banquets here they are: A feast of fat things, of wine on the Lees well
refined: Esaias. 25 6. And the Master of the feast says freely, Eat O friends,
drink, yea drink abundantly O beloved Cant. 5. Therefore delay not to come,
that thou may be filled with this joy, in Communion with God.

Psalm. 132.14. This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell for I have a delight
there: O how should we stand admiring at his free grace and love, And what an
Engagement is this unto us to walk humbly, and holily with him?

Let us therefore be diligent to improve this Communion, it will be our
unspeakable happiness, and Glory; hereby we are enabled to act for God, with
cheerfulness and life, all duties are easy, and pleasant to us, which when
this is wanting we carry on but heavily: This lifts us up above the reach of
Temptations, the flesh is down, or very much weakened: Satan is at quiet, in
respect of many suggestions which at other times he drives on, and watches his
season when he perceives the soul in another frame; being in Communion with
God, the world is then under our feet, the daintiest baits of it, have no taste
nor relish with us: Yea the greatest outward Afflictions (which when Communion
is wanting do load us, and press us down and which break the bark, or the
heart of others) these are but light, and are easily borne. By close Communion
with God we live in another sphere, in another world, then the Common sort of
Christians who improve not Communion; it lifts Beleivers as it were into the
third heaven, where are unspeakable pleasures, and contentments, and the soul
says, its good being here; O that I might build, and rest here, and go no
more down from this Mount: from this Mount the soul takes a view of the holy
Land, and sees the beauty, and glory of it, the soul sees it self interessed
in the kingdom, and all the riches, and Treasures of it. O the Privileges
that Christ has purchased for the beleiving soul, they cannot be numbered nor
conceived! for God is the great everlasting Portion of his people, and in him
are all desirable things, suitable to the soul, which are plainly laid open to
the eye of the soul, the spirit sealing an assurance thereof unto it in this
Communion, which is satisfying and filling more then can be expressed.

Seeing such a Fellowship and communion may be had with God Communion is) that
some have little Communion with God, for their Communion is so much, and so
heartily with the Creature, that it cannot be also with God; their speeches,
their daily course, and practices, their deadness in duties, their cold, and
hartlesse acting for God, for the interest of Christ, their starven love to the
saints, and their eager, and serious pursuit of their own interests, in
things of the world, so highly prising every petty advantage, as that rather
then they will part with it, they will let the glory of God, the Gospel,
Religion, and all Gods people, suffer blemishes, and disparagement.

These (and such like) things I say, do too clearly evidence, and prove their
Earthly mindedness, and consequently that they are at a distance from God, and
enjoy not this Communion: For it is as possible that darkness should abide
upon the earth where the sun shines, as that earthly mindedness, and Communion
with God, should abide together.

The seven and twentieth Observation in Nature.
WHen the Husbandman has a plantation in hand, or intends to enlarge his
Orchard he does then remove, and take out of the way whatsoever hinders his
work; all the shrubs, and bushes, wild trees, hedges, stones, Roots, or
whatsoever else lies in the way: He sets himself and his workmen to cut them
down, root them up, and remove them, that so he may plant his Fruit Trees,
and have a large, and fair Orchard.

This may teach us. That

Proposition shadowed.
Who, or whatsoever hinders the inlargment of the Church of God, he will
certainly (and sometimes with great anger) take out of the way.

The works and people of God in all ages, have been opposed by his enemies,
and hindered for a time, but God has ever appeared for his people, and helped
them, and carried on his designs by them, and for them, and the opposers of
God, and his people have been brought down.

When God went about to plant and enlarge his Church the people of Israel, how
did he cut down, and destroy their enemies that hindered, and opposed them?
When Kings and Princes, with great Nations rose up against them to stop the
plantation, these great Mountains were levelled before them, these tall
Ceders, and barren trees were hewn down on every side: Pharaoh, and his great
Host, Syhon and Ogg with their Armies; Josh. 12.
one and thirty Kings with much people, even as the sand of the sea for
multitude, Iosuah 11.4. all fell before Israel; If Rivers or Seas hinder their
passage, they shall be dried up; Armies of Giants are cut off, Luke 10.17.
men, and devils are made subject unto them.

Who art thou O great Mountain before Zerubbabel, Ezekiel. 21.17.
thou shall become a plain, Zecha. 4.7. God will Overturne, Overturne,
Overturne all persons and things that oppose him.

The husbandman will cut down, and root up the wild Plants, and trees, with
Anger, and great fury, he will come with fire, and sword, as the Prophet
speaks Esaias. 66.14.15. The hand of the Lord shall be known among his
servants, and his indignation toward his enemies, the Lord will come with
fire, and his Charets like a Whirlwind verse. 16. For the Lord will judge with
fire, and with his sword all flesh.

Now when shall this be, even when the Lord will enlarge his Church, when he
will extend peace to Jerusalem as a River, and the glory of the Gentiles like a
flowing stream, Esaias. 66.12. When the isles a far off shall declare his
glory among the Gentiles, and brethren shall be brought out of all Nations;
when the new heavens, and the new earth shall be made, the Church of God
enlarged, and beautified; as we may see at large, verse. 19.20. etc. The Prophet
Jeremiah speaks likewise to the same purpose, c. 23.19.20. Behold the tempest
of the Lord goes forth in wrath, and a violent whirles wind shall fall down
upon the head of the wicked; and the anger of the Lord shall not return,
until he have executed, and till he have performed the thoughts of his heart.

Now when these things shall be, we see verse. 20. in the latter days (when God
is enlarging his Church) ye shall understand it plainly.

This God will do, that he may glorify himself in showing forth his power,
and justice toward his enemies, and love to his people.

This may inform us, and give some light unto us, why all the destructions,
confusions, and overturnings (which have been in these Nations of late years)
have come to pass; and what other Nations shall shortly find also.

The great husbandman is about the enlarging of his Orchard, according to the
many Prophesies, and promises in his word; Now therefore who, or whatsoever
hinders and stands in the way, shall certainly be removed 2 These. 2.7. The
Lord shall consume him (Antichrist) with the spirit of his mouth, and destroy
him with the brightness of his coming.

Weeds and wild Plants in a garden, that is carefully ordered, are not so sure
of plucking up, as these persons are of a downfall; for God has said it: he
will plant his Garden, and enlarge it, upon an high mountain, and eminent, and
then up go the wild trees, though never so high and beautiful, Ezekiel. 17.24.
Then all the trees of the field shall know that I the Lord have brought down
the high tree, have exalted the low tree, have dried up the green tree, and
made the dry tree to flourish, I the Lord have spoken it and have done it.

Pharaoh, the inhabitants of Egypt, Canaan, and others, were destroyed in their
opposition against the plantation of old; so shall it be with all hardened
sinners in these latter days: Those being but Types, and shadows of things
that shall come to pass in these gospel times: Heb. 10.1. The law has a
shadow of good things to come, Not only as they shadow forth Jesus Christ, but
also the things of Christ in his Church.

Gods own people, It is to manifest, and evident, that even some of them do
in some respects, oppose the work of God; we see what divisions, and
contentions there are amongst them, about the things concerning the kingdom of
Christ: Now therefore take heed of opposing the mind of God; for if he be
displeased with those who help not the Lord against the mighty; will he not be
much more displeased, with those that oppose him, and are against him, in any
of his designs? It may hinder them of much good which otherwise they might
have received from God, See Page
yea, it may provoke God to cut them off, though his own people: The
husbandman sometimes cuts off a Branch, or cuts down even a good tree, when it
is in his way, and hinders any of his great works: so doubtless does the Lord
with some of his own people, when, through any worldly interest, or
corruption, they oppose his designs: Therefore take heed, speak not, neither
act against God and his ways through mistakes, be not unwise, but understand
what the will of the Lord is Ephesians. 5.17.

The eight and twentieth Observation in Nature,
WHen rare, and excellent fruit trees, and fruits are first known, there being
but few of them, they are more valued, and esteemed, then afterward when they
are multiplied, and grown common; though the commodities are still the same in
goodness, as at first.

This shadows out unto us, That

The constant enjoyment of the best things from God (through corruptions) makes
them less noted, and esteemed. Proposition shadowed.


The nature of man is much taken with new things which having been a while
used, and enjoyed, are not afterward of so much value with us, though the
things remain in their former goodness, and worth, health, peace and plenty,
and the best good things of this life, yea, the Ordinances of Christ, society
of the saints, seasons and oportunities of grace, spiritual privileges, are
less observed and prized after a long enjoyment of them, then at the first:
Though Manna was a pleasant bread, Angels food, and the people of Israel were
well pleased with it for a time, yet afterward they were weary of it Numb.
21.5. Our soul loatheth this light bread.

When the people of God see the necessity and want of good things, and
earnestly pray, and wait for them, and at length God satisfies their desires,
and gives out the mercy longed for, then they are much taken, and affected with
it, their affections are raised, and enlarged, they put a price, and value upon
it, greatly rejoicing in it, and blessing God for it; But after a certain time
of enjoyment, the heart is less upon it, the streams of affections are
abated, and run lower, there is not that frequent notice taken of it, neither
when the mind reflects upon it (at any time) are the affections stirred, as at
the first when the thing was new.

Thus it is even in respect of the best, and choicest things we receive from
God in this life, even the sense, and evidences of the love of God, pardon of
sin, intrest in Christ, Communion with the father, and the son through the
spirit, These things after an habitual long enjoyment of them, are less
noted, and less affect the heart, then upon their first discovery, so that God
expostulates with his people about it, he takes notice of it, and observes the
difference of the frame of their spirits, what it has been and what it is
afterward, Jer. 22. I remember the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine
espousales etc. when thou wentest after me in the wilderness: time was when we
were first acquainted, and thou did take me for thy Lord, and Husband, thou
did express much love toward me, and wast affected with me, and we walked
closely together, but now the case is otherwise: what iniquity have ye found in
me that ye are gone far from me, and have walked after vanity, and are become
vain, as verse. 5. thou have lost thy first Love, Rev. 2.4.

God is sometimes necessitated (as we may say) to take away, and deprive his
people of Privileges, and good things, that so by a sense of the want of them
they may be brought to see their unthankfulness, and take more notice of them,
and prize them more when they are restored.

The experience of Christians make this too evident.

cold, and sluggish under the richest enjoyments: Let us often reflect upon it,
and loath our selves for this unanswerable frame of spirit toward God, men
cannot bear unthankfulness, or slighting without withdrawing the
manifestations of their love: Now such as cannot out of an ingenuous Principle
return love for love to God, yet let the fear of loosing enjoyments make such
persons value and prize them.

neglecting, or undervaluing precious things from God, should make us long for
the state of glory, when the soul will be in a constant frame frame of fervent
love to God, and be as much affected with enjoyments after thousands (millions)
of years, as at the first.

The nine and twentieth Observation in Nature.
ALL the s^p and nourishment that the branches of a Tree have, they receive it
from the Root, the boughs and branches have not one jot of sap, but what
arises from the Root, there would not be one Bud, or blossom, or shoot, or
leaf, or fruit, upon the Tree, if the Root did not give up sap to nourish,
and maintain them.

This shadows out unto us, That

Our life, growth, strength, and all our spiritual Acts, Proposition shadowed.
are from Christ.

Christ is the Root, and stock of every believer, and all spiritual life,
and habitual grace is from him: and not only the seed, habits, and principles
of grace, but also all the workings and actings of grace are from him, as at
first we were stark dead in sins and trespasses until he gave us life, so
being quickened by the son (who quickneth whom he will) we cannot grow, nor
act but by influences from him, 2 Cor. 3.5. We are not sufficient of our selves
to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. A good
thought is the least and lowest act of grace, and yet that we cannot do of our
selves, good thoughts, and desires are as Buds or Blossoms upon a tree, which
show themselves before the fruits, Now if trees cannot bud of themselves, how
much less can they bring forth fruits.

Which also our Savior plainly tells his disciples, Jo. 15.5. Without me ye
can do nothing: He does not say without me ye cannot do any great thing, but
nothing at all. And Hosea 14.8. from me is thy fruit found: The Spirit of
Christ is the spring, and Root of all our spiritual life, it is the strength,
and power of the soul in believers, Acts 1.8. Ye shall receive power when the
Holy Ghost is come upon you. Paul ascribes his life, and power to Act, all to
Christ, Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, the life which I
now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the son of God. And Phil. 4.13.
I can do all things (says he) but it is through Christ that strengthens me.

fruits, effects, and consequences, which spiritual eyes discern in
themselves, and others.

salvation, and deliverance from sin, wrath, and hell; but doubtless there is
ignorance of this point in many, and a great neglect in most, in respect of
eying Christ, and drawing virtue from him by faith, as to particular actings
all along in their lives: were we but well instructed in this point, and did
but practice accordingly (even to look unto Christ with the eye of faith, to
fetch life, strength, quickening and all things needful) we might then dye
more unto sin, Acts 1.8.
and live more unto God, and might find our selves strengthened with might in
the inner man by his glorious power, even the spirit of Christ: Col. 1.11.
which works in his people mightily, verse. 19.

from Christ let therefore all be unto Christ: give the glory to him, seeing
the life, and power to Act is from him. This is a thing of most special
concernment, and to be noted by every believer; that as we do all in the
strength of Christ, who is the efficient cause of all the good we do, so also,
we should do all unto Christ, as the final Cause, unto whom, and for whom we
do all.

These two special things the Apostle lays down in one verse Phil. 1.11. He
prays that they may abound in love and be filled with the fruits of
righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God.

It is the property of hypocrites, and temporary believers, to act in their
own strength, Gifts, and parts, and for themselves, their eye is secretly upon
themselves: Hos. 10.1. These are empty Vines: they bring forth fruit to
themselves, their fruit is as good as no fruit, because for themselves; but
trees of the Lords planting bring forth fruit, that he may be glorified, Esaias
61.3. and Romans 7.4. That we should bring forth fruit unto God.

The thirtieth Observation in Nature.
Fruit Trees that spread much, and grow low, near the ground, such (most
commonly) bring forth more, and larger fruits then high Trees that aspire up
into the Air: some Reasons may be given for it, See Lo. Ba. Not. Hist.

This shadows out unto us, That

Humble Christians bring forth far more, and fairer fruits, Proposition
shadowed.
then such whose spirits are lifted up.

Lowly Christians are like the lower grounds under hills and near Rivers, upon
which when moisture descends from the heavens, and from the hills, it rests
there, and makes the ground fat, and consequently fruitful.

Who was a more fruitful Christian than David the holy Prophet? he was so
eminently fruitful, and brought forth so much and so lovely fruits, as that
God himself commends him, and says he walked in all the commandments
according to his own heart (one particular excepted) and we see of what a
spirit he was in respect of humility, Psalm. 131.1.2. My heart is not haughty,
nor mine eyes lofty, my soul is even as a weaned Child.

And the Apostle Paul discovers a spirit of more then ordinary humility, 1 Cor.
15 9. I am the least of the Apostles, that am not meet to be called an
Apostle. And as though that were not low enough, he descends lower: I am less
then the least of all Saints, Ephesians. 3.8. But now, who among the Apostles, or
Saints brought forth more and greatter fruits then this lowly tree: In nothing
was he behind the very chief Apostles, 2 Cor. 12.11. yea: he labored more
abundantly then they all, 1 Cor. 15.10. and 2 Cor. 11.23. In labors more
abundant.

The Reasons hereof are, first: humble Christians have more from God then
others; because nearer God: they walk with God, and Communicates himself to
them more then to others, as familiar friends communicate secrets one to
another: so God to the humble soul that walks with him, He gives grace to
the humble: 1 Pet. 5.5. He will teach the humbe his way. Ps. 25.9. but he
resists the proud, and is a far off from him.

Secondly, Humble souls are communicative; they make others partake with them
of what God has given them (Children, and every one pluck fruit from a low
Tree) and he that waters shall be watered also himself, Prove. 11.25. the
more they give out, the more they have coming in, the more good fruit a Tree
brings forth the more will the husbandman do for it (by way of culture) that
it may still bring forth more fruit.

Thirdly, Humble Christians are most fruitful, because they receive profit
from all persons, from all things, they can learn something from every thing,
from the meanest from the worst (whereas proud persons think they have so much
that they will learn from none) so that their advantages are both from heaven and
earth, as material trees growing low, near the ground have not only the sun
and rain, but also some advantage by the reflection of the sun beams from
the earth: which tall, high Trees have not.

humility, and beware of pride: if we would bring forth much and fair fruits;
let us labor to be clothed with humility: and follow the most glorious
Pattern herein Mat. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek, and lowly in heart:
Then shall we bring forth much and great fruits, whereby our father, will be
glorified, whereof our selves, and others may eat and be filled.

But here we may stand, and take up a lamentation for what we see contrary in
many of the people of God in our days: especially among those who have best
parts and abilities, O what shall we do to pluck up this poisonous destructive
Plant, from among the good plants of grace.

This has a strong hold even in many of the Saints, and is like that unclean
spirit Mat. 17.21. which goes not out but by Prayer and fasting: with great
striving, and much ado.

Consider: is it no Argument against it in that it puts us a far off from
God, in respect of that close communion we might otherwise have with him: and
secondly, it almost stifles, and chokes our graces that they cannot act, at
they do in the humble soul. thirdly: it blemishes, and clouds exceedingly
(both in the eye of God, and humble souls) the beauty and honor of Christians
in this life, and lessens their future glory, and that for ever.

This is for the honor and praise (as well as for the consolation) humble
saints; who though they be lowest, perhaps, in outward respects here in the
world, yet are they in highest esteem with God: their humility exalts them,
even in the account of God, and such low spreading Trees, shrubs in their own
eyes, when they are transplanted into the Garden of God in Paradise, shall be
set upon the highest ground, and be the talest Trees there, far above many of
their breathren who in this life are far above them.

The one and thirtieth Observation in Nature,
THe Root, body, boughs, branches, and small Twigs of a Tree make but one
body, or substance: Though the parts of a Tree are distinguished, and known by
several names, and are divided into multitude of boughs, branches, and twigs,
yet all of them are so joined together as that they make up but one body, or
substance.

This shadows out unto us That

Jesus Christ and his people, Proposition shadowed.
(though multitudes of distinct persons, yet) are so united, as that they make
but one body.

Christ is the head of his Church: and all believers being united to him by
faith, are his Members: 1 Cor. 12.27. Col. 1.18.
Ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular. Now there is not a more
real union in nature between the head and the Members in the body of a man, or
between the Root and branches of a tree, then there is between Christ, and
his people.

When Christ ascended up on high he gave Gifts unto men for the perfecting of
the saints, the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.12. That they may grow up into him in
all things which is the head, even Christ, verse. 15. From whom the whole body
fitly joined together, and compacted, by that which every joint supplyeth,
according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, makes
increase of the body, unto the Edifying of it self in love, verse. 16.

Christ calls himself the Vine, Joh. 15.5. that is the bottom, stock or Root
of the Vine, and his people are the Branches; Now as the Branches being joined,
and made one with the Root do receive all their nourishment, sap and life
from the root whereupon they increase, and without which they would certainly
die and wither, so it is between Christ and his people; there being a real,
mystical union and oneness between this head and this body, life and
nourishment is given from the head to the body, Col. 2.19. from which (head)
all the body by joints, and bands, having nourishment ministered, and knit
together, increases with the increase of God.

joined to Christ, and one with Christ they shall have life, nourishment,
strength, wisdom, righteousness, holiness, all good things in this life, out
of his fullness, and glory hereafter for ever: it cannot be otherwise; for in
so doing Christ provides for himself, and glorifies himself, his Members
being one with him.

great dignity, beauty, and glory put upon Believers (though the meanest.)
Union and oneness with such a glorious person puts a spiritual glory upon
them. A great Prince marrying a mean person, by that union, an honor is
derived upon the party, according to the dignity of the Prince. Now believers
are married to Christ, Jer. 3.14. and Romans 7.4. and so made one with him, as
the husband and the wife are one: so that what dignity and honor is upon the
husband, is also, in a proportion, upon the wife.

The two and thirtieth Observation in Nature.
THe Root of a Tree does continually give up sap, and nourishment to the
Boughs and branches all the year long; as well in winter to preserve life, as
in summer to cause growth and increase: But no sap at any time descends from
the Branches to the Root: (though most men, upon mistaken grounds (of this
See. page.) conceive, and affirm, that sap descends in Autumn into the Root.)

This shadows out unto us, That

As we have our life, and all from Christ, Proposition shadowed.
so we are continually receiving new supplies from him, but can add nothing to
his infinite perfections.

Christ is the Root, as his people are the Branches, and from this Root, sap
continually arises to maintain life, and cause growth and fruitfulness: Jer.
17.8. He shall be as a Tree planted by the waters, and that spreads out her
roots by the River, and shall not see when heat comes, but her leaf shall be
green, and shall not be careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease
from yiedling fruit. So. Psalm. 1.3.

And Esaias. 58.11. The Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul
in drought, and make fat thy bones, and thou shall be like a watered Garden,
whose waters fail not: They shall not hunger, nor thirst, etc. by the springs
of water shall he guide them, Esaias. 49.10. As willowes by the water courses,
Esaias 44.4.

Here we see are continual supplies of nourishment to the soul: Rivers (we
know) are continually running, and fountains, or springs are continually
springing; these Gardens are watered with waters that fail not, as the Prophet
speaks, Esaias. 18.11. Though the body, and branches of a tree were as full of
sap as the bark would hold, yet would all be soon exhausted, and spent, and
the branches would wither and dye, if there were not a continual supply from
the Root: So though a man had the habitual grace of all beleivers on earth
yea of all the Angels in heaven (as much as a Creature is capable of) yet could
he not thereby persevere, all would be spent without new supplies from Christ.

Our Savior tells us these supplies never fail, but are constant Joh. 4.14.
Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst: but
the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water springing up
into everlasting life.

We see then supplies from Christ are constant, and continual which believers
draw from him.

By these Rivers, streams, and springs of water, are meant the constant
supplies the believing soul draws, and receives from Christ by his spirit. As
we see: Joh. 7 38, 39. He that believes on me, out of his belly shall flow
rivers of living water. This spoke he of the spirit. And for the second part of
the Proposition: we can add nothing to his infinite perfections, Job. 22.1, 2.
Can a man be profitable to God, is it gain to him that thou make thy ways
perfect: And again Job. 35.7. If thou be righteous, what give thou him, or
what receives he of thine hand.

So the Apostle: Romans 11.35. Who has first given to him, and it shall be
recompensed unto him again.

God is no gainer by us: All his Creatures together doing theirutmost, can add
nothing to his essential glory, which is infinite, and therefore admits of no
additions. But we are said to glorify God, when we manifest, declare, and set
forth what he is; when he is made known among his Creatures, and worshipped.

wisdom, strength, quickening, and all Gifts, and graces, even to Jesus Christ
the storehouse, and Treasury of all good things. For it pleased the father
that in him should all fullness dwell, Col. 1.19. There is something in Christ,
suitable to all, and every of the wants of his people; which they may obtain
of him.

I live (says Paul) yet not I, but Christ lives in me Gal. 2.20. So Peter and
John having healed the man, put off the honor from themselves upon Christ,
Acts 3.12. why look ye so earnestly on us? his name has made this man strong
etc. verse. 16.

The three and thirtieth Observation in Nature.
THe ways and Rules of the husbandman in Ordering his fruit trees are very
strange to most people, they wonder to see many pieces of his husbandry in his
Orchard, and Garden: some things seem contrary to reason, when he cuts down
or diggs up some fair large Trees, beautiful to look upon, and sets small
weak plants in their stead, and cuts off some large tops, and branches of
others, and grafts only a few little twigs in their rooms, wrapped about with a
lump of clay: when in winter he prunes his trees, and lays their roots bare,
and scores, and cuts their bodies, on every side, these (and many such like
works) are strange to most men, they have other thoughts of them then the
Husbandman has.

This shadows out unto us, That

The dispensations of God toward his Church, Proposition shadowed.
are contrary to the Judgments of most people in the world.

In all ages, God and his ways have been opposed, by the corrupt reasonings
of men: Man in his natural estate cannot see God, nor the things of God, he
perceives them not, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14.

When God is about that great work to bring souls out of the snare, and
bondage of Satan, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God; his ways
whereby he does this, are very strange to most men: when they see poor
creatures humbled, and broken in their spirits, and sometimes almost distracted
through fears, and apprehensions of wrath, or under any other great
Affliction, what do most people think of such? see, say they, how God plagues
them for their Hypocrisy, they will presently censure them for dissemblers:
David being under Afflictions, became a wonder, a monster unto many, Ps. 71.7.
they judged God had forsaken him, verse. 11. Even so it is now.

And as it is thus in respect of particular persons, so also in respect of the
whole Church. When God went about to enlarge his Church in the days of the
Apostles, Luke 10.1.
how contrary were his ways and dispensations to the judgments of most then;
In sending forth a few poor plain men (two, and two) to preach the Gospel
and win souls? how did the Learned proud Pharisees, and most of the people,
despise them, and persecute them from city to city? They understood not what
God was about, no more then the people of this generation. O how contrary are
the dispensations of God to the apprehensions of most in this age! They speak
against his ways, contradicting, and blaspheming.

Yea the ways of God are contrary to the apprehensions of many of the godly
among us, some of them directly oppose God, and his great design, others do
not, cannot put to their hand to further it, for they apprehend it not, they
cannot close with it: In their Sermons, Prayers, Discourses, they speak nothing
of it, to promote it, nay (being darkened through interests, and corruptions)
they oppose it, and speak against it, and those who carry it on.

The reasons hereof are cheifely these.

As for all natural men, they judge of things according to carnal Principles,
sense, and Reason, now when the ways of God are not suited to these, they
cannot see, nor judge of them: The natural man cannot perceive the things of
God, for they have no spiritual Principles. 1 Cor. 2.14.


Secondly: In the people of God, there is much pride, and self-love, carnal
ends, interests etc. which (many times) sway their affections much, and thereby
their Judgments are darkened, according to the degrees of these corruptions:
For as any soul grows in grace, and holiness, and gets more of the divine
Nature, or Image of God, so are the things of God more, or less manifest to
such a one.

Thirdly, God will be seen, and acknowledged in the world, especially in his
great dispensations, therefore are his ways often so unsuted to the
apprehensions of men; but when they see at length, that God brings about his
ends by them, which they thought so unlikely, then they admire. He will get
himself glory in all his workings; by doing his work, his strange work, and
bringing to pass his Act; his strange act, Esaias. 28 21.

Hence we may see the certain downfall of Antichrist, and all his partakers
all the Enemies of God; because the ways of God are and they know them not,
thence it is, that they do, and will oppose God, and fight against him, to
their own destruction: Though the arm of the Lord be made bare, and lifted up
never so high, and apparently in the world, in carrying on his designs, yet
they will not see it nor acknowledge it, they will not behold the majesty of the
Lord: Esaias. 26.10. When his hand is lifted up, they will not see but they shall
see, and be ashamed, verse. 11. Hardened Pharaohs, with all the blind multitude,
opposers of God, his ways, and his people, shall be (at last) all cast, as a
Millstone, into the midst of the sea, never to rise more.

Are the ways of God in the sea, and his paths in the deep waters, and his
footsteps not known, and contrary to the Judgments of most, Gods own people
stumble at his ways, and dispensations, and in a sort, oppose God, or no way
help forward his designs; O then let us be earnest with God for wisdom from
above, and his spirit, to make out the mind of God to us, not only to know the
things freely given to us of God, but also to know what things are of God in
the world, to know the design of God in our generation, 1 Cor. 2.21.2.
that so we may be so far from staning out against it, as that we may comply
with it, and help it on with all our might.

The four and thirtieth Observation in Nature.
THe Husbandman having great Plantations in hand, calls none to help him in
his special works, about his Fruit Trees, but such persons as have skill, and
experience in the several works he sets them about: for if he should employ
ignorant, and unskilful men about grafting, Inoculating, setting, and ordering
of his young trees, they would do more hurt, then good, therefore it is
necessary his servants, and under workmen should have some competent skill, and
experience, in the works about which he imployes them.

This shadows out unto us, That

Proposition shadowed.
Those who have not the sanctifying spirit, and grace of God in them, are unfit
for the work of the ministry: such bring more prejudice, then advantage to the
Church of God.

Ministers of the Gospel (they who are so indeed) are Gods Husbandmen,
Co-workers, fellow-laborers with God in his Orchards, and Gardens (his
Churches) about his spiritual fruit trees: We are laborers together with God,
1 Cor. 3.9. Ye are Gods husbandry, ye are Gods building: I have planted, Apollo
watered, and God have the increase, 1 Cor. 3.6.

They are employed by God, to open blind eyes, and to turn souls from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, Acts 26.18. God
gives them a Command, and Commission to preach the Gospel to every creature;
that is, to all mankind; to teach all Nations, and to Baptize them into the
Name of God: that is, Instrumentally to ingraft souls into Christ, to work
grace, or holiness, the Nature, or Image of God, which is baptizing them into
the Name of God (the Name of God, and his Nature, being all one) Christ, and
his spirit (the efficient cause) being in them, and with them; who sanctifies
his people, through the washing of water by the word, Ephe. 5.26. In Christ
Jesus I have begotten you, through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15.

Now whom God calls to this great work, he prepares, and fits them (in some
good measure) for it; he powers his spirit upon them, they have an unction from
the holy one, who teaches them all things, 1 Ioh. 2.20. Their wisdom is from
above, James. 3.17. By this anointing of the spirit, men are fitted for the
work of the Ministry, but without they are not fit; though they have humane
learning, and parts (which are of special use and advantage in the Church of
God, if sanctified) yet without the spirit of Christ, men are in darkness and
cannot see the things of God: 1 Cor. 2.14.
They cannot say with the true ministers of Christ (who are chosen, called, and
sent) the things we have heard, and seen, declare we unto you, 1 John 1.3. Luk
12.3.

When God called, and sent, Moses, Samuel, Esaias, Jeremy, and the rest of the
Prophets, he fitted them for the work: The Apostles when called, and sent, had
all a Mouth, and wisdom given them, Luke 21.15. That is, the spirit; this
anointing was powered out upon them: They were endued with power from on high,
Luke 24.49.

As Jesus Christ the first Minister of the new Testament was fitted to preach,
and publish the mind of his father, so are his people, whom he calls, and sends
for that purpose: Now Christ was fitted by this anointing, Esaias. 61.1. The
spirit of the Lord is upon me because the Lord has anointed me to preach good
tidings, etc. and Esaias 42.1. Behold my servant, etc. I have put my spirit upon
him.

And when Christ sent forth his disciples to preach the Gospel, how did he
prepare them for it, even by the same anointing, Joh. 20.21, 22. As my father
sent me, so send I you, and he breathed on them, and said receive ye the holy
Ghost. Thus also the Ministers of the Gospel that succeed him; they have the
same anointing, which fits them with gifts, and graces, for this work: what
ever humane learning they have (more or less) this anointing teaches them,
and makes them learned in the great mystery of godliness. Jesus Christ the
wisdom of the father, in whom all fullness dwells, and the spirit of Christ
dwells in them; hereby they are made able Ministers of the new Testament; Not
of the Letter, but of the spirit, 2 Cor. 36.

Carnal men (though never so learned) know not what they say, they have the
letter of the word, but the spiritual sense is veiled, and hid from them,
through the darkness of their minds; they have no insight, nor Experience in
what they say: But every scribe that is instructed unto the kingdom of heaven,
is like unto a man that is an houshoulder, which brings forth out of his
Treasure, things new, and old, Mat. 13.52.

True Ministers of the Gospel are Ambassadors for Christ, 1 Cor. 4.20. they
are also stewards of the Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. and it is required in
stewards, that a man be found faithful, verse. 2. May it not thence be
concluded, that unregenerate persons, who cannot be faithful, are unfit to be
stewards neither are entrusted by God in this great work^?

From what has been said, will it not follow; That those are no true
Ministers of the Gospel, who are ignorant of, and inexperienced in the great
work, and mystery of Regeneration, who have not the work of Grace upon their
own hearts. They are Thieves, and Robbers, who enter not in by the door (which
is Christ) but climb up some other way, Joh. 10.1. These come to get the
fleece, and care not if the flock be scattered, and torn by the wolves; how
can they teach others, who were never taught themselves? is he fit to lead
others who is blind? Now the Natural man sees not, perceives not spiritual
things, neither can he, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14.

If any shall Object, That Judas was an unregenerate person, and yet sent to
preach, Apostles: It is answered: That is an Extraordinary Example, and
foretold many generations before; Extraordinary Examples are not to be pleaded
in ordinary Cases; it was of absolute necessity that such a one should be, that
the scriptures might be fulfilled.

spirit of God, though they have not grace, yet having Learning, good gifts,
and Parts, they may do good therewith in the Church of God: It is answered:
Although it be granted that carnal men in the Ministry (having good Gifts,
endowments) may do some good thereby, does this prove they are therefore fit
for the Ministry, or that they are sent of God, God of his infinite wisdom,
and grace, orders, and over-ruleth all things, for good to his own people,
even the very sins of men, and Devils.

But further: Though some good may be done by carnal Ministers, it cannot be
denied, but they do much more hurt, then good by their carnal Interpretations,
and Mis-applications of the scriptures, and bad Examples: Not having the
spirit, not being Learned in the Mysteries of godliness, nor being taught by
wisdom from above, they pervert the scriptures to their own, and others
destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16. they cannot see the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.14. so
that they deceive the souls of the poor carnal people, and lead them
blindfold to hell: when the blind lead the blind, both fall into the ditch,
into the bottomless Pit, so that as our Savior bid his disciples, and the
multitude, to take heed of the Leaven, or doctrine of the Pharisees (who were
fools, and blind, as to the spiritual understanding of the scriptures) so
also should we take heed of false interpretations of the scriptures, by
carnal men in our days. Does not God reprove (and expostulate with) such for
their hold undertaking in this kind, Psalm. 50.16: What have thou to do to
Preach my Laws, or that thou should take my word in thy mouth, seeing thou
hate to be reformed? See also Jer. 14.14. and Jer. 23.20.

This informs us: That surely the time is at hand (and is not the Gospel
Ministry shall be purged, the dross (carnal Ministers) shall be cast out, and
the pure mettle preserved, according as was Prophesied, Mal. 3.1, 2, 3. when
the Messenger of the Covenant, Jesus Christ, shall come, and Reign gloriously
in the Nations; he will be as a Refiners fire, and shall fit as a Refiner, and
purifier of silver, he shall purify the sons of Levi verse. 3. ignorant
scandalous persons (who make the sacrifices of the Lord to be abhorred, (as
Elies sons) the Name of God, and his Gospel to be blasphemed, and true
Ministers despised, and reproached) these shall be cast out as unsavory salt,
and a true Ministry set up, and encouraged.

Is not this the work of this day? Let them therefore who are employed
therein, take heed of doing the work of the Lord negligently, but employ, and
improve their Talent of Authority faithfully, and diligently, for their Masters
interest: And let all the people of God be earnest with God to carry on the
work himself, with his own hand, by his own spirit, otherwise Instruments
may labor to no purpose, in this or any other work: And that God would more,
and more purify his own people, even those who are most pure; for in them
there is much dross yet unpurged out. Though I take this to be the most
proper, and genuine meaning of this place, yet not with exclusion of the other.

This points out unto us, who are the true Ministers of the Gospel, anointing
of the spirit, and are taught of God, as the truth is in Jesus, that are called
and sent of God, and approved by his Church and people to that Office and
work: These are the true Ministers of the Gospel of Christ; these can speak
of the things they have heard, and seen, 1 John 1.3. they have skill, and
experience in the things whereof they speak: they have the tongue of the
Learned (though some, it may be, not much humane learning) and know how to
speak a word in season to him that is weary; because they have a fountain of
light, and truth, and wisdom within them, he dwells in them, in whom are all
the Treasures of wisdom, and knowledge, Col. 2.3. being filled with all the
fullness of God, out of which he fills his people, who receive of him grace,
for grace, and are changed from glory, to glory, by his spirit, 1 Cor. 3.18.

These are workmen that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of
truth, 1 Timothy 2.15.

Ministers of the Gospel have but little humane learning, how will they stand
themselves, and be able to maintain the Truths of God, against Learned
heretics, and enemies of Christ?

Regenerate persons in whom Christ dwells stand upon surer grounds, and are more
safe from It is true, the best of Gods people, ( Ministers of the Gospel, and
others) are subject to some errors in Judgment, as they are subject to some
sins and infirmities in their conversations: But yet that promise Joh. 16.13.
shall be fulfilled; That the spirit of God shall lead his people into all
necessary thruths.
damnable Heresies (though they have but little humane Learning, and but weak
parts) then the most learned carnal person in the world; because they stand by
the Power of God, the other, by a humane power: Christ has undertaken to keep
them; none are able to pluck them out of his hand; the gates, the powers of
hell shall not prevail against them; it is not possible any should deceive the
Elect, Mat. 24.24.

And though they cannot (perhaps) maintain an Argument in a scholasticall way,
yet they can maintain it in a better way; that is, according to scripture, the
word of God, which dwells in them plenteously, in all wisdom; thereby they have
confuted, (and so shall hereafter) their adversaries; Out of the mouths of
Babes, and sucklings (that is, men of despised parts with the carnal world)
God has ordained strength, even to the stilling, and silencing of the Enemy,
Ps. 8.2.

Has not God said this again, and again, in several expressions? why will
not men (even some of Gods own people) believe it? but bring a disparagement
upon the wisdom of Christ, and upon his people, by their contradictions, that
so they may set up (secretly) some thing of their own: see what the Apostle
Paul says to this purpose (and beware of holding the truth in
unrighteousness) 1 Cor. 27.28. God has chosen the foolish things of the
world, to confound the wise; and the weak things of the world, to confound the
mighty things; and vile things; and things that are despised, has God chosen,
and things which art not, to bring to naught things that are.

Though the carnal wisdom of men accounts the Prayers, discourses, Arguments,
Gifts, and seize of the saints, and all their ways, to be foolish,
weak, vile, vain etc. yet even by these (the power, and spirit of Christ
being in them) God will confound, and bring to naught their High things, their
great things, and break down all their strong holds, for the foolishness of
God (as men count foolishness) is wiser then men, and the weakness of God is
stronger then men, 1 Cor. 1.25.

It is certainly the wisdom of the flesh, and not that which is from above,
to conceive, that none but men bred up in Universities, are fit to preach the
Gospel of Christ: For the word and spirit, are able not only to make men wise
unto salvation, but also to make the man of God (Regenerate men) absolute, and
thoroughly furnished unto this, and every good work, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. else
how are the words of the Apostle true?

These things being so, then Governors and Tutours in every society (where
this great work is intended) should make it their maine business to instruct
the youth in the things of the Kingdom of God; and to be isntrumental for
their Ingrafting into Jesus Christ, without which they can never be fit, nor
able Ministers of the New Testament, though they have the highest attainements
in Learning and parts that the nature of man is capable of.

There is great care taken to enlarge the faculties and to gain spiritual
Gifts and parts (common as well to the Reprobate as the Elect;) by study, and
exercises, and all means possible; whereas the truth is, the attainement of
these without a Principle of grace together with them, does but make men more
blind in spiritual things, and makes the boults, and bars of corruption the
stronger, to shut out Jesus Christ: As it was with the learned, but carnal
Graecians (to whom Christ and the things of Christ were foolishness) so it is
with learned unregenerate men in all ages: Therefore this is that unum
necessarium, that one necessary thing, a Principle of grace, without which all
humane learning and parts, are but as an empty sound, and to be accounted (as
all things else) but as dung and dross to the saving Experimental knowledge
of Christ: this men will readily acknowledge in the Notion, and common
apprehension, Practical Judgment so contradictory.

Notwithstanding what has been said, let none that are godly take occasion
hereby to entertain too high conceits of themselves, and of their abilities
to teach, and instruct others in the things of God, upon this ground, because
they are regenerate, and have the spirit, and upon that account be so
ignorantly confident of their abilities, as to despise, or neglect any means
for their growth, and increase in all gifts and graces, as conceiving they have
all knowledge immediately upon their interest in Christ, which yet it may be, is
very weak, and little, let us take heed of thinking more highly of our selves
then we ought to think: but to think soberly, according as God has dealt to
every man the measure of Gifts, and graces: and let us labor to improve our
Talents, great or small, more or few, and to lay them out for the best
advantage, both of our Master, of ourselves, and others; Even to the glory of
God, and profit, and edification of one another.

Neither ought men, from what has been said, to take occasion to despise, or
undervalue humane Learning, and parts, which are of singular use in the Church
of God, when sanctified, and joined with grace, and holiness.

There are very many instances, not only in former ages, but also in this
present generation of Ministers of the Gospel, and others, Men eminent in
humane Learning, and parts, and in grace also, who have been and are great,
and special Instruments employed by God, for the destruction of Antichrist,
and the enlargement, and building up of the Church of God.

The five and thirtieth Observation in Nature.
THe husbandman Grafts all the wild Plants that he brings into his Orchard,
None but engrafted Trees must grow there, None must be Pruned, and Ordered, but
they must also certainly be engrafted, being wild, and naught by nature, he
engrafts them with some good, and choice fruits, otherwise they will bear
sower, bitter, and unpleasant fruits.

This is another Similitude of the state of spiritual fruit trees whence we
learn.

That none but Engrafted Trees grow in Gods Orchard the Church. Proposition
shadowed.


The Mystical husbandman takes pleasure in none but such as are Engrafted
Trees, for before Engrafting they bring forth fruits distasteful to him,
therefore, till that be done they are not within the Walls of his Orchard the
Church invisible, and so not in his Care, and Love. Though many seem to be
within the Garden enclosed, yet they are not, And though it may in a sense be
said, That many are in the Church, which are not of the Church: That Is only in
a General acceptance considered as visible professors, yet taken strictly, no
ungrafted Trees are either in, or of the Garden enclosed.

The Grafting here spoken of is Regeneration or the New birth, This must
necessarily be don, ere any can be fit Plants for Gods Orchard, Luke. 13.3.
Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God, Joh. 3.3. And
again Joh. 15.4. As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide
in the vine, noe more can ye, except ye abide in me. The Apostle shows us this
Engrafting in plain terms: Romans 6.5. We are Planted together in the
likeness of his death, and Romans 11.24. We are Grafted contrary to Nature into
a good Olive tree.

By this Engrafting is that Union, that believers have with Christ whereby they
do as really, and truly receive spirit, sap, life, and power to grow, and
bear fruits, as the branches of a Tree do receive sap, and vigor from the
stock, and Root by which they increase, and bear fruits.

The spirit, on Christ's part, and faith on ours, are the ties, and Bonds of
this union, we see the necessity of both: without the spirit of Christ, we are
none of his, Romans 8.9. and without faith it is impossible to please him, Romans
14.23. so that its certain the husbandman will not admit of any into his
heavenly Orchard, but such as are Ingrafted Trees.

Hence we may conclude, that many persons deceive themselves, ingrafted, they
live in blindness, and content themselves with groundless persuasions of
their being in Christ within the wall of his Church, when as yet they are
ungrafted Trees, they have a form of godliness, but want the power of it, 2 Timothy 3.5. such are in a sad case, for not being within the Wall of Gods
enclosed Garden, they are out of his care, and protection (otherwise then by
his common providence) they have none of the special, and peculiar privileges
of his engrafted Trees. O labor to get into Christ.

The six and thirtieth Observation in Nature.
SOme fruit trees bring forth fruits rough, and of a bad color, and of a
harsh, and sharp taste, and yet these fruits are more wholesome for the body then
some other fruits which are smooth, beautiful to look upon, and sweet to the
taste, for all sharp, and bitter things are abstersive, and cleanse the body
from dull, and phlegmatique humors, whereas sweet things much used stuff up
and choke the passages of the body.

This shadows out unto us this Proposition: That

Proposition shadowed.
Those fruits of spiritual fruit trees which are harsh, sharp, and bitter are
(for the most part) more profitable then such as are mild, and pleasant.

The words and dealings of Parents toward their children, and of one friend
toward another which are sometimes tart and sharp, usually work better
effects then indulgent, and smooth dealings, which usually cockers up and
imboldens children in licentiousness Pro. 29.17. correct thy son and he
shall give thee rest, yea he shall give delight to thy soul.

The common saying is: spare the Rod and spill the Child, whereas seasonable
reproves, and due correction restraines corruptions from breaking forth.

The sad example of Elies sons is sufficient to prove this, whose mild, and
indulgent behavior toward them emboldned them in destructive courses, the
miserable consequences whereof were upon his whole family, 1 Samuel: 2.30, 35.

So also among familiar friends, the fruit of the lips that is sometimes tart
and bitter at present is found many times more profitable, and of better
effect, than that which is mild, and gentle: such are most faithful friends as
deal most plainly with us, though sometimes their words, reproves, and
dealings, may seem harsh and tart, in case of some offense or neglect of duty,
they are far better friends then such as will sooth up a man in all his
ways, or else be silent, in respect of reproofs, Prove. 28.23. He that rebukes
a man, afterward shall find more favor then he that flattereth with his lips:
And again, Pro. 27.6. faithful are the wounds of a friend, but the kisses of
an enemy are deceitful.

The Prophet knew these tart fruits to be best, Psalm. 141.5. Let the righteous
smite me and reprove me, for that is good for me.

Thus it is also between God, and us: The fruits of his love in sharp, and
bitter corrections, do (for the most part) prove better, and more profitable to
us, then pleasant, and sweet prosperity, Ps. 119.72. It is good for me that I
have been in trouble, etc.

We should hence learn not to judge of things according to sense, and present
feeling, and apprehensions, taste, and relish, but according to the profitable
effects that it works.

So although harsh dispensations from God and dealings from men may seem at
present not joyous but grievous, yet they afterward work the peaceable, fruit
of righteousness Heb. 12.11. more then cherishings according to the flesh.

The seven and thirtieth Observation in Nature.
Fruit Trees bear no fruits in Autumn, except they bud and Blossom in the
spring: The Husbandman looks not to receive a harvest of fruits from Trees,
that do not prepare Buds and Blossoms, and bring them forth in the spring of
the year: But such as blossom well in the spring, give good hopes of fruits
in their seasons.

Hence we learn: That

Proposition shadowed.
Those persons are not like to bring forth good fruits in old age, who labor
not for them in time of youth.

When men labor, and are diligent in good Employments in their youth, there is
some hopes of fruit-fulnesse in after times: But what profitable fruits for the
good of the Church of God, Common wealth, or their own comfort, can those
persons bring forth in the Autumn of their life or old age, who spend their
youth, or spring time, in idleness, and sensual pleasures, and make no
preparation then, by study, labor, and diligence, in all good things, for
fruits afterward whereof themselves, and others might eat, and be satisfied?

Will the Husbandman expect a Harvest, without a seed time? Prove. 20.4. The
sluggard ploweth not etc. therefore shall he beg in harvest, and have nothing.

The foolish Virgins sleep, while they should labor and prepare Oil,
therefore they shall be shut out, when others enter in with the Bridegroom,
Math. 25.11.

aged, and declining persons are so ignorant of God, and destitute of any
profitable knowledge, or good fruits, they trifled away their spring time, they
did not blossom then, nor prepare for fruits in Autumn.

spring is not yet past, now to bud and blossom, by diligence, and all good
endeavors, now to sow good seed plentifully, that so they may reap a full,
and joyful harvest, Eccl. 12.1. Now to remember their Creator in the days of
their youth, before the evil days come, etc.

We may learn this providence even from the least, and lowest rank of living
Creatures, the Bees, and the Ants, these in spring, and summer provide; and lay
up for winter, Prove. 6.6.

This is a thing of high concernment indeed, O let youth now labor to get
themselves implanted into Christ; Romans 6.5. and then they will bud, and
Blossom, and bring forth fruits, some in youth, and more in Autumn and Old
age, Ps. 92.13. such as be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in
the Courts of our God, they shall bring forth more fruit in old age.

The eight and thirtieth Observation in Nature.
Fruit Trees that are not profitable are hurtful: if they bear not fruits
they cannot be said to be harmless, such as although they do no good, yet
they do no hurt; but there are positive evils, and harm in, and by them,
loss, and prejudice to the husbandman, they suck away the juice, and fertility
of the earth, spoil or hurt the herbs, flowers, and plants, which grows
under them, with droppings and shade, they fill up the room where profitable
fruit trees might stand, the husbandman looses his labor about them, and is
discredited by them, etc.

This shadows out unto us this Proposition.

That those who do not act for God, Proposition shadowed,
they act against him.

There are one sort of persons who are clearly, and evidently Active for God,
others as much against him, taking part with his enemies; but there are a third
sort who think it a special point of wisdom to sit still, and act neither on
the one side, nor on the other, let them go too, say they, we will not meddle,
its good being quiet, why should we put our finger into the fire when we may
keep it out? but let such know, they are the very enemies of God, as well, as
really, as those who act visibly against him: for not to act for God, is to act
against him, Judge. 5.23. Curse ye Meroz said the Angel of the Lord, curse ye
bitterly the inhabitants thereof, because they came not out to the help of the
Lord, to the help of the Lord against the mighty. And Luke 11.23. he that is
not with me, is against me, and he that gathers not with me scatters.

He that is not on Christ's side, is on his enemies side; men may speak, and
act against Christ when they are silent, and sit still, the sentence shall be
pronounced against them at the last day, as well for not feeding and clothing,
and visiting Christ in his Members, as for beating or wronging of them, Mat.
25.43.

This shows us what esteem God has of lukewarm professors, particular
Obligations lying upon them to be actives such who are set in Office, and
power, for this very end, and purpose, to be active for God, yet how little do
many do, in discharge of the trust reposed in them. Let such know, not to Act
for God is to act against him.

correct coldness, and neglects, even in his own people: Moses, Aaron, Eli,
were not spared in this case: but were scourged for neglects.

Doubtless God is as jealous for his honor now, as ever, and he looks that
every one of his people (in his sphere wherein he moves) should act with life,
and zeal for him. And to those to whom he has given much power, and
authority, of them he requires the more.

The nine and thirtieth Observation in Nature.
THe husbandman looks for more fruits from some of his fruit trees then from
some others, those upon which he bestows most time, cost, and labor, from
those he expects most fruits. And is displeased if his expectation be not
answered accordingly.

This shadows out unto us: That

Proposition shadowed.
God expects greater returns of duty from some persons, then from some others,
and neglect thereof provokes God against them.

In the Ceremonial Law God required more sacrifices from the Rich, then from
the Poor: such as had great store of Oxen, Sheep, and other things to be
offered in sacrifice should not have been accepted had they offered a pair of
Turtle doves, or two young Pigeons, which yet were accepted from the poorer
sort of persons: So also under the Gospel: To whom much is given, of them does
he require the more, Luke 12.48. God had done great things for for Eli, and
David, 1 Samuel 2.27, 28. 2 Samuel 12.8.
and expected (accordingly) greater returns of duty, and obedience, all their
lives after; but they failing in some great particulars, God is sore displeased
with them, and reckons up the great benefits, and particular engagements they
had received, and tells them he expected other returns from them.

So also Hezekiah received much, and God looked for answerable returns: but he
rendered not according to the benefits received. 2 Cro. 23.25. and God was
displeased with him upon that account.

God planted a Vineyard, Esaias. 5.1, 2. and bestowed much care, and pains about
it, and looked for an answerable return of good fruits, but because it brought
forth wild grapes instead of good and pleasant grapes, he laid it wast. Some
have received more, and lie under greater engagements from God, than others,
therefore God looks to receive more.

This shows us the great danger such persons lie under, who much from God, and
return but little; having received many Talents, and not making an answerable
return, by improving of them to the honor of God, and advantage of his
people; Nay, who perhaps use all against God, and his people.

God gives to some many Gifts of Nature, and Common Graces, much knowledge,
learning, wisdom, great riches, honors, Offices, Places, much time, liberty,
great, and choice means of grace, special providence, and dispensations, and
many other Talents which others have not: of these God requires more, than of
those who have fewer, and less of these things, and the not making suitable
Returns,

If God spared not his choice servants, Eli, David, Ezekiah, etc. If Judgment
begin at the house of God, how shall the ungodly, and sinner escape? 1 Pet.
4.17.

Let every one of us consider what we have received, that so we may make unto
God some answerable return: God looked for more (and received more) from him
that had the five Talents, than from him that had received but two. Matthew
42.5.23.

Noe one (not the lowest, or meanest) is freed from making returns of duty to
God: though God require much from those who have received much, yet the mean
person, who has but a little, must return of that little; Ephesians. 4.28. Let him
work with his hands, that he may have something to give to him that needs.
And it will be accepted according to that a man has, and not according to that
he has not, 2 Cor. 8.12.

So also, of the use and improvement of all other Talents, gifts, graces,
liberty, Power, and the rest.

The fortieth Observation in Nature.
ALthough Fruit Trees bring forth many, great, and beautiful fruits, yet they
are not esteemed, except also they have a good taste, it is the relish that
gives the Commendation to fruits.

This shadows out unto us: That

Proposition shadowed,
It is not the multitude (nor exactness of performance) of duties, that God
accepts, unless there be sincerity, and right ends in doing thereof.

The Taste of Mystical Fruits, lies in the sincerity, and truth of the heart:
sincerity, and right Ends, is that which God chiefly looks at, and accounts
upon it accordingly: Actio denominatur a fine, The end denominates a work
good, or bad, it is the form of every duty.

The great end must be the glory of God, (though we may have subordinate ends,
our own happiness, and others) being Married to Christ, we must bring forth
fruit unto God, Rom 7.8. Trees of righteousness, being trees of the Lords
planting, they bring forth fruit, that he may be glorified, Esaias. 61.3. so Joh.
15. Truth, sincerity, Love, right ends, these make fruits taste pleasantly, for
without Love, there cannot be right ends, And therefore the Apostle says 1
Cor. 13. Though a man have all knowledge, all faith, though he bestow all his
goods to feed the poor, and do never so many good works, yet if they taste
not of love, they are nothing worth, if there be not sincerity and right ends,
God accounts not of them.

Many are but empty Vines, because they bring forth fruit to themselves: fruits
as good as no fruit, Hos. 10.1.
when they have no good taste, which they have not, when the Ends are not right.

The Pharisees brought forth fair and goodly fruits to look upon, Mat. 6.2.
they Preached, they prayed much, they gave much alms, they fasted, paid
tithes, etc. but the taste of these fruits was naught, they had no love to God,
they wanted sincerity, right ends, in what they did, Matthew. 6.2. They did them
to be seen of men: for themselves, and not for God.

Hence we may learn that much of the fruit that is brought good taste, though
they are beautiful to look upon, as to the matter and substance, yet they may
be but as Apples of Sodom, fair on the outside, but rotten within, of an
unpleasant taste. Men for the most part bring forth fruit unto themselves, they
aim at their own profits, honors, or something mainely and cheifely, if not
wholly for themselves: but the honor of God, the interest of Christ, is not in
their eye, their Love in their works is but Self-love.

Let us try the taste of our fruits, whether we have sincere, and right ends in
what we do, whether they taste of Love, Love to Cor. 16.14. Oh how sweet and
pleasant is the taste of those fruits, which spring from a principal of love to
God, upon the apprehension of his Love to us in Christ!

Seeing the taste of fruits makes them acceptable to God, this is a small, and
want outward beauty, yet because they have a good taste, the husbandman likes
them well, they are pleasant fruits in his account, because their hearts are
perfect, there is truth, sincerity, love, holy and right ends mixed with their
fruits, so that the husbandman delights to come into his Garden, and to eat
these his pleasant fruits, Cant. 4.16.

The widows two mites were but very small fruits, and yet because our Lord
liked the taste, he said they were better, and more acceptable, than any, or all
of the Pharisees great and many fruits, Math. 12.43.

The one and fortieth Observation in Nature.
WHen Grafts begin to grow by the sap they receive from the stock they will
certainly (by the Law of Nature) hold on, until they come to perfection.

The Proposition shadowed: That

Proposition shadowed,
The smallest measure of true grace in any person, can never be extinguished,
but will certainly grow up to perfection.

Grace is compared to a grain of Must-ardseede, Mat. 17.20. which though it be
but a very small substance, yet in a while, it grows to a great one; Though it
be but as a spark of fire in flax, it shall not be quenched. Esaias. 42.3. it
will increase to a great flame.

To see (and be convinced of) the want of Christ, and to desire after him, is
the smallest measure of grace, which yet shall certainly increase: such a
hungry soul shall at last be filled, and satisfied with the fulness of
Christ, Mat. 5 6.

If the spirit have cast the seeds, and Principles of grace into the soul, he
will water them, and cause them to grow, and bud, and blossom, and bring forth
fruits: To him that has shall be given; and he shall have abundance, Mat. 25,
29.

All the powers of hell cannot rob the soul of the least measure of grace.

weak in grace, though they have but a drop of the water of life, yet it shall
be a well of water springing up to eternal life, Joh. 4.14.

And therefore dejected, and weary souls that fear the work of grace is not
in them, that long after Christ, and would feign be satisfied that they have an
interest in him; Let such know the seed of God is in them, sown by his
spirit, and therefore it is that they have these desires, thirstings, longings,
etc. and cannot be satisfied without Christ. These motions and workings of
soul are not any where, but where the spirit dwells, and where he has begun
the work of grace: these are sure evidences that they are united to Christ,
and ingrafted into him, and these buds, and breakings forth show clearly (to a
discerning eye) that they have taken hold of the stock, and that they have
received from it, some sap and life, and therefore can never be broken off, nor
die, but they shall certainly spring up, and grow to perfection, and bring
forth the fruits of Love, joy, and praise to all eternity, for he who has
begun a good work in them, will perfect it, Phil. 1.6.

The two and fourtieth Observatioo in Nature.
THose fruit trees about which the husbandman tryes his skill most and about
which he takes most pains, if these are barren, or bring forth naughty fruits,
they discredit him more then many others.

This shadows out unto us: Proposition shadowed.
That

God has more dishonor by the sins of Professors, than by the sins of
others.

Persons who have interest in, and relation one to another, bring dishonor, or
Reputation one upon another, according as they walk: a man is commonly judged
according to his associats, or Companions, so do the ways of the people of
God (or those who profess themselves to be so) reflect upon God either for his
honor, or dishonor.

The sin of Elies sons brought more dishonor to God, than the sins of many
others, because of their Relation to God, in respect of their Office: They made
even the Offerings of the Lord to to be abhorred. 2 Samuel 12.14.

Many Professors, through their Pride, earthly-mindednesse, and other
offensive walking, bring a reproach upon the Profession of Religion, and
consequently upon God himself, Romans 2.24. The name of God is blasphemed among
the Gentiles through you.

When the enemies of God fee Professors walk scandalously, and behave
themselves unanswerable to their profession, these things reflect even upon
God: James 2.7. do not they blaspheme that worthy name by which ye are called,
like as the heathen did of old? Ezekiel. 36.20. They profaned my holy name when
they said to them, these are the people of the Lord, which are come out of his
Land. Even so now, some say in scorn of Professors (when they walk contrary to
the Gospel,) These are the people of the Lord, these are the saints, the
Brethren etc. And hereby they profane, and blaspheme the name of God, and bring
reproach upon his ways, and his Gospel: By reason of whom the way of truth
shall be evil spoken of: 2 Pet. 2.2. M Boulton says, That a dissolute
Minister, is a thousand times more pernicious, than an hundred private men,
though practicing villainy in the highest degree. So also (in some proportion)
it may be said of any that make profession of the Gospel.

Eli, David, Solomon etc. (though eminently in the favor of God,) yet he
punished their offenses with the Rod, and their iniquity with scourges, which
made them and their posterity smart, for many generations after.

names the name of Jesus to depart from iniquity: every one that professes
the Gospel to be tender of the name of God, to walk warily, and circumspectly;
very many Professors give Offense, and scandal, by those two grand accursed
Lusts of Pride, and Earthly-mindednesse, As their gifts and some outward
advantages, increase, so (usually) Pride increases, and discovers it self;
And as this filthy venomus Plant grows, and increases in the soul, it much
hinders, and keeps down the Plants of grace, where they are, so that they
become poor, and feeble. And as for Earthly-mindednesse, which the Apostle
calls Idolatry and the Root of all evil Coll. 3.5. It is of all things most
unbecoming those that profess to have their Treasure and inheritance in heaven.

O what a dishonor is this unto Jesus Christ, as though there were not enough
to be had out of the fullness of Christ, to satisfy the souls of his people,
but they must come for supplies to Creatures: Out of all doubt, those souls
where this Lust prevails, have little, or no Communion with God, let them
pretend what they will, for love of the world is (as a holy man says) the very
Canker, and Cut-throte of all heavenly-mindednesse; So that proud,
earthly-minded Professors shame the Gospel, and dishonor God more than others.

The three and fortieth Observation in Nature.
IF fruit trees are Ingrafted while they are very young, the work is soon
done, and is scarce perceived afterward, whether it be ingrafted or no,
otherwise then by the fruits. But if the work be delayed until the trees are
grown great, and strong, then the work is more difficult, and manifest
afterward, not only by the fruits, but also by some visible, and apparent
marks upon the tree.

This shadows out unto us, Proposition shadowed. See Obser. 60. and 62. Jer.
1.5. 1 Samuel 3.19. 1 Kin. 18.12. 2 Timothy 3.15.
That

Conversion in youth is not so apparent as in elder years.

Some are called the first hour of the day, and some the third, some the sixth,
and some the last hour Mat. 20.1, 2. Some are sanctified from the womb, some
early in their youth: others after many years. Now for those in whom the
spirit of God begins to work by means of Religious education in Childhood,
and youth, when they come to years, they are (usually) subject to doubtings,
and fears, about their spiritual condition, more than others, when they
hear, and read of some who have gone through straits, and difficulties,
fears, and terrors, in their New Birth, and cannot speak of any such thing out
of their own experience: This is usually a ground (through their own weakness,
and Satan's subtilety) of questioning their Estates. Because the work of grace
in these, is begun insensibly, and grows up by degrees hardly to be
perceived. Mark. 4.27. It springs up, and grows they know not how.

But such as are converted after many years of living in a carnal unregenerate
state, these are converted with greater difficulty, and more remarkably, one
contrary discovers, and sets off another clearly, and a sudden change of
states, makes the thing more manifest.

Any works that have small, and weak beginnings, and that go on but slowly,
and by degrees, these make no noise, are scarce perceived; But works that have
violent beginnings, and are carried on with power, and speed, these awaken
every man's observation.

The Jaylors Conversion was remarkable, because there was a speedy change
wrought, from one state to another, Act. 16. So also the Conversion of S. Paul,
was a manifest change, Act. 9. The like of many others: as both Scripture, and
experience show us.

how, where, and when, they were first wrought upon, who yet are certainly
ingrafted into the^ Stock Jesus Christ. The spirit (its likely) began early
with them, and cast seed into their minds, while they were but of tender
years, which grew up they knew not how, as our Savior says Mark. 4.27. The
husbandman bended the Twig while it was young, and tender, and engrafted it,
and pruned, and ordered it unto a comely Tree, and made it fruitful; And the
work then was done with more ease and less observation then it is usually
afterward.

Such as these must Labor to satisfy themselves, and make their Calling, and
Election sure, chiefly by trying of their fruits: examining them by the word of
God. See Observe: in Nature 8. and 22.

The four and fortieth Observation in Nature.
IN a Fruit-tree the Bigg and great Boughs are but a few in Number, in respect
of the small Boughs, there are multitudes of little small Boughs, branches,
and Twiggs upon a Tree, for one great Bough.

Proposition shadowed.
This shadows out unto us: That

The great persons in the world, who are in Christ, are but few in number, in
respect of the meaner sort.

We see by too much experience, That the rich, and great ones of the world
(for the most part) refuse Christ; Their licencious lives, their walking
according to the flesh, sufficiently testify that such who so walk, are in a
Carnal state, but those that follow Christ, as his Disciples, are (generally)
of the meaner sort of persons; The Apostle is express in this, 1 Cor. 1.26,
27. Ye see your calling, Brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh,
not many Mighty, not many Noble are called. But, Jam. 2.5. God has chosen the
poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which he has
promised to them that love him. Joh. 7.48. Have any of the Rulers, or Pharisees
believed on him? But the Poor receive the Gospel.

This calls aloud to all great persons, to try, and examine themselves,

There is no reason any one should envy, or desire the condition Carnal
eminent persons. That spark, or blaze of seeming glory; may quickly be
extinguished in everlasting darkness.

The five and fortieth Observation in Nature.
THe Branches, and Boughs of fruit trees are tossed, and shaken by the winds,
yet there is no danger of their falling while the Root remains firm in the
Earth.

Hence we learn, That

Although believers are shaken by the winds of Temptations, yet they cannot be
overturned, because they are fixed upon Christ. Proposition shadowed.


We have no promise that we shall be free from Temptations, tossings, and
shakings in this life, but rather are foretold of them: Joh. 16.33. In the
world ye shall have tribulations, but he of good cheer, I have overcome the
world. But we have a sure promise that no Temptation shall be too hard for us:
1 Cor. 10.13. The house built upon the Rock, shall stand against all the
floods, winds, and storms of Temptations, Matthew. 7.24.

The faithfulness, 1 Pet. 1.5.
and all the Attributes of God are engaged for our safety, and deliverance: 1
Cor. 10.13. God is faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted above your
strength, but will give an issue to every Temptation that ye may bear it.

Job, David, Heman and many others; we read, were much shaken with winds and
storms of Temptations, but yet they were all the while safe, they were not
overturned, because they were fixed upon Christ, they were Rooted in him.

So all the people of God are as Mount Sion, which cannot be removed, but
abides fast for ever, Ps. 125.1.

great Consolation to believers, in their greatest Troubles: Though they pass
through the waters, they shall not be drowned, though they walk through the
fire, they shall not be burnt, Esaias. 43.2.

Though they (as Branches of a tree) are shaken and tossed this way and that
way, yet they shall not be overturned, because they grow upon the Root, and
their stock, or Root is steadfast and immovable.

The six and fortieth Observation in Nature.
IRregular Buds, or shoots of fruit trees, are easily rubbed, or broken off at
their first putting forth; but if let alone, they will grow great, and strong,
so that then it will be far wore difficult to cut, or break them off.

The Proposition shadowed hereby is: That

Proposition shadowed.
Sinful thoughts, and motions in the soul, are most easily suppressed, at their
first rising.

If we give way to the motions of Corruption within us, they will grow, and
gather strengrh, and be much more hard to master, and bring down, than at
their first stirrings.

Solomon (upon this Account) advises to be aware, and to leave off Contention
in the beginning, so soon as it begins to appear Prove. 17.14. The Children of
Mystical Babylon must be dashed in pieces, so soon as they are borne.

If a Poole of water begin to break the Bank, its wisdom to stop the breach
suddenly, else it quickly grows wider, and more hard to be done.

Diseases are more easily cured at first, then when they have got strength; so
spiritual diseases.

suppress risings of Lusts, and Corruptions quickly: And therefore let us take
and observe Solomon's advice, Prove. 4.23. to keep the heart with all diligence,
for out of it are the issues of life.

The seven and fortieth Observation in Nature.
FRom one fruit tree are sometime^ taken Grafts for many trees, which being
ingrafted upon several stocks, multitudes of other Trees are thereby
propagated, and increased, which also bear store of good fruits.

Proposition shadowed: That

The Instructions of one godly person, Proposition shadowed.
sometimes are effectual (by the spirit) to the implanting of many into
Christ.

As one sinner destroys much good, Prove. 9.18. so (often) one good man is the
Instrument, and means of much good: God makes use of him for the conversion of
many unto God; He turns many to righteousness: Dan: 12.3.

Many Grafts of good Motion, counsels, and Instructions, are sometimes taken
from one good man, which take hold, and grow in the minds of many others, as
long as they live.

Grafts taken from that excellent fruit-tree, the Apostle Peter, were
effectual to the ingrafting of many into Christ, Acts 2.37.41. The same day
there were added unto them about 3000 souls: And again: Acts 4.4. Many of
them which heard the word believed, and the number of the men were about 5000.
Their Counsels and Instructions were ingrafted into their Minds, as the Apostle
speaks, James 1.21. Receive with meekness the Ingrafted word.

The word takes hold, and rooting in the heart, as a Graft in the stock, which
grows there, and brings forth fruit: Col. 1.6. The Gospel is come unto you,
and brings forth fruit.

Good Mystical fruit trees (holy men) afford many good Grafts) Pr. 15.4. a
wholesome Tongue is a tree of life, which affords many good Grafts) whereby many
other fruit trees are increased of the same kind. Trees of righteousness of
the Lords planting, Es. 61.3. which bear store of good fruits to the
husbandman.

Image of God upon their spirits, and bring forth good fruits But also for that
they are the means of so much good to others. Who by their Prayers, Preaching,
Printing, Instructions, Government, and good examples, are instruments, and
means, of bringing many souls to God, of Ingrafting, and multiplying
fruit trees in Gods enclosed Garden.

The eight and fortieth Observation in Nature.
Fruit Trees being Ingrafted, they Naturally bring forth good fruits, Because a
new, and another Nature (in the graft) is joined to the wild Plant on which it
is Grafted; Notwithstanding some mixture of the Nature of the wild stock, yet
the Graft overrules, to bring forth good fruits according to its own Nature.

Proposition shadowed.
This is another Similitude of the state of Mystical fruit trees, and shadows
out unto us this Proposition: That

Persons ingrafted into Christ, do naturally bring forth good fruits.

Every regenerate person has two natures in him the divine Nature, and Corrupt
Nature. And these two Natures act in him all his life time: But notwithstanding
corrupt Principles, the divine Nature prevails in beleivers, for the general
course of their lives.

Ye are partakers of the divine Nature (says the Apostle) 2 Pet. 1.4. whereby
persons ingrafted into Christ, are carried out to act for God according to that
Nature, and so bring forth good fruits Naturally: their fruits taking their
denomination from the better Nature.

Believers have the Image of God renewed in them, and his Law written in their
hearts, That is knowledge, dispositions, and inclinations carrying them (by a
spiritually natural power) to what is holy, just, and good, in some degree as
Adam had in his innocence: so that they Naturally bring forth good fruits, and
have a Natural propension, aptness and inclination to the things of God, as
unregenerate persons have to carnal things. And where this divine Principle,
or spiritual Nature, has attained high degrees, where grace is at a high
pitch, and the soul in a spiritual frame, there the workings of it are more
clear and apparent. There is a Natural disposition, affection, and
inclination toward God, and the things of God, even to all spiritual things,
as spiritual: Romans 8.5. They that are after the spirit, do mind the things of
the spirit.

Notwithstanding the cross workings, and stirrings of Corrupt nature, yet (for
the general) the movings, and workings of the spirits of Believers, and the
fruits they bring forth, are according to this spiritual nature. Romans 8.1.
They walk after the spirit, and Romans 7.25. with my mind I serve the law of God.
The general course of their lives is spiritual, or spiritually Natural, as
springing from that Mystical root, the spirit of Christ, acting those
spiritual dispositions, and inclinations which he has fixed in the soul.

This may prove Professors whether they be found or no; let them examine their
Principles from which they act: whether spiritual, and divine Principle
within, or from motives, or Considerations from without: whether it be not
Custom, Examples, Counsels or Commands of men, interest in, or engagements of
friends, Praise of men, outward advantages, or at best, Natural Conscience,
that moves them, and carries them on in Religious ways.

Hereby we know that the ways of God are easy, and pleasant for whatsoever we
do naturally, we do easily, and with delight; It is (in some degrees) with the
adopted sons of God, as with his Natural son, in this respect, to account
it their meat and drink to do the will of their heavenly father: so that this
is a great encouragement to all, to give up their names to Christ, Prove. 3.17
His ways are ways of pleasantness, and all his paths are peace.

The nine and fortieth Observation in Nature.
THere are but few Ingrafted trees in a Country, in comparison of those
ungrafted: there are many thousands in the woods, and wast grounds, of wild
trees, the number of which far exceeds the number of the trees of the Garden.

The Proportion shadowed.

That there are but a few Godly persons in the world, in comparison of the
number of the wicked. Proposition shadowed.


This appears expressly, Matthew. 7.13, 14. Wide is the gate, and broad is the
way that leads to destruction, and many there be that go in thereat. Because
strait is the Gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few
there be that find its so again Matthew. 20.16. Many are called, but few are
chosen.

Experience makes this too manifest: most embrace this present world, and but
few deny themselves, and follow Christ: few in the world make profession of
Christ in comparison of the multitudes of Idolaters in other Nations: And of
those who make profession, how many Hypocrites, to one true hearted Nathaniel?

The godly are in number, as the gleanings of Grapes, when the Vintage is done:
Or as the shaking of an Olive tree, two or three Berries in the top of the
uppermost bought, four, or five in the outmost Branches thereof, Esaias. 17.6.

This is a sad Consederation, and should make us take up a

This should stir up every one to labor with all diligence to make their
calling, and election sure, to know they are of the number of the little flock.

The fiftieth Observation in Nature.
SOme wild, and ungraded trees bear fruits very like to those that are
Ingrafted in shape, and color, so that men often mistake the one for the
other.

This shadows out unto as this Proposition:

That the works of formal hypocrites are (in many things) very like the worlds
of true Christians. Proposition shadowed.


Many Formal Professors have special eminent Gifts and abilities, which (it
may be) exceed those of some real Christians, they can Preath, Pray, and
discourse well, and can make a shift to carry themselves so, as to gain some
good opinion among men; yea, and pass for Sincere Professors.

Who were more exact in their lives (as to outward performances of duties, then
the Scribes and Pharisees, in Preaching, Praying, giving to the Poor? etc. and
yet our savior charges them with Hypocrisy, Matthew. 28.27, 28. Woe unto you
scribes, and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye are like unto whited sepulchers,
which indeed appear beautiful outwardly, etc. Ye outwardly appear righteous
unto-men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy, and iniquity.

So it is at this day: the fruits of many seeming Christians appear beautiful
outward, as if they were the fruits of ingrafted trees, whereas in truth they
are but the fruits of wild Trees.

This being so we ought to set our selves to distinguish fruits that are
brought forth, both our own, and others, that we take not Crabs for Apples;
Let us not judge of fruits by their Bulk, or substance, Beauty, and form, or
Number, but by their Nature, See Observe. 40.
and quality, their Taste: A spiritual Palate is able (for the most part) to
taste the fruits that are brought forth by men: he that is spiritual judges
all things, 1 Cor. 2.15. spiritual men have the Law written in their hearts,
knowledge, dispositions, inclinations a frame and temper of spirit (in some
degee) answerable to the mind of God; This spiritual Nature in the soul, by
the assistance of the spirit of God together with the written word, is the
guide of all believers, thereby they judge of good, and evil fruits, of wild,
and of Ingrafted Trees, 1 Cor. 2.12.

The one and fiftieth Observation in Nature.
SOme grafts are in part prepared by the husbandman in Order to Ingrafting, and
yet through neglect, or unskilfulnesse in Ordering, or hurts by Men, Cattle,
hot suns, dry winds, or something else, they are spoiled, and never take hold
of the stocks whereby they should grow to perfection.

This shadows out unto us: That

Proposition shadowed.
Some Persons are wrought upon in part {in somethings) like to those that are
Ingrafted tnto Christ, who yet never attain to be really united to him.

The spirit of God Convinces the world of sin, as well Reprobates, as the
Elect, they are sometimes terrified with the apprehensions of the wrath and
justice of God for sin, and may (for a time) lie under the spirit of Bondage,
and common convictions of the spirit, and may have knowledge, and some common
graces, and reform in part, and make a Profession; And yet after all, throug
negligence, workings of Satan, and the world, they come short of Christ.

The young man in the Gospel Mat.19. had same good beginning, some civil
righteousness, and being by Christ told what to do more, he slinks back from
Christ, and went his way to his earthly possessions. So the hearers, Luke 8.13.
they hear the word, and believe for a time, but in temptation fall away. And
many of the disciples of Christ, John. 6.66. went back, and walked noe mart
with him. also 1 John 2.19. Gal. 5.7. Ye did run well, who did hinder?
They went out from us etc. so many in these days: having begun well, after a
while they fall off, and with Demas embrace this present world.



Mark: And to give all possible diligence to make our Calling, and Election
sure, and to put that great Question out of Question, whether arm we are really
in Christ, whether we receive sap and life from that stock to grow, and bring
forth good fruits, if so; then certainly we shall persevere unto the end.

The two and fiftieth Observation in Nature.
THe least, and most crooked Ingrafted tree brings forth better fruits, without
any artificial helps, then the fairest tree with all the art that can be used
to it, if ungrafted.

This Similitude shadows out unto us this Proportion.

That the meanst person in Christ, brings forth better fruits, then the most
accomplished unregenerate person in the world. Proposition shadowed.


Every believer is acted by the spirit of God, and spiritual Principles, and
all their spiritual fruits spring from Christ their root, and thence it is
that they are of such account with God; But unregenerate persons cannot do one
good work, cannot bring forth one good fruit, because they have no spiritual
Principles, they have not the spirit of God, as to any renewing santifying
operations in them, but are whoiy carnal, and therefore whatsoever proceeds
from them is so, Jo. 3.6. That which is of the flesh, is flesh, And Tit, 1.15.
To them that are defiled, and unbelieving is nothing pure but even their minds
and consciences are defiled. As from a muddy fountain flow impure streams,
or from a corrupt Root spring naughty fruits, so from the spirits of carnal
persons proceed fleshly operations: The carnal mind is enmity against God,
Romans 87 So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God, verse. 8. Their
grapes are grapes of gall, their Clusters are bitter, Deuteronomy. 32.32.

But the fruits of believers are sweet and pleasant fruits, because they
spring from the true Vine, Joh. 15. So that the husbandman will come into his
garden, and eat his pleasant fruits, Cant. 4.16.

Hence we may see the gross mistake of most people in the spiritual fruits
according to bulk, and outward beauty. The Sermons, books, discourse etc. of
great men, are for the most part cried up, and had in estimation (especially,
if they be not only eminent in Place, and Office, but also in learning, and
Gifts) who yet in the mean time neglect, or slight the Sermons, Prayers,
books, and discourses of persons low in the world, and in Gifts, and natural
endowments, though these proceed from a gracious heart a renewed nature, and
the spirit of God, though they have a taste, a savor, and relish of the divine
Nature, and have a vein of holiness running through them, which God himself,
and his people, who are most spiritual, are delighted with. But the natural
man cannot perceive, nor discern the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.14.

worldly wise men, though eminent in all natural, and acquired abilities, who,
like the proud Pharisee, boast of themselves and despise others, whose fruits
are far better then theirs; But know O vain man, That not he that commends
himself is approved, but whom the Lord commends, 2 Cor. 10.18.

gifts, and natural endowments, yet their Graces may be eminent, and their
fruits precious. Though they be small as the poor widows mite, yet they are
better, and of more esteem with God, then all the great fruits of formal
Professors, Mark. 12.41, 42.

The three and fiftieth Observation in Nature.
THe thriving roots of a fruit-tree is always ready to give up sap and
nourishment to the Branches; and if the Branches, could draw sap continually,
the root would continually give it.

The Spiritual lesson shadowed.

Proposition shadowed.
That Christ is continually ready to communicate strength, and refreshing to
his people, and all defects thereof are from themselves.

Believers receive all their life, and power from Christ whereby they do any
thing spiritually. And when the soul finds not strength, and refreshings by
reason of the strings of Corruptions, and temptations from satan, and the
world, yet all the while Christ is ready to communicate himself, for it is his
Office, as well as his Nature, he is appointed of God to give out all supplies
to his people, 1 Cor. 1.30. He is made unto us wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption, The soul is sometimes sluggish, and careless
of seeking, or entertaining Christ, yet Christ is ready, and calls for
entrance, Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and
open the door, I will come in and sup with him, and he with me, Rev. 3.20. And
again Cant. 5.2, 3. It is the voice of my beloved that knocks, saying, open
to me my love, my dove, my undefiled. But how careless is the soul of
entertaining Christ: I have put off my Coat, how shall I put it on? etc.

The Apostle tells us the Lord is ready, Jam. 4.8. draw nigh to God, and he will
draw nigh to you, if we ask we shall receive, if we seek we shall find, if we
knock it shall be opened, Mat. 7.7. We find by experience, when we seek Christ
diligently we find him refreshing the soul, quickening, and enlivening of it,
but if we neglect him, our spirits are dull, our affections grow cold.

Christ is ready to give out himself to those that look after him, at their
first coming to him, and at all times afterward, Joh. 4.47. He that comes
unto me, I will in no wise cast off. He is the treasury of all grace, and
dispenses grace to his people for all purposes, quickening grace, strengthening
grace, preventing grace, teaching grace, comforting grace, he is the God of all
grace, and is still ready to communicate of the same to his people, if they be
but ready, and fit to receive it.

It may hereupon be objected by some under a Temptation, Ob.
O but I have prayed long, and sought the Lord, but I am not heard, I am almost
discouraged in praying and waiting so long.

It is answered: The Cause is in thy self, upon one account, An.
or other; It may be thou have displeased Christ by some prevailing lust, it
may be thou have neglected, and slighted his grace, and loving kindness
toward thee aforetime, not walking in any measure answerable thereunto, have
thou not looked after other lovers in letting the stream of thy affections
run toward empty creatures? Or Christ may withhold, to prevent these things,
or the like, which else would be, that thou knowing how dear it costs thee to
obtain manifestations of his grace, they may be the more prized: Or thy graces
have need of trying, and exercising, which else being unactive, would be at a
stand, or decay: there is some cause or other in thy self: If need be, ye are
in heaviness through manifold temptations, 1 Pet. 1.6. so that Christ is ready
to communicate of his fullness to his people, and usually, the soul (being in
a good healthy state, and not clouded with lusts, or temptations) seeking of
him does find him, yea: before his people call he will answer, and while they
are yet speaking he will hear, Esaias. 65.24.

love, and thankfulness.

grace for grace, even the same spirit, and same graces, that Christ has in a
measure.

The four and fiftieth Observation in Nature.
Fruit Trees being ordered with skill, and diligence, they become abundantly
fruitful, which if neglected, and nature be left to it self, they will bear
but little fruit, or not so much, nor so good, as with due culture, and
ordering.

This is another Similitude, of the state of Spiritual fruit trees and
shadows out unto us this Proposition: That

Proposition shadowed.
By diligent use of the means of grace Christians attain great advantages,
which through neglect, (or slight using means) would be lost.

Whosoever proposes an End unto himself cannot (rationally) expect to have
it, without using fit means for attaining of it; salvation is that great, and
general end that men aim at (at least pretend to it) but how can they expect
to find it, who neglect, or slight the means, whereby only it is attained:
which is the knowledge of Jesus Christ?

Heaven is not gotten by sitting still, but by laboring and striving for it, in
Gods way; The kingdom of heaven is taken by violence, and the violent take it
by force, Mat. 11.12. and Luke 13.14. strive to enter in at the strait gate.
Means must be used with diligence; If we would have wisdom, we must ask it of
God, James 1.5. And Pro. 22. If he incline his ear, and apply his heart to it,
if he cry after knowledge, and lift up his voice for understanding, if he seek
her as silver, and search for her as for hid treasures; then he shall
understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God.

Here must be inclining the ear, and applying the heart; here must be crying,
and lifting up the voice, seeking, searching, and then shall we find.

Giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue etc. 2 Pet. 1.5. and again
verse. 10. Give all diligence to make your calling, and Election sure: the
diligent soul shall be made fat Prove. 13.4.

But on the other side, neglect of the means of grace, or careless use
thereof, loses these advantages, many seek to enter, but shall not be able,
some seek not at all, others seek but negligently, and so find not.

In attaining degrees of Gifts, and Graces, we see by Experience, that men of
mean natural parts, by diligence use of means, grow eminent, and far beyond
others who have better natural parts, if they be negligent to improve them.

I know means are nothing of themselves, without the concurrence of the spirit
in them; but as means without God can do nothing: so, usually, God without
means, if men neglect them will do nothing: The diligent soul shall be made
fat: Prove. 13.4 but such as neglect means or use them negligently, they loose
all and perish: The desire of the slothful kills him, Prove. 21.25. My people
are destroyed for lack of knowledge: because thou have rejected knowledge, I also
will reject thee, Hos. 4.6. they rejected knowledge, in rejecting, and
neglecting the ways and means of knowledge: ye have set at naught all my
counsels, and would none of my reproofs: and verse. 29. they hated knowledge,
they would none of my Counsels: that is: they neglected all: therefore God
rejected them.

Ordinances, and means of grace: though God has commanded, and appointed
them, as means of greatest advantage to his people.

neglect, or carelessly use the means to know God.

diligent and constant use of the means of grace, not only as to the attayning
of grace where it is not, but also to the increase of grace, where it is
wrought, Especially in childhood and youth: I am persuaded not one of many
would perish, if Parents, and such as have the education of youth (themselves
being Godly) did use all good means diligently, for the working of grace in
their hearts: Its true; the use of the best means will not be effectual
without the concurrence of the spirit of God, but where God gives an heart to
go on in the use of means which be has appointed, he will surely come (in his
own season) and make it effetcuall.

And for experienced well grown Christians, there is no means to obtain
great advantages, great measures of grace, and glory, like watching over the
heart, to keep it in a spiritual frame, corruptions down, and the graces
active, to walk closely with God daily in communion with him, to be still
acting faith upon Christ, not only to receive, and draw all supplies from him,
but also to give, and asscribe all unto him. These are fundamental to all
purposes: all external means without these are to little or no purpose.

The five and fiftieth Observation in Nature.
IF a young Plant or bough of a tree, be often bended and bowed one and the
same way, it will after a certain time grow in that posture, into which it is
so often bended, although by the course of Nature it would grow otherwise.

This shadows out unto us this Proposition: That

Frequent Acts in things good, or evil, beget habits, Proposition shadowed.
and make all such works easy to us.

Custom is called a second Nature, it make things easy though at first they
were difficult, and such things are hardly forgotten, or laid aside; Can the
Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots, then may ye also do good
that are accustomed to do evil? Ier. 13.23.

The Apostle Peter says they had their hearts, exercised with Covetous
practisers, so that they could not cease from sin 2 Pet. 2.14.

So also on the other side: Custom in the ways of God does strengthen habits,
and make them easy to us, not only upon that great account, of Communion with
God in duties; but also every good work is more easy to us in respect of use,
and custom: The ways of God are naturalized to Gods people, by degrees, they
become spiritually natural to them. Daily walking with God and keeping the
mind much in a spiritual frame, the soul will be more and more fixed, and
established in that frame. The frequent use of things Natural, moral, or
spiritual, will make them familiar to us, when the same things to others not
accustomed to them, are uncouth, and strange.

Let every one beware what customs they use, especially if begun youth: When
an ill custom is spied out, either in the temper of the spirit, or outward
man, wisdom to oppose it to alter it, as soon as may be, for every Act makes
it more familiar, and habits will steal on, and be daily confirmed.

Professors had best consider, and beware from what Principles Custom be the
strongest cord that draws them. Many times when Custom has got strength, it
resembles both Nature, and Grace.

Seeing Custom is so strong: This should teach all, as to good customs in
youth, as soon as possibly may be; so also to be frequent in good works, and
ways of holiness, that so by degrees habits may be comfirmed, and such things
made familiar to us?

And herein we should consider what things are of greatest concernment to us,
and be mo st frequent therein.

Now Experienced Christians know, That watching over the heart, to keep down
Corruptions, or to suppress them at their first rising, And too keep the heart
in a spiritual, and heavenly frame, and in Communion with God, is a
fundamental thing, and of highest concernement in our Conversation.

Therefore to be frequent in Prayer, Meditation, and other duties (wherein the
spirit of God usually concurrs) for keeping up of the heart with God, to live
in God, to have fellowship and Communion with the father, and with his son
Jesus Christ, is the wisdom of a Christian: the more pure the Fountain is
kept, the more pure all the streams will be: According to the temper of the
spirit of a man, such are those things that proceed from it.

Use, and Custom in these things will make them more easy to us; for besides
the immediate assistance, of the spirit, there is the power of custom
superadded. All the Actings of Grace (as well as of Nature) are mightily
confirmed, and improved by Custom.

The six and fiftieth Observation in Nature.
Fruit Trees having received some hurt (by men, Cattle, or otherwise) when the
husbandman applies himself to cure such mischeifes (by his labors about the
Roots, and Branches) such Trees usually are much advantaged thereby (to What
they were before) and may be said to have gotten by their former hurts.

This shadows out unto us this Proposition.

That afflictions, and whatsoever befalls the people of God; the same works
advantage to them. Proposition shadowed.


Afflictions, and Temptations do not only not destroy us, but contrariwise
(through the wisdom, power, and goodness of God in ordering them,) they work
profit, and advantage to us. Though they are bitter, and tedious for a time,
yet afterward they bring the peaceable fruit of righteousness to them that
are exercised thereby, Heb. 12.11. And again, 2 Cor. 4.17. your light
afflictions which are but for a moment, work for you a far more exceeding,
and eternal weight of glory.

That great, and general promise, Romans 8.28. is full to this purpose, All
things work together for good to them that love God.

Yea, the advantage is usually in this life, as well as hereafter.

Joseph (an eminent fruit-tree) received much wrong, several ways, but when
the husbandman takes him in hand to heal, and cure him, he does not barely do
it, but also advance him, he gets by his Banishment, and imprisonment.

So Daniel was not only delivered from the den of Lions, but it was an
occasion of his advancement, The like of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, Dan.
2.49.

Job a famous fruit-tree, having been broken, and bruised with enemies on every
side, not a Branch free, yet when the husbandman sets upon his cure, he
recovers him with an advantage, he gained by his losses.

David was even overwhelmed with troubles, but observe the issue, Psalm. 71.20.
Thou have showed me great and sore troubles, yet have thou turned, and
refreshed me, etc. Thou have increased my greatness and comforted me on every
side.

Yea, when the people of God declare their Experiments, we usually here them
say, they have gotten by Afflictions, sin the worst of evils, is (by the
wisdom of God ordering it) an occasion of good to them, as humbling them more
than all Afflictions.

And as Afflictions in general work good to the people of God, so the
greatest work the greatest advantages, 2 Cor. 1.5. As the sufferings of Christ
abound in us, so our Consolation also abounds by Christ.

be patient in Tribulation, Romans 12.12. This is a maine ground we should be so,
in regard great and many advantages come by them. He corrects us for our
profit: Heb. 12.10. that we might be pertakers of his holiness.

Therefore let us join with God against our Corruptions, and if so, then we
may count it all joy when we fall into diverse temptations, James 1.2.

hardest things, the worst things that befall his people, to work together for
their good.

The seven and fiftieth Observation in Nature.
THe Husbandman makes use of ordinary, and common Tools, and Instruments,
about his chiefest works in his Garden his knives, laws, spades, and other
instruments, are not of Gold, silver, or costly mettles, neither are they
carved, or framed by any great Art, but they are plain ordinary Instruments,
which he makes use of to Engraft his fruit trees, and to do his chiefest
works about them.

This shadows out unto us, That

God (for the most part) uses mean and ordinary men, and means, Proposition
shadowed.
for effecting of the greatest works in the world.

What greater works do we read of, than the deliverance of Israel out Egypt,
by signs, and wonders, t heir passage through the Red sea, and the barren
wilderesse, over Jordan, and their conquering great nations, and settlement in
Canaan?

Now God did not use some great Monarch, as his Instrument, but Moses, who was
called from keeping sheep, and made Isntrumental in many of these great works,
and having done much, then Joshua (Moses his servant) he must do the rest.

Gedeon, he was but of a poor family and least in his Fathers house, Judge.
6.15. being following a mean Employment, threshing corn, when God called him to
make him general of an Army, to work a great deliverance for his people:
which also was done by weak means; 300 men, Chap. 7.7.

Elisha was taken from the Plow to be a great Prophet, 1 King. 19.19.

David was following the sheep when God called him to be King over his people,
and passed by Eliah31 his brother a more likely person. And also made use of
this small and mean Instrument (by a poor slender means) to destroy Goliath,
a great Giant, and consequently, a great army of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 16.17.

Amos (a heardsman was called to be a Prophet, Chapt. 1.1.

Shepherds were made use of, to reveal the most joyful news that ever was
made known to the world: the birth of our Savior, Luke 2.

The Apostles, and many of the disciples of Christ, were mean persons, and
called from low employments, to follow the greatest work in the world, to preach
the Gospel.

They were not the learned Rabbis, not Eloquent Orators, nor the disputers of
this world, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 1. but men of low Conditions, these
were called to preach the Gospel, for the conversion of souls; Not with the
enticing speech of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit, and of
power, 1 Cor. 2.4. Not with wisdom of words, lest the cross of Christ should
be made of none effect, 1 Cor. 1.17.

God is pleased to effect this, and other his greatest works in the world, by
mean Instruments, and means, that his own power may be the more seen in
them; for if the greatest, and most likely Instruments, in the judgment of men,
were employed in the greatest works, they would take all (or most of) the
honor to themselves, and others would give it them. So God should loose his
honor. Yea, God has destroyed, and will destroy the wisdom of this world, by
those persons and things, that the word accounts foolish, 1 Cor. 1.27. God has
chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and God has
chosen the weak things of the world to confound the mighty things, verse. 28.
And vile things of the world, and things which are despised, has God chosen,
and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are.

As God has done, so he will do still great works in the world, by mean, and
low Instruments and means: he has great, and mighty works to bring to pass
in the Nations, in bringing them into subjection to our Lord Christ. He will
destroy Antichrist, even all that oppose him, he will level the Mountains,
and enlarg the kingdom of his dear son, and set up his Throne, and put the
scepter into his hand to rule the people who have been disobedient, he will
build his holy City Jerusalem, and make it a praise in the Earth.

And now; How will God do these great things? what Instruments will he use?
will he use altogether Golden instruments, carved, and pollished by art, the
most eminent men, and of highest Place and esteem in the world? Surely no: But
God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the things that are
mighty, etc. 1 Cor. 1.27. That is; persons, and things which carnal wise men,
in their Judgment account weak and foolish, although in the Judgment of God
they are otherwise esteemed: for the weakness, and foolishness of God, and of
his people (as men count weakness, and foolishness) are stronger, and wiser,
than the strength, and wisdom of the world, verse. 25.

A worm shall thresh. the mountains, and beat them small as Chafe. Esaias.
41.14.15. Surely, a worm must be in the hand of some mighty one, to be enabled
to do such great things.

Has not God already done great things in our days, even before our eyes, by
Instruments and means (time was) very unlikely, and of small account with the
carnal world? have not weak Instruments, and means been like the Cloud that
Eliah's servant saw rise out of the sea, at first no bigger then a man's hand,
but afterward it covered the whole heavens?

Have not Princes, Lords, and the mightiest men both in Church, and state, yea
whole Nations, have they not been subdued by a handful of men, whom their
adversaries slighted, as Goliath did David, saying in themselves, and one to
another, we shall presently swallow them up? Do not all the Trees of the field
know, that the Lord has brought down the high tree, and exalted the low Tree,
has dried up the green tree, and made the dry tree to flourish? Ezekiel. 17.24.

Many Instances (were it convenient) might be brought of men, and means, whose
beginnings were but weak, and small whereby God has brought to pass great,
and mighty works.

Beware of despising mean Instruments, and weak means which God for the most
part makes use of, for bringing to pass great things. Despise not the day of
small things, Ezekiel. 4.10. for God will build Jerusalem not by might, nor by
power, but by his spirit. Mean and low Instruments shall be stirred up by his
spirit, and shall do his great works in the world, And these Instruments shall
be sure to have the men of the world, with their wisdom, to slight and despise
them, as Sanballat, and Tobia did the Jews, Nehe. 4.1, 2, 3. what do these
feeble Jews, etc? Even that which they build, if a fox go up, he shall even
break down their stone wall. And one reason is (besides the disagreement of
flesh and spirit) because the wisdom, and strength, and glory of the people of
God, is veiled under a low, and mean Condition in the world. And though by
their wisdom they deliver a city, or do some great works, yet Eccl. 9.16. the
poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard.

Upon the same account the wisdom, and works of our Savior were slighted, and
neglected, though he did work as never any did, and spoke as never man spoke,
Matthew. 13.55. Is not this the Carpenters son? verse. 57. They were offended in
him. Even so it is now with his Members.

But who art thou, O man! that replyest against God, in despising, and
quarrelling with mean Instruments? What if God willing to show his power, and
wisdom in weak Instruments, and means, lay aside, or let alone, more eminent
instruments, and more likely means: will thou not give him leave to do what he
will with his own? is thine eye evil, because he is good? Has he not said,
the weak things of the world shall confound the mighty? has he said it, and
shall he not do it yea, he has said it, and done it, and he will do it,
until be perform all his pleasure, and chose that oppose him shall be ashamed.

The eight and fiftieth Observation in Nature.
THough there are many good fruits in an Orchard, yet some are more choice and
special fruits than some others, and accordingly are of greater price, And
esteem among men.

This Similitude shadows out unto us this Proposition: That

The Prayers, Sermons, writings, discourse, and works of some godly men,
Proposition shadowed.
are much more spiritual then of some others.

Gods people are of several standings, and degrees of grace, some have small
measures, some greater measures of grace, some are but babes in Christ, others,
are strong mwen, some fathers, 1 John 2. 12.13 some have their conversations
much in heaven, their spirits are much taken up about spiritual things, they
walk closely with God, and have near, and sweet Communion with God: they are
little conversant with the things below, but are most taken up with God, and
the things of God; But now others (though godly persons) walk at a greater
distance from God, and therefore have less of his Image, they are less
changed than others: As the Apostle says of Bodies, 1 Cor. 15.30. There an
Celestial bodies, and bodies Terrestiall, so it may be said of the Spirits,
even of such as are Godly; some have their minds much in heaven, by keeping
watch over their hearts, and walking in daily communion with God, others though
they have the life of grace in them, yet it is very weak, and feeble, they are
very much carnal, and earthly. Oh! there is much difference between the
spirits, and lives, of some beleivers and some others: some are filled with the
spirit, as Stephen, Act. 6.5. A man full of faith, and of the holy Ghost,
others have but small measures of the spirit, and their faith and other graces,
are but weak, and slender: Mat. 16.8 O ye of little faith.

And now; according to the measure, and degrees of grace, holiness, or Image
of God in believers, are all those things that proceed from them; they are
more or less spiritual. As according to the Form, and Nature that is in the
Material fruittree, such are the fruits, that it bears; And thence it is that
some have better fruits then some others. According to the spring, or
fountain, such are the streams.

Let this stir us up to strive, and labor after higher, and greater degrees
of grace, and to keep it active, by constant, and close walking with God, that
so all that proceeds from us may be accordingly spiritual Hereby will be
unspeakable advantages to us: The more holy, and spiritual any soul is, the
more God delights in it, and communicates himself to it, And of higher account
all the fruits of such a soul are, both with God, and his people that are most
spiritual.

The spiritual man judges all things, he has a spiritual eye, and a
spiritual Palate to taste spiritual fruits, of what relish they are, and
according to their spiritualnesse he prizeth them, if his own spirit be in a
spiritual frame.

The husbandman prizeth a few choice and special apples, or other fruits, more
than a Bushel of ordinary kinds: Accordingly does the Mystical husbandman
account of spiritual fruits, and so should we.

The nine and fiftieth Observation in Nature.
INgrafted fruit trees have three great enemies, one from within, and two from
with-ut; first, the sower sap of the stocks secondly, careless persons,
thirdly, bad aires.

Thi^ shadows out unto us: That

Regenerate persons have three great enemies, one ward, and two outward,
Proposition shadowed.
the flesh, the world, and the devil.

Though there are very many pregnant Similitudes between Material, and
Mystical Fruit Trees, yet in this particular, there is a great dissimilitude.
That is, the stock of the Material fruit-tree is by Nature wild, sower, harsh,
and of a bad sap (a Crab-tree or the like) but the Graft is of a good Nature,
taken from some choice and special tree, which being grafted upon a stock of a
worse kind, although it be predominant and rule in bringing forth good fruits,
according to its own Nature, yet it is something imbased, and made worse by
the badnesse of the stock.

Now it is contrary in the Mystical fruit-tree: There the This is so when a
believer is ingrafted into Christ; but when the word is ingrafted into the
heart, then the Similitude holds in this particulars also, in that (as in the
natural fruit-tree) the stock is bad, and the graft good. The heart of man is
altogether corrupt by nature, but the word, and seed of grace, engrafted, and
sown in the heart, is perfectly good, and precious.
stock, is perfectly good, and precious, and the Grafts corrupt, and naught;
Yet in these maine, and principal respects (as in many others) the Similitude
holds, in that the graft receives all its nourishment from the stock, and in
that there are two Natures both in Material, and Mystical fruit trees (in the
stock, and Graft) and both strive one with the other, as all contraries
(joined) do.

This being premised, I proceed with the Proposition

One of our great enemies is the flesh, or Corruption of Nature, this is our
greatest enemy, and does us most mischeife, Romans 7. 21. I find a law, that
When I would do good, evil is present with me, Gal. 5.17. the flesh lusts
against the spirit, etc.

Secondly, the world by its Commands, threats, persecutions, Counels,
Persuasions, Allurements, and Examples, is laboring to draw us from God, Joh.
15.19. and 1 John 2.16.

Thirdly, the devil like a roaring Lion goes about seeking whom he way
devour, Pet. 98.

Hence we may see the gross mistake of those who think and say, they are free
from Corruption, which Paul complained of, Romans 7.17. Sin awelleth in me, and
verse. 24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
death?

I am persuaded the more spiritual any Christians are, the more clearly they
see their Corruptions, although they are weaker in such than in others. Atoms,
or Moses appear in the Beams of the sun, but not in a dim light.

Seeing we have three great enemies to encounter with, this

The sixtieth Observation in Nature.
GRafts before they are joined to the stock, must endure (ordinarily) many
difficulties, under the hand of the Husbandman, ai cutting off from the Tree,
lying by for a time (it may be several weeks, or months) after that, cutting
to the pith, or heart with a sharp knife, etc. See Observe. 62.


This is another Similitude of the dare of Mystical Fruit Trees, and shadows
out unto us this Proposition.

That the people of God in their Conversion (for the most part) go through many
straights, Proposition shadowed.
and difficulties.

Those whom God intends to Ingraft into Christ, the spirit first convinces
them of sin, he inlightens their understandings to see where (and in what case)
they are by Nature, and of their utter inability to help themselves out of it:
And by degrees cuts them off from all things in themselves; Their Reason,
wisdom, skill, Learning, Gifts, all their duties, and performances, all their
own righteousness, all put together, is but as vanity and emptiness, there is
nothing in any thing of their own to help them, or do them good, so that the
spirit becomes a spirit of bondage to them for a time, letting them see nothing
but terror, and sad sights, A strict Law, or Covenant of works binding them
over to Justice and wrath, eternal death.

So that hereby they are cut to the heart, and are put upon enquiring and
seeking which way to get out of this Case, Acts 2.37. what shall we do?

Some are kept longer under fears and terrors, and are cast lower than others,
they are brought in such a condition, as that they will be glad to receive
Christ upon any Conditions; then the spirit of God opens their eyes to see a
way out of their miseries, then he holds forth Christ unto them in the tenders
of the Gospel, Oh how glad is such a soul to receive Christ upon any terms,
upon any terms in the world! Then the soul longs, and hungers, and thirsts
to be satisfied with Christ, and accounts all things but as dung and dross in
comparison of him. Then the spirit of God leads the soul (as by the hand) to
lay hold upon Christ, to close with him, and by little, and little works a
persuasion in the heart that Christ is his, and that he is Christ's, upon the
Account of that new, precious, sure Covenant of grace; in which are all the
glorious sweet promises of the Gospel included.

Let Professors try themselves whether ever they found the build their house
upon the sands, against which when the Rain, and the winds, and floods beat
(when Temptations arise) it will fall, Mat. 7.27.

Yet it is not with all alike in their coming to Christ, some close with him
upon easier terms than some others; howsoever in all that come to Christ,
there must be a sense, and sight of their misery by sin (as they are under the
Covenant of works) and their great need of Christ to deliver them from it, and
thereupon a desire to rest upon him by faith, for Justification, and acceptance
with God through him. Of this see more at large, Observation in Nature 25.

The sixty one Observation in Nature.
THe Husbandman (upon occasion) praises, and commends his fruit trees, when
they bear many, and good fruits; some for one property, and some for another.

Proposition shadowed.
This shadows out to us, That

When the people of God bring forth good fruits, God himself does praise and
commend them.

The Lord takes pleasure in his people, passing by their infirmities, and
taking notice of what is good in them.

It was a very high commendation that God gave of Abraham, Genesis 18.19. I know
him that he will command his Children, and his household after him, and they
shall keep the way of the Lord.

God took notice of the good fruits that Phynehas brought forth, and commends
him, and rewards him, ( Numb. 15.11.12. etc.) in that he was zealous for his
God. He said of David, That he was a man after his own heart. So of Moses,
Number. 12.7. My servant Moses is faithful in all mine house. And Nathaniel Joh.
1.47. Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile,

Particulers need not be multiplied: one or two scriptures may serve for more,
Romans 2.29. Their praise is not of men, but of God: and 2 Cor. 10.18. Not he
that commends himself, is approved, but he that the Lord commends.

This is much for the comfort, fruits are none of the fairest on the outside in
the eyes of men, they have not bulk, nor shape, nor color to commend them
unto men, yet being well tasted savoury fruits, having the Relish of truth,
sincerity, Love, and right ends, the husbandman likes them well, and will
commend them even before men and Angels, Matthew. 25.24. Well done thou good and
faithful servant, thou have been faithful over a few things etc. enter thou
into the joy of thy. Lord, so again verse. 23.

The sixty two Observation in Nature.
THere is a great change wrought upon fruit trees by Engrafting: Before they
brought forth sower and naughty fruits, See Observe. 43. and 60.
but now pleasant.

This is another Similitude etc. and shadows out unto us this Proposition.

That persons by Regeneration have a great Change wrought in them. Propesition
shadowed.


All by Nature bring forth bitter and naughty fruits, sower Grapes, Grapes of
Gall, their clusters are bitter: And there is noe way possibly to bring them to
bear good fruits, but by engrafting them into Jesus Christ.

Now Regeneration, or implanting into Christ, works a great change throughout
the whole man, upon all the faculties of the soul, and in Conversation. The
understanding which before was dark, and ignorant of spiritual things, then
becomes (by litttle, and little) enlightened and apprehensive of spiritual
things, Heb. 10.32. after ye were illuminated, etc: The will which before was
cross and stubborn, opposing the will of God, becomes (in some measure)
obedient, and inclining to what is of God: and to affect spiritual things, as
spiritual, for themselves.

The affections, which (before implanting into Christ) were cold and dead
toward Christ, and the things of God, then have heat and life in them, they
stir and move after spiritual things.

Unregenerate persons cannot see, nor judge of spiritual things, no more than
of visible outward objects without light, but when the work of grace comes
into the soul, then light shines there, Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were sometimes
darkness, but are now light in the Lord: so 2 Cor. 4.6.

By this Ingrafting there is a Transforming: a change of the Mind, Romans 12.2.
be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind; there is a new heart and a new
spirit, Ezekiel. 36.26.

this Change be wrought, except a man be borne again, he cannot see the
kingdom of God, John 3.3. what ever we do let us give all diligence to make
our calling, and Election sure: Many deceive themselves: O what a sad thing is
it to be mistaken in this great, and most concerning business, whereon depends
our Eternal welfare! There is no salvation out of Christ, and if any man be in
Christ he is a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. There are new Principles, and
dispositions in the soul, contrary to those of Corrupt Nature: consider it
seriously; and give all diligence to make your calling and Election sure.

The sixty third Observation in Nature.
OF one matter or substance in trees are made several distinct substances, Of
the sap in Fruit Trees are framed the Bark, wood, Pith, Leaves, Buds, Blossoms,
stalks, fruits, and seed: all of them distinct, and of diverse Natures, and yet
formed by one and the same spirit, and sap, arising from the root of the tree.

This Similitude shadows out unto us, That

The several Gifts and Graces in believers, are wrought by the same spirit.
Proposition shadowed.


Gifts and Graces in the people of God differ not only in degrees, but also in
Nature, and kind (as they are distinct Gifts and Graces) yet all of them framed
by the spirit of God, for the edifying, and building up of his Church.

Some excel in Gifts, yet are but low in Graces, some others are weak in
Gifts, but strong in Graces: They have a strong says; a fervent love, much
humility, invincible courage, and zeal, and would sooner suffer for Christ,
than some others who excel in Gifts.

These things the Apostle shows at large, 1 Cor. 12.14. Now there are
diversities of Gifts but the same spirit, and there are diversities of
administrations but the same Lord, and diversities of operations, but the same
God who works all in all.

And as in the Material fruit-tree all the several and distinct substances
mutually concur (according to the Law of Nature) to the increase, and making
up of a fair, and comely fruit-tree, not only for the profit of the Husbandman,
but also for the increase, and multiplying of the same species, or kind, so
likewise do all the several Gifts and Graces in believers (wrought by the same
spirit) serve mutually as well for the enlarging and multiplying the branches
of the Vine-tree, the Church of God, as the honor of the Husbandman that
planted it.

This points out whither we should go for Gifts, and Graces, Jam. 1.5.17. they
come down from the father of lights.

lowest gifts and graces in their brethren, because they are the same in kind
with theirs, and from the same spirit.

same spirit dwelling in them, as the strongest Members, yea, the same spirit
that is in the head, who in due time will draw all of them to himself.

The sixty fourth Observation in Nature.
There are very many Profits, and pleasures found in the Husbandmans Garden of
fruit trees both to himself and others: fruit trees bring many Profits to a
man's estate, Profits to his body, to his Mind, to his name; And there are
Pleasures to all the senses: He also invites, and bids his friends welcome into
his Garden, and make them partakers with him of his Profits and pleasures.

This is another Similitude and shadows out unto us this Proposition, That

Proposition shadowed.
There are exceeding many and great Profits, and pleasures found in the Church
of God.

The Church is compared to a Vineyard, wherein are many choice plants, Esaias.
5.1.2. etc. It is called an Orchard, and Garden of Fruit Trees, Cant. 4 12.13.
A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse, thy plants are an Orchard of
Pomegranates with pleasant fruits.

Mr. Bolton.
Now as in Vineyards, Orchards, Gardens, etc. (which are, as a holy man says,
as the stars, and Paradises of the Earth) there are many Profits, and
Pleasures found, so are there likewise in the Church of God.

There are Profits to all purpose, 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is Profitable to all
things, again, Rev. 3.18. I Council thee to buy of me gold, that thou may
be rich. The people of God are made rich by Christ, so that they lay up
Treasures, they have a treasure in their hearts, Matthew. 12.35, and treasures in
heaven, Matthew. 6.20. God is their father, and all his Attributes are laid out
for them; They have an inheritance immortal, and that fades not away,
reserved in heaven for them.

They have infinite treasures, because Christ is theirs, and all his fullness.

And as there are these Profits found in the Garden of fruit trees, the Church
of God: so also there are Pleasures in abundance: all her ways are ways of
pleasantresse, Prove. 3.17. As the husbandman invites his friends into his
fruit-garden, to eat of his fruits, and drink of his wines made of them, and to
partake of all his Pleasures there; so does the Mystical Husbandman invite his
friends to partake of the delights that are in his Garden, Cant. 5.1. I am come
into my garden my sister, my spouse, I have gathered my mirrhe with my spice, I
have eaten my honey comb with my honey, I have drunk my wine, with my milke-Eat
O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly O beloved!

And as we sit in Arbours, and under the shade of trees in Gardens in summer
season, and eat pleasant fruits and drink wines made of them: such delights
also are in this Mystical Garden, Cant. 2.3. As the Appletree among the trees
of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons. I sat down under his shadow
with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my rast. verse. 4. He brought me
into the Banqueting house. And in the banqueting house there are pleasant
wines, to cheer, and refresh the heart, mixed wines Prove. 9.2. wine of the
Pomegranate, Can. 8.2. I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine: of the juice
of my Pomegranate. There is both seasting, and Banqueting in this Garden of
fruit trees, Esaias. 25.6. A feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the Lees,
of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the Lees well refined. There is
variety of all dainties, and free welcome, they need not spare: the Master of
the feast says freely from his heart: Eat O friends, drink, yea drink
abundantly O beloved Cant. 5.

So then we see, there are variety and abundance of Profits, and Pleasures in
the Church of God.

This therefore may be improved for the invitation and encouragement enclosed
Garden to enter into it, those that did never yet feast nor banquet with Christ
there, nor so much as taste of any of his delicates. O let them all take notice
of these things, and consider where they are, and what they are a doing. They
are now in a dry and barren wilderness, where there is a dearth, a scarcity
and want of all profitable, and pleasant things, they are now with the
prodigal feeding swine, and grasping empty husks to satisfy themselves, being
ready to famish for want of food, while they might have bread enough, and the
fatted Calfe to feed upon: if they will come into this pleasant Garden, there
they shall have a feast of fat things, of wine on the lees weel refined.

They shall have all that their hearts can desire, Psalm. 37.5. they shall have
joy, and peace, and full satisfactions, there they shall have Christ, and all
his fullness made theirs: there they shall have God for their Portion, in whom
they shall find infinitely more happiness, and satisfaction, than in all the
Creatures both in heaven and earth. Therefore come into this Garden, now, even
now, while it is called to day, and be partakers of the Profits, and pleasures
of it.

Garden enclosed, and are partakers of all these great privileges, consider,
and admire the abundant love, and kindness of God toward them, and walk in
some measure answerable thereunto. There are some of the friends of Christ with
whom he feasts, and banquets frequently: letting them find the powerful
workings of his spirit, establishing, and refreshing their spirits, in many
discoveries of his love to them, assurance of the pardon of sin, freedom from
Hell, Satan, the condemning power of the Law, or Covenant of workd, etc.
discovering to them, that all the ways and proceedings of his providence
toward them are in Wisdom, Love, and Mercy, to the increase of grace here,
and to fit them for glory hereafter, his spirit witnessing, and sealing unto
them the unchangeable love of God in Christ, in the Covenant of free grace,
whereby they have an habitual, and well grounded assurance of their present
state of happiness, and of their perseverance in it unto the end; And then an
exaltation unto infinite glory, unto all Eternity.

These, and such like, are the dishes and dainties in the Feasts, and Banquets
that are found in this Garden enclosed the Church of God.

The sixty fifth Observation in Nature.
THe husbandman does carefully fence his Orchard, or Garden of fruit trees
round about, he makes a Wall, Pale, hedge, ditch or some fence or other on every
side of his Garden, that no Cattle, nor any other enemies may anoy, or hurt it.

This shadows out unto as: That

The Church of God is encompassed, Proposition shadowed.
and preserved by God himself.

The Prophet Esaias speaking of the Lords Vineyard, Chap. 5.2. says: He fenced
it, or (as it is in the Margent) he made a Wall about it, that is: he himself
is about it, Psalm. 125.2. As the hills are round about Jerusalem, so is the
Lord round about his people, from henceforth even for ever.

All the Attributes of God are for the safty, and preservation of his people,
Ps. 5.12. With favor shall thou compass him, as with a shield: so of his
power, wisdom, faithfulness etc. This was the hedge that Satan saw was about
Job. chap. 1.^0. Have not thou made an hedge about him, and about his house, and
about all that he has on every side? 2 Ki. 6.17. There were Charets, and
horses round about Esha: which were Angels, for the preservation of Elisha: as
the Prophet has it Psalm. 68.17. the Charets of God are 20000 even thousands of
Angels: so the Angels are still ministering spirits to all, the faithful. God
gives them a charge to keep his people in all their ways, Psalm. 91.11.

The Church of God is called a Garden, a garden compassed, and fenced; Cant.
4.12. a Garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse.

This is sound, and unspeakable consolation to all that fear God. The Power,
Wisdom, Love, Mercy, faithfulness of God, even God himself compasses them
round about: they dwell in God, Job. 17.21. and 1 John 4.16. who, or what then
can hurt them, or prevail against them? Soldiers within a strong impregnable
Garrison, need not fear a besieging enemy, if they have all things necessary,
and convenient for them there, so the people of God dwell in God in whom is all
fullness, Esaias. 33.16. He shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be
the munition of Rocks, bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure: see
here the safety of such as fear God: The Tower wherein they are, is so high
that no enemy can possibly scale it, neither can they undermine it, it is built
upon a Rock or Rocks, and they have provision enough within, bread and water,
by which is understood all the fullness of God, given out both in temporals and
spirituals: so that the Gates of hell (all the powers of men, and devils
combining together against them) shall not prevail over them: nay their
enemies shall be destroyed in their attempts: for God is a Wall of fire round
about his people, Zeck. 2.5. and a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. all the enemies
of God, and of his people shall be consumed by it.

So then; we seethe safety and happiness of all the trees of Gods enclosed
Garden, they are implanted into Christ, they are enclosed and encompassed by
God himself, they shall be preserved from all evil, and shall want no manner
of thing that is good.

All the Attributes of God, even God himself, is a Brazen Wall, a Wall of
fire, compassing them round about; so that nothing shall hurt them. And
although their enemies (sometimes) may kill them, yet they cannot hurt them:
Though (possibly) they may loose their heads, yet they shall not loose an hair
of their head, Luk 21.16, 17, 18. Their loss for Christ is gain.

The sixty sixth Observation in Nature.
WHen the husbandman dresseth up his Orchard or Garden, and removes such trees,
and plants as are barren, and unfruitful, or that bear naughty fruits, and
plants others in their rooms, that are choice and special trees, and gathers
out the stones, weeds, rubbish, and whatsoever is offensive, and bestows much
time, cost and labor, in preparing and ordering all things in his Garden for
his profit, and delight, men may judge (by all these things) that he intends to
come settle himself, Proposition shadowed.
and dwell there.

This shadows out unto us, That

When God does purg a Nation, or place from persons, and things that are
offensive to him, and brings in his own people, and worship in stead thereof,
this is an evident taken that God intends to dwell there.

God is infinite, and is not included in one place more than another; The
Heaven of heavens cannot contain him, 2 Chro. 6.18. yet he is said to dwell in
some places rather than in others, by special manifestations of his love and
goodness there, more than in other places: When God purposed to make the Land
of Canaan his dwelling place, he cast out the inhabitants of the Land, and
planted his own people, and his worship there: as we see at large in the
History. This Moses foretold. Exodus 15.17. Thou shall bring them in, and plant
them, in the mountain of thine inheritance, in the place O Lord which thou
have made for thee to dwell in: and Exodus: 29.45. I will dwell amongst the
children of Issrael, and will be their God.

When God had Mercy on Israel (after a long time of trouble, and desolation)
and comes to dwell among them again, then he brings down, and casts out their
enemies, and oppressors, and gives his own people authority, and power over
them, as we see Esaias. 14.2. They shall take them Captives whose Captives they
were, and they shall rule over their oppressors. It is God that puts down
one, and sets up another, Psalm. 75.7. I the Lord have brought down the high
tree, and exalted the low tree, have dried up the green tree, and made the dry
tree to flourish, I the Lord have spoken it, and have done it, Ezekiel. 17.20.
when God roots up, or cuts down high, green, flourishing trees, but barren of
good fruits, and plants choice trees in their stead, though low, and despised
in the eyes of the world, this is, that he may dwell among them and walk among
them 2 Cor. 6.16. he sets his Tabernacle there, Levit. 23.12. and takes
pleasure in them, Ps. 149 4. for the Lord has chosen Zion, he has desired it
for his habitation: and says, This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for
I have a delight therein, Ps. 132.13, 14.

This being so, that when God begins to reform a Nation, or place, its a
sign he intends to dwell there, this is a ground of great consolation to the
people of God in England, and other parts, where God has begun his great work
of Reformation (notwithstanding many things are yet amiss) but especially to
some particular places, Universities and some other places.
where more remarkable evidences of his presence are manifest in removing
fruitless, and unprofitable Trees, and planting in their stead many fruitful
trees, not only in a private capacity, but also in a Public, many godly
Magistrates, for the execution of Justice, and taking part with those that fear
God, in stead of curbing, and discouraging of them in well doing.

And also in respect of many faithful ministers of the Gospel, who preach
Jesus Christ, and declare the glorious mysteries of the Gospel in stead of
blockish ignorance, or else doubing with untempered mortar: Though all are not
thus through the Nation, yet it may be so said of many more now than in former
times.

Are not such as are put in Authority, and Power in the Nation, of the best
men? is not the Magistracy of the Land of choice Persons, (such as are most fit
and capable) of the godly party? at least, it is the endeavor of those in
supreme power, that it may be so. And as for the Ministry of the Nation, though
it have been (in the general) very corrupt, and is so st ll in many place;
yet has there not been in this a great reformation of late years, which is
still going on among us?

And as the Magistracy, and Ministry of the Land, are much changed, and
reformed, so also are By whom God has wrought of late years, even wonders in
these three Nations; Not to be paraleld in any Histories of former ages,
unless by the Wars of Canaan. God has eminently, and most remarkably appeared
for us, and that in a course and scries of his providence, not only in the
sight of his people, but even the enemies themselves being Judges.
Military men; heretofore in corrupt times, the soldiery were of the worst of
men, the most notorious, desperately wicked men under the sun: whereas now they
are of the best: men fearing God, very many of them: not only Commanders, and
Officers, but also common soldiers have been, and are men of says, and
prayer, as well as courage: such as the good soldier the Centurion was,
mentioned Matt 8.5. whom Christ himself commended: and as Cornelius, another
Centurion of a band, of whom it is said, that he was a devout man, and one that
feared God with all his house, Act. 10.2.

And as the Magistracy, Ministry, and Soldiery are very much reformed, and
good men amongst them all are set up, and encouraged, and evil men removed,
and discouraged; so also persons fearing God of all rank^, and conditions are
countenanced by the Authority of the Nation: having liberty, and freedom in
the work of the Lord, whereby the Gospel, and the kingdom of Christ, is
enlarged, notwithstanding all opposition, or any thing that is yet amiss among
us.

Are not all these things evidences of Gods presence among us, that he is a
coming nearer to us, that the husbandman intends to dwell, and delight himself
in his Garden, where he is thus at work so remarkably? Rejoice therefore, and
let all the Trees of the field clap their hands: for in stead of the Thorn is
come up the firetree, and in stead of the Brier is come up the Myrtle tree,
Esaias. 55.12.13. Solomon says: When the righteous are in Authority the people
rejoice, Prove. 29.2. Certainly such as fear God do so. And this by the way)
may serve for a trial, and touchstone of men's spiritual estates; whether they
are in the flesh, or in the spirit.

But it may be Objected: Do we not see rather signs of Gods departure from us,
than of his coming nearer to us? for do we not see Errors, Heresies, and
Blasphemies abound among us, divisions and contentions in every place?

It is answered: Truths of the Gospel more fully, and generally manifested and
known, than they have been formerly? the Kingdom of Christ is enlarged, and
grows daily. There are more Professors of Religion in these days, than in
former times; Not only Professors in Hypocrisy, but also in truth, and
sincerity. And as Errors, and Heresies are more awakened, so also are the
Truths of God more cleared; and its certain, Truth will at length prevail,
and silence Error: Truth will suppress Errors, and devour them, as Aarons Rod
did the Rods of the Magicians of Egypt, Exo. 7.12.

And as for divisions and contentions among us, let none think Nation, or City,
or Family, where he was not before, there will certainly be divisions; Matthew.
10.34.35. Think not that I am come to send peace on the earth: I came not to
send peace but a sword. For I am come to set a man at variance against his
father, and the daughter against her Mother, and the daughter in law against
her mother in law etc. Flesh, and spirit, even in, and amongst the people of
God, will oppose each other; there will be divisions amongst God own people
upon this account (they seeing but in part, and with different degrees of
light) as well as between them, and carnal persons. Where the spirit of God in
any of his people strikes at the Corruptions of others, in any respect; where
their Names, interests, and concernments are touched, this occasions divisions,
and contentions: All which, God will by his wisdom, power, and goodness, over
rule, and order for the good of his people, making them to sift, and try things
more thoroughly, that so thereby both truth, and Error, may be more manifest.

Also many things which some godly men have heretofore caled Errors, they
afterward (upon examination, and a more full discovery of them) embraced for
Truths, and many things which good men in former ages never saw, not
understood, are now made manifest, and evident to be the Truths of God: the
Spirit of God in these Gospel days: being (according to his promise) powered
out more abundantly, light is more clear than heretofore, and consequently
things hid in darkness, mysteries of the Gospel, are more discovered: Though
the day, as yet, as to many things, is not clear, nor dark but it shall come
to pass that at evening it shall be light, Zech. 14.6, 7. And the light of the
Moon shall be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be
seven fold, Esaias. 30.26.

And further; In answer to the former Objection: Though some among us have
fears and doubts of Gods departure from us, yet if they do but consider all
things well (weighing one thing against another, and look upon them with a
spiritual eye, not dimmed with selfish, worldly interests, they shall then see
many more, and more evident tokens of Gods drawing nearer to us in these
Nations, and of his abiding with us, than of his departing from us: which ought
to be observed, and thankfully acknowledged by all, as it is by many of his
choicest servants. For certainly, were there the contrary to what we see, and
have of late years seen, among us, then we should, and we might indeed
account them fatal signs of Gods departing from us: should we see wicked men
govern, and have the supreme power in those Nations; to be chosen, and
Commissionated in all the great affairs, and concernments among the peoples
should we see the people of God discountenanced, curbed and restrained in every
place, and the wicked encouraged and upheld, should we see the choicest
ministers of the Gospel, and the most eminent holy men of all ranks,
imprisoned and persecuted by all the powers of the Nation, as they have been
heretofore; should we see and behold all the dispensations of God toward us,
to be a weakening the hands of his people, and giving strength, and rule into
the hands of evil men, then indeed we might have cause to fear, that God had
surely a great controversy with us, and a departing from us; but now while we
behold the contrary to all these things, why may we not conclude, and expect
the contrary?

We should make such a conclusion as Manoahs wife did, when she had seen, and
observed many evidences of Gods favor toward her her husband, and her self
(when he, who should have taught her, had groundless fears, Judges 13.23. If
the Lord would have destroyed us, he would not have done all these things for
us.

So; though we are indeed a sinful people, worthy to be destroyed, yet God
having given us so many, so great, and so wonderful evidences of his grace,
and favor, and of his coming to dwell among us, we ought to observe them, and
thankfully to acknowledge them, with a full confidence that God will abide with
us, and no more depart from us.

There is a time, and that at hand, when the Church of God shall be so free
from the power of Antichrist, as never to be any more subject to him: God will
make his Church an eternal excellency, and the days of her mourning shall be
ended. Esaias 60.15, 20. and Esaias 62 4. According to the Prophesy in Dan. 7.22.
The time came that the Saints possessed the Kingdom: and Rev. 5.10. We shall
reign on the earth. God has begun to fulfill this word, which shall go on to
the ends of the earth: his Name is engaged in it, and he will do great things
for his people, though they are unworthy, yet for his own great Names sake. The
two Witnesses being now arising, as it is the Judgment of many precious Saints
that they are, the Church will be more, and more glorious, notwithstanding all
opposition.

Seeing it is a sign that God is coming nearer to us, and that he will dwell
among us, when he supplants carnal men, and carnal things, and sets his own
people, and worship in their stead, then in the rooms of others, in highest
places for the government of the Nations, in the Universities, and all the Land
over, these persons have a special Obligation upon them to bring forth better
fruits than their Predecessors upon several accounts; first, that the
Husbandman, who planted them; may have the honor of his work. Secondly, for
their own sakes, and those with whom they lives for in case they bring forth as
bad fruits, as those trees in whose room they grow, it will provoke God
against them; but when God likes of, and delights in the fruits of his people,
he will then continue his presence with them, which is their life, happiness,
and glory; he will then delight to walk in his garden, and eat his pleasant
fruits, Cant. 4.16. and say, this is my resting place, here will I dwell for I
have a delight therein, Psalm. 132.13.14.

The sixty seventh Observation in Nature.
THe ground of some Orchards is not level, but shelving or declining; so that
some part of the ground is higher than the rest, and accordingly some of the
trees grow upon higher ground than some others: Now tht husbandman values not
the fruit trees (at all, the more for thar situation, he esteems not those on
the highest ground, more than those on the lowest ground, but he priseth his
Trees according to their fruits: His care for his trees on the lowest ground is
as much (and sometimes more) as for those on the higher ground.

Proposition shadowed.
This shadows out unto us, That

The free love and care of God is as much toward his people in the meanest,
outward condition, as toward those who are most eminent in the world.

The great Mystical husbandman has a large Orchard, he plants his Fruit Trees
where he pleases over all the parts of the world; and some of them are planted
on high, and some on low grounds, which he valueth not according to their
Eminency, or meanness (that with him is not considerable) but according to the
truth, and sincerity of their hearts, according to their fruits: Poor Lazarus,
and rich Abraham, are both cared for, and beloved of God, one as well as the
other: The poor widow Mark. 12.42. (that was able to make but one farthing in
all the the world) she, and her offering was as well accounted of as King
David's, Solomon, or others of highest rank; he respects not persons 2 Cor.
19.7. and again Romans 2.11. There is no respect of persons with God: He will
take the servants part (in any just cause) as soon as the Masters, Ephe. 6.9.
He that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong that he has done, and there is
no respect of Persons, Col.2 3.25. 1 Pet. 1.17.

God has the same account of the poor, as of the Rich; of the Bond, of the
free, if Believers, Romans 10.12. There is no difference between the Jew, and the
Greek, for the same Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him: So
again, Romans 3.22. He accepts not the persons of Princes, nor regards the
Rich more than the Poor, Job. 34.19.

The serious consideration of this may be a good means to keep the spirits of
those humble, who are of the highest rank Believers; and that they despise not,
nor neglect their brethren in a lower rank: Though they are planted on the
higher ground, in the Garden of God in any place of power, or authority over
others (and upon that account honor, reverence, and subjection (as God
requires) is due unto them from their brethren, and Fellow Members of an
inferior rank) yet the the same bears no weight in the account of God: All
the Nations of the Earth, are but as the drop of a bucket, or as the small dust
of the Balance, in the eye of God, Esaias 40.15. How small then are a few men of
one Nation, though they may be as mighty hills and Mountains in eminency, in
the sight of men?

All men naturally have a Principle of pride in them, but none are in so much
danger of it, as those persons (though godly) who are set above others, in
Church, or Commonwealth: and therefore they have the more need to be minded
of it, that they may be aware of that most prevailing Corruption, which puts
the Creatures at a distance from God, Paul himself had need of something to
suppress it, lest he should be exalted above measure, 2 Cor. 12.7.

Hence we may gather; That believers of the lowest rank in outward respects,
have as great, and as many Privileges in all Church Assemblies as those of the
highest rank; whether it be to speak, or hear, or partake of any Ordinance
for their profit, and edification: so that due respect toward superiors, be
observed.

Thirdly: Let all believers of the lowest rank walk chearefully, sleighting,
or neglects from superiors. Thou that are now under, and below many of thy
brethren for a moment, may be above them hereafter to all Eternity.

The eightieth Observation in Nature.
THose Fruit Trees which have the influence of the sun continually, they
flourish with leaves, blossoms, and fruits continually, as it is in the East,
Sr Wa: Rawley. 1 Book. 1. part. Chapter 3.. 9. 10. page 64. 68. Proposition
shadowed.
and West Indies: there the sun is all the year long, giving forth his heat,
and warmth, and never going a far off (so as to make a winter) as in these
Northern parts of the world, so that fruits-trees there flourish with leaves
and blossoms, green, and ripe fruits all the year long.

This is another Similitude of the state of Spiritual Fruit Trees, and
shadows out unto us, That

Believers who daily walk with God, having the light of his countenance, and
constant communion with him, such are abundantly fruit full.

Although every believer is ingrafted into Christ, and draws sap and virtue
from him, and has the countenance of God toward him, and the influences of
the spirit to cause fruit-fulnesse, yet not all alike: there is great
difference in the degrees of Gods manifesting, and giving out of himself to
his people. God is a sun to his people, and he shines upon some but seldom,
and clouds himself again and withdrawes for a time, and then a winter comes
upon that soul. But he is pleased to shine upon some others more constantly,
and they have an habitual enjoyment of God, after some sad and dark times of
the spirit of bondage, and desertion in the former part of their lives, when
they have again laid hold on their beloved, they will not let him go; and he
is as willing to stay with them, so that they have a constant enjoyment of God,
walking daily in communion with him, I mean, for the maine course of their
life, though the spirit be not always in a like frame, and constant temper
every hour of he day, which none can expect whilst we are in the flesh: Yet
as to the generality of their lives, the sun is near, and discovers himself
clearly and apparently to the soul. The workings of the spirit of God, are
manifest, evident and clear to the soul: the soul acts upon God, and God
upon the soul, there are reciprocal acts upon each other daily, frequently.
The spirit of God witnesses, and seals to the soul the sure and
unchangeable love of God in Christ, and the soul sets to its seal also, that
God is true, gracious, precious, and says to God (with a lively faith) thou
art he whom my soul loves, thou art my portion, my Treasure, my God, and
Savior, my all through Christ. God acts upon the soul, and says, thou art
mine, I have chosen thee, and will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; and the
soul acts upon God again, and says, thou art mine, thou have made me to
choose thee, and I will love thee, and serve thee, and praise thee, and joy in
thee for ever. Thus with infinite Acts of this Nature is this Communion
continued (in daily walking with God) whereby such souls are so revived,
filled and satisfied, that they are abundantly fruitful, and bring forth
fruits continually.

These trees are continually green and flourishing with leaves, blossoms and
fruits: such a one (as the Prophet says, Jer. 17.8.) He shall be as a tree
planted by the waters, and that spreads out her Roots by the River, and
shall not see when heat comes, but her leaf shall be green, and shall not be
careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yiedling fruit. And
Psalm. 1.3. He is as a tree planted by the rivers of waters, his Leaf shall not
wither, etc. The righteous shall flourish like a Palm tree, the most beautiful
and excellent of all trees, and which is continually green and fruitful,
because it grows in those parts where the sun is continually near it.

Now by the Rivers, waters, sun, dewes, rimes, etc. we are to understand the
manifestations of God, the influences of his spirit, Hos. 14.5. I will be as
the dew to Israel; and then it follows, he shall grow as the Lilly, and cast
forth his roots as Lebanon, verse. 6. his branches shall spread, and his beauty
shall be as the Olive tree: I will be dew, and rain and sunshine and then they
shall be as the Olive tree, or as the Palm tree, which are allwaies green, and
fruitful.

So that such Christians as live under the dewes, and droppings of heaven, and
have the sun still shining upon them in their daily walk, and Communion with
God, they are abundantly fruitful. This our Savior himself tells us, Joh.
15.5. He that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit.
This abiding in Christ, is to abide, and continue in Communion with him, by
daily acting all the graces: such as walk so bring forth much fruit.

keep close to God, and daily to walk with him, to lay out our selves
diligently by Prayer, Meditation, public Ordinances, viewing over all
experiences, and former manifestations of the love of God in Christ toward us,
etc. to gain, and keep the light of Gods countenance, and clear evidences of
his love, the lively, and constant, or frequent actings of his spirit in us;
that by this sunshine, dew, and rain of heaven, his fruit trees may be
continually green, and flourishing, with blossoms, and fruits. This and no
other, is the way to be abundantly fruitful, whereby we may bring much glory
to God and gain infinite advantages to our selves for when the soul by these
things is put into an heavenly, and spiritual frame and temper, then the
pleasant fruits flow forth abundantly: when the North and South winds of the
spirit awake and blow upon the Garden, then the spices thereof flow forth,
Cant. 4.16.

The sixty ninth Observation in Nature.
THe Husbandman does not only Graft his fruit trees, but also Orders them from
year to year, many other ways, by Pruning off all irregular and fruitless
branches, weeding, watering, baring the roots, sometimes laying good soyles to
them, and sometimes abates of their too full and fat nourishment, doing diverse
other things for the good of the trees in order to fruit-bearing.

Proposition shadowed.
This shadows out unto us, That

God does not only engraft his people into Christ, but orders them in all other
respects also, to make them abundantly fruit full.

Material fruit trees (through the fatness of soil) do frequently shoot
forth strong and big branches, called proud shoots, and bring forth great,
fair, broad leaves: but such trees bring forth but few and small fruits. In
such a case the Husbandman deprives them of some part of their fat feeding, and
put unto their roots some sand or barren earth in sted, and cuts off the proud
shoots.

So it is with the people of God: although they are Ingrafted, yet unless the
husbandman look to them they will often (through prosperity and abundance)
shoot forth many branches of pride, lofty and high Imaginations, and
conceits, and content themselves with bringing forth fair, broad Leaves of
shows and professions, Ceremonies, forms, and something that's outward, but
bring forth (all the while) small, and few fruits: So that because this too
full feeding with the fine flower, honey, and Oil of prosperity causes them to
abate of their fruit-fulnesse, Ezekiel. 16.13.
therefore the husbandman will deprive them of some part of it: as we see, Eze.
16.27. I have diminished thine ordinary food; and in sted thereof makes them
feed upon the bread of adversity and water of affliction: Ezekiel. 30.20. whereby
they become more fruitful.

The husbandman also prunes his fruit trees: John 15.2. He purges them, that
they may bring forth more fruit.

Thereby they are full of mercy, and good fruits, Iam. 3.17. all his
corrections (through his wise, and gracious ordering) bring forth the peaceable
fruit of righteousness, Heb. 12.11.

When the corrupt stock of Nature springs forth, he cuts them off, Ezekiel. 27.8.
In measure when it shoots forth, thou will debate with it. His rough wind,
verse. 8. blows upon them, and this is his end, verse. 6. By this shall the
Iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his sin.

The husbandman also (in case of inconveniences by too full feeding) strikes
into the body (or Master root) of the tree, Theoph. Lib. de causis Plant^ cap.
18, 19.
a Pin of Iron, or hard wood, that the superfluous sap may run out: So Paul was
ordered, 2 Cor. 12.7. There was given him a thorn in the flesh, lest he should
be exalted above measure. See also Ezekiel. 28.24. He calls for the Northwind of
afflictions, as well as the southwind of consolations, to make fruits abound,
Cant, 4.16.

The people of God by Experience find these things profitable.

This should make us not only patient under all afflictions, and orderings of
God, but also to be thankful for them: pruneth and corrects us for our
profit, to be partakers of his holiness, to bring forth much fruit to his
glory, Heb. 12.10. Joh. 15.8.

The seventieth Observation in Nature.
Natural Fruit Trees grow every year stronger, and stronger; every year the
Branches put forth, and enlarge themselves more or less, they spread wider,
and higher, and stronger until their attain their natural bigness, and are
thereby more able to resist strong winds, and more out of the reach of Cattle,
and common enemies.

This is another Similitude of the state of spiritual fruit trees, and
shadows out unto us this Proposition, That

The graces of believers increase daily in strength, whereby they are more and
more able to resist spiritual enemies. Proposition shadowed.


After believers are ingrafted into Christ their Root and stock, they from
thence forward receive sap, and life, and power from him, whereby they are
acted in all duties, whereby they increase, and get strength from day to day,
Ps. 84.7. they go from strength to strength: being ingrafted into Christ, we
are established, strengthened, and built up in him, Col. 2.7. And Ephesians. 4.15. We
grow up in him in all things which is the head, even Christ, verse. 16. from
whom the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted, by that which every
joint supplyeth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every
part, makes increase of the body unto the edifying of it self in love.

Paul and Apollos were Isntrumental in Planting and watering, God gave the
increase, 1 Cor. 3.6.7. The whole body of Christ increases with the increase
of God, Col. 2.19.

To him that has shall be given, and he shall have abundance, Mat. 25.29. His
brook shall become a River, and his River shall become a sea. As Material
fruit trees shoot upwards, and extend their branches yearly, so do the
Mystical: if there be but a careful use of means, Phil 3.13. This one thing
I do, forgetting things that are behind, and reaching forth unto those things
that are before, I press toward the mark etc. Graces being at first but as a
grain of mustard seed they increase unto large branches, Matthew. 13.31.

Every Act both in Nature and grace, does strengthen the habit: and according
to the frequency and vigor in acting, so the habit improves; if the Acts of
grace be but seldom, and but weak, the Habits, and Principles grow, but
slowly: And when Acts cease for a time (as in some Temptations) yet the habits,
seeds, and Principles lie secret, and sure in the soul, and will (as heat pent
up, and smoothered for a time) break forth afterward more strongly, and will
enable the soul to trample upon all enemies.

The use of this may be to discover who are really in Christ.

As there is an increase in all the Members, and parts of Children (if in
health) so in the spiritual man. Ephesians. 4.16. according to the effectual
working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the body: As it is
thus of the Church: so also of every particular Member of it.

Now this increase is not in all alike, nor at all times to be perceived in any
one person, but differs according to Talents of grace at first received, and
also according to the operations of the spirit, and according to the means,
and helps that Christians have, and use in the course of their lives.

Therefore labor to discern an increase.

And lest some weak souls should stumble at this, and question the truth of
all, because they discern not an increase of grace in themselves, but rather a
decay, because they find not now such vehement workings of affection, nor such
enlargednesse of heart as sometimes heretofore: Let such consider, that God
sometimes withdrawes, that they may be sensible of the different states,
tempers, and frames of their spirits, which may be made use of as a special
evidence of spiritual life.

Secondly: strength of grace consists not in the enlargednesse of the
affections in duties (which is usually most in young Christians) but in a
solid, well grounded faith, knowledge, experience, and clear apprehensions of
the love of God in Christ, these (more or less, if we are diligent in the use
of means) grow to the last; though there are (in some Christians) some
interruptions, through Trials and temptations, which yet God does order for
their advantage.

The seventy first Observation in Nature.
SOme fruit trees that are but weak, crooked, and uncomly Trees, that have
little beauty, in respect of shape, and color, etc. they are (notwithstanding)
more profitable, and bring forth more pleasant and more useful fruits, than
many fair, tall, and beautiful trees. To instance in the Vine, Ficus and uvae
inter fructus autumnales principatum obtinent. Proposition shadowed.
and the fig tree; what trees are so low, crooked, weak, of so deadish
colored outsides, as they, which yet yield the most refreshing, pleasant
nourishment? Many high, strong, beautiful trees are far short of them in
worth, and goodness.

This Observation shadows out unto us, That

Many persons of a low rank, and but of despised parts, do yet bring forth
more profitable fruits, than many others eminent in gifts, and outward
respects.

Many of the Saints (in their measure and proportion) are as their Lord and
Savior, of whom it is said, he has no form nor comeliness, there is no
beauty that we should desire him: he is despised, and rejected of men etc.
Esaias. 53.2.3. and yet who brought forth such fruits as he? who (besides that
great, and maine work for which he was sent) went daily about doing good, and
did always that which was pleasing to his father, Joh. 8.29. As he was
despised, and rejected of men, for the holiness and spirituallnesse of his
doctrine, and life, as well as for his meanness in the world; even so are many
of his people at this day: And so it was (too) in former times; Were not the
Apostles and disciples of Christ, of a low rank in the world, taken from mean
employments, whose natural parts had little improvement by humane Learning,
which caused the proud Pharisees to despise, and reject both them and their
doctrine, and yet who brought forth the best fruits, they, or the Pharisees?

That great fruit-tree (mentioned Luke 18.11.) which was grown (in his own
conceit, and its like in others too) as high as heaven, and spread large, yet
his fruits were not accepted; as the fruits of the poor, low, despised shrub,
the Publican, who came far short of the Pharases in outward respects.

That of the Apostle 1 Cor. 1.27, etc. is a sufficient proof for this point.
The foolish things, the weak things, the base things, the despised thing: The
persons and things, their Gifts and endowments, their Judgments and actings
that the worldly, and carnal wise men, and some spiritual men very carnal in
their Judgments and ways, account foolish, weak base, and altogether despise,
and trample on, these, even these, are of more esteem with God, and are more
profitable in his Church, than many persons and things eminent in the world,
and of highest esteem among men.

Learn then to judge, and esteem of persons and things, Trees, and fruits as
God does: judge righteous Judgment; look upon things with a spiritual eye, and
taste them with a spiritual Palate: God expects now that his people should be
more spiritual than in former times, that they should come off more from
Externals, whereon former ages have so much stood Gospel worship, and
conversation, is more in the spirit, than many (even of the godly) are yet
convinced of; The plain simplicity of the Gospel, in the delivery, and
manifestation of it to others, is despised: Persons who preach and publish the
Gospel (and cannot but speak the things they have heard and seen) are
neglected, despised, and cried down, Acts 4.20.
unless they come adorned with eminent Gifts, Humane learning, and other
external qualifications, which the fleshly wisdom of men eyes more than the
spiritual, savory, well tasted fruits they bring forth, to the refreshing, and
feeding the souls of men to eternal life. One of these poor, low, despised,
spiritual trees (without form, or comeliness in a carnal eye) brings forth
more good and profitable fruits, than an hundred of some of those who come with
external Ornaments of Titles degrees, tongues, excellency of speech and Its
true indeed; humane learning, and eminent parts are excellent, and of singular
use in the Church of God, if sanctified, if in regenerate persons (especially
in such who have also great measures of grace, to make all subservient
thereunto) othewise all is used, and turned for self, and sinister ends and
purposes, and against Christ.
Humane wisdom, which the Apostle (who had more Learning than they) cared not
for in his Ministry, 1 Co. 2.1, 4. My speech and my preaching was not with the
enticing words of man's wisdom, but in the demonstration of the spirit, and of
power.

Plain experimental discourses of spiritual, holy men, but of ordinary
gifts, about Christ, and his kingdom, are for the most part, more profitable
(amongst the vulgar sort of people) than the discourses of learned men, about
the same thing: One reason (besides the special presence of the spirit) may
be, because the Matter, Method, and expressions of ordinary gifted persons, are
all suited, and fitted to Common capacities, they express themselves in words
easy to be understood: as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 14.9. They speak to men
(as the Apostles in their time) in their own Language: therefore things have
the more easy, and ready entrance, and admission into their spirit.

Whereas persons of high seize in Gifts (most commonly) speak (as the
Apostle says) into the air, in an unknown Tongue, as to vulgar
understandings, when (perhaps) they think they speak plainly. 1 Cor. 14.9.


Now besides what has been said, continual experience proves these things
abundantly. Therefore let not Moral Gifts, and attainements be over valued,
while the spirit of Christ, and his graces are neglected.

The seventie second Observation in Nature.
THe Husbandman expects fruits from all his Fruit Trees, he will not approve of
any one barren-tree in his Orchard: Though he looks not that all should bear
alike, yet he will not endure any fruit trees that are not fruit-full, or some
way or other profitable to him.

Hereby we are taught: That

God will not allow an idle person; but expects every one should be profitable
in his place. Proposition shadowed.


The world is Gods great family, and he will have no one idle, but every one
(that is able to labor) some way, or other employed in that which is good; And
therefore he bestows upon every one a Talent at least, upon some two, upon
some more: some Gift, or Gifts of body, or mind, or both, which they ought to
employ, and improve for the honor of their Lord and Master, and good of their
brethren. A day of account is coming and hard by, when there will be a sad
reckoning for all idle persons, Matthew. 25.26. thou wicked and slothful
servant; cast ye the unprofitable servant into utter darkness, verse. 30. No
one is exempted from a particular calling, or labor, 1 Cor. 7.20. Let every
man (says he) abide in the same calling wherein he was called.

Paul could not abide an idle person, he would not allow a man meat unless he
would work; if able, 2 These. 3.10. Thus we commanded you, That if any would
not work, neither should he eat: we must work either with the hand, August.
de Op. Mona. Lib 2.
or with the mind: Laborant qui mente operantur. We command you (says the
Apostle) work with your own hand, 1 These. 4.11. And again, Ephesians. 4.28.
Working with his hands the things that is good, that he may have something to
give to him that needs.

The spirit gives Gifts diversely, but the end is to profit withal, 2 Cor. 12.7.

Such as have Gifts, and Talents, and use them not, are like Idols who have
eyes, and see not, ears, and hear not, hands, and work not, feet, and walk
not, Psalm. 150.5.6.7.

Hence we see the shame, and danger of many persons in the world: richer, and
greater sort; who having several Gifts, and Talents bestowed on them, are
(notwithstanding) idle and unprofitable, letting their parts rust, and lie hid
in a napkin: Though they have rich Revenues to live upon, yet they ought to
labor for God, his Church, and the Commonwealth: Nemo sibi natus. Every man
is a Member of the body Politic, and ought to do something for the good of
the whole body: as the Members in the Natural body.

Here what Directions for walking with God. page 49.
Mr Boulton says of such as are unprofitable in Church, and Common wealth: he
is (says he) a cursed drone, a child of idleness, and sloth, the very
tennis-ball of Temptation, most unworthie of the blessings, and benefits of
humane society, who does not one way or other cooperate, and contribute to the
Common good with his best endeavors in some honest particular calling.

The best men in all ages have ever set themselves to some good Employments,
God would have none idle, no not Adam (even in his state of innocence) he had
an Employment assigned him, being put into the Garden of Eden to dress it, and
to keep it, Genesis 2.15.

So then: here is an Employment (among others) fit for the best men; the work of
the first man, even in his perfect state, and that appointed by God himself,
as befitting such a condition: Philosophers, Kings, Emperors, in former ages,
delighted in the work of an Orchard, as was formerly showed at large.

Men may honor God, greatly profit themselves, the Church, and Commonwealth
by their studies and labors in a Garden of Fruit Trees.

The seventie third Observation in Nature.
SOme Fruit Trees live longer than others, some die while they are young,
others when they are large trees, at their full growth; perhaps by diseases, or
excessive heat and dryness at their roots, or are violently cut down for
their barrenness or bad fruits: others live till they be grown very old, and
die by degrees with very age, and as these are removed the husbandman plants
others in their rooms.

This shadows out unto us the state of Mystical fruit trees, in this
Proposition: That

Proposition shadowed.
The life of man is very uncertain: some die in Childhood, others in youth,
others in old age, and in the room of these others arise.

Seeds of decay are sown in the best soil of man's body, which spring, and
grow, and bring forth (sooner, or later) dissolution. The Causes of decay and
death both in natural, and spiritual fruit trees are often alike. The
husbandman observing the Canker, worms, or other diseases to seize upon some
of his bad trees which he sets little by, he neglects them, and says, if they
die, let them die, I Will set better in their rooms. So says the Mystical
Husbandman of his fruit trees (because of their barrenness, or bad fruits)
when he sees diseases, or miseries seize upon them; I will will not feed you,
that that dies, let it die, and that that is to be cut off, let it be cut off:
Ezekiel. 11.5. he has not that care of them, as he has of his fruitful trees,
they are not within his special protection, John 17.9. I pray not for the
world.

Again, some he cuts down in their full strength, as was prophesied against
Elies house, 1 Samuel 2.33. All the increase of thine house shall die in the
flower of their age: So Ier. 15.8. a spoyler at noone day, her sun is gone
down while it was yet day: as to the people of Judah (in the general) in time
of their prosperity, so to many (in particular) in their health, and full
strength, Psalm. 55.25. The blood thirsty, and deceitful man shall not live out
half their days. So Psalm 37.36.

Now as these are cut down, others are planted, Ps. 109 7. Let his days be
few, and let another take his office: and Ps. 75.8. he puts down one, and
sets up another.

Others (again) live till they be very old, and decay by degrees, and are like
old Barzillai, 2 Samuel 9 35. who (by reason of age) could not taste what he ate,
or drank, etc. they live till they be satisfied with age, Ps. 91.16.

Seeing our lives are so uncertain, and that we know not when Mark 13.35.
Whether in the evening, or at midnight, or at the dawning of the day, we should
therefore be always ready, that is: to be sure that we have an interest in
Christ, without which there can be no preparation for death.

This shows the desperate estate of all unregenerate persons, they are in
danger every moment of a sudden destruction; and Herod upon the Throne of his
glory, Belshazzar in the midst of his feast. Dan. 5.6. Haman at the Banquet of
wine, in his glory, Hester. 7.10. I have seen (says David) the wicked in great
power, and spreading himself like a green Bay Tree etc. But how quickly was
he gone? Psalm. 37.35.

Hence we should be stirred up to bring forth good, and profitable Prove. 10.27.
My son keep my Commandments, for length of days, and long life, and peace
shall they add to thee: especially let us attend to the works of our
generation, according to the pointing out of the word, and hand of providence.

The seventy fourth Observation in Nature.
WE see by experience that what kinds of seeds of fruit trees we sow in our
Nurseries, such will be the trees, and consequently the fruits of those trees;
if the seed be good, the trees and fruits will be so also, if the seed be
naught, so will be the trees and fruits: the seed contains in it the form of
the trees and fruits.

This is another Similitude of the state of spiritual fruit trees, and
shadows out unto us this Proposition, That

Proposition shadowed.
According to men's Principles, such are their actings, and their rewards
according to both.

Original sin, corruption of Nature, is the seed that lies in the soul of
all mankind, which naturally springs up, and grows like a plant, or tree,
higher, and larger, and stronger every day, branching it self, and breaking
forth in thoughts, words, and works: now according to the Nature of this seed,
or these branches, or trees, such will be the fruits. Jer. 6.19. Behold I will
bring evil upon this people, even the fruit of their thoughts; we see what
those fruits were in the following words, even perishing and destruction. Also
Jer. 32.19. Thine eyes are upon all the ways of the sons of men, to give
every one according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings.
And again, Hos. 10.13. Ye have prolonged wickedness, ye have reaped iniquity,
ye have eaten the fruit of lies: and what the fruit was we see in the following
verses: dashing in pieces, and utter destruction.

So also on the other side; the seed, or principles of grace in the soul
springs up, and grows like a tree into a body, boughs, and branches, which
bring forth good, and pleasant fruits, whereof we may eat, not only in this
life, but also to all Eternity. This seed springs up, and branches it self
into thoughts, words, actings, multitudes of-waies in our conversations; a
wholesome tongue is a tree of life, Prove. 15.3. The fruit of this Tree in
Prayer, Praises, etc. has a sweet, and acceptable taste, in the account of the
husbandman. So also is it pleasant unto men, Prove. 25.11. A word fitly spoken,
is like apples of Gold in pictures of silver.

All sorts of spiritual seed brings forth answerable fruits, Gal. 6.8. He
that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting.

The spirit of God, and the habits of grace in the soul continually spring up,
and bring forth good fruits: persons in whom these dwell act according to their
Natures, and fruits; and rewards are accordingly dispensed, Romans 6.22. Ye have
your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life.

These things being so, they call aloud to every unregenerate seed, and root
of corrupt Nature, otherwise they will certainly bring forth poisonous, and
deadly fruits, whereof they shall eat and drink to all eternity, Romans 7.5. The
motions of sin which were by the Law, did work in our Members to bring forth
fruit unto death. Natural men cannot act any thing that is good, because there is
no good seed, no spiritual principles; therefore it necessarily follows
their fruit will be bitter: Gal. 5.7. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for
whatsoever a man sowes, that shall he also reap: he that seweth to the flesh
shall of the flesh reap corruption: The fruit, the reward is perdition,
eternal misery: They shall eat the fruit of their own way, Prove. 1.31. so
also, Job. 4.8. and Prove. 22.8.

Men may as rationally expect pleasant Apples from Crab-seede, or good wheat
from Tare seed, as comfort or happiness from co^rupt Principles.

This Proposition is a ground of unspeakable comfort, and encouragement seed
within them, 1 John 3.9. his seed remains in him; that is, the vigor, the
workings, the efficacy of the spirit, Principles, and habits of grace, the word
of God, these remain in believers, which spring up, grow, and bring forth
fruit to eternal life: the fruit is according to the seed, their reward
according to their Principles and actings, Gal. 6.8.

He that now goes on his way weeping, and bears good seed, shall doubtless
come again with joy, bringing his sheaves with him, Psalm. 126.6.

There Is an Emphasis in the word doubtless: out of all question, nothing more
certain, we shall reap in due time, if we faint not, Gal. 6.9. And that we may
not faint, let us often make use of these cordial promises already mentioned,
with this (and the like) wrought down to us from the hand of God, Esaias. 3.10.
say ye to the righteous, it shall go well with them, for they shall eat the
fruit of their doings.

The seventie fifth Observation in Nature.
Of this see at large Obser. 64.
Fruit Trees are profitable many ways; in the wood and boughs pruned off, to
burn, also for Ioyners and other Tradesmen: the boughs and blossoms adorn:
the house in the spring; their odor is refreshing to the spirits, and their
cool shade in the heat of summer; but especially profitable in their fruits,
whereof we eat, and drink all the year long.

This is another Similitude and shadows out unto us this Proposition: That

Proposition shadowed.
Spiritual Fruit Trees ingrafted into Christ are many ways profitable in
their Generations.

Such as fear God will certainly follow some profitable course of life, some
lawful calling or labor, either of body, or mind, or both, whereby they may
advantage themselves, and others.

They are also profitable in many spiritual respects, by discourse, reproof,
counsel, and admonition: by Prayer, Preaching, printing Books, communicating
their Talents for the good of others; by their Alms, and acts of charity, and
love to their brethren, and to all by their good Examples, which shine forth as
lights in the world, directing others.

They are profitable to others, both in privative, and positive respects:
wicked persons who live amongst them, are often spared for their sakes, the
Tares are suffered to grow because amongst the Wheat; yea, and share of many
positive outward blessings for their sakes: Laban and his family shared of the
blessings powered down upon Jacob, Genesis 30.27. which Laban acknowledged, I have
learned (says he) by experience, that the Lord has blessed me for thy sake.

So Potiphar had many outward blessings for Joseph's sake: likewise Pharaoh and
all his Court fared the better because of Joseph: he and his house had a full
Table, when others perished with hunger.

Yea, Godliness, and Godly men are profitable to all purposes, 1 Timothy 4.8.
having the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.

Hence we may conclude the madness and unreasonablenesse godly, and persecute
them continually, although they are their best friends, preserving them from
many Judgments, and procuring to them many temporal blessings: every man
naturally seeks the destruction of things dangerous, and deadly to him, but
who but unreasonable men will seek to destroy things useful, and profitable to
them, yea persons, and things without which they cannot subsist? for were the
Godly taken out of the world, a flood of fire would quickly consume the wicked.

A whole City was preserved, for a time, for Lots sake, Genesis 19.22. I cannot do
any thing till thou be come to Zoar.

This should make every one to love and cherish these profitable Trees where
ever they grow, and to defend them from spoil, or hurt, as much as in us lies.

When Onesimus was ingrafted into Christ, then he became profitable, both to
Paul, and to others, Epistle to Philemon. 10, 11. Now profitable, both to thee
and me: so that Paul requires of Philemon to account of him now, not as a
servant, but as a brother, even as of Paul himself, verse. 12. So that we
should love the people of God, not only because they are beloved of God, and
bear his Image, and are fellow brethren, and fellow Members with us, but also
because they are so many ways profitable.

The seventy sixth Observation in Nature.
THe sower, and bitter sap of the wild stock (which is ingrafted) runs through
all the whole tree, into the body, boughs, branches, buds, leaves, blossoms,
fruits, and does something Although the graft changes the sap of the wild stock
into its own Nature, yet not totally; a tang of the wild nature remains.
imbase the fruits, making them less pleasant, and sweet, yet the fruits are
good, and acceptable fruits.

This shadows out unto us: That

Proposition shadowed.
The most spiritual actings of believers taste of corrupt nature, which
notwithstanding are acceptable unto God.

The soul, and spirit of man is the stock into which the word of God, and
Principles of grace are ingrafted, and these drawing, and making use of the
sap, life, strength, and powers of the soul in all the faculties, do change
them into their own spiritual nature, in a great measure, yet not totally;
even as the Of this see more pa. 119. Observe. 59.
natural grafts of a good and pleasant nature do change the sap, virtue, and
strength of the wild and sower stocks (so much thereof as the Grafts draw)
into their own nature, in a great measure, but not wholly.

Though Christ and his graces dwell in his people, yet corruption (in a
measure) abides there also, and this corruption runs through the whole man, and
is mixed with all our thoughts, words, and actings: though they proceed from
the principles and habits of grace fixed in the soul by the spirit of God; as
some noxious, or hurtful quality in the Liver mixeth it self with the blood,
and stains it throughout all the body.

Spiritual acts, as they proceed from the spirit of God, Principles of grace,
and are done in love to God, and directed to right ends, are pure and perfect
these fruits have a pleasant taste with God the husbandman; yet as they proceed
from us, and are acted in, and through the faculties of the soul (where
Corruptions, and imperfections reside) they are imperfect.

This mixture of corruptions with our services and duties was typified in the
offerings of the people, Exodus 28.38.

Aaron (a type of Christ) bore the iniquity of the holy things.

And the Prophet Esaias (upon this account) pronounces all our best
righteousnesses to be as filthy rags, Esaias. 64.6. The Apostle also knowing
this, complained of it, Romans 7.21. I find a Law, that when I would do good,
evil is present with me. All believers know, and find this by continual
Experience.

meritorious, and means of Justification: but let us look unto Christ our
high Priest to bear the imperfections of our best works.

The consideration of this may be a means to pull down the high thoughts of
such as are lifted up, in looking upon their Gifts in regard Corruption runs
through all these, and stains them; our purest wine is mixed with water, and
our best fruits are but bitter-sweets.

This should make us rejoice in, and admire the infinite love of Love covers
all sins, Prove. 10.12.

Though the Church and every believing soul be black and spotted as the Moon,
through the stains of Corruptions, yet such is the love of Christ, that he
over looks all, as though nothing were amiss, Can. 4.7. Thou art fair my
love, there is no spot in thee.

The seventie seventh Observation in Nature.
IN Fruit Trees are two Natures, the one of the sower wild stock, the other of
the pleasant graft: Now these two natures being in one body strive together, as
all contraries (joined) do, to convert each other into its own kind, or
nature, Even as hot water and cold being mixed, these qualities strive to
change each other, and that which is most powerful prevails.
but the Nature of the graft is predominant, and converts the sap (that it
draws) into its own nature; though not totally. See page 119.

This Observation shadows out unto us; That

There is a continual combat between grace and nature in every regenerate
person, but grace prevails.

Every believer by engrafting into Christ, Proposition shadowed.
receives another nature, the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. which abides in the
soul, together w th the other, the corrupt nature which it had before: Now
these two natures being contary oppose one another all our lives long: There
are motions of the spirit, and motions of the flesh, upon all occasions,
workings, and inclinations in the soul toward, and against good and evil,
Gal. 5.17. the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the
flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the
things that ye would. The flesh still moves against the motions of the spirit
of God, and principles of grace, framing objections, and reasonings against
good motions, Romans 7.21. I find then a law, that when I would do good, evil is
present with me: The spirit is ready to every good work, but the flesh is
sluggish, loath, backward, verse. 22. I delight in the Law of God concerning the
inner man, but I see another Law in my Members warring against the Law of my
mind etc.

But now, though it be so, that the motions of the flesh oppose the motions of
the spirit, yet for all that the spiritual man rules in the soul, for the
maine and generality of our lives: And Christians know by Experience that
(according to the promise Gal. 5.16. Walk in the spirit, and ye shall not
fulfill the lusts of the flesh) when they walk circumspectly, and watch over
the heart, to keep it up in a spiritual frame, in communion with God, then
the flesh is low, and kept under.

flesh and the spirit, this should make us watchful against the flesh that it
prevail not: we know the flesh never sturs but to do us hurt: who would not be
incensed against such an enemy? now the way to prevail against the flesh is
to cherish, and delight to obey the motions of the spirit, as before; Gal. 5.16.

The seventie eighth Observation in Nature.
SOme fruit trees (as being of different kinds, and for several other causes)
bring forth more fruits than others; and the same fruit trees bring forth more
fruits some years, than they do some other years. Experience tells us, that
when there comes a pleasant, and mild spring (with other concurrent advantages)
trees bear as many fruits, as in 3 or 4 other years.

Proposition shadowed.
This shadows out unto us, That

Some believers are (by advantages) more fruitful than others, and at some,
more than at other times.

Every Christian being engrafted into Christ brings forth some good fruits; and
having a Talent, or more, a stock of grace, gifts, and advantages, he imployes
and improves all one way or other, for the honor of God: but some believers
have greater measures of grace, and more advantages of improving them than
others, and therefore their returns are greater, and their fruits are more.

We see Matthew. 25.20. He that had five Talents he brought forth more fruits
than they that had received less: And the Apostle says 1 Cor. 15.10. I
labored more abundantly than they all.

Some Christians as they have greater measures of the spirit, and the graces of
the spirit, so they have better natural parts, and more outward helps and
means, in respect of time to hear, and read the word, to converse with
others, special dispensations of Providence, and the like advantages, whereby
they are enabled to bring forth more fruits than others who want such helps,
and means of fruitfulness.

Some are carried on with vigorous actings of spirit, with a lively hope, with
a strong faith, with fervent love, and with great measures of every grace, and
can do, and suffer more for God, than other believers can.

Others again having but weak natural parts, small measures of knowledge and
grace, wanting helps and means of growth and improvement, having but dim
evidences of the love of God, their fruits are according to these, fewer, and
smaller than some other Christians bring forth.

Yea: the same individual person brings forth more and better fruits at some
seasons than at others.

At those times when the soul is in a more spiritual frame and temper, in
more immediate communion with God, when the spirit of God sensibly actuates,
and quickens the Principles, and habits of grace in the soul, and makes them
lively, and vigorous, when the North and south winds blow upon the Gardens,
then the spices thereof flow forth, and fruits abound. But at some other times
the actings of the soul are but low, and weak, while the spirit withdrawes
and withholds his operations; if the winds blow not, the ship with all its
sails moves slowly.

This being so: let no sincere soul be discouraged, and dishartned (yiedling
to a temptation) to see some other Christians go beyond them in fruitfulness:
if such diligently press on toward the mark, they shall be accepted. It may
be others have received more from God than thou have, more Talents of Gifts,
Graces, time, and many advantages: Now there being a sincere, and ready mind,
it is accepted according to what a man has, and not according to what he has
not, 2 Cor. 8.12.

more fruits, and obtain unspeakable advantages.

The seventie ninth Observation in Nature.
THe husbandman rejects not his fruit trees because they sometimes fail in
bringing forth fruits; perhaps a cold time may come when they are in blossom,
and spoil much or most of them, or if that fruit they bring forth be somewhat
imperfect by spots, roughness, chaps, or the like, yet if it taste well, if it
have a good relish, he approves of the fruits, and commends them, makes much of
the trees, notwithstanding all imperfections in both.

Hence we learn this Lesson, That

God bears with the failings, and imperfections of his people, and is ever
ready to take notice of, Proposition shadowed.
and commend the good that is in them.

The Lord is pleased to bear with the failings of his people, and seems not
to see them, but contrariwise takes notice of what good is in them, and speaks
of it with commendation, as if it were their own.

We see this fully in the case of Job: God passes by his many, and great
failings, and scarce takes notice of them (in standing so much upon his
justification, and breaking out to curse the day of his birth, etc) but on the
contrary observes, and commends what is good in him, Ye have not spoken of me
the thing that is right, as my servant Job has, and Jam. 5.11. ye have heard
of the patience of Job.

David sinned, and failed very much in many things, as in purposing, and going
about to destroy Naball, and all his house, 2 Samuel 25.22. without a just cause:
in numbering the people, and in many other things upon record: all which God
passes by as if they had not been, and says of him, that David walked before
him with a perfect hear, t and departed not from him in any thing, save in the
matter of Vriah, 1 Kings 15.5.

How wonderfully did God bear with Jonah, and how mild was God toward him,
when Iona was up in an angry, sturdy humor, and would needs maintain it, and
answer God peremptorily, I do well to be angry Jonah? 4.9. So Christ passes
by the ignorance and prejudice of Nathaniel concerning himself, and insted of
a reproof gives him a commendation, Behold an Israelite indeed in whom there
is no guile, Joh. 1.46.47.

And as this is the love of Christ toward particular persons, so also toward
his whole Church: though the Church be as full of spots as the Moon, yet the
exceeding love of Christ covers a multitude of faults, Prove. 10.12. and says,
thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee, Can. 4.7. Love bears
all things, endures all things, 1 Cor. 13.7.

God does not only conceal the failings of his people very much, but he takes
notice of, and commends the most secret good they do: and sometimes publishes
the secret and closet good works of his people upon the house top, Luke 12.3.
Do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same, Romans 13 3. Yea
praise not only of men but of God, Romans 2.29. As it is our duty to speak well
of God, and the things of God, to his praise; so it is the pleasure, and good
will of God to speak well of his people, to their praise and commendation: so
he spoke of Abraham, Genesis 18.19. I know that he will command his children and
household to walk in my ways, etc. The like commendation is given of Moses, My
servant Moses is faithful in all mine house: There are many instances of Gods
concealing the faults, and failings of his people, with commendation of the
good that is in them.

Now God judges righteous judgment, therefore it is our true honor to be
commended by him. Not he that commends himself is approved, but he whom the
Lord commends, 2 Cor. 10.18.

Psalm. 97.10. Ye that love the Lord, hate evil: the hatred of evil is a
fruit of love.

commendation.

love than for fear, a servant though but morally honest, and of a good
disposition will do more for a mild Master that bears with him, than if he
were harsh, and hard to please: The Cords of love and kindness will draw a man
of an honest mind in the way of obedience faster than scourges can drive him.

Joh. 4.11. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another: Let
us bear with one another infirmities, and take notice of all the good we can
in each other. This is to be like God.

Shall God forgive Talents of sins to us and shall not we forgive a few pence
to our brethren? See the reproof and punishment of the want of this duty,
Matthew. 18.32.33. Consider the sweet exhortation of the Apostle to this purpose,
Ephesians. 4.23. Be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one another,
even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

The eightieth Observation in Nature.
Fruit Trees bring forth their fruits in their seasons; some at one time, some
at another, some sooner, some later in summer, and Autumn: every kind observes
the Law of Nature which God has fixed in them in respect of times and seasons
of bearing fruits.

From hence we may observe: That

Trees of the Lords planting bring forth fruits seasonably. Proposition
shadowed.


All that are branches of the true Vine do not only bring forth good fruits,
and by the purging, and ordering of the husbandman bring forth much good fruit,
John 15.2. but also they bring forth good fruit in due season: good fruits
brought out unseasonably loose thereby much of their beauty, and goodness:
therefore observe the season.

The Prophet David describing a Godly man, one of his properties is this, he
brings forth his fruit in due season, Psalm. 1.3. Solomon says, a fool utters
all his mind, but a wise man keeps it in till afterward: Prove. 29.7. A wise
man brings forth the fruit of his lips seasonably.

The voice of a fool is in the multitude of words; while others are speaking,
that is no good season, but a man should stay and wait for a fit time, for an
opportunity, when his words may be heard, yea, and when the minds of the
hearers are best prepared to hear such, or such a truth, when its most like to
take impression: Believers have spiritual wisdom, wisdom from above, Esaias.
50.4. The Lord has given me the tongue of the learned, that I might know how
to speak a word in season to him that is weary. Though this be principally
meant of Christ the head, yet his members have from him the same spirit of
wisdom to speak seasonably to weary souls, and to speak in the cause of
God, when there is occasion and season.

This is to admonish every one to consider, and observe the season, fittest
season for every duty, looking unto God for direction therein. This will be
much to the beauty, and worth of them: Every thing is beautiful in his season:
To every thing there is a season, Eccl. 3.1. Circumstances commonly make or
mar things: and sometimes that which is a duty, as to the substance, and
matter, is turned into sin in respect of the manner, and time of performance:
so that this is of very great consequence, to observe a due season in duties,
Prove. 15.23. A word spoken in season, how good is it! it is like Apples of
gold, in pictures of silver, Prove. 25.11.

The husbandman looks, and calls for fruits in their season, Mar. 12.2. At the
season he sent a servant that he might receive of the fruits of the vineyard.
So Mat 21.41.

We ought in private meetings to consider what discourse is most seasonable,
what questions, exhortations, reproofs, are most suitable, and seasonable, and
accordingly apply our selves: our spirits at some seasons are far more apt to
receive impressions than at other times.

Now therefore we should be seasonable in public and private duties; but some
take little heed to this, when the subjects they hold forth in Sermons suite
neither with persons nor things (to which they ought to apply their doctrine,
if they will speak seasonably) but are like snow in harvest, or singing songs
to an heavy heart. Many things materially good, for want of due circumstances
and seasonablenesse in performance are of little worth.

Those doctrines in public, and discourses and duties in private, which are
not only agreeable to the word in general, but also concur with and carry on
Gods maine designs in the generation we live in, such fruits are seasonable
fruits, otherwise (though good in themselves) they are not seasonable; Also
when the word is so divided as to give to every one his portion, and
application is made to particular, and different cases and Conditions of
persons, then these fruits are seasonably brought forth.

The eighty first Observation in Nature.
Fruit Trees yield forth their fruits, as well to the wicked as the godly: The
unholy and profane do yearly eat, and drink of their fruits and have profits,
and advantages by them as well as the most holy.

This shadows out unto us: Proposition shadowed.
That

The godly are profitable not only one to another, but the wicked also fair
the better for them.

They that fear God have great and precious promises made to them concerning
the good things of this life, as well as of the life to come, which God
performs to them as he sees is best for them, of which outward good things
the wicked (who grow amongst them as Tares amongst the Wheat) are partakers.

Also, being partakers of the divine nature, and having the spirit of their
heavenly father dwelling in them, they imitate God in some measure, who does
good to the just, and unjust, and lets his rain fall, and sun shine upon the
wicked, and the good, Matthew. 5 25. They do good to all, according to the
command, Gal. 6.10. and that of Matthew. 5.44. Love your enemies, bless them
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that
despitefully use you, and persecute you.

Wicked men share both of privative, and positive blessings among the godly:
Even Sodom was spared for a time, while righteous Lot was among them. How many
fared the better for Joseph's sake?

David was kind to churlish Nabal, in keeping his Cattle from spoil while he
remained by them.

Laban was blessed (in outward things) for Jacobs sake, Genesis 30.27. Potiphar
and his house, Pharaoh and all Egypt fared the better for Joseph, Genesis 39.5.
and 41. etc.

Also they reprove, exhort, and admonish the ungodly, as well as the godly,
they give, and lend, and do good not only to them that will do good and lend^
and give to them, but also to their enemies: if their enemy hunger they will
feed him, if he thirst they will give him drink.

the righteous is more excellent than his (carnal) neighbor, Prove. 12.26. and
Prove. 17.27. He is of an excellent spirit. Herein he holds forth some
resemblance of the Nature of God his father, who does good to the just, and
unjust.

Psalm. 109.4. for my love they are mine adversaries. This is the highest
aggravation of man's sin against God, to sin against love, against mercy, and
kindness. God calls Heaven and Earth to wonder at it, Esaias 1.2. Here O
Heavens, and give ear O Earth, etc. I have nourished and brought up children,
and they have rebelled against me, so (in a proportion) is the sin aggravated
in respect of men: it is the highest ingratitude to return hate, for love,
evil for good.

The eighty second Observation in Nature.
SOme fruit trees are slow in bearings fruits, many years pass ere they bear
any considerable quantity of fruits; but notwithstanding the husbandman does
not presently cut them down, but prunes them, diggs about them, waters, and
orders them from year to year, and waits for their fruits.

This shadows out unto us this Proposition: That

When men are slow in the duties of obedience, God is patient toward them,
Proposition shadowed.
and in the use of all means waits for their fruitfulness.

God is the great Husbandman of his Vineyard the Church, and having many
fruit trees in it, he prunes, orders, and gives them convenient culture from
year to year, by his word, spirit, Ministers, Providence, favors, frowns,
Chastisements, and all means, and looks every one should be fruit-full under
all his dispensations; And yet so it is, that many are unfruitful, or bear
but few, and small fruits; though God expect much, they return but little,
now, notwithstanding God of his infinite patience tarries and waits upon them
for their fruits. Many years did the Lord wait for the fruits of Repentance
from the old world, 1 Pet. 3.20. The long suffering of God waited in the days
of Noah, And Esaias 30 18. The Lord will wait that he may be gracious. He Plants,
and waters, and prunes, and dresses his fruit trees, and then waits for their
fruits in their seasons, Luke 13.7. These three years I come seeking fruit on
this fig tree. God cuts not down fruit trees suddenly for their
unfruitfulnesse, but sends his word, and spirit, and causes the dewes, and
rain of Heaven to fall upon them in manifold mercies, and Providence, and
then waits for, and expects fruits. God is (as the Apostle says 2 Pet. 3.9.)
Long suffering to us ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance.

This should make us observe, and admire the abundant kindness power, wisdom,
justice, and absolute of himself, having no need at all of his Creatures, and
in a moment able to bring to naught whatsoever shall oppose him, shall yet wait
upon his Creatures, as if he had some need of them, or expected some advantage
by them, whereas it is for our profit and advantage: he is indulgent toward
his Children, bearing with them, Ps. 103. when they bear some good fruits, he
purges and pruneth them, that they may bring forth more fruits, John. 15.5.

Yea, he is long suffering toward all, looking that the riches of his
goodness, and forbearance, and long suffering should lead them to Repentance,
Romans 2.4. and make them to bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life.

Hence we should learn to be thus minded on toward another, Ministers of the
Gospel, Masters, Governors, Tutours, they should (herein) be followers of God
as dear children, Ephesians. 5.1. though their expectations, and desires be not
answered, in the profiting and growth of those under their charge, yet they
should not be discouraged, but wait still, and prune, and dress, and order
their young plants still, waiting till their profiting appear, as the
Husbandman waits for the fruit of the Earth, and has long patience for it,
James 5.7.

fruits of our obedience, O let us wait for the performance of his promises:
For they that wait for him shall never be ashamed: that is, they shall obtain
at length above their expectation, Esaias. 64.4. Since the beginning of the world
men have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither has the eye seen, O
God! besides thee, what he has prepared for him that waits for him.

The eighty third Observation in Nature.
WIld material fruit trees have no power to engraft themselves, but grow from
year to year, according their wild nature, and bring forth sower, and naughty
fruits, neither is there any possibility that such Trees should ever be
engrafted, and bear good fruits, without the skill, and pains of the
Husbandman.

This is another Similitude of the state of Mystical Fruit Trees, and shadows
out unto us this Proposition: That

Proposition shadowed.
Unregenerate persons (of themselves) cannot come to Christ, nor bring forth
one good fruit.

Naturally every one is dead in sin, and has no more power to come to Christ,
or do one good work, than a dead Carkase has to walk, or work, Joh. 6.44.
No man cancome to me except the father which has sent me draw him.

The Natural fruit-tree can as soon graft it self as any soul move toward
Christ, without the power of the spirit of God: The heart of man by nature has
no other but corrupt Principles in it, which all the time of unregeneracy daily
grow stronger, and stronger, which are not only altogether indisposed to all
that is good, but also oppose it, and contradict the motions of the spirit. As
they are alive to all that is evil, so they are dead to holiness, there is no
more power in the soul (by nature) to move toward Christ, than there is in a
stone to move upwards of it self.

What is less than to have a good thought of, or toward God? and yet that we
have not without the spirit, 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our
selves to think any thing, as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God.

This shows us the sad and woeful estate of persons out of Devils are in the
Chains of darkness, in which they are reserved unto the Judgment of the great
day: such have their Portion in this life, even all the good things they are
like to have. Little reason then had David, (or any of the people of God in
their greatest sufferings) to envy the prosperity of the wicked: He counted
himself foolish for so doing when he saw their end, Psalm. 92.7. When the
wicked spring as the Grass, and the workers of iniquity do flourish, it is
that they shall be destroyed for ever.

Here also we may see the Error of those who hold free will:

This is, and will be a continual ground of love to God (to free Electing love
in God therefore let us show forth the praises of God in a holy, and fruitful
Conversation, for he that has begun a good work will perfect it unto the day
of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.6.

The eighty fourth Observation in Nature.
SOme Fruit Trees (if they be not carefully looked unto will break out, and the
sap will press upwards in some few branches only, or chiefly and leave other
branches with little sap, which grow poorly, and weakly, and some die; whereas
a well ordered Tree should spread, and enlarge it self in all the Branches.

This Observation shadows out unto us, That

Proposition shadowed.
Some Christians chiefly pursue some particular duties belonging to them, and
neglect others.

Works and actions of spiritual fruit trees may be considered as Branches, as
well as seed, or fruits.

Some persons (as experience makes too manifest) are very careful, and
diligent about some particular duties, which they carry on from day to day: and
its well they do so, because those things they ought to do: but there are other
duties (perhaps equally as convenient, or necessary to be done) which are
altogether, or very much neglected, they shoot forth in some branches, but not
in all: they are content to do some small, and easy things suitable to their
natures, and ends, while they neglect great and substantial matters: our
Savior reproves such, Mat. 23.23. Ye have omitted the weightier matters of the
Law, Judgment, mercy and faith, these ought ye to have done, and not to leave
the other undone.

Some Christians are all (or most) for public duties, and very much neglect
the private; they hear (it may be) three or four Sermons on the Lords day (in
this place) and often on other days (and they are to be encouraged in frequent
hearing the word) but yet many such neglect (or slightly perform) private
duties of Prayer, meditation, examination of the heart, and particular
application of the word, without which much hearing is to little purpose. The
heart of man is deceitful, and Satan is deceitful, and both will be ready
enough to persuade and carry on to public duties all the day (seeing they
will needs be religious) that so they may be hindered of greater spiritual
advantages, in neglecting the private duties aforementioned, which are
absolutely necessary to a Christians growth in grace.

Some other Professors are diligent in duties public, and private, in
reference to themselves, but neglect duties in reference to others; as
Exhortation, Reproof, distributing to their necessities, visiting them
sometimes (especially in their afflictions) herein they fail much: although
these are the great, and weighty duties of Christians: for if we fail in the
great duties of love and charity toward our fellow members, what do we, where is
our Religion? Pure Religion, and undefiled before God, even the father is this,
to visit the fatherless and widows in their afflictions, etc. James 1.27.

See what our Savior says of these duties, Matthew. 25.36. Magistrater ought
not only to restrain, and punish what is to Gods dishonor, but also to
contrive, stand for, and uphold what is acceptable to him.

Ministers of the Gospel ought not only to preach the Gospel in the public
congregation, but also to take all occasions in private to exhort, rebuke,
instruct, and encourage the people in the things of God, to be instant in
season and out of season, inquiring how the work of grace goes on in the
hearts of their people, and to know their state (which Paul so much enquired
after, in his own person, and by others, that he might speak, and write more
suitable to their conditions) Phil. 2.19. Col. 4.8. how Satan works, what
dispensations they have from God, and to learn experiences from them; studying
men, as they study books, by which course they may become wise, and skillfull
workmen, and know those ways and workings of God, of Satan, of Grace and
Corruption, which otherwise they can never know.

Pastors of congregations have a strict charge, Acts 20.28. Take heed to all
the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers: Now to oversee the
Church imports more than only to Preach in public, that is but a part of
their work: A special care should be had of the different state of particular
persons.

This should put us upon Examination what works and duties God requires of us
in our general, and particular Callings, that knowing them, we may observe one
as well as another, and have respect to all Gods Commands. Let us not suffer
one duty to justle out another, which is frequent among Christians: Many think
if they are still doing what is good, and about the work of God, they look not
so much about them, nor consider what is necessary besides, or what is more
necessary and profitable, and so many times neglect the maine work. They let
some branches of duties wither, and dye, while the sap and strength of the Tree
presses forth, and spends it self in other branches less fruitful.

The eighty fifth Observation in Nature.
WHile fruit trees remain ungrafted, all the labor, and culture, the
husbandman can bestow upon them will not make them bring forth good fruits,
though they grow in the best place of the Garden, and be watered, pruned, and
ordered never so well, yet because they are ungrafted, and wild trees, they
will bear sower and noughty fruits.

This is another Similitude of the state of spiritual fruit trees, and
shadows out unto us this Proposition: That

While persons remain in an unregenerate state, all the means of grace is
unprofitable to them. Proposition shadowed.


Many make a profession, who yet have nothing of the power of godliness: they
attend the Ordinances, they hear the word, pray, have privileges among the
Saints yet, bring forth no good fruit. Judgments, Mercies, favors, outward
providence, inward workings of the spirit by reproves, counsels,
inlightnings, etc. all is in vain to them, they cannot receive these things
nor profit by them, because not engrafted, they reject the word, Psalm. 50.17.
Thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee; And Heb. 4 2. The
word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that
heard it.

And as they reject the word, so also they resist the spirit, Acts 7.51. Ye do
always resist the Holy Ghost; as your fathers did, so do ye. Yea Judgments,
and punishments are ineffectuall to them, Esaias 9.13. The people turns not
unto him that smites them, neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts, Amos 4 9.
I have smitten you with blasting, and mildew, etc. yet ye have not returned
unto me, says the Lord: I have sent amoung you pestilence, and ye have not
returned unto me. And verse. 11. I have overthrown some of you etc. yet ye have
not returned unto me, says the Lord.

So we see all that God does for, or against persons out of Christ, all the
means of grace is unprofitable to them; they neglect the mercies of God,
reject the word, spirit, Judgments of God; and all the reproves, admonitions,
Counsels, Exhortations, and Examples of his people.

Hence we see the miserable condition of persons out of Christ, nothing will do
good upon them: would it not be accounted a heavy curse, if the Lands of some
men should bring forth nothing but briars, thorns, and weeds, with all the good
husbandry that could be bestowed on them, with rain, sun, and dewes, when by
the same means, other men's grounds are made fruitful? this spiritual curse
upon the souls of unregenerate persons is infinitely greater: such (without
Repentance) are nigh unto cursing, and everlasting burnings, Heb. 6.8.

Labor then with all thy might to get this evidence of Regeneration, thrive,
and profit by the means of grace.

The eighty sixth Observation in Nature.
Fruit Trees when they prosper well, and grow in a decent, comely form, and
bring forth much good fruit, as they do profit many, so also hereby they credit
the husbandman, they bring some reputation to him who orders them; but if they
grow poorly, and bring forth little, they discredit their keeper.

This teaches us this Lesson: That

Christians by walking holily, and fruitfully, Proposition shadowed.
they bring much honor to God, but if otherwise, dishonor.

Every one of the people of God that professes Christ, is as a City upon a
hill, as our Savior said of his disciples, and therefore their ways are seen,
and observed by all sorts of persons, so that if they walk wisely,
circumspectly, and fruitfully, they bring honor to God, and credit to their
profession, Matthew. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see
your good works, and glorify your father which is in heaven: And again, 1
Pet. 2.12. having your conversation honest among the Gentiles etc. they may by
your good works which they shall behold glorify God in the day of visitation.

But if on the contrary professors walk loosely, and negligently, these things
reflect upon God, to his dishonor: As a servant to a great person, if he
behave himself licentiously by drunkenesse, swearing, and the like it reflects
in some sort) upon his Master, who keeps such a person in his house. So it is
between God and his people: if they walk circumspectly, in a holy and
fruitful conversation they glorify the name of God to whom they have
relation, but if they walk vainly, and loosely, if they walk in pride,
minding earthly things (the two grand sins of many professors in our times)
scraping, and holding together the trash of the world, as though there were no
better things to be had in the ways of God, then they cause the name of God to
be blasphemed, his ways to be scandalized, and the generation of his children
to be reproached, the name of God is blasphemed through you, Romans 2.24. James
2.7.

holy and fruitful conversation: for Joh. 15.8. Herein is my father glorified
that ye bring forth much fruit.

I verily believe, God has more honor, Religion and the Gospel more credit,
by some one of his people (mean and despised, it may be, in the eye of a
corrupt mind) than by an hundred others, who yet may have grace to bring them
to heaven: therefore let us strive to out go one another in bringing honor to
God by a holy and heavenly conversation.

The eighty seventh Observation in Nature.
IF a Grafted tree and a wild ungrafted tree grow near together, both of them
sucking one and the same juice of the Earth, the one converts it into good sap,
and nourishment, and consequently into good and wholesome fruits; the other
turns the same juice of the Earth into sower, bitter, and it may be (as in
some kinds) into poisonous fruits; and this is from the different Forms, and
Natures of the Trees.

Proposition shadowed.
This shadows out unto us this Proposition: That

The same things which are blessings to the Godly, are curses to the wicked,
because of their different Principles.

The righteous and the wicked dwell together, they are mixed as the Wheat and
Tares, Flowers or Weeds in a Garden; and both for the most part, are partakers
of the same outward privileges, but to them that are in Christ, all things
work together for their good, Romans 8.28. To the pure all things are pure, but
to the unbelieving there is nothing pure, Tit. 1.15. A godly man does not only
draw sweetness out of things that are of themselves sweet, out of the word,
Ordinances, Christ, and his people, but also even out of things that are
bitter, as Crosses afflictions, Temptations, Trials, to him out of the
strongest comes sweetness.

But now a wild ungrafted tree, a person out of Christ, he is like the spider
that sucks poison out of the sweetest flowers, the best things become evil to
him; blessings become curses: his health, strength, liberty, riches, honors,
friends, gifts, Learning, etc. all these become snares unto him, he makes use
of them to his own hurt, draws nothing out of them but sin, and death. Their
Table becomes a snare to them, and that which should have been for their
welfare, it becomes a Trap, Psalm. 69 22.

Yea, all spiritual things prove for their greater condemnation, they despise
the riches of Gods grace; and turn it into wantonness, Jude 4. and therefore
treasure up unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath; The very Gospel it
self (which is the power of God to salvation, and the savor of life unto life
to them who are in Christ) these wild Plants suck no sweetness out of it, but
to them it is the savor of death unto death, 2 Cor 2.16.

Yea, the greatest Gift that ever was bestowed on the sons of men, Jesus
Christ (out of whom the branches ingrafted into him, draw sweetness, sap and
life, marrow and fatness, wine and water of life) he is not sweet to them,
but contrariwise an offense: Christ crucified is to them a stumbling block, and
foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.23. Christ, his word, his Ordinances, his people, his
mercies, Judgments, all his things are perverted, and abused by them.

Hence we may see and admire the free distinguishing love of God toward his
own people, who makes such a difference between all things, even the worst
things are good to them, they draw virtue from them but all things, even the
best things, are evil to the wicked, they draw poison and death out of them.

Seeing that by reason of the corrupt nature in the wicked they draw evil out
of what is good, and that all things are abused by them to their own
destruction; this should caution us always to beware of their Opinions,
Judgments, and practices: though they be never so eminent in parts, and
learning, and bring Scripture to back them, yet suspect all, for they cannot
see nor discern; their minds and consciences are defiled, they suck not the
marrow of-truth out of the word, but they pervert it to their own destruction,
2 Pet. 1.16. they draw poison, corrupt doctrine out of the pure, and wholesome
wells of salvation.

Therefore our Savior warned his disciples to take heed and beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees, and Sadduces: which was their doctrine, Mat. 16.6, 12.
The word which is as the Pillar of fire, and discovers to the people of God
their way, is but a dark Cloud to them, Exo. 14.30. they stumble at the word,
yea at Christ himelfe, 1 Pet. 2.8. A stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense,
even to them which stumble at the word, etc.

The eighty eighth Observation in Nature.
THe best fruit trees have some faults, and defects, are subject to Cankers,
Mossinesse, and other diseases, to luxurious growthes: some years they bear
but few fruits, and many of them small, and perhaps spotted, or chapt, or
otherwise imperfect.

This shadows out unto us this Proposition. That

Proposition shadowed.
The best of Gods Children are guilty of many sins and infirmities in their
conversations.

We know there are two Natures continually working and striving in every
regenerate person, and sometimes the flesh prevails very much, and the graces
of the spirit are clouded, and obscured by it in the best men.

Moses spoke unadvisedly with his lips, Psalm. 106 33. Aaron made an Idol for
the people. David fained himself mad, 1 Samuel 21.13. he numbered the people
contrary to the mind of God, he committed adultery, and murder, and sinned in
many other respects. Paul and Barnabas contended together, and parted, Acts 13.
Job and Jeremiah cursed the day of their birth, Jerem. 20.14. Jonah was very
angry without cause, Chap. 4.1.

We need not multiply particulars, the Experience of the people of God makes
this too manifest, who say with Paul, Romans 7.15. that which I do, I allow not,
for what I would, that do I not, but what I hate that do I, verse. 19. The evil
which I would not that I do, Jam. 3.2. In many things we offend all.

The consideration of this should humble all the people of God, corrupt Nature,
and can by no means be rid of it.

This should make every one of us watchful, and circumspect

The consideration of this Proposition may be a means to stay

Take heed of too much admiring the best men; there is dross Judgments and
Examples because theirs: Let us trial things and hold fast that which is good,
1 These. 5.2.

The eighty ninth Observation in Nature.
WE see material fruit trees that are ungrafted (wild trees) as forward to
bring forth their sower, and naughty fruits, as the grafted trees are to bring
forth their good fruits. Crab-trees and others (of the worst kinds) are as
forward (in the spring) in blossoming, and shooting forth, as grafted trees of
the best kinds.

This is another Similitude of the state of spiritual fruit trees, and
shadows out unto us this Proposition, which also concurrs with the word and
Experience: That

Carnal persons are as forward, and zealous in the ways of sin, as (usually)
the godly are in the ways of holiness. Proposition shadowed.


All people are carried on in those ways that are suitable to their Principles,
whether spiritual, or carnal: Papists (and other superstitious persons (are
as zealous in their ways, as usually men fearing God are in Gods ways.

The Idolatrous people mentioned, Jer. 44. were very zealous, and earnest in
worshipping their false gods, insomuch that when the Prophet from God told them
the danger thereof, and that it would be no less than destruction to them if
they continued so to provoke God, their spirits rose against him, they answered
him boldly, and stoutly, with one consent, verse. 16.17. The word that thou have
spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not hear it of thee, but we
will do whatsoever comes out of our own mouth, as to burn incense to the
Queen of heaven, and to power out drink offerings unto her, as we have done,
both we and our fathers, our Kings and our Princes.

So were the worshipers of Baal earnest and forward in calling upon their
Idol, cutting and lancing themselves: And the people of Ephesus, Acts 19. how
earnest were they for upholding their Diana? verse. 28. They were full of wrath,
and cried out, saying great is Diana of the Ephesians: and the whole City was
full of confusion, and they rushed into the Common place with one consent, etc.
So verse. 24.

How vehemently earnest have we seen carnal persons for upholding the book
of Common Prayer, receiving the Lords Supper at Easter etc? Wherein they will
not be hindered, an experiment whereof we had lately of some grossly ignorant
persons, who were prevented at one place from receiving the sacrament of the
supper from the hand of a profane Minister, they went after him the same day,
to another place, wading through the waters (which then by reason of great
rain overflowed the banks) to come to him, out of their blind zeal not
knowing what they did.

and for all superstitious customs, feastings, may-games, merry meetings, and
such like: who amongst the godly are more forward, and ready in the ways of
God, than these kind of persons are in these ways of sin?

Now the reason of this is, because the ways of sin are agreeable and suitable
to the Nature of carnal persons; and Secondly: because Satan works mightily
in the spirits of such persons, to stir them up, and to carry them on in
carnal courses; especially in any thing which has in it but the least show of
good.

The consideration of this should make regenerate persons to take shame to
themselves, That they who have the Commands of God, Divine Principles, the holy
spirit, the glory of God, the welfare of others, an eternal inheritance etc.
to carry them on and encourage them, should yet be no more forward and zealous
in the the ways of God, then ungodly ones are in the ways of sin: O it should
humble us g eatly that we are so dull, cold, and formal, that we have no more
zeal, spirit, and life in the pleasant, and holy ways of God; that we are no
more forward to bring forth sweet, wholesome and pleasant fruits to God, than
wicked men are to bring forth poisonous, and deadly fruits.

It is an intolerable shame to some professors especially, to see them so
likewarme, and unactive in the ways of God, when power is in their hand to act
for God, and his people, they move slowly, and feebly in his cause: wicked men
are (commonly) more zealous and active in the service of Satan and their
lusts, then Gods people are in the service of the living and true God.

This is a thing greatly to be bewailed by us.

The ninetieth Observation in Nature.
THere is great difference in the dimensions, or bigness of fruit trees: some
are very high, and large trees, others but low and small: some are huge, strong
trees, others but weak and slender; some growing upon poor barren grounds,
they can never attain that bigness, as others that grow upon strong fertile
grounds: yet the husbandman orders, and preservethall of them.

This is another Similitude of the state of Mystical fruit trees, and shadows
out unto us this Proposition. That

The conditions of the people of God are much different, yet God cares for
them all. Proposition shadowed.


The state of the children of God is very various, whether we consider them in
Natural, civil, moral, and spiritual respects: some are young, some old;
some of weak, some of strong constitutions of body; some but of weak and low
natural parts and abilities of mind, others of eminent gifts and endowments;
some of poor and mean estates, and live much upon contribution, others are
rich, and great in the world; some are low and weak in grace, babes in Christ,
others are strong men, fathers, etc. yet God cares and provideth for them all,
his love is toward all. Rich Abraham and poor Lazarus are both beloved of
God: some are in great esteem and reputation generally among the people (as
Cornelius) Acts 10.22. A man of good report among all the Nation of the Jews;
others lie in contempt, and dishonor: some have great measures of grace, as
the woman of Canaan, Matthew. 13.28. O woman great is thy faith: so the
Centurion, Luke 7.9. I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel: Others
have but a weak faith, Matthew. 8.26. O ye of little faith: So Matthew. 16.8. O ye
of little faith: So Romans 14.1.
in some grace is but as a grain of Mustard-seede, in some others it is grown
high and strong: Stephen was a man full of faith, Acts 6.5.

So of Love and other graces: some have much, others but little: Simon,
mentioned Luke 7.40. had but a little love to our Savior; but Mary loved much:
so of knowledge, zeal, etc.

We see the state of Gods people is very different in all respects, yet the
care of God is for all: 1 Pet. 5.7. Cast all your care upon him, for he cares
for you. And again; speaking of his Vineyard the Church, Esaias 27.3. I the Lord
do keep it, I will water it every moment lest any hurt it: I will keep it
night and day.

Now God cares for one as well as the another, because all cost a like price,
the precious blood of Christ, and all are Members of his son: a man cares
for, and cherishes all his Members, so Christ.

not discouraged at all these: for being within the wall, or pale of the
Church, the orchard, or Vineyard of God, he preserves them; the same skillful
and careful hand that pruneth, waters, and orders the strongest, and
greatest trees, does the same (really) to the least: Yea his care is especially
to his weak plants, because they are most liable to hurt, and danger.

Secondly: such as differ from their brethren in being more eminent Natural,
moral or spiritual endowments, if they have many Talents, let such often
consider who made them to differ, and beware of despising, or neglecting the
lower Saints; and bear with the infirmities of the weak, Romans 15.1. and be
ready to distribute, willing to communicate in temporals, and spirituals, as
good stewards of the manifold gifts, and graces of God, 1 Pet. 4.10. and be
therein like unto their heavenly Father, in caring for the lowest, and meanest.

The ninety first Observation in Nature.
THe husbandman frequently walks among his fruit trees, and viewes, and
considers them; he takes notice how it is with particulars: If any of them be
weak, and diseased, and thrive not as others, he considers the cause, and sets
himself to the cure: As it is with them he applies himself accordingly
toward them.

This shadows out unto us: That

True and faithful Ministers of the Gospel do diligently look into the state
of their people, and deal with them accordingly. Proposition shadowed.


Ministers of the Gospel are employed by God about his husbandry; which is his
Church and people, 1 Cor. 3.9. ye are Gods husbandry: And the Apostle says we
are laborers together with God in this work.

Now careful husbandmen are still looking into the state of their work, how
it is in this, and that, and the other particular, that so they may diligently
apply themselves; so do faithful Ministers toward their people.

They are also Shepherds, and it is the duty of Shepherds to watch over their
flocks, and to consider, and diligently to observe how it is with particular
sheep, and to apply themselves accordingly: so do true and faithful
Ministers; according to that in Prove. 27.23. Be diligent to know the state of
thy flocks, and look well to thy herds: God gives a very strict charge to
Ministers of the Gospel, Acts 20.28. Take heed unto your selves, and to all
the flock over the which the holy Ghost has made you Overseers, etc.

To take heed to the flock and to Oversee it, implies a special care to look
into, and to examine, and consider the state, and condition of particulars, as
well as to have an eye over them in the general: So the Apostle uses the same
word thrice in one Chapter, Heb. 13.7. them that have the Oversight of you: and
verse. 17. them that have the Oversight of you: and again verse. 24. them that
have the Oversight of you; Though another translation has it, them that have
the rule over you: but his seems to carry in it that Lordly power and dominion
which Christ will not allow any of his Ministers over his people; he has not
set them as Lords over Gods heritage, 1 Pet. 5.3. But Overseers, and Examples
to the flock; which is also agreeable to the words of the holy Ghost in Acts
20.28. the holy ghost has made them Overseers: which carries in it more of
care, and labor, than of authority and rule; according to that of the Apostle,
2 Cor. 4.5. Our selves your servants for Jesus sake.

This is also further confirmed by the same word which the Apostle Peter uses,
1 Pet. 5.2. Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the Oversight
thereof.

Now certainly this word so often used carries more in it, than only to Preach
the Gospel; And this is also more confirmed by the Example of the Apostle
Paul, fully set forth in many places, who did not only preach and write to the
Churches, but also did often enquire, and send to know their state, yea, he
went himself to particular Churches, and families, and Persons, to whom he had
preached to see, and consider, and know how it was with them, 1 These. 3.5. I
could no longer forbear, I sent to know your faith, etc. And when he heard
they stood fast in the faith, it was matter of great consolation to him, and of
many thanksgivings unto God on their behalf, verse. 9. and Col. 4.8. he sent
Tychicus to know their state.

So also he sent Timothy for the same purpose, Phil. 2.19. That I also may be
of good comfort when I know your state. He calls upon Barnabas to go with him
to visit poor souls, Acts 15.36. Let us go again, and visit our brethren in
every City where we have preached the word of the Lord, and see how they do.

Yea Paul earnestly prayed for opportunities to perform this duty, he longed
to see, and confer with the Saints to whom he had preached, Romans 1.9, 10, 11.
and Romans 15.23, 24 without ceasing I make mention always in my Prayers, making
request to come unto you, for I long to see you, etc.

Now the Reasons why Ministers of the Gospel ought not only to preach the
Gospel but also to consider, See Mr Baxsters exhortations unto this duty;
discorse of true happiness. p. 320. 321. and Mr Fener also to same purpose.
and enquire into the spiritual states and conditions of their People: First,

That so they may be instructed more perfectly in the deep Mysteries of the
kingdom of God; they may hereby come to be acquainted with the various
methods, ways, and workings of the spirit of God in the hearts of his people,
and the wiles, and depthes of Satan; with the nature of grace, and;
corruption. Ministers should study men, as they study books although they may
come to know the general Nature of these things from the Scriptures, Books,
and their own particular experiences, yet unless they take in this also, to
converse frequently with others, and look into their states they can never be
so able to deal with souls as they should be.

Many content themselves with some few particular Cases, and Instances
mentioned in scripture concerning Job, David, Human and some others, and scarce
look further, measuring all others most commonly by these, as not being
(indeed) acquainted with the various, and different dealings of God with his
people.

Secondly: By looking into the particular state of their people, they may
speak more sutably, and seasonably to them; when they know their particular
Lusts, and corruptions, their Temptations, Cases, doubts, etc. their degrees of
knowledge, and other graces, they may then apply the word more properly and
effectually, than otherwise they can upon all occasions: As Physicians when
they have enquired into, and know the state of their Patients, may administer
Physic more effectually than otherwise they can. So Though Ministers may
speak many good things, general truths according to the Scriptures, yet they
may be, and are many times very much besides the particular cases and present
concernments of many, or most of their hearers, as not knowing their particular
states.

Ministers of the Gospel (even good men) do but the one See Observe. 84.
half, or but a part of their work; They preach the Gospel, but they look
not, they enquire not into the state of their people. To preach the word is not
to perform the Office of an Overseer; nor to follow the Example of the Apostle
Paul, showed in all those places before mentioned, who laid out himself with
diligence to know the state of the people in every place where he had preached.
But many think it sufficient to be diligent in their studies, composing of
Sermons to preach in public, laying out their time and strength that way, but
greatly neglecting this other duty, of enquiring, and looking into the
particular state of souls, and applying themselves thereunto accordingly.

I speak it upon knowledge and experience, with grief of heart and
indignation against the gross neglects of some in this matter: who have been
so far from enquiring after the state of others, as that when poor souls
have come to them to acquaint them with their doubts and fears, and troubles
of spirit, they have neglected them, and given them a very slight answer, and
sent them away much more burdned than before, which opportunities they should
most gladly have embraced, and have been very tender of such wounded, sick, and
weary souls, and have come and sent often to them, and taken care of them as a
Nurse cherishes her Children.

seek their own things, and neglect the things of Jesus Christ, Phil. 2.21)
that yet we have some Paul's and Timothies among us, who lay out themselves
diligently to look into the particular state of souls, and naturally take
care for their welfare.

These are wise, and skillful Physicians of souls, and know how to apply
suitable and seasonable things to them; whereas those that neglect this duty,
are but as Emperique Physicians, who have but only some few general notions,
which they apply in all Cases.

Let such therefore who are diligent in this work, be encouraged to go on, as
faithful and wise stewards, to give every one his portion in due season, and
they shall (in due time) receive a great Reward, Lu. 12.44. even when the
chief Shepherd shall appear, they shall receive a Crown of glory that fades
not away, 1 Pet. 5.4.

The ninety second Observation in Nature.
THe husbandman values, and approves most of those Trees, and fruits that are
most for his purpose; most proper for his design, and end that he has in his
eye: admit his great design be to make wine of the fruits, Cider, Perry etc.
then he likes those best, that are fittest for that use: Or if his design be
to transport them into other parts for sale, then he approves most of good,
hard, lasting fruits etc. He had rather loose diverse trees of other kinds, than
one of those which bear fruits suitable to his great end, and design.

This shadows out unto us: Proposition shadowed.
That

God discovers a special care of, and love unto those of his people, whose
Judgments and ways concur with his great designs in their generation.

In every generation God is carrying on some particular and special design or
other; and some of his people help on the work more than others, some rather
hinder it: they preach, and pray, and act against it (through ignorance of it,
being darkened with some lusts or worldly interests) Now, though God cannot
forsake any of his people, though they oppose him, yet they shall loose by it,
they shall have less of God than others, whose Judgments and ways concur
with God in his designs.

Such of the people of God as are active for, and with God in his designs,
they shall have special distinguishing care, and love showed toward them,
which others who neglect the work of God, or oppose it, shall not find. Nay
such are in danger, not only of loss, but also of some visible testimonies of
Gods displeasure toward them. Such who fall in with Gods special design in
their generation shall find special grace and kindness from God; such
distinguishing love Daniel found when he prayed, and labored so earnestly for
the restoring, and enlargement of the Church, then in Captivity Dan. 9. which
was Gods great design then in that generation, he found skill, and wisdom,
and understanding, which others had not: the care and love of God was eminently
discovered toward him, even to a miracle in preserving him in the Lions den,
and an Angel was sent as a messenger from God, to tell him he was a man
greatly beloved Chap. 10.11.

What special care, and love did God manifest toward Moses, who was eminently
isntrumental for God (in his generation) in gods design of bringing Israel
out of Egypt, and carrying them to Canaan; Moses had peculiar honor above
others of Gods people, yea, above other Prophets in his time, Numb. 12.6, 7, 8.
If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make my self known unto him
in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream. My servant Moses is not so,
who is faithful in all my house, with him will I speak mouth to mouth, even
apparently, and not in dark speeches, and the Similitude of the Lord shall he
behold. Caleb, and Joshua, who followed the Lord closesy, and constantly in his
design (which was the work of their generation, of setting Israel in the
promised Land) what distinguishing respect, honor and love had they above
others?

The Lord himself gave a testimony of them, that they wholly followed him,
Numb. 32.12. they possessed that good land, when others (who would not believe
nor act for God in the work of that generation) were cut off.

Other proofs and instances might be brought.

Now the reasons hereof: God gives out distinguishing mercy to his people that
join with him in his great work because thereby they most please him and
honor him, and give the greatest evidence of their love to him that can be:
God will reward the obedience of his people in the least, and lowest duties,
they shall not kindle a fire on his altar in vain, nor give a Cup of cold
water, nor do the least kindness to any of his people in vain: but much more
when they act with zeal for God in the highest, greatest duties, he that
herein sows plentifully (his labors and diligence) shall reap plentifully,
2 Cor. 9.6.

Seeing this is so then let us labor to find out, and understand designs of
God in our generation, that so we may join with him, and help to carry on the
Lords work; thereby great advantages will arise unto us; when through
ignorance, or neglect thereof, or opposition thereto, we may suffer loss of
what else we might have, in the enjoyment of God, or be otherwise corrected by
him. Of this see Mr Tillinghast: Generation work. p. 45. 46.


Now therefore: what are the Designs of God in this our generation, for
understanding whereof we must compare prophesies, and promises, with the
visible dispensations of providence in the age we live in, and observe how the
actings of God in the world suit or answer to what he has foretold, or
promised should come to pass; and also inquire and observe what the most,
humble, holy, selfedenying Saints have upon their Spirits, how they stand
affected; (for God reveals his secrets to the humble, not to the proud, though
his own people) And also by frequent, and much conversing with God in walking
with him, this is best known: such as have close Communion and fellowship with
the father, and with the son, in the spirit, shall certainly know much more
of his mind, of his ways and designs, than others of his people who (through
some unmortified corruptions) walk at a distance from him.

But to touch briefly what we have grounds to believe is Gods great design
which he is now carrying on (more especially in this generation) it is; the
enlargment of the Kingdom of his son Jesus Christ; the setting up Christ as
King over the Nations more gloriously than ever heretofore: according to many
promises, Esaias. 2.11. The Lord alone shall be exalted in that day, and Chap.
24.23. Zach. 14.9. The Lord shall be King over all the Earth, etc.

Now in order hereunto many other prophesies, and promises must be fulfilled;
as those concerning the propagation of the Gospel, 60 3, 4, 5. etc. The
abundance of the Nations shall be converted unto thee, the forces of the
Gentiles shall come unto thee, and many other places: Also union, and oneness
of spirit Zeph. 3.9. pulling down of high and lofty things, Esaias 2.11, 12.
etc. The 60.18. I will make 5. Pouring out of greater measures of the spirit,
Joel 2.28. whereby will be more, and clearer discoveries of Gospel truths,
Esaias 30.26. The light of the Moon shall be as the light of the sun, and the
light of the sun sevenfold.

So that the exaltation of Christ, and the enlargment of his Church and
Kingdom, being Gods great design in this age, it concerns every one of his
people to labor together with God in this glorious work: such as are
sincerely, and zealously active herein, shall find special distinguishing love
from God.

Now every one of Gods people will be ready to think, and say, they are for
this design, it is their daily prayer that the Kingdom of Christ may be
increased: but notwithstanding, certain it is, that many even of Gods own
people afford God but little, or no help herein, but rather hinder, and oppose
the work (really, and indeed) through the darkness of their Judgments about
it: (though in some respects they think they advance it) for such as give no
encouragement to persons and things, ways, and means, little, and low in
their eyes, which yet God has chosen, whereby to carry on his designs, but
rather despise them, distaste, and speak against them, such may be said to
hinder the work (for he that opposes the means, opposes also the End) And
this indeed is done through the prevailing of self love, and worldly
interests which dim their sight, such have not yet learned that great Gospel
lesson of denying all for Christ, they have but a small measure of the spirit
that Moses, John Baptist, and Paul had, who could be content to lay down their
own esteem, Numb. 11.29. Joh. 3.30. Phil. 1.16.17.18.
and interests at the feet of Christ, and be willing to decrease so that
Christ might increase, by any ways or means that he shall choose, persons and
things, which are neglected, and despised, not only by carnal men, but also by
the carnal part of spiritual men. But such shall have fewer manifestations of
the love of God than others of his people that concur with him: they shall
not see, nor know so much of the mind of God, nor find their hearts so
refreshed, and enlarged in communion with God, nor find so much esteem, and
love from his people as those that close with God in his great designs.

The ninety third Observation in Nature.
WHen the husbandman intends to plant a very large Orchard, out of rough
unmanured grounds (like a wilderness) full of bushes and wild trees where
never was any before: when he resolves, and sets on such a huge and vast
Plantation, such a great work is not presently effected but by length of time;
perhaps he may be many years about it.

This shadows out unto us this Proposition: That

God is a long time in calling the Gentiles, Proposition shadowed.
and implanting them into Christ, according to his purpose and promises.

All the people of the world are either Jews or Gentiles; under these two all
Nations are comprehended, As we see Romans 3.9, 19. We have proved both Jews,
and Gentiles, that they are all under sin, v. 19. That all the world may become
guilty before God.

Formerly the Jews only were the people of God, the Gentiles were strangers to
God, and without God in the world, wholly overspread with Idolatry, as we see
Romans 1. But in due time this Wilderness was made the Garden of the Lord.

God the great husbandman of his Orchard the Church, began to plant the vast,
wast grounds, the wilderness of the Idolatrous Nations, the Gentiles, above
sixteen hundred years ago, and is still about it, and will at length finish
it, and perform all his purpose, and pleasures toward them.

The time when he began this great plantation was in our Saviors days, who
gave light to the Gentiles that sat in darkness; but especially after his
Resurrection, and Ascension, he set his husbandmen (the Apostles and Disciples)
on work, Matthew. 28.19. Go teach all Nations, and Mark. 13.10. the Gospel
must be published among all Nations.

The Lord told Ananias, that Paul was a chosen Vessel unto him to bear his
name before the Gentiles. Act. 9.15. And Paul himself afterward gloried in
this, in that he was employed about this work of being isntrumental in this
great plantation (which now God was about, having newly begun it) of implanting
or ingrafting the Gentiles into Christ, the true Vine, and Olive tree: In as
much as I am the Apostle of the Gentiles, I magnify mine office, Romans 11.13.
He rejoiced greatly to foresee by faith, such a huge and vast Orchard
(consisting of many millions of goodly fruit trees that were to be planted in
it) which would bring forth abundance of good fruits to the husbandman) so did
Peter also (and many with him) rejoice at it, Acts 10.45. They were astonished,
because that on the Gentiles also was powered out the gift of the Holy Ghost.
and Acts 11.18. They glorified God saying, then has God also to the Gentiles
granted repentance unto life.

They saw this wonderful great plantation begun, and cut out of the wast, and
barren Wilderness of the Gentiles, and they rejoiced in it, and helped to
carry it on: Paul planted a large piece of ground, and God watered it, and gave
the increase: for he tells us, Romans 15.19. from Jerusalem round about unto
Illyricum he fully preached the Gospel of Christ: he (through the power of the
word and spirit) made wild trees, barren, unfruit-full trees, to be engrafted,
fruitful trees: The Gospel (containing the unsearchable riches of Christ)
which he preached among the Gentiles, became in ingrafted word in their hearts,
and sprang and grew up, and brought forth fruit as he tells us Col. 1.6. The
Gospel which is come unto you, as it is in all the world, and brings forth
fruits, as it does also in you since the day ye heard of it.

Now here were great and glorious beginnings, and proceedings for many years
together, in the Apostles and Primitive times, but afterward the, work went
on more slowly, when Antichrist was revealed he that did let, being taken out
of the way (that is the Emperor who had his seat in Rome, being removed to
Germany) when the Pope, and the whole Hierachy of Rome had gotten head and
strength, and credit in the world, then they greatly hindered the work, though
it has been carried on ever since, yet much more slowly than at the
beginning: After a time there arose many, and great enemies against the Church,
and every where persecuted the Saints; The Beast out of the bottomless Pit,
the red Dragon, the Beast with seven heads and ten horns. The Beast with two
horns like the Lamb; the Whore of Babylon, the Beast with the false Prophet,
etc. these enemies of the Church hindered (as much as in them lay) the
propagation of the Gospel. As formerly enemies hindered the building of the
Material Temple, so have they ever since hindered the building of the
spiritual Temple: or (according to the Similitude) the great Plantation of the
husbandman. It is a very great Orchard, there is much work to be done in it,
and about it, and many, and powerful enemies are against it, therefore the
husbandman is long about it: It is so large, that it reaches to the ends of
the earth: over every kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation, Rev. 5.9.
And as it is large, so there is much work, and but little help; Matthew. 9.37.
The harvest truly is great, and the Laborers but few.

There is herein a ground of exceeding great gladness and rejoicing, Orchard,
or Garden for himself, over all Nations; though there have been but slow
proceedings in the work, for a long time, yet the proceedings have been sure:
God, and his people have been at work ever since, they began it unto this day;
and we have Prophesies, and Promises that it shall go on unto perfection, yea,
and more speedily too, in these latter days, than in former times, Esaias 60.3,
4, 5, etc. Lift up thine eyes round about and see, all they gather themselves
together, they come to thee, the abundance of the sea (or Nations) shall be
converted unto thee, the forces of the gentiles shall come to thee. They shall
fly as doves to their windows verse. 8.

Yea here is a ground of rejoicing indeed, when we consider the exceeding
largnesse of this Orchard, which shall take in, not only the wilderness of the
Gentiles, but also, his old, decayed forsaken Orchard, the Nation of the Jews,
the husbandman will join them to it, and Graffe them (these decayed, broken,
withered Branches) in again, and their coming in shall be as life from the
dead, Romans 11.15. it shall be a mighty advantage to the whole Church in all
parts: here will be a wonderful, beautiful, large Orchard, let us cast our
eyes above, as well as below, and look upon that part now already transplanted
into heaven, as well as that upon Earth, and withal consider it with its
increase, that it is daily growing larger and larger, Zach. 2.11. Many Nations
shall be joined to the Lord in that day, what day? even when the Lord shall
inherit Judah, his portion, in the holy Land, and shall choose Jerusalem again.
Here is a Prophesy of the coming in both of the Jews and Gentiles about one
time, which will greatly enlarge the Church, and is aground of great rejoicing
to all the people of God.

a long time in calling of the Gentiles, this should stir up the people of
God in this Nation, and other Nations (who are called) unto continual praises
unto him, for that he has done the work already for us: many other parts of
the world are yet in darkness, they are yet as the wilderness, wild trees,
and unmanured, not yet within the compass of this pleasant Orchard, we might
have been in their case.

work is great, and God has been a long time about it, and is yet going on,
let all that can, help forward the work, God is able to do all works which he
wills by his own immediate hand, but he is pleased to use Instruments therein:
The great husbandman, has subhusbandmen, underworkmen in his great Plantation.
All his people are required to put to their hand for the enlargement of the
kingdom of Christ, by their Prayers, exhortations, reproffes, instructions,
admonitions, Examples, etc. according to the gifts, But this is no liberty for
any people, under the pretense of new revelations from God, and a light within
to go about reaching things contrary to his word, and reveled will, and to
condemn all Churches, and Congregations, persons and things; though never so
holy, that are not of their way, and cast into their mould.
and Talents they have received. Especially now in this generation seeing God
by his providentiall dispensations calls aloud for it, having given his people
(^) freedom and liberty in all places, and great encouragements in the work
of the Lord, which in former ages they have not had: It is the duty not only of
Pastors, and Officers of particular congregations, but of all believers to
labor to enlarge the kingdom of Jesus Christ, and to be faithful, diligent
laborers in the Lords Vineyard. This is the Lords great design, and the very
work of this generation, in a particular respect, who so hinders, or neglects
it (even of Gods own people) shall suffer for it; who so faithfully acts in
it, shall meet with special manifestations of the Love of God toward them.

The ninety fourth Observation in Nature.
THe husbandman does not much stand upon the outward form of his Orchards, and
Gardens, to have them all just of one fashon, and shape, either round, or long,
or square, or otherwise: He having diverse Orchards, and gardens, they are some
of one form, and some of another, as some are larger than others, so some are
of one cut, or shape, and some of another, he accounts it not necessary that
they be all Uniform; but so the inward form be good, so the trees have good
Natures, and properties, bringing forth good fruits, that's it he values, its
all in all.

This shadows out unto us this Proposition: That

External Uniformity in the Churches of Christ, Proposition shadowed.
is of small account with him, in respect of Unity and spiritual worship.

Several congregations, or Churches of Christ (having the spirit of Christ,
faith, love, unity of doctrine, and ordinances) may have diverse forms, and
ways of outward administrations, and every Church is to be left to its own
liberty therein, and not to be in joined such or such Forms, Methods, and
ways of proceedings in the worship of God, or in the discipline and government
of the particular Churches.

For now in the time of the New Testament, the worship of God consists not in
Externals (neither are they commanded) as heretofore under the old
administrations of the law: But our Savior tells us, John 4.23. The hour
comes and now is, when the true worshipers, shall worship the father in
spirit and in truth. Many in the Apostles time had vain, and needless
disputations, about meat and drink, and observation of days, and such like,
Romans 14.1, 3, 5, 10, 13. etc. he tells them, verse. 17. The Kingdom of God is
not meat, and drink (it consists not in any external thing) but it is
righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.

So that he leaves them to the using or not using of such outward things to
their own pleasures, being of an indifferent Nature: verse. 5. let every man be
fully persuaded in his own mind.

Now so it is, in respect of External Uniformity in Churches, the worship of
God being Now spiritual, he leaves the external part of it unto the choice
and pleasure of his people, to concur in one way or External form; or to
vary, as they judge meet, and convenient (every particular Church among
themselves) in respect of time, As for one day in seven to be dedicated to God
in worship, that is the moral part of the fourth commandment and was changed
from the seventh to the first day of the week, by Christ himself, and
observed by his Apostles and Disciples.
place, manner and form, and would not have his people to fall out, and differ
about tything Mynt, Anise, Cummin, (petty and indifferent things) while they
neglect the weighty, and great matters of the Law; unity, and spiritual
worship.

The Apostle Paul sharply reproves the Corinthians for standing so much upon
Men, Names, Titles, 1 Cor. 1.12. One says, I am of Paul, another, I am of
Apollo, another of Cephas, another of Christ, even as many in our days they
stick in the outside, in Names, and Forms, Lutherans, Calvinists, some are for
the Episcopal way, some for the Presbiterian, some for the Independent, some
for the Rebaptized way, some reject all these (as the These people proceed
further in censuring others then ever any did; for they judge and condemn not
only the Fortunes, and outward administrations of all Churches: but also the
whole sirituall state, and condition of all persons that are not of their way,
and that suddenly, and rashly, without knowledge of the persons; contrary both
to Scripture and Reason: crying up a dim Natural light within, and
neglecting the true light of the word and spirit of Gods who not trying the
spirits whether they be of God or not, they (in many things) put darkness for
light and light for darkness.
Quakers) and say their's is the way: So that may we not say as the Apostle
said 1 Cor. 3.3. Are ye not carnal? for whereas there is among you envying,
and strife and divisions, are ye not carnal and walk as men? In as much as
they differ about Names, and Forms, and neglect, and break love, and unity,
they are herein, carnal, though there may be truth of grace in, and among
them, yet in this thing they are weak, they are carnal: this is knowing and
approving of men, after the flesh which the Apostle Paul allows not, 2 Cor.
5.16.

I suppose it may be said of this, or that Form of worship as Paul says of
Circumcision, 1 Cor. 7.19. Circumcision is nothing and uncircumcision is
nothing, but keeping the Commandments of God, and Gal. 6.15. In Christ Jesus,
neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a New
creature, neither this or that form, or external way of worship avails any
thing, but faith, love, and spiritual worship: righteousness, peace, and joy
in the holy Ghost: an interest in Christ, regeneration, or becoming a new
Creature, unity and love with, and toward one another, walking with God, in
fellowship with the father, and with his son Jesus Christ in spiritual
worship: these are the things that God requires of his people. Not but that God
calls for the service, and worship of the outward man, and some External
forms, and ways in his spiritual worship, as well as inward worship: but he
ties not his people to one way, or form, as men would do, and stand for, and
make divisions amoung the Churches about it: which God no where requires in his
word; and as for Examples in the Apostles times, they vary in every Church, as
occasions required: there is no one form (only) established.

As for that Command, 1 Cor 14.40. Let all things be done decently and in
Order, the meaning is not that the worship of God in his Ordinances, or
practices in all Churches should be all in one manner, way, or form, but that
they should observe Order among themselves, in every particular Church, or
congregation: As in Cities and Towns Corporate, though their Customs differ
one from another, yet there is Order in, and among themselves, in each
particular place.

The Apostle tells us, Acts 10.34, 35. That in every Nation, he that fears
God, and works righteousness, is accepted with him: Now in many, or several
Nations, there are many and several ways and forms, in and about the worship
of God, in the administrations of the Ordinances of Christ, and yet all are
accepted of God, when the worsh p is in spirit, and in truth.

Bodily exercise profits little: 1 Timothy 4.8. any thing whatsoever wherein the
body is exercised is of little, or small account, in respect of spiritual
worship: it is the acting of the spirit, soul exercise, that God looks after
and stands upon: he values but little bodily exercise, any thing whatsoever
that is external, in his worship.

Now the reason why God stands not upon externals in his worship (or the same
customs, and orders among all the Saints) is because he is a spirit, and
spiritual worship is suitable unto him, let it be clothed with this or that
form, it is accepted if it be in sincerity and truth: Secondly, because Christ
has set his people free from the yokes of bondage, Gal. 5.1. Not only from
Circumcision, and legal Ceremonies and forms, but also from all other Rules
and precepts of men, which his word has not laid down.

It is true indeed: in time of the Law for 2000 years together, the Church
was under forms, and set praescript Rules for the external part of worship,
but when Christ came he set his people free, not only from sin (as before his
coming in the flesh) but also from all those Methods, and Forms, Rites, and
Ceremonies, commanded by Moses from the mouth of God, Ephe. 2.15. He abolished
the Law of Commandments, contained in Ordinances, that is, the old external
administrations about the worship of God, that so all his people, as well
Gentiles (now) as Jews, might worship God in spirit and in truth, but no more
in this, or that external form, and no other: And accordingly the Church of
Christ has been at liberty in respect of forms, in the Apostles, and
primitive times, and for many ages together afterward, until of latter times
external Uniformity was earnestly pressed in the Churches, which Luther and
other Good men opposed.

The Essence of the Kingdom of God is not any external thing but
righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, faith, love, holiness,
walking with God: in these things.

Uniformity, or oneness in the external part of the worship of God in the
Ordinances, or Government of Churches, and for want thereof to break off
unity, love, and Communion with the people of God, it is of the flesh, and not
of the spirit: This has been, and is the great sin and mistake, even of many
of the people of God, the ground of whose differences lies in such external
things, circumstances, and forms, as the word has not determined, or
prescribed to be either so, or so; though men would be thought to prove their
opinions (in particular things) as to the form of worship and Church
Government, by the Scriptures.

The Godly of the Episcopal, and Presbyterian Judgment, the Independent, and
Rebaptized Churches, and others differing from them, what do they differ about?
Not the Essentials of Religion, or worship, but merely in Ceremonies, forms,
and External things, which are not clearly held forth neither in the Doctrine
of the Gospel, nor in any constant practice of the Saints. For we cannot find
in all the Acts of the Apostles, or primitive Christians, any constant Methods
and Forms in the worship of God, or in Government of Churches, but they varied
in the forms, and external Acts, as occasion was offered.

Paul preached sometimes on the Jews Sabbath, sometimes on the first day; yea
(as occasion was) every day; and sometimes in the night; sometimes he prayed
and taught in the house, sometimes in a ship, sometimes by a River side,
sometimes in a Temple: To the Jews he became as a Jew, to the Greeks as a
Greek, to the strong as strong, to the weak, as weak, he became all things
to all, that he might win some: he stood not upon external forms in
worship, but upon the substance, and Essence of it, which is spiritual.

Our Savior Christ sometimes he prayed long (all night) sometimes he was
breife, sometimes he stood, and lift up his eyes to heaven, sometimes being
prostrate on the ground: sometimes he taught in the Temple, sometimes in a
private house, sometimes in a ship, sometimes on the shore, sometimes standing,
sometimes sitting: The disciples of John they fasted often, but Christ's
Disciples took more liberty in the use of the Creatures; Christ administered
the Sacrament of the supper in the evening, Paul at midnight, some in the
Morning, others at noone; some Churches receive it sitting, others kneeling,
some take the Elements from the Ministers hand, others sit about the table, and
take the bread and wine themselves: some partake of this Ordinance every week,
others every month, some twice in a month, others twice in the year, or as
often as they please.

And as there is a liberty in the Churches to vary (and no Uniformity) in these
Ordinances, so also the Customs have been various in respect of Baptism;
some Churches Baptize with dipping, others by sprinkling; some Churches Baptize
Infants of believing Parents; others, only those persons who can give an
account of their faith; and hence now arises the great controversy, and
contention amongst brethren, who fall out by the way, and break peace, love,
and Communion one with another about the shadow, the sign, the form, though
both have and hold the substance: Many Members of both Churches are Baptized
with the holy Ghost and with fire, as John 1.5. are baptized into one body by
the spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. yea, and have been baptized with water also, though
there be not a Uniformity in their practice: perhaps the difference will prove
(when thoroughly understood) but a circumstantiall difference and doubtless no
sufficient ground to break off Communion amongst the Members of Christ.

Surely Jesus Christ will not take it well at their hands, who refuse Communion
and fellowship with those with whom he himself delights to have Communion, and
who are ashamed to call them brethren, whom Christ himself is not ashamed to
call brethren, Heb? 2.11. All believers are brethren, not by a conformity (or
Uniformity) in any Ceremony or external observation, but by faith in Christ.

All have the privilege to be the sons and daughters of God who believe on
his name, John 1.12. all are the Children of God by faith in Christ Jesus, John
3.26.

Now therefore: for men to refuse, or neglect Communion and fellowship with
their fellow Members, and brethren, for want of Uniformity in a Ceremony, in
the sign, though they have the substance, is it not carnal, do not such walk
as men?

unity, love, and fellowship with all the Godly, though they differ from us in
Judgment or practice in the way and manner of administrations in the worship of
God, or particular practices in Government: for the ground of the Churches
Unity is not Uniformity in any external things, but it is their having all but
one head.

The Apostle most earnestly beseeches them to maintain Unity upon a sevenfold
ground, but in them all not a word of Uniformity, Ephesians. 4.4. There is one
body, and one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling, one
Lord, one faith, one baptism; one God and father of all, who is above all, and
through all, and in you all: Here we see, 1. All believers, though multitudes
of Members yet are but one body 2. That one body, has but one spirit, As one
soul animates and sets on work all the Members of the Natural body, so does
this one spirit in the mystical body. 3. There is also one hope; All believe^s
have an expectation of the enjoyment of God in glory for ever. 4. They have all
one Lord; are fellow servants under one Lord Jesus Christ. 5. So also have they
but one faith, believers in all ages of the world have but one faith, in the
same God and Savior. 6. They have but one Baptism, not baptism of the sign,
but of the substance; all believers are baptized with the baptism of the
spirit, Jews, and Gentiles in all ages; 1 Cor. 12.13. By one spirit we are all
baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Greeks. 7. Believers have but
one God and Father, they are all borne of God, are brethren in the Lord, sons
and daughters alike to the Lord Almighty, Heirs together of one Inheritance
and Kingdom.

So then, Here are strong bonds of Unity, and love, among the Saints, though
Uniformity in outward things, be wanting (here is no mention at all of
Uniformity) though they differ in their opinions, in ways and forms of
worship, and Government, yet being all one body, having all one spirit, one
hope, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father, these are
sufficient grounds of their Union, and love, one with, and to another: These
are the things that God stands upon, having Unity here in these things whereby
they worship him in spirit and truth, though they vary in many external parts
of worship, and outward administrations, they are dispensed withal as we see,
Romans 14.18. he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and
approved of men, and verse. 3. God has received him, or approved of him.

Let not men therefore disowne their brethren, for differing from them in the
form, in outward administrations of worship or Government: when yet they
worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth: which if they do, it is from the
carnal part, and to be mortified.

The ninety fifth Observation in Nature.
THe Husbandman often makes a hedge, or fence, about his Orchard, and Garden,
with wild plants, unfruitful trees, or such as bear naughty, unpleasant
fruits: as Crabtrees, Thorns, Briars, Oaks, Ashes, Elmes, or any such like,
which serve well for a mound, or fence, about his fruitful Trees, and preserve
them from anoyances, and hurts, that else they are subject unto by Cattle, and
otherwise in many respects.

This shadows out unto us: That

God (many times) makes use of wicked, Proposition shadowed.
and unregenerate persons for the preservation and good of his own Children.

Many Kings, and Magistrates though wicked, and carnal, have been set up for
the defense of the Godly: very many carnal persons though they have but only
general convictions, a form of Godliness, common Gifts, and graces, yet they
own the true Religion, and the professors of it: notwithstanding they have no
true, nor cordial love to either: God makes such as an outward common fence
against the breakings in of Tyrannical, and savage persons, who might
otherwise anoy the Church of God. Yea, many Moral persons are not only a
means of defense to the Godly, but they are also helpers, many ways, by their
Gifts, and Talents, and outward good things which God has given them.

The spirit of God does convince the world of unregenerate persons upon this
Account, even for the good of his own people, giving to them some common
light, and graces, and apprehensions of the things of God, that so he may take
off their fierceness, and bitterness that otherwise would naturally break out
against the Godly, and not only so, but that also they may be helpful, and
profitable to his own people.

Pharaoh was convinced that God was with Joseph, and so became his friend: yea,
and to all his brethren, and his fathers house, and preserved them, and
nourished them with the best things of the Land of Egypt, Genesis 40. Laban
entertained, and preserved Jacob above 20 years together, Genesis 29. etc.
Pharaohs daughter nourished Moses, and the whole Court was his friend many
years. King Nebuchadnezzar, was convinced that God was with Daniel, and
preserved, and promoted Daniel; so did Belshazzar And King Darius afterward:
Dan. 6.3. Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego were not only preserved, but advanced
in the Province of Babylon by King Nabuchadnezzer a heathen king.

There is abundant Experience of this truth, in all ages, especially in these
times of the Gospel; multitudes having common convictions of the things of
God, and entertaining the form of Godliness, though they want the power. They
generally (if they have power) preserve the people of God, and Religion, from
overthrowes, and destructions, which otherwise Tyrants, and barbarous enemies
would bring upon them: Yea, and God makes them many ways useful, and helpful
to his people, by their Gifts, and Common graces, in Natural, and Moral
things.

special care, and love of God, the power, wisdom, and goodness of God
toward his own people: who makes even their enemies to become friends to
them: Enemies indeed, in their Principles, and Natures, but friends through the
overruling power of God. The world, and all the creatures in it, are ruled, and
ordered for the good of the people of God: All things are yours (says the
Apostle) 1 Co. 3.21.22. the world, life, death, things present, and things to
come, all are yours. God uses, overruleth and orders all things, for the
advantage of them that fear him.

The ninety sixth Observation in Nature.
THe Husbandman in Ordering of his fruit trees observes the seasons: some works
are to be done at such a time of the year: The spring is the season for
Grafting, the summer for Inoculating, Autumn, and winter for Transplanting,
pruning and other works, he carefully observes the seasons for particular
works.

This shadows out unto us this Proposition: Proposition shadowed.
That

God in his infinite wisdom, and goodness observes the fittest times, in all
his dispensations toward his people.

The great husbandman of his Vineyard, and Garden enclosed, as he gives
discretion to men to order their works of husbandry, Esaias 28.26.
does with infinite more wisdom, order his own husbandry in respect of the
matter, manner, and seasons of his work: Ier. 30.11.
When he corrects his people, as he does it in measure so also in season;
when it is most likely to prevail, and take effect, and when his spirit
reproves the soul, it is always in season.

When he speaks to comfort, and refresh the soul, it is in season, Esaias 50.4.
That I should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary: he
gives his Cordials seasonably. He is a God of Judgment and Wisdom, and he
waits to be gracious, Esaias 30.18. He taries the time, stays till the fittest
time, waits for the opportunity, the season to give in a mercy: when it may be
with most advantage to his own glory, and the good of his people.

As God stays till the fittest time for the punishment of wicked men (when he
may do it most to the glory of his Justice) so also in the dispensations of
grace and mercy to his people. God tarries till men have filled up the measure
of their sin: Genesis 15.16. The iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full. And God
indures with much long suffering, the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction,
Romans 9.22. so also he waits till his people be fitted for such, or such a mercy
as he intends to give, till some corruption be more mortified and subdued, and
till grace have attained more strength, till grace have been tried, and
thereby been improved, and increased: when the soul is prepared, and the
season come, then also the mercy will come: Hab. 2.3. it will surely come it
will not tarry: Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt (as a type of other mercies
and deliverances to the Church, and people of God in after ages) it was at an
appointed time, and fittest time, when the people were best prepared for such a
dispensation. Exodus 12.41. the self same day it came to pass. So also God
deals with others of his people, according to that of the Prophet, Psalm.
102.13. Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Syon; for the time to favor her,
yea the set time is come.

God observes the fittest time, the season, in his dispensations toward his
people, that thereby he may lay a ground for the advantage of his own glory;
for the clearer manifestation of his glorious Attributes, Mercy, Justice,
wisdom, power, goodness, etc. And secondly, because hereby we are the more
clearly convinced of what is done, and are more taken, more affected with it,
it makes the deeper impression, is set on the more strongly, and a mercy in
season ingages the heart more firmly, and fully, than otherwise it would do:
Peter was not delivered out of Prison at first, so soon as the Church prayed
for him, but God chose a peculiar season, even the very night before Herod
intended to bring him forth to execution, Acts 12. God made Hanna to wait long
for a mercy, yea God himself waited to be gracious to her, at the fittest
time, when she was in extraordinary bitterne of spirit, God gave her her hearts
desire; a Child of

Hence we should learn to magnify the riches of the wisdom, and grace of God
toward us, who not only bestows good things upon fittest time.

Does God wait on us to dispense mercies, for our best advantage, and shall
not we wait on God, shall not we be content to tarry the Lords leisure, which
is always the fittest time, for the fulfilling of his promises, and our
prayers, as the Prophet encourages Psalm. 27.14. Wait on the Lord, be of good
courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart: wait I say on the Lord.

Is God seasonable in all his dispensations toward us, let us then labor to
be seasonable in bringing forth fruit unto him, and one toward another: It is
true, we should bear good fruits continually: but yet there are some especial
times, some seasons, opportunities which are advantages in our actings for God,
our selves, and others; these a Christian should watch for, and wisely manage.

The ninety seventh Observation in Nature.
THe Root of a tree communicates, and gives up sap to all the Branches, one as
well as another, to the smalest as well as to the greatest: the least branch,
or Twig upon the Tree, yea the least bud upon the least branch, has as
constant, and real a supply of sap from the root, as the greatest bough or
branch upon the Tree.

This shadows out unto us: Proposition shadowed.
That

Jesus Christ gives forth as constant a supply of all grace to the meanest of
his people, as to those who are most eminent.

Christ takes care of all his people, he will not loose or neglect the least
member: John 17.12. Those that thou gave me I have kept, and none of them is
lost. He prays for them all, John 17.21. That they all may be one, as thou
father art in me and I in thee etc.

He provides milk for babes, as well as strong meat for such as are better
grown, 1 Cor. 3.2. And charge Peter again and again, (as he would show his
love to him) to feed his Lambs and his Sheep, John 21.15, 16, 17. He gives a
charge to all that they take heed that they offend not, nor despise one of his
little ones, Matthew. 18.10. He is the good and careful Shepherd, that takes
care of all his sheep, and feeds them, John 10. He carries the Lambs in his
bosom, and gently leads such as are young, Esaias 40.11. not one of his little
ones shall perish, Matthew. 18.14. And as he writs unto the elder and stronger
Christians, the fathers, and young men: so also to his little Children, 1 John
2.12, 13. etc. He takes care of all, and communicates grace, and supplies to
all, to the meanest, and weakest, as well as the strongest: Yea, and rewards
all that show good will, (though the smalest kindness) to the least of his
Members, as if they had done it to himself, Matthew. 25.40. Verily I say unto
you, in as much as ye have done it unto the least of these my brethren, ye
have done it unto me.

Jesus Christ toward his people: who though he be exalted on high, and set at
the right hand of God, far above all Principality, and power, and might, and
dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in the
world to come, Ephe. 1.21. yet he remembers his people, even every one of them,
as well the least and meanest, as the strongest and most eminent of them: as
well the Lambs, little Children, and babes, as strong men, and fathers; and
communicates of his fullness, grace for grace, as well to one, as to another
(in their measure) as really as the Root does sap to all the branches small
and great.

weak believers who are still under doubts, and fears by reason of their
weakness: let such know, and consider, that Christ upholds them, though they
are but small, and weak twigs, or branches, being united to the stock, or
Root, the same nourishes them, and gives up (by his spirit) sure, and constant
supplies of sap, and life unto them, whereby they live and grow and bear fruit
(some more some sesse) as really as the greatest branches: His love is to one,
as well as to another, all were purchased at one, and the same rate even with
his own blood.

The ninety eighth Observation in Nature.
SOme Fruit Trees are profitable for one purpose, and some for another, their
fruits being of several kinds, some are useful one way, and some another,
some are fittest for Cider, others to bake, or to be prepared several ways
for the Table, others are eaten of themselves, without any preparation; some
are fit for food, some for Physic, some for Cordials: all are good, and
profitable in their kinds, according to their several uses.

Proposition shadowed.
This shadows out unto us this Proposition: That

The people of God bring glory to him, profit, and edification to the body of
Christ, in diverse respects, according to the diversity of the Gifts, Graces,
and Operations of the spirit of God in them.

This is manifest from Scripture, and continual Experience. Believers having
several Gifts and endowments in Nature, and grace, are employed, and set on
work by God in their generations according as he has fitted them for their
several work: For as the Members in the Natural body have not all one, and
the same Office, so neither the Mystical body, Romans 12.6. Having then Gifts,
differing according to the grace that is given to us, whether prophecy, let us
prophecy according to the proportion of faith verse. 7. Or Ministry, let us
wait on our Ministering, or he that teaches, on teaching, or he that exhorts
on exhortation etc. As every man has received the gift, so Minister the same
one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God; Let him do it as
of the ability which God gives, that God in all may things be glorified
through Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. What ever his gifts, or abilities be,
weak or strong, mean or eminent, they are his Talents (or one at least) which
must not be hid, but used, and employed, for the glory of God, and profit of
himself and others.

As among the Members of the body, the least, and meanest is use, full, and
profitable to the body; And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need
of thee: nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you: but such as
seem to be most feeble, are necessary, 1 Cor. 12.21, 22. so in the body of
Christ and also in the political body, the Commonwealth, the laboring
husbandman, and the meanest Tradesman are necessary, and their labors, and
industries, in several and various ways, are all, as (really in their
measure) conducing to the upholding, and advantaging of a Nation, as those in
the highest employments.

The Apostle shows this truth very largely, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. etc. There are
diversities of Gifts, diversities of administrations, diversities of
operations by the same spirit, verse. 8. To one is given the word of wisdom, to
another the word of Knowledge, to another faith, to another the gifts of
Healing, to another the working of Miracles, to another Prophecy, to another
discerning of spirits, to another diverse Tongues, to another the interpretation
of tongues. All these works that one and the self same spirit, dividing to
every man severally as he will.

Seldom, or never is it seen that any one man is eminent in all the faculties
of the mind in all gifts and graces, but if he excel in one, he is defective
in another, If his gift lie in solidity of Judgment, and understanding, it may
be he is defective in his utterance, or ready making out, what he conceives,
and apprehends, wherein some others excel, that come short of him in Judgment:
one man excells in quickness of apprehensions, another in soundness of
Judgment, another in the gift of memory, another in a facile, and ready
expression. One is eminent in the grace of faith, another in love, another in
humility, another in patience, another in zeal: One man has skill in one
science, another man in another, One in this Art, or Trade, another in some
other.

As the Members in the Natural body have several forms, and several uses
and offices, so is it in the Mystical body the Church, and also in the state,
or Common wealth, that in various, and several respects, all might bring Glory
to God and benefits one to another.

The consideration of this should make us to admire the wonderful wisdom of
God, in so ordering, and disposing of things, that one person might be helpful
and profitable to another, every one useful in his place, and calling, by
their several gifts, graces, actings and operations, of several natures and
degrees, among themselves, and one with another; that all should conduce, and
work together (though in several ways, and respects) to bring glory to God,
and profit, and edification each to other.

Governors (and all who have any charge over others) to observe, and find out,
what the Gift, and qualification is, of those over whom they have any charge,
that so accordingly they may design them, and dispose of them; this is their
duty, and their wisdom. And it is every ones duty in reference to himself
before he enter upon any Calling, or course of life) to consider wherein
cheifey his gift lies, that accordingly he may apply himself: For seeing the
spirit of God divides to every man gifts and qualifications severally as he
will, 1 Cor. 12.11. it is our duty to row with the stream, and sail with the
wind; we shall make the speedier and better progress. And for want of this
many men dishonor themselves and their Callings, and God most of all; by
entering upon those ways, and works for which they are no way fit, as wanting a
Gift to that purpose, it lying in some other respect, which they ought to have
searched out and improved, that so they might have brought thereby more glory
to God, and more profit to the body of Christ.

And further in this Proposition as in a glass, we may see the folly, and
pride of some men, who being eminent in some Gifts, or endowments, and thereby
also (it may be) answerably profitable, in Church or Commonwealth, upon
occasion of which they despise others, who are their inferious in such gifts:
but know O vain man, that those others may excel thee in some other Gifts,
and may bring glory to God, and benefit to the body of Christ as much another
way by their fervent prayers, spiritual speeches, and conferences, holy and
humble walking, diligent improvement of Gifts, Talents, advantages which God
has put into their hands. And therefore Christians should walk humbly, though
never so eminent in qualifications, even upon this consideration as well as
others, that though they excel their brethren in these, and these things, yet
those their brethren may go beyond them in other gifts, and be profitable as
much, or more than themselves another way, according to what God has given
them.

The ninety ninth Observation in Nature.
All the winter long there is sap abiding in the tree, and continually rising
Of this see at large, 100, 101, etc.
up from the Root, to preserve the tree in life, against all anoyances, by the
air, extracting out the sap, or by dry, cold winds, frosts, mildewes, blasting
or the like, that else would destroy the tree.

This shadows out unto us: That

There is a continual secret supply of strength from Christ, Proposition
shadowed.
to every believer, in time of desertion, and temptation, to preserve from
total falling away.

The Lord has foretold his people that through many tribulations, they must
enter into the kingdom of God, and hereafter in heaven it shall be said of
them these are they that came out of great tribulations: They must go through
many trials, and temptations in this world, yea some of them go through fiery
trials, very sharp, hot, terrible temptations both in reference to the
outward, and inward man, when not only all creatures seem to be against them,
but even God himself also; God sometimes hides his face, and answers not, yea
seems as an enemy, and yet in all these deep Ps. 69.2. Lam. 3.54. Waters
flowed over mine head^ then I said I am cut off.
waters, and floods that run over them, they are preserved from drowning,
their head is above water, yea, and a secret hand underneath upholds them from
sinking: God bids all his redeemed ones take notice of this Esaias. 43.2. fear
not, for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine:
when thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through the
Rivers, they shall not overflow thee, when thou walk through the fire, thou
shall not be burnt, etc.

David was in great distress, when he said I am forgotten as a dead man out of
mind, I am like a broken vessel, Psalm. 31.12. yet help was nearer then he
was aware of, which he afterward perceived, and acknowledged, v. 22. I said in
my have, I am cut off from before thine eyes, nevertheless thou heardest the
voice of my supplications.

In the winter of desertion, and distress of soul, when the sun is clouded,
yea, and gone a far off too, as to the souls apprehension, when a poor
creature can perceive no motions of the spirit, nor workings of any grace, when
there is no buds not blossoms, no leaves nor fruits, to be perceived upon the
tree, no sign of life, no sunshine, nor showers, no dewes, no refreshing, but
contrariwise, Clouds and darkness round about, cold boisterous winds, sharp,
hard frosts, storms of snow, and hail, all discouragements, deadness,
hardness of heart, all kinds of temptations, from within, and without, yet
even then there are secret supports, from and by the hand of Christ, he is
there present, and oversees all, and manages all for the good of the poor
soul, for otherwise the spirit would fail, it could not be able to bear up
under the weight of these temptations.

Cordial, to poor distressed souls, Psalm. 69.2.
when they sink and stick fast in the deep mire where there is no standing,
when they are fallen into deep waters where the floods run over them. Let
them know and consider, that the thoughts of God toward them are not as their
thoughs: They sometimes say, or are ready to say, and think as the distressed
Church did, Esaias 49.14. The Lord has forsaken me; and my Lord has forgotten
me.

But what are their thoughts of God (in the mean time) toward such poor
discouraged souls, his thoughts are thoughts of love, even the most tender
love; passing the love of the most tender Mothers toward their dear Children;
Esaias 49.13. Can a woman forget her sucking child that she should not have
compassion on the son of her womb yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget
thee. Though God withhold sometimes the evidence of his love from his people,
yet his love changes not, though he seem to cast down, and overthrow yet he
does secretly uphold.

Therefore let such of his people that walk in darkness, and have no light,
trust in the name of the Lord and stay themselves upon their God, Esaias 50.10.
and in the use of all good means wait for deliverance, for as God gives now
a sure and secret support in, and under the affliction, so he will give (in his
time) a full deliverance; that his people may praise him.

The hundred Observation in Nature.
Fruit Trees give forth their fruits, as freely to the poor, as to the Rich,
they naturally bear as much and as good fruit in the poor man's Garden, or
Orchard as in the rich man's: They are (all one) as free, and liberal to the
poor, as to the Rich, and greatest persons.

Hence we may learn: That

True Christians do communicate of their good things, as freely to the poor
as to the Rich.

There are Rules, and commands to use, and improve our Talents of all good
things for the good of all, Poor and Rich: but especially to give out, and
distribute to the Poor, and meaner sort: and more especially to those that are
Godly, Gal 6.10. Do good unto all, but especially to the household of faith, 1 Timothy 6.18 Be ready to distribute, willing to comunicate, He. 13.16. To do good,
and communicate for get not.

This is a just Reproof unto those who call themselves Christians (and it may
be are so) and yet have little regard to the Poor, and meaner sort of persons
who live amongst them, in any the good things Many of the greater sort of
persons (Professors and others) are free in their Gifts, and benefits one
toward another; frequently inviting, and feasting one another, but few, or
none of the Poor, or meaner rank of Christians, are the better for all such
expenses; directly contrary to the Rule, and command of our blessed Savior (as
though they had never heard of any such thing) where he says plainly: Luke
14.12. When thou make a dinner or a supper, call not thy rich neighbors, and
friends, least they bid thee again, and a recompense be made thee, but call
the poor, etc. and thou shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the just.

Though this place be not so to be taken, as though the rich might not be
invited, yet it is much more strong for the poor; But how far are many Rich
Professors from walking by this rule, or the Example of Job Chap. 31 17. who
tells us he eat not his Morssels alone; but the poor had part with him: and
this was a ground of comfort to him in his greatest troubles? What will such
persons answer our blessed Lord at the last day, when he tells them, ye were
ashamed of me in my poor Members, ye owned them not, ye invited and
entertained one another freely, and frequently, but my poor brethren were not
amongst you; although ye knew your Masters will in this thing, yet ye did it
not, but walked contrary to it?

poor, and meanest Members of Jesus Christ, as to the Rich, And according to
the Example of Christ, own them for brethren: To these he will say, come ye
blessed Children of my father, inherit the kingdom; for in as much as ye
showed kindness to these my brethren, ye did it unto me, Mat. 24 34.

Thus have I (through the assistance of God) performed my promise, to make up
what was formerly published, an 100 Observations in Nature, with Similitudes;
together with their improvement to spiritual uses.

I have many more in my Nursery; but most are yet in the seed, or Bud, which
when they are grown up, and enlarged (as these) into a Body, and Branches, I
shall (if the Lord please) communicate them also: that others (if they will but
receive them, and be content to have them planted in their own Gardens) may
partake of their Fruits; such Fruits as the Apostle speaks of Gal. 5. and Col.
1.6. And it is my desire, and supplication to the great husbandman that he will
engraft every truth into our hearts, and cause it to grow, and thrive (by the
Sunshine, and Rain of heaven) and to bring forth much good fruit, unto
himself: pleasant, and savory fruits, such as he loves, and will eat of, that
his soul may bless us: yea, and whereof we our selves may also feed, not
only he^ but to all Eternity*

FINIS.

