THE PARLIAMENTS RULES AND DIRECTIONS concerning Sacramental knowledge:
Contained in an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons of the 20th of October 1645.

Drawn into Questions and Answers: (which Answers in the bigger Character are
the Ordinance it self in the words of it.)

With an Addition of Scripture-proofs: and some brief Directions for
self-EXAMINATION.

BY ROBERT AUSTIN, D.D.

For the use of the place where he himself is Pastor; and the benefit of such
other people, as stand in need of the like help.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for John Bellamie, and are to be sold at his shop, at
the three golden Lions near the Royal Exchange. 1647.

Rules and Directions concerning Suspention from the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper in cases of Ignorance.
1. Of one God in three persons. ALL such persons who shall be admitted to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper ought to know that there is a God, that there is
but one ever-living and true God, maker of Heaven and Earth, and Governor of
all things; That this only true God, is the God whom we worship; That this God
is but one, yet three distinct Persons, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all
equally God.

2. Of man's creation and fall. That God created man after his own Image, in
knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness; That by one man sin entered into
the World, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all
have sinned; That thereby they are all dead in trespasses and sins, and are by
nature the children of wrath, and so liable to eternal death, the wages of
every sin.

3. Of CHRIST. That there is but one Mediator between God and man, the man
Christ Jesus, who is also over all, God blessed for ever, neither is there
salvation in any other; That he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of
the Virgin Mary; That he dyed upon the Cross to save his people from their
sins; That he rose again the third day from the dead, ascended into Heaven,
sits at the right hand of God, and makes continual intercession for us, of
whose fullness we receive all grace necessary to salvation.

4. Of Faith, Repentance, and holy Life. That Christ and his benefits are
applied only by Faith; That faith is the gift of God, and that we have it not
of our selves, but it is wrought in us by the Word and Spirit of God.

That faith is that grace whereby we believe and trust in Christ for remission
of sins and life everlasting, according to the promise of the Gospel, that
whosoever believes not on the Son of God, shall not see life, but shall perish
eternally.

That they who truly repent of their sins, do see them sorrow for them, and
turn from them to the Lord, and (...) except men repent they shall surely
perish.

That a godly life is conscionably ordered according to the Word of God, in
Holiness and Righteousness, without which no man shall see God.

5. Of the Sacraments. That the Sacraments are seals of the Covenant of Grace
in the blood of Christ; That the Sacraments of the New Testament are Baptism
and the Lords Supper; that the outward Elements in the Lords Supper are Bread
and Wine, and do signify the Body and Blood of Christ Crucified, which the
worthy Receiver by Faith, does partake of in this Sacrament, which Christ has
likewise Ordained for the remembrance of his death, that whosoever eats and
drinks unworthily, is guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord, and therefore
that every one is to examine himself, least he eat and drink judgment to
himself, not discerning the Lords Body.

6. Of the souls and bodies of men after death. That the Souls of the faithful
after death do immediately live with Christ in Blessedness, and that the Souls
of the wicked do immediately go into Hell torments. That there shall be a
Resurrection or the bodies both of the just and unjust at the last Day, at
which time all shall appear before the judgment Seat of Christ, to receive
according to what they have done in the body, whether it be good or evil; And
that the righteous shall go into life eternal, and the wicked into everlasting
punishment.

And it is further Ordained by the Lords and Commons, That those who have a
competent measure of understanding concerning the matters contained in these
Articles shall not be kept back from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper for
Ignorance; And that the Examination and Judgment of such Persons as shall for
their ignorance of the aforesaid points of Religion not to be admitted to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is to be in the power of the Eldership of every
Congregation:

THE PARLIAMENTS RULES AND DIRECTIONS concerning Sacramental knowledge: drawn
into QUESTIONS and ANSWERS: (Which Answers are the Ordinance it self in the
words of it.)

With an Addition of Scripture-proofs: and some brief Directions for
self-EXAMINATION.

BY ROBERT AUSTIN, D.D.

For the use of the place where he himself is Pastor; and the help of such
other places, as stand in need of the like help.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for John Bellamie, and are to be sold at his shop, at
the three golden Lions near the Royal Exchange. 1647.

The Parliaments Rules and directions concerning Sacramental knowledge, drawn
into questions and answers, with an addition of Scripture-proofs and some
brief Directions for self-examination.
I. Of one God in three persons.
Q. WHether do you believe that there is a God?

A. Yes, and I know there is, ACT. 17.28. ROMANS 1.19, 20, 21.

Q. How many Gods do you believe there are?

A. Only one ever-living and true God, 1 COR. 8.4. 2 TIMOTHY 6.17. JER. 10.10.

Q. Is not the Father God, the Son God, the Holy Ghost God?

A. Yes.

Q. How then do you say, that there is but one God?

A. There is but one God in respect of divine essence; yet there are three
distinct persons all equally God; MAT. 28.19. 1 JOHN 5.7.

Q. Who is this one everliving true God?

A. The maker of heaven and earth; and governor of all things whom I alone do
worship, JONAH 1.9.

II. Of Man's Creation and fall.
Q Did this God create man holy or sinful?

A. God treated man holy; after his own image in righteousness and true
holiness, ECCLE. 7.31. COL. 3.10.

Q. How came all men then to be sinful?

A. By one man [Adam] sin entered into the world, and death by sin, in whom all
have sinned, as being all in his loins, ROMANS 5.12.

Q. What follows from hence?

A. That by means of Adams sin and the corruption we draw from him, all men are
dead in trespasses and sins, and are by nature the children of wrath, and so
liable to eternal death, ROMANS 5.15. EPHESIANS. 2.1.

III. Of Christ.
Q. How then do you hope to be saved?

A. By the only mediation of Jesus Christ, ACT. 15.11.

Q. Are there no more Mediators then one?

A. No, but one Mediator between God and man, the Man Christ Jesus, who^s over
all God blessed for ever; neither is there salvation in any other, 1 TIMOTHY 2.5.
ROMANS 9.5. ACT. 4.12.

Q. What is Christ?

A. He is both the eternal ROMANS 1.3.4.
Son of God, and the Son of man MAT. 1.8.
and as man he was conceived of the holy ghost, MAT. 1.25.
born of the Virgin Mary GAL. 3.13.
who also dyed upon the cross, to save his people from their sins; and rose
again LUKE 24.21.
the third day from the dead, REV. 8.3, 4.
ascended up in to heaven, and now siteth at the right hand of God, and makes
intercession for us JOH. 1.16.
of whose fullness we receive all grace necessary to Salvation,

Q. Shall all men be saved by Christ?

A. No, only they who are true and living members of his body, for Christ is
the Savior only of his own body, Ephe. 5.23.

IIII. Of Faith, Repentance, holy life.
Q. How do men come to be living members of Christ's body?

A. Only by faith, whereby we become in. grafted into him, GAL. 2.20. JOH.
15.5.

Q. Have we faith of our selves?

A. No, it is the EPHESIANS. 2.8.
gift of God and wrought in us JOH. 6.44.45.
by his Word and Spirit.

Q. What is faith?

A. It is that grace whereby we believe, and trust in Christ for remission of
sins, and life everlasting, according to the promise of the gospel, JOH. 3.16.
ACT. 16.31.

Q. Shall none then be saved, but those that thus believe in Christ.

A. No, whosoever believes not in the Son of God, shall not see life, but shall
perish everlastingly, JOH. 3.18.36.

Q. How may we know whether we have this true faith?

A. By our repentance and godly life, ACT. 3.19. GAL. 5.6.

Q. What is Repentance?

A. It is a seeing of our sins, and sorrowing for them, and turning from them
to God, ACT. 3.19.

Q. Is this repentance necessary to salvation?

A. Yes, for except men repent they shall surely perish, Luke 13.3.

Q. What is a godly life?

A. A life conscionably ordered according to the Word of God, in holiness and
righteousness, PSALM. 119.9. LUKE 1.75.

Q. Is a godly life also necessary to Salvation?

A. Yes, for without holiness and righteousness no man shall see God, HEB.
12.14.

V. Of the Sacraments.
Q. You said a little before that faith is wrought in us by Gods Word and
Spirit. To what end then serve the Sacraments?

A. The Sacraments are seals of the Covenant of grace made in the blood of
Christ; namely, that in him and by him we should be blessed, ROMANS 4.11. GENESIS
22.17, 18.

Q. How many Sacraments are there in the New Testament?

A. Two, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord.

Q. What is the outward Element in Baptism?

A. Water, wherein the party Baptized is dipped or sprinkled in the Name of
the Father Son, and Holy Ghost, MAT. 20.19.

Q. What does the washing of the water signify?

A. The washing away of our sins in the blood of Christ, ACT. 22.16.

Q. What are the outward Elements in the Lords Supper?

A. Bread and wine.

Q. What do these signify?

A. The body and blood of Christ crucified, which the worthy receiver by faith
does partake of in this Sacrament, 1 COR. 11.24, 25.

Q. Why did Christ Ordain this Sacrament?

A. One main end was for the remembrance of his death (1 COR. 11.24, 25.) that
is, that we might remember what he has done for us, and we again owe to him by
way of thankfulness, even all love and obedience unto the death, 2 COR. 5.15. a
second was, that by feeding on Christ's body and blood, we might thereby be
enabled to dye to sin and live to God, ROMANS 6.11.

Q. What is the danger of unworthy receiving?

A. 1. They are guilty of a heinous sin, namely, of profaning the body and
blood of Christ. 2. They eat and drink judgment to themselves, that is to
say, the cause of many judgments, as not discerning the Lords body, 1 COR.
11.27. and 29.

Q. What is the way to come worthily?

A. To examine our selves before we come, 1 COR. 11.28.

VI. Of the Souls and bodies of men after death.
Q. What becomes of the souls of men after death?

A. The PHIL. 1.23.
souls of the faithful immediately live with Christ in blessedness, and the
LUKE 16.23.
souls of the wicked immediately go into hell torments:

Q. Whether shall men's bodies rise again?

A. Yes, both of just and unjust at the day of judgment 2 COR. 5.10.
at which time all shall appear before the judgment seat of Christ, to receive
according to what they have done in the body, whether it be good or evil MAT.
25.16.34.41.
and the righteous shall go into life eternal, and the wicked into everlasting
punishment

Directions for the Examination of our selves before we come to the Lords
Supper, added by the Author.
Q. YOu said even now that we must examine our selves before we come to Gods
table; tell me, how must we examine our selves.

A. The word [examine] in the Original signifies to prove and try as the gold
smith does his gold, which he does we know two ways. 1. By his touchstone,
whether it be tiue or counterfei^. 2. By the balance whether it be weight, or
how much to ligh^. So must we try our selves by the touchstone and balance of
Gods Word. 1. Whether we be Christians REV. 3.1.
only in name, 2 COR, 13.5.
or in deed, and it truth. 2. If in truth, then how we come short of what we
should be.

More plainly we must examine our selves, 1. concerning our graces, and 2.
concerning our sins.

Q. Of what graces must we examine our selves.

A. More especially of those which more immediately concern our coming to Gods
Table, as,

1 Of our knowledge, which is the eye of the soul to discern what we eat.

2 Of our faith, which is as the hand of the soul to receive Christ and all his
merits as the chief nourishment of our souls.

3 Of our repentance which is as a sallet of sour herbs to provoke our dull
appetite to these heavenly dai^^ies.

4 Of our love which is as the heat of the stomach to digest Christ and to
convey him into all his members.

5 Of our reverence and godly fear of that divine majesty before whom we come
and of the heavenly instructions we come about.

6 Of our thankfulness to the matter of the feast, who has made us thus a
feast of the flesh and blood of his own and only son.

Q. Wherein consists this examination of our selves concerning these?

A. According to the scriptures manner of speaking (which under words of
knowledge comprehends affections and practice suitable) it consists in three
things.

1 In an impartial search whether we have these graces of which is made up our
wedding garment; which is a vesture of gold wrought about with diverse colors,
PSALM. 45.10. that is to say the garment of faith interwoven with diverse other
graces, 1 PET. 1.7. COL. 1.3.12, 13, 14.

2 If we find we have those graces, then the second thing is to prepare our
selves; that is to say, to stir them up, and put them on as the b^^de her
ornaments against our coming; for it is not the bare having, but the having on
our wedding garment that makes us welcome guests, MAT. 22.12. it is not the
bare having of grace, but the present exercise thereof that makes us worthy
receivers. The Corinthians had all graces, 1 COR. 1.4, 5, 7. but 1 COR.
11.28.21.29.
because they came not in the exercise of them (as of their love and godly
fear) they were judged of God as unworthy receivers, as not discerning the
Lords body, we must therefore quicken and revive our graces, before we come and
so put on our wedding garment.

3 If we fear we have not these graces, then the third and last thing is to
bewail our wants and to fly unto God and to beg them of him by hearty prayers,
JAMES 1.5.

And finding our selves thus groaning under the sense of our wants, and
hungring and thirsting after Gods grace, we may boldly come; for Christ MAT.
11.28.
calls all such to come, and promises MAT. 5.6.
they shall be filled.

Q. You said we must also examine our selves concerning our sins; of what sins
especially must we examine our selves?

A. 1. Of scandalous sins whereby we have not only offended God, and wounded
our own souls, but also scandalized our brother; that is to say, grieved the
stronger, and occasioned the weaker to sin by our example.

2. Of our wilful defects and decays in grace; arising either from our neglect
of the means, or not using them so frequently and conscionably as we ought, or
not approving the occasions of grace and our former experience attained unto.

Q. Wherein consists this examination of our sins?

A. According to the former use of the Word it consists

1. In a careful and faithful searching out our sins with all their
aggravations, as with how high a hand we have offended; against what light we
have sinned; what offense to God and man we have incurred; and what wounds have
followed on our own souls thereby.

2. In a diligent enquiry, how we stand affected to our sins? As,

1. Whether we judge our selves for them and grieve especially that we have
offended God, grieved his good spirit, scandalized our brethren, and wounded
our own souls.

2. Whether we earnestly desire to be freed, not only from the punishment, but
also from the power of sin, and to be reconciled unto God.

3. Whether to this end, we fly unto Christ, that he may thus save us from our
sins, and make our peace with God.

4. Whether we resolve fully with our selves to leave, by Gods grace, our sins
for the time to come, and to lead new lives; and to this end, to use all means
appointed by God, and to use them frequently, and conscionably as we ought, and
to improve all holy opportunities.

And they again who find it thus with them they may come with comfort; but as
for those who are neither troubled with the want of Gods grace, nor with the
burden of their sins, and coming to Gods Table, have no sense of what they come
about; nor prepare their hearts to seek the Lord (2 CHRONICLES. 30.18, 19.) such
cannot be but unworthy receivers: and so eat judgment to themselves as not
discerning the Lords body.

FINIS

