AN ADDRESS From the JUSTICES of the PEACE Of the COUNTY of MIDDLESEX, As it
was Ordered by the Court at HICKS'S HALL, And Humbly presented to His MAJESTY
By the Body of the said Justices, on Monday the Eighteenth of April, 1681. WITH
HIS MAJESTY'S Gracious Answer.

C2 R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon as printer's device

Dublin, Reprinted by Benjamin Took and John Crook, Printers to the King's
Most Excellent Majesty; And are to be sold by Mary Crook and Andrew Crook at
His Majesty's Printing House in Skinner-Row, 1681.

Midd ss. Ad generalem Quarterialem Sessionem pacis Domini Regis, tent' per
Adjornament' pro Com' Midd' apud Hicks's-hall in St. John-street in Com' praed'
die Sabbati scil't decimo sexto die Aprilis Anno Regni Regis Caroli Secundi
nunc Angl' etc. Tricesimo Tertio.
The ANSWER of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, to the Message sent to them
from His Majesty by the right Honorable Sir Leoline Jenkins Principal
Secretary of State, as also their Humble and Thankful Acknowledgment of His
Majesty's Grace and Favor to His Subjects expressed in His Majesty's
Declaration lately Published by His Command.

May it please your Majesty,
WE, your Majesty's most dutiful and loyal Subjects; your Majesty's Justices of
the Peace for this your County of Middlesex, having by your Majesty's Command,
received a Signification from the right Honorable Sir Leoline Jenkins, by
Letter dated the Fifteenth of April instant; That it is your Majesty's Pleasure
we should Depute some of our Body to Wait upon the right Honorable the Lords
of your Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, to propose Ways and Methods
for the putting in Execution, with Effect, the Statute made in the 43 Year of
Queen Elizabeth, for the Relief of the Poor, in pursuance of a Petition
heretofore by us presented to your Majesty for that end, have with all
readiness obeyed your Majesty's Command, and have Deputed some of our Body to
wait upon the Lords. And as we cannot but with all Humility acknowledge your
Majesty's transcendent Goodness, and Charity to the Poor, in reminding us of
our Duty, for their Relief, so (with your Majesty's leave) we must presume to
say, That we esteem our selves obliged to lay hold on this seasonable
Opportunity to make our further Humble Acknowledgment to your Majesty withal
Gratitude for that most Gracious Declaration lately. Published by your
Majesty's Command; by which your Majesty is pleased to put your People in mind
of the Miseries they endured (when the Monarchy was shaken off) by those most
Illegal and Arbitrary Powers, (who most Tyrannically disposed of the Lives and
Fortunes of your good Subjects at their pleasuers, and left them neither
Religion, Liberty Property,) And that your Majesty is Graciously pleased to
give us your Royal Word to Govern according to the Laws of the Kingdom, which
cannot but Extinguish, and thereby quiet the Fears and Jealousies of all
rational, and good Men, and we hope bring them to a right Sense of their Duty
to your Majesty, and their own Interest, and make them confident they shall
enjoy their Religion, Liberty and Property. And for our own parts, we do assure
your most Sacred Majesty, It has made so deep an Impression in us, that we
unanimously Resolve our Lives and Fortunes shall be at your Majesty's Service,
for the Defense of your Majesty's most Sacred Person from Danger (whom God
preserve) and for the preservation of the true Protestant Religion, and your
Majesty's Government in Church and State as by Law established.

Per Cur' ADDERLFY.

Presented to His Majesty by the Justices of the Peace of the said County in a
Body.

Whereunto His Majesty was pleased to return this Gracious Answer,
Gentlemen.
I Heartily thank you for your Address, and for your Assurance of Assisting Me
in the Support of the Church of England as by Law it (...)s Established. I am
an utter Enemy to all Arbitrary Proceedings, and shall Endeavor much as in Me
lies to Maintain the Legal Rights and Properties of My Subjects, it being the
best* if not the only Way for the Preserving the public Peace.

FINIS.

