EFFIGIES DOCTISSIMI UIRI MARTIN LUTHER THEOLOGI OBYT 17 FEBRUA: Ao 1546.


THE LIFE AND DEATH OF Dr MARTIN LVTHER

The Passages whereof have bin taken out of his own and other Godly and most
Learned, men's writings, who lived in his time.

MVLIER AMICTA SOLE HABENS LVNAM SVB PEDIBVS. CORONATA XII STELLIS.
E^^^esia Milv^^^



1 Thessalonians: 5:12:13: We beseech you, brethren, to know them, Who labor among
you: etc: and to esteem them very highly for there work sake, and be at peace
among your selves:/

LONDON Printed by: I: L: for John Stafford. and are to be sold at his shop in
Chancery lane, over against the Rolls: 1641.

To THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sr. THOMAS ROE Knight; Chancellor of the most Noble
Order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
TO whom rather should I address this present discourse, then to your
Honorable self, who by your Ann. Dom 1628. and once since that time
Embassy extraordinary for his Majesty of England into Germany well observed
the country and the present estate thereof, where many passages here mentioned
were acted. And much the rather do I humbly present it to your Honorable
Patronage, because, upon that happy occasion, it pleased our gracious God to
put then into your mind and to nourish therein ever since, a serious
consideration of the deplorable distractions of the Christian Church; as he did
into good Nehem. 1. and 2.
Nehemiahs mind, of the lamentable estate of Jerusalem in his time. Your
compassionate and tender affection was, and is still much moved to Segnius
irritant a^imos demissa per aures, quam que sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus, Hor.
observe the living stones of the New Jerusalem lying in the dust, or drencht
in their own blood, some of her Priests and their flocks clad in Sackcloth,
others with their people by sword and fire cast out and banished: and which is
worst of all, your Honor well discerned how difficult a task it was to cure
this fearful malady: because disaffection of parties and dissension of
opinions, unless God prevented the mischief, would not admit the binding up
of the wound. Nor did these miserable calamities of Gods people only vex and
grieve your pious and religious soul, but also so rouzed and summoned up your
Honors most serious thoughts, that with As the good Samaritan not only pitied,
but took care of the wounded man.
an hearty and godly providence, with a sincere and prudent circumspection
you presently consulted with other most learned, religious and Christian
lovers of Gods Church about the peace thereof, so far as possibly may be
attained, and so far, as it lies in the power of Christian Princes, of most
judicious Divines, and of truly zealous people, guided by them both: that as
much as may be, we may all be Christians should be peaceable one with another:
the devil and the world raise stirs too many to molest the Church.
of one mind and accord, and think, and speak one and the same thing, as the
sacred Scripture often and straightly gives us in charge. For this end Mr.
John Dury a Divine of singular piety and learning, truly studious of the
Churches peace, and incomparably sedulous to advance the same, and first
interessed in the work by your Honorable means and encouragement, has so much
prevailed with many illustrious This by several instruments signed by them
will plainly appear.
Princes and States, and the most eminent learned men in Germany, and the parts
adjoining, that the work is very well promoted, and an hearty inclination
wrought toward a good correspondencie for Ecclesiastical peace. God grant
your Honor life and health, that to your great comfort, and all true
Christians joy, you may shortly see the work come to more maturitie and
perfection.

Amidst your Honors grave and weighty intendments for this and other
occasions of much concernement, may you please to reflect on this discourse. I
conceive that there be many passages therein very considerable for these and
after times: and that they will make much for the exciting of our
thankfulness to God: when we behold from what beginnings, in an 100 and few
more years, Gods truth has risen, and Papisticall and Anabaptisticall error
fallen. It is remarkable that the points by D. Luther mainly opposed were
Indulgences, the Popes boundless power, merit of works, Purgatory, Communion
but in one kind: all When walled Cities and Castles are taken, Villages must
yield. Isor.
chief points and palpably and and undeniably gross. And on the other side,
that he stood up against the Anabaptists rebaptization of themselves, their not
baptizing infants (as not commanded by Christ;) their having all things in
common (as had the Primitive Christians, Acts 2.44.) and against the
Antinomians heresies concerning the law, and other like erroneous fancies. It
is also observable that Dr. Luther striking at the Popes unlawful power, never
sought to exalt himself to honor or He left his wife and three children in
want and distress too manifest a sign thereof.
riches. For though, as he says, he himself with other learned men executed
Episcopal Authority in visiting the Churches of Saxony, and reforming things
amiss: yet he knowing his talent fittest for the Chair of Wittenberg, never
would rise higher; but wrote a book concerning Christian Episcopacy, and
installed Nicolas Amsdorf Bishop of Neoburg, and George Anhaltinus Bishop of
Mersburg.

And in regard that Luther studied and read, as Professor, Philosophy of
diverse kinds, was well versed in the Fathers, and in Aquinas, Scotus, Occam and
other Schoolmen, and attained to the Greek and Hebrew tongues: he was thereby
(...). Arist.
enabled rightly, and soundly, and gravely, and not Some who know nothing do^e
about questions and strife of wor^^ etc. 1 Timothy 6.4.
ignorantly, rashly, or humorously to judge of these studies, and of their use
in Theology.

It was also very commendable in him, that he disliked railing discourse
without solid and concluding arguments, slighted foolish and groundless
calumnies, reproved young students forward and rash attempts without authority
for the promoting of his cause, blamed the headie and disorderly tumults raised
by the Boores and vulgar sort, confessed ingenuously his doubting of some
points, his ignorance in others, and craved pardon, if having been lately a
Popish Monk, he should in any point err from the truth. Seeing this was D.
Luthers prudent and religious course, I shall never marvel at his The cause
required it. And God sweetly ^^oderated Luthers vehemence with P. Melancthons
mild and calm temper.
Heroical Spirit, and impregnable confidence of Gods assistance, and of the
success of his attempts: and on very good ground famous and worthy Princes
countenanced and assisted him, as a man, by his then opposites, convicted of no
error, doing much good service in the University, offering his cause to any
just trial, appealing from the Pope to the General Counsel, and in his whole
course manifesting Lutheri vitam apud nos, nemo non probat. Eras Epis.lib. 5.
a true correspondence of his life with his doctrine. Much more I might here
add, but will not longer detain your Honor from the discourse it self. I
humbly beseech our gracious God, who enabled D. Luther to be an excellent
instrument for the reformation of the Christian Church, for beating down of
error, and setting up of Gods Truth, that he would implant in us all, quiet,
temperate, and Christian affections, Luther endured not to have any one called
a Lutheran. And Erasmus says, Prorsus odi ista dissidiorum nomina: Christi
sumus omnes. lib. Ep. 2.
and love of Christ's Name, and still more and more perfect the settling of
Truth, and building up of his Church, until we all become living stones in the
spiritual Temple fitted for our God. The same God of peace crown your
Honorable self, and all sincere promoters of Christian peace, with peace
external and internal here, and with eternal bliss hereafter. So prays
he, who is

Your Honors ever to be commanded Thomas Hayne.

Christian Reader:
DAvid a man after Gods own heart, as in other respects so especially in not
forgetting any of Gods benefits, but frequently and sweetly descanting on them
in his sacred songs of praise, among many other blessings, mentions Gods
gracious leading his people out of Egypt, and teaching them by the ministry of
Moses and Aaron. The like thankfulness to God should we show in our These are
a chief and excellent work of the New Testament Church. Rev. 4. Rev. 7.11, 12.
Rev. 153.
hymns of glory to God, as for infinite other, favors in these later times,
so especially for our coming out of the spiritual Egypt, by the Ministry of
Dr. Mart. Luther. The goodness of God to the Israelites and Us is much alike
in both these our deliverances. For when Egypts tyranny was grown to
extremity, and Romes heresies at full maturity, God seasonably put to his hand,
and by Moses, then bred up in Pharaohs Court, and by D. Luther, lately trained
up in Monkery, showed a like mercy to us both. However men did project to bend
the excellent endowments of these worthy men to their own purposes, God turned
them to better use, and seasoning them with his grace, fitted them for the
confusion of the Old and New Egypts. God will be When the event is seen, then
we can observe, how Godshand was in the work.
plainly known to have matters of great importance at his own disposing. He
of his great goodness directs to the right object his servants ardent zeal to
do good: as in judgment he lets the malicious and envious zeal of both Egypts
persist in an evil course to their overthrow. Hence it was, that as God took
off S. Paul from his blind and unseasonable zeal for Moses Law in the
Pharisaicall way, and bent it to the advancing of the Gospel: So he quelled
Luthers raging fury and intent As S. Paul did to vex and kill Christians, Act.
9.1. and 22.19.
to vex and kill the opposers of the Pope: and put a zealous spirit into him
for the maintenance of sacred Truth, and the downfall of Popish superstition.
And indeed rightly did Erasmus judge, that Epist. B. 14. page 453..
those corrupt times called for a sharp, and launcing and fearing Surgeon,
to cure their long festered maladies. For the worship of God and the truth of
Religion was then (as amongst the Israelites in Elias time) much depraved and
defaced, and required a magnanimous and undaunted spirit, like to that in
Elias, to reform matters extremely out of frame. Erasmus saw full well, how
difficult a task D. Luther underwent, and for his own part and undertaking
was assured, that if the He foresaw, that by these Novum saeculun brevi
exoriturum. lib. Epist. 3.
knowledge of good Arts, of polite Learning, of the Original tongues, of the
Sacred Scripture florisht, that the dark fogs of Popery could not long continue
undispel'd. And therefore he complied with all Even with George Duke of Sax.
whom Luther found most opposite to the Gospel. Eras. epist. B. 12 page 430.
Princes, and He praised some for learning, that they might strive to be
praiseworthy for it. Epist. page 351.
men studious of good letters whatsoever, to make a knowing world: and would in
no wise, though earnestly set upon both by loving entreaties and kind usage,
as also by bitter calumnies, and harsh railings of the Pontificians, do any
thing of special moment against Luther. He was confident, that, if Luther,
being violently opposed and maliced, should fail, yet the Truth of Christ, by
the light of all good literature and Gods blessing, would, maugre all the
Papists malice, get the upper hand, and spread it self.

But God was abundantly gracious to D. Luther, and made him, as Jeremy, Ier.
1.18.
a defenced city, an iron pillar, and a wall of brass, against which his
Antagonists could in no wise prevail. Had a spirit of pride or contention, or
any by-respect set Luther on work against the Pope, or had he stood upon
questions litigious, or of an indifferent nature, he could never have begun
with that courage, gone forward with that confidence, come off with that
honor, which he did. The blessing of God and a good conscience bore him out,
to take such incredible pains in reading, preaching, translating, commenting,
disputing, writing, advising the Political State, directing the
Ecclesiastical, restraining the Papists fury from open war, counselling some
Protestants from too hasty proceedings, preventing tumultuous designs,
avoiding secret traps set for him, and in daily praying to God for the
prosperity of the Gospel.

All true Christians will heartily bless God for him, and his resolute and
happy beginning of Reformation: if Papists who notoriously defamed and
slandered him in his life time, persist still to calumniate him after his
death, Men may judge something now by the good effect of his labors.
God in the last day will be judge between them. Luther was (and who is not?)
subject to such weaknesses, as humanity makes incident to the best men. He knew
his slips, he acknowledged them, he craved pardon for them. Yea, he
considering, that he was a man, and might err, entrusted his learned and
faithful friend These two by conjoyning their studies settled truth: whereas in
the Council of Trent, though some Divines saw the Truth yet the major part
confirmed error.
Melancthon to revise and moderate some of his Tenants after his decease.

In brief Luthers faith was admirably strong in his God, his labors and
studies of singular benefit to Gods Church, his books and writings very many
and learned, his life most pious, and therefore his death full of comfort and
blessed.

Accept (good Reader) this Treatise now presented unto you in an English
dress, out of the learned and laborious work of Melchior Adamus: and expect
the Lives of other most godly and reverend Fathers in Gods Church, and worthy
Champions, against the enemies of Gods truth, both English and foreign. Some
whereof were never extant before, others, but sparingly in English set forth;
all of them worthy of everlasting memory for their promoting of Gods glory, and
their love to Christian Truth. These will shortly appear from the Pens of
sundry reverend, religious, and faithful Divines amongst us. God make all
these labors useful to Gods people, and us all thankful for his Divine and
gracious goodness to these last and worst times.

Yours in all Christian offices Tho. Hayne.

To the precious Memory of Dr. Mart. Luther.
WElfare those gentle Quils (whose ere they be)
Whose meritorious labors shall set free
The Vrne imprisoned Dust of that renowned
Thrice famous Luther: Let his head be crowned
With sacred Immortality, and raised
Much rather to be wondered at then praised.
Let Babes unborne, like fruitful plants bring forth
To after days new Monuments of his worth,
And time-outlasting Name: that Babels Whore
And all her bald-pate panders may even rore
For very anguish, and then gnaw and bite
Their tongues for malice, and their nails for spite,
Whilst men made perfect in his well known story
May all turn Patrons, and protect his Glory.
Francis Quarles.

WHen blackest clouds of Romish errors base,
Had quite ore-spred Truths amiable face,
And Antichrists ore-topping tyranny
Had chained all Europe to Idolatry;
Then, suddenly and strangely God did raise
(To Romes deep admiration and amaze)
Renowned Martin Luther, dauntlesly
To vindicate his Truth, and Rome defy.
He, maugre all their spite and fury fell,
Did Papal fogs of Error clean expel;
Clearing the Sun of Truth to such pure light
As, ever since, has shone abroad most bright.
Of Hercules his Club, what talk we, then?
Since Rome is ruined with great Luthers Pen.
I. Vicars.

THE LIFE AND DEATH of Dr. Martin Luther.
THE Family of the Luthers was ancient, Luthers parentage.
and spread into diverse parts of the Territories of the Earl of Mansfield. It
consisted of the middle degree of Men. The Parents of Martin Luther first lived
in Isleben a town in that Earldome: thence they went to dwell in Mansfield,
Thence M. Luther went to Isenak. Lu. Epist. Tom. 1. page 227.
the place, of which the Earldome took its name. There John Luther father of
Martin possessed Mettle Mines, bore office, and for his integrity was in good
esteem among the best Citizens. Margaret Lindeman was the wife of John Luther,
and Mother of Martin; she was a woman commendable for all virtues beseeming a
worthy Matron, especially for her modesty, fear of God, and calling on his
name: So that she was a pattern of virtue to many others.

The birth of Luther, An. 1483.
Martin Luther was born of Isleben, Ann. Dom. 1483. Novem. 10. at 9. a clock at
night on St. Martins day: and was thence called Martin. His parents brought him
up in the knowledge and fear of God, according to the capacity of his tender
years, and taught him to read at home, and accustomed him to virtuous
demeanor. The father of George Aemilius (as Luther often has related) first
put him to School, Aemilius put him to School.
where though the truth was much darkened by clouds of Popery, yet God
preserved still the heads of Catechism, the Elements of the Cisioian Grammar,
some Psalms and forms of prayer.

An. Dom. 1496. John Reineck his School-fellow at Magdeburg.
At fourteen years of age, he with John Reineck, who proved a man of especial
virtue and authority in those parts, were sent to Magdeburg. Whence a league
of entire friendship ever continued between these two; either because of a
Sympathy and agreement of their natures, or their education together in their
first studies. At Magdeburg he, as many others born of honest parents, lived a
poor Scholar for the space of one year. Thus even the greatest matters have
small beginnings, and scarce any thing is highly exalted, but from a lowly
degree.

An. 1498. he went to Isenak.
Thence by his parents he was removed to Isenak, where was a School of great
fame: here was a Schoolmaster, who (as Luther by experience found, and would
profess) taught Grammar more dexterously and truly. One reason also of his
being sent thither was, because his Mother was born there of a worthy and
ancient family. How he perfected his Grammar learning.
There he perfected his Grammar learning, and being of a very quick wit, and by
nature fitted for eloquence, he soon surpassed his School-fellows in
copiousnesse of speech and matter, and excelled in expression of his mind both
in prose and verse.

Upon this his tasting the sweetness of learning, Luthers love to learning.
he was inflamed with an earnest desire to go to some University, the
wellspring of all good literature; and surely had he met with good and
commendable Tutors, he by his piercing wit had attained all good Arts: and
perhaps he might by the milder studies of true Philosophy, and diligence in
well framing his style somewhat have tempered the vehemeneie of his nature.

He went to Erford An. 1501. He studied at Erford, An. 1501.
Where he fell upon the crabbed and thorny Logic of that age: which he soon
attained, as one who by the sagacitie of his wit, was better able to dive into
the causes and other places of Arguments then others.

Here, out of a desire of better learning, His course in his reading.
he read over Cicero, Livy, Virgil, and other monuments of ancient Latin
Authors. These he perused, not as a child, to glean Phrases from them: but to
discern what therein was useful toward the right conforming of man's life. And
to that end seriously observed the counsels and grave sentences in those
writers: and having a faithful and sure memory, what ever he read or heard, he
had it still in readiness for present use. Hereby he so excelled in his youth,
that the whole Universitie admired his wit.

When at Erphord he was graced His being M. of Arts, An. 1503. or as others,
1505.
with the degree of Master of Arts at twenty years of his age, he read, as
Professor, Aristotle's Physics, Ethics and other parts of Philosophy.
Afterward his kindred seeing it fit that so worthy indowments of wit and
eloquence should be cherished for the public good, by their advise he betook
His study of the Law.
himself to the study of the Law. But not long after when he was 21. years
old, of a sudden besides the purpose of his parents and kindred (upon an
affright from his faithful mates violent death) he betook himself to the
Augustine Monks He entered the Monastery, An. 1504.
College in Erphord. But before he entered the Monastery, he entertained his
fellow He takes his leave of his fellow Students, Tom. 1. epist.
students with a cheerful banquet: and thereupon sent them letters
valedictory; and sending to his parents the Ring and gown of his degree of
Master of Arts, unfolded to them the reason of the change of his course of
life. It much grieved his parents that so excellent parts should be spent in a
life little differing from death. But for a months space no man could be
admitted to speak with him.

Nor was it poverty, but the love of a pious life, which bent his mind to the
Monastical life. In which though he spent his time in the usual school
learning, and read the Writers upon the Sentences, and in public disputations
clearly opened their inextricable labyrinths to the admiration of many: yet
because in this kind of life he sought not to ennoble his fame, but to further
his study of a pious life; he looked into those studies but upon the by; and
with much ease attained their Scholastical methods.

When on a time in the Library of the College, Luther meets with a Latin
Bible.
running over the books thereof in order, he met with a copy of the Latin
Bible, which he never saw before; There with admiration he observed that there
were more Evangelical and Apostolical texts then what were read to the people in
Churches. In the old Testament with great attention he read the story of Samuel
and Anna his mother: and began to wish, that he was the owner of the like book;
which not long after he obtained. Hereupon he spent his time on the
Prophetical and Apostolical writings, the fountains of all heavenly
doctrine, seeking thence to inform his mind with Gods will, and to nourish in
himself the fear of God, and true faith in Christ from true and undoubted
grounds. Some sickness and fear whet him on to attempt these studies more
earnestly.

It is said, Luther fell into a grievous sickness, An. 1501.

A Priest comforted him.

The Monks used him hardly.


that in this College Luther in his younger years fell into a most violent
disease, in so much that there was no hope of life: and that an ancient Priest
came to him, and with these words comforted him. Sir, Be of good courage, for
your disease is not mortal: God will raise you up to be a man who shall afford
comfort to many others. At the first, the Monks handled him somewhat harshly,
whilst he performed the office of the Custos, and was compelled to cleanse the
unclean places: as also to walk up and down the City with a bag or wallet.
But upon the request of the Universitie, of which he had been a member, he was
eased of that burden.

He was often cheered up by conference with the ancient Priest; to whom he
revealed his fears and scruples of mind, and heard him discoursing of faith
at large, and going on; the Creed to the Article. The Article of remission of
sins explained.
I believe the Remission of sins. Which he thus explained. Namely, that a man
must not only in general believe that sins are remitted to some men, as to
David, and to Ester, for this the devils believe: but that God commands, that
we should each man in particular believe, that our sins be forgiven us in
Christ Jesus. This exposition, said he, is confirmed by St. Bernard: and showed
him the place in his Sermon upon the Annuntiation: where these words are to be
found. Bernard. Sermon of the Annunt.
But add this, and believe this also, that thy sins are forgiven thee for
Christ's sake. This is the Testimony in thy heart, which the spirit of God
gives, saying, Thy sins are forgiven thee. For the Apostle thus determines of
the matter; That a man is freely justified by faith. Luther said, that he was
not only confirmed in the truth; but also put in mind of Saint Paul ever in
these words, asserting this truth: We are justified by faith. Concerning this
point, after that he had read the expositions of diverse men, he further said,
that from the speeches of Paul, he observed to accrue unto himself much
comfort, and great light to discern the vanity of other interpretations,
which then were used.

Then he began to read St Augustines works: He read St Augustine.
where both in his Comment on the Psalms, and in the book, Of the Spirit and
letter, he found many evident places, which confirmed this doctrine concerning
faith, And writers on the sentences.
and the comfort, which was before kindled in his breast. Yet did he not
utterly cast of the reading of Gabriel and Camaracensis, writers on the
Sentences, but was able to recite them by heart in a manner. He spent much time
in often reading Occam, and esteemed him for acuteness of wit before Thomas
Aquinas and Scotus: also he studiously perused Gerson. But chiefly he read
often Austins works, and kept them well in memory. This earnest prosecution of
his studies he began at Erphord: and spent there five years in the College.

In the year 1507. he put on the priests hood. He began to say Mass An. 1507.
B. 1. Epist. 1.
The first Mass which he celebrated, was May 2. Domini Cantate. Then was he
24. years old. In this course he continued 15. years; to the year of our
Lord 1527. At that time Io. Staupicius, who endeavored to promote the
university of Wittenberg lately begun, He was removed to Wittenberg An. 1508.
desired that the study of Theology should there flourish, and well knew the
wit and learning of Luther: and removed him to Wittenberg, An. 1508. when he
was 26. years old. Here in regard of his daily exercises in the schools and
his sermons the eminency of his good parts did more and more show themselves.
And among other learned men, who attentively heard him Martinus Mellurstad,
commonly called Lux mundi, Mellurstads Judgment of Luther.
the light of the world, often said of Luther: that there was in him so noble a
strain of wit, that he did verily presage, that he would change the vulgar
course of studies, which at that time was usual in schools, and prevailed.

He was professor of Philosophy at Wittenberg and inveyes against Arist. Tom.
1. Epist. 10.

He went to Rome An. 1510.

What manner of Masses at Rome. Tom. 6. Ien. Germ. page 88.


At Wittenberg Luther first explained Aristotle's Logic and Physickes: yet
intermitted not his study of Divinity. Three years after, that is An. 1510.
he was sent into Italy and to Rome in the behalf of his Covent, for the
deciding of some controver-among the Monks. There he saw the Pope, and the
Popes palace, and the manners of the Roman Clergy. Concerning which he says:
I was not long at Rome: There I said, and heard others say Mass: but in that
manner, that so often as I call them to mind, I detest them. For at the Table
I heard among other matters some Curtisans laugh and boast, and some concerning
the bread and wine on the Altar to say: Bread thou art, and bread thou shall
remain; Wine thou art, and wine thou shall remain. He further adds, that
the priests celebrated the Masses so hastily and perfunctorily, that he left of
saying Mass, before he betook himself to the Gospel. And cried out, Away
with it, away with it. In talk with his familiar friends he would often
rejoice at this his journey to Rome, and say; that he would not for 1000.
florens have been without it. After his return from Rome, Staupicius so
advising, He was made Doctor of Divinity, A. 1512.
he was made Doctor in Divinity, after the manner of the schools, and at the
Charge of Duke Frederike Elector of Saxony. For the Prince heard him preach,
and admired the soundness of his invention, the strength of his arguments, and
the excellence of the things, which he delivered. Now was Luther 30. years
old, Staupicius would have him Doctor and why.
and had attained a maturity of Judgment. Luther himself used to profess,
that he would have refused this honor, and that Staupicius would have him
permit himself to be graced with this degree, saying pleasantly: That there
were many businesses in Gods Church, wherein he would use Luthers help. This
speech then spoken in a complementall way, at length proved true by the event.
Thus many presages go before great changes. Luther expounds the Epistle to
the Romans.
Soon after he began (as the place required) to explain the Epistle to the
Romans and some Psalms: which he so cleared, that after a long and dark
night, there seemed a new day to arise in the judgment of all pious and
prudent men. Here he showed the difference of the Law and Gospel, and refuted
an error then most frequent both in the schools and sermons: namely that men
by their works can deserve remission of their sins: and that men are just
before God by observing the discipline commanded: as the Pharisees taught.
Luther therefore recal'd men's minds to the son of God, and (as John Baptist)
showed them the Lamb of God, He recal'd men to Christ
who takes away the sins of the world. And taught them, that for Christ's
sake their sins are forgiven, and that this benefit is received by faith. He
cleared also other points of Ecclesiastical truth. His manners and doctrine
agreed.
This beginning made him of great authority, and that much the more, because
his demeanor was suitable to his doctrine, so that his speech seemed to come
from his heart, not from his lips only. For the saying is as true, as old,
(...), A man's pious carriage makes his speech persuasive. Hence it was, that
men easily assented to him, when afterward he changed some of their rites. As
yet, he attempted not to do it, but was a rigid observer of good order, and
added something more strict then usual. The Prophets and Apostles cleared.
With the sweetness of this doctrine all godly minded men were inamoured, and
much it affected the learned, that Christ, the Prophets and Apostles were
brought out of darkness and prison, and that the difference of the Law and the
Gospel, of Gods Word and Philosophy, (of which they read nothing in Thomas,
Scotus and their fellows) now Erasmus writings.
was manifested. At this time also young students were invited to a mote exact
study of the Latin and Greek tongue, whereupon many worthy and ingenious men
were much affected with the sweetness of polite learning, and abhorred the
barbarous and sophistical style of the Monks. And now also Luther betook
himself to the study of the Greek and Hebrew tongues, Luther studieth Greek
and Hebrew.
that upon his knowledge of the phrase and propriety of the original, he
might more exactly judge of doctrines grounded thereupon.

An. 15 16. Jo. Tecelius sold Indulgences.
Luther being thus busied, into Misnia and Saxony, John Tecelius a Dominican
friar brought indulgences to be sold. This Tecelius was adjudged to death by
Maximilian the Emperor, and commanded to be thrown into the river Oenopente,
but was pardoned at the request of Frederike Duke of Saxony, who as it befell
was in those coasts at his condemnation. This Tecelius averred (as other
matters, so especially) that he had so large a commission from the Pope, that
though a man should have defloured the Blessed Virgin, for money he could
pardon the sin. And further he did not only give pardons for sins past, but
for sins to come. And not long after an Edict was set forth with Albertus the
Archbishops arms, which enjoined the officers in especial manner to commend
the validity of the indulgences. The Pardoners also at certain rates gave
license on days prohibited to eat milk, cheese, eggs, flesh.

Luthers Godly zeal being inflamed with these proceedings, Luthers
propositions about Indulgences.

The day of Indulgences confusion. Tom. 2. epist. page 345. Tecelius his
opposing Luther.


set forth certain propositions concerning Indulgences. These he publicly
affixed at the Church next to the Castle of Wittenberg, on All Saints Eve, An.
1517.

Hereupon Tecelius persisting in his old course, and hoping thereby the more to
oblige the Pope to himself, calls a Senate of Monks and Divines of his own
stamp: and sets them on work to write something against Luther. In the mean
time he himself might not be silent: Nor would he only preach against Luther,
but with open mouth cries and thunders, that Luther was deservedly to be burnt
as an Heretic: and withal publicly cast Luthers propositions and his Sermon
concerning Indulgences into the fire.

These violent courses of Tecelius and his accomplices, Luthers temper in this
cause.
necessarily put Luther upon a more copious declaration and defense of the
Truth. Thus began these Controversies, in which Luther aimed not at, nor so
much as thought of the change, which followed: nor indeed did altogether
disallow of the Indulgences, but desired a moderation in their use. Yea, it
appeared that Luther would have been quiet, so that his adversaries had been
enjoined silence. But when he saw, that whatsoever the Popes crafty
mony-gatherers insinuated to Albertus Archbishop of Mentz, was defended and
believed by the common sort, and yet knew not that Tecelius was hired by
Albertus to make those Sermons for the purchasing of his Bishops roab: He the
day before the Calends of November. An. 1517. complained to the Archbishop by
writing concerning their impious clamours, and entreated that he by the
authority of his place would call in their libels, and prescribe to the
Preachers some other form of preaching their pardons: so Luther Tom. 1. epist.
p. 37.6.

Luther writes to the Archbishop, who answered him not.


himself says. At the same time Luther sent him Propositions concerning
Repentance and Indulgences: which he then first set forth. These are extant
Tom. 1. of Luthers works. The Archbishop returned no answer to Luthers epistle.
Tecelius opposed contrary Positions made by Conrade Wimpin and others, at
Franckfort on Viadrus; and compared the Pope with Peter, and the cross erected
by the Pope with Christ's cross: Tecelius his Theses burnt by the Students of
Wittenb.
At Hal in Saxony the Students of Wittenberg publicly burnt in the market
place Tecelius his Theses: of this Luther thus writes to Ioh. Longus. That you
may understand aforehand, what was done about the burning of Tecelius
Propositions, Tom. 1. epist. p. 54.
lest fame (as often it comes to pass) should misreport the matter. The
Students being extremely weary of the old dunstical course of studies, and most
desirous of the sacred Bible, and it may be out of their love to me, when they
knew that one was sent by Tetzel Hal, and was come with his Positions, went
presently unto him, and terrified him, asking him how he durst bring such
stuff thither. Some bought of him, some took the rest from him, and (giving
intimation that whosoever would see Tecelius Positions burnt, should come to
the market place at two a clock) burnt 800 of them. All this was unknown to the
Prince, the Senate and Rector, and all of us. This great injury done the man by
our Students displeases my self and the rest. And though I am blameless,
Luthers excuse.
yet I fear that the whole proceeding will be laid to my charge. A great
brute was raised hereupon, but especially amongst them, with a just
indignation. What will be the issue hereof, I cannot say: sure it is, that my
danger will be much the more.

When Luther perceived that the Positions were very well liked of, Tom. 1.99.
Lat.
and entertained as sound and orthodox; which he at first propounded to be
discussed by disputation, till the Church defined, what was to be thought
concerning Indulgences; he wrote to Ierom Bishop of Brandenburg, Luther writes
to the Bishop of of Brandenb. Tom. 1. p. 63. Ep. and 40. p.
under whose Jurisdiction he was, and submitted what he had written to the
Bishops judgment; and entreated him that he would dash out with his pen, or
consume with the fire, what he thought unsound. The Bishop answered Luther, and
declared that his desire was, that the setting forth of his arguments about
those matters should a little while be deferred: and that he wished that the
common talk about Indulgences had never been. Luther answered: I am content so
to do: and had rather obey, then work miracles, if I could well do them. He
wrote also to Ioh. Staupicius the Vicar of the Augustinian party: He wrote to
Staupicius.
and gives him an account of his proceedings, and sends to him the Answers
of the disputations concerning the validity of Indulgences to be imparted to
Pope Leo the tenth. In these he showed the Pope how inconsiderately and
sordidly the disposers of his Indulgences had abused his authority. He wrote
to the Pope. T. 1. Epist.
He also annexed thereunto the Protestation, which is extant in the 1. Tom. of
his works.

Eckius opposes Luther. Prieras writes against Luther. Tom. 1. Wit. p. 107.

Luthers answ.


Now also John Eckius opposed Luthers conclusions, with Obilisces or marks of
disgrace. To them Luther opposed his Asterisces or notes of approbation. After
this Silvester Prierias a Dominican, and Mr of (as they call it) the sacred
Palace, very confidently enters into the quarrel with a Dialogue and preface
to Leo the Pope. In this writing Prierias set down certain Theses for the
ground of his judgment. Luther answered him and opposed the sacred scripture
to the authority of Thomas Aquinas, whom Prierias cited. Upon this a reply was
made against Luther: in it Prierias said that he liked it well, that Luther did
submit himself to the pleasure of the Pope; was not ambitious, and did defend
Thomas, as the Angelical Doctor. Luther answered this with an Epistle only to
the Reader: and together with other matters, says: If the Pope and Cardinals
be of the same opinion, if at Rome the same doctrine be taught, there is no
doubt, but that Rome is the very seat of Antichrist: Luthers conclusion
concerning Rome.
and that Greece, and Bohemia, and all others are happy, that they made a
departure from the Pope: and that new commendations of the Pope were daily
invented to prevent the calling of a lawful Council.

Afterward Io. Hogostratus a Dominican writes bitterly against Luther and
exciteth the Pope to use the rounder course of fire and faggot. Hogostratus
controversy with Luther.
Luther answered him in brief, and told him of his cruel bent: and wittily
taxed the ignorance of the man: and admonishes him not to proceed to seek
laureolam in mustaceo, the laurel garland in so mean a perfection.

In the year 1518. Luther, Luther goes to Hidelberg 1518.
though most men dissuaded him, yet to show his observance of authority, went
(for the most part on foot) to the college of Hidelberg. At Herbipolis the
Bishop entertained him courteously. So also did Wolfgang the Count Palatine at
Hidelberg. 6 Call. of May. See the Theses. Tom. 1. page 141. Bucer present.
In the College of the Augustinians now called the College of Sapience, he
disputed about Justification by faith. Bucer was there present, and by his
quickness in writing took what Luther spoke, and imparted all to Beat.
Rhenanus, who gave Luther much deserved commendations. Of this disputation
Luther thus speaks. Luthers speech of that disputation.
The Doctors admitted my disputing with them willingly, and argued the matter
with me with much modesty, that in that very regard, I hold them worth much
commendations. For though they thought that Divinity strong, yet they all
argued seriously and strongly against it, except one alone, who was the fifth
of them a Ianior Doctor: He made all the Auditory to laugh by saying, if the
Rustic rout should hear this, they would stone and kill us.

Upon Luthers return he wrote an Epistle to Tom 1. epist. page 60.
Iudocus a Divine and Philosopher of Isenac, once his Tutour. Where he has
this speech. All the Doctors of Wittenberge (in the doctrine concerning grace
and good works) are of my Judgment, Luthers judgment approved.
yea the whole University except one licentiat Doctor Sebastian: even the
Prince himself and our Ordinary Bishop, and many of the Chieftaines, and all
the ingenious Citizens with joint consent affirm, that before they neither
knew, nor heard of the Gospel, nor of Christ.

The declaration of Luthers Propos. Tom. 1. Lat. An. 1518.
After that he put forth in print the resolutions and declarations of his
propositions about Indulgences, which he dedicated to Pope Leo the 3. as was
before said. The causes of his printing them were, as he said: to mitigate his
adversaries, to satisfy some men's request, and not to suffer some to conceive,
that the whole business was determined. For he confessed that of many things
he yet doubted, of some things he was ignorant, and did pertinaciously affirm
nothing; but did humbly submit all to the Popes determination. Hereupon
Maximilian the Emperor being solicitous of the event of disputations of this
nature, Luther cited to Rome. Tom. 1. Lat. Wit. page 203.
moved the Pope to interpose his own authority. The Pope by Tho. Cajetan
Cardinal cited Luther to Rome. This he also desired of Frederick Elector of
Saxony. Luther having notice hereof, mainly endeavored, that the cause might
be handled in Germany under competent Judges: and at length he prevailed, by
the mediation of Wittenberg Tom. 1. page 106.
University to the Pope, and by Charles Multitius a German the Popes
Chamberlain, and the mediation of the Elector of Saxony to Cajetan then the
Popes Legate, that at Auspurg before the Legate himself Luther might plead his
own cause.

About the beginning of October, On Saint Marks day. Tom. 1. epist. p. 83.

What was required of him.


Luther came on foot to Auspurg, in his hood borrowed of Wenceslaus Linkius,
and much wearied with the journey: and upon assurance of his safety was
admitted to the Cardinals presence. Who admonished him, first, To become a
sound member of the Church, and to recant the errors, which he had divulged:
secondly, to promise that he would not again teach his former doctrines:
thirdly, that he would abstain from other doctrines, which would disturb the
peace of the Church. Here also it was objected to him, that he denied the Merit
of Christ to be a treasure of Indulgences: and that he taught that faith was
necessary for all which should come to the Sacrament. Cajetan defended the Pope.
Cajetan proved his own opinion by the decree of Clement the sixth, and at
large extolled the authority of the Sea of Rome, as being falsely preferred
before all Scriptures and Councels. After much debating the matters, Luther
entreated some time to deliberate thereon: and returned the next day, and in
the presence of some witnesses and a Scribe, and four of the Emperors
Counselors, professed, Luthers answer to the Cardinal.
that he gave the Church of Rome all due observance, and if he had spoken any
thing dissenting from the judgment of the Church, be would reverse it: but
could revoke no error, being not yet convicted by Scripture of any, and did
appeal to the judgment of the Church. Hereupon the Legate, sharply chiding
Luther, dismissed him, and dealt with Staupicius to bring Luther to revoke,
what he had taught. But Luther not convinced as yet by Scripture, persisted in
the truth. Yet at length fearing least the Cardinal should make more use of
his power and greatness, then Scholarlike disputations, he appealed to Rome,
Tom. 1. epist. p. 96. b. and 99. b.
and departed from Auspurg, October. 20. Because the Cardinal charged him not to
come into his presence, unless he would recant. Yet Luther left behind him an
epistle to the Cardinal, and affixed thereunto a formal appeal unto the Pope.

Cajetans Letter to the Duke of Saxony.
Cajetan took Luthers departure in ill part, and wrote to the Duke of Saxony,
that he would either send Luther to Rome, or banish him out of his territories,
and entreats him not to give credit to Luthers defenders, and to take heed of
staining the illustrious Family, whence he was descended. The Dukes answer.
The Elector returned answer: That now it was not in his power to do this,
because Luther was not convicted of any error, and did much good service in
the University, and did offer his cause to trial and disputation. The
resolution of the Duke was more confirmed by an Epistle of Erasmus, and the
intercession and vote of the University of Wittenberg. Here I may not pass
over a notable proof of Luthers Heroike courage. When Luther came to Auspurg,
he by the counsel of such as the Prince Elector sent with him, waited three
days for to have the Emperors Letters for his safety. In the mean time the
Cardinal sent one for Luther: but he denied to come, until the Emperor
granted what he desired. At this the messenger was offended and said: Luthers
conference with the Cardinals messenger.
Do you think that Prince Frederick will take up arms in your behalf? I
desire it not, said Luther, in any wise. Then the Party; Where then will you
abide? Luther answered: Under the cope of Heaven. The Italian replied: Had you
the Pope and the Cardinals in your power, what would you do? I would, said
Luther, give them all due honor and reverence. At this the Messenger after the
Italian manner biting his thumbs, went away.

Upon these dealings Luthers spirit fainted not, Luther was intended to go
from Saxony.
yet least he should cause detriment or danger to any one, or derive suspicion
on his Prince, and that he might more freely deal with the Papal crew, would
have gone into France or some other country. But his friends on the contrary,
counseled him to stick firmly to Saxony: and that the Popes Legate should be
certified, that Luther was ready in any safe place appointed him to make his
answer. But Luther having settled his resolution to depart, took his leave of
the Prince Elector, Tom. 1. epist. page 120.
and by a letter sent to him, November. 29. thanked his Highness for all
friendly offices of his love. The Prince sent that letter to the Legate: and
appointed Luther to abide at Wittenberg. Of this Luther thus wrote: The Prince
was fully minded, that I should stay: but what his mind now is, since the
Royal proceedings are published, and I have appealed to the Council, I know not.

For he understanding by the Cardinals Letter, Luther appealeth from the Pope
to the Council. An. 1518.
that Judgment should pass on him at Rome, he made a new Appeal, saying, that
he was forced of necessity to appeal from the Pope to the Council ensuing:
which was in many respects to be preferred before the Pope.

About the same time toward the end of the 18 year, Charles Multitius sent to
bring Luther to Rome.
the Pope sent Charles Multitius a Misnian Knight, and bestowed on Prince
Frederick a golden Rose, according to custom consecrated by the Pope on the
fourth Sunday in Lent: and exhorted him to continue in the faith of his
ancestors. He was earnest with Luther to be reconciled to the Pope: and had
seventie Briefes Apostolical (as they call them) to show: that if the Prince
would deliver him out of his custody, for which cause the Pope sent him the
Rose, in seventie Towns the seventie Briefes should be set up, and so he
should be brought safe to Rome. But he opened the closet of his heart to Luther
himself, when he thus spoke. O Martin, His speech concerning Luther. Praef.
Tom. 1. Luther.

Lat. work at Wittenb.


I conceived you to be an old man, and sitting in some solitary place as an
ancient Divine, in some private manner to have disputed your Tenants: But now I
see you to be in your best age, and full of vigor. Had I 25000. armed men I
could not be confident that I could bring you to Rome: for as I came
hitherward, I tried how men stood affected; and found, that where one man stood
for the Pope, three stood for you against him. What Multitius did in this kind
was ridiculous, for he asked of women and maids in the Innes as he came, what
they thought of the Seat of Rome. They not knowing the force of this speech,
answered, What know we, whether at Rome ye sit on wooden or stone seats? He
further required of Luther, that he would have a regard to the Churches peace;
and promised to endeavor, that the Pope should do the like: Luther freely
promised most readily to do what ever he could with a safe conscience in
regard of Gods Truth: and affirmed that himself was desirous and studious of
peace, and that it was not his fault that these stirs arose; for necessity
had urged him to do, what he had done.

Multitius also called unto him Tecelius the chief original of these debates:
Multitius reproves Tecelius.
and with sharp words and threats so daunted the man, Tom. 1. ep. Luth. p.
152. and 208. Tecelius his death.
till now a clamorous, unaffrighted, bold face, terrible to all: so that ever
after he languished and with hearts grief pined away. Luther wrote a
consolatory letter to him in this case: but for fear of the Popes indignation
he died. Frederik the Elector a prudent and Religious Prince neither yielded to
the Popes desire, nor vouchsafed his Rose any respect: though Multitius
wonderfully boasted of it at Dresa, and said: Doctor Martin is in my power.
About this time the Bohemians sending a book written by John Hus to Luther,
encouraged him to constancy and patience: The Bohemians encourage Luther.
and confessed that the Divinity taught by Luther was sound and right.

Matters being grown to this height of dispute, and Luther having many
adversaries; at Leipsick a town in Misnia belonging to George Duke of Saxony
Cosen german to Prince Frederik, Carolostadius dispute with Eckius.
in the 19. year a disputation was held. Thither came Andreas Carolostadius
accompanied with Luther, Melanchthon and Barninus Duke of Pomerania. He at that
time was in office in the University of Wittenberg. Thither came also John
Eckius a Divine of Ingolstad. Hereupon the 17. day of June, John Eckius and
Carolostadius began the disputation about free will. Namely, whether there be
in man any free will to do good as of himself? that is, as they say: whether
in congruitie we deserve grace, when we do what is in us to do? Eckius
granted that there is not in man a genuine and natural power and ability to
do a good work, but an acquired. On this point eight days were spent by his
playing the Sophister.

Luther could by no means obtain leave of Duke George freely with his safety
to dispute, and thereupon came not as a disputer, but an as Auditor to
Leipsick, under the protection granted to Carolostadius. Whereupon Eckius
coming to Luthers Lodging said, Luther invited by Eckius to dispute.
that he heard that Luther refused to dispute, Luther answered: How can I
dispute, seeing I cannot obtain protection from George the Duke. To this
Eckius replied: If I may not dispute with you, I will no longer dispute with
Carolost adius. For I came hither to dispute with you. If I can obtain for you
the Dukes leave, will you dispute? When Luther assented thereunto, Eckius
presently procured for him a public grant of safety and liberty to dispute.
This Eckius did out of an assured confidence of victory and renown to
himself, by confirming that the Pope is the Head of the Church, Whether the
Pope be head of the Church Jura Divino.
Iure Divino, by Divine right: which Luther denied. Hence Eckius took occasion
at large to flatter the Pope and demerit his favor, and to derive much hatred
and envy on Luther. This the bold champion stoutly attempted in the whole
disputation, but was not able to make good his cause, or confute Luther. Eckius
chief arguments were: Eckius his argument.
that the Church could not be without an head, seeing it was a body consisting
of several members. Then he produced the place in Matthew: Thou art Peter etc.
and some speeches of St Jerome and Cyprian, and the Council of Constance, where
against the Articles of the Hussites, it was concluded: That it was necessary
to salvation, that men should believe that the Pope was the Oecomenicall
Bishop, or Christ's vicar over the whole world. Afterward they entered into
dispute about Purgatory, and Indulgences, (but in brief) about repentance,
about remission both of sin and its punishment, and about the power of priests.
The two last days Carolostadius disputed again, and on the 14. day of July
the disputation ended. This disputation was set forth afterward by Luther, who
granted that the Pope by humane right was head of the Church. Epist. Tom. 1. p.
176.
Whereupon Duke George inviting Luther and Eckius to dinner, and embracing both
of them, said: Whether the Pope have his authority by divine or humane right,
Pope he is. Luther afterward changed his opinion about this point. Before this
disputation at Leipsick, Luther was desired by Charles Multitius to go to
Confluence, there to plead his cause before him being the Popes Commissary. But
Luther excused himself, and showed that for many reasons, he neither could,
nor ought to go thither.

In the year 1520. upon Multitius advise, Luther wrote to the Pope An. 1520.
Luther wrote to the Pope, and sent him his book lately written concerning
Christian liberty, and offered conditions of peace. About this time Frederik
the Elector fell into a grievous sickness. Whereupon Luther moved by some
friends, and out of Christian charity wrote the book called Tesseradecas to
comfort him. Then also he wrote the book Of Confession of sins: in which he
took occasion to speak of vows, and deplored their torturing of men's
consciences. And whereas in an other Treatise written by him, he had said: that
he judged it behoofefull, if the Council would so permit, that the Lords supper
should be administered to all in both kinds: This speech, because it directly
crossed the last Lateran Council, was excepted against by many: amongst whom
was John Bishop of Misnia; who prohibited the the Churchmen under his
jurisdiction to administer the Lords supper in both kinds, and enjoined them
to suppress Luthers book. Luther maintained his cause and answered his Edict.
In the mean time the Divines of Lovan (consulting with Adrian Cardinal of
Derthuse then in Spain) and the Divines of Cullen by a decree censure some of
Luthers books as wicked and worthy to be burnt: The Divines of Lovan and
Cullen oppose Luther.
and held it fit that Luther should recant his opinions. When Luther heard of
this, he answered every particular punctually. And because he found so many and
so great adversaries, he wrote to Charles the fifth newly created Emperor: and
entreating pardon for this his address, Luther writes to Charles the fifth
Emperor.
humbly besought him, that he would so long only afford him protection, as
that he might give account of his proceedings, and overcome, or be overcome:
because it would well beseem the Imperirial power not to permit the innocent
to be violently handled, and trampled on by their wicked adversaries. To the
same purpose he wrote to other the Dukes and Lords of the Empire, and showed
them how he began and was drawn into these attempts. Not long after he wrote to
Albertus Archbishop of Mentz, Cardinal, Luther writes to the Archbishop of
Mentz.
and in submissive manner showed how he was condemned by two sorts of men; one
who never read his books; the other, who read them, but with hearts full of
hatred and prejudice. The Archbishops answer.
The Bishop answered, that he heartily desired, that all sacred matters should
be handled both by Luther and all other Divines, (as it was meet) religiously,
reverently, modestly, without tumults, envy, contumely. He said moreover, that
it was a grief to him to hear, that some great men disputed concerning the
Primacie of Rome, free will, and other slight matters (so he called them) not
much pertaining to a Christian indeed: and that such like rash opinions could
not be broached among the ignorant people, but with encouraging them to
disobedience; He wrote also about the Lords Suppers celebrating in both kinds,
and about the Authority of Councels. And shut up his letter with Gamaliels
verdict. If thy work be of God; Tom. 2. Lat. Wit. page 48.
it will stand firm and unmovable: if it was begun of envy or pride, it will
easily be blown away. In like manner Luther wrote to Adolphus Bishop of
Mersberg, who answered him to the same purpose, and admonished him, that he
would overruled his pen with the love of Christ the Author of our peace.

At the same time it befell, 1520. The Duke of Saxon maliced for Luther.
that Frederik Duke of Saxony had some occasion to send to Rome, and gave the
business in charge to Valentine a Dithleben a German. He brought word back,
that the Elector was in disgrace at Rome for Luthers sake: because he permitted
his new opinions to be dispersed. His excuse. Tom. 2. Lat. Wittemb. p. 50.
The Prince hereupon thus wrote in his own defense, and answered, That he never
defended the doctrine and books of Luther, nor was of that bent: and though he
did hear, that many learned men approved Luthers judgment; yet he opened not
his mind therein. Further he said, that Luther was ready to give an account of
his doctrine before the Popes Legate, so that he might be assured of safe
conduct: and that if his error was detected, he would change his opinion: and
that Luther of his own accord would have departed out of those coasts, had not
Multitius persuaded to detain him there, rather then to permit him to settle
elsewhere, that so he might more freely and safely attempt some higher design.
And therefore that there was no cause, why any one should have an ill opinion
of him.

Tom. 2. Lat. Wittenb. page 51. etc.

The Popes Bull.


To this Letter the Pope returned answer, and sending a Copy of the Bull, which
Eckius had obtained, desired, that the Elector would make Luther to recant, or
if he refused so to do, he would imprison him, and keep him safe, till he
further declared his pleasure. At this the Court of Saxony was somewhat Tom. 1.
epist. page 249.

Luther thought of a place to retire himself in.


troubled; and Luther began to think of some retired place, where he might
conceal himself. Some Noble Germans approvers of Luthers judgment, hearing
this, offered Luther entertainment and protection, as namely, Francis a
Sickengen, Hulderike Hutten, Sylvester de Schavenburgen. Of whom the said
Sylvester wrote to Luther, and entreated him, not to depart into Bohemia, or
into any other country, but to come to him, during the time of the Popes
exasperation and menaces, and promised that an 100. French Horse should attend
his safety. Hereupon Luther taking courage admonishes Spalatinus, that this
course should by the Letter of Duke Frederik, be made known to the Cardinal of
St. George. These are Luthers words. Tom. 1. epist.
I send you the Letter of Sylvester Schavenb. the French Knight, and were it
not displeasing to you, I desire that by the letter of the Prince, notice may
be given to the Cardinal of St. George, whereby they may know, that should they
with their threats and curses expel me from Witten. they should effect nothing
else, but to make a bad matter much worse. For now there are not only in
Bohemia, but even in the midst of Germany such Princes, who both will and can
defend me from the threats thundered out against me by mine adversaries. And
then perhaps it may so fall out, that biding under their protection, I shall
more strongly bend my forces against the Romanists, then if under the Princes
government, I should publicly perform my place as Reader of Divinity. This,
unless God prevent it, will doubtless be the issue of this matter. Hitherto I
have given all due respect to the Prince, but then, if I be provoked by ill
usage, I shall not need to submit unto him. And therefore in what matters
soever I have not so roughly dealt with them, let them attribute my forbearance
therein not to my modesty, nor to their tyranny, nor their deserts, but to my
respect to the Prince, and to his authority, as also to the common good of the
Students of Wittenberg. Concerning my self, I venture upon the danger, and
contemn Romes both fury and favor. Let them censure and burn all mine, I
will not be reconciled to them, nor at any time hereafter join with them. On
the contrary I (unless I can get no fire) will burn all the Pontifician law,
the sink of heresies; yea, I will put an end to my humble observance, which I
have hitherto in vain showed; and wherewith the enemies of the Gospel are more
and more incensed.

Tom. 2. Lat. p. page 66..

Book of Captivity of Babylon.


Luther also before he saw the Popes Bull, put forth his book, Of the
Babylonian Captivity. In which he wished, that what he had written concerning
Indulgences was abolished, and this proposition divulged in stead thereof;
Indulgences are the wicked tricks of Romes flatterers: And in stead of what he
wrote against the Pope, this Proposition; The Popedom is a robustious Hunting
practiced by the Bishop of Rome. Then he handled the Sacraments, and
acknowledged but three of the seven to be Sacraments of Christ's Covenant. The
Pope called Antichrist.
He wrote also against the execrable Bull of Antichrist; and called the Pope
Antichrist: and confirmed the Articles censured by the Bull.

An. 1520.
Charles the Emperor that year came to Aquisgran, where with great solemnity
he was crowned Emperor. About the Calends of September. he with Frederik Elector
of Saxony went to Colonia Agrippina. At this time the controversies of Religion
being hotly prosecuted, the Elector would not suddenly do any thing of his own
head, in a matter of so great import: but would try the votes of the most
prudent and learned Clerks, Erasmus judgment about Luther desired.
and among others of Erasmus, whom he sent for from Lovan to Collen. When first
he requested to hear Erasmus judgment concerning Luther, and wondered that so
great and extreme hatred should be raised by some Monks and the Pope against
Luther, whose life and carriage he conceived to be commendable, and his
doctrine not impious; Erasmus answered in a pleasant manner; That his Highness
needed not wonder at that: Tom. 2. Lat. Sleidan.

Luthers judgment.


for Luther had in his disputations dealt against the Monks bellies, and the
Popes crown. Afterward seriously and gravely giving his opinion concerning the
controversies of these times, he showed, that Indulgences, and other abuses and
superstitions were justly taxed, and that their reformation was necessary, and
that the sum of Luthers doctrine was orthodox: and that only he seemed too
vehement and violent in contending with his adversaries: and that an
Evangelical business was to be handled after an Evangelical manner. Frederick
the Elector being confirmed in the truth by the sage judgment of Erasmus, did
gravely admonish Luther to moderate his fierceness in disputes. Then also
there came to Collen Martinus Coroccialus and Ieronymus Alexander, Tom. 2. Lat.
who again set upon Duke Frederik in the Popes name. But when the Elector
answered not as they expected, they said, that they must deal with him
according to the form of the decree, and burnt Luthers books.

It is reported that these advocates of the Pope did promise Erasmus a
Bishopric of rich revenew, Luthers books burnt.
if he would write against Luther. Erasmus is instigated against Luther.
But he answered: That Luther was a man too great for him to write against: and
that he learned more from one short page of Luthers writings, then from all
Thomas Aquinas books. Lady Margarets answer.
It is also said, that Margaret the Emperors Aunt, who ruled all Belgium, when
the Magistri nostri of Lovan complained, that Luther with his writings did
subvert all Christendom, did demand, what manner a man Luther was; when they
answered, that he was an unlearned Monk; she replied: Why then, see that all
you learned men, being a great multitude, write against that one unlearned
fellow: and doubtless the world will give more credit to many of you being
learned, then to him being but one and unle^^ned.

Tom. 1. Epist. p. 290


Luther knowing what was done with his writings, An. 1520. December. 10. Luther
burne^ popish books.
called the students of Wittenberg together, and in a frequent assembly of
learned men, before the gate of Elister near to the great College, where a
fire was made, cast the Popes laws and the Bull of Leo with some writings of
Eckius, Emser, and others thereinto; and said: Because thou troublest Christ
the holy one of God, eternal fire will trouble thee. The next day he expounded
the Psalms and earnestly charged his auditors that as they loved the salvation
of their souls, they should take heed of the Popes statutes. And in writing
gave a reason presently of this his action. Thirty errors of Popery.

Tom. 2. lat. page 125.


And out of the great multitude of errors in the Popes Laws culled out these
thirty.

1. The Pope and his clergy are not bound to be subject and obedient to the
commandments of God.

2. It is not a precept, but a counsel of St Peter, where he says: That all
men ought to be subject to Kings.

3. That by the Sun the Papal power, by the Moon the Imperial or secular power
in a common wealth was signified.

4. That the Pope and his Chair were not bound to be subject to Councels and
Decrees.

5. That the Pope had in the Closet of his breast all laws, and plenary power
over all laws.

6. Whence it follows: That the Pope has power to disanull, to change and
determine of all Councels, and all Constitutions and Ordinances: as he daily
practices.

7. That the Pope of Rome has a right to require an oath of all Bishops, and
to oblige them to him in regard of their palls received of him.

8. If the Pope be so neglective of his own and his brethrens salvation, and
so unprofitable and remiss in his place, that he carry along with himself (as
if he was the chief slave of Hell) innumerable people to be eternally
tormented; no mortal man ought to reprove him for this sin.

9. That the salvation of all faithful men depends on the Pope, next after
God.

10. No man on earth can judge the Pope, or censure his determinations: but the
Pope is judge of all men.

11. The Sea of Rome gives authority to all rights and Laws, and is it self
subject to none of them.

12. The Rock on which Christ, Matt. 16. builds his Church is the Sea of
Rome, with them adjoining.

13. The Keys were given to Saint Peter only.

De Constit. c. Translat. 25. q. 1. Jdeo permittente.
14. Christ's Priesthood was translated from him to Saint Peter.

15. The Pope has power to make Ordinances and Laws for the Catholic Church.

16. This sentencce, whatsoever thou bindest on earth, shall also be bound in
heaven, establishes this conclusion: that the Pope has power to charge the
Catholic Church even with his rash laws.

17. That his command of abstinence from flesh, eggs, butter, and other meats
made of milk, is to be observed, else men sin and are liable to
excommunication.

18. The Pope forbidding all priests to marry wives, inhibits all the
Priesthood from Matrimony.

19. Pope Nicolaus either the 3. or 4. in his Antichristian Decretal, among
other matters badly decreed, well judged that Christ by giving the Keys gave
power over both the celestial and terrestrial kingdom.

20. The Pope judges that loud and impious lie for a truth and requires that
it be received, namely, That Constantine the Great gave him the Romans
provinces and Countries and power over the whole inferior world.

21. The Pope affirms, that he is the heir of the sacred Roman Empire. De
sentent. et re judic. c. Pastoralis.

22. The Pope teaches that it is just and lawful for a Christian by force to
repulse force and violence.

23. That inferiors and subjects may be disobedient and resist their Princes,
and that the Pope can depose Kings.

24. The Pope labors to have power to dissolve and break all oaths,
leagues, obligements made between superiors and inferiors.

25. The Pope has power to break and alter vows made to God. De vot. et vot.
red.

26. The Pope teaches that he that delays to pay his vow commanded by God, is
not to be censured, as a breaker of his vow. ibid.

27. The Pope teaches, that no married man or woman can serve God.

28. The Pope compares his unprofitable laws with the Gospels and sacred
scriptures.

29. The Pope has power to interpret and unfold or expound the sacred
scripture at his pleasure and will: and to permit no man to interpret the same
otherwise then the Pope himself pleases.

30. The Pope receives not his authority, power, strength,, and dignity from
the scripture; but the scripture from the Pope.

This in brief is the sum of the whole Canon Law: The Pope is God on earth,
supreme in all heavenly, earthly, spiritual, and secular matters. And, All
things are the Popes; to whom none dare say: what do you?

Here Frederik Prince Elector obtained of the Emperor to call Luther to the
Court held at Worms in March An. 1521. Luther seen for to Worms. 1521. And
goes thither.
Luther receiving the Emperors grant for his safety, went from Wittenberg,
and was conducted thence by Casparus Sturnius Herald, and accompanied with
Iustus Jonas, Ier. Schurfius, and Nic. Amsderfe. Of the students he took only
Peter Suavenus a Dane as his companion: who afterward being called by Christian
King of Denmark to his Court did much advance good letters, and did the Church
good service. When he came to Hidelberg, he proffered to dispute publicly
with any that would.

Here many did dehort Luther from going to Worms: Some dehort him.
Others said, that by the burning of his books, he might know what was the
Popes censure concerning himself: Others told him of the usage of Hus and
Savonarola. But Luther with a resolute courage lightly regarded their advise,
and said, that these discouragements were but cast into his way by Satan, who
knew, that by the profession of the truth, especially in so illustrious a
place, his kingdom would be shaken and indamaged. He further brake forth into
these words: If I knew that there were so many Devils at Worms, as tiles on
the houses, yet would I go thither. Also Francis of Sickingen one in high
esteem with the Emperor, at Bucers request did invite Luther to come to his
Castle at Ebernburgh: where the cause might more commodiously be agitated. But
Luther answered, that he was sent for by the Emperor, not to Ebernburgh, but
to Worms: and thither he would go. Luther comes to Worms.
So taking his journey he came to Worms on April the sixth, which was the
third Holyday after Misericordias Domini. They say the Duke of Bavaria his
Iester, whether suborned by others, or by some instinct, met Luther at his
entrance into the town with a Cross, as is wont in funerals, and sung with a
loud voice: Welcome come thou hither, and much desired of us, who sat in
darkness. Presently some counseled Caesar, Promise of safety to Luther was to
be kept.
that Luther was to be dealt with, as they did with Hus. But Caesar thought it
just to make good his promise: and especially Lodowik the Elector Palatine
withstood the designment: and prudently said; That if they should take that
course with Luther, it would set a brand of imfamy and eternal disgrace on the
name of Germany.

On the 17. day of April, at 4. Luther appears before Caesar.
a clock in the afternoon, he appeared before the Emperor, and many Princes,
his Assessours. Here John Eckius a Lawyer, Caesar's Spokesman, and Official of
Triers, upon command said, with an audible voice. Martin Luther, there are two
causes, why Caesar with the consent of the Princes and States have sent for
you: which I now propound to you, and expect your answer. First, What he is to
answer to.
Whether these Books (here he held up a bundle of books written in the Latin
and German tongues) were written by you, and do you acknowledge them to be
yours? The second, Whether you will revoke and recant any thing in them, or
stand in defense of them. Jerome Schurfius a Lawyer on Luthers part, desired
that the titles of the books might be recited and spoken publicly, which
being done; Luther briefly repeated what was desired of him, Luthers answer.
and answered. Concerning the books now named, I profess and acknowledge that
they be mine; but concerning my defense of what I have written, (that I may
answer rightly thereunto) seeing it is a matter of very great moment, I desire
(that I may not speak rashly and against my conscience) sometime to
deliberate. After some debate of the matter, Eckius said again. Though by
Caesar letters missive you might well understand the cause, why you were sent
for; and therefore need not to delay, but make your answer presently: yet
Caesar, such is his clemency, grants you one day for to deliberate on the
matter: and commands that to morrow about this hour you here present your
self, and make your distinct answer by word of mouth, and not by writing. Upon
Luthers desiring of respit, some thought that he would not be constant: but
they failed in their opinion. Here I may not pass it over in silence, that
when Luther drew near to Caesar's throne, many of the Princes Counsel
encouraged him, Luther encouraged by diverse present. Mat. 10.19.20.
saying: that he should be of good courage and not faint, Nor fear them who
could kill the body only, but not hurt the soul. Others put him in mind, to
meditate on this: When ye shall appear before Kings and Princes, be not
solicitous, how and what to answer. For in that moment, it shall be given you,
what you shall say.

Luthers second answer.
The day following, Luther appeared at the hour appointed. And after that
Eckius had asked him: What now was his resolution? he first humbly desired of
the Emperor and Princes, That they would grant him their gentle attention: and
then said: Of the books which I have written, some of them tend to faith and
Piety; to these my adversaries give ample Testimony. Should I recant these, I
might be justly censured as a wicked man. Other of my books are against the
Pope of Rome and Papisticall doctrine, which both has and still does much
trouble the Christian world, and does much mischief. These should I revoke, I
should confirm their tyranny. The third sort of my books are against some
private men, who defend the Papists cause, and by many calumnies upon me. In
these, I confess, I have been too vehement: and besides I confess, that I am
not of an unerring perfection: but yet I can not safely revoke these books,
unless I will set open a gap to the impudency of many. Being a man I may err:
and therefore desire any one better to instruct me by the testimony of
Scripture. Eckius indignation and reply.
When he had thus said, Eckius with a sour countenance replied. You answer not
to the matter, nor does it pertain to you to call the authority of the
Council into question. A plain and direct answer is required of you, whether
you desire that your writings should stand good. Then said Luther. Seeing you,
O Caesar, and the Princes command me to answer punctually, I obey. This is my
resolution: Unless I be convicted by testimony of Scripture or evident reason,
I may not revoke any thing, which I have written or spoken. For I will not in
any wise wound my conscience. I do not conform my belief to the Popes or the
Councels determinations alone; for they have often erred and delivered
contrarieties one to another. I neither can nor will do any thing concerning
Gods word to the offense of my conscience. Seeing it is neither safe nor honest
to do any thing against conscience. This will I stand to: vary from this I may
not. God help me, Amen. When he was again urged, he persisted in this answer.
So they departed.

Caesar's Letter to the Princes about Luthers cause.
The next day Caesar sent a letter to the assembly of the Princes; this was the
sum thereof. Our ancestors and other Christian Princes obeyed carefully the
Church of Rome which now Dr Martin Luther opposes: now because he is resolute
not to yield one inch of his errors, we cannot without a blemish to our name
depart from the example of our ancestors, but must defend the ancient faith,
and be assistant to the Sea of Rome: we will then excomunicate Martin Luther
himself and all his adherents, and take any other course, which may conduce to
extinquish these disputes. But we will not in any wise violate, and break our
promise made to him under our seal, but give him safe conduct to the place,
whence he came.

This Letter of Caesar was diligently and a good while scanned in the Senate by
the Princes. It is reported that some there were among them, who would have
followed the decree and practice of the Council of Constance: and held
themselves not bound to make good the promise of his safe return. But some of
the Princes, especially Lodowik Prince Palatine (as it is reported) earnestly
withstood them. Wherefore they judged that not only fidelity was to be
observed toward him, but also, that he was not rashly to be condemned: because
the matter was of very great consequence, whatsoever the Emperor decreed: whom
being newly come to the Imperial seat they did well perceive to be pressed and
provoked by the Popes instruments against Luther.

After a few days the Archbishop of Triers and other Princes, The Archbishop
of Triers dealing with Luther. Sleidan. B. 3.
who by Caesar's permission were present, call Luther April 24. unto them. The
Bishop then in a friendly manner dealt with him to desist from his resolution.
But Luther giving him thanks for care of his safety, stood firmly in his
former doctrine: and submitted what ever he had written to Caesar's and the
Princes perusal, and judgment, so that they tried them by Gods word. When the
Bishop asked him, what remedy he knew or could advise for these stirs? Luther
answered: None other then that of Gamaliel in the Acts of the Apostles. If this
counsel and proceeding be of Men, it will not continue: if of God, no power of
man can dissolve it. And this he besought him to signify to the Pope. The
Bishop again said; What if the Articles were collected and submitted to the
Council? Luther answered, Yes they might, so that they were not the same which
the Council at Constance condemned. The Bishop replying: that he feared they
would be the very same. Luther courageously answered; Those will I defend,
though I was presently to die. Hereupon the Bishop quietly dismissed Luther:
who entreated him, that he might have leave to return to his friends, and have
safe conduct from Caesar. The Bishop promised to obtain it for him, and a
little while after sent Eckius the officer of Caesar to signify to Luther,
that he had free liberty to depart under Caesar's protection within 21. days:
withal he was bid not to preach in his journey home, nor to write any thing,
which might raise further stirs. Luther answered As it seems good to the
Lord, so be it: blessed be the name of God. Afterward he gave humble thanks to
Caesar and the Princes, and commended himself to them.

Luthers departure from Worms.
On the 26. of April Luther taking his leave departed from Worms. Casp.
Sturmius a Messenger some hours after followed him, and found him at Openheim.
Luther being in his journey sent Letters back both to Caesar and the Princes
Electors, and States of the Empire, commending himself and his cause to them;
and said he was ready to do any thing, Luther excommunicate and proscribed.
which was meet, except to revoke any thing, that he knew to be warranted by
Gods word. The Emperor hereupon, May the 28. proscribed Luther: whom Pope Leo
on the 28. of March on the day of the administration of the Lords Supper, had
excommunicated. At this all men stood earnestly expecting, what those
thunderbolts would effect.

Frederik the Elector a prudent Prince, seeing Luther to have incurred the
hatred of all; that no danger might seize on him, committed the business of
conveying Luther into some safe place, where he might be free from access, to
some faithful friends of the Nobility, that there he should be kept private,
till Caesar was departed out of Germany. They presently, faithfully, and
secretly conveyed him to the Castle of Wartenburg near Isenack: Luther
conveyed to Wartenburgh. Luthers Patmos.
This place Luther afterward used to call his Patmos. There were but eight
privy to this, who did it with that secrecy that not any but themselves could
know what was become of him. It is reported that the Papists set their wisards
on work to descry him: but they could not certainly design the place where he
was. Luther abode in that woody wilderness about ten months: and in this
retiredness wrote diverse useful Treatises for the Church; Luthers works
written in this his retiredness.
as the Explications of the Gospels and Epistles dedicated to Albertus of
Mansfield: the book against Latomus about sin remaining in the regenerate.
Besides he cut in two the two sinnewes of the Popes kingdom, namely, Private
mass taken away at Wittenberg.
Private Masses and Monastic Vows, which books he dedicated to the Augustine
Friars (who in his absence abrogated private Masses and began to dispute about
Monastic Vows) and to his Father. They of Wittenberg also gave a reason to
the Elector why they did so: and showed to what end Temples and Colleges were
instituted at the first; that is, not for private Masses, but that young people
might be there brought up piously: and that the means they were endowed with,
were for the use of both Readers and scholars that were in want. And that this
buying and selling of Masses was crept in within four hundredth years of that
time.

Luther found courteous entertainment and kind respect in that his wilderness:
for in his Epistles he often mentions the friendly offices of his Host: to
whom he preached on the Lords day and at Festival times in his private
Chapel. Luthers taking the air and his recreation.
Some times Luther for his healths sake went forth into the strawberry groves,
and somewhat farther into the Monasteries, which were near, taking upon him
the name Iunker George a noble man, and accompanied only with one attendant,
who was faithful and secret, and would often warn Luther in the places where
they were entertained, not presently to lay aside his sword, and to take in
hand the books before him; for so he might be descried. Sometimes he went forth
a hunting with his friends. Of this sport thus he writes. I was a hunting two
days, to see that lordly but bitter-sweet sport. Here we took two Hares, and
some silly young Partridges. The sport is meet for such as have nothing else to
do. There did I contemplate as a Divine amidst their nets and dogs. Nor did the
outward appearance of the game more delight me, then what I conceived by it,
Hunting is a resemblance of the devils practice.
move me to pity and grief. For what could this sport signify and resemble,
but by the dogs, wicked Popish divines, and by the nets, the cunning tricks and
wiles by which they seek to catch harmless Christians, as hunters those silly
creatures? This was a most evident mystery of the pursuing of plain hearted
and faithful souls. Yet was there a more cruel mystery presented to me: When
by my means, we kept a young Hare alive; and put her in my Coats sleeve, and
so left her: in the mean time the dogs finding it, broke one of her legs, and
taking her by the as she was in the sleeve, stopped her wind. Thus it is with
Satan and the Pope, who cruelly destroy poor souls without regard of my pains
to save them. I was by this time weary of this sport, and thought that more
pleasing, where Bears, Wolves, Bores, Foxes, and such like savage creatures
are struck dead with darts and arrows. It comforted me again, (for I took it as
a mystery and resemblance of salvation) that Hares and harmless creatures are
taken by men, and not by Bears, Wolves and ravenous Hawks who resemble Popish
Bishops and Divines: because by these may be signified a devouring by Hell, by
those an eating of them as food for heaven.

He passed also to Wittenberg from his Patmos making few acquainted therewith,
He came privately to Wittenberg. Tom. 1. epist. page 367. Luthers infirmity.
Tom. 1. epist. page 361.
and lodged with Amsdorf: here he spent some few days and was merry with his
friends, without the Electors knowledge. In his retiredness he was much
troubled with costivenesse, having the benefit of natural ease that way but
once in four or five days: Then also was he tried by some devilish
tentations, which much disquieted him. This disease he overcame by exercise,
and medicines sent him from Spalatinus. Then read he also the Hebrew and Greek
Bibles: and besides the books above mentioned, he wrote many letters to his
friends, which be now printed.

At length not enduring further delay and innovations, he returned from his
Patmos to Wittenberg, He returned to Wittenberg.
without the knowledge of the Electour. March the sixth, Ann. 1522. he rendered
these reasons of his return to the Electour. Tom. 2. epist. page 47.
First, said he, I am called back by the Letters of the Church and People of
Wittenberg, and that with much solicitation and entreaty. Secondly, at
Wittenberg Satan has made an inrode into my flock, and raised such stirs,
that I cannot well repress and quiet them with my writing alone, but of
necessity I must live there, be present among them, and both hear them and
speak to them, goin and out before them, and do what I can for their good.
Besides I fear, that some great and violent sedition will arise in Germany,
and make Germany undergo grievous punishment for its contempt and ingratitude.
I thought it therefore needful to do do what I ought and could for them in
this regard by my counsel and endeavor, to teach, admonish and exhort them,
thereby to avert Gods anger and judgment, or at least to stay them awhile.
Furthermore, Luthers confidence, and relying on God.
I know well, and am verily persuaded that my preaching, and my proceeding to
divulge the Gospel of Christ is not of my own motion; but the work of God. Nor
shall any kind of death or persecution shake this my confidence, and make me
think otherwise; and I conceive that I rightly divine that no terrors or
cruelty can put out the light already shining. And in an other Epistle. I
return to Wittenberg under a more sublime and strong protection, then the
Elector of Saxony can give me. Nor did I ever mind to sue for defense from
your Highness. Moreover did I know that your Highness would and could defend
me, verily I would not return. No sword can advance and maintain this cause.
God alone can order and promote it, without any man's excessive care and
helpful hand. Therefore in this cause he that most strongly trusts to Gods
assistance, he most surely defends himself and others. Seeing therefore I
perceive your Highness to be weak in faith, I can by no means attribute so
much to your Highness, as to be persuaded that I can be defended and freed
from danger by you. I will keep your Highness person, your mind and body, and
estate safe from all danger and damage in this my cause, whether you believe me
or not. Let your Highness then be assured and not doubt at all, that this
matter is far otherwise concluded of in heaven, then at Norimberg. For we
shall find, that they which think they have devoured all the Gospel and queld
it in the rising, are not yet come to the Benedicite. I have to deal with
another manner and more powerful Prince, then our Duke. He knows me, and I
him conveniently well. Did your Highness believe, you should behold the
wonderful works and glory of God: Whereas you not yet believing, see none of
these things. To God be glory and praise for ever. This and much more to this
purpose he wrote, showing his full assurance and plerophory of faith most
admirable. He also wrote thus to Melancthon concerning the cause of his return.
Provide a lodging for me, Another cause of Luthers return.
for the Translation of the Bible compels me to return to you: pray to God that
it may stand with his good pleasure. I desire to conceal my self, as much as I
can, yet will I proceed in my work resolved upon. He wrote the like to
Amsdorf: That for the translation of the Bible he must return to Wittenberg,
that therein he might use other men's counsel and help.

Luther being returned, from the Lords Day first in Lent that whole week every
day preached one Sermon; these are extant: and in them he showed what he liked
or disliked in the alterations made in his absence. He found fault with them,
who had abrogated private Mass and Idols, and administered the Lords Supper in
both kinds, and taken away auricular confession, differences of meats,
invocation of Saints, and other the like matters; not because they had done
impiously, but because they proceeded not herein orderly. He affirmed that he
condemned the Papisticall Mass, the worshipping of Images, the rules of
auricular confession, prayer to Saints, the Popish fasting: but he did condemn
them only by the Word of God preached, and not by a violent abrogation of
them. How much he prevailed by those Sermons, Carolostade offended with Luther.
he tells in these words. I, says he, gave offense to Carolostade, because I
blamed his proceedings, though I condemned not his doctrine. Only this disliked
me, that dealing about ceremonies and outward matters, he labored less in
that which is Christian doctrine indeed, namely, faith and charity: for by his
unadvised course of teaching, he brought the people to this pass, that he
thought himself a Christian by these petty matters, by communicating in both
kinds, by not using confession, and by breaking down images, etc. And this was
the beginning of dissension between Luther and Carolostade. 1522. Luther
translated the New Testament and printed it.


In this 22. year the New Testament came forth, as it was translated into the
German tongue in his Patmos, and afterward revised somewhat by Melanct. used
about it. Tom. 2. ep^st. p. 55. and ep^st. 1. to Camerat.
Melancthon. Some Popish Princes and Bishops prohibited their people to read
it. He wrote also a Letter to the Tom. 2. epist. page 85.
Bohemians concerning matters of great moment: and exhorted them to constancy
in the truth, which they had received, and that they would not fall back to
Antichrist for a vain hope of peace: He also dissuaded them from making
themselves guilty of the innocent blood of John Hus and Jerome of Prague. And
where as some objected their many different Sects; he showed that there were
many more among the Papists: and prescribed the Bohemians a course, how they
might cure this disease. Here he inveighed earnestly against such Bishops, as
did condemn and persecute the doctrine of the Gospel: and being often provoked
did neither defend their own doctrine, nor refute Luthers. He showed them that
by their tyranny they should not prevail: because he was neither moved by the
Popes Anathema or curse, nor Caesar's proscription, and that he would endeavor
so much the more to propagate the Gospel, and set to it with the more courage,
by how much the more violently they withstood it: and that the Gospel would not
be extinguished, though they should kill him: and that God would plague them
most conspicuously and grievously, if they proceeded in their furious course.
In this book he so angered the then Bishops, Abbats, Monks, and the whole dregs
of them, that they resolved that seeing they could not burn Luther himself,
they would burn all his books.

About this time also, Luther confuted Nicolas Stork, Luthers dealing with the
ringleaders of the Anabaptists.
Thomas Muncer and other fanaticall ringleaders, and Prophets broaching new
doctrines, who pretended revelations Angelical, and conferences with God, and
denied the Baptism of infants: and thereby sowed the seed of Anabaptisme.
These false prophets came from the Cygnean City to Wittenberg, in Luthers
absence, and molested Carolostade, Luthers harsh answer to the King of England.
and Melancthon. Now also Luther answered Henry the eight King of England, who,
as other adversaries also, set out a book against Luther, and had given him by
Pope Leo the title of Defender of the Faith of the Church. Only Luther
answered him somewhat sharply: which course some of Luthers friends disliked.
Of the same thus Erasmus wrote. If Luther first commending the godly care of
the King, had afterward with solid arguments refuted his opinions, and laid no
disgrace on the Kings person, I suppose he had done that which would much have
advanced his cause. Again. What set Luther on, to say in his book against the
King? Let your Highness come to me, and I will teach you. Truly the Kings
book was written in a good Latin style, and not unlearnedly. Luther thus
excuses this his fact. Luthers excuse for so writing.
If any man be offended at my sharpness toward the King, I thus answer him.
In that book I have to do with senseless monsters, who contemn my best and
most modest writings, and my humble submission, and are more hardened by my
calmnesse. Besides I abstained from bitter speeches and lies, with which the
Kings book is full fraught: nor is it any great matter, if I give no more
respect to an earthly King, and speak sharply, seeing he was not afraid to
blaspheme the King of Heaven with his speech, and to speak profanely in his
virulent lies. God the righteous judge divide the matter between us. This book
he dedicated to Sebastian Earl of Schlick, Sebastian Earl of Schlick.
whose singular piety and zeal he commends: and says, he will make this
writing the beginning of his flying to the Bohemians. For both the King and
others had falsely accused him of flying thither and did triumph and brag,
saying: We have won the day, the Heretic is fled to the Heretics.

In the year 1523. at the Assembly at Norinberg, 1523. An assembly at
Norinberg.
the Emperor being absent, the decree made at Worms was disannulled. And when
the Popes Legate complained thereof, and said, that Luther was not punished
according to Caesar's decree; The Princes answered that most men in Germany were
so instructed by Luthers Sermons and books; that if that decree had been
executed, it would have given occasion of great sedition: and that this
construction would have been made thereof: namely, that the truth of the Gospel
was thereby oppressed and extinguished, and manifest errors and evils stood
for, which might not be tolerated or winked at any longer. A Council to be
held in Germany.
And that now this assembly was gathered; that a free Council might shortly be
kept in Germany at Mentz, or Argentorate, or Mets, or Cullen. And that in the
mean time Luther and others should set forth no books; the Preachers should
Preach nothing but the Gospel, plainly and modestly, according to the
interpretations commonly received by the Church: that such Preachers as
transgressed should be mildly punished, by fit men appointed by the Bishops:
lest any one should suspect, that this was done to hinder the free preaching of
the Gospel: that the Printers should imprint, or divulge nothing, but what was
allowed and approved by learned and judicious men; that the Priests who had
married wives, should be amerced according to the award of the Popes laws. The
hundred grievances of Germany. Sleid. lib. 4. page 29.
There were here also exhibited to the Legate an hundredth grievances of the
German nation: of which we will speak elsewhere.

Luther interprets the Decree.

Sleidan. 4. page 83.


This Decree was diversely interpreted by several parties. Luther by his
letters to the Princes declared how he conceived the meaning of it. And 1, that
they commanding that the Gospel should be taught according to the received
judgment of the Church, intended not according to the course of Thomas or
Scotus, but of Hilarie, Ambrose, Augustine and the like. Again, that the
Bishops should choose fit men, who should be present at Sermons, and mildly
admonish such as offended, if need were. This Luther showed to be well decreed,
but could never be effected: because they wanted learned men. Concerning that
which they decreed about books, he rejected it not: so that the decree did not
extend to the sacred books of the Scripture; the publishing whereof was in no
wise to be prohibited. Lastly, concerning the amercing of Priests who either
married, or left their order, the decree was too harsh, and if the Gospel was
purely to be preached, Caesar was offended at the Decree.
ought to be mitigated. The Emperor was somewhat offended with this decree,
and attempted by his Legate to take it away: The Gospel propagated.

Tom. 2. epist. page 121.


but all in vain. For this business was far otherwise concluded of in heaven
then at Norinberg, as Luther wrote. For the Princes and Cities of the Empire
strove, who first should admit the reformed doctrine. This was done in Denmark,
Prussia, Livonia, Silesia, and elsewhere.

In this year Luther set forth the book concerning the dignity and office of
the Civil Magistrate: Luthers book concerning the Civil Magistrate. 1523.
Frederik the Elector was much delighted with this book. He wrote also to the
Waldenses, commonly called the Picards, concerning the adoring the Sacrament.
In which book he first mentions the opinion of Berengarius concerning the Lords
Supper, before he began the contention with the Helvetians.

He now also set forth the five books of Moses in the German tongue, The German
Pentateuch.
three thousand years since the death of Moses. He published also a book to the
Senate of Prague, about ordeining of Ministers, and another, about avoiding the
doctrine of men. He wrote this year also to the Livonians, and showed his
great joy at their entertaining the Evangelicall doctrine: which many tyrants in
Germany sought obstinately to oppress: and forewarned them, that they must
expect cruel persecutions of the same kind: to the undergoing whereof, he
gravely and piously exhorted them, encouraging them to be resolute and to
persevere valiantly in the truth of the Gospel, which they had received. He
further did instruct them briefly and plainly concerning Justifying faith and
the true nature of good works.

The form of the Mass set out by Luther.

Chytreus in Sax. 10. page 282.


He this year also set forth a form of the Mass, and Communion; herein he
retained all the usual rites, which were not plainly repugnant to the word of
God: as the preface out of the Psalms, the Kyrie, the Collect, the Epistle,
the sequence, the Gospel, the Creed, the sermon, the prayers, the preface; the
Sanctus, the Lords prayer, the words of the Lords supper, the Elevation, the
agnus Dei, the thanksgiving. But the Canon of the Mass; which transformed the
Lords supper into a sacrifice for the quick and the dead, Auricular Confession.
he wholly omitted. This was the first change of the rites, though
Carolostadius attempted the like before. Auricular confession was also brought
into use again, 2. Martyrs in Germany. 1523
and private absolution also, which Carolostadius had abandoned. And when 2.
Monke^ of the Augustinian profession were the first day of July burnt by the
Inquisitor, and first shed their blood for the reformed doctrine of the faith;
Luther renowned their constancy with an hymme or Psalm, and praised them as the
first Martyrs of his time. Of this story also Erasmus Epist. b. 21. b. 7. and
b. 14. E. 4.
writes. Then also Luther sent a Letter consolatory to the Augustins which is
extant amidst his works. He wrote also to the Miltebergians, who were then in
danger for the Gospels sake. Their first instructor was John Draco
Carolostadius. Luther also comforted three noble Misnian virgins, which were
turned out of the Friburg Court of Henry Duke of Saxony. Other Nuns left their
Cloisters elsewhere; whereupon Luther wrote thus to Spalatinus. There came to
me those nine converted Nuns, who left Nimpschen Monastery: miserable is
their case, but they were conducted by honest citizens of Torgaw, Nuns
leaving their Cloisters.
namely by Leonard Coppe, and his unkles son, and Wolfius Tomitzech, that
there is no cause of suspicion. I much pity them, but especially many other
their like, who every where in great number perish by their cursed and
incestuous chastity. That sex is most weak of it self, and by Gods and
natures appointment, is to be a mate for man, and being by papisticall cruelty
shut up from men is brought into perdition. Tom. 2. Epist. p. 131.
Among them was Katherin de Bora who afterward was Luthers wife. He writes to
to the same Spalatinus elsewere of other Nuns, thus. There departed 16. Tom.
2. cp. p. 139.
Nuns out of the Monastery of Widderstetten under the Earl of Mansfield; of
which 11. came to the Quaestor of Alstet. Of them Albertus received five. It is
now debated among them, whether they ought to be entertained or rejected. Tom.
2. cp. p. 134. and 112.
Nor yet is here an end of our news. This year is most fruitful of Novelty,
and as I perceive still will be. Luther also often was earnest with the Elector
of Saxony suing to him by Spalatinus that he would demolish the Wittenbergian
Bethaven, that is the College of All Souls. And gave this reason. Because
almost all the Priests there not only live wickedly, but also are contemners
of God and men with obstinate hearts, and every night play the whoremasters,
and in the mornings say Mass with an impudent and brazen forehead. For this he
called Amsdorfe to witness: and said that all of them, except three, were
wanton persons, and not to be maintained: yea, that it was the duty of the
Magistrates to prohibit their whoredom, and compel them to marry. For though
no man can be compelled and forced to the truth: yet public wickedness is to
be taken away. At the least the Masses might be forborne, which were maintained
at the Princes charge, and were wickedly performed, and to no good end.

John the Prince of Anhalt by Doctor Ieronymus and a Franciscan warned Luther
to acquit himself of holding a new Article, with which Ferdinand of Norinberg
did charge him, namely, that he held that Christ was the seed of Abraham.
Luther excusing himself. Tom. 2. page 121.
At the first Luther conceived that they jested with him: but when he found
that they spoke it sadly; he was forced to give credit to their speech, that he
was in very deed so accused.

Frederik Duk. of Saxony warned to punish Luther.
Pope Adrian then opposed the Gospel, and by his Bull, as they call it, very
much blamed Frederik Electour of Saxony for the neglect of his duty in not
punishing or banishing Luther. And then warned and entreated the Prince, that
now at length he he would do it: and if he would not, he should try how keen
the Popes and Emperors swords were. The same request Henry the eight King of
England and Lodowik King of Hungary and Bohemia made. To all these the Elector
returned no other answer, then that Luther was first to be heard in the
Council, before he was to be condemned. The Popes Legate accuses Luther.
The Popes Legate also accused Luther at the Norician assembly; as being most
like to Mahomet. For as the Turks by Polygamy, so Luther taking away the vows
of Chastity does loose the reins to all licentiousness, and overthrow the
state of the Church, and therefore he might be condemned before he was heard:
besides, as now he did show his cruelty against the Ecclesiastical state, he
would afterward do the like against the Political.

In this year Christiern King of Denmark and his wife sister of Charles the
fifth were expulsed their Kingdom for his too violent government. And being in
banishment at the Court of his Uncle Frederik Elector of Saxony, heard Luther
preach.

In the 24. year Clemens the 7. Laurent. Campegius the Popes Legate
made Pope in Adrians steed sent Laur. Campegius the Cardinal his Legate to
Norinberg. He wrote at large to Frederik the Elector: and highly praised the
Popes good will, and did undertake that a Council should be called. Then also
Caesar and most of the Princes of the Empire pressed for the decree of Worms.
Which thing when Luther had notice of, he bewailed the state of Germany, and
complained of the blindness of men. That year Erasmus Roterod. Erasmus wrote
against Luther being much importuned thereunto.
persuaded by the King of England and Thomas Wolsey Cardinal, wrote against
Luther. He put forth (against his will, as he wrote to Melancthon) the Treatise
concerning free will. What was Luhers judgment about the same, that which he
wrote to Spalatinus shows; Tom. 2. epist. 230.
namely, It is incredible how I disdain the book of Eras. concerning
free will: and yet I have scarce read eight leaves thereof. It grieveth me to
answer so unlearned a book of a man so learned. That book was answered by
Luther, An. 1526. with which delay the minds of learned men were held in
suspense, what would be the issue of the controversy.

This year was remarkable for the unhappy Sacramentary controversy; The
beginning and proceeding whereof is related in the life of Carolostade, Zwingl.
and Oecolamp. and I list not here to renew our grief by opening the sore again.

About this time came forth the fanatic writing of Tho. Muncer of Stolberg,
Muncers writing against Luther.
and the Preacher of Alstet: in which he disgorged his venomous fury against
the Lutherans. The book which he wrote against Luther, was dedicated to Christ
Prince of Princes. He rayled on Luther, because he wanted an Enthusiasticall
spirit, and had nothing in his writing but a carnal spirit. The same Muncer
wrote to Melancthon a letter plainly showing his fanaticall spirit.

The Psalms put forth, etc.
Luther now put forth David's Psalter in the German tongue, and a book against
the seditious, and an Epistle to Frederik and John Princes of Saxony against
the enemies of images, and Enthusiasts, who boasted of illumination and
conference with God. He also set forth a book about the Exaltation of Benno a
Bishop once of Misnia: Of Benno Bishop of Misnia.
whose bones were on the sixteen day of May dug up at Misnia, exalted, and
placed in a marble Tomb: which act some took to be religious, other jested and
laughed thereat.

This year in October, Luther laid aside his Monkishhood: Luther casts away
his monkish weed.
and declared his judgment concerning the Synod to be called for
determination of the ceremonies, saying thus. I think it not very safe to call
together a Council of our men for the settling an uniformitie of Ceremonies: Of
calling a Counsel.
for it will set a bad example, though it be attempted with a good zeal, as
appears by all Councels from the beginning. So that in the Apostolical
Synod they did more treat concerning matter of action and Traditions, then of
faith. In the Synodes after this they never disputed about faith; but always
about opinions and questions, that the name of Councels is more suspected and
hated by me then the name of free will. If one Church will not of its own
accord imitate another in external matters, what need is there to compel them
by the decrees of Councels, which presently are changed into laws and snares
to entangle men's souls. Rather let one Church freely follow the good example
of another, or let each Church enjoy her own ways, Reformation in the
Cathedal Church at Wittenberg.

Tom. 2. Ep. p. 246. 1525.


so that the unity of the spirit be kept entire in faith by the word of God,
though there be diversity and outward ceremonies, and elements of the world.
About this time the Priests of Wittenberg keeping their Popish rites, were at
length evicted, and in the end of the year abrogating private Mass, began a
Reformation in the Cathedral Church. Luther had long pressed them to this, and
had written thus to Spalatinus in this year. By Gods help I will abrogate
private Mass, or venture upon another design.

The year 1525. The Boores rise in arms.
is famous by the rising of the Boores: when this broyle was a hatching, and
the Rustic fury did not yet break forth into taking up arms, Luther did
dissuade all men from sedition, as being a crime of very high nature. He also
handled the Articles of the Boores, and showed how most of them were contrary
to the word of God. He wrote also to the Princes and Nobility, and put them in
mind of their duty: Luther exhorts to quell them.
and by another Treatise exhorted all men, to join for the subversion of the
theevish insendiaries, as for the quenching of a common fire. This book was
censured by some as too sharp, but was at large defended by Luther.

The contention with Carolostade.
In the beginning of this year, Luther answered Carolostadius his books,
intitling his book (Against the Celestial Prophets.) At Wittenberg then the
chieftains of the Anabaptists were called Prophets: The Anabaptists.
because they boasted of secret revelations, and prophetical spirits; the
principal men were Muncer, Ciconius, Cellarius, and his friend Carolostad.
Luther in the first part of his book speaks of images, private Mass and
Carolostade: and affirms that images were forbidden in the old Testament not
in the new: and that Carolostade was not expelled by his means: The name of
Mass.
and that the name of [Masse] was given by the Apostles to the Sacrament of the
altar. The subject of the second book was the Eucharist, where he first dealt
against Carolostades exposition of the word ((...)) This: and then answered the
Arguments of Carolostade: and said that the words (which is given for you) have
this sense. The body which you eat in the bread, ere long, when it is not
eaten shall be given for you. And as it is not written, Take the body and eat
it; so neither is it written, Take the bread and eat it. And that Christ's
speech, The flesh profits nothing.
The flesh profits nothing, is to be taken as spoken not of the flesh of
Christ, but of the sense of the flesh, which is death, Romans 8. That the
breaking the bread, is the distribution of the body: and that the blood of
Christ which is powered out for us, now sits at the right hand of God; but
that the efficacy of that effusion of his blood is for ever. And finally that
it is unknown how the bread becomes and is the body of Christ: and that we
must stick to the very words of Christ. Against this Zwinglius and
Oecolampadius wrote, as is said in its due place.

Now also Luther renewed the ordination of Ministers of the Gospel in the
Church: Ordering of Ministers.
Of whom George Rorarius was the first: and now first the Mass was celebrated
at Wittenberg in their mother tongue. And now was set forth a book of German
songs composed by Luther and others the last year: German songs.
and a book of the abomination of the Mass, in which he galled the Popish sore
backtjades, Luther writes to Strasburg about Carolostade.
and made many of them kick against him. He wrote also a letter to them of
Strasburg, where he heard that Carolostade abode, and dissuaded them from
devouring his poison. On the contrary Strasburg sent George Caselius the Hebrew
Professor, and entreated Luther that he would not break the unity of the
Church for the controversy of the Eucharist: that he would acknowledge
Zwinglius and Oecolampadius, learned men and of good fame, for Brethren: that
he would write of the Lords Supper, and show, what he taught was consonant to
the truth.

Luther returned this answer by Caselius. Namely, Luthers answer.
That nothing was more to be desired then peace: but to be tied to a continual
silence was not safe: that answer could not be made without condemning them:
and that the word [condemn] was censured as opprobrious. That he was censured
of those most modest men as a Cannibal, and a worshipper of God turned bread
and eatable: that he liked not the advice of the Divines Strasburgh, concerning
silence about the question of the bodily presence, and preaching faith and
other parts of the word: That either he himself or they were ministers of
Satan: and that therefore in this case there was counsel to be taken, and no
mean between both to be followed: That the reasons brought to make the speech
tropicall were of no force. And that it must be proved, that the verb [est] not
in other places of Scripture, but here is in effect [significat.] that where
Paul says, The rock was Christ, he speaks not of the corporal, but the
spiritual drink: for he adds the drank of the spiritual rock. And that
there was a manifest mistake in that [This Lamb is the Lords Passover,] for
this phrase is no where extant in the Scripture: and therefore he besought the
brethren for Christ's sake, that they would avoid this error.

Luther marries.
Luther being forty two years old, of a sudden and unexpectedly married
Katherin a Bora a noble virgin late a Nun, and this was the occasion. Luther
had a purpose that this Katherine should have been married to M. Glanus the
Pastor of Orlamund. Of this she having intimation, acquainted Amsdorf, Luthers
inward friend, therewith, and by him entreated Luther to alter his
determination, and to signify to him, that she would enter into the honorable
estate of Matrimony with any other, rather then with Glanus. When Luther heard
this, and what Ierom Schurfius had said; namely, that if that Monk should marry
her; the whole world and the devil himself would laugh thereat, and so the
Monk should undo all that formerly he had done. Here Luther to grieve the
world of Papists, and the devil, and gratify her father persuading him
thereunto, Cameratius in the life of Melancthon.
resolved to marry her. And on the 13. day of June, inviting to supper
Pomeranus, and Apelles the Lawyer, and Luke the Limmer was betrothed to her,
and not long after married her. This Luthers enemies much disliked, so did his
friends also: not because they thought the marriage unlawful: but because they
wished it had been done at some other time. For thus writes Camerarius. It
fell out, that when these turbulent and dangerous broils were not yet
pacified, Martin Luther married, not long after the death of Frederik the
chief of the seven Electors of the Empire. Philip Melancthon much grieved at
Luthers marriage, not that he condemned it as unlawful, but because hereby an
occasion was given to Luthers enemies and ill willers, who were many, rich, and
of great power, to speak against him bitterly, and with open mouth to reproach
him: when especially the very time did help forward and set them on, who were
minded so to do. And of what power the convenience of time is in every action
all know full well. But when he perceived that Luther himself was somewhat
troubled with the same thoughts, he not only moderated his passion, but did
cheer up Luther, and endeavored to ease his grief and sorrow with pleasant
conference, and thereby brought him to his wonted cheerfulness again.

What Luthers adversaries did about this marriage.
Luthers adversaries not only observed the time of the marriage, but
proclaimed the marriage to be incestuous, in which a Monk married a Nun.
Hereupon the King of England in his Answer to Luther, styles this marriage
incestuous, and there says among other opprobries put upon Luther, that he
could not have committed a sin of higher nature. Conradus Collinus Prior of
Cullen and Jerome Emsenus Chaplain to George Duke of Saxony.
the best Divine among the Papists wrote virulently and disgracefully of this
marriage. Yea some there were, (whom Erasmus gave credit unto) who laid a sin
to Luthers charge, from which the time of his child's birth did acquit him.
Against these disgraces Luther thus animated himself: saying. Luthers answer to
their opprobries.
If my marriage be a work of God, what wonder is there, if the flesh be
offended at it? It is offended even at the flesh which God our Creator took,
and gave to be a ransom, and food for the salvation of the world: if the world
was not offended with me; I should be offended with the world, and should fear
that it was not of God, which I have done. Now seeing the world is vexed and
troubled at, I am confirmed in my course and comforted in God. The cause of
Luthers marriage.
So do you. The cause of his marriage he there also relates; saying. We
resigned the revenew of the Monastery to the Prince. I who abode in the
Monastery so long as it pleased God, now like a private housekeeper. I have not
married to prolong my life, but (seeing my dissolution nearer approaching, and
people with their Princes to rage against me) that I might leave mine own
doctrine for the weaks sake confirmed by mine own example; for my doctrine may
perchance be kicked against and trodden on after my death.

This year the Anabaptists spread themselves over Helvetia and other parts of
Germany: Anabaptists at Anwerp.
and began to broach their fancies at Anwerp. Hereupon Luther by an Epistle
warned them of Anwerp to take heed of the erroneous spirit, Luther writes to
Anwerp.
which had hindered him very much: and recited the impostures of false spirits
in Popery, and the by-pathes of the seducing spirits of the present times.
There he set down the erroneous Articles of a tumultuous spirit at Anwerp and
opened the inconstancy, lying, boldness, and ambitious desire of honor
lurking in that Spirit: and entreats them to forbear the question concerning
Gods hidden will, and to attend to, The Articles of the Anabaptists.
and learn the necessary precepts set before us by our God. The Articles were
these.

1. That every man has the Spirit. 2. That the Spirit was nothing else but our
reason and understanding. 3. That every man believes. 4. That there were no
(inferi) or place of torment for men's souls, but that the body only was
condemned. 5. That every soul should be saved. 6. That by the law of nature we
are taught to do good to our neighbor; as we would he should do to us: and
that this will in us was faith. 7. That we sin not against the law by
desiring any thing if our will consent not to our desire and lust. 8. That he
which has not the Spirit, has not sin, because he wants reason, which they
called the Holy Ghost.
Now also Luther wrote to the King of England by the persuasion of Christiern
the banished King of Denmark. Tom. 2. Ep. 290.

Luther writes to the King of England, etc.


This Epistle was submissive, and is extant in his Epistles. He wrote also
humbly to George Duke of Saxony: that he would be pleased to afford him his
favorable respect. But the King returned him an harsh answer, and objected to
him his levity and inconstancy: and defended Cardinal Wolsey against Luthers
writing to him: that hence it appeared, how he hated Luther. When Luther saw
the Kings answer printed, he was very much grieved at what he had done, and
that he had so much yielded to his friends, as to write in so humble a strain.
The like befell him upon his writing to Cajetan, George Duke of Saxony and
Erasmus Rotterod. who by Luthers lenity were incensed rather then pacified. He
resolved never afterward to run into the like error. Cocleus and Eckius
wonderfully also insulted over Luthers submissivenesse. Wherefore Luther now
printed a book against (as he called it) the Ill languaged and contumelious
book of the King of England.

An. 1526.
In the year 1526. Luther refused Erasmus book, entitled de serve Arbitrio.
The delaying of his answer proceeded from the cause certified to Tom. 2. ep.
270.
Amsdorf: in these words. I will not answer Erasmus till I have done with
Carolostade, who makes great troubles and stirs in upper Germany. Erasmus
provokes thereby, put forth his Hyperaspides, Erasm. his Hyperasp.
of which book Luther thus writes. Erasmus that viper being rouzed up will
write against me again: Tom. 2. epist. 314.
what eloquence will that most vain hunter after glory exercise to cast down
Luther? About the same time Duke George and the Bishops attempted many ways to
wrong Luther, as appears by his letter to Myconius: saying. The wicked
Papists conspire, and, Epist. page 324.
as Melanctheus writes to me from Iena threaten war against me. Wherefore
see you, that the people admonished hereof, manfully contend by faithful and
continual prayer to the Lord, that they may be overcome and withheld by the
Spirit, and constrained to keep outward peace. Verily I understand by the
writings and speeches of many, that there is very great need of earnest prayer:
for Satan's plots are a working. Wherefore I entreat you, that you would
persuade the people to this most necessary and prevalent work, because they are
endangered and exposed to Satan's sword and fury encompassing them. He further
says, Six Sects of the Sacramentarians.
That the Sectaries were divided into six Sects. Six heads in one year are
sprung up among the Sacramentarians: it is a strange spirit, which so much
differs from it self. One sect followed Carolostade, that is fallen: a second
is that of Zwinglius, which is falling: the third is with Oecolampadius which
will fall: the fourth also which is Carolostade is fallen: he thus disposes of
the words. That which is given for you, is my body. The fifth is now arising in
Silesia, set forth by Valentine Crantwald and Caspar Schwenkfeld, who thus
invert the words. My body which is given for you, is this, that is, spiritual
meat. These grievously vex and molest us with their writings, for they are most
obstreperous and full of words, I wish they had my disease of the Stone, they
seem so strong to undergo it. The sixth is that of Peter Florus at Cullen,
which Melancthon will deal with: I never saw ought but one letter about it. O
how he reprobates Luther. I know says he, that Luther is forsaken of the Lord.
All those Spirits differing each from other contend with subtle arguments, all
of them boast of revelations obtained by prayer and tears, and agree only in
this, that all of them fight each with other for us. This Christ effects for
us.

Luther wrote a consolatory letter to John Husse of Breslow a Teacher of the
Gospel, notwithstanding the scandal raised by the Heretics, and their fighting
against the Articles of our Faith: and in special manner he animated him
against Schwenfeld and Crantwald; Luthers speech of comfort to Hessus.
saying, You speak the Truth, friend Hesse. Hitherto the combat was about
points not grounded in the Scriptures, as about the Pope and Purgatory, and the
like: Now ye come to more serious matters, and to the battle already won
concerning points in the Scripture. Here we shall see the Dragon fighting, or
rather we shall combat with him, Michael being our Captain in these Heavenly
fights. When the Dragon shall pull down the third part of the stars with his
tail to the earth: then the cause will call for our strength in Christ. Here
you shall see, what manner a warrior, and how strong a champion Satan is, whom
yet you have not sufficiently tried, or had experience of. Schwenkfeld and
Crantwald, which I much lament, are reserved for these mischiefs. But the
foundation of God stands firm, having this seal. The Lord knows who are
his, let this be our comfort, and in this let us be confident to prevail over
the gates of Hell.

Besides other studies of Luther, Tom. 2. epist. 318.
he now expounded Ecclesiastes: which was not easy and plain (as he said) for
an Interpreters labor. There are, says he, The form of the German Mass.
therein many Hebraismes and obstacles in that tongue, not yet well made known.
Yet by the grace of God I break through them. This year he wrote a form of the
Mass in the German tongue: in which he permitted some ceremonies, to be used
or not used at men's pleasures. Among other speeches thus he says. Yet we
retain those garments, altars, His work at Jen.

Tom. 3. p. 277.


waxe-candles used at the Mass, till they grow old, or that it seem good to
change them. If it please any man to do otherwise, I permit him to do as he
likes best. But in the true Mass among Christians unmixt with Papists. it is
fit that the altar should not remain, but that the Minister should turn himself
to the people: as Christ doubtless did, at the first celebration of the Lords
Supper. But let this also await its due time. He wrote also four consolatory
Psalms to Mary Queen of Hungary; upon the miserable death of her husband King
Lodowick, who was drowned. He then also divulged other Treatises, which are
mentioned in his works.

An. 1527. The Anabaptists.
In the 27. year the Anabaptists broached their new doctrine, about the not
baptizing of Infants; and were themselves rebaptised: they also taught
community of goods. Both Luther and Zwinglius wrote against them, and the
Magistrates punished them in diverse places. Of the military life.
Luther wrote also upon the question, whether soldiers lived in a kind of
life, tending to happiness? In which discourse he learnedly and godly handled
many things concerning war, and its discipline. He dealt also against the
Sacramentarians, as he calls them, and in his book averreth that Christ's
word, This is my body, yet stand firm. Tom. 2. epist. p. 331.
Of the book thus Luther writes to Spalatinus. I doubt not, but that I have
thoroughly moved the Sacramentarians: for though my book be full of words, and
not so learned, yet I am persuaded that I have touched them to the quick. Bucer
has written most virulent letters against me unto our Jonas; already they make
a Satan of Luther: what suppose you that they will do when they be gauled with
that book. But Christ lives and reigns. What strange portent was before his
death. See Tom. 2. epist. page 337.
Amen. He also comforted them of Hall, for the death of George Winckler their
Pastor, who was slain by conspiracy. He also answered John Hessus to the
question: Whether a Christian man may fly in time of Pestilence? and to an
other question, namely. Whether after the truth of the Gospel is made known, a
man may for fear of the tyrants forbear to administer the Lords Supper in
both kinds: which Luther denied against the Prischanists.

About the beginning of the year 27. Luther fell suddenly: Luther sickness.
1527.
sick of a congealing of blood about his heart, which almost killed him: but
the drinking of the water of Carduus Benedictus, whose virtue then was not so
commonly known, he was presently helped. But he wrastled with a far worse
agony afterward on the Sabbath after the visitation of the blessed Virgin. This
is recorded by John Bugenhagius, and Iustus Jonas, who saw his affliction. A
worse sickness afterward.
Here he endured not only a corporal malady, but also a spiritual tentation,
which Luther called a buffiting of Satan. It seemed to him, that swelling
surges of the sea in a tempest did sound aloud at his left ear, and against
the left side of his head: yet not within, but without his head, and that so
violently, that die he must except they presently grew calm. Afterward when it
seemed to come within his head, he fell down as one dead: and was so cold in
each part of his body, that he had remaining neither heat, nor blood, nor
sense, nor voice. But when his face was besprinckled with cold water by Jonas (
for so Luth. had bidden) he came again to himself: and began to pray most
earnestly, and to make a confession of his faith; and to say, that he was
unworthy of Martirdom, which by his proceedings he might seemed to run upon.
Luthers last Will.
His will and Testament concerning his wife with child and his young son this
he made. Lord God I thank thee that thou would have me live a poor and
indigent person upon Earth, I have neither house, nor lands, nor possessions,
nor money to leave. Thou have given me wife and children, them I give back unto
thee: Nourish, teach, keep them (O thou the father of orphans and Judge of the
widow) as thou have done to me: so do unto them. Luthers recovery.
But by using daily prayers and continual fomentations, after that he had
sweat thoroughly, the grief by degrees decreased, so that in the evening of
that day, he rose up and supped with his friends: and confessed that his
spiritual temptation was far sorer then his corporal sickness. Hereupon
the day following he said to Iustus Jonas. I will take special notice of the
day last past: in which as in a school, I was put to the trial of my
progress. And sat in a most hot sweating house. The Lord brings to the
graves mouth and fetches back again. He often makes mention of this tentation
in his letters to his friends; and confirmed the faith by receiving absolution
from a Minister, and the use of the Sacrament.

Leon Keisar burnt for Religion.
This year also he put forth the Story of Leonard Keisar his friend, who was
burnt for the Gospels sake, at the Command of William Duke of Bavaria. Of this
man's Martyrdom thus Luther writes. I have received the relation concerning
Leonard Keisars death: Tom. 2. page 354. b.
as also all his manuscripts from his Uncles son: which shall shortly be
published, God willing. Pray for me, who have been much buffetted by the Angel
of Satan; that Christ should not forsake me. O wretch that I am! and so much
inferior to Leonard: I am a preacher only in words, in regard of him, so
powerful a preacher by his suffering. Who can make me fit, that not by his
Spirit double on me; but by one half of it, I may overcome Satan, and put a
period to this life. Blessed be God, who among so many monsters has showed us
unworthy sinners, this one glorious spectacle of his grace, that he may not
seem wholly to have forsaken us.

Then also by the advice of Luther and the Command of John the Elector was
ordained a visitation of the Churches in Saxony. An. 1527. 1528.
The chief care of this business was committed to John a Plannitz a noble
Knight, to Ierom Schurfius a Lawyer, Asmus Hanbicius and Melancthon. Many
matters were hereby discried, which needed speedy redress: many faults were
found, which must necessarily be amended: nor can I easily say: how great was
the benefit of this visitation. For faults of many years continuance, were
reformed, the Churches fallen back were in many places confirmed, and their
safety for time to come was well provided for. This visitation ended An. 1528.
in which year Luther put forth the Institution of Visiters, and the large
Confession concerning the Lords Supper, which were added for their direction.
There it is that Luther thus writes to Amsdorf. We Tom. 2. ep. p. 394.
are visiters, that is Bishops, and we find poverty and scarsity every where.
The Lord send forth workmen into his harvest. Amen. And in another place to
Spalatinus. Ibid. p. 394.
Our visitation goes on, of what miseries are we eye witnesses? and how often
do we remember you, when we find the like or greater miseries in that harsh
natured people of Voytland. Let us beseech God to be present with us, and that
he would promote the work of his poor Bishops: who is our best and most
faithful Bishop against all the Arts and forces of Satan. Amen. And again. In
our visitation in the territories of Wittenberg, we find as yet all pastors
greeing with their people, but the people not so forward for the Word and
Sacraments.

Answer to Zwinglius and Oecolampadius.
The 1. part of the book, called The Great Confession of the faith concerning
the Lords supper, deals with Zwinglius, the 2. part with Oecolampadius; and
blames both of them. To this Oecolampadius and Zwinglius replied at large: and
dedicated their books to the Prince of Saxony and Landgrave of Hessen. Bucers
Dialogue
Bucer also in the German tongue answered Luther in a Dialogue where he makes
Sebaldus and Arbogastus speakers. These are the last books, which these men
wrote against Luther.

Carolostade Epistle to Pontanus.
This year also Carolostadius wrote a letter to George Pontamus Chancellor of
the Duke of Saxony; in which he lays down the groundwork of his Tenants
concerning the Lords supper. This was answered by Luthers Epistle to the same
Pontamus: Luther therein admonishes that care must be taken, Luthers answer.
that no blemish be laid upon the Electour, by whose connivence Carolostade
does there divulge his own dreams and heresies. Luther also Tom. 4. Ep. Ien.
wrote to Carolostadius, and confuted his Arguments: and in the end of his
letter grants, that Christ alone does give his body: but denies that thence
it follows that the Minister does not give it by the Lords command.

An. 1529. The greater and less Catechism.
In the beginning of the year 1529. Luther put forth his greater and lesser
Catechismes for the good of the under sort of people, and admonished the
Pastors and Ministers that they would seriously attend their offices, and teach
carefully in the Villages. That they would preach still the same things about
the same points and often press them upon the people. Luthers book against
the Turk.
Here also Luther put forth a book against the Turk in the German tongue: this
he did partly because it was then reported that the Turk was coming upon
Hungary and Germany, which appeared true by his besieging of Vienna: partly
because some Pastors endeavored to persuade the people, that war was not to
be waged against the Turk. Yea some proceeded to that height of folly, that
they desired that the Turk would come, and lay his yoke upon them. The
assembly at Spire.
And when at that time there was held an Assembly at Spire, where first arose
the Name of Protestants, and Luthers assistants, whose help he used in
translating the Prophets, The name of Protestants.
were separated he himself being sickly, that he might be in some employment
in Melancthons absense, translated the book of Wisdom which was afterward
revised by Melancthon and printed.

In October this year Philip Landgrave of Hessen, Conference at Marpurg.
with a pious intent called together the Prime Doctors of the Saxon and
Helvetick Churches. Luther called. Tom. 4. Ien. p. 4^^
Among whom Luther being sent for returned this answer: That little good was
to be hoped for by that conference: except the adverse part came thither to
yield: and that himself could not yield: because he was assured that he was in
the truth. In this meeting the chief heads of Divinity were handled, and
concluded of. No one point was with choler contended about: nor did they depart
alienated or divided in their affections by any controversy: as elsewhere The
life of Oecolampadius and others.
is showed.

In the last year a same was spread of a league made by some Popish Princes
against the Duke of Saxony and Landgrave of Hessen: Of this thus Luther
writes to Wenceslaus Lincus. Tom. 2. Ep p 386.

Fame of the Popish Princes league. Luthers letter about it.


That ungodly league of wicked Princes, though they deny it, what stirs has
it caused: but I do interpret the slight and poor excuse of Duke George, as a
confession of the fact. But let them deny, excuse, dissemble it: I know, that
that league was not a Chimera or a thing of no being: a Monster cannot be but
monstrous and conspicuous enough. And the world knows well, that they with
most pertinacious minds, deeds, edicts, designs, have hitherto publicly
attempted, and still do attempt the like. For they desire that the Gospel was
abolished: this none can deny. But why write I thus to you? who know this to be
undoubtedly true. I do it only, that you may know, that we will not trust
that wicked crew, though we offer them peace. The Lord confound the Counsels of
that George Duke of Saxony.
Morotates Moors bundle of folly, who like Moab dares attempt more then he can
effect: and as ever, so still is proud above his power. Let us pray against
such men-slayers. Hitherto they have been forborne, if again they plot any
thing, first we will pray to God, then we will admonish Princes of them, that
they may be destroyed without pity: seeing they be unsatiable bloud-suckers
and cannot be at rest, unless they see Germany weltring in her blood. The
letter intercepted.
This letter intercepted and brought to Duke George gave occasion of a great
disaffection between the Duke and Luther: as the letters written from each of
them to the other fully manifest. For Luther printed a treatise of letters
privately sent and intercepted: and on the other side George the Duke printed a
preface to the Translation of the New Testament set forth by Emser: This
preface was full fraught with gall. Luther thus says of it. I have received
your letter, friend VVenceslaus, by which you certify me, Ep. Tom. 2. p. 389.
what Duke George has adventured to do. He required the same of me not long
agone, and afterward of our Duke: when he could not prevayle: he has printed
the coppie of it with an invective against me: such is his notorious folly,
railing fury. They say that there are 8000. books printed: which he transports
into all coasts under his own seal. Thus shall poor Luther at length be kept
down, and Duke George shall triumph most gloriously. To the Mart he will send
them. After I by some private means had got a coppie thereof, I wrote an
answer thereunto, which shall be divulged at once with his writing contrary to
his expectation. New Broiles thereupon.
Perhaps he will burst with rage, and die like a miserable idiot. I could wish
that theevish Mericion had taken it in mine own hand: I am so far from
fearing that Satan: though I wonder at Scheurferus, that not delivered my
letter up to them, but that he is so familiar with my bitterest enemies. I
entreat you that with your congregation you would pray against that furious
homecide and bloody ruffian, as a man possessed by more then one Devil, and
breathing out nothing but menaces and slaughter: that it would please Christ to
save him, as he did Saint Paul; or confound him. For why should this unquiet
and mischeivous vassal of Satan be offensive to heaven and earth?

An. 1530. The assembly at August. and conformity of Protest.
The remembrance of the thirtieth year will never be razed out, while men live
on earth: for in this year was held that solemn and numerous assembly before
the Emperor and the States of the Empire, which was printed and made known to
all the nations of Europe. Read the Story Tom. 5. Jer. Germ. Chitr. B. 13. Sax.
Sleid. b. 2. Luther wrote the seventeen Articles.
elsewhere. We return to Luther. He composed the seventeen Articles, before the
Divines of Saxony took their journey to Augusta: In these Articles he omitted
scholastic disputes and points unnecessary for the peoples instruction, and
comprised the sum of wholesome and necessary doctrine for the salvation of men's
souls and true piety. Other Princes and Cities, who embraced the doctrine of
Luther, commanded their Divines to set down in writing a brief declaration of
the doctrine commonly taught in the Churches of their territories. That these
seventeen Articles written by Luther, Luthers Articles followed by Melanct.
were especially made use of by Melancthon in writing the Confession, the very
words and phrases in most of the Articles retained, and the order and method
of the Articles much alike, Joh. Elector of Saxony came first to August.
and the Epistle of John Elector of Saxony dated from Augusta to Luther before
Caesar's coming, do witness. For John Elector of Saxony came to Auspurg
contrary to the opinion and exspectation of all men; yea he came thither first
of all the Princes, accompanied with John Frederik his son, Francis Duke of
Lunenburg his sisters son, Wolfgang Prince of Anhalt his wives brother, and
these divines, Jonas, Philip, Spalatinus, and Islebius. Luther abode at Coburg.
For when he went from Coburg he left Luther in the Castle, because he was
banished by the Pope and Emperor, and was extremely hated by the Pontificians:
yet would that he should remain in that place near at hand, that more easily
and speedily he might be consulted with, for any matter pertaining to Religion.

Luther that he might further the common good, though he was absent, wrote a
book to the Bishops and other Divines of note in that assembly: in which he
deciphered, fully, what was the state of the Roman Church under the Popedom,
and opened their cruelty, and exhorted them, that they would not now omit the
occasion of curing this sore. He further showed that the doctrine taught by
himself was agreeable to that of the Prophets and Apostles, and that all
designs undertaken against God would be frustrate. Melanct care in this
assembly.
Melanct. knowing the rage of the Papists and Caesar's threats was very
solicitous and troubled thereat, not so much for his own, as for the issue of
these matters and posterities sake: and gave himself almost wholly up to
grief, sighs and tears. Luther having notice hereof did often cheer him up
and comfort him by his letters. These words are part of one of his epistles. In
private conflicts I am somewhat weak, and you strong: In his book written, An.
1529.
and on the contrary you in public conflicts are somewhat weak, I stronger.
If I may call that a private conflict, which is between me and Satan, for you
are ready to die, if you were called to it; but fear the disaster of the
public cause. But I am resolute and secure for the public cause, because I
am assured that it is just and true, that it is Gods and Christ's; and is not
appaled with the guilt of sin, as I a private servant of God am compelled to
trembling and palenesse. For this cause like a secure spectator, and do not
regard the menaces and cruelty of the Papists. If we fall, Christ the Lord and
ruler of the world falls with us. And suppose he fall, I had rather fall with
Christ, then stand with Caesar. Nor do you alone strive to hold up Gods cause,
I constantly stand to you with my sighs and prayers, I wish I might also with
my bodily presence. For the cause is mine; rather I say mine then all yours:
and attempted by me not out of any rash humor, or desire either of glory or
gain: which thing the Spirit witnesses to my conscience: and the matter it
self has already plainly showed, and will more and more show it even to the
end. Wherefore I entreat you for Christ's sake not to forget Gods promises and
the divine comforts, where it is said. Psalm. 55.
Cast thy care upon the Lord: have thine eyes fixed on the Lord, Psalm. 27.
play the man, let thine heart be comforted. The book of the Psalms and the
Gospels are full of the like speeches. Joh. 16.
Be of good comfort I have overcome the world. If Christ be the Conqueror of
the world, why should we fear it, as if it would overcome us. A man could
find in his heart to fetch such a sentence upon his knees from Rome, or
Jerusalem. And in the same Epistle, you would determine of these businesses
according to your Philosophy by reason, that is, cum ratione insanire, run wild
with humane overcare: and kill your self: nor do ye see that this matter is
beyond your reach and providence: and I pray Christ to keep it, that it come
not into your hand and counsel, which is a thing vehemently desired by you.
For then publicly and apparently, and suddenly we shall perish. And in another
Epistle. Grace and peace in Christ. In Christ I say, not in the world, Amen.
Concerning your apology for your silence, I will speak elsewhere. I
extremely dislike your excessive cares with which you say you are consumed.
That these reign so much in your heart, is not from the greatness of the
cause, but the greatness of your incredulity. For there was greater cause of
this in John Hus his time then in ours. Then again suppose there be great
cause, the Agent and chief mover in it is of great power; for it is not our
cause. Why then do you continually and without ceasing macerate your self? If
the cause be faulty, let us revoke it; and fly back; if it be good: why do we
make God a liar? who has made us so great promises, and bids us to be of a
quiet and contented minds: saying, Cast thy care upon the Lord. The Lord is
near unto all them, who being of a troubled heart call upon him. Speaks God
these things into the wind, or casts he these pearls to bruits? I am often
troubled, but not perpetually. Your Philosophy and not your Divinity does thus
vex you; the same befalls your Ioachim. As if it were possible that you
should effect any thing with this unprofitable care. I pray you, tell me, what
can the Devil do more then kill us? I beseech you, that seeing in all other
matters you are a good soldier, you would wrestle with your self as being
your own greatest enemy, by providing such store of Armor for Satan against
your self. Christ once died for sin: but for Justice and truth he shall not
die, but live and reign. If this be true, what fear is there for the truth,
if he reign? But it will be cast down by the wrath of God, let us be cast
down with it; but let it not be done by our selves. He who is become our
father, will be the father of our children. I pray for you earnestly, and I
grieve that you make my prayers, the most violent sucking-leech of cares, to be
fruitless. I truly as concerning the cause (whether it proceed from stupidity
in me or from the Spirit, Christ knows) am not troubled much, yea I have a
better hope, then ever I expected: God is able to raise the dead: He is
powerful also to maintain his own cause now ready to fall; yea to raise it
again, were it fallen, and to advance it, if it subsist: If we be not worthy,
let it be done by others. For if we be not sustained by his promises, who, I
pray you are there in the world, to whom they do belong? But more another
time: so that it be not to carry water into the Sea. Christ with his spirit
comfort, teach and strengthen us all. Amen. If I perceive that the cause goes
not well with you, or be endangered, Luthers desire to come to the Assembly.
Apoc. 9.8.
I shall not contain my self, but shall come with speed unto you, that I may
see the ghastly Jaws of Satan's teeth, as the Scripture calls them. From our
wilderness. Ian. 25 An. 1530.

After this the Confession written by Melancthon according to Luthers direction
and advise, The Protestants Confession.
was exhibited in the Latin and German tongues in Caesar's palace, Iun. 25. at
2. a clock in the afternoon: and was read by the Chancellor of Saxony before
Charles the fifth, Ferdinando and all the Electors and Princes being assessors,
and that with so shrill and loud a voice, that not only in that large hall,
but also in the Court beneath and in the places adjoining it was well heard.
Who subscribed to it.
They who subscribed to this Confession were John Duke of Saxony, George
Marquess of Brandenburgh, Ernest and Francis brothers, Dukes of Brunswick and
Lunenburgh; Philip Landgrave of Hassia, Wolfgang Prince of Anhalt; and two
Cities of the Empire, Norinberg and Reutling. After it was read, the Princes
judgment was threefold. First, Some thought fit that the Decree of Worms
should be pressed, and the refractary compelled to it. Secondly, Others would
have had the Confession examined by learned and pious men, and then to be
delivered to Caesar. Thirdly, Some desired that the Papists should exhibit a
confutation of it to the Potestants: and that the whole cause should be left to
Caesar's judgment: It was commanded the Papist to confute it if they could.
To this last most of the Princes agreed. Thereupon the Pontifician Divines (of
whom John Faber and Eckius were chief) were enjoined to prepare their
confutation. They wrote many things bitterly against the Protestants, and
rather multiplied revilings then arguments. When therefore they were bid to new
mould their writings, the publication of the Pontifician refutation was
deferred seven weeks from the exhibiting of the Confession.

Melancthon and Luthers letter each to other.
In the mean space Luther and Melancthon conferred by their letters concerning
many points controverted, and discussed, what might with a good conscience be
yielded to their adversaries, especially concerning humane traditions, and
matters devised by men in Gods worship. Luther also by many Epistles gravely
written, and by exhortations full of spirit and life (which are indeed the
treasures of all wholesome and powerful comfort) confirmed the hearts of the
Prince Elector, Luthers Exhortation.
and of Pontanus his Chancellor, and their Colleagues in the prosecution of
their attempts for the common safety and peace of peace of the Church and
State, and posterity, and for curing the apparent wounds thereof, and
preventing the distractions of the Church, and the confusion of Opinions.
Luther writes to Albertus Cardinal.
He sent also to Albertus of Mentz the Cardinal in the time of the Assemblies
fitting, a printed Epistle. He was a man of chief authority amongst the rest;
wherefore Luther endeavored to persuade him, that seeing there was small hope
to setle a concord in religion, he would obtain of the Emperor at least a
grant of Political peace. At the same time Erasmus wrote a letter of the same
argument to Campegius.

At length the Refutation of the Protestants Confession was new dressed and
refined, The refutation of the Confession, read.
and on the third day of August, was in Caesar's Palace publicly read before
the States of the Empire. The Emperor professed that he would persist in his
opinion, and requested the Duke of Saxony, and such as joined with him, to give
an assent. But, The copy of it hard to be got.
when as they could hardly obtain a copy of the confutation, and that with
these conditions, that it should not be published, nor transcribed, nor any
reply made thereunto, and could not prevail to have these conditions omitted;
the Archbishop of Mentz, and his brother the Marquess of Brandenburgh, and
Henry of Brunswick, requested of the Emperor that he would give them leave to
take a friendly course for the composing the controversy. Arbiters of the
cause.
When Caesar had yielded thereunto, there were of each party, seven at first,
and then secondly, three chosen out of each seven, who were to take a course
for settling of concord. Here when the Saxon party seemed to yield too far to
the Pontifician, Luther wrote thus to Melancthon. Luthers admonition to
Melancthon.
Concerning obedience to be performed to the Bishops, as in jurisdiction and
the common ceremonies, I pray you have a care, look to your self, and give no
more then you have, lest ye should be compelled again to a sharper and more
dangerous war for the defense of the Gospel. I know that you always except
the Gospel in those Articles: but I fear lest afterward they should accuse us
of breach of our covenant, and unconstancy, if we observe not what they please.
For they will take our graunts in the large, larger, largest sense: and hold
their own strictly, more strictly, and as strictly as they can. In brief, I
wholly dislike this agitation for concord in doctrine, as being a thing utterly
impossible, unless the Pope will abolish his Popedom. Concerning the
Confutation, this should have been added, that it was a very cold one. Of it
thus Luther wrote to Melancthon. Grace and peace in Christ the Lord over his
enemies. I thank God, who permitted our Adversaries to devise so fond a
confutation. Christ is come and reigns. Let the devils, if they will, turn
Monks and Nuns: Nor does any shape better become them, then that in which
they have hitherto set forth themselves to be adored by the world. -- Then a
little after this: Did not I foretell you, that you troubled your self in vain
about traditions, because that point exceeds very much the capacity of
Sophisters? There has ever been disputation about laws amongst the wisest men:
and truly it requires an Apostolical ability to judge purely and surely
thereof, for there is no Author extant, except Paul alone, who has written
fully and perfectly of this matter. Because it is the death of all humane
reason to judge the law: the spirit in this case being the only Judge. What
then can Sophisters here perform, whose reason is blinded? Well, we have done
our part, and well satisfied them. Now is the time of working together with the
Lord, whom I beseech to direct and preserve us. Amen.

In that loving course for composing the differences by the Arbitratours, when
the point of invocation of Saints was handled, and Eckius produced Jacobs
speech, Let my name be called upon those children: Melancthon first answered,
and then Brentius said, that there was nothing extant in all the Scripture of
the invocation of Saints. Hereupon Coclaus, that he might step in as patron to
the Cause, did thus excuse the matter. That in the old Testament the Saints of
God were not prayed unto: because they were then in Limbo, and not in Heaven.
Here John Duke of Saxony concluded and said to Eckius. Behold O Eckius, the
speech by you brought out of the old Testament notoriously defended. The
Confession of our party, which Caesar, Ferdinandus his brother, the Princes of
Bavaria, The Confession of the Protestants, translated into diverse tongues.
and some Bishops attentively listened unto, and the other party could not
endure, was translated into Italian (for the Pope, who was not very well
skilled in Latin) and into the English, Spanish, French, Boemian, Vngarian
tongues.

The issue of all came to this, The issue of matters in this assembly.
that though the Protestants did desire peace of Caesar, and space farther to
deliberate of the matter, they could not obtain their desire. The Confession it
self was rejected, and all who assented to it, unless they suffered all
matters to run in their old Tenor, were brought into hazard of their lives and
States: there were some also appointed to execute Caesar's decree. Whereas
therefore it was daily exspected, that the Protestants should be warred against
by the Pontificians: Luther soon after the Assembly with a noble and Heroik
spirit set forth a book to the Germans, whose title was Luthers admonition ad
Germanos.
Warnungan seine liebe deutschen. Wherein he exhorted them to embrace peace,
and showed that they ought not to obey a wicked Edict, and further by arms the
persecution of the true doctrine of the Gospel, and harmless Princes and
Churches: and fight for Idols and other abominations of the Papists. Yet he did
not counsel the Protestant side to take up arms, before the Pontifician
faction should in the Emperors name invade them with war: But if they should
resist, and defend themselves with force of Arms when they were set upon, he
excused them from being traduced and condemned as seditious persons: and showed
that they must be conceived to stand only upon their own and their peoples
defense.

Luther studies in the wilderness at Coburgh.
Before we leave the wilderness of Coburg, and come thence with Luther: observe
first, what books he there wrote; Besides some mentioned before, of the rest he
thus writes to Melancthon. Though I have been troubled with weariness of the
task, and head ache, and have laid aside Ezekiel, yet do I in the mean time
translate the small Prophets: and in one week more, I hope, shall finish them,
by Gods help. For now only Haggai and Malachi remain undone. I busy myself
herein rather for the comfort I reap by them, Luthers ardent prayers.
then that I am able to undergo the pains. Secondly know the fervency of his
prayers in this wilderness: of which Vitus Theodorus, who accompanied him at
Coburg, thus wrote to Melancthon. No day passes, in which Luther spends not
three hours at the least, and they are the hours most fit for study, in
Prayer. Once it so fell out, that I heard him praying. Good God* what a spirit,
what a confidence was in his very expressions? with such reverence he sueth for
any thing, as one begging of God; and yet with such hope and assurance, as if
he spoke with a loving father or friend. I know, says he, that thou art a
father and our God: I know therefore assuredly, that thou will destroy the
persecuters of thy children. If so be thou please not so to do, thy danger
will be joined with ours: this business is wholly thine: we adventured not on
it, but were compelled thereunto. Wherefore thou will defend us. When I heard
him praying in this manner with a clear voice as I stood a far off, my mind
also was inflamed with a singular kind of ardency: because I observed how
passionately, how gravely, how reverently, he in his prayer spoke of God, and
urged Gods promises out of the Psalms, as one assured, that what he asked,
should come to pass. I doubt not therefore, but that his prayers will much
advance and further the desperate cause treated of at the Assembly. When in
that assembly the chief and almost the sole dissension between Luther and the
Protestants was about the Lords supper: this liked the Papists, but grieved the
Potestants. Bucer therefore by the consent of the Duke of Saxony and his
Magistrates consent, Bucer goes to Luther.
went from Auspurg to Coburg to see what agreement could be made between him
and Luther: Nor did he receive a cross answer, but diversely the business was
hindered. Thither also came Vrbanus Regius See Regius his life.
for to consult with Luther.

An. 1531. An. 1531. An interpretation of Caesar's edict.
Luther mildly wrote an Interpretation of Caesar's Edict, not against the
Emperor, but against the Princes and Bishops who were the chief instruments
of the Civil broils. In this he defended diverse chief heads of Christian
Religion: As the Eucharist in both kinds; that the Church might err; the
Mass and free will he disallowed, and showed that we are justified by faith,
not by works. Of this point observe his remarkable profession. I Martin Luther
an unworthy preacher of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ thus profess and
believe: That faith alone without respect to our good works does justify us
before God: An exelent Protestation of M. Luther.
and that this Article cannot be overthrown by the Roman Emperor, or the Turk,
or the Tartarian, or the Persian; nor by the Pope, or all his Cardinals,
Bishops, Sacrificers, Monks, Nuns, Kings, Princes, Potentates of the world,
and all the Devils. This Article, will they nill they, will stand: Hell gates
cannot prevayle against it. The spirit of God does dictate this unto me, this
is the true Gospel. For thus the Article in the mouth of all Christian children
has it. I believe in Jesus Christ crucified and dead. Now no man died for our
sins but Jesus Christ the son of God, the one and only son of God: I say
it again and again, Jesus the one and only son of God redeemed us from our
sins. This is most surely grounded and undoubted Doctrine: this the whole
scripture cries out aloud, though the devils and all the world storm and
burst with anger at it. And if he alone take away the sins of the world, we
verily cannot do it with our works. and it is impossible that I can lay hold
on Christ otherwise then by faith: he is never apprehended by my good works.
And seeing faith alone lays hold on our Redeemer, and not our works the
concomitants of our faith, it abides undoubted truth; that faith alone before
our works, or without our works considered, does this, which is nothing else,
but to be justified, but to be redeemed from our sins. Then good works follow
our faith, as the effects and fruits thereof. This doctrine I teach: and this
the Spirit of God; and the whole Christian Church delivers for truth: In this
I will persist, Amen.

With these two writings, The Admonition to the Germans, and The interpretation
of Caesar's Edict, Luther madded the nest of the Popish Hornets: who thereupon
put forth a book against him; but without any man's name to it. Luther sharply
answered this book, In the book Weber den Wrucht. etc.
and gravely acquitted himself of the crimes objected against him, that is,
That he denied the yielding obedience to Caesar: that he himself was a Trumpet
for rebellion and sedition: that all things written by him concerning the
designs of the Pope were figments, and lies. But he proved them to be true by
many remarkable sayings and deeds of the Pontificians: which are contained in
Tom. 5. of his works at len. p. 304, etc. An. 1532.
his German writings, and other books by him set out this year.

In the year 32. by Gods goodness and the intercession of the Archbish. of
Mentz, and the Elector Palatine, the Emperor First peace to the Protestants.
granted Peace to the Protestant Churches, upon some certain conditions,
propounded to the Duke of Saxony especially. Which that he should most
willingly embrace, Luther by his Sleid. B. 8. p. 205.
letter seriously persuaded the then present Elector, and his son Frederik,
who soon after succeeded his father. For this very year the 16 day of August,
that godly Duke, a most constant confessor of the Evangelicall truth departed
this life. For the perpetuating of whose memory, Luther made two funeral
Sermons, and Melancthon a funeral oration at his burial, which expressed the
Idea or Character of a good Prince.

An. 1533. Luther comforted the Oschatz.
In the year 1533. Luther comforted the Citizens of Oschatz by his letter, who
had been turned out for the confession of the Gospel; In his letter he says:
The Devil is the Host, and the World is his Inn: so that where ever you come,
you shall be sure to find this ugly Host. A controversy with George Duke of
Saxony.
He answered also the Elector of Saxony to this question: How far it is
lawful to take up arms in our own defense? Especially, now there was a great
controversy between Luther and George Duke of Saxony, who of old hated most
vehemently Luther and his doctrine. Therefore that the Protestant party might
not be enlarged by his peoples embracing it, he bound them all by oath not to
receive Luthers doctrine. He also provided that the Citizens of Leipsick, who
coming to Confession after the Papists manner, and then received the Sacrament,
should have a ticket given them, which afterward they should redeliver to the
Senate. About seventie were found without tickets. For these consulted with
Luther what they should do? Luther answered; That they should do nothing
contrary to their consciences, as men which firmly believed that they should
receive the Sacrament in both kinds; and that they should undergo any
extreamitie. In the Epistle are these words. Seeing now Duke George dares
undertake to dive into the secrets of men's consciences he is worthy to be
deceived, because he will be the Devils Apostle. Hereupon Duke George wrote to
the Elector of Saxony his cosen German; and accused Luther both of giving him
base language, and also of stirring up the people under his command to
rebellion. The Elector wrote this to Luther, and told him that unless he can
clear himself, he must receive condign punishment. Upon this occasion Luther
refuted this accusation: and denied, That he ever counseled them to resist
their Prince: but that patiently they would endure their banishment: And that
he was so far from infringing the authority of the Magistrate, that no man
did more stoutly confirm it, or more fully declare it: George the Duke called
the Devils Angel.
And that George the Duke was called the Devils Angel for the Subjects sake;
because they should not think, that the Edicts were a lawful Magistrates, but
the devils. Luther comforts the banished Citizens of Leipsick.
He joined thereunto an epistle to them of Leipsick, to comfort them in their
banishment, and to counsel them cheerfully to undergo their present calamity,
and to give God thanks for giving them courage and constancy: He told them,
that this rejoicing of their adversaries was neither sound nor lasting: and
that it would perish sooner then any man thought: and that all attempts of the
enemies of the Gospel were hitherto frustrate, and by Gods singular favor into
the ground. Luthers less Apology.
He wrote also a brief Apology: in which he clears himself of these crimes
objected against him: Namely, that he was a liar, a bro^ker of his promise, an
Apostate. Here denying the former, he yielded himself to be an Apostate or
revolter, but a blessed and holy one, who had not kept his promise made to the
Devil: and that he was no other revolter then a Mammeluke, who turns
Christian, or a Magician, who renouncing his covenant made with the Devil,
betaketh himself to Christ. To these passages he added diverse things concerning
Monkery. Of the dispute with the Devil.
And again in a new Treatise he oppugned private Mass, and their consecration
of Priests. In this Treatise he related his Disputation with the Devil: which
the Papists and Jesuits diversely play upon. The truth of that matter, A letter
to Frankford.
he in this book unfoldeth, as being the best Expositour of his own meaning. He
sent also a letter to the Senate and people of Frankford, in which he exhorted
them to take heed of Zwinglius doctrine, and instructed them about the
Confession.

An. 1534. Petrus Paulus Vergerius.
In the year 1534. the Elector of Saxony joined in pacification with King
Ferdinando. This highly grieved Petr. Paulus Vergerius, so that in the name of
Pope Clement he expostulated the matter with Ferdinando. This year Luther
spent in preaching, writing Treatises, and Commenting. And this year the
German Bible translated by him, and brought into one body, was first printed,
as the old privilege dated at Bibliopolis under the Electors hands shows.

An. 1535. P. Vergerius returns into Germany.
In the 1535. year, this Bible was published. Then the fancies of the
Anabaptists began to appear in Westphalia, and made a very great combustion.
This year P. Paul. Vergerius was sent back by the Pope into Germany. He spoke
to the Duke of Saxony about the holding a Council at Mantua. Luthers labors.
He also met with Luther, and dealt with him about matters of Religion; Then
Luther wrote many Sermons and Epistles, and a book in a popular way about
prayer, and a Preface to Vrbanus Rhegius book against the Monasterians, New
Valentinians, and Donatists. And when the Pope had appointed the Council at
Mantua, Council at Mantua.
Luther wrote certain asseverations and Theses against the Constantian (as he
called it the Obstantian) Council. He sent also a consolatory writing to the
Christians of Mittweid expulsed for the Gospels sake: and a letter to the
Archbishop of Mentz, the last he calls it, yet he wrote many after it. This
year Luther began publicly to preach on Genesis, which task he ended (as
himself was wont to ominate) with his life, six years after. An. 1536. Concord
between Luther and Bucer, etc.


In the year 36. the form of the Concord between Luther and Bucer, and other
Doctors in the Churches of upper Germany was written by Melancthon at
Wittenberg; And published in the end of May. In Bucers life.
This elsewhere we spoke of, and told who subscribed thereunto. This year Philip
Duke of Pomerania at Torgaw married Mary daughter of John Elect of Saxony, and
of Marg. of Anhalt. Luther was at the marriage, and prayed for Gods Blessing
upon the new married couple. When all the rites were performed, Duke Philip
reached out his hand to Luther at this Luther stood a while silent, and still
held his hand: and with a loud voice said. The Lord God be with you: and keep
your posterity from failing. Now when as Barnimus the Uncle of Philip had no
male children, Philips wife for four years was barren: so that all the Male
stock of the Duke of Pomerania was likely to be ere long extinct: at length,
by Gods blessing, according to the prayer of Luther, he had seven sons by
this wife: and wonderfully enlarged that noble Family.

The Assembly at Smalcald.
In February the year following the Duke Elector of Saxony with the Confederate
Princes and Cities, and their Divines held an Assembly at Smalcald for matters
of Religion: that the Princes might deliberate about calling the Council to
Mantua: and the Divines confer about matters of doctrine. Luthers articles
there approved and to be exhibited to the Council.
Hither therefore Luther and Melancthon were called, Luther wrote Articles
concerning the chief controverted heads of Christian doctrine. These the other
Divines did approve, and these were to be exhibited in the Council of Mantua
(if ever it were held) and put up in the name of the Saxon and near thereunto
adjoining Churches. Commonly they are called the Smalcaldick Articles. These
were joined to the Augustane Confession, and the Apology, and Luthers
Catechismes.

Luther sick of the stone.
At this meeting Luther fell sick of a grievous disease, so that there was no
hope of his life. He was pained of the stone, and obstruction in the bladder
eleven days. Here he, though most of his friends disliked and reasoned against
it, would be carried thence; the event proved his resolution good. George Sturk
the Physician being sent for from Erphord went along with him. Luther as he was
carried along, made his will: in which he bequeathed his detestation of Popery
to his friends and the Pastors: as before in the house of Spalatinus in the
year 1530. where he made this Verse.

Pest is eram vivus, moriens ero mors tua Papa.
I living, stopped Romes breath,
And Dead, will be Romes Death.
But the night after his departure thence he began to be somewhat better.
Luthers recovery.
At Tambach the passages of his urine opened, so that he voyded it in great
abundance: The joy at his recovery showed by Melancthons Letter.
and called that Village the place of his happiness. This recovery of Luther
was cause of great joy to many godly men, even to all who loved Luther,
especially to Melancthon: who signified the same to Luther in these words by
his letter. I heartily thank the God of all mercy and our Lord Jesus Christ
our high Priest interceding for us, and compassionating our infirmities, for
your recovery from your dangerous disease. I rejoice at my heart both for your
and the Churches sake, that you enjoy your health again, and the rather
because herein we behold the apparent love and mercy of God to his Church. Your
letter expressing your recovery put cheerfulness into the countenances of the
Princes and all good men: they all acknowledge that the light of the Gospel has
been in these days made known to the world by your Ministry, and know that
they are beholding to you for it: and foresee what a loss it would be to the
Church if they should lose you. Therefore with joint votes they pray that long
you may live among us, and thank God, who has restored you from death to
life. I hope God accepted of this their joy and thanks. And I pray God for
Christ's sake to make you perfectly sound and healthful. -- Here we have not
yet ended our deliberation about giving Caesar's messenger an answer to his
harsh dispute against our former answer. So that neither yet is any answer
given to the Pope. The Duke of Wittenberg commends your noble courage, who
durst in such a disease travel, and fly from this cave. He minds to follow
your example: for having been eight days sick he resolves to be gone to
morrow. Christ grant, that I may shortly see you in good health. I was much
grieved for you, and that the more, because being absent, I could not perform
any friendly office to you. I was perplexed at some physical errors, by which
your disease was augmented: so that no man can express how extremity of
grief wrought upon me. Nor am I yet freed from all grief. If your malady was
only a difficulty of urine from some stopping, I hope all danger is past. But
if it be from the bigness of any stone, I trust that the danger will be much
the less, and that you have a prudent and faithful Physician, whom I pray God
to direct and assist. From Smalcald. 1537.

An. 1537.
Here the Pope rejourned the meeting of the Synod from the first of November to
the first of May the year following: and designed the place for it to be
Vincentia a large and renowned City of the Venetians, and sent thither some of
the Cardinals to begin the Council. He pretended a serious consultation for the
purging the Augean Stable: and now commended the same business to some choice
men, but omitted the propounding of the oath to them, and would that no man
should know the intent of this reformation. Yet was it not long hid: and as
soon as it was taken notice of in Germany, Luther in the vulgar tongue, and
John Sturmius in Latin wrote to the Reformers an answer. Luthers book by a
picture in the frontispice showed its argument. Luthers book of the Popes
reformation.
For the Pope was pictured sitting on a high throne with some Cardinals
standing round; who with Fox tails on the end of long poles, The Popes
reformation turned to smoke.
as with brushes cleansed all parts above and beneath. At length all that
reformation came to nothing, by whose policy and tricks it is well enough
known. Luther now divulged one of the chief Articles of the Papists belief
(namely, concerning Constantines donation) with annotations confuting it, for
the Pontificians sake. He published also some Epistles of John Hus, which were
sent to the Bohemians in the prison at Constance, An. 1516. and wrote a preface
to the Spiritualty, The Legend of John Chrysostom.
who would be present at the Council. He sent also to the Pope, Cardinals and
Prelates, the Legend concerning John Chrysostom with a preface and
annotations. Luther of the Helvetians.
He sent also an Epistle written in a way of friendly compliance to them of the
Evangelical league, concerning the Concord of the Helvetians, and therein
showed his consent, and what was his judgment concerning the Supper of the
Lord.

Here, The sect of the Antimonians.
as if the Church had not contentions enough already, the new Sect of the
Antinomians start up. Their chief ringleader was John Agricola of Isleben, who
formerly had been familiarily acquainted with Luther. They held that repentance
was not to be taught from the decalogue, and they reasoned against them, who
taught that the Gospel was not to be taught to any, but to such as were humbled
by the Law. And they themselves taught, that whatsoever a man's life was, though
impure, yet he was justified, so that he believed the Gospel. Thus Luther was
put to a new pains, and at large confuted them. And showed that the Law was
not given, that we might be justified by it, but to show us our sins, and to
terrify our consciences. Therefore the Law was first to be taught, and the
Gospel afterward, which shows the Mediator. John Agricola being better
instructed by Luther acknowledged his error, and revoked it under his own
hand in public.

An. 1538. Sim. Lemnius his libel.
About this time An. 1538. near Whitsontide Melancthon being Rector of the
University the summer half year, one Sim. Lemnius put forth a book of
Epigrams: by which some thought the fame of diverse men and women was
blemished. Luther hereupon showed himself to be, as ever, a detester of such
notorious libels, and wrote an Epistle to the Church of Wittenberg in which he
inveighed against the Author of the libell, and showed how he disliked the
course of this base Poet. But the Author escaped, and afterward by most
impudent lying set forth so filthy and impure writings, that all good people
judged, Sleid. b. 12. Camerarius in Melancthons life.
that he was not to be pardoned for his former folly: and that what evil
soever befell him, it was far less then his wickedness and madness
deserved.

This year also were put forth the three Oecomenicall Creeds with Luthers
annotations and exposition.

In the year 1539. An. 1539.
were agitated deliberations with much care and difficulty concerning the
obtaining peace of the Emperor: because many feared an attempt unjustly to
oppress the State. Luther therefore together with his Colleagues of Wittenberg,
Of lawful defense.
composed and put forth a Treatise concerning a Defense lawful, approved, and
not contrary to Gods will. Of the name of Councels and the Church.
And because now the name of the Council and Church were in every man's mouth,
Luther put forth a book in their mother tongue concerning both of them. In the
Preface whereof he says, that the Pope by calling a Council does play with
the Church of Christ, as they do with a Dog, who offer him a crust of bread on
the point of a knife, and when the Dog takes it, knock him on the nose with
the handle thereof, to make such as see it laugh. Luther in that book declared
the authority of the Scriptures. And then treats of the council Apostolical,
of the Nicene, Constantinopolitan, Ephesine, Carthaginian Councels. And shows
what a Council is, and which to be called true, what are the signs and works
thereof: and that Christian Schools are perpetual Councels; and therefore
that they are with great care to be maintained, as much advancing the good of
the Ecclesiastical, Political, Oeconomicall Hierarchy on earth.

About the Conclusion of the Smalcald Assembly, George Duke of Saxony dies.
Henry succeeds.
April 24. George Duke of Saxony died childlesse: and declared Henry his
brother with his sons Maurice and Augustus his heirs upon condition, that they
should not alter the Religion: which if they should attempt, he bequeathes his
whole territories to King Ferdinando, to have and hold the same, till the
condition was observed. But whilst the Ambassadors treat with Henry about the
same, Protestancy in M^snia.
making glorious propositions to him, and promising him mountains of gold: He
resolutely denied to do it: George died before the Ambassadors could return;
so that George otherwise then he intended, held Henry for his heir. Hereupon
in Misnia was presently made such an alteration, that whereas in Easter
Holidaies the Papisticall Priests preached, at Whitsontide Luther Now fifty
years old.
and his Scholars had free possession of the Pulpits. So Luther here began
Reformation, others after him added perfection thereunto.

An. 1540. The conference at Hagenaw.
In the year 1540. it was decreed that the Divines should meet at Hagenaw on
the Rhine, and peaceably confer about the Doctrine of controverted points.
Melancthon sick in his journey.
Melancthon journying thither, fell into a grievous disease at Vinaria: so that
there he stayed, and made his Will, and prepared himself for death. Hither
Luther and Cruciger, at the Electors instance, took their journey both by night
and day. Here Luther finding Melancthon pitifully consumed with the disease,
weeping and sighing cried. How excellent and useful an instrument of the
Church do we find miserably sick and almost dead. And when he had saluted him,
Luther prays for Melancthon, etc.
He fell down on his knees, and heartily prayed for him: and then performed
what friendly offices he could by comforting, admonishing, and sometimes
chiding the sick man. Of this Melancthon thus wrote to Camerarius. I cannot by
words express, what pains I have undergone, into which sometimes I have a
relaspe. I perceived also that Doctor Luther was much afflicted in mind for
me: but he concealed his sorrow, because he would not increase mine. And
endeavored to cheer me up with his noble courage, sometimes comforting,
sometimes reproving me somewhat sharply. Had he not come to me, I had died.

This year Robert Barnes a learned Divine was burnt at London the last of
June, Robert Barnes burnt at London.
for witnessing to Gods truth. He was familiarly known to Luther, upon his
coming to Wittenberg in the Embassy about the divorce made by King Henry. His
confession printed by Luther.
Luther caused the Confession of this his friend, and the faithful Martyr of
Christ to be printed with his Preface; and besides admonished the Pastors by
another peculiar Treatise, to inveigh against Usurers and Usury.

In the beginning of the year 1541. An. 1541. Myconius sick and comforted by
Luther.
Luther wrote a consolatory letter to Frederik Myconius lamentably spent with a
Consumption: and affirmed that himself could have no joy to live, if he died:
and thereupon wished that he himself might first lay down the tabernacle of his
weak body: and said that he was verily persuaded that his prayers should be
granted for Myconius life. As indeed it came to pass: for Myconius outlived
Luther six years, and would say: that Luther obtained this for him by his
prayers. After Easter, Bernard the infant son of John of Anhalt was baptized
at Dessaw. Here Luther preached two Sermons to the Courtiers, the Brother of
the Prince of Anhalt, and the Bishop of Brandenburgh: which were printed. He
wrote also an Answer to a railing book of one, John ^udding.
whom he calls Hans Wurst. Wherein he defended himself and his doctrine,
against the Papists and their Popish errors. Tom. 7. Jen.
He put forth also an Exhortation to prayer against the Turk: and answered the
Princes questions concerning Transubstantiation, Free Will. Justification by
faith, and other points.

About this time the Bishopric of Neoburg, by Sala, was void; There Nicolas
Amsdorf a Divine born of a noble Family, An. 1542.
was enstalled by Luther, at the command of the Elector of Saxony the Patron of
that Diocese, and Julius Pflugius, whom the Canons of the College chose, was
refused. Luther placed him in the Bishopric, Ian. 20. An. 1542. This thing, as
many conceived, gave occasion to other stirs: and very much offended the
Emperor, who much affected Pfugius for diverse respects. Of this see more in
Amsdorfs life. After this Luther wrote a book in the German tongue, and called
it, The Pattern of the inauguration of a true Christian Bishop.

The Alcoran in the German tongue.
He published at that time the Alcoran, which by Richard a Dominican was
translated into the vulgar tongue: He added to it a faithful admonition
concerning the abandoning the Turks doctrine, and affirmed that not the Turk,
but the Pope was Antichrist. And upon a difference rising between the Elector
of Saxony and Maurice concerning the territories and town of Wurce^; so that
war was likely to ensue; Luther with weighty reasons in his letters
dissuaded both the Princes from their designs. He further also opened his
judgment about a Position some years agone by him propounded: Namely, that to
war against the Turk was nothing else but to fight against God, who uses him
as his whip to scourge us. Now also he wrote a consolatory letter concerning
abortive birthes and bringing forth dead children.

The years 1543 and 44, An. 1543.
produced many great troubles and stirs. For now the Sacramentary contention
began afresh, to Melancthons great grief: Camerarius in the life of Melancthon.
whom some attempted to set at jarres with Luther. Some there were also, who
sought to cool Luthers heat, and spoke little more favorably of the Rhenan
Churches, then of the Turks. Wherefore when Christopher Froschoverus the
Printer of Tigur sent Luther a copy of his Tigurin Bible then Printed; Luther
to the Printer to Tigur.
Luther admonished him by his letter, that he should not publish anything,
which came to him from the Ministers of Tigur: and that he had nothing to do
with them, nor would receive or read their books: that the Churches of God
could not join in Communion with them, who already were running into the way
of Perdition, and would bring others into hell and damnation: and that he would
oppugn them with his prayers and books whilst he lived. Luther writes
against the Jews.
And now Luther first wrote against the Jews, and refuted their lies, and their
blasphemous conceit about Shemhamphoras, the name of God expounded. He also
wrote his judgment, His answer to C. Schwenckfeld.
and a short answer to Casp. Schwenckfelds book and letter: whom he bad not to
mention him in his writings, and sent him away with this answer. The Lord
reprove Satan who is in thee, confusion befall the Spirit, which called thee,
and the course which thou runnest, and all the Sacramentarians and Eutychians,
who partake with thee; and all thy blasphemies. Thou do as they, of whom it
was written: they ran and I sent them not; they spoke and I commanded them not.

His judgment about ceremonies and excommunication.
He wrote also his mind to others concerning the Ceremonies and
excommunication: he desired that there should be few Ceremonies, and they
tending to edification, and that excommunication should be brought into the
Church as a profitable discipline: but could scarce hope to see it. He
admonished the young students at Wittenberg to avoid fornication, with which some
then were taxed: yea he threatened that he would hold no society with men of
that ill condition: Luther at Mersberg.
and tarried some time at Mersburg with the Prince of Anhalt: But afterward he
was called to his ordinary task by the University, sending for him an
honorable Embassy. A commentary upon David's last words.
About this time he wrote an excellent Commentary upon the last words of David;
wherein he soundly and plainly declared the Article of the Trinity, the
distinction of the persons, Christ's Deity and humanity.

An. 1544. Commentary on Genesis.
In the year 1544. he finished the first part of his Commentaries on Genesis:
in which he often blames the Sacramentarians: and foretells, that after his
death many would oppugn Luthers doctrine. Then in September he published the
brief and last Confession concerning the Eucharist: wherein he expressly
explaineth what in the Lords Supper is received by the worthy receivers, what
by the unworthy; what by faith, what without faith: and censures Zwinglius,
Oecolampadius and others at Tigur: who set forth an Apology of their doctrine
the year following. Of this In the life of Bulling, and Lavat. Histor. Sacr.
elsewhere is spoken.

This very year the 17. Luthers last Lecture.
of November he finished his explication of Genesis: which was his last
public reading in the Universitie: which he concluded with these words. See
Mathes. Sermon concerning Luther. p. 169. b.
Thus end I my explication on Genesis; God grant that others may more rightly
and truly expound it, then I have done. I cannot proceed farther therein: my
strength fails me: pray for me, that it would please God to grant me a quiet
and comfortable departure out of this life.

This year in Italy was spread a most impudent lie about Luthers death: The
lie in Italy about Luthers death.
The sum of it translated out of the Italian is this.

A stupendous and rare miracle which God ever to be praised, Tom. 8. Jen. p.
206.
showed about the filthy death of Martin Luther, a man damned both in body and
soul, so that it conduced to the glory of Jesus Christ, and the amendment and
comfort of godly men. When Martin Luther was sick, he desired the Lords body to
be communicated to him, which he receiving, died presently. When he saw that he
must die; he requested that his body might be set upon the Altar, and be adored
with divine worship. But God to put an end to his horrible errors, by a great
miracle warned the people to abstain from the impiety, which Luther invented:
For when his body was laid in his grave: suddenly so great a stir and terror
arose, as if the foundations of the earth were shaken together. Whereupon all
at the funeral trembling, were astonished, and after a while lifting up their
eyes, beheld the sacred host appearing in the air. Wherefore with great
devotion of heart, they placed the most sacred Host on the holy Altar.
Whereupon the fearful noise ceased. But in the night following a loud noise
and rattling much shriller then the former was heard about the sepulcher of
Luther, which awaked all the City, terrified them, and almost killed them with
astonishment. In the morning when they opened the sepulcher, they found neither
his body, nor his bones, nor any of the clothes: but there came a sulphurous
stink out thereof, which almost overcame the standers by. By this miracle many
were so amazed, that they amended their lives for the honor of the Christian
faith, and the glory of Jesus Christ. When this lie came Printed into Germany,
Luther did subscribe with his own hand, words to this purpose.

I Martin Luther do profess and witness under mine own hand, that I on the
21. day of March received this figment full of anger and fury concerning my
death, and that I read it with a joyful mind, and cheerful countenance: And
but that I detest the blasphemy, which ascribes an impudent lie to the divine
Majesty, for the other passages, I cannot but with great joy of heart laugh at
Satan's, the Popes, and their accomplices hatred against me. God turn their
hearts from their diabolical maliciousness. But if God decree not to hear my
prayers for their sin unto death: then God grant that they may fill up the
measure of their sins, and solace themselves to the full with their libels,
full fraught with such like lies.

This year Luther set forth a book entitled, Against the Popedom ordained by
the Devil. In this he treats of the Council appointed by the Pope, and often
adjourned, or translated from place to place, and of other plots of the Popes.
The Italian disgraced the Germans.
There he speaks of the Campanian, who coming out of Germany into Italy,
turned his bare breech toward Germany, using words to the disgrace of the
nation.

Luther published diverse other Treatises as the explication of Christ's speech.
Search the scriptures: And showed The blindness and ingratitude of the world, in
handling Christ's complaint of Jerusalem. By Luthers advice especially, Georgius
Anhaltinus undertook the government of the Church of Mersberg. Of this is
spoken in the life of Duke George.

In the year 1546. An. 1546.
Luther accompanied with Melancthon visited his own country: The Council of
Trent began. Camerarius in vita Melanct.
and returned again in safety. Not long after, the Council of Trent being
begun, and having sat once or twice, Luther was called again by the Earls of
Mansfield to his own country, for to compose a dissension among them
concerning their bounds and heritages. Luther was not wont to deal in matters
of this nature, Luther called to Mansfield.
having been versed in sacred studies all his life time: but because he was
borne at Isleben, a town in the territories of Mansfield, he was willing to do
his country service in this kind. Wherefore making his last sermon at
Wittenburg the 17. He lodged at Justus Jonas his house.
day of January, he took his journey on the 23. day: And at Hall in Saxony
lodged at Iustus Jonas his house, Luthers danger.
where he stayed three days because of the roughness of the waters, and
preached the 26. of January upon Paul's Conversion. On the 28. day being
Thursday at Hall he passed over the river with Iustus Jonas and his own three
sons, and being in danger of drowning said to Dr Jonas; Luther very sick.
Think you not, that it would rejoice the Devil very much, if I and you and my
three sons should be drowned? When he came to the Earls of Mansfield, he was
entertained by a hundred horsemen or more of the Court, Luthers employment.
and was brought into Isleben very honorably, but very sick, and almost past
recovery: which thing he said did often befall him, when he had any great
business to undertake. But using some means for cure of his infirmity, he
sat at supper with the company: and so continued to do from the 29. of January
to the 17. of February, and treated of the differences, for whose determination
he came thither. In this time he preached sometimes, and twice received the
Lords supper, and publicly received two students into the sacred order of the
Ministry. And at his lodging used much godly conference at Table with his
friends, Luthers conference.
and every day devoutly prayed. The day before his, death though he was
somewhat weak, Whether in the other life we shall know one another.
yet he dined and supped with the company: and at supper spoke of diverse,
matters and among other passages asked, whether in Heaven we should know one an
other? when the rest desired to hear his judgment thereof. He said. What
befell Adam? he never saw Eve, but was at rest in a deep sleep, when God formed
her, yet when he awaked and saw her, he asks not; what she was, or whence she
was? but says, that she was flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone. Now how
knew he that? He being full of the Holy Ghost, and endued with the knowledge of
God, thus spoke. After the same manner we also shall be in the other life
renewed by Christ; and shall know our parents, our wives, and children, and all
about us, much more perfectly, then Adam knew Eve at her bringing to him.

After supper, when he went aside to pray, Luthers disease of which he died.
as was his custom, the pain in his breast began to increase: whereupon by
the advice of some there present, he took a little Unicorns horn in wine:
and after that slept quietly an hour or two on a pallat near the fire. When he
awaked, he betook himself to his chamber, went to bed, and bidding his
friends, good night, admonished them, who were present to pray God for the
propagation of the Gospel: because the Council of Trent and the Pope would
attempt wonderful devises against it. Having thus said, after a little silence
he fell asleep: But was awaked by the violence of his disease after midnight.
Then complained he again of the narrowness of his breast, and perceiving that
his life was at an end, he thus implored Gods mercy, and said.

O heavenly father, my gracious God, Luthers prayer before his death.
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, thou God of all consolation, I give thee
hearty thanks, that thou have revealed to me, thy Son Jesus Christ; whom I
believe, whom I profess, whom I love, whom I glorify, whom the Pope of Rome
and the rout of the wicked persecute and dishonor. I beseech thee, Lord Jesus
Christ to receive my soul. O my gracious heavenly Father, though I be taken
out of this life, though I must now lay down this frail body: yet I certainly
know, that I shall live with thee eternally, and that I cannot be taken out of
thy hands. He added moreover. God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that every one, who believes in him should not perish, but have
life everlasting. And that in the 68. Psalm. Our God is the God of salvation:
and our Lord is the Lord, who can deliver from death. And here taking a
medicine, and drinking it, he further said. Lord I render up my spirit into thy
hands and come to thee. And again, Lord into thy hands I commend my spirit,
thou, O God of truth, have redeemed me. Here as one falling asleep and without
any bodily pain, that could be discerned, he departed this life. And when
Doctor Jonas and Caelius said. O reverend father, do you die in the constant
confession of that doctrine of Christ, Luthers death.
which you have hitherto preached? He answered so as he might be heard: yea,
which was the last word he spoke. Thus he in his native country, not having
seen it many years before, dyed much lamented by many. This fell on the
eighteen of February on the day in the Calender ascribed to Concord, about
three a clock in the morning, in the great climactericall year of his age.
Soon after his body put into a coffin of Lead, was carried in funeral manner
to the Temple of Isleben: where Iustus Jonas preached.

Then the Earls of Mansfield desired that his body should be interred within
their territories: But the Elector of Saxony, required that it should be
brought back to Wittenberg. In the return thereof, which way so ever it went,
it was honorably attended, and with much grief accompanied out of each
Princes Dominion: and at length upon the 22. Luthers body brought to Wittenberg.
of February in the afternoon, was brought to Wittenberg, and was carried into
the Temple near adjoining to the Castle, with such a troop of Princes, Earls,
Nobles, their living as students, and other people, that the like was seldom
or never seen in that town. When the funeral rites were performed, His
honorable burial.
Pomeranus preached to an assembly of many thousands. And after that Melancthon
with many tears and sighs made a funeral Oration. When this was done, the
coffin with his body was put by the hands of diverse learned men, into the tomb
near to the pulpit, in which he had made many learned Sermons before diverse
Princes, Electors, and the Congregation of many faithful Christians. In a
brazen plate his picture, lively deciphered, was there set up, with verses by
it to this effect.

This Sepulcher great Luthers Corpse contains This might suffice: yet, read
these following strains.
Here, in this Vrne does Martin Luther rest,
And sweetly sleep in hope to rise most blessed.
By whose rare pains, firm faith, and Christ's free Grace,
Which formerly, thick Fogs of Error base,
And duskie Clouds of Works desert hid quite,
Were well reduced to their ancient Light.
For, when blind Superstition ruled All,
And did fair Truth, long time, suppress, and thrall,
He, by Gods Word and Spirits inspiration,
The Gospels Light re-spred, for every Nation.
And, well-instructed by Paul's sacred voice,
(Scorning Romes Cheats,) to teach pure Truth, made choste.
And, as John Baptist, in the Wilderness,
Did Gods Lamb, who heales Sin Preach and express:
So (O Sweet Christ) did Luther clear thy book,
When all the World was caught with Errors book.
And, what the difference was betwixt the Law
(Whose tables Moses brake, though God he saw,
Upon Mount-Sinai) and the Gospel sweet,
Which heales Sin-conscious hearts, which Gods wrath meet.
This difference, lost, to the world He did restore,
That, so, Christ's gifts of Grace might shine the more;
He stoutly did oppose Romes Cheats and Charms,
And Papal rule, which wrought Gods Saints great harms.
Exhorting all, Romes idols for to fly,
He many souls wan to true piety.
And, maugre all Romes threats and snares most sly,
Finished, in Faith, his Course, most valiantly.
Dying in peace, his Soul with Christ does rest,
Crowned with immortal Glory, truly blessed.
For which rare Doctor let both high and low
Bless God, that they so clear Christ's truth do know.
And pray the Lord that these his Gospels rays
May to the World shine-forth for datelesse days.
Philip Melancthon.
Dead is grave Luther, worthy all due praise,
Who set forth Christ, in Faith illustrious rays.
His Death the Church laments, with Sighs sincere,
Who was her Pastor, nay, her Patron dear.
Our Isreal's Chariots and Horsemen rare,
Is Dead, with me, let All sad Sables wear;
Let them their grief in groaning verses sing,
For, such sad Knells, such Orphans, best, may ring.
Theodore Beza.
Rome tamed the World, the Pope tamed Rome, so great;
Rome ruled by Power, the Pope by deep Deceit.
But, how more large, than Theirs, was Luthers Fame,
Who, with One Pen, both Pope and Rome did tame?
Go, fictious Greece, go tell Alcides, then,
His Club is nothing to great Luthers Pen.
John Major.
By Luthers labors, Leo the tenth is slain;
Not Hercles Club, but Luthers Pen's his bane.
Joachim a Beust.
When Luther died, then, with him died, most sure,
A Crown, and credit of Religion pure.
His Soul soar'd-up to heaven, on Concords day,
Which tended Luther, thither, on his way:
Dear Christ, since Discord followed with Coats rent,
Give to thy Spouse Elijahs ornament.
Upon his Tombstone the Universitie of Wittenberg, as to her beloved father,
engraved.
The body of Martin Luther Doctor of Divinity lies here interred, who in An.
1546. the 12. of the Kalends of March died in Isleben the place of his birth:
when he had lived 63. years 3. months and ten days.

MARTINI LVTHERIS. THEOLOGIAE D. CORPUS H. L. S. E. QVI ANNO CHRISTI M. D.
XLVI. XII. CALL. MARTII EISLEBII IN PATRIA S. M. O. C. V. AN. LXIII. M. III. D.
X.

Thus Luther ran his course, and this was the period of his travels. When first
Melancthon heard news of his death, he utttered these sacred words of the
scripture: The Chariot and horsemen of Israel is gone: and took his death
most heavily. For they had lived together 28. Melancthons sorrow for Luthers
death.
years in most religious manner, so that Melancthon truly loved him for his
admirable virtues: and was a faithful mate and helper to him in clearing the
doctrine of the Gospel. Their entire love and faithful society.
For though those times were prone to distractions, and men's wavering minds
desirous of dissension, yet when as each knew others infirmities, there never
fell any jarre between them, which caused any alienation of their affection,
or parting their company and fellowship.

But what and how great storms rose in Germany after the death of Luther (out
alas! What followed Luthers death.
) each Christian knows. So that Luther said truly, and often foretold: That
whilst he lived, by Gods help, See Mathel. Sermon. on Luthers life.
there would no war be raised in Germany; but when he was dead, the age to
come would see the event. Concerning the doctrine of the Gospel, he uttered
this heavenly truth. These things will be a great bane to Christian Religion.
First, What will be great hindrances of Christian Religion.
forgetfullnesse of Gods blessing on us in restoring to us the Gospel.
Secondly, security, which already commonly and every where reigns. Thirdly,
worldly wisdom, which would bring all things into good order, and cure the
public stirs with wicked Councels.

There was in this worthy man of God a quick and prudent understanding,
Luthers virtues.
a magnanimous and noble Spirit. He was ever constant in known truth: His
constancy in the truth.
from the confession whereof he could never be removed with threats or
promises. So that when upon a time, one Papist demanded of another, Why do you
not stop the man's mouth with gold and silver? The other answered: See, this
German beast cares not for money.

There appeared in him a singular proof of his valor and noble courage in the
Auspurg Assembly, when thus he wrote out of his Wilderness to Spalatinus. That
Kings and Princes and people, Luthers courageous speech about the Gospels
success^ at the Assembly at ^d^^p^^g 1530.
rage against the Christ or anointed of God, I esteem it a good sign, and think
it much better then if they flattered. For thereupon follows, that he that
dwells in heaven laughes at them. And when our Lord and King laughes, I see no
cause, why we should weep before their faces. He laughes not for his own sake,
but for ours, that we rather trusting to him then to any thing else, might
laugh at their vain designs: so much need is there of faith, that the cause of
faith may not be looked upon without faith. But he that begun this work, he
began it without our counsel and contrivance; And he himself will forward with
it, and finish it without, and beyond all our counsels and devises: of this I
make no question; I know and am assured hereof. He in whom I believe, is able
to do above all, which we can ask or conceive. Though Philip Melancthon
contrive and desire that God should work according to, and within the compass
of his counsels, that he might have wherein to glory: and say. Surely thus the
business should be carried: Thus would I have done. But this is not well
spoken: I Philip would have it so. This (I) is too flat and dull, too low a
style. It must be thus. The God, who says, I am that I am; this is his name, I
am; He will have it so. It is not yet seen who he is, but he will appear, as he
is, and we shall see him. But I have done. Be you valiant in the Lord, and put
Melancthon in mind from me, that he set not himself in Gods place: but fight
against that ambition of Deity, which was inbred and took roo^ in us in
Paradise by the devils suggestion: for that is an affectation not furthering
the business now in hand. The desire of being like God, thrust Adam and Eve
out of Paradise, and it alone does trouble us, and turn us out of the course of
Peace. We must be mortal men, and not Gods: Thus in brief: If we think
otherwise, everlasting unquietness and anguish of heart will be our reward.

Luther was ready for Martyrdom once or twice, and thought his adversaries
would have him to it: whereupon at his going to Auspurg. An. 1518. thus he
wrote to his dear friend Tom. 1. epist. p. 85.
Melanct. Show your self a man of resolution, as you already do. Teach the
students Gods truth. I am going (if God so please) to be sacrificed for them
and you. For I had rather die, and never more enjoy (which thing alone would be
most grievous to me) your most sweet society, then to recant and revoke any
truth which I have preached, and give occasion to overthrow the right course of
studies. And elsewhere he thus wrote Tom. 1. epist. p. 297. and Tom. 2. p. 340.
to Spalatinus. I had rather, as I have often said, die by the hands of the
Romanists alone. And would by no means that Charles and his Counselors
should interpose themselves in putting me to death. The Emperor Sigismund
unhappy after Hus his death.
I know what misery befell Sigismund the Emperor after the martyring of Hus:
how nothing prospered with him afterward, how he died without issue male, how
his daughters son Ladislaus also died, and so had he his name extinguished in
one age of men: besides Barbara his Queen became a dishonor to the royal
place she held; and other matters which you well know. But yet if it so please
God, that I shall be delivered into the hands not only of the Papists and
spiritual Governors, but of Temporal Magistrates also, the Lords will be done.
Amen. And again thus to Lambert Thorn imprisoned. I rejoice with you most
heartily, and give thanks to our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that he has
not only graciously given me the knowledge of his word, Tom. 2 Epist.
but made me see a plentiful and glorious increase of his grace in you.
Wretched man that I am! It is reported that I first taught those things, for
which you suffer, and yet shall be the last, or perhaps shall not be vouchsafed
at all, to be made partaker of your imprisonments and Martyrdoms. Yet herein
will I challenge something, and comfort my self in this, that your miseries,
your bonds and imprisonments, the fires prepared for you are mine also: and so
indeed they are, seeing I profess and preach the same things with you, and
suffer and rejoice together with you.

The chief points of Religion opened and cleared by Luther.
God by Luther and his fellow workmen opened and cleared the necessary doctrine
of Gods Church concerning the Mediator and justification of man before God, of
the differences of the Law and the Gospel, of worship pleasing God, of
Invocation: and other points. He was wont often to deplore the ungodly praying
to the Saints departed, and said: That there were many reasons, why that
invocation was execrable, and that this was one chief: namely, that by that
profane custom the Testimony of Christ's Divinity was obscured, to whom both
the writings of the Prophets and Apostles attribute the honor of invocation.
These are the Idols which sharpen the barbarous sword of the Turk to cut of our
necks. Melancthon Tom. 6. declam.
Nor will he ever be kept from shedding our blood, except in godly manner those
things be reformed. For how wicked and impious those hymns be, which are sung
in the Popes Quires, who knows not? O Mary, thou Mother of grace defend us
from our enemy, and in the hour of death receive us. And again. Saint
Dorothy create a new heart within us: Saint Catharin translate us from the
troublesome sea of the world to the pleasures of Paradise: open Paradise for us.

And that Gods truth might be propagated to posterity, Luthers worthy pains in
translating the Bible.
with continual and great labor and study he so plainly and perspicuously out
of the original texts translated the Bible into the German tongue, that his
translation may well serve in steed of a Commentary. He often speaks of the
labor and difficulty of this task. As in his letter to Wenceslaus Lincus. We
are now busied in translating the Prophets, a work (God knows) of great
pains and industry, to bring Hebrew writers to speak the German tongue; to
leave their Hebrew idiom, and express themselves in our barbarous language:
The difficulty of Jobs Translation.
This is as if the Nightingale should be compelled to imitate the Cuckoo, to
leave her warbling melody, and fall into an unisone. And again to Spalatinus.
In translating Job we are put to very great pains in regard of the loftiness
of the style: that this book may seem more impatient of our translation, then
Job himself of his friends comforting him: He may seem yet still to sit upon
the dunghill. Unless perhaps the Author of the book desired, Luthers course
in translating the Bible.
that it never should be translated. This is the reason why the Press makes
no better have in this part of the Bible. In this work he used the pains and
counsel of his colleagues, Tom. 1 epist. ^71.
whom elsewhere we have named, that they might be witnesses of his faithful
care in dark places. Mathes. Sermon concerning Luthers life. p. 153.
He entreated Spalatinus to send precious stones from the Court, for his better
knowledge of them: and took care that he might know the names and differences
of certain beasts and fowls, and creeping things, and insects. He had Rams,
Sheep, Calves killed and cut up at his house, and learned the names of their
joints and the propriety of speech about them, from the butchers. Oftentimes,
as himself relates, he spent fourteen days together in the interpretation of
one word or line with Melancthon and Aurogallus help. In their consultation,
this was their course. Luther was President in the work performed in the
Monastery, and ever had by him the old Latin Translation, and his new one, and
the Originill Text: To Melancthons care was commended the Greek Bible; to
Crucigers the Hebrew and Chaldee: other professors were employed in the
perusing the Rabbis: and every one of them still came to the work well
premeditated. Every one gave his judgment concerning the place to be
translated, they compared all together, Luthers revising the first Edition of
the Bible.
and at length concluded of the expression thereof. But Luther before his death
revised the first edition: for one day teaches another. For this pains we owe
him perpetual thanks: for it much benefits the Church, and informs such as
know not the original: yea it much pleasures the learned in the tongues for
conference of translations. Who carped at this.
Yet this pains was blamed by Vicelius and Staphylus and other vassals of the
Pope.

Luther expositions of the Bible.
Luther also published many learned Expositions and Comments on the Scripture:
Of which thus says Erasmus. Erasm. judgment thereof.
In one leaf of Luthers Commentaries is more solid Divinity, then in many
prolix Treatises of the Schoolmen, and other the like. He also refined and
much enriched the German tongue: Luthers eloquence in his own tongue.
He translated out of Latin, some things which other thought not possible to
be rendered in the vulgar tongue, and yet used most significant and proper
words, so that some one word might seem to set the whole matter forth most
expressly.

Of the Pope Luther wrote, how he made use of the Mass even for the souls
departed: and says, that he with his Mass had gone not only into all corners
of the world, but even into purgatory it self: here he uses a word in the
German tongue signifying the noise Isi binnunier gerum, Pett in die hell.
of his tumbling down into hell. Also he calls Indulgence-Mongers,
pursethreshers, because the Pope winnowed good money out of that chafe. There
are full many such passages in his German writings. Well therefore said
renowned Sturnius concerning him, Luther may be reputed very well the Master of
our tongue, whether you speak of the purity or copiousnesse of it. The
counselors of Princes, the Judges of Cities, all Secretaries, all Ambassadors
and Lawyers attribute this praise to him being a Divine. The cause defended by
him was just and necessary, and of itself deserved the victory: but assuredly
he shot forth the darts of his arguments, with the strong arms of true
Oratory. If he had not revived Religion, if he had preached no Sermons; had he
written nothing else, but what he divulged of the Scriptures translated, yet
for this his pains, he deserved very excellent and perpetual glory. For if
the Greek and Latin, and other translations be compared with the German, they
come short for clearness, pureness, propriety, and agreeing with the
original. I am persuaded that as no Painter could pass Apelles; so not any
writer can go beyond Luther for his translation in our tongue.

He began a matter, as was conceived, beyond the reach of man; Luthers
adversaries.
and liable to extreme danger. But there is no counsel, no power prevalent
against the Lord: who most admirably defended Luther living and dead against
all his adversaries. Whilst he lived, he had most potent, most subtle enemies,
and in a word, Secret plots against Luther.
all Antichrists kingdom: nor only did the Pope and his Bishops, his
Universities and other Sophisters openly set upon him with Bulls and Treatises
published: but designed to take him away closely with poison, daggers, guns,
and other means. Concerning secret plots against him, they be well known. He
thus speaks of them. There * is here a Polonian Jew hired with two thousand
crowns to poison me: my friends have disclosed the plot to me by their
letters. He is a Doctor of Physic, and dare attempt any thing, and will go
about it with incredible craft and celerity. This very hour I caused him to be
apprehended; what the event will be, I cannot say. This is the news. To
Spalatinus also Tom. 2. epist. 271.
he wrote, that there were many Actors of the plot, whom he would not have
wrackt, if they would not voluntarily confess by whom they were suborned, but
endeavored to have them set at liberty. Yet he adds. Though I am fully
persuaded that he was the man descried unto me, The Papists designs.
all marks of him did so rightly answer the description sent to me. Again, what
the Papists did attempt, the words of Alexander the Popes Legate do well
declare. Of w^h Luther thus speaks. Spalatinus writes Tom. 2. epist. p. 8.
that Alexander was bold to say; Though you Germans, who pay the least sums
of money to the Pope, have shaken of the yoke of servitude, yet we will take a
course that ye shall be consumed with civil broils, and perish in your own
blood.

Concerning the fables and lies cast abroad in his life time, what should I
say? Lies against Luther.
Of his country and p^rentage, it was bruited, that he was a Bohemian, and
borne of (as they call them) heretical Parents. Then they laid aspersions upon
his promotion at Wittenberg, and defamed it with sundry lies. Hear what he
wrote to Spalatinus: That Ambassador, Tom. 2. epist. p. 8.
or I know not what of Ferdinands, was with me, to see what manner of man I
was, and how I carried my self. He said that it was told his Master, that I
went up and down armed and guarded, and did spend my time among Queanes, diverse
tavern hunters, and was notorious among all men, with I know not what other the
like honors. But I am now well inured to such lies. How often was he reported
to fly to the Bohemians? how often were scandals raised from his writings? Tom.
2. ep. p. 71. 85. 289.
how often was he called a flatterer of Princes, a trumpet of sedition? His bold
speech and vehemence was a string much harped upon. Whence he says of
himself. Almost all men Tom. 2. ep. page 6.
condemn me of two much eagerness. But I am of your mind, that it is Gods
will to have the inventions of men in this manner thus revealed. For I see
matters in this our age quietly handled to be quickly forgotten, and no man to
regard them. And again. Tom. 1. ep. p. 292.
Yet do not I deny, but that I am more vehement then is fit: which thing seeing
they know so well, they should refrain from provoking me: How hard a thing it
is to bridle the pen, you may well enough learn by your self. And this is the
reason, why I have ever been averse from showing my self in public matters:
but the more averse that I was, so much the more was I carried against my own
desire, yet never, unless most grievous wrongs were done, the Word of God or
my self for its sake. Whereupon it fell out that had I not been apt by nature
to vehemence and imbittering my style, the very indignity of the matter would
have urged a dead and stony heart to write sharply: how much more my self, who
am of an ardent spirit, and write not a dull style. Monsters of men carried me
beyond the due temper of modesty. For the warrant of this sharpnes he used to
allege the example of Christ, who called the Jews, an adulterous and
perverse generation, a generation of Vipers, hypocrites, children of the
Devil: and Paul's example, who calls them dogs, va ne bablers, seducers,
illiterate: yea Act. 13. most sharply inveighes against the false Prophet.
Moreover Erasmus often used to say. In regard of the height of the diseases of
this last age of the world, God has sent them a sharp Physician. Also Charles
the Emperor said. If the Popes Priests were such as they should be, they would
not need a Luther. Further he had diverse spiritual tentations and terrible
buffets of Satan: as namely in his sickness at Coburg, and at other times,
when his body was weak. These much afflicted him, and sometimes made him lie
as one dead; but by physic applied for his cure, and reading the Scripture,
and singing of Psalms, which he used to call them about him unto, he was
recovered, and eased of those affrights; and esteemed them but as the Devils
traps, from which God would deliver him.

In the dismal war of Germany, Charles the Emperor kept the soldiers from
digging up Luthers bones.
scarce could the soldiers be restrained from exercising their cruelty upon
his dead corpse. For when Wittenberg yielded to the Emperor Charles: and he
came to see the town; the Spaniards would have dug up Luthers tomb, and
burnt his body, Charles the fifth (as faithful witnesses have related) said.
Suffer him to rest till the day of resurrection, and the Judgment of all men.

But in the beginning of Luthers preaching, he minded not to have proceeded so
far, Tom. 1. ep. Luth. p. 230. b.
as the issue drew him to. For An. 1520. he thus wrote. I will offer them
silence with all humility: so that others be also silent. For I will omit
nothing on my part, which may conduce to peace: and have ever been careful so
to do. I will therefore make ready an humble letter to the Pope: If matters
prove calm as I hope, it is well. If not, it is well also: for it is Gods
pleasure so to have it. He often purposed also to have departed from the
Papists malice. For thus he writes to Spalatinus. Had not your letter come to
my hands, I had prepared to have gone out of the way. And yet I am ready to be
gone, or to stay. And again, I have not free liberty to speak or write; If I
go hence, I will pour out my whole mind, and offer my life to Christ.

Luther discerned not all truth at first. Tom. 1. ep. page 130.
He daily more and more discerned Gods truth, and could not wind himself out of
some errors in the beginning presently: for about the invocation of Saints
thus he wrote An. 1518. My good Spalatinus, I never judged, that the worship of
Saints was superstitious, nor the praying to them for matters especially
pertaining to the body. For thus our neighbors the Pighards heretics in
Boemia conceit. For we in better manner obtain of God by his Saints any good
thing (for assuredly all good is Gods gift) then others get by Magicians and
Wisards of the Devil, as the manner is. But this my meaning was, that it is
superstitious, yea ungodly and wicked to beg of God and the Saints things
corporal only, and to neglect the things which concern the soul and
salvation, and are sued for according to Gods will: As if we forgot or believed
not his word, saying; Seek first or cheifely the kingdom of God, and all
these things shall be added to you. Yea every where Christ teaches us to
slight corporal matters, and our bodies, as base things in regard of our
souls. Concerning the adoration in the Sacrament thus he wrote. I say Tom. 2.
ep. page 72.
it is free for us to adore Christ, and call upon him sub sacramento under the
Sacrament. For he sins not, who does not adore: nor does he sin, who does
adore. Concerning the administration of the Lords Supper in the vulgar tongue
thus he wrote. I wish the Mass Tom. 2. ep. page 243.
might be used in the Mother tongue, rather then can promise to have it so.
Because I cannot bring it to pass, as being a matter requiring both Music and
the Spirit. So in the mean time I permit every man to abound in his own sense;
till Christ inables me to say more. He first celebrated the Mass in the mother
tongue, An. 1525. as he writes to Langus and the members of Erford. This day
we attend the Princes command, Tom. 2. ep. page 301.
the next Lords day we will publicly sing in the name of Christ: and Mass
shall be in the mother tongue for the Lay people. But the daily service shall
be in Latin, but we will have the Lessons in the vulgar tongue. These things
ye shall have shortly published.

Luther causes Psalmed in the German tongue to be used. Tom. 2. ep. page 230.
Concerning this thus he wrote to Spalatinus, An. 1524. We intend according to
the example of the Prophets and ancient fathers of the Church, to make Psalms
or spiritual songs for the common people, that the word of God may continue
among the people, if not otherwise, yet surely in Psalms. We seek for Poets,
where we may. Now seeing you have attained both the free use and Elegancy of
the German tongue, I entreat you to take some pains with us in this business,
and try how you can turn a Psalm into verse: as I have given you a pattern. I
would have you not to use late invented and courtly terms: But make the verse
to fit the simplest and most vulgar capacity: yet let the words be smooth and
proper. Let the sense also be clear, and as near as may be to the original:
yet may you use this freedom, as to vary the words sometimes, so that you keep
the sense. I cannot perform the work so neatly, as I would, and therefore
desire to try how near you can come to Heman, Asaph or Jeduthun.

He taught many things soundly and gravely about the Scripture and the
authority thereof, as, That our faith was to be built on the Canonical books,
Tom. 1. epist. p. 61.
the other books required our judgment. Of the word, the Sacraments and
Ministers he taught. Tom. 2. epist. p. 273.
That we are planters and waterers, and are Ministers of the word of life and
Sacraments of salvation: Tom. 1. epist. page 11.
but are not Givers of the increase. Concerning our Justice he said. Thou Lord
art my justice: I am sin. Thou have taken what I am, and given me, that which
was thine. Thou have taken that which thou wast not; and given me, that which I
was not. Tom. 2. epist. page 371.
Concerning ceremonies he said. I condemn no Ceremonies, but those which are
contrary to the Gospel. Tom. 2. epist. page 28.
Concerning Moses: As the learned men of the world say; that Homer is the
father of all the Poets, the fountain, yea the Ocean of all learning and
wisdom, and eloquence: so our Moses is the father and fountain of all the
Prophets and sacred books: that is, of all heavenly wisdom and eloquence.
Concerning humane learning. Tom. 2. epist. page 307.
I am persuaded that Theology could not wholly be kept sincere without the
skill of other Arts. For heretofore, when knowledge of other learning was
decayed or despised, Theology did fall and lay neglected most miserably. Nay,
I discern that the revelation of Gods Word would never have become so glorious,
unless first the Tongues and Arts had been brought into use and flourished,
and made a way for Divinity, as John Baptist did for Christ. And elsewhere, I
think they err, Tom. 1. epist. page 360.
and are extremely out of the way, who think the knowledge of Philosophy and of
nature to be of no use for Theology. Of Tentations thus he speaks. I would
have men, who are tempted, thus to be comforted with faith and hope: first to
avoid solitariness, and still to have company and to sing Psalms and talk of
holy matters. Then secondly, to be assuredly persuaded, (which though it be
most difficult, yet is it the most ready cure) that those thoughts are not
their own, but Satan's: and therefore that they should earnestly endeavor to
turn their hearts to some other thoughts, and leave those evil thoughts to
Satan. For to insist upon them, to strive with them, or to struggle to overcome
them is a provoking and strengthening them, to a man's perdition without remedy.
Of men distracted and fools this was his judgment. Tom. 2. epist. page 281.
I think that all fools and such as have not the use of reason are vexed or
led aside by Satan: not that they are therefore condemned, but because Satan
does diversely tempt men, some grievously, some easily; some a longer, some a
shorter time. And whereas Physicians attribute much to natural causes, and
mitigate those evils by natural means sometimes; this comes to pass,
because they know not, how great the power and strength of the devils are.
Concerning the Assembly at Auspurg, Tom. 1. epist. Melanct. page 408. to I.
Obenburg.
whose remembrance Melancthon delighted not in, because there such as
endeavored the propagation of the Gospel were censured by Charles the fifth,
harshly and grievously. Tom. 5. oper. Jen. page 280.
Whereunto five Electors, thirty Ecclesiastical Princes, Secular Princes
twenty three, Abbats twenty two, Earls and Barons thirty three, and thirty
nine free Cities subscribed; Of this assembly, I say, this was Luthers
judgment; Though after much expense ye see nothing done at Auspurg, yet thus I
think: though their cost had been double, yet the public confutation of the
sophisters and envious persons would be equivalent thereunto: for they sought
to disgrace our doctrine with lies, as if it was the most erroneous that ever
was heard. Of it also Brentius says. The cost bestowed in all assemblies
within the memory of men are not a sufficient price for the excellent treasure
of the Confession and Apology. Conf. Theolog. Melanct. page 438.


Tom. 2. epist. page 196. and 250.
Of the Lords Supper thus Luther writes. I neither can nor will deny this, that
if Carolostadius or any other man within these five years could have persuaded
me, that there was nothing in the Sacrament but bread and wine, he should have
done me a singular kindness. For I have labored much and been most studious
about this points discussion, I have endeavored with all possible intention of
mind to clear and fully open this matter; because I well saw that hereby I
could especially wound the Papists. Besides I had two others, who wrote to me
more soundly and acutely of this point, then Carolostadius, nor did so wrest
the words to the conceit of their own humor. But I saw my self fast taken, and
had no way left to escape. For the Text of the Gospel is so clear and
powerful, that it cannot be shaken, much less be overthrown with words and
glosses suggested by addle heads. Of this question he wrote a large Epistle and
endeavored to prove That Christ's flesh was not only eaten spiritually, Tom. 2.
epist. page 196.
but corporally. And whereas elsewhere he speaks otherwise of this matter,
there be some, who affirm that he opened his mind thereof a little before his
death. For it is said, Mellific. Histor. part. 3. page 450.
that as he was fitting himself for his journey to Isleben, Ian. 23. An. 1546.
he affirmed to Melancthon, that he confessed, that he had gone too far in the
Sacramentary controversy. And when Melancthon persuaded him to explicate his
mind by publishing some book: he answered; that by this course he should
derive a suspicion on all his doctrine as faulty: but Melancthon might do as he
saw cause, when he was dead. The witnesses of this his speech are Melancthon,
Herbert de Langen, Daniel Burenius Cons. of Breme and others.

When Antonius Musa the Pastor of Rochle on a time complained; that he himself
could not believe, what he taught others. Luther answered, I thank God that I
hear others to be affected to the Papists doctrine, as I was. He was wont to
say, that a preacher should beware of bringing three dogs into the pulpit with
him, pride, covetousness, envy. This rule he gave concerning government of
ones self in preaching. When, says he, You see the people hear most
diligently, conclude that they will go away more cheerfully.

He judged them in Princes Courts to undergo the greatest labors, who are
compelled to drink so extremely, that they cannot rest night or day. When a
Stone was brought unto him out of the Mansfeild Stone-pits: wherein was the
image of the Pope with a triple Crown. Lo, said he, the Pope must be revealed
and extold by Metal Mines, and diggers of Metals.

Three things, said he, make a Divine. Meditation, prayer, tentation. And that
three things were to be done by a Minister. 1. He must read the Bible over and
over. 2. Pray earnestly. 3. Always be a learner. And that they were the best
preachers to the people, who spoke as to Babes in Christ, in the ordinary
strain, popularly and most plainly. When he visited the Churches in Saxony, and
a country man repeated the words of the Creed in the vulgar tongue, saying, I
believe in God the Father Almighty. He asked the country man, what was meant
by Almighty? who answered; I know not. Luther said, neither do I nor any
learned man know it. Only believe thou that God is thy father, and that he can
and will preserve thee and thine.

He took delight to express some things in his own tongue, and in Ryme. Of
which some were to this sense and meaning.

Eat what is sodden well;
Drink what is pure and clear:
That thou the truth does tell,
To all let it appear.
Speak not to all, what ever thou do know:
If thou be well, keep wisely were thou art:
Conserve with care, what ever is thine own,
Mischance sure-footed comes like the nimble Heart.
Be silent in due time, abstain, sustain,
Hold up thy head. Of need to none complain.
Despair not of Gods help, thy state to stay:
Who sends assistance to us every day.
He was in his private converse of such behavior that his life was a pattern
of virtue. Luthers private life.
As he dined or supped, oftentimes he would dictate matter to be preached;
sometimes correct the faults of the press, sometimes he would recreate
himself and others with Music. He was by nature (which Melancthon would often
wonder at) a moderate eater and drinker: and yet had no small or weak body:
His temperance.
He has been seen for four days together and being in health, to eat and
drink nothing at set meal times: and often at other times for many days to
be content with a little bread and fish. I will say nothing how in the
Cloisters he macerated himself with watchings, fasting, labors. Oftentimes
being invited to banquets, Tom. 1. ep. p. 2^5.
he went not, because he would not lose his time, I, said he, lose too much
time by invitations to feasts here in the City: I know Satan has such an hand
in it: that I may not deny it, and yet it does me harm to accept the courtesy.
In company he was familiar, pleasant, courteous, yet grave, as beseemed a man
of his place. He was affable, and studious of truth.

His zeal in prayer.
Melancthon affirms, that he often found him at prayer with great ardency and
tears imploring God for the whole Church. He set apart every day a certain
time for reading some Psalms, and intermixed his own prayers and tears with
them. He often used to say; that he was offended with them, who either through
idleness or variety of employment said, that it was enough to pray with
groans only. And for that end, said he, forms of prayer are prescribed us by
the will of God, that reading might inflame our minds, yea that the voice also
might profess, what God we call upon.

His recreations.
When he recreated his mind, and took it of from study, he delighted to play at
Chesse, and was skillful at it. He sometimes practiced the art of Turning with
his servant Wolfgang: and would say: if the world should deny us sustenance for
my pains in Gods word, we would learn to get our livings with our hands. Tom.
2. ep. p. 293. and 334.
Sometimes he did play on an Instrument, sometimes shoot. He was careful also
of the neatness of his garden, and desired of his friends variety of plants
to furnish it: So that he had no vacant time. Of his employments thus he
writes. I am very full of employment: Tom. 2. ep. p. 365.
the Psalter requires a whole man: preaching to the people might well require
all my pains: my course of worshipping God and prayer might wholly busy me:
my pains in expounding Scripture by writing, my writing Epistles, my care of
other men's affairs takes up my time; my converse with my friends (which I use
to call a feeding of my corpse) does very badly steal away a great part of my
time. It was his usual course either to meditate, or to read, or preach, or to
give good counsel to his friends: so that he was never idle.

He was very liberal to the poor. Luthers liberality.
On a time when a student asked some money of him, he bad his wife give him
some thing: and when she excused the matter in regard of their penury at that
time: he took up a silver cup and gave it to the Scholar, and bid him sell it
to the Goldsmiths, and keep the money for his occasions. When a friend sent him
200. angels of gold from the metal-mines, he bestowed them all on poor
students: When John the Electour gave him a new gown: he said, Mathes. in his
sermon. p. 144.
that he was made to much of: for if here we receive a full recompense of our
labors, we shall hope for none in another life. When the same Electour offered
him a vain of Metals at Sneberg: he refused it, lest he should incur the
tentation of the Devil, who is Lord of treasure under the Earth. Tom. 2. ep.
page 342.
He took nothing of Printers for his copies, as he writes, saying. I have no
plenty of money: and thus yet I deal with the Printers: I receive nothing from
them for recompense of my many copies, How he dealt with Printers.
sometimes only I receive of them one copy. This I think is due to me,
whereas other writers, yea translaters, for every eight leaves have an Angel.
Concerning money given him, thus he writes. The hundredth Angels given me I
received by Tanbenhem: and Schart gave me fifty: that I stand in fear, that
God will give me my reward here. But I protested that I would not so be
satisfied by him, I will either presently repay it, or spend it. For what
should I do with so much money? I gave one half of it to P. Prior, and made
him a joyful man.

His loving affection to his children.
He was very lovingly affectioned toward his children, and gave them liberal
education: He kept in his house a Schoolmasters to train them up in good arts
and a godly life. When he saw Magdalen his eldest daughter ready to die, he
read to her that in Esaias 26.19. Thy dead servants shall rise again, together
with my dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust:
For thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead.
Come my people, enter into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee: Hide
thy self as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be over-past.
My daughter enter thou into thy chamber with peace: I shall ere long be with
thee. For God will not permit me to see the punishments hanging over the head
of Germany. And upon this wept plentifully. But in public when he went along
with the Hearse he bridled his affection, and was not seen to shed one tear.
And as all men of excellent spirits have a zealous anger in due place. His
anger and zeal.
So Luther by nature was vehement, but yet placable: As appears in this, that
when Melancthon much moved to passion once came unto him, and all the rest were
very mute, Luther uttered this verse.

Vince animos iramque tuam, qui caetera vincis.
Thine own heart overcome, thy fury tame,
Who all things else have stoutly overcame.
And then smiling said, we will not further dispute of this matter, and turned
his speech to other occasions.

He foresaw and foretold many things, as the combustion which rose in Germany;
saying, Tom. 2. epist. p. 10. and p. 207.
I am very much afraid, that if the Princes give ear to Duke George his ill
counsel, there will arise some tumult, which will destroy all the Princes and
Magistrates in all Germany, and engage in it all the Clergy. Of the death of
Frederik Elector of Saxony, thus he writes. Tom. 2. epist. page 10.
If God in heaven has resolved in wrath to deal with us, that neither our
prayers, nor counsels of amendment can hinder it, let us obtain this that our
Josias may sleep in peace, though the world be left to go into its Babylon.

Of the covetousness of Germany and the dearth there, thus he speaks. We
fear famine, Tom. 2. epist. page 207.
and we shall suffer it, and find no remedy for it. And when as without
necessity, we are solicitous to prevent famine, like wicked and incredulous
Gentiles, and neglect the word of God and his work; he will permit shortly a
dismal day to come upon us, which will bring with it whole Wain-loads of
cares; which we shall neither have power or means to escape. Diverse other
things he also foretold.

Of Luthers He^l^^.
He had his health competently well, but that sometimes he was troubled with
headache, especially in his elder years. Whereupon he was afraid of some
violent A^oplexie: and when he felt a swimming in his head, or noise in his
ears, he used to say: Lord Jesus, smite me gently, for I am absolved from my
sins according to thy word, and am fed unto life eternal by thy body and
blood. Thine Apostle John and our Elector were taken out of this world, by this
kind of death. He endured often tentations, whereupon he said: All here are in
health except Luther, who is sound in body, and without suffers at no man's hand
in the world: only the Devil and all his Angels vex him.

Of Luthers person.
He was of an indifferent stature, of strong body, of so Lionlike a quickness
of his eyes, that some could not endure to look directly upon him, when he
intentively beheld them. They say that one of mild spirit, who could not endure
in private to talk with Luther; was courteously used by Luther, yet was so
pierced with the quickness of his eyes, that being amazed he knew no course
better then to run from him. His voice was mild and not very clear, whereupon,
when on a time there was mention at table about Paul's voice, which was not very
perfect and full: Luther said; I also have a low speech and pronuntiation. To
whom Melancthon answered. But this small voice is heard very far and near.

Of his wife and children after his ^eath.
In wedlock he lived chastely and godly above twenty years, and when he died,
left three sons and Catharin de Bora a widow, who lived after his death seven
years. To her it was a great grief that her husband died in a place far from
her, so that she could not be with him, and perform the last conjugall offices
to him in his sickness. In the time of the war which presently followed, she
wandered up and down with her orphans, and in banishment was exposed to many
difficulties and dangers: And besides the miseries of widowhood, which are full
many, the ingratitude of many did much afflict her: for where she hoped for
kindness in regard of her husbands worthy and noble deserts of Gods Church,
often she was put of with great indignity. When afterward her house at
Wittenberg in time of pestilence was infected, she for her childrens safety,
as became a godly mother, betook her self to Torg, where (...) also an
Universitie. But in the way, when the hor^^s affrighted ran out and seemed to
endanger the wagon, she amazed not so much for her own, as her childrens
preservation, lept out of the wagon, whereby poor wretch she grievously
bruised her body in the fall, and being cast into a poole of cold water, caught
thereby a disease, of which she lay sick three months in banishment, and pining
away at length died quietly in the year, 1552.

Luthers writings were published at Wittenberg and Iene in several Towns both
in Latin and the German tongue. Luthers writings.
Part of them were expositions of Scriptures, part doctrinall, part polemicall.
Of these this was his own judgment. Above all I beseech the godly Reader; and
I beseech him for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, His judgment of them in the
Praes. of Tom. 1. Lat. Work printed at Wittenberg.
that he would read my writings judiciously, and with much pitying my case.
And let him know, that I was formerly a Monk and a most furious Papist, when I
first entered into the cause undertaken by me: yea, I was so drunk and drowned
in the opinions of Papisme, that I was most ready to kill all men, if I could,
or to assist and consent to their attempts that did kill them, who even in one
syllable should dissent from the Pope. Such a Saul was I, as some that be yet
alive. I was not so cold and calm in defending Popery as was Eckius and his
mates, who more truly for their bellies sake seemed to defend Popery, then that
they were serious in the cause: yea they seem still to me to laugh at the Pope
in secret, as Epicureans. But I proceeded in the Popes defense earnestly,
because I set before mine eyes the last day of judgment, and trembled thereat:
and desired from my very heart to attain salvation. In another of his writings,
he in a manner wishes his books extinct, Tom. 7. Jen. Germ. p. 288.
saying. Alas, my friends should not trouble me: I have enough to do with the
Papists, and might almost say with Job and Jeremy, would I had not been born,
yea almost say, I would I had not published so many books: and would not care,
if they were all perished. The Antimonians.
Let other such spirited men's writings be sold in every shop, as they desire.

Luther also was much against it, that any man should be called a Lutheran
after his name. Tom. 2. Jen. Germ. p. 69.
Because the doctrine was not his, neither did he die for any one; and because
Saint Paul would not endure to have it done by his own person, 1 Cor. 3.
Against this humor of men also. Luther said. How should it come to pass, that
I a sack of worms meat should be accessory to this, that the children of
Christ should be called after my base and unworthy name. He also much opposed
the title of Lutherans, because we be all Christians, and profess the doctrine
of Christ: as also because the Papists are guilty of this crime, by calling
themselves Pontificians. In his b. of Rhetoric. Exer.
We ought not to imitate them in evil. Of Luthers books thus writes Sturmius.
I remember that in an epistle of Luthers to Wolfgangus Capito, which is in
Conradus Huberts Library some years ago I read, That he himself took content
in none of his books, but only in his Catechism and his book against Free
Will.

For a conclusion I will here add Melancthons judgment concerning the Talents
by God bestowed on Luther and others. Pomeranus, says he, Melancth. in Mathes.
sermon.
is a Gramarian, and explains the force of words, I intend Logic and show the
context of the matter, and the Arguments, Justus Jonas is an orator, and
copiously and elegantly discourses: But Luther is all these, a very miracle
among men. What ever he says, Camerarius in Melancth. life page 251.
what ever he writes it, peirceth men's minds and leaves behind it a wonderful
sting in their hearts. And Camerarius speaks thus of Luther. The name of
Luther is so odious to some, that they detest the hearing it: on the contrary
other endure not that any thing should be found fault with, which either he
speak or did: and if any man dare speak against him, they declaime against him
presently, as one guilty of impiety. They who thus extol the name and
authority of Martin Luther, as not doubting to elevate him above the condition
and measure of Mortal men, should see to it, that they do not wrong the good
name of so excellent and admirable a man by attributing too much to him: and
that they do not seem to shelter and protect their audaciousnesse, under his
excellency. And those calumniators, who not only condemn all his writings as
ungodly and turbulent, now also, if they had any wit, might remember and
consider, what is gotten by bitter envy, contumacy, froward opposition and
outrageous clamours.

Wolf. Severus of Luther.
Wolfgang Severus Tutour of Ferdinando of Austria, afterward Emperor, wrote a
distich encomiastick upon Luther to this purpose.

Of Iaphets race has Luthers like n'ere been,

And his superior, sure, will n'ere be seen.

His Imprese was a Rose and a Cross, the explication whereof is this.

A Rose and Cross great Luthers heart disclose.

The Rose, his Joy, the Cross, Christ's yoke, he chose.

Thus have we described Luthers Life and Death out of his own and other
learned men's writings: in perusing whereof, the Reader is to be entreated
(which thing Luther himself requested concerning his whole works) to judge
well what he reads, and to consider well, whence Luther came, and at what
time he wrote, namely, out of the dark mistes of Popery, and when the rays of
the Gospel began again to show themselves.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 2. l. 3. borne at. p. 7. l. 18. Dominica. p. 8. l. 9. controversy. p. 10.
l. 14. were by Erasmus writings. p. 13. l. 4. to Hal. p. 17. l. 21. ^eeing
justly pref. p. 21. l. 29. Baraimas. p. 29. l. 25. Aleander. p. 34. l. 28. his
Jester. p. 37. l. 7. and lay many. p. 42. l. 6. name of. p. 56. l. 23. and
against ^uth. p. 61. M. Glacius. p. 64. l. pen. refuted. p. 65. l. 4. provoked.
l. 5. Hyperaspistes. l. 12. Melancthon. l. pen. Carolostados. p. 66. l. 16.
Hesse. p. 68. l. 12. words. p. 68. l. 28. Priscilianists. p. 69. l. 1. suddenly
sick. l. 2. but by the. p. 69. l. 25. son thus. p. 72. Pontanius. l. 26. the
rudersort. p. 74. l. 18. M^rotatos moros. p. 75. l. 25. Scheurlerus. p. 78. l.
9. I am like. p. 100. l. 10. whereas. l. 21. Cruciger. p. 113. l. 10. in
faiths. p. 121. l. 25. Sturmius. p. 123. Aleander l. 29. ^licers. p. 127. l.
18. the ministers of. l. 25. caused Psalms. p. 132. l. 9. judged.


