The Address OF John Dryden, Laureat, To His Highness the Prince of ORANGE.
IN all the Hosannah's, our whole World's Applause,
Illustrious Champion of our Church and Laws;
Accept, Great NASSAW, from unworthy Me,
Amongst the Adoring Crowd, a bended Knee:
Nor Scruple* Sir, to hear my Ecchoing Lyre,
Strung, Tuned, and Joined in the Universal Quire;
From my suspected Mouth, Thy Glories told,
A known Out liar from the English Fold,
Romes Votary, the Protestant sworn Foe --
Rome! -- my Religion, half an hour ago.
My Roman Dagon's by thy Arm or'ethrown;
And now my Proselyted Soul's Thy own.
Thy Glory would convert that Infidel,
That had whole Ages stood Immovable.
No wonder then Thou can Affections sway
In Tender Breasts like mine, such pliant Clay,
As could even bear new Moulding twice a day.
Nor doubt thy Convert True, I who could raise
Immortal Trophies, even to Cromwell's Praise:
I who my Muses Insant Quill could Fledge,
With high-sung Murder, Treason, Sacrilege:
A Martyred Monarch, and an Enslaved Nation,
A Kingdom's shame, the whole World's Execration,
By me Translated even t'a Constellation.
If this, all this, I could unblushing Write;
Fear not that Pen that shall Thy Praise Endite:
Where High-Born-Blood my Adoration draws,
Exalted Glory, an Unblemisht Cause.
A Theme so all Divine, my Muse shall wing,
What is it, Great Prince, for Thee I will not sing?
No bounds shall stop my Pegasean flight,
I Will spot my Hind, and wash my Panther white.
Against the seven proud Hills I Will Muster all
My keen Poetic Rage, and Rhyme with all
The Vengeance of a second Hannibal:
The Papal Chair by dint of Verse o'erturn;
My Moulten Gods, like Isreal's Calf, I Will burn;
Copes, Crosiers, all the Trumpery of Rome,
Doomed to Great Wallers Blazing Hecatomb:
I Will pound my Beads to dust, and wear no more
Those Pagan Bracelets of the Scarlet Whore.
But whether am I rapt! for, oh! my Fears!
I bend beneath the weight of sixty Years:
Low runs my Glass, more low my Aged Muse,
And to my Will, alas, does Power refuse.
But if, Great Prince, my feeble strength shall fail;
This Theme I Will to my Successors entayle:
My Heirs the Unfinisht Subject shall Complete.
I have a Son, and he, by all that' Great;
That very Son (and trust my Oaths; I Swore
As much to my Great Master JAMES before)
Shall by his Sire's Example, Rome renounce;
For he, young Stripling, yet has turned but once.
That Oxford Nursling-plant, that hopeful Boy,
His Fathers, and the once Ignatian Joy,
Designed for a new Bellarmine Goliath
Under the great Gamaliel, Obadiah,
That Youth, great Sir, shall your Fames Trumpet blow,
And soar, when my dull Wing shall flag below:
A Protestant Herculean Column stand,
When I, a poor weak Pillar of the Land,
Now growing old, am crumbling into Sand.
But hark; methinks I hear the buzzing Crowd
At my Conversion dare to laugh aloud.
Let Cens'ring Fopps, and snarling Envy grin,
Tickled and pleased with my Camelion Skin.
No; senseless Fools, my true Dimensions scan,
And know the Laureat's a Leviathan.
Now Tyburs Mouth ebbs low, and on that shore
My rolling Bulk, alas, can sport no more:
Down the full Tide I scowr, to take a loose
In the more swelling Surge at H^bver-Sluys.
Let chatt'ring Daws, and every senseless Widgeon,
Their descant pass on that great Name, Religion;
Religion, by true Politician Rules,
The Wise Man's strength, and the weak-side of Fools.
For we, who Godliness for Gain support,
Heavens Votaries for Candidates at Court,
Make our Church walls, our Rampart, Sconce and Fort.
Our Masses, Dirges, Vespers, Orisons;
Our Counter-scarps, our Ravelins, and Half-Moons.
And now our Avemary's put to the Rout,
And from that Bastion, I am beaten out;
I Am but retiring to a new Redoubt
Why should I blush to turn, when my defense
And Plea's so plain? For if Omnipotence
Beth' highest Attribute that Heaven can boast;
That Is the tru'st Church that Heaven resembles most.
The Tables then are turned, and it is confessed,
The strongest and the mightiest is the best.
In all my changes then, I Am of the right side;
And by the same great Reason justified;
When the bold Crescent late Attacqu'd the Cross,
Resolved the Empire of the World t'ingross,
Had tottering Vienna's Walls but failed,
And Turkey over Christendom prevailed:
Long, long ever this, I had past the Dardanello,
And sat the mighty Mahomets Hayl-fellow:
Quitted my duller Hopes, the poor Renown
Of Eaton College, or a Dublin Gown;
And commenced Graduate in the great Divan,
Had reigned a more Immortal Mussulman.
No Art, Pain, Labor, toyl's too much, to assail
Heavens Towry Battlement; my Heaven I Would scale
Through all Religions, Church over Churches mounted,
More than the Rounds that Jacob's Ladder counted.
Has this stupendous Revolution past;
A change so quick, and I not turn as fast?
Let boggling Conscience shock the squeamish Fool,
Poor crazy Animals, whose Stomachs pule:
Shall scrup'lous Tastes disgust their Paschal, stickle
Whether true dressed in Sowce, or Broth, or Pickle?
If Muscadine runs low, I Am not so dull,
But I can pledge Salvation in Lambs-Wool.
And if Salvation to one Church is bound,
So much the rather would I change all round.
Change then can be no fault: A whole Life long
Kept in one Church, may always be in the wrong.
But there where Conscience circles in her flight,
We who 're of all sides, must be once in the Right.
London, Printed in the Year, 1689.


