Ad Populum: OR, A Low Country Lecture to the People OF ENGLAND, After a
Thanksgiving Dinner, Aug. 25. 1653.

Whereunto is annexed an EPITAPH Upon M. H: Vanthromp, made by his own
Secretary, and faithfully translated into English, word for word.

WITH, Another more sober Epitaph by a concealed Author.

printer's or publisher's device

Aug: 27th LONDON, Printed for G. B. in Fleetstreet. 1653.

A Low Country Lecture to the People of England after a Thanksgiving Dinner.
AFfronted by the Dutch? A Nation that
Began on English Alms, and so grew fat?
That owe their Livelihoods, and latter breath
To our more merciful Elizabeth;
When on their bended Knees with stretched out hands,
And style of poor distressed Netherlands
They got the Golden Fleece; shall these, grown high,
Outbrave us with their Aristocracy?
We grant them High and Mighty, Monstrous strange;
(As the Grassehoppers upon the old Exchange.)
We grant their Crests like Joves when he was Bull-
Rampant, when Lovesick, and of Vigor full:
Now, now I scent the plot and cunning on it,
That Jove is said to cross the Hellesp^nt;
When being aided with a present Fleet
He and his dear Europa went to Crete:
If Hercules got forty in a Night,
How many Dutchmen Jove before daylight?
Nay Authors there are extant, that aver
That Bacchus was begot a Hollander,
And after the Act that Melancholy Jove
Took Semele and thrust her in a Stove:
Yet though he lodged young Bacchus in his thigh,
These Dutchmen find him out when they are dry;
But lest some envious Wight should think we strain,
Let Barkley speak, and we go on again.
Germani nulla comitate suavius quam longo nec sobrio convivio peregrinos
credunt accipere, and tam verissimam ab ipsis hospitibus benevolentiam in se
expromi, ubi mutuis poculis innudari non-abnuunt: Immensa cupiditas potus jans
confesso vitio illam gentem infestat, nec ad voluptatem tantum haec Thracia
libido est, fed in part Comitatis and pene disciplinae, etc. Ears they have
eminent and Visible,
Slit but the Tip it is like a Testicle,
In which should any of them Pendents wear,
A Jack-line to them were but as a hair;
And for a Jewel to so grave a Pate,
Great Tom of Lincoln were most adaequate:
Poor Iohna Gaunt, or puny Warwicks Guy,
Compared to these, is a mere Ieffery:
An Hercules, or Omphale in stone,
Are but as Pigmies upon Pelion:
That Man-devouring Lunsford were he put
Under an Arm of theirs, would only strut
Like a young Mandrake, or the Child that grew
Within his side was lately set at view.
What think we of three hundred then and more,
Borne at a litter on the Belgic shore,
Of these young Tadpole-spawnes? so vaste a Train,
As if some Pharaoh to be plagued again:
Had we such teeming wombes, our Army might
Give warning for an Army overnight,
And armed Mirmydons next day appear,
Ready for battle the ensuing year,
In coats of Secundene, instead of Buffe,
True coats of Male, proceeding from the Ruff
Dame Nature wears, and freely does bestow
Upon these Red-coats ere she lets them go:
Thus Cadmus with his Serpents Teeth in the Earth
Got Mars a new stock by a present birth;
And men ex tempore stood Rank and File,
Just as the Teeth grew in the Crocodile.
An hungry Camp no doubt, and such as might
Grin at the Foe, and put them all to flight.
Well, go thy way for a stupendous Meg.
Thou needst no Issue in thy Arm or Leg
To draw forth peccant humors, if we yield
Mothers entaile diseases on the Child;
thou art as free from all as Eve when she
Knew not a Bitter-sweet or pippin-Tree.
Lend me belief some man of Public faith,
Or I must stagger at what story says:
Never did Anatomists design or tell
Toe very one of those his single Sell:
Speak great Van-Helmont, how could all these lie
Without committing Rapes and Buggery?
Grant her the swine faced Lady, else to big,
I must not think she was so huge with pig;
It Is so, and hence the Name of Bores that swill
In their crude Barley Broaths and hog wash still.
What though the River Rhene pass by their Coast?
(A thing whereof their hide-bound Writers boast.)
What though Pannonia yield them rich supplies?
Is this a plea for red distorted eyes?
Should one of them, over taken, reele and fall,
'Twould cause an Earthquake Epidemicall:
Nay, were their Gallowses not made of stone,
Astraea might go hang her self for one;
No Justice would be done, for should they do it
In wood, 't would take up fifteen hundred foot,
And yet not serve the turn, whereas alas
They see not so much in a twelve-months space;
Their Fuel is Flora's green mantle, which
They burn, (as if their Mother was a Witch.)
A Chimny-sweeper there is a worse Trade
Than is a Poet here, and yet it is said,
Our English pallats have been so mistaken,
As not to know them by the taste from Bacon:
Nay more, it is said, their hides have been sent over,
And served for Shoe-soales twenty miles round Dover.
Well may the Cuts Physicians get from thence
Be more demonstrative to outward sense,
In whom the very Capillary Veins
Appear like Cable-Ropes, and in their Brains
The Privy parts as visible and fair,
As if one should dissect a Flanders Mare:
The hammer in the Ear like Vulcans, and
The Drum strikes an Alarm at command:
A well appointed Army might get in,
Break through the Labyrinth and steal the Pin.
Nor is it hyperbolicall to say,
John Lilburne was an Eare-wigg the other day,
And buz'd about, and did distill into
The Orenge-mongers what they were to do.
What Rage O Citizens, what madness now
Makes such a breach 'twixt Maurice grave and you?
He that delights in that title more
Than did his Predecestors heretofore;
Who from a Mutton fist would never refuse
A clap upon the shoulder, or such News
As Ieffery and Ralph tell on the way,
As they jog homewards on a Market Day;
Such as the fumes afforded that proceed
From Brande wine good store and Indian weed.
O were Erasmus now alive to tell
Their Colloquies when e're they article;
How many large Beere-glasses bid for Peace,
How many more revi'd before they cease:
Peace? it is a thing more estimable then
The salted Rump of a Muscovian Hen,
No Pickled-herring like it, it is for this
They worship to their drag-net while they fish.
O for a Rhombus here to plead for Peace,
(That they might once more sing sweet Oranges,)
Such as the Adriatic seas did yield
To Nero as the Master of the field;
A Present, such an one as might draw on
The most obdurate to compunction.
Were there but such a Rhombus to be had,
How would the Senators at Hague be glad,
And hope their Gilders and their Duckettoones
Might still be theirs against the Afternoones
Collation, all in Drink (Jack Falstaff like)
No jarres but those of Wine, none forced to strike;
No cautionary Towns demanded then,
No arms be laid down, no impeaching Men,
Nor fighting, except once in twenty years
Or so, to learn how to put on their geeres.
How might they teach this Rhombus to implore
Mercy upon the sea, upon the shore;
And put it in his mouth, to let them know,
He never was my Lord of Warwicks foe?
Never persuaded Huls delivery,
Or tempted Sir John Hotham with a fee,
Though some Malignant tongue, some spightfull man
Say Rhombus is a Presbyterian.
Cozen to John of Leiden, and that he came,
The Author of that sect to Amsterdam?
This were the way, first teach him how to bow,
When take his Qu, next where to stop, and how
To keep his countenance, and role his eye,
With a beseeming graceful Modesty;
As for the ground and subject of his speech,
Let it be all submissive to beseech
The victors, that they might no tribute pay,
But rather, that (for ever and a day)
Their fishing might be free, and what they took
Might be their own, be it with net or hook.
How can they Tributaries be (alas,)
Out of a few Poor John, and a little Plaice;
A sea-dog or a Tortoisse, or perhaps,
A quarter of an hundred of poor Crabs.
No Salmon in his mouth did ever bring
One piece of silver for an offering,
Nor Flounder, though his mouth would nothing bate,
In compass of the Mouth at Aldersgate.
If any do for greater booties toil,
How do they lose their labor and their oil?
The generous Whale, plays with her skill and power,
And sends some Remora Ambassador
To stop their proud design, and bid them trade
In their beloved herring or dry shad.
How shall an hundred thousand precious souls
Drink after supper, in transcendent boules,
As both their constitution and the fire,
They carry in their veins, eft soones require?
O Herring! Herring! thou art that King-fish,
For whose offenses, man must bear all this;
It Is for thy trespasses, it is for thy sin,
But see now what a pickle thou art in;
When boys in London streets with open throat,
Do cry thee up and down for five a groat.
If needs Elected Princes, let their be
The Lobster chosen next, clad cap-a-pe:
That with defensive Arms may gain the field
With Natural, not artificial shield:
An Ajax that may laugh within his shell,
And stories of Great Hector vanquished tell.
But Rhombus may not on, or farther prate,
Nature has took an order well for that:
All that he speaks here, is by Miracle,
Having no Lungs, to help one syllable;
Yet for his Country, such a heart as bleeds
To think that they must feed next year on greeds,
And grains divorced from their dearest Beer,
What will become then of A vous mine heir?
No set meals once a quarter then, where Tony
Is placed above his Mistress, and sleek Ioa-ne
Drinks to her master set at lower end,
By nodd and not by word, as to her friend.
Some hope is of Conversion, where the Jew
Sits with the Gentile (were it so 'ith Pew)
No more of Aarons Bells, no more I tro,
Of very Moses, brought out for a show,
With ten Commandments (the 11th would be
Not to abuse him, were it very he)
No more shall Innocents of eight days old,
Exposed lie, to cruelty and cold.
No more, no more of Circumcision boast,
It Is seen how the Virility is lost.
Policy, now bids you get men indeed,
Give them Restoratives, not make them bleed:
That they may tug the Oars and Canvas spread,
When the remainder of mankind is dead:
And every Pirrha, when her mate is gone
Officiate for her lost Deu calion.
If once more ye are beat, let the women all,
Enter themselves into Mall Cutpurse Hall.
Whence a new stock may come, that scorn to wink
And fight, when for their wench, and not their drink.
FINIS.
EPITAPH.
HEre lies his high and mightiness -- Hick-up,
-- sirrah you Raschall fill out the other cup,
His High and mightiness -- (for there I think
I left off) -- sirrah shall we have no drink?
His high and mightiness -- Lord of what not,
Lord of -- you rogue bring up a chamber pot.
Lord of what not, Lord of (so far I Am right,
Bring in some clean pipes quickly, and a light)
-- Lord of what not -- Lord of the Ocean deep,
-- Hanged let another make it, I must sleep.
Another.
HEre with his face toward Heaven, great Tromp is laid,
(Thus grinning honor Titles, thus are paid)
A Ship his Tomb and Coffin, where poor he,
Lies a sad Omen to his Soldiery.
The calmer gales in vain now fan the deep,
In vain they rock the Barque; he is fast asleep.

