A SPY, Sent out of the TOWER-CHAMBER in the FLEET.

Diogenes-like ARGVS is sent to spy,
The sequel tells you both by whom and why:
If thou can help him to his wished end,
Thou Wilt prove the Prisoners and thy Kingdoms friend.
Though hard my business, tedious be my way,
I Will on, and make Return without delay:
No rest I Will give to feet, nor eyes, till I
Have done the duty of a watchful Spy.
If any one there be
that wants my Spies,
Let him repair to me,
I Will spare him Eyes.


Printed in the seventh year of the Authors Oppression, being the 8th year of
this Parliaments Reformation: And in the year of our Lord, 1648.

THE AUTHORS NAME.
H He that would know by whom the Spy is sent,
E Expect withal to know the Spies intent;
N Nor need he seek much further, he may be
R Resolved speedily, it is I am he,
Y Your fellow subject, spoild, and unjustly spent,
A And by Injustice am to prison sent.
D Diogenes-like, My Argus goes to see
I If any Justice in the Kingdom be:
S Such is his care; In his Epilogue.
and he does promise thee
That HENRY ADIS shall his answer see.
The AVTHOR to the READER, Upon his Infant-Muse.
MY Maiden-Muse, whose subject was divine,
Is now by reason of our unjust time
With it distracted, all turned into passion,
As if contention only were in fashion.
Her fancies that did soar beyond the skies,
By my undoing, haste to satyrise,
How could she thunder out injustice store,
In such a strain that never was reached before?
Did I not curb her in, she would plainly tell
Each man his faults, and who do ill or well:
How could she praise the one, display the other,
Without partiality, though 't were my brother,
Or best of friends, the nearest of my kin?
She so detests and hates that hell-bred sin.
How does she blush to see Gods Image, Man,
By his injustice like the Devil to stand!
Perverting Truth into a shamefully,
How much laments she when she hears men cry
They 'r Plundered, Robbed, and spoiled of all they have,
and of a Freeborn Subject made a slave.
Life, Liberty, Estate, and Kingdoms Law
by greatness too unjustly kept in aw.
This moves her passion, makes her grow unruly,
and now I taste her disposition truly:
How froward is she, waspish, in the Pet,
to see that Christians worse then Heathens set
Themselves to rob their God, of these his due,
Justice and Mercy, only by which two
Most glorious Attributes he is pleased alone
To make himself to us most clearly known?
Beshrew them for disturbing of her rest,
for she for heaven and heavenly things was pressed:
If thus in Infancy she is forced to chide,
in riper years who may her taunts abide?
For in her youth if she such frowns do show,
in older age she needs must rougher grow.
And now her passion's raised, 't is not in me
to moderate or alay it, till she see
True Justice done, and I from Prison freed:
the which, that it be gained with greater speed,
I beg thee gentle Reader, press and cry
for Justice, as if thou thy self did ly
In my Estate, from which thou can not be
till better Justice done, secured or free:
It is a general good, be then inclined
to have the Ruined Prisoner in thy mnid:
For what thou do for him, thou wilt plainly see
is for thy self, and thy posterity.
The AVTHORS CHARGE TO HIS ARGVS.
QVick sighted Argus haste, Make no delay,
Like to the Lion, greedy of his prey,
Range far and near, in every corner spy
Where Justice innocent may lurk or ly:
For sure I am he is hid, and has not been
In this our Climate I speak by woeful experience.
scarce these seven years seen.
The noise of Drums, and Guns, the smell of Powder,
Or Match, our Cannon-shot, which are far louder.
Or our innumerous tearing Ordinances,
The horsemens clatt'ring Arms, or horses Prances,
Our Thundrings, Blundrings, Plundrings every day,
I fear have scared him from us quite away.
Sweet Argus haste thee, and perform the charge
That I do give thee: Thy commission's large:
And be not absent from me many years,
To raise in me new Jealousies and Fears;
But take it as a branch of thy Commission,
To act thy careful part with expedition:
Continue faithful, prove as true as steel,
Constant, like him that turns Fortunes wheel.
Remember Juno's bird, and never be
Deceived again by any Mercury:
Let no deluding Music more inchant thee,
Nor Threats, nor frowns of any greatness, daunt thee:
I do conjure thee to perform the trust
In thee reposed, be faithful, true, and just:
Be watchful, careful, let no eye be sleeping,
But all employed, in every corner peeping,
Where any probability may be
That Justice lurks, or thou just acts may see.
Haste to the Army, to the headquarters hye:
Search out the Reformadoes where they lie;
Be frequent at their quarters, learn if they
Have not connived, and let him steal away,
Who if h' ad staid, and wars been hust and left,
Their often Plundrings had been proved plain theft;
Enquire amongst them if they do not know
That he was banished the Army long ago
Before this Model, if he exiled, then
Why should we seem to blame these other men
For not performing what they have declared?
In Conscience then these men may well be And lay down Arms.
spared.
But shall I tell thee Argus the conceit
That came into my musing troubled pate?
I fear those Members lately sent away,
Banished Him first, and after durst not stay.
But to thy charge, post further into the West,
There take what speedy course thou think best
To find him out, but ere thou further go,
Take some instructions how thou may him know;
Be not mistaken, it is not every he
That sits in Justice seat, that just will be,
Thou see it proved true, thou know how I
Have suffered in a Court of Equity:
How I am ruined, and turned out of all,
And yet turned in again to bondage thrall
Bereaved of house, and goods, and remedy,
And as unjustly caused in Goal to lie.
Which makes many think that I have spent all,
Truth is, I Am ruined by unsavory Lenthal.
That partial Judge, who with his Ianus face,
Relents no wrongs, blusheth at no disgrace,
Whose wills his Law, and be it right or wrong,
He Will still be taking part with them that is strong,
Who lately went to the Army, it is well known,
Which was disliked by many of their own:
And when Sir Thomas printed forth his praise,
The People could not hope for better days,
When as this So I shall prove him.
Machiavel is so detected
For his injustice, yet is still respected,
And honored as the Kingdoms dearest friend,
When as his aim is nothing but self-end.
Whose actions are so vile, so foully base,
That they do live engraven in his face.
His greatness, nor his power cannot blind them,
But all the Kingdom both remark and mind them,
Whose powerful influence flows to such a rate,
That our inferior As Justice Hooker Justice Parker, the Sheriff of Middlesex,
and Klinkerd the Bayliffe of Westminster, but of them at large in the Spies
answer.
Ministers of State
Dares not to cross, nor his injustice alter,
But rather with him by injustice falter.
Who by his power does hope to beset free
From that injustice they bestow on me.
Argus be wise, and be not easily charmed,
Forewarned be, as thou art now fore-arm'd,
Observe the marks that I shall give to thee,
To know true Justice from Partiality.
A Reverend Judge is he whom thou do find
Thus qualified in outward act and mind,
This is his wish, and in his heart it is treasured,
To have his greatness by his goodness measured:
He Is one that does appear to thee and me,
None other then he would have us both to be.
And yet this is his care, his greatest fear,
Lest he prove other then he does appear,
True Justice cannot one thing seem to be,
And yet prove other, that is hypocrisy:
And as his heart's inclined to give content,
So are his outward acts as innocent,
Like to his Emblem, thou shall clearly find
To all respect of Persons he is blind,
His ears are open all complaints to hear,
And from bribe taking both his hands are clear
In one a tickle Balance thou shall spy,
To weigh all diff'rences with equity,
A two edged sword there does possess the other,
To cut as well to stranger as to brother
His equal due, such is his circumspection*
The innocent to shroud by his protection
From all abuses, but the nocent he
Does punish with as much severity:
In fine, he gives no leave to me or you
To cozen any of his real due:
He is endowed with virtue, and such art
That he devides to each his equal part
With innocence, without Partiality.
And if thou chancest such an one to spy,
Take Eagles wings if thou be'st in the West,
And bring me word, for they will speed thee best,
And as quick Titan in his course does hie,
So do thou quickly cut the starry sky,
If in the East thou find'st such creatures are,
Get up betimes, haste with the morning star,
And with Aurora's light let me have word.
This Phoenix if the Southern part afford,
Call to this welcome sight swift Mercury,
And whilst his senses ravished are to see
This seldom seen, strip off his swifter wing,
And post away to me the news to bring,
By which thou shall his cunning equalize,
When he bereaved thee of thy hundred eyes.
If in the cold and ruder North thou find
This Heaven-bred creature, swiftly be inclined
To make thy speed, which that thou may improve,
Go hire the wings of that swift Scottish Dove,
And soar my towering Ark, and there present me
With that, which nothing better can content me:
This Olive Branch alone is that will press,
And give both me and all the Kingdom ease.
But ere thou come away, incline his heart
To stay till thy return, and not to part
From that his residence, do thou entreat him,
And in these gentle begging words bespeak him.
Sweet Justice, thou great stranger in our Land,
By whose great power all Kingdoms firmly stand
Under their great Creator, thou art he
That can annihilate our misery.
And can restore the wronged to right again,
And glad the hearts of discontented men,
Who by Jehovah's power can with a smile
Both King and People forthwith reconcile:
Who can unlock the prisons, and can see
The many poor oppressed, subjects free:
Where hundreds are enslaved this instant hour
By tyranny and arbytrarie power,
I do conju^e thee now, as thou art true,
That hence thou part, nor bid this place adieu,
Till I but carryword, and come again
With thousands of poor discontented men,
Who are bereaved of all for want of thee,
And brought to slavish woe and misery.
If thou did view our discontented land,
Longer thou could not thus remotely stand:
Did thou behold thy judgment seat abused,
Thy self disgraced thy name profanely used,
By those that are not what they seem to be,
Surely thou would no farther from us flee,
But rather haste to vindicate thy name,
And to restore thy self, thy ancient fame,
To terrify that crew that have abused thee,
And thus disgracefully so long have used thee.
If thou with confidence these words can say,
I am assured he cannot then away,
For when the poor oppressed to him cry,
He must in Justice give them remedy,
Nay it is his kind, This makes him Justice be,
To right the wronged, to set the bondman free,
To ease the heavy burd'ned and oppressed,
And mercy show to him that is distressed:
If he be Justice just, he will be be known
The only He the poor man's cause to own;
Else he must cease from what he seems to be,
And then he is not what he shows to thee:
Therefore if he shall seem to slight thy speech
When thou do press, entreat, or thus beseech,
Or else pretend some other weighty thing,
Either for People, Kingdom, or the King:
Believe him not, though he make protestations,
Vows, Covenants, and several Declarations:
Though he pretend Religions purity,
And that a very Saint he seems to be,
In observation of each Fasting-day,
Or by the Spirit though be seems to pray,
Though he be zealous to destroy the Cross,
And blot out names of Easter, Lent, and Mass,
To banish superstitious holy days, Or Christmasse.

With fingle-fangling Rosemary and Bays,
That root and branch has pulled the Bishops down,
That Presbyters alone might wear the Crown,
Of government, or if the only he
That stands most for Independency,
And yet neglects the poor man's cry to hear,
All his religion's va^n, it is plain and clear,
He wants the fear of God, and Charity,
And all his shows are but hypocrisy:
Believe him not what ever his pretenses,
Let him not cozen nor delude thy senses.
Too many such we have, it is too well known,
That makes both me and thousand subjects groan,
Who hears, and sees, and knows our misery,
And can give ease, yet suffers us to lie;
Such is their sordid baseness, whose self ends,
Is how to pleasure greatness, and their friends
To raise to honor for the time ensuing,
Though by their Princes, and his peoples ruin.
As for my M. Bell Burgess of Westminster, but more of him in the Spies answer
Trustee, he on whom I doted,
To deal for me, to greatness is devoted.
Who when I told of this my rued story,
He answered me, I was too peremptory
To send to him to help these my decaies,
Who gives me over, and my trust betraies.
I charge thee once again, believe not these
Who Justice slights, themselves alone to please:
And will not mercy show, but pass them by
As those ordained for woe and misery.
And forthwith post both North, and East, and South,
And as thine eyes, so open wide thy mouth,
And send out Proclamations, Hue and Cry,
If any one that see him passing by
Can bring thee tidings of him, he shall see
By thousand prayers himself rewarded be,
And shall be counted as ^is Kingdoms friend,
Her differences and discontents to end:
The Kingdom then shall flourish, and the King
And People, shall enjoy their own again:
And then the King shall into favor take him,
And as he is good, so he as great shall make him,
And crown him with an olive wreath, and then
The ruined Subjects all shall cry Amen.
And thus it shall be done alone to him
That Justice brings to Kingdom, and the King.
FINIS.
ARGVS his EPILOGUE to the Reader.
A A Trustee I am made, thou see I Am sent,
R Resolve I do, and it is my full intent
G Great care to take to find out Justice clear,
V Unless he quite forsaken has our Sphere:
S Such love I bear him who in prison lies,
ARGUS will not be sparing of his eyes
T To search and seek to note, to pry and spy,
O Observe, and Mark, I Will lend each place an Ey,
T That so, if any place will Jus afford
H He taht has sent me forth may have quick word.
E Each house I Will slyly press, and each Committee,
The greatest both in Parliament and City.
R Resolved I am to try my utmost skill
E Each day and hour, till I have viewed my fill:
A And as I find each place to Right inclinde,
D Distressed Adis shall impart my mind:
E Expect it speedily, I Will not delay,
R. Reader farewell until some other day.
Errata. In the fifth marginal Note, for Justice Parker, read Justice Carter.
also in the same page l. 28. r. Fore-armed be, as thou art now fore-warned.

As also these following 6. lines, after the aforesaid line,

It Is not the Judgment Seat, the reverend Gown,
The Judges countenance, his smile or frown,
Nor is it greatness makes the sentence just:
In all, or any of these, repose no trust:
Let none of these thy cleerer Ey-sight charm,
for then thou wilt bring me but a false Alar'm.
In the 2d following page l. 17. for press, r. please.

WHereas this Author, Henry Adis, late of Covent Garden Vpholder, being
imprisoned in the Tower chamber of the Fleet, by an Arbytrarie power: and most
unjustly turned out of his house, and ruined by that powerful Man of our times,
the honorable William Lenthal, Esquire, not as he is Speaker of the Honorable
House of Commons, but as he is a Commissioner for the custody of the great
Seal, and Master of the Rolls. And being denied the benefit of going abroad
with his keeper by him (though petitioned for) so that he cannot have any
benefit of his Trade and Customers, who for the present relief of himself, his
wife, and three small children, was lately enforced to publish in print some of
those Arts which it has pleased God to endow him with; amongst which are these
ensuing, which have been found very commodious and beneficial to all that have
used him therein, viz.

He has found out a new way by fire to purge out all manner of grease, wax,
oil, or other spots of sweet meats, Ale, Beer, or Wine, or any other filth or
soil, out of wearing apparel, or other things, without slabb'ring or wetting
them, so that the color shall not be thereby endangered, though not in grain,
and with that expedition, that if he have a suit over night, it shall (if
necessity require) be restored by the next morning completely cleansed, and as
well over all the suit, as the spotted places; so that the whole garment shall
be well nigh as fresh as at first: and as speedily all clothes of Leather.

He also cottoneth Frise, Bays, or Penistone in garments, without taking them
to pieces: and also raises a wool upon Cloth or Stuffes in suits that are not
too low worn upon the thread; so that if he have a suit but about half worn, he
brings it to a very good perfection; yet if never so low worn, he so cleanses
and ordreth it, that it may be long worn with credit.

By the foresaid Art he also does as much in Silks, Sattins, Taffates, and
Velvets, as ever was done by any, to cleanse it from grease, wax, or oil, which
he does in wearing apparel, or otherwise.

By which Art also he refreshes silver and gold lace, or fringe upon wearing
apparel, beds, or other things, though never so black and tarnished, and
brings it to a very good luster, and to continue long.

All which by reason of the expedition and easy charge has and will be
accounted very commodious for people of all ranks and qualities; especially
those who are desirous to wear their apparel neat and clean, and are not
willing in these distracted and hard times to make new, or bestow much in
altering those they have.

He also scoureth, refreshes, and mendeth all sorts of Tapestry, Turkey-work,
or Needle-works, and riddeth them clean from moths.


