SCRIPTURE MANIFESTATION of the Equalitty of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Wherein is above an Hundred Particulars by parralell places of Scripture, this
truth is clearly confirmed; NAMELY THAT THE Scriptures Manifest the Son, and
Holy Ghost to be God equal with the Father, by ascribing to them such Names,
Attributes, Works, and Worship, as are proper to God alone.

By BENJAMIN AUSTIN, Pastor of the Church of God at Castle-Ashbey in
Northamptonshire.

There are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost, and these three are one, 1 John 5.7.

Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19.

Awake O Sword against my Shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow,
says the Lord of Hoasts, Zac. 13.7.

Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be
equal with God, Phil. 2.5, 6.

LONDON, Printed for P. W. and JOHN WRIGHT, at the Kings Head in the Old Bailey,
1650.

To all those that love the Lord Jesus in Sincerity.
Brethren,
THE Beloved Disciple of the Lord tells us, 1 John 2.18. That in his time
there were many Antichrists; Many that did seem to profess Christ, yet in
truth did oppose him, which in words would confess him, but in works would
deny him, Tit. 1.16. If the first Age of the Church could not escape the fuery
of Satan: and if those more pure times did not avoid the unbridled rage of his
Antichristian Darlings: we that live in the latter days, which are the
perilous times, must not look to be free from Satan's opposition, nor hope to
be exempted from the malice of his Antichristian Factours. For the mystery of
iniquity which was but hatching, in the Apostles days, is now grown to it is
full maturity: it then began only to work, 2 These. 2.7. it is now acting with
the efficacy of Satan with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, 2 These.
2.9. And however there are many Antichrists in the world, yet according to
John's threefold description of them, we may work them into three heads; For
they are such as deliver poisonous Doctrine not truly grounded on Gods Word,
and do oppose, first, the Divine Nature of Christ: secondly, the Humane Nature
of Christ: thirdly, the Offices of Christ.

First, there are Antichrists, who do oppose the Divine Nature of Christ, as
Cerinthians, Arrians, Samo-Satenians, Jews, Turks, and in a word, the
Sarcinians, whose Doctrine is as it were a filthy sink, into which all the
Heresies of former and latter Ages have emptyed themselves. These the Apostle
John directly describes, 1 John 2.22, 23. He is Antichrist that denies the
Father and the Son. For although never any Antichristian Heretic did in
words deny the first Person; and however they may pretend with the blinded
Jews, and misled Turks, they do honor the Creator of the World: yet by
taking away that personal relation which he has to the Son, they deny him
by consequence to be a Father, and dishonor both the Father and the Son.

However therefore they would undeseemedly fasten on us the Name of Antichrist,
because we affirm the Lord Jesus in Nature, and Essence, to be equal with the
Father, whenas even the Father styles him his fellow, Zac. 13.7. and the
Son, who is in the form of God thinks it no robbery to be equal with God,
Phil. 2.7. who was the only begotten Son of God, Joh. 1.14, 18. Joh. 3.16,
18. 1 John 4.9. and said, that God was his proper Father, Joh. 5.^8. and he is
said to be his proper Son, Romans 8.32. (for the word translated own is (...),
in the Original) yea he is the Son (...), of himself, Romans 8.3. And
therefore the name and nature of Antichrist agrees to them, and not to us; For
they oppose the Father, and the Son, and by denying Christ to be the eternal
Son of God, they deny also God the Father to be a true and eternal Father.
Thus do they rob them both of their excellent glory: making the one to be no
proper Father of Ch^^st, and the other to be no proper Son of God, whom they
blasphemously affirm to be a (...).

Secondly, they are Antichrists who deny the Humane Nature of Christ, as
Marcionites, Valentinians, Manichees, and others; They take away the benefit of
his death and passion. The Apostle does more especially point at these, 1 John
4.3. and 2 John 7. where he shows him to be of an Antichristian Spirit, that
denies Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh.

Thirdly, they are Antichrists who do not oppose directly the person of
Christ, but by delivering Doctrine contrary to the Word, do oppose Christ in
his threefold Office.

First, they depive Christ of his Kingly Office, and make the Pope the
Supreme, and uncontrollable Head of the Church, exalting him above all that is
called God, 2 These. 2. namely above Angels, Magistrates, Devils, which in
Scripture are called Gods; yea, above God, and Christ, whenas they give power
to him to prescribe Laws, which are more authentic to them, then the Laws of
God. None being of power to dispense with his, as he can, and does with Cods
Laws. And they attribute such sovereignty to him, as not only to forgive
sins on earth, but to place, or displace souls in Heaven, or in Hell at his
pleasure.

Secondly, they take away the Prophetical Office of Christ. For they in stead
of teaching the Doctrine of Christ, teach the Doctrine of the Devils, 1 Timothy 4.
Setting up Legens, Councels, Decreees, Decretals, Traditions, and their corrupt
glosses of the Text above the Scripture. And with their Anagogicall,
Allegorical, and Tropicall interpretations of the Scriptures, have quite taken
away the true sense thereof.

Thirdly, they divest Christ of his Priestly, Office; by Indulgencies, Pardons,
Penances, Pilgrimages, Masses, Dirges, Purgatory, works of Supererogation, and
a thousand the like inventions, have taken away the one all-sufficient Oblation,
and satisfaction of Christ. All whose wearing service shall one day have no
better reward, then, who required this at your hands? yea, that which in a word
overthrows all the Doctrine of Christ, and was enough. If Rome had stood
guilty of no other error, to have made us to separate from her, even her
soule-destroying Doctrine of Justification by Works. For as the Apostle
speaking of the Jews, told the true Church of Rome, Romans 10.3. They being
Ignorant of Gods Righteousness, and going about to establish their own
Righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the Righteousness of God.
These the Apostle John principally deciphereth in the Revelations, Rev. 13. etc.

However, these Antichrists are divided, and do crash one against another, yet
all do fight against Christ, and do oppose his Church. They being like
Sampsons Foxes, joined together by the tails, with the fire of dissension
betwixt them, whereby they do set on fire Gods dearly beloved Vin^yard.

And although Antichrist had always a mouthfull of blasphemies, yet never were
there more loathsome blasphemies belched forth from the rotten hearts of his
corrupt followers, then in these latter days. For now many in a pretended
zeal against the whore of Babel, have joined with the false prophet Mahomet,
and out of a seeming opposition to the Romanish Antichrist, have embraced the
Turkish Antichrist, whereby the hearts of sound professors have been sadded;
those who have been weak in the faith, have had their faith shaken, and others
who before were wavering, have been tossed to and fro, with the stormy winds of
erroneous Doctrine, and have split themselves on the soule-destroying Rocks of
Heretical opinions, miserably blaspheming God, and deploredly making shipwreck
of faith, and a good conscience, 1 Timothy 1.19, 20.

And surely, it makes my heart to melt, and my soul to mourn in secret, to
see how greedily men such in this Antichristian poison, in stead of the pure
milk of the Word; poisoning thereby there own souls, and with their
poisonous breath endangering, if not infecting the souls of others; making
them to vilify the Son of God, and to do despite to the spirit of Grace.

Now that which first revived this cursed Monster of opinion in our Fathers
days, was carnal policy. For some Polonians, Transylvanians, and other
Turkish borderers out of sinister respects, and base ends, went about to
reconcile God and Belial, Christ and Mahomet, Christianity and Turcisme
together.

But that which has since heightened their pride, and made them bold to fight
against the Lord Jesus, and his holy Spirit, and yet to promise themselves
Victory beforehand in this their unequal combat: is first, their natural
blindness, which makes them to have the gross conceits of God, and of his
simple Nature; They conceiving him to be like some corporal Substance, and
therefore require alike instance in Nature in this mystery, whereas the Lord is
of a pure, spiritual, transcendent Nature.

Secondly, Pride, who although they cannot fully understand what their own
souls are, yet dare to think they can comprehend, and bound the
incomprehensible God in the narrow limits of corrupted reason, and therefore as
Peter prophesies of them, 2 Pet. 2.12. They speak evil of the things they
understand not, who therefore shall utterly perish in their own corruptions.
And as he shows, 2 Pet. 2, 1. By denying the Lord that bought them, bring
upon themsel^es swift destruction.

Thirdly, Giant-like ambition, who think themselves able to resist truth,
though manned with a whole army of Martyrs confessors; Fathers living in all
Ages of the Church.

Fourthly, Gross Ignorance, and false glosses of the Scripture, which they
wrest to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.

Fifthly, the not considering of Gods wrath against them, which have formerly
undertaken this and the like cause, as against Arrius, Cerinthus, Olympius,
Valens, the Arrian Emperor, Pope Anastatius. 2. Julian. and diverse other as ye
may see recorded in the Centurialists, Ruffin. Tripart. Histor. Platin. Cyril.
For that which Moses speaks of Korah and his Companions, was true in these,
Numb. 16.29. They dyed not as every man dies, neither were they visited after
the visitation of all. Arrius, and Anastasius which went to ease Nature, voided
their own bowels into a Jakes. Oerinthus killed with the fall of a House,
Olympius was slain with thunder and lightning, Valens burnt in a Cottage,
Julian, if not slain with a darte from Heaven, yet with a Dart directed by a
divine hand, which being ready to give up the Ghost, he took it out of his body
and threw it toward Heaven, and cried out, Thou have overcome me, O Galilean.

But happily some will object against me, first, why I should adventure to
traffic in public, when others who have more, and greater Talents, yet
desire to keep theirs private.

In brief, all that I shall say for my self is this; An earnest desire of
doing good, has put me on this labor, and has made me to seem carelessly
prodigal of my little; Oh that it were as fervent in richer hearts, and that
they would traffic in the like kind. How would the Church of God which is
beautiful as Tirzech, comely as Jerusalem, be also then terrible to the
enemies thereof, as an Army with Banners? Whereas yet (me thinks) I hear
opposed truth cry aloud for help, and do see the languishing Church robbed of
her Children, with cheeks bedewed with tears, bewailing her self, and
spreading her hands, imploring aid of all her friends, and crying out in the
bitterness of her soul to all that pass by. Look away from me, for I will
weep bitterly? labor not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the
Daughter of my people.

Oh that all in their several places, would endeavor to quench these horrid
flames of Doctrinall Errors, and that to this end they would with the Children
of Israel, 1 Samuel 7.6. draw water out of their hearts, and pour it out of
their eyes before the Lord, and beseech him to put to his hand, because they
have almost destroyed his truth, by wickedly trampling under foot his Christ,
and by miserably blaspheming his holy Spirit.

Secondly, others that are more learned, will perhaps blame my plainness of
Language, and dislike my labor for want of elegant expressions, and happily,
because I have not cited the Fathers that have copiously written of this
subject.

But these I beseech, that they would not dislike truth, because she comes
plainly attyred, nor disregard so^d Doctrine, although she wears a homely
dress. The strength of the matter was the thing that I aimed at, and not
elegancy of words: and the validity of the argument was more intended by me,
then any neatenesse of style. Besides, I held it most fit to speak of the Lord
in his own words, and not in the wisdom of speech, and I desired Gods holy
Spirit, rather then man's enticing words.

As touching the Fathers, I have indeed seldom cited them, not out of any
dislike of them: but because I know they are disliked, slighted, and contemned
of the enemies of this truth. And because the thing I proposed, was the
confirmation of this point by Scripture.

Where if I should have used Hamane Eloquence, this Subject of all other is
most unfitting. There being nothing in which want of words does more wrong us,
or can more grieve us, then in the discussing of this misterious truth. Where
many things may be adored, which we cannot search into: many things may be
searched in, which we cannot conceive: and many things be conceived, which we
cannot utter. The path of this truth is narrow, slippery, steep, and therefore
it will not admit of a stragler, to rove up and down in a wandering discourse.

Thirdly, Some there be that may carp at the word Essence, Trinity, and
Persons, which I have used.

To these I answer, first, in every Art this liberty is granted, to use terms
of Art, which happily are no ways used but in that Art: and why should Divinity
which is more excellent then all Arts and Sciences be debarred that common
privilege, which every inferior Art, and Science has granted to it.

Secondly, the thing is in the Scriptures, if not the word, and it is a vanity
to dote about questions, and strife of words, when as we agree in the thing.

The word being but the shadow, and the thing the sustance, and therefore the
word necessarily follows the thing, as the shadow the body. And surely did
not men dislike the truth, they would never quarrel with the words that
express it.

Thirdly, the words were used in the Church long before the Council of Nice,
as ye may see in the writings of Ireneus, Justin, Martyr, Clemens, Alexand.
Syprian, Origin, Tertul. Lactant. and others, yea, and the same of these words
are used by the enemies of this truth.

Fourthly, the words Essence, Trinity, Person.

Thuschija, or Essence derived of Jascha fuit, is used of God, Isa. 28.19. Job
12.16. Pro. 8.14.

Secondly, Essence is most properly ascribed to God, who alone has Essence of
himself, and all things have their essence from him.

Thirdly, If the word Essence were not in the Scriptures, yet the Adversaries
cannot deny, there is that which is equivolent to it. As for example, the Names
of God, both in the Old Testament, Jehovah. Jah, Ehejeh, all derived of the
Hebrew Root, Havah, or Hajah, that signifies to be, and also the Names of God
in the New Testament, Rev. 1.4, 8. Rev. 41, 17. Rev. 16.5. He that was, and is
to come, and I am, Joh. 8. whose conjugate is Essence.

Fifthly, the word Trinity, though not found in the Scriptures, yet the word
three being used of God ^ Joh. 5.7. it follows from the equivolency of its
conjugate; even as the word Unity is not found in the Scriptures, but the word
One being used, it follows from the equivolency of its conjugate also.

Secondly, If the word Three were not so used, yet Christ and his Apostles, and
Prophets Name, Three, Mat. 28.19. 2 Cor. 13.14. Mat. 3.16, 17. Hag. 2.5. Psalm.
33.6. Rev. 1.4, 5. 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. Ephesians. 2.18. Ephesians. 2.22. 1 John 5.7. Isa.
63.9.10. Joh. 14.16. Joh. 15.26. Gal. 4.6. 2 These. 3.5. etc.

First, as touching the word Person, which we use, because we have no fitter.
The Greek word, (...), is applied to the Father, Heb. 1.3. as also (...), is
ascribed to the Father, Mat. 18.10. to the Son, 2 Cor. 2.10. 2 Cor. 4.6. the
Holy Ghost, Psalm. 95.6. in the Greek; David inviteth all to worship his Person,
whom he introduces, speaking; which was the Holy Ghost, Heb. 3.7. which Greek
words are translated by the word Person.

Secondly, if that may be called a Person, which has personal Acts ascribed
to it. Surely then the word Person may be given to the Father, to the Son,
and to the Holy Ghost, for we have all three speaking in the first, spoken to
in the second, and spoken of in the third Person. I might instance in many
hundred places of Scripture, I shall only name a few.

First, you have all three speaking in the first. 1. The Father. Ps. 2.7, 8.
Heb. 1.5. 2. The Son, Mal. 3.1. Can. 2.1. Re. 21.1 3. The Holy Ghost, Ac. 10.1.
Ac. 13.2


Secondly, you have all three spoken to in the second. 1. The Father, Joh.
11.42. Joh. 17. 2. The Son, Act. 13.35. Ps. 2.7. Ps. 110.4. 3. The Holy Ghost,
Can. 4. la. Act. 4.24. It was he that spoke by the mouth of David, Act. 1.16.


Thirdly, you have all three spoken in the third, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. where to
show there is none greater, nor lesser then other: you have, first, the Spirit,
and from him are derived gifts, verse. 4: secondly, the Son, and from him are
Administrations, uers. 5. thirdly, the Father, and from him your have
Operations, verse. 6. you have in the like manner, the Son, mentioned in the
first place, before the Father, 2 Cor. 13.14. 2 These. 2.16. Gal. 1.1. Ephesians. 5.5.
Sometime the Son, put in the last place, after the Holy Ghost, Rev. 1.4, 5.
Though the usual order of the Scriptures, is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
Mat. 28.19. 1 John 5.7. 1 These. 3.11, 12.

If men were not blinded with sin, they might see this their great error, in
fighting against the Lord Jesus and his Spirit. The Lord open their eyes to see
the glorious light of the truth, and draw their hearts to embrace it.

Now the Lord Jesus Christ, and God even our Father, who has given us
everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace, comfort your hearts, and
establish you in every good work and word, 2 The. 2.16, 17. That ye may grow
in grace, and the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3.18. Looking for
the mercy of the Lord Jesus to eternal life, Jude 21. Which is the prayer of
him, who through the grace of the Lord Jesus has devoted himself to the
service of the least of Christ's little Ones, which believe in him, And is

Yours in the Lord Jesus, BENJAMIN AUSTIN.

The Scriptures manifest the Son and Holy Ghost to be God, equal with the
Father, lib. 1. c. 1. By ascribing to them 1. Such names ^s are proper to God
only, cap. 2. as In the Old Test^ment 1. Jehovah, cap. 3. 2. Lord of Hosts,
cap. 4. 3. Jah, cap. 5. 4. Eheieh, or I am, ca. 6. 5. El, cap. 7. 6. Elohim,
cap. 8. 7. Adonai, cap. 9. 8. Shaddai, cap. 10.
In the new Testament 1. (...) God, cap. 11. 2. (...) Lord, ca. 12. 1. One,
cap. 2. 2. Eternal, cap. 3. 3. Omnipresent, cap. 4. 4. Omnipotent, cap. 5. 5.
Omniscient, cap. 6. 6. Incomprehensible, cap. 7. 7. Most wise, cap. 8. 8. Most
free, cap. 9. 9. Most holy, cap. 10. 10. Good, cap. 11. 11. Gracious, cap. 12.
12. True, cap. 13. 13. Living, cap 14. 14. Glorious, cap. 15. 15. Blessed, cap.
16. 1. Common works, which extend to all, Sect. 1. 1. Creation, cap. 2. 2.
Preservation, or providence 3. Illumination, cap. 5. 4. Judging the earth, cap.
6. 1. Universally, in regard of all creatures in all places, cap. 3. 2.
Particularly, in regard of the Sea, cap. 4.

2. Special works, the benefit whereof reach only to the church of God, Sect.
2. which are such works as the Lord works in regard of 1. Christ the head of
the Church as his 1. Incarnation, cap. 2. 2. Attestation, cap. 3. 3. Vocation,
cap. 4. 4. Miraculous operations, cap. 5. 5. Death and Passion, cap. 6. 6.
Resurrection, cap. 7. 7. Ascension, cap. 8.
2. The Church, the body of Christ, and do concern, 1. The Church in general,
sect 3. as, namely the Lords. 1. Covenanting with them, cap. 2. 2 Delivering
Israel out of Egypt, cap. 3. 3 Sending Angels to them, cap. 4. 4 Sending them
Prophets, cap. 5. 5 Sending them Apostles, cap. 6. 6 Appointing them their
places in which they must preach, cap. 7. 7 Speaking in and by the Apostles and
Prophets, cap. 8. 8 Strengthening them in their calling^, cap. 9. 9 Sending
Pastors and Teachers, cap. 10. 10 Giving laws to the Church, cap. 11. 11
Giving the law on Sinai, cap. 12. 12 The transg ession whereof does off^nd him,
c. 13. provoke him, c. 14
13 Working wonders, cap. 15. 14 Gifts of Miracles, cap. 16. 1^ Building the
Church, ca. 17. 16 Raising the Dead, cap. 18. 1. Election, cap. 2. 2.
Redemption in keeping and and delivering us from 1. Sin, cap. 3. 2 Satan, cap.
4. 3. Wrath to come, ca. 5.
3 Justification in regard both of 1. Remission of sins or healing the ^oul,
cap. 6. 2. Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, cap. 7.
4. Faith, cap 8. 5. Hope, cap. 9. 6. True Knowledge, cap. 10. 7. Our union and
communion with God, cap 11. 8. Adoption, cap 12. 9. Sanctificat^on in the
beginning and progress thereof by Drawing us to him, c. 14. Quicknin us, cap.
15. Multiplying his graces in us, cap. 16.
10 Giving us testimony we are his, c^p. ^7. 11. Sealing us, cap. 18. 12.
Givi^g unto us Christian Liberty, cap. 19. 13. Glorification, cap. 20,

2. The Faithful in particular, Sect. 4. as namely, in




In both the old, and in the new 1. Father, cap. 13. 2. Highest, cap. 14. 3.
Lord God, cap. 15. 4. L. G. Almighty, c. 16 5. Great G d, cap. 17. 6. Great
King, cap. 18. 7 The G. of Israel, c. 19

2. Such Attributes as are proper to God, lib. 2. cap. 1. as 3. Such works as
are proper to God. lib. 3. which are either 4 Such divine honor and religious
worship as is proper to God al^ne. lib. 4. as 1. Worship given by Men, cap. 2.
Angels, cap. 3.
2. Obedience and Service, cap. ^. 3. Love, cap. 5. 4. Hearing of him, cap. 6.
5. Knowledge of him, cap. 7. 6. Believing on him, cap. 8. 7. Hoping and
trusting on him, cap. 9. 8. Baptizing in his Name, cap. 10. 9. Swearing by him,
cap. 11. 10. Prayer, cap. 12. 11. Praise by Men, cap. 13. Angels, cap 14.
12. Building to him the Temple of Jerusalem which was his house, built for his
honor and worship, cap. 15. 13. Legal Sacrifices were offered to him, cap 16.
14. Glorifying him in our lives and conversations, cap 17.



THE Consubstantialitie and Equality of FATHER, SON, and HOLY GHOST; Who are
but one GOD, yet three Persons: Distinguished from each other, both internally,
by their Personal Properties; and externally, by their order in co-working.
The first Book.
The Names of GOD are equally ascribed to FATHER, SON, and HOLY GHOST, in the
Scriptures.
CHAP. I.
THERE is nothing which a Christian can know with more comfort, or err in with
greater danger, then this great and holy mystery of three Persons in one
divine essence; the conceit either of three substances, or of but one
subsistence, is erroneous and damnable: Neither have we (I say not any better,
but) any other Guide, to direct us with safety to search out this mysterious
Truth, but the holy Scriptures. Reason must not bear sway herein; not because
it contradicts that, but because this transcendeth that; where, if Reason
might be admitted our Pilot, to steer our Faith in its right course, it would
not be prayse-worthy to believe. But when Faith lays hold on a bare Truth,
which is above Reason; now we believe, not because it is mani ^sted by sense,
or demonstrated by Reason, but because it is so taught in the holy Scriptures:
This is that which makes us happy, and our Faith commendable. As our Savior
tells Thomas, when he was by his outward senses convinced of the Lord Christ's
divine power: Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou have believed; blessed
are they that have not seen, and yet have beleev^d, Joh. 20.29. For it is a
sign we take God at his word, when we believe a Truth, because the Scripture
affirms it. And without doubt, the Majesty of Heaven is so far pleased to
reveal himself to us in his Word, as we (clothed with corruptible bodies) are
capable of: by which we may know so much of God, as is not only useful for
our comfort, but also needful for our salvation. The greatest measure of this
knowledge, which we can attain in this life, is but dark, in comparison of
that clearer Light which we shall enjoy in Heaven: Although even that will not
be a total comprehending of the Lords infinite Majesty, yet it will be a full
apprehending, in resp^ct of our selves, who are finite creatures; and therefore
cannot know so much of an infinite God, as he himself knows of himself. In
that place of Paul; Then shall I know, as also I am known, 1 Cor. 13.12. The
word (as) is a note of quality, not of equality; it intimates a likeness,
it demonstrateth no proportion: yet we shall have such a perfect and certain
knowledge of God, as will conduce to our eternal felicity. In the mean
while, the Lord affords us some comfortable glimpses of his Divine Majesty;
He looks forth upon us out of the windows, and shows himself through the
Lattesse, Cant. 2.9. We may see Christ shining gloriously on our souls through
the grates and windows of his Word and Sacraments: The wall of our flesh
hinders the full fruition of him. We can only by the eye of Faith see the
Lord as through a Glass, darkely, 1 Cor. 13.12. We see him in the Ministry
of his Word, which we shall do well, if we take heed thereunto, as unto a
Light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawne, and the Day Star
arise in our hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19. The Scriptures are the Light which we must
look unto, that we may steer our Faith aright in the troublesome Sea of this
World, that we may not make shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, 1 Timothy
1.18, 19. Oh that we would consider, that in all the ways wherein we walk, if
we have not this Light to direct us, we either wander in darkness, or are
misled by an ignis fatuus, a mock-Light; which if we follow, we hazard our
souls, and lose our true comfort: And amongst other Truths, we shall clearly
discern (if we look not through the false-colouring Spectacles of Arrius)
even this Truth; That the Son and Holy Ghost are God, equal with the Father,
when as the Scriptures ascribe to them such Names, Attributes, Works, Worship,
as are proper to God, and common to them with the Father.

CHAP. II.
The Scriptures manifest the Son and Holy Ghost to be God, equal with the
Father, by ascribing to them equally with the Father, such Names as are proper
to God.
FOr these, who have the Names of the true God in the Scriptures properly,
definitively, and absolutely predicated of them, even as the Father has, are
truly God, as the Father is.

But the Son and the Holy Ghost have the Names of the true God properly,
definitively, and absolutely predicated of them in the Scriptures, even as the
Father has.

Therefore the Son and the Holy Ghost are truly God, as the Father is.

The Major is evident; the Minor I shall prove by induction: showing unto you
out of the Scriptures, That not only one or two Names of God, but all the
usual Names of God are equally attributed to the Father, to the Son, and to
the Holy Ghost: I shall instance in these following.

First, the Names of God in the Old Testament are, 1. Jehovah, 2. Lord of
Hosts, 3. Jah, 4. Ehejeh, or, I am, 5. El, 6. Elohim, 7. Adonai, 8. Shaddai.

Secondly, in the New Testament, in the Greek, 9. (...), 10. (...), God, and
Lord.

Thirdly, in both the Old Testament and the New, 11. Father, 12. Highest, 13.
Lord God, 14. Lord God Almighty, 15. Great God, 16. Great King, 17. The God of
Israel.

CHAP. III.
The Name Jehovah is ascribed to the Father, to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost.
JEhovah is a Name of God, that describes unto us his essence: It is derived
of Havah, esse, to be.

First, Because the Lord alone has essence, and being of himself, Isa. 44.6.

Secondly, He it is that alone gives life, and being to all creatures, Act.
17.25.

Thirdly, He gives being to his Word, and Promises, effecting what he
speaks, and performing what he promises, Isa. 45.2, 3. Ezekiel. 5.17.

First, This Name is proper to God alone, Psalm. 83.19. Thou whose Name alone is
Jehovah: and Nehem. 9.6. Thou art Jehovah alone. It is the incommunicable Name,
Wisd. 19.21. because it is never simply given to any but to God only. It was
called of the Grecians (...), a Name that was not to be expressed, either in
regard of the Grecians, which out of want of Letters could not write it, or in
respect of the Jews, which out of superstition would not speak it.

This Name, because it could not be written in Greek, has the force of it
opened by the Holy Ghost, Rev. 1.4, 8. Rev. 4.8. Rev. 11.17. Rev. 16.15.
styling the Lord, He that is, that was, and that will be, or is to come. And
that you may know he expresses an Hebrew Name, he varieth not the Cases
according to the manner of the Greeks, but speaking in the Genitive Case, he
puts this Name in the Nominative, Rev. 1.4. according to the Hebrew form,
(...), etc. Je, the first syllable of the Name Jehovah, is a note of the time
to come; Jeheveh, He will be: Ho, a sign of the time present; Hoveh, He that
is: and Vah, a Characteristicall mark of the time past; Havah, He was, or has
been. This Name points out the Eternity of his Essence, that he is God from
everlasting to everlasting, Psalm. 90.2. which is of himself, and from
himself, a most absolute and perfect substance.

Secondly, Although this Name Jehovah is a Name of Gods Essence, and is always
used Singularly, and never Plurally, as Elohim and Adonai are; (which are Names
of God in regard of his Personalitie, or Subsistence, and the Lord styleth
himself one Jehovah, Deuteronomy. 6.4. but never one Elohim) yet the ancient Jews
before Christ, did note the mystery of the Trinity, in their expositions of
this Name, by twelve, and by forty and two Letters, which they called Sem
Hamphoras. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, was their exposition of this Name by
twelve Letters, in Hebrew: And the Father is God, the Son is God, and the
Holy Ghost is God, three in one, and one in three, is their exposition of that
Name by forty and two Letters; it being written likewise with so many, as R.
Judas Nagid. R. Hacadosh, R. Moses Ben Mammon, and others observe: Adding
moreover, that this mystery was to be kept secret until the coming of the
Messiah who should more clearly reveal it; R. Hacadosh in Galarazeia. Yea,
they were so Catechized in the mystery of the Trinity, that, as P. Fagius
observes on Exodus 28. they collected this mystery out of this Name; which,
although it was called Tetragrammaton, or the Name of four Letters, yet (say
they) there were but three sorts of Letters in it: ( Jod) signified the Father,
who was the beginning of all things; ( Vau) is a conjunction copulative, and
denoted the third Person; ( He) signified the Son of God: And they affirm,
this Letter is doubled, to demonstrate both Natures of the Messiah. These, and
the like observations, you may see in the learned Works of the much admired
and ever to be honored, Mornaeus de verit. Christ. Relig. P. Calat. and
others, who have sufficiently proved, that the ancienter Doctors of the Jews
believed this mystery; albeit their latter Rabbis, in opposition to the Lord
Jesus, do oppose it. And surely, the Jews in Christ's time were acquainted
with this Truth, in that they accuse Christ of Blasphemy, when as he said he
was the Son of God, Joh. 10.33. First, because he being but a man, as they
thought, yet made himself God, Joh. 10.33. Secondly, because he made himself
(as they rightly concluded) equal with God, when as they said, God was his
Father, Joh. 5.18. They not denying, that there was a Son of God, which was
equal with the Father; but denying him to be that Word, and Son of God;
blaspheming him whom they accused of Blasphemy, Mark. 14.64, 65. Joh. 19.7.
And that the Holy Ghost was known to them, is evident, Mat. 1.20. where the
Angel tells Joseph, that Mary was with Child by the Holy Ghost. And John
Baptist speaking of Christ, says, He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost,
and with fire, Mat. 3.10. In vain had he spoken to them of the Holy Ghost, of
whom they had not heard of before. That place, Act. 19.2. where the Disciples
had not heard whether there were an Holy Ghost, it cannot be so understood, as
if they were ignorant of his Person, but of the gifts of Tongues, and
Prophesying by him: for first, being Disciples, they were baptized in the Name
of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: secondly, when the Holy Ghost is
used Personally, he is pointed out with one, if not with two Articles, in the
Original; whereas when the word is used metonymically, for his Gifts and
Graces, you have usually no Article in the Greek prefixed, as in this and
diverse other places. Thirdly, you have the same expression used by the
Evangelist John. Joh. 7.39. The Holy Ghost was not: He was in Person before, he
was as touching sanctifying Graces before; but he was not yet poured forth on
the Disciples (as Joel prophesied, Joel 2.28.) in gifts of Tongues, and
miraculous operations.

Thirdly, This incommunicable and essential Name of God is sometimes used
Personally, and is then ascribed either to tho Father, or to the Son, or to
the Holy Ghost: for,

First, the Father is Jehovah, Genesis 19.24. The Lord rained fire and brimstone
from the Lord; where you have the Son executing Judgment from Jehovah his
Father: and Zach. 3.2. The Lord said to Satan, The Lord rebuke thee: where one,
that is Jehovah, speaks of another Jehovah; namely, Christ speaks of his
Father: and Psalm. 2.2. The Kings of the earth stand up against the Lord, and
against his Anointed.

Secondly, the Son is Jehovah, as in the two aforecited places, Genesis 19.24.
Zach. 3.2. where the Son is styled Jehovah, even as the Father is. Isa. 25.9.
This is the Lord, we have waited for him, who also did swallow up death in
victory, Isa. 25.8. which was the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 15. in whom that
Prophecy was fulfilled. John Baptist is to prepare the way of Jehovah, Isa.
40.3. which was the way of the Lord Christ, Mark. 1.2, 3, 4. Luke 1.76. It was
the Lord Jesus, who was valued at thirty pieces of silver, Mat. 27.9. whom
Zachary calls Jehovah, Zach. 11.13. I will save them by the Lord their God,
Hos. 1.7. A Prophecy fulfilled in Christ, who is the Lord our righteousness,
Jer. 23.6. Six times, Zach. 12. is he called Jehovah; which, that it was Christ
of whom the Prophet speaks, is clear, Zach. 12.10. They shall lo^ke upon me
whom they have pierced: which John, a faithful eyewitness, shows it was
fulfilled in Christ, Joh. 19.34, 35. and as a true interpreter, affirms, that
this Prophecy was spoken of him, Joh. 19.37. He it was, that appeared to the
Patriarchs and Saints in the Old Testament, Act. 7.30, 32. who was then often
called Jehovah, Exodus 3. Genesis 18. Judge. 6. Exodus 13.22. who is likewise styled
an Angel of the Lord, Exodus 14.19. who often took the name of an Angel, but
never the nature of an Angel, Heb. 2.16. he being no created Angel, Heb. 1.13.
but the uncreated Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. The Mediator between God
and us, Zach. 2.10, 11. Jehovah promises to dwell among us, which was the
Word, who was made flesh, and dwelt among us, Joh. 1.14. who is our God, and we
are his people.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is Jehovah. Ezekiel calls him Jehovah, Ezekiel. 2.4.
Ezekiel. 11.5. which he before called the Spirit, Ezekiel. 2.2. Ezekiel. 11.1, 5. It was
the Holy Ghost, who gave orders for the Tabernacle; so the Apostle shows,
Heb. 9.8. whom Moses calls Jehovah, Lev. 19.2. Exodus 25.1. The Holy Ghost
spoke by the Prophets, 2 Pet. 1.21. 1 Pet. 1.11. whom usually they style
Jehovah, Jer. 47.2. Jer. 51.1. Jer. 33.12. Yea, Isaiah calls him Jehovah,
Isa. 6.3, 5. whom Paul expressly calls the Holy Ghost, Act. 28.25. Yea, the
Prophets in the New Testament say, Thus says the Holy Ghost, Act. 21.11. And,
the Holy Ghost said, Act. 13.1, 2. And, the Holy Ghost testifies, Act. 20.21.
Whereas the Prophets in the Old, which spoke by the same Spirit, say, Thus
says the Lord.

Thus does the Scriptures affirm the Father to be the true God Jehovah, the
Son to be the true God Jehovah, the Holy Ghost to be the true God Jehovah;
because whatsoever Name, Attribute, Work, or Honor is by the Scriptures
ascribed to the Father, is in the like manner given to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost, as is exemplified in the Name Jehovah. Not as if there were three
Jehovahs, differing in nature, essence, or substance, (for, the Lord thy God is
one Lord, Deuteronomy. 6.4. and, I am the Lord, says he, and there is none else, Isa.
45.5.) but because there is but one essence of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
which yet are distinct from each other by their mutual relations, or personal
properties.

CHAP. IV.
Lord of Hosts is a Name common to the Father, to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost.
JEhovah Sebaoth, Lord of Hosts, or Elohe Sebaoth, God of Hosts, is a Name
proper to God, Isa. 51.15. Jer. 51.19. Jer. 10.16. Jer. 32.18. He has Armies
in Heaven, in Earth, and in all places, by which he fights against his and
the Churches enemies; and he it is that orders and guides all the Hosts in
the world. The whole battle, in a just and well-managed War, is the Lords,
1 Samuel 17.47. He is the great Commander of all creatures, he has soldiers
under him of all sorts; he can make Worms to be his great Army, Joel 2.25.
and by them can he render vengeance to his enemies, and reward them that hate
him. Acts 12.23. Herod's pampered Carkas is made a Stable for Worms to live in,
his body is food for them to feed on, (as the word in the Syriack imports:)
yea, Frogs, Flies, and Lice, are under his command, Exodus 8. He that gives
them their being, sets them their stint; they cannot hurt an Israelite, or
spare an Egyptian. Yea, from the lowest of all earthly, to the highest of all
heavenly creatures, they are all under his command, and fulfill his word, Psalm.
148.2, 3, 10. Psalm. 103.20, 21, 22. And yet such is his Power, that he need not
muster his Forces, nor gather his Armies together; it is sufficient, if he do
but arise, his enemies shall be scattered; if his Power do but appear, they
that ha^^ him shall flee, Psalm. 68.1.

This Name is never given to any creature in the Scripture, but to God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

First, the Father, He is the Lord of Hosts, Zach. 2.9. Zach. 2.11. Ye shall
know the Lord of Hosts has sent me. The Prophet speaks of Christ, who was
sent by the Lord of Hosts, his Father.

Secondly, the Son, He is the Lord of Hosts, Zach. 2.8. Thus says the Lord
of Hosts; after the glory has he sent me to the Nations that spoiled you. Lo
the Son, who is sent by the Father, is styled likewise the Lord of Hosts; for
the Prophet mentions one Lord of Hosts sending, another Lord of Hosts sent.
Isaiah likewise calls Christ the Lord of Hosts, Isa. 8.13, 14. Sanctify the
Lord of Hosts himself, let him be your fear, and let him be your dread, and
he shall be for a sanctuary, but for a stone of stumbling, and for a rock ^f
offense to both the Houses of Israel. That Christ was the Lord of Hosts, who is
also styled a stumbling block, is confirmed by two un-erring Interpreters,
namely, by Peter, 1 Pet. 2.6. and Paul, Romans 9.32, 33. He it was whom Hosea
first calls an Angel, Hos. 12.4. and in the next Verse styles him, The Lord
God of Hosts, Hos. 12.5. The Chariots of God are twenty thousand, even
thousands of Angels, Psalm. 68.17, 18. That this was Christ, who was the Lord of
this great Host, the Apostle makes clear, Ephesians. 4.8. in citing the very next
words, and applying them to Christ.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost, He is the Lord of Hosts, Zach. 1.3. Say thou to them,
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Turn ye to me, says the Lord of Hosts, and I
will turn to you, says the Lord of Hosts. Where you must admit the
Holy Ghost, who spoke by the Prophets, Act. 1.16. 2 Pet. 1.21. Neh. 9.30. Mar.
12.36. to be He, that is styled the Lord of Hosts in the first place, unless
you will admit a Tautologie, by ascribing to one and the same Person three
times commanding of, or speaking to Israel, when as he speaks only twice to
them. Yea, the Prophet Isaiah compares the Spirit of the Lord to a Warlike
King, who sets up his Standard against the enemies of his Church, Isa.
59.19. When the enemy shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall
lift up a Standard against him.

Yet that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one Lord of Hosts, the Prophet
Isaiah makes plain, Isa. 6.1, 3, 5. when he was sent by him, Isa. 6.9. First,
that this was the Father, if any deny, Isaias manifests it, Isa. 48.16.
Secondly, that it was the Son, whose glory he saw, when he sent him, John
averreth, John 12.40, 41. Thirdly, that it was the Holy Ghost, who sent him,
Isaiah affirms, Isa. 48.16. and Paul puts it out of doubt, Act. 28.25.
Thus one God, distinguished into three Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
has one and the same glory, and is one and the same Lord of Hosts, in nature,
substance, and essence, though they are distinct from each other, by their
mutual relations to each other: the Father begetting the Son, the Son
being begotten of the Father, and the Holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and
the Son.

CHAP. V.
Jah is a Name of God ascribed to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
JAh is a Name of God, of the same signification and derivation with Jehovah;
it is not often used in the Scriptures, unless it be in Psalms, or Songs of
Thanksgiving. Sometime this Name is redoubled, as Isa. 38.11. I shall not see
the Lord, the Lord in the land of the living. Sometime it is joined to Jehovah,
as Isa. 12.2. Isa. 25.4. and sometimes with Elohim, as Psalm. 68.19. Often times
it is joined to Hallelu, and so it is used in the beginning and ending of the
five last Psalms. It should be the first and last, our highest and chiefest
end, to glorify Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Jah is not a proper Name of Christ incarnate, (as some imagine, who say, That
Christ in his incarnation was Deus contractus, when all the fulness of the
Godhead dwelt bodily in him, Col. 2.9. as they say, Jah is contracted of
Jehovah:) for this Name is given,

First, to the Father, together with the Son and Holy Ghost, Exodus 15.2. The
Lord is my strength, and song. Israel did acknowledge Jah to be their
deliverer, who delivered Israel out of Egypt, and destroyed his and their
enemies; which I shall show to be the works of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
Psalm. 35.3, 4. Jah is praised, who made a Covenant with his people; which was
not only the Father, but also the Son and Holy Ghost, as I purpose to
manifest.

Secondly, the Son has this Name ascribed to him, Psalm. 68.4. which Psalm
the Apostle, by citing the eighteenth Verse, shows belongs to Christ. And,
Psalm. 118.14, 18, 19. The Lord, or Jah, is my strength; and, the Lord has
chastened me sore; and, praise the Lord; which was Christ: as out of the
twenty and second Verse of that Psalm, by being compared with 1 Pet. 2.4.
Act. 4.11. Math. 21.42. Mar. 12.10. does easily appear.

Thirdly, to the Holy Ghost. Psalm. 68.18. Thou receivest gifts from men, for
the rebellious also, that the Lord, or Jah, God might dwell amongst them: Or,
if you read it according to the Apostles interpretation, Ephesians. 4.8. gave
gifts unto men: It is both ways a Prophecy of Christ, who received the
promise of the Holy Ghost from his Father, Act. 2.33. and did give him to his
Church, who also dwells in the faithful, Romans 8.9. 2 Timothy 1.14. Romans 8.11. 1
Cor. 3.16. Jam. 4.5. 1 Cor. 6.19. 1 Pet. 4.14.

Oh, that as praise is in precept, Psalm. 146.1. last. Psalm. 147.1. last. Psalm.
148. Psalm. 149. Psalm. 150. Psalm. 135. joined to this word, that it might be so
likewise in our practice: at the leastwise, let it be our endeavors to perform
it. Give praise to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Praise the Lord in his Name,
Jah.

CHAP. VI.
Ehejeh, or I am, or I will be, is a Name of God, ascribed to Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost.
EHejeh is a Name of God, of the same signification and derivation with
Jehovah; it notes unto us the eternity, and immutabilitie of God, both in
himself, and in his Promises: a Name which God is pleased to style himself
by, Exodus 3.14. I am. To this Name Christ alluding, styles himself, I am,
Joh. 8.58. Joh. 8.28. Joh. 8.24. Joh. 13.19. Joh. 4.26. I shall show not only
the Father, but also the Son and the Holy Ghost to be Ehejeh, when as I treat
of the work of God in bringing Israel out of Egypt, as he promised, Exodus 3.
who are one God, of one essence and substance: The Word being the Fathers own,
Romans 8.3. proper, Romans 3.32. begotten Heb. 5.5. Heb. 1.5. his only begotten
Son^, Joh. 3.16, 18. Joh. 1.18. 1 John 4.9. And therefore of the same essence
with him that begat him. Neither is the Spirit differing in nature from the
Father and the Son, from whom he proceeds, and in whom they are; no more
then the spirit of man differs in nature and essence from a man, in whom he
is, 1 Cor. 2.11.

CHAP. VII.
El is a Name of God, ascribed to the Father, to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost.
EL is a Name of God, in regard of his Power which he has in himself, and
which he gives to all creatures. This Name is ascribed,

First, to the Father. Thus Christ in the days of his flesh offering up
prayers and supplications, Heb. 5.7. to his Father, styles him El Mat. 27.46.
Mar. 15.34. Eli, Eli, etc. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

Secondly, to the Son. He is El Gibbor, Isa. 9.6. The mighty God; a Name not
communicable to a creature: His name is Emmanuel, Isa. 7.14. Mat. 1.23. A
Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and shall call his Name Emmanuel. And
therefore he was borne of a woman, after the manner of men, that it might be
manifested he was truly man: And yet not borne of man's seed, that he might be
known to be not only man, but God also, as his Name imports.

Thirdly, to the Holy Ghost. He has said, which has heard the words of God,
which saw the vision of she Almighty, falling into a trance, but having his
eyes open, Number. 24.4. He, whose words Balaam heard, was the Spirit of God, Number.
24.2. He spoke by him, and in him, and yet in the fourth and sixteenth Verses,
it was the words of El which he heard.

Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, having one and the same Name properly and
definitively given to them in Scripture, are one in Nature also.

CHAP. VIII.
Elohim, or Eloah, is a Name ascribed to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
ELohim is a Name of God, attributed to him in regard of his Power and
Almightinesse. It is commonly used plurally, and is often joined with Jehovah,
which is always used singularly; the one, noting the unity of the essence;
the other, the plurality of Persons of this one God. This Name the Lord
challenges, and demands: (...) there any God beside me? Isa. 44.8. David
acknowledges no God, besides the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 17.10. 2 Samuel 7.22. Yet this
excludes neither of the three Persons of the blessed Trinity from being God.

First, the Father has this Name Eloah given to him. Psalm. 40.8. I delight to
do thy will, O my God. The Lord Jesus, as man, delighted to do God his
Fathers will, both by active obedience, in fulfilling the Law, and by passive
obedience, in suffering, and dying for our sins, which were the transgression
of the Law, 1 John 3.4.

Secondly, the Son has this Name ascribed to him. Job 19.25, 26. I know that
my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand the latter day upon the earth; and
though, after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see
God. That this whom he calls God, was the Lord Christ, is clear: first, He
is our Redeemer, our God: secondly, He it is, who being not only God, but also
man, shall stand upon the earth: thirdly, It is the Son of man that shall
come to judge the earth: fourthly, He calls him God, whom he shall see with
his bodily eyes. Now this could not be the Father, or Holy Ghost, or the Son
of God, as God, for so he is invisible; but the Son, clothed with our flesh;
he that is God and man, the Lord Jesus. Again, Isaiah says, Make straight in
the Desert a high way for our God, Isa. 40.3. We have four faithful
Interpreters, showing us, that this was John Baptist, preparing the way of
Christ: first, Matthew, Math. 3.4. secondly, Mark, Mark. 1.3. thirdly, Luke,
Luke 3.4. fourthly, John, Joh. 1.23. Thus if you interpret the Old Testament
by the New, the Prophets by the Apostles, you shall easily prove Christ to be
God, and Lord, and clearly see him so acknowledged by the Prophets. And
indeed, Isaiah often times in his Prophecy affirms Christ to be God, Isa.
40.9. Say to the Cities of Judah, Behold your God. Isa. 25.9. This is our God,
we have waited for him. Isa. 35.4. God will come with recompense, he will come
and save you: Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, etc. So Psalm. 102.24,
25. O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days, thy years are
throughout all generations; of old than have laid the foundations of the earth,
etc. This was Christ, the Apostle shows, Heb. 1.10.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is likewise so called, Levit. 26.12. I will walk
among you, and will be your God, and y^ shall be my people. That this is the
Holy Ghost, the Apostle citing this place, makes clear, 2 Cor. 6.16. where he
likewise affirms the Faithful to be his Temple. Now the Faithful are the
Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19. who dwells in us as in his Temple, 1
Cor. 3.16. He which spoke by David, was the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Samuel 23.2.
who in the third Verse is called the God of Israel.

Yea, to express this mystery of the plurality of Persons in the Godhead,
this word Elohim is most frequently used in the Plural Number, and has
sometimes a Verb Plural joined with it, as Genesis 20.13. Genesis 35.7. 2 Samuel
7.23. But more usually to express the Unity of the Essence in the Trinity of
Persons, it has either a Nowne Singular joined with it, as Jehovah Elohim,
Deuteronomy. 6.4. Levit. 26.13. Or a Verb Singular, Genesis 1.1. Or two Verb^s, one
Singular, and another Plural, Genesis 1.26, 27. Or a Nowne Singular, and a Verb
Singular, Genesis 2.4.8.22. Or two Nownes, one Singular, another Plural, Josh.
24.19. Jer. 10.10. Or a Verb Singular, and a Nowne Plural, Psalm. 58.11. Or
being used in the Singular Number, yet it has a Nowne Plural joined with it,
Job 35.10. None says, Where is God my makers?

Surely, the Scriptures in these diverse constructions did point out this
mystery of the three Persons; the like not to be found of Angels, men, or
Idols: though the Jews of latter times, in their blasphemous opposition of
Christ, have earnestly endeavored to show it, if possibly they could.

First, Neither the Name Elohim, nor any other Name of God, is used plurally,
when it is spoken of one Angel, or of one man, as it is of one God. As for that
place, Exodus 7.1. this Name is given improperly, or tropically, to Moses, who
was the Lords Ambassador to Pharaoh, and did thereby represent the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, who did send him, and who did deliver Israel out of
Pharaohs hand, as I purpose to manifest. He therefore representing the glorious
Trinity, has a Name given him of God, which does import the nature of this
Tri-une Lord that sent him.

Secondly, For Baalim, and other Idols, which are used plurally, and have the
Name of Elohim given to them: First, Baalim was a Name given by the Jews to
the true God, Hos. 2.16, 17. and so might be used by them as Elohim and Adonai
are. The Jews being Idolaters, gave not only the Worship of God, but also his
Names to their Idols, as Exodus 32.4, 5. they called the Calfe Jehovah Elohim,
supposing their Idols to have, at the leastwise to represent the Nature of the
true God: and therefore, secondly, they thinking to represent the true God by
them, who is one in Essence, and three in Persons, who is God alone, Psalm.
86.10. and, there is no God beside him, Isa. 45. who neither is nor can be
represented by Images, Isa. 40.18. Act. 17.29. would have their Idols Names to
represent the Names of the true God: thirdly, Baalim, and other names of Idols,
are Judge. 2. and in other places of the Scripture, used plurally, to express
the several sorts of their Idolatries; there being many Baals, and Idols,
worshipped by the Jews, who often changed their Idols, Jer. 2.36. Ezekiel. 16.15,
16, 25, 26, 28, 29. and multiplied their gods according to the number of their
Cities, Jer. 2.28. Jer. 11.13.

Thirdly, If we should grant, the Hebrews did use sometimes the Plural Number
for the Singular, yet it is not their use, to put in the Plural Number that
which has no plurality of Nature; as in expressing of the true God, to use
these plural words, Elohim, and Adonai, if there were but one Person in the
Godhead.

CHAP. IX.
Adonai is a Name of God, ascribed to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
ADonai is a Name properly given to God, in regard of his sustentation and
dominion over the World, who rules the World, and sustaineth all Creatures
therein. Though this Name be given to Creatures, yet it is but analogically,
and is not pointed in the same manner, as it is when it is used plurally for
the Creator. This Name is used as Elohim is, and the one is put for the other,
2 Samuel 7.18. 1 Chronicles. 17.16. and is joined with Jehovah. The Psalmist uses
plurally both these Names, Psalm. 136.2, 5. where he speaks of God, who is one
in essence, as if he had spoken of many, and calls him Gods, and Lords, to
signify the mystery of the Trinity in one essence: and therefore before, and
after, in the first and fourth Verses, he expresses God by words singular,
where, four times does the Psalmist exhort men to praise the Lord, only
varying the words. This Name is ascribed to all three Persons.

First, the Father has this Name given to him by the Psalmist, Psalm. 8.1. as
the Apostle alleging this Psalm, Heb. 2.6, 7, 8. intimates.

Secondly, the Son is so styled; The Lord said to my Lord, Psalm. 110.1. the
Father said to his Son: and, the Lord, whom ye seek, shall come into his
Temple, Mal. 3.1. That this was Christ, you have it so interpreted in three
Evangelists, Luke 1.76. Mark. 1.2. Mat. 11.10. He is thy Lord, and worship thou
him, Psalm. 45.11. That this was the Messiah, not only the Apostle, Heb. 1.7,
8. but also the Jewish Rabbis so affirm; and Daniel entreated the Lord to
hear him for the Lords sake, Dan. 9.17.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost, Ezekiel. 2.4. he is there styled the Lord, which in the
second Verse is called the Spirit; and so likewise, Ezekiel. 11.1, 6.

Yea, Isaiah manifests this truth more clearly; where God, called Adonai,
says, Whom shall I send? or, who shall go for us? Isa. 6.8. Whom shall I
send? There is the Unity: and, who shall go for us? There is the Trinity.
That this was the Son and Holy Ghost, together with the Father, is clear, if
ye compare Joh. 12.39, 40, 41. Act. 28.25, 26. and Isa. 48.16. with this Isa.
6.8, 9, 10. as I have showed. Yea, Malachy uses this word in the form
Plural, and joyneth with it a word Singular, Mal. 1.6. If I be M^sters; (Any)
is Singular, and (Adonim) is Plural: If I, There is the Unity of the Essence;
be Masters, there is the plurality of Persons.

I know some may object, Isa. 19.4. That Adonim Casheh is so used, when
ascribed to men; and Adonai, Genesis 24.33. Genesis 42.30.

But first, Casheh may be a Substantive, and it may be translated, Lords of
Cruelty: but if Casheh be an Adjective Singular, and Adonim a word Plural,
joined to it; it then may note the multitude of Masters which the captived
Egyptians should serve: and yet their unanimitie in cruelty toward these
Egyptians, which though many, yet should join as one man, in Lording over that
slavish people: So that this place makes not against the Argument, for the
proof of the Trinity, from the use of the word plurally.

Secondly, that place, Genesis 24.35. Abraham's servant uses this word plurally,
The Lord has bl^ssed my Masters greatly; but he speaks of Isaac (whom he
calls his Master likewise, Genesis 24.65.) as well as of Abraham: For where the
word is restrained to Abraham, he uses it singularly, as in 36, 37, 39, 42.
Verses, etc.

Thirdly, that place, Genesis 42.30. though Adonei be used there plurally, yet it
makes nothing for the Adversaries of this Truth. It may then be read according
to the Original; The man of the Lords of the Countr^y spoke roughly to us:
that is, the chief of the Lords, or the chief Lord, spoke roughly to us: Now
Joseph was chief Lord under Pharaoh, Genesis 41.40. Psalm. 105.21. Act. 7.10. And
it is an Hebraisme frequently used in the Old and New Testament, to add the
name of Man, thereby to express any excellency: as a man of Words, is an
eloquent man, Exodus 4.10. a man of Arm, is a mighty man, Job 22.8. a man of
War, Exodus 15.3. a noble or chief Warrior; a man of Countenance, 2 Samuel
23.21. and a man of Measure, 1 Chronicles. 11.23. is a goodly man.

Besides, in these two last Objections, the force is in the Points, and not in
Letters: If the Points in the Hebrew be not coevall with the Letters, then
these Objections are of no force from the Text, but only from the Massorites
additions.

CHAP. X.
Shaddai, or Almighty, is a Name of God, ascribed to the Father, to the Son,
and to the Holy Ghost.
SHaddai is a Name that God is pleased often times to call himself by. It
sets out Gods all-sufficiencie and selfe-sufficiencie, both in regard of
himself, as also in regard of his children, to bless, protect, and to make
them eternally happy; as also in regard of his enemies, to destroy and ruin
them. To which the Scripture has reference, when it says, (Shad) Destruction
comes from (Shaddai) the Almighty, Joel 1.15. Isa. 13.6. This Name is never
ascribed to any creature, neither indeed can it: for no creature has
sufficiency of it self, but it has dependence on the Creator, Act. 17.28. In
him we live, and move, and have our being.

This Name is ascribed,

First, to the Father. Job 33.4. The Spirit of God has made me, and the breath
of the Almighty has given me life: where the Father, and the Son, from whom
the Spirit of God proceeds, Joh. 15.26. Joh. 16.7. and whose Spirit he is,
Mat. 10.20. Romans 8.11. with Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.9. 1 Pet. 1.11. are called
Almighty, and God.

Secondly, to the Son. Genesis 35.11. Christ calls himself, El-shaddai. That
this was Christ, Hosea clears, Hos. 12.4. where he calls him an Angel, yet
it was no created Angel, Hos. 12.5. It was the Lord God of Hosts, the Lord is
his memorial. But the Father and the Holy Ghost have not the Name of an Angel
ascribed to them, only the Son of God is often so styled, who is likewise by
the Psalmist called Shaddai, Psalm. 68.14. When the Almighty scattered Kings,
etc. This the Apostle shows to be Christ, if you compare the eighteenth Verse
of the same Psalm with Ephesians. 4.8. And surely, though Christ was rich, yet for
our sakes he became poor, 2 Cor. 8.9.

Thirdly, to the Holy Ghost: He is Shaddai, the Almighty. Balaam saw the
Visions of the Almighty, Number. 24.4. Number. 24.16. which were the Visions of the
Holy Ghost; for so Moses intimates, Number. 24.2. The Spirit of God came on him.

Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one in Name, one in Nature, and are one
selfe-sufficient Lord God. Oh that we had Faith, to depend upon this our
all-sufficient God for safety; and also Knowledge, not to mistake our Tenure,
by usurping that as our own, which the Lord only lends to us: the one,
would give unto us soule-solacing content, in the enjoyment of God, and of his
Graces; the other, would free us from soule-vexing sorrows, flowing either
from the absence, or loss of outward things: seeing that we are keepers, not
absolute commanders; stewards, Luke 16.12. not possessors of them, as our own;
the Lord only being possessour of heaven and earth, Genesis 14.19. Psalm. 24.1.
Deuteronomy. 10.14. 1 Cor. 10.26, 28. And from his al-sufficiency comes all ours.
Oh, how would this abate our pride in outward things, and our vainglorying in
inward graces! 1 Cor. 4.7. Romans 11.20, 21.

CHAP. XI.
(...), or God, is a Name of God used in the New Testament, and ascribed to
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
(...), or God, is a Name often used in the new Testament; There is but one God,
1 Timothy 2.5. 1 Cor. 8.4. Ephesians. 4.6. And there is none other but he, Mar. 12.32.
One in Nature, Substance, and Essence; though three Persons, subsistences, or
relations: For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are o^e, 1 John 5.7. There is alius
and alius, non aliud and aliud; another Personally, though not another
Essentially. And though we cannot say there are three Gods, yet every Person is
God. The Scripture, the rule of our faith, denies the one, but assenteth to
the other, by ascribing the Name of God, not only to the Father, but also to
the Son, and Holy Ghost; where we may easily perceive, that the Apostles, and
other Penmen of the new Testament, when they speak of the Father, and of the
Son together, call the Father, God, and the Son, Lord; but speaking of them
apart, or severally, they use both these names promiscuously, giving this Name
God, indifferently to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: For,

First, the Father is God; God, who in sundry times, and in diverse manners
spoke in times past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days
spoken unto us by his Son, Heb. 1.1, 2. And to us there is but one God the
Father, 1 Cor. 8.6. This is not spoken exclusively, as if the Son and
Holy Ghost were not God with the Father, but inclusively, by way of inclusion
of the Son and Holy Ghost; The Son being in the Father, and the Father in
the Son, John 14.9. 10. They being one, John 10.30. and the Holy Ghost
proceeding from both, John 15.26. John 16.7. Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.9, 11. This only
excludes Idols, not denying the Lord Jesus, nor his holy Spirit to be one God
with the Father, no more then the verse following, saying, One Lord Jesus
Christ, denies the Father to be Lord, or excludes him from having any
Dominion over us. And as the Father is included in the latter, so the Son and
Holy Ghost is included in the former.

Secondly, the Son is God. Romans 9.5. Of whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ
came, who is over all, God blessed for ever. There are two Reasons, why the
Apostle treating of the Jews, does set forth the Divinity of the Lord Jesus.
1. For the honor of Christ, whom the Jews blasphemed. 2. For the honor of
the Jews, whose manifold privileges, ver. 4.5. he had reckoned up. In
conclusion, he adds this as the greatest, he puts it in the last place, as
the weightiest: That Christ who is God over all blessed for ever, came of them.
And surely, if the Lord Jesus had no other Nature but Humane, it had been
needless for the Apostle to have added these words, (according to the flesh)
but he was the only begotten Son of the Father, John 3.16. The Son of
himself, Romans 8.3. his proper Son, Romans 8.32. And therefore of the same
essence with God his Father: He being opposed to Men and Angels, the adopted,
or created sons of God; he therefore had another Nature from God his Father,
namely Divine, which he took not from Abraham his Father; For before Abraham
was, I am; (as he says) John 8.58. The Apostle puts this out of doubt, 1 Timothy 3.16. Without controversy great is the mystery of godliness, God was
manifest in the flesh. There is not any thing more mysterious, there cannot be
a greater wonder, then that God, who is immortal, should take our flesh, and
become mortal: That he, who thundreth in the Clouds, should lie sprawling in a
Cratch: That he, who was in the form of God, should take on him the form of a
servant. He, that was the Lord of all, the maker of Heaven, and had all the
Mansions therein at his disposing; should for our sakes become poor, have no
House to put his head in, and should be so disrespected of a common Inn, that
he which came to save men, should take up his first lodging with Beasts. What
wonder had it been to men, or mystery worthy for Angels to pry into, 1 Pet.
1.12. To have seen a Creature manifested in the flesh, as some impiously
think, and blasphemously speak of Christ? But he was God, who redeemed us
with his own blood, Act. 20.28. For God to love his rebellious Enemies, and to
lay down his life for us, John 3.16. was love in him, beyond imitation, fit
for our most serious admiration. In Christ dwelt all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9. Where, 1. There was not divine qualities only
resident in him, but there was the Godhead, that dwelt in him. 2. It was not a
little measure thereof, but the fullness of the Godhead. 3. It is not only
said the fullness, but all the fullness of the Godhead. He has the full
nature of God, as the Father has; yea, all that the Father has, Joh. 16. (he
says) was his: the Father having a divine Nature in him, the Son has the
same divine Nature in him. He is Emanuel, God with us. He was in the form of
God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with God; yet made himself of no
reputation, and took on him the form of a servant, and was made in the
liknesse of man; he humbled himself, and became obedient to death, etc. Phil.
2.6, 7. Lo you have the two Natures of the Lord Jesus described: where you
have his divine Nature set forth, and his equality therein with his Father
plainly expressed; he was in the form of God, and equal with God: as also
his humane Nature, he was in the form of a servant. For the one does as
clearly express his Godhead, as the other does his Manhood. 2. Not only
the Father styles the Son his fellow, Zach. 13.7. but also the Lord Christ
himself thought it no robbery to be equal with his Father, Phil. 2.6. Why
should any rob him of that honor, which the Father ascribes, and he knew
due to himself? 3. He made himself of no reputatiton, or rather he emptied
himself; of what? even of his divine Majesty and glory, which he did as it
were lay aside. 4. What great pattern of humility had it been in him, if he
had not been equal with his Father, to have humbled himself, and become
obedient to his Father? But John 1.1. In the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was with God, and the Word was God. And 1 John 5.20. The Apostle speaking
of Christ, he adds, This is the true God, and eternal life. Heb. 1.8. Thy
throne, O God, is for ever and ever. It is the Lord Christ, whose Majesty is
there described. Yea, Thomas acknowledged him to be God and Lord, Jehovah
Elohim, John 20.28. My Lord and my God, which was not a foolish exclamation, or
a fond admiration (as some would make it) but a faithful acclamation, and a
holy confession. For, 1. Here is no note of exclamation, it is ^, not ^, in the
Original. 2. Thomas acknowledged something now, that he did not before. But he
knew the Father to be God and Lord: This speech therefore concerned God the
Son, whose Humanity he touched when he acknowledged his Divinity. 3. Christ
both commended and condemned his faith, John 20.29. He commends the matter of
his believing, though he condemns the manner of his believing. Jude shows
how many ungodly men did broach this blasphemous error, in denying Christ's
divinity, Jude 4. They deny that only God, and Master, our Lord Jesus Christ,
for so it ought to be read, and understood of Christ, who is our God, that
created us; our Master, that redeemed us; our Lord, that rules in us. Peter
also, 2 Pet. 2. speaks of the same men by way of Prophecy. And it could not
be spoken of the Father: for never any Heretic denied the Divinity of the
Father. Paul calls our Savior, God, Tit. 1.3. According to the commandment
of God our Savior. And surely, he that reads diligently the new Testament,
shall find God, or Lord, and Christ, to be used often reciprocally for each
other, as, 2 Cor. 5.20. Ephesians. 6.6. Romans 14.10, 11, 12. Luke 3.6. Act. 28.28.
Heb. 3.4. Jam. 1.1. 2 Cor. 2.16. 1 Cor. 9.21. Act. 16.31. with 34. Tit. 2.10,
13. 2 Pet. 1.1.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is God. Peter calls him God, Act. 5.3, 4. whom he
before had called the Holy Ghost; for reproving Ananias, for lying to the
Holy Ghost, he aggravateth his sin, by showing him what the Holy Ghost is: Thou
have not lied to men, but to God. Again, Act. 11.17. Forasmuch then as God
gave them the like gift, as he did unto us, who believed on the Lord Jesus
Christ: what was I, that I should withstand God? That it was the Holy Ghost,
whom he twice calls God, appears, by comparing this verse with the 15.
verse. The Holy Ghost gave them the like gift, as he did unto us. He fell on
these Gentiles, and gave them the gift of tongues, as he did to the Apostles,
and other Jews. The Apostle Paul likewise manifests the Holy Ghost to be
God, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. Know ye not, that ye are the Temples of God, and that the
spirit of God dwells in you: If any man defile the Temple of God, him shall
God destroy; for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are. Three times
does the Apostle call the Holy Ghost, God: Yea, that text does afford three
several arguments to confirm unto us the Deity of the Holy Ghost.

First, the Apostle proves the faithful to be the Temples of God, because the
Holy Ghost dwells in them; which argument were invalide, and of no force, if
that holy Spirit were not God. 2. The Holy Ghost dwells constantly in the
Faithful, as in one Temple. Three times is the word Temple used singularly. He
uniteth all the Elect in all the world in one, and so dwells in them all, as
if they all were but one, and yet so fully and comfortablely dwells in one,
as if that one were all; It being proper to God alone, to be so infinitely
boundless in his substance, as thus to fill all places. 3. We being the
Temples of the Holy Ghost, he is therefore God. It was unlawful to make
Temples of wood or stone, but to the true God. He therefore must needs be God,
who has so many, and such stately Temples as the faithful are. The Angel
Gabriel, Luke 1.35. showing that Christ should be conceived by the power of the
Holy Ghost, adds in the 37. verse: For, with God nothing shall be impossible.
Plainly manifesting, that the Holy Ghost, who was to effect this great work,
was God. Yea our Lord Christ manifestly affirms him to be God; Have ye not
read that which was spoken to you by God? saying, etc. Mat. 22.31. Was it not
the Holy Ghost who spoke by Moses, and by the Prophets, 2 Pet. 1.21. And
therefore the Scriptures, which were inspired by the Holy Ghost, are said to be
inspired of God, 2 Timothy 3.16. It is said of Cornelius, he was warned of God by
an holy Angel to send for Peter, Acts 10.22. which Angel is called an Angel of
God, Acts 10.3. Yet he, who sent to warn him, was the Holy Ghost, for so he
himself tells Peter, that he sent them, Acts 10.20. where you see, that the
Holy Ghost has twice the Name of God ascribed to him: yea, the Names of God
and of the Holy Ghost are often changed, 1 Cor. 14.2. He that speaks in an
unknown tongue, speaks not to men, but to God; howbeit, to the Spirit he
speaks mysteries, and not only in the New Testament, but in the Old, as Ezekiel
2.2, 4. Ezekiel. 11.1, 5. Number. 24.2, 4. and diverse other places. Thus Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, are absolutely, and definitively called God, without
limitation, addition, or correction of speech, (as Creatures are not) who
though three Persons, yet but one true ever-living God, of one and the same
substance. I, and my Father (says Christ) are one, John 10.30. One in every
thing, but in that wherein the opposition of relation distinguishes them. That
our Savior is one with the Father by identity of Essence, appears, 1. By his
own answer, John 7.29. I know him, for I am of him, and he has sent me. 2. By
the Jews accusation, for they did not challenge him for affirming himself to
be some Vicegerent or second Prince, but for making himself equal to God,
John 5.18. and that being Man, made himself God, John 10.33. which thing in
both places is justified, and maintained by our Savior. They are therefore one
in Essence, will, and action, not in Person, as the Holy Ghost is likewise one
with Christ; and therefore you have Christ appearing in a Vision to John, Rev.
1.13. and described by John in the beginning of all his seven Epistles to the
seven Churches, as the Person that writes to them, Rev. 2.1, 8, 12, 18. Rev.
3.1, 7, 14. Yet in the conclusion of all these seven Epistles, it was the Holy
Spirit of God, that speaks and writes thus to the Churches, and whom they
are commanded to hear: Let him that has ears hear what the Spirit says to
the Churches, Rev. 2.7, 11, 17.29. Rev. 3.6, 13, 22. Thus Father and Son are
one and the holy Spirit and the Son are one; yea, all three are one, 1 John
5.7.

CHAP. XII.
(...), or Lord, is a Name of God, ascribed to the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost.
(...), by which the Septuagint Translation and the New Testament usually
interpret the word Jehovah, which we translate Lord, Mat. 22.43, 44. And thus
there is but one Lord, 1 Cor. 8.6. Ephesians. 4.6. and the same Lord is over all,
Romans 10.12. 1 Cor. 12.5. Where, although the holy Penmen of the new Testament,
when they speak personally of the Father, in his relation to Christ, they
usually call the Father God, and the Son Lord: Yet when either they use these
words, God, or Lord, essentially, you shall find these Names often changed, or
used for each other, as Romans 14.6. Romans 14.11, 12: or if these Names be used
Personally, as when the Father, or Son, are spoken of apart, not only the
Son, but also the Father and Holy Ghost are so called; For this Name Lord is
common to all three Persons. For,

First, the Father is Lord. Thus Christ, as man, giving thanks to his Father,
said, I thank thee, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, Mat. 11.25. Luke 11.21.
And the Apostles in their prayer, Act. 4.26. The Rulers were gathered together
against the Lord, and against his Christ. And the Saints in their Doxologie,
Rev. 11.15. The Kingdoms of the world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord,
and of his Christ. Yea, Christ and Peter, in their Sermons, (citing that place
of Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said to my Lord, Mat. 21.44. Mar. 11.36. Luke 20.42.
Act. 2.32.) do ascribe this Name Lord to the Father and to the Son.

Secondly, the Son is Lord. He was so proclaimed by Angelical Heralds. By
Gabriel, an Angel of the Lord, before his incarnation, Luke 1.17. By another
Angel to the Shepherds, at his birth, Luke 2.11. where there is no less then
a whole Chore of this heavenly Host ascribe glory to God, and sing an heavenly
Hymn to his Majesty. He is likewise acknowledged so by Zachary, Luke 1.76.
by Elizabeth, Luke 1.43. by John Baptist, Joh. 1.23. Luke 3.4. and that from a
testimony of the Prophet Isaiah, which did prophetically proclaim him
Jehovah, Isa. 40.3. By Peter he is styled, Lord of all, Act. 10.36. But why do
I instance in more? Seeing that the holy Writers of the New Testament do five
hundred times at the least (as some more punctually have observed) ascribe this
Name to Christ.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is Lord, 2 Cor. 3.17. Now the Lord is that Spirit, and
where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. There the Holy Ghost is
styled Lord, and the Spirit of the Lord. He is Lord, of the same essence with
the Father and the Son; and yet the Spirit of the Lord, as he proceeds from
them both. And the next Verse may be read, The Spirit of the Lord, or, the Lord
the Spirit: which, diverse reading the new Translation according to the
Original, notes in the Margent. Again, the Apostle in his prayer (as I shall
more fully show hereafter) directed to the Holy Ghost, styles him Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 3.12. 2 Thessalonians. 3.5. Matthew likewise affirms that to be spoken of the
Lord by the Prophets, Mat. 1.22. which Peter affirms to be spoken of the
Holy Ghost by the Prophets, 2 Pet. 1.21.

Although therefore the Apostle says there is but one Lord, 1 Cor. 8.6. Ephesians.
4.5. and Jude calls him the only Lord, Jude 4. yet neither the Apostle Paul,
nor the Apostle Jude excludes the Father and the Holy Ghost from being Lord;
but they include them in the same Unity of the Essence, being equal in Power,
Majesty, and Glory; and are all the only Lord, though they be distinguished
in their Persons: yet the Unity and the Essence of their divine Nature, and
Power, is not divided.

CHAP. XIII.
Father is a Name of God, common to all three Persons, though usually ascribed
to the first.
FAther, is a Nanie we properly ascribe to the Lord: first, in regard of his
Creation of Men, and Angels, Luke 3. last, Job 38.7. secondly, in regard of his
gubernation of the World, Mat. 6.32. thirdly, in regard of his Regeneration of
his Church, and People, Isa. 64.8. Deuteronomy. 32.6. who is the cause of the being of
all Creatures, and the well-being of his Church: though analogically, and
improperly, it is given to these, who are under God the instruments of our
being, Ephesians. 6.2, 4. Col. 3.21. yet not properly are they to be esteemed
Fathers, as God is, Mat. 23.9. who is our heavenly Father, Mat. 6.9. Mat. 5.48.
where the word Father is not to be restrained to the first Person, as it is
when either all three Persons are expressed, as Ephesians. 2.18. Mat. 28.19. 1 John
5.7. Gal. 4.6. or when the first Person is conferred with the second, Gal. 1.3.
2 Cor. 1.3. Col. 1.3. but it is to be understood essentially of the Father, the
Word, and the Spirit.

Yea, the Name Father is not only essentially communicated to all three
Persons, but also Personally ascribed, in respect of us, either to,

First, the first Person, who is not only the Father of Christ, but also in
him our Father, Joh. 20.17. I ascend (says Christ) to my Father, and your
Father; to my God, and your God: which diminishes not, much less does it take
away Christ's Divinity, but shows the order that is in the three Persons. The
Father, who is first in order, and not in time, is usually called by Divines,
Fons Divinitatis and Operationis, the Fountain of Divinity and Operations;
yet their Divine Oeconomie does not show any inequality in Persons, but their
order in working. And again, Joh. 17.1. These things spoke Jesus, and lift up
his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the hour is came, etc. God is Christ's
Father after a more excellent manner then he is called our Father. He is his
Son, or the Fathers Son of himself, Romans 8.3. his own Son, or proper
Son, Romans 8.32. his only begotten Son, Joh. 1.14, 18. Joh. 3.16, 18. (as I
have showed.) And Indeed, Christ is an only begotten Son: first, according
to h^s Divine Personalitie, he was begotten of his Father only: secondly, in
regard of his humane nature, he was his mothers only begotten, he came from
her only: thirdly, in regard of both, he was an only Son, he having no
Brother: fourthly, because all that the Father has is his, Joh. 16.15. But we
are in and through him Children, by Creation, Regeneration, and Adoption. He is
a Son by nature, we by counsel, Jam. 1.18. Joh. 1.13. And surely, were there
no other argument, to prove the equality of nature of the Father, and of the
Son, this were sufficient to prove it, because he is the Fathers proper
Son, the Son of his own self, his begotten Son, his only begotten
Son. For he that is God, cannot properly beget any other but him that is God.

Secondly, the second Person, who although a Son eternally begotten of his
Father, and so not a Father in respect of God, yet to us he is an everlasting
Father, Isa. 9.6. and we are his children, by adoption and regeneration, Heb.
2.13. Joh. 1, 12. who may say, happily with the Apostle, complaining of his
former wretchedness, we were as men borne out of duo time, 1 Cor. 15.8.

Thirdly, The Holy Ghost is our Father; He, together with the Father, and the
Son, creates, regenerateth, and adopteth. We are by regeneration begotten of
God, 1 John 5.18. And, borne of the Spirit, John 3.6, 8. we are his Children,
Psalm. 34.10. and are taught of God, John 6.45. And therefore the Lord Jesus
being to send the Holy Ghost, who should teach them all things, John 14.26.
says, he will not leave them Orphans, John 14.16. Plainly showing, the
Holy Ghost should be their Father. Yea, so the Holy Ghost promises, 2 Cor.
6.16, 18. I will be a Father to you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters.
That he which makes this promise to us, is the holy Spirit, appears out of
the former verses: For we are to him, that makes this promise to us, Temples,
and he it is that dwells in us: Now it is manifest we are Temples of the
Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19. and he dwells in us, 1 Cor. 3.16.

Though these be three subsistences, or Persons, ye they be one in essence,
substance, or nature, and to us one Father, Mal. 2.10. O Lord, thou art our
Father (says the Church of God) Isa. 63.17. That this was spoken of all the
three Persons, is manifest out of the foregoing verses. 1. There was the
Father, who led them, and put his holy Spirit in them, Isa. 63.11, 12. and who
was afflicted in all their afflictions, Isa. 63.9. Secondly, there was the
Son, who is called the Angel of his presence, who saved them, Isa. 63.9.
Thirdly, there is the holy Spirit, who led them, Isa. 63.14. against whom they
rebelled, and whom they vexed, Isa. 63.10. Although these are three, yet but
one Lord, or Jehovah, and one Father. Who seeing he is our Father, let us carry
our selves to him as dutiful Children: for so he requires, Mal. 1.6. A Son
honors his Father, and a servant his Master: If then I be a Father, where is
mine honor? and if I be a Master, where is my fear, says the Lord of Hosts?

CHAP. XIV.
Most High is a Name of God, ascribed to the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost.
HIghest, or most high, is a Name of God, who is the most high over all the
Earth, Psalm. 83. last. and in the Heavens, Luke 2.15. Albeit there cannot be
two most High, which are essentially differing from each other; yet Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, which differ personally, have this Name ascribed to
them, who are one, and the same most High God.

First, the Father is the most High. So the Devil acknowledges, Luke 8.28.
And the Angel Gabriel professes, Luke 1.32.

Secondly, the Son is the most High. John Baptist, who was the forerunner of
Christ, is said to be the Prophet of the most High, to prepare his way before
him, Luke, 1.76.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is the most High. The Lord Jesus being to be conceived
(as we acknowledge in the Creed, by the powerful operation of the Holy Ghost,
the Angel answers Mary, who demanded of him, how she should conceive, that
knew no man, Luke 1.35. The Holy Ghost shall come on thee, and the power of the
most High shall over-shadow thee. Moreover, that which Isaiah calls a
rebelling and vexing of the Spirit, Isa. 36.10. and Steven, a resisting of the
Holy Ghost, Act. 7.51. and the Author to the Hebrews, a tempting, and grieving
him, Heb. 3.7, 9. the Psalmist affirms it to be a tempting and provoking the
most High, Psalm. 78.56. The Holy Ghost being most High, whom they tempted, whom
they provoked; Yea, he that inspired Balaam, was the Spirit of God. So Moses
shows, Number. 24.2. The Spirit of God came upon him, even him Balaam styles
the most High, Number. 24.16.

Oh, let us be glad, and rejoice in the Lord, and sing praises to his Name, who
is the most High, Psalm. 9.2. who is the most High for evermore, Psalm. 92.8.
Even to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, let u^ give praise.

CHAP. XV.
Lord God is a Name ascribed to the Father, to the Word, and to the Spirit.
LOrd God is a Name peculiar to him, who is the Supreme Majesty of heaven and
earth, 2 Kin. 19.19. Thou art the Lord God, then only. Though this Name be
given only to God, who is one: yet this one God is distinguished into three
Persons.

First, the Father is Lord God. Daniel praying to the Father, to be heard for
Christ's sake, Dan. 9.17. ascribes to him this Name of the Lord God, Dan. 9.3.
And the Angel Gabriel speaking of Christ's Oeconomicall Kingdom committed to
him, as God and Man, the Head and King of his Church, says, Luke 1.32. The
Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his Father David. Besides, the
Holy Ghost is often called the Spirit of the Lord God, as Isa. 61.1. Isa. 48.16.
Joel 2.27, 28. who was the Spirit of the Father, Mat. 10.20.

Secondly, the Son is Lord God. Thomas so acknowledged him, Joh. 20.28. My
Lord, and my God: the Angel Gabriel does so style him; for it was Christ, John
was to go before, Mar. 1.2. Lu. 1.76. who was to go before him, who was the
Lord God, Luke 1.16, 17. John so calls him. The Lord God of the holy Prophets
sent his Angel, Rev. 22.6. It was the Lord Christ who sent his Angel to John,
Rev. 22.16. Rev. 1.1. God promises to save Israel by the Lord their God, Hos.
1.6. That this was the Lord Jesus, is manifest; for whomsoever the Father
saves, he saves by Christ. No man comes to the Father, but by him, Joh.
14.6. neither is there salvation in any other, Act. 4.12. He was raised unto
Israel a Savior, Act. 13.23. Moreover, the Holy Ghost is called the Spirit of
the Lord God, Joel 2.27, 28. who was the Spirit of Christ, Gal. 4.6 Romans 8.9.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is Lord God. The Spirit which entered into Ezekiel,
Ezekiel. 2.2. Ezekiel. 11.1. and speaks by him, was the Lord God, Ezekiel. 2.4. Ezekiel.
11 5. He it was that spoke in and by the Prophets, Nehem. 9.30. Number. 11.29.
Act. 28.25. Act. 1.16. which by Zachary is so styled, Lu. 1.68. with Lu. 1.70.

So you may see, the only Lord God is the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost.

CHAP. XVI.
Lord God Almighty, is a Name ascribed to the Father, to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost.
LOrd God Almighty is a Name given to God, in regard of his protection over his
Church and people, and also of the destruction of his and their enemies. There
can be but one Lord God Almighty, but he is distinguished into three Persons,
or subsistences, which is so called.

First, the Father is Lord God Almighty, who with the Son and Holy Ghost is
usually so styled in the Revelations, Revel. 11.17. Rev. 15.3. Rev. 16.7. Rev.
19.6. I know some expound some of these places personally of the Father, others
expound them personally of the Son: But I rather take them essentially, as
spoken of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; neither is the Father only so
styled; But,

Secondly, the Son is Lord God Almighty, Rev. 1.8. (so Paguine renders it,
and also other Greek and Latin Copies. That this is spoken of the Son, the
words before and after show, it being interposed between a double description
of Christ: First, of his Names and Offices: Secondly, of his glorious Majesty
appearing to John in a Vision, as is laid down to us with its circumstances
from the ninth verse to the end of that Chapter.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is Lord God Almighty. So Paul shows, 2 Cor. 6.16,
17, 18. it being the Holy Ghost that there speaks: first, it is He, who is in
the faithful, as in his temple, 1 Cor. 6.19. secondly, He dwells in them,
Romans 8.11. thirdly, He likewise makes a Covenant, to be their God, and they
shall be his people, Jer. 31.33. with Heb. 9.15, 16.

Albeit the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are Lord God Almighty, yet
are they not three Lords, or three Gods, or three Almighties, but one Lord God
Almighty.

CHAP. XVII.
Great God, is a Name ascribed to the Father, to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost.
GReat God, is a Title peculiarly attributed to the Lord: He is a great God
above all gods, 2 Chronicles. 2.5. there being none so great a God as our God, Psalm.
77.13. Psalm. 86.8. even his enemies being Judges Ezra 5.8. who style him the
great God. This Name, some who deny the Lord that bought them (as Peter
speaks, 2 Pet. 2.7.) to be God, do peculiarly give to the Father, stiling
him, in opposition to the Son and Holy Ghost, the great God; when as they are
of one Power, Majesty, Glory, and Essence with him.

First, the Father is styled the great God by Daniel, Dan. 9.4. who prayed to
the Lord, the Father of our Lord, (as the son of Syrach speaks) Ecclus
51.14. who beseeches God to hear him for the Lords sake, Dan. 9.17.

Secondly, the Son is styled the great God by Paul, Tit. 2.13. looking for
that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and Savior,
Jesus Christ. First, the Lord Christ is that blessed hope; He is the hope of
Israel, Act. 28.20. and also him, in whom the Gentiles trust, Romans 15.12.
Secondly, (...) (as Zanch. Piscat. Beza show) is wholly and alone attributed to
Jesus Christ in the New Testament. Thirdly, if by great God should be
understood God the Father, and Savior only have relation to Jesus Christ;
then there should be a double Article in the Greek, to distinguish them: but
here is only one single Article, which points out one only subject, even
the Lord Jesus, to whom these belong. Wherefore, if Jesus Christ were not God
by Nature, but only by Office, as some blasphemously affirm, he had not been
a great God.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is styled a great God: so says the Psalmist; The Lord
is a great God, Psalm. 95.3. That this was the Holy Ghost, the Apostle shows,
by citing that following part of the Psalm, as spoken of him, Heb. 3.7. He is
the great God, whom he introduces speaking, which was the Holy Ghost.

But if this Verse be not spoken Personally of him, but essentially of God, yet
this Title is due to him, as he is one with the Father and the Son; and even
so in that and other places, (where the Name of God is taken essentially) it is
to be referred to him, together with the Father and the Son.

CHAP. XVIII.
Great King, is a Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
Great King, is a Title properly ascribed to the Lord; who is the blessed and
only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6.15. and is God
alone of all the Kingdoms of the Earth, 2 Kin. 19.15. Isai. 37.16. God
challenges this title, Mal. 1.14. I am a great King, says the Lord of Hosts;
yet this only great King, who is God alone of all Kingdoms, is,

First, the Father, he is a great King, Mat. 5. and has a great Kingdom, Mat.
26.29.

Secondly, the Son, he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 17.14. It is
his Name, Rev. 19.16. He is the King of Israel, Joh. 12.15. Zac. 9.9. Psalm.
45.5, 11, 13, 15. who has an eternal Throne, a Scepter, an Anointing, a
Kingdom, Heb. 1.7, 8. who reigns as a Conqueror, in regard of his
Victories, over Sin, Death, Hell, Antichrist, and all his enemies: It being
the honor of earthly Kings to rule over their Subjects with a golden Scepter,
to show their riches; But it is the honor of the Lord Jesus, to rule over his
enemies with a Rod of iron, Rev. 2.27. Psalm. 2.9. to manifest his power and
strength.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is a great King, Psalm. 95.3. with Heb. 5.7. as I
showed before, who appoints his inferior Officers in the Church, Act. 13.2.
Act. 20.28. and who makes Laws for his people, Act. 15.28.

Yea, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one King, Rev. 11.17. John treating
both of the Lord; and of Christ, does add, speaking as of one; He shall
reign. They have one Throne, which is confirmed unto us by the mouth of two
Evangelicall Prophets; the Prophet Isaiah in the Old Testament, and the
Evangelist John in the New.

First, Isaiah saw the Lord of Hosts sitting on a Throne, Isa. 6.1. whom in the
fifth verse he styles a King, which did send Isaiah to the people of the
Jews; which was not only the Father which did send Isaiah, but the Son
also, Isa. 48.16. and so John affirms, Ioh. 12. 40, 41. These things said
Isaias, when he saw Christ's glory, and spoke of him, yet the Holy Ghost also
sent, and spoke by him, Isa, 48.16. and Paul witnesses it, Act. 28.25. Well
spoke the Holy Ghost by Isaiah the Prophet.

Secondly, John describes Gods Throne, Rev. 4. Rev. 5. where is not only God
the Father, but also the Son our Redeemer, who is styled a Lamb, who is said
to be in the midst of the Throne, Rev. 5.6. even equal with the Father. And
the Lamb being there, the Holy Ghost also must be there. For the Holy Ghost,
called the seven Spirits, is the seven Eyes of the Lamb, Rev. 5.6. which is in
the midst of the Throne with the Father, and whose Throne it is with the
Father, Rev. 22.1, 3.

CHAP. XIX.
The God of Israel, was the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
THe God of Israel is a Name which the Lord is often pleased to assume to
himself, Isai. 45.3. and is so called of his Church and people, Act. 13.17. He
is so called in two respects. First, in regard of his love toward them, they
being his peculiar enclosure, taken out of the Commons of the world, Deuteronomy. 7.6.
Secondly, in respect of his service, which he expects from them, and they
willingly give to him. God will reign over the wicked in spite of all their
oppositions, Psalm. 99.1. But he rules over the faithful in his Church more
especially, that willingly offer themselves, Judge. 5.9. This title
distinguishes the true God from false, the Lord Jehovah from Idols and Devils.

This Name in holy Scripture is ascribed to,

First, the Father he is the God of Israel, Act. 3.12, 13. Ye men of Israel,
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, the God of our
Fathers has glorified his Son Jesus: The Father of Christ, was the God of
the Fathers of the Israelites, the God of Israel.

Secondly, the Son, he is the God of Israel. So the Angel intimates to
Zachary; Many of the Children of Israel shall John turn to the Lord their God:
And he shall go before him in the Spirit and power of Elias, Luke 1. 16, 17.
whom did John go before, but Christ, whom the Angel calls the Lord God of
Israel? Mal. 3.1. Mar. 1.2. Luke 1.76. Luke 7.27. who was also the King of
Israel, Joh, 12.13. The Prophet Zephany makes them equivalent one to the
other, Zeph. 3.15. And Ananias, an Israelite, acknowledges to Paul, the Lord
God of our Fathers has chosen thee. That this was the Lord Jesus Ananias
affirms, Act 9.17. The Lord (even Jesus, that appeared unto thee in the way)
has sent me unto thee; and Paul gives thanks to Christ for choosing him, 1 Timothy 1.12. Yea, the Lord Christ that appeared to Moses, and is called an Angel,
Act. 7.30, 34. who was the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3. styles himself the
God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, Exodus 3.6. He it was
that sent his Angel to John, who was the Lord God of the Prophets, Rev. 22.6.
which were of Israel, for so he affirms, Rev. 22.16.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is the God of Israel, he who spoke by the mouth of all
the Prophets, Luke 1.70. was the God of Israel, Luke 1.68. That this was the
Holy Ghost, is evident, 2 Pet. 1.21. 1 Pet. 1.11. Ephesians. 3.5. Act. 1.16. Act.
28.25. who spoke by the Holy Ghost, 2 Samuel 23.2. who was the God of Israel, 2 Samuel 23.3. The Spirit of the Lord being called the God of Israel.

And indeed, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which brought Israel out of Egypt
(as I shall show) is the God of Israel: He being their God, Exodus 20.2. that
brought them out of Egypt; Jehovah Elohim, Deuteronomy. 5.6. Exodus 20.2. The Lord thy
Gods, one Name of God being singular, and the other plural.

Thus you see, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost have the Names of God definitively
and absolutely predicated of them. And as Ireneus, who lived long before the
Council of Nice, observes in his third Book, Cont. Haeres. Cap. 6. Neque
Dominus, neque Spiritus Sanctus, neque Apostoli eum, qui non est Deus,
definitive and absolute Deu^ nominassent in aliquando nisi esset verus Deus.
Neither the Lord nor the Holy Ghost, nor the Apostles would have ever called
him God, which is not definitively and absolutely God, and unless he were the
true God. And indeed, he that is a diligent reader of the Scriptures, shall not
find any Name or Names of God ascribed to the Creature, without some addition,
limitation, or correction of speech: by which it may easily be discerned, that
they are not truly God, to whom when the Name of God is ascribed, yet is so
limited, is so restrained; seeing that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost is the God
of Israel. Oh let us give to the Lord alone, the honor due to his Name, and
let us conclude with the Psalmist, Psalm. 41. last. Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, from everlasting to everlasting, Amen, and Amen.

The second Book.
The Attributes of GOD are equally ascribed to the FATHER, to the SON, and to
the HOLY GHOST, in the Scriptures.
CHAP. I.
The Scriptures manifest the Son and Holy Ghost to be God, equal with the
Father, by ascribing to them equally with the Father, such Attributes as are
proper to God.
THese who have the incommunicable Properties of God, even as the Father has,
are truly God, equal with the Father.

But the Son and Holy Ghost have the incommunicable Properties (or
Attributes) of God, even as the Father has.

Therefore, the Son and Holy Ghost are truly God, equal with the Father.

The Major Proposition is evident, and needs no proof.

The Minor I shall prove by particulars, and shall show, that Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost are co-equall; and 1. One, 2. Eternal, 3. Omnipresent, 4.
Omnipotent, 5. Omniscient, 6. Incomprehensible, 7. Most wise, 8. Most free, 9.
Most holy, 10. Good, 11. Gracious, 12. True, 13. Living, 14. Glorious, 15.
Blessed Lord God: though distinguished from each other by their Personal
Relations, and Properties, as also by that Order, in which they co-worke.

CHAP. II.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are One.
TO be One, is most proper to God, Deuteronomy. 6.4. 1 Timothy 2, 5. 1 Samuel 2.2. Deuteronomy.
4.39. The Unity that is in the Godhead, is of all other the greatest; God
being especially one in essence: He is Unissimus, most one, as the Schools
speak. Though therefore the Father and the Son are distinct from each other
by their Relations, yet are they one, Joh. 10.30. yea, one in every thing, but
in that which their Relations distinguishes them. And as the Father and Son
are one, so likewise the Son and the Spirit are one. When it was Christ who
writes and speaks to the seven Churches, Rev. 2. Rev. 3. yet these writings
and sayings were from the Spirit. And therefore, though in the beginning, or
Preface, Christ is described as the writer, as the speaker; yet in the Epilogue
and conclusion of the same Epistles, the Spirit is introduced, as the Author
and inditer of them: He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says
to the Churches. Surely, the reason is, what Christ speaks, the Spirit
speaks: the Holy Ghost receives of Christ, and of the Father, and shows
unto men, Joh. 16.14, 15. They are one in Essence, Will, and Action; what the
one does, the other does likewise, Joh. 5.19. There are three that bear record
in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one, 1 John 5.7. As Relatives they cannot be one, but as they subsist in one and the
same essence, so they are one. Absolutely they therefore are one, though
relatively they are three. Neither are there (as Athanasius shows) three
Fathers, but one Father, Ephesians. 4.6. 1 Cor. 12.6. 1 Cor. 8.6. Not three Sons,
but one Son, 1 Cor. 8.6. 2 Cor. 11.4. 1 Cor. 12.5. Nor three Holy-Ghosts, but
one Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 11.4. 1 Cor. 12.4, 11. It is one and the same Spirit who
works all; and, Ephesians. 2.18. it is one Spirit by whom we have access in Christ
to the Father.

CHAP. III.
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are Eternal.
Eternity is an essential Property of God, and is incommunicable to a
Creature. First, some things there be, which have not a beginning, yet have an
end; as Gods Decrees, which he from all eternity decreed to be fulfilled in
time, Ephesians. 1.4. Tit. 1.2. 2 Timothy 1.9. Secondly, some things there are, which
have both a beginning, and an ending; as all sublunarie Creatures, except Man,
1 Pet. 4.7. Thirdly, some things there are, which had a beginning, and have no
ending, as Angels, Col. 1.16. Joh. 1.3. And the Souls of men, which likewise
had a beginning, Genesis 2.7. Zach. 12.1. yet are immortal, Mat. 22.30. Only the
Lord has neither beginning, nor ending; Time being the measure of the
Creature, not of the Creator. He inhabites Eternity, Isa. 57.15. His ways are
everlasting, Hab. 3.6. He is God from everlasting to everlasting, Psalm. 90.2.
He is not only before the Creature, but before the making of it; from an
everlasting before, to an everlasting after it: Or, if you will, God is not
only from everlasting to everlasting, in regard of himself, but also in
respect of his Church, and people. He is from everlasting before, by
predestination; to an everlasting after, by glorification. He is the King of
ages and times, 1 Timothy 1.17. ruling them, and disposing of them according to
his own will and pleasure. He is the King of Eterritie, Jer. 10.10. He is the
first and the last, and besides him there is no God, Isai. 44.6. Isai. 4.1.4.
He is the eternal God, Genesis 21.33. His Name is for ever, Psalm. 135.13. Thus,

First, the Father is eternal; and in this regard he is styled, he which is,
and which was, and which is to come, Rev. 1.4.

Secondly, the Son is eternal; he has the same title ascribed to him, which
is, and which was, and which is to come. Rev. 1.8. He is Alpha, and Omega, the
first and the last, Rev. 1.11. Rev. 22.13. Rev. 2.8. Rev. 1.17. Who is the
first, though not the first alone, because the Father is with him. He is the
beginning and the ending, Re. 22.13. He is the everlasting Father, Isai. 9.6.
who though born in Bethlehem, in regard of his humanity; yet in respect of his
Divinity, his goings forth has been from of old, from everlasting, Mich. 5.2.
Or as the Original will bear it, from the days of eternity. His Kingdom is
everlasting, Isai. 9.7. Luke 1.33. Rev. 11.15. His Throne is for ever, and
ever, Heb. 1.8. Psalm. 45.7. He is without beginning, or ending, Heb. 3.7. He
lives for ever, Rev. 1.18. Heb. 7.25. He is before all things, Col. 1.17, 18.
He is eternal life, 1 John 5.20. 1 John 1.2. As he is the Son of Man, he is a
Priest after the order of Melchizedeck, Heb. 7.15. But as he is the Son of
God, Melchizedeck is said to be like unto him, that abides a Priest
continually, Heb 7.3. The heavens and all other creatures shall fail, but his
years fail not, Heb. 1.12. Yea, the Jews knew that the Messiah must be
eternal, John 12.34. John the Evangelist proves the eternity of Christ.

First, because he had his being before any creature was created, 1 John 1.12.

Secondly, because he was begotten of the Father, Joh. 1.18. Joh. 3.16. he was
not created, not made as creatures are: and John Baptist shows Christ to be
after him, yet before him, Joh. 1.30. After him in his Humanity, yet before
him, in regard of his Divinity. Yea, the beloved Disciple John speaking of
Christ, he repeateth (was) four times, Joh. 1.1, 2. In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and that Word was God: The same was in the
beginning with God. He was, was, was, was; where can wicked blasphemers show he
was not?

Thirdly; the Holy Ghost is eternal. He is the eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14. and
the everlasting God, which gave Commandments by the Prophets, Romans 16.26. That
this was the Holy Ghost, is manifest; For he spoke and commanded by them, 2
Pet. 1.21. Ephesians. 3.5. Nehem. 9.30. Isai. 6.9, 10. with Act. 28.25, 26. 2 Samuel
23.2. he abides with the faithful for ever, John 14.16.

The Father the Son, and the Holy Ghost are consubstantiall, coeternall, of one
and the same Substance, Essence, and Nature, being one eternal Lord God, which
has being in, and by himself alone. There cannot be more infinites, nor more
eternals, then one; as God is, who is one in essence, though distinguished into
three Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; which are not before or after
each other, in regard of any prioritie of Nature, Honor, or Time, but only in
Order, who are before or after each other, only in order of subsisting, and
working. Thus the Father is before the Son in order, who is begotten of his
Father, and does nothing but what he sees the Father do, Joh. 5.19. And the
Father and the Son before the Holy Ghost in order, who proceeds from them,
Joh. 15.26. and who speaks not of himself, Joh. 16.13. but receives of the
Father, and of the Son, and shows that unto the faithful, Joh. 16.14, 15.
that neither is the Son before or after the Father in time, neither is the
HolyGhost after either of them, but being Relatives, are together by nature.

CHAP. IV.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are Omnipresent.
OMnipresency, is a property peculiar to God; he is ever with us, ever before
us, he always overseeth us, though our eyes see him not. His essence is
immeasurable. He fills all places, Act. 7.49. 1 Kin. 8.2, 7. Isai. 66.1. He
is a God at hand, and a God afar off, Jer. 23.23. God alone is every where,
Psalm. 139.8, 9. Amos 9.2, 3, 4. He is not in loco definitivo, in any place
definitively, as Angels are; much less is he in loco circumscriptivo, in any
place circumscriptively, as corporeal creatures are: But he is every where
present, whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain, 2 Chronicles. 6.18. He is in
Heaven, reigning in Glory and Majesty; He is in earth, ruling by his power and
providence; he is in Hell, tormenting with his wrath and justice.

First, in regard of all Creatures, the immensitie and greatness of God is
seen working in, and by them, Act. 17.28. and present with them; And so,

First, the Father is present in all places: his eyes are upon the children of
men; and he hears the prayers of his servants in all places, Joh. 16.23. he
dwells in th faithful, Joh. 14.23.

Secondly, the Son is present in all places: when he was on earth, in regard
of his humanity, was also in heaven, in regard of his Divinity, Joh. 3.13.
And, now, though ascend^d into heaven, in regard of his humanity, Act. 1.9,
10, 11. Act. 7.55. yet in regard of his Divinity, he is ruling by his power
both in heaven and in earth, and in all places under the earth, Phil. 2.10. The
Lamb who is in the midst of the Throne, and of the four Beasts and in the
midst of the Elders, Rev. 5.6. yet also walks in the midst of the seven
Golden Candlesticks, Rev. 2.1. yea, where two or three are gathered together,
he is in the midst of them, Mat. 18.20. he is with all the faithful to the
end of the world, Mat. 28.20. yea, he dwells in them, Ephesians. 3.17. And
surely, where God the Father is, he is in the unity of the essence with him,
Joh. 1.1. being in the Father, and the Father in him, Joh. 14.10, 11. filling
all things, Ephesians. 4.10. At his ascension, he ascends where he was before,
Joh. 6.62. he ascended with his body into heaven, where he was before in his
Deity, Joh. 1.18.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is likewise every where. David demands, whither
shall I go from thy Spirit? or, whither shall I go from thy presence? Psalm.
139.7. Thus the Spirit, with the Father and the Son, are present every where;
The Holy Ghost abides at all times, and in all places of the earth, in the
hearts of all faithful men, Joh. 14.16, 17. he remains amongst the people of
God, Hag. 2.5. He dwells in them, Romans 8.11. Romans 8.9. 2 Timothy 1.14. 1 Cor.
3.16. the believers are his Temples, 1 Cor. 6.19. this one and the same Spirit
works all gifts, and all graces, in all the faithful, 1 Cor. 12.11. 2 Cor.
11.4. and is in all the hearts of the faithful, Gal. 4.6. and abides in them
for ever, Joh. 17.16. 1 John 2.27. yea, the Spirit of the Lord fills the
World, and contains all things, Wisd. 1.7. he proceeds both from the Father
and the Son, Joh. 15.26. Joh. 16.7. and is with them, which are mutually at
the right hand of each other, Psalm. 110.1, 5. he being always where they are,
Psalm. 139.7. David joyneth Gods presence and his Spirit together, The Father
and the Son being one in another, Joh. 10.38. and he in both, and they in
him, Zac. 7.12. he is the Lambs eyes who is in the midst of the Throne, Rev.
5.6. he is before the Throne, Rev. 4.5. and, sent forth into all the earth,
Rev. 5.6.

That which Didymus Alexandrinus, in Lib. de Spirit. Sanct. writes, is
notable. Ipse Spiritus Sanctus, si una de creaturis esset, duntaxat
circumscriptam haberet substantiam, sicut universa, quae facta sunt: nam etsi
non circumscribantur loco and finibus invisibiles creaturae, tamen proprietate
substantiae finiuntur: Spiritus autem Sanctus, quum in pluribus locis sit, non
habet circumscriptam substantiam. The Holy Ghost, if he were a Creature, he
would have a circumscribed substance, as all Creatures have; for although
Angels and Spirits are not circumscribed with place, and bounds; yet they are
bounded with the propriety of their substance: but the Holy Ghost being in
several places, he has not a circumscribed substance.

Secondly, in regard of his Church, in which God rules more especially, as in
his Kingdom, and dwells more particularly, as in his own house, who is
above all, and through all, and in all, Ephesians. 4.6. And thus, without
appropriation to any Person, the Holy Trinity is over all, in regard of the
excellency of his glory; through all, in respect of the gifts of his Majesty;
and in all, in the presence of his dignity: Or, if you will, i^ reference to
all three Persons.

First, the Father is all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28. God is all in all; he is all,
as the first cause, and working in us all, as in the secondary causes.

Secondly, the Son is all in all, Col. 3.11. Christ is all and in all; and as
John Baptist speaks with a reduplication, Joh. 3.31. is above all, yea, he
fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.23.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is all in all, 1 Cor. 12.11. All these work, that one
and the same Spirit, dividing to every one severally as he will. He is the
incorruptible Spirit, that is in all, Wis. 12.1. all Believers receive one and
the same Spirit, 2 Cor. 12.4. There cannot be many infinites, which are present
in all places, for the infiniteness of one would hinder the infiniteness of
another, if they were not one and the same essence. But Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost being gresent in all places, are consubstantiall: in essence one,
and the same infinite Lord God, which works all in all, 1 Cor. 12.6. which
are mutually in each other (as Christ speaks) the Father in me, and I in him,
Joh. 14.11. and the Holy Ghost, who is the Spirit of the Father, Mat. 10.20.
Rom 8.11. and the Spirit of his Son, Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.9. Phil. 1.19. 1 Pet.
1.11. and proceeds from both, Joh. 15.26. and is of both, 1 Cor. 2.12. called
the Spirit of Elohim, Genesis 1.2. Genesis 41.38. Number. 24.2. to note the plurality of
Persons from whom he proceeds, being in both, even as the Spirit of man is in
man, 1 Cor. 2.11. and that not only in the Father, but also in the Son: and
therefore he is styled the eyes of the Lamb, Rev. 5.6. which is in the midst of
the Throne, and yet sent forth into all the earth: where therefore the one is,
the other is, and what the one works, the other works likewise.

Oh that men would consider this omnipresencie of God! to wicked men it might
be a Bridle, to stop their course in Sin, that they run not into all
excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4.4. to consider that God is present with them; he that
is their Judge, beholds them and their actions: and to good men it would be
also a Staff, to support them in all their soule-afflicting tentations; that
God knows their works, Rev. 2.1, 2. who is not unrighteous, to forget their
work and labor of love, Heb. 6.10.

CHAP. V.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are Omnipotent, or Almighty.
Omnipotency is an essential property of God, it is one of his Names, Genesis
17.1. He names himself to Abraham, the Almighty God; power being essentially
in God, he is not only called Almighty, but power, Mar. 14.62. He has power
and sufficiency of himself, and he gives power and sufficiency to all
things: there is a twofold power in God. First, an absolute power, whereby God
is of Himself able to do all things, that are not contradictorie, Mat. 3.9.
Secondly, there is an actual or limited power, a power which is limited by
Gods will, Genesis 19.22. The Lord can do more by his absolute power, then he
will do by his limited power. A creature may will more, then he can do; but
the Creator can do more then he will; he takes away, who can hinder him? who
will say unto him, what do thou? Job 9.12. what God is there in heaven, or
in earth, that is able to do according to his works, or according to his
might? Deuteronomy. 3.24. he does what he will in earth and in heaven, and none can
stay his hand, Dan. 4.35. He is Almighty.

First, the Father is Almighty, so we acknowledge in the Apostles Creed.

Secondly, the Son is Almighty, Rev. 1.8. That verse is put between a double
description of Christ: First, of his Names and Offices, in the Antecedent, or
foregoing verses: Secondly, of his glorious power and Majesty, as he appeared
to John in a Vision, in the subsequent and following verses. Besides, in Psalm.
68.14. he is styled Almighty, who led captivity c^^tive, and ascended on
high, Psalm. 68.18. That this was Christ, the Apostle clears, Ephesians. 4.8. he is
most mighty; so the Sons of Korah show, Psalm. 45.4, 6. That this was the
Lord Jesus, the Author o the Hebrews manifest, Heb. 1.8, 9. Isaiah calls
him the mighty G^d, Isa. 9.6. A creature, in regard of Gods deputing him to
some Office, may with some limitation, or addition, be called God, as Moses is,
Exodus 7. and Magistrates. Psalm. 82.1, 6. But El-Gibbor, the mighty God, is a
Name of nature, and never any Creature had that denomination ascribed to him;
he works all things that the Father works, Joh. 5.19. and is equal with
the Father, so he himself thinks, Phil. 2.6. and so his Father accounts
him, Zach. 13.8. he calls Christ his fellow, and we ought to acknowledge it,
for his power is Divine, 2 Pet. 1.3. supporting all things therewith, Heb. 1.3.
and is thereby able to subdue all things to himself, Phil. 3.21. who is above
all, Joh. 3.31. which promises to do whatsoever we shall ask in his Name,
Joh. 14.14. which he could not effect, if he were not Almighty.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is Almighty; that which Balaam calls a seeing of
the visions of the Almighty, Number. 24.4, 16. Moses manifests it to be the
inspiration of the Spirit of God, Number. 24.2. He is the power of the Almighty,
Luke 1.35. he measures the Waters in the hollow of his hand, and meteth out
the heavens with a span, and comprehends the dust of the earth in a measure,
he weighs the moun^aines in scales, and the hills in a balance, Isa. 40.12.
And that you may know that the Prophet speaks of the Spirit of the Lord, he
adds; Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord? Isa. 40.13. He it was that
moved on the Waters: first, Cherishing them, to make them fruitful: secondly,
Ordering them, to their places, Genesis 1.2. His Power is not shortened, nor
straightened, Mic. 2.6. It was his Power, by which the Apostles preached, and
wrought their Miracles, Romans 15.19. Through mighty signs and wonders, by the
power of the Spirit of God. If the Holy Ghost were not a Person distinct from
the Father, but only the Power by which he works, what a vain Tautologie
would it be of the Apostle to say, by the power of the Spirit; which, according
to their interpretation, should be, by the Power of the Power of God.

Although the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are Almighty, yet they are
not three Almighties, or Omnipotents, but one Almighty, or Omnipotent; one in
outward and essential Operations, one likewise in Essence, though three
distinct Persons; distinguished from each other by their Personal Properties,
and by their order and manner of working, in regard of their external and
common works.

Oh that we had in us, the Divine Principles of Faith, that we might fly unto
him for succor in all our wants, who is infinitely powerful; and might rest
on him for help in all our distresses, who is boundlessely gracious, both in
himself, and toward us, above all that we are able to ask, or think, Ephesians.
3. Then should we run with delight in the ways of Gods Commandments, and
neither start aside through secret fear, or fall back through open Apostasy.

CHAP. VI.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are Omniscient.
OMnisciencie is an essential property of God: There is not any creature that
is not manifest in his sight, Heb. 4.13. He sees all our works, Psalm. 139.2,
3. He hears all our words, Psalm. 139.2. and understands all our thoughts
afar off, Psalm. 139.4. Yea, the Psalmist does not only affirm, but also
prove this truth, Psalm. 94.9, 10, 11. He that planted the ear, shall not he
hear? God therefore takes notice of our words: He that formed the eye, shall
not he see? the Lord therefore knows our works: and as for our thoughts, the
Prophet adds, the Lord knows the thoughts of man, that they are but vain;
all Gods knowledge is wonderful. More particularly, the Lords Omnisciencie
appears in three particulars:

First, in regard of the heart of man, which he searches: Secondly, in regard
of the works of men, which he sees: Thirdly, in regard of future events, which
he beholds, and fore-sheweth.

First, in regard of the heart of man. The Lord sees not as man sees: for man
looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart, 1 Samuel
16.8. he knows the secrets thereof, Psalm. 44.21. it is his prerogative to be
the searcher of it, Jer. 17.9, 10. he only knows the hearts of the children
of men, 1 Kin. 8.29. where,

First, God the Father knows the heart: and therefore Paul showing that he
truly gloried in his infirmities, and afflictions, appealeth to God the
searcher of all hearts; The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ knows
that I lie not, 2 Cor. 11.3.

Secondly, God the Son knows the heart, Joh. 5.42. he professes it, and
Luke 11.39. he intimates this truth to the Jews; Paul calls him, as a
searcher of the heart, to witness, Romans 9.1, he knows what is in man, Joh.
2.25. he knew the Imaginations of the Jews, Joh. 5.42. Luke 6.8. Joh. 6.15.
Luke 7.39, 40. Mat. 22.18. Mat. 9.4. Mat. 12.25. Luke 11.17. Mar. 2.4. Joh.
5.45. he knew the thoughts of his Disciples, Mat. 16.8. Mat. 17.24, 25. Luke
9.47. Joh 6.61, 64. Joh. 16.19. Joh. 1.47. he searches the heart, and tries
the reins, Rev. 2.23. he knows the thoughts, motions, and inclinations
thereof.

Thirdly, God the Holy Ghost searches the heart, Wisd. 1.5, 6. Paul calls
him, as a searcher of the heart, to witness, Romans 9.1. he searches out the
deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. and therefore surely searches out the deep
things of man; he knew the heart of Ananias; (why says Peter) has Satan
filled thy heart, and why have thou conceived this thing in thy heart? Act.
5.3, 4. How did Peter know the secret fraud of Ananias, and of Satan's lurking
in his heart, but by the Holy Ghost, who revealed it to him? And therefore
Peter demands; how is it, that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of
the Lord? Act. 5.9. Yea, the Holy-Spirit of the Lord revealed to Elisha the
thoughts of Gehazi, 2 Kin. 5.26. and the secret Counsels of the King of Syria,
2 Kin. 6.12. even the words that he spoke in his Bedchamber.

Secondly, in regard of man, and all Creatures; the Lord knows all things:
all actions are manifest to him, Heb. 4.13. he knows all the Fowls of the
Mountains, and all the Beasts that feed thereon, Psalm. 50. 10, 11. his eyes
are in every place, Prove. 15.3. nothing can be hidden from him, Job 42.2.

First, the Father knows all things; he knows the wants of all Creatures,
Mat. 6.30. Where, though the word Father is taken essentially, and not
Personally, yet the Father, with the Son and Holy Ghost, is necessarily
understood: The Father knows who are his, electing them according to his
foreknowledge, 1 Pet. 1.2.

Secondly, the Son knows all things. Peter acknowledged it expressly, Joh.
21.17. Lord thou know all shings; yea all the Disciples confidently aver
it, Joh. 16.30. now we are sure thou know all things. The Woman of Samaria
calls forth her Neighbors to Christ to see him, that told her all that ever
she did, Joh. 4.29. he walks in the midst of the seven Golden Candlesticks,
seeing their ways, and knowing their works, approving them that were good, and
reproving them that were evil, Rev. 2.1, 2, 9, 13, 19. Rev. 3.1, 8, 15. he
knew the fruitless toyling of Peter, and he could direct him where he should
cast his Net, which shall enclose a multitude of Fish, so that their Net brake.
And he knew how to detain the Fishes together, till their partners came and
helped them, filling both their Vessels that they began to sink, Luke 5.5, 6,
7. he knew from the beginning who believed not, and who should betray him, Joh.
6.64.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost knows all things, Wis. 1.6, 7. he searches all
things, even the secret things of God, 1 Cor. 2, 10. If to know of himself the
secrets of man, is proper to God, Jer. 17.9, 10. much more, to know the secrets
of God, is proper to God only.

Thirdly, in regard of the prediction, or fore-shewing of future events. It is
proper to God alone certainly to know future events. God challenges the
Heathenish vanities, Isa. 41.23. Show the things that are to come hereafter,
that we may know ye are Gods; and again, the things that are coming, and
shall come, let them show unto them, Isai. 44.7. Things in their causes may be
fore-showne, not only by Satan, but also by men; Only the Lord can show what
things necessarily shall be, whose second causes are not. Yea, he can and only
does produce the causes, and alter them and their effects at his pleasure: So
true is that of Tertullian, Testimonium Divinitatis est veritas divinationis.
The Lord only, to whom all things are present, knows these things, that are
future in respect of us, and does reveal them to us, when the knowledge of
them is for our good; and so,

First, the Father does reveal and keep secret future things, according to his
holy will, and Divine pleasure. And therefore our Savior checking the
curiosity of the Disciples, demanding the time of his restoring the Kingdom
to Israel, says, Act. 1.7. It is not for you to know the times and seasons,
which the Father has put in his own power.

Secondly, the Son reveals future things, Mar. 13.23. he foretold his
Disciples all things; he fore-shewed the destruction of the City and Temple of
Jerusalem, and the manner of it, forty years before it was accomplished, Mat.
24.25. Luke 19. the Lord Jesus, who is the Lamb in the midst of the Throne,
can alone open the Book with seven seals, Rev. 5. which can manifest what
shall be to the end of the World, and can reveal it to his Church. He knew all
the answers and passages that men should give to his Disciples, and they should
meet withal, when he sent them, Mat. 21.2, 3: Mar. 14.13, 14. Luke 22.10, 11,
12, 13. he saw what should happen to himself, Joh. 18.4. who should betray
him, Joh. 13. Joh. 6.64. the hour of his death, Joh. 2. Joh. 19.28, 30. yea,
for this end he tells it to them, as he says, Joh. 13.19. that ye may know
that I am; a Name peculiar to God, Exodus 3.14. he testified what was foretold
in the Revelations, Rev. 22.16. Prophesies, which many of them were not
accomplished a thousand years after: as God, he knew all things; although as
man, he was ignorant of the day and hour of judgment, Mar. 13.32.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost reveals future things. The things that David spoke
before of, were spoken by the Holy Ghost, Act. 1.16. he foretold the general
famine, Act. 11.28. as also the binding of Paul, and the place where it must be
done; although Paul was many hundred miles distant from that place, and much
dissuaded from going thither, Act. 21.11. Act. 20.23. he it was that revealed
to Simeon, that he should not see death till he had seen the Lord Christ, Luke
2.27. he fore-sheweth the departure from the faith in the latter days, 1 Timothy
4.1. he testified before the sufferings of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.11. in the Old
Testament he told the Jews, and diverse other Nations, what should happen to
them, Nehem. 9.30. 2 Pet. 1.21. and in the New, did show all things to the
Apostles, what should come, Joh. 16.13.

Thus Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; First, do know the thoughts and hearts of
men; Secondly, do know all the ways and works of men, and of all creatures:
Thirdly, do know all things that are to come, and are one Omniscient Lord God,
equal in essence and Omnisciencie. Therefore, as the eye of the Lord is on us,
so likewise let the eye of our souls be ever fixed on him, for our comfort,
and for our direction. And let us pray, that he would guide us with his eye,
Psalm. 32.8. his eye directs men, when no eye beholds them; his eye often
terrifieth them, when no eye sees them; his eye comfort them, when no eye
looks on them; and his eye counsels them, when no other eye is nigh them.

CHAP. VII.
The knowledge of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is incomprehensible and
unsearchable.
GOD is incomprehensible, comprehending all things, not being comprehended
himself. Well might Zophar demand: Can thou by searching find out God? can
thou find out the Almighty, to perfection? it is as high as heaven, what can
thou do? it is deeper then hell, what can thou know? the measure thereof is
longer then the earth, and broader then the Sea, Job 11.7, 8, 9. he shows the
infiniteness of Gods knowledge to be every way past finding out. Yea, the
Apostle, that could sound as deep as any man, yet finds this bottomless
depth to be infinitely beyond his reach, and therefore breaks out into an
admiration. Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and of the
knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out? Romans 11.33. Job is driven to acknowledge his ignorance, and to
confess his error, that he uttered things that he understood not, things too
wonderful for him, Job 42.3. and David does tell us, that the Lords greatness
is unsearchable, Psalm. 145.3. and his knowledge too wonderful for him, Psalm.
139.6. his Majesty is infinitely transcending our knowledge; for we are rather
known of God, then do truly know God, Gal. 4.9.

First, the knowledge of the Father is unsearchable. Agur puts this as an
unanswerable question to all unbeleevers, Prove. 30.4. What is his Name, if thou
can tell? there being nothing but the nature and essence of God, but may be
comprehended and explained by some Name. No man knows the Father, but the
Son, and them to whom the Son will reveal him: which excludes, not the
Holy Spirit of God, for he searches out the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10.
but creatures only, Mat. 11.27. Luke 10.23. Joh. 1.18. yet the Disciples of
the Lord, and all true Believers see him and know him, Joh. 14.7. Joh. 6.46.
Joh. 14.9.

Secondly, the knowledge of the Son is unsearchable. Agur likewise puts
this as an unanswerable question to all unbeleevers, Prove. 30.4. What is his
Sons Name, if thou can tell? he has a Name which no man knows but
himself, Rev. 19.12. and those which have this knowledge revealed of the
Father, Mat. 16.17. None knows the Son but the Father, Luke 10.23. Mat.
11.27. whose love is described to his Church to be passing all knowledge,
Ephesians. 3.18, 19. who is yet according to that measure of grace given them of
God, both seen and known of them, Joh. 14.9. Joh. 10.14. and who are to grow in
the knowledge of him as they grow in grace, 2 Pet. 3.18.

Thirdly, the knowledge of the Holy Ghost is unsearchable; he is unknown to the
men of this world, who are out of Christ, Joh. 14.17. but he reveals himself
to his Church, 1 Cor. 2.12. who both see him and know him, John 14.17. and God
by him, 1 Cor. 2.12.

Thus Father, Son and Holy Ghost is one incomprehensible Lord God: whose
incomprehensible Majesty can be no otherways known of us, but as in his
Divine pleasure he has manifested himself in his Word. Oh that men would
therefore submit their reason to the Scripture, and believe these Divine
truths, of the incomprehensible God, which are discovered to them by the Word:
although the things which are there laid down, are not only beyond their
apprehensions, but seemingly contrary to their corrupted reasons; then would
not men wilfully oppose truth, which they are willingly ignorant of, but would
amongst other truths, see Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to be equal in the
Incomprehensibilitie of their Majesty and glory.

CHAP. VIII.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are only wise.
Wisdom is properly attributed to God; he is infinitely wise of himself,
neither is there any but he that is wise, Ecclus. 1.7. for, First, God is wise,
and most wise, yea, in himself only wise, Romans 16.27. 1 Timothy 1.17. Secondly,
he it is that gives wisdom to men, Dan. 2.21. Exodus 36.22. Jam. 1.6.

First, the Father is infinitely wise; he abounds toward us in all wisdom,
and goodness, Ephesians. 2.8. and, Secondly, he gives to us the Spirit of
wisdom, and revelation in the knowledge of himself, Ephesians. 1.7.

Secondly, the Son is infinitely wise; he is the only wise God and Savior,
Jude 15. Not as if the Apostle excludes the Fathet and the Holy Ghost, for
they are of one essence with him, but only all Creatures. First, the Lord
Jesus is wise in himself; he is called by the Name of Wisdom, Pro. 8. and
Counselor, Isa. 9.6. and no ma^ell, for in him are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3. They are hid in him with the Mantle of his
humanity. Secondly, it is he that makes us wise, 1 Cor. 1.30. and calls us
to that end, Prove. 8.5, 6, 7, 8. who, as he was the Son of God, was
infinitely wise; but as the son of man, he grew, as in stature, so in
wisdom, Luke 2.52.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is infinitely wise: First, in himself he is wise; He
is the Spirit of wisdom, Isa. 11.2. Exodus 28.3. Ephesians. 1.17. He needs no
Counselor, to teach or direct him, Isa. 40.13. Secondly, He gives wisdom to
the Saints, 1 Cor. 12.8. Job 32.8. He it is, that taught all the Prophets and
Apostles wisdom and knowledge, 2 Pet. 1.11. Ephesians. 3.5. 2 Pet. 1.21.

And it is remarkable, that S^lomon, Prove. 1.20. uses (Chochmoth) plurally,
and the Verbes singular. It may show unto us the wisdom of Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, who preach unto us in the Ministry of the Word, and are one
infinite wise God; who alone is wise in himself, and does only give wisdom
to the children of men.

CHAP. IX.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are most free, or unrestrained.
Freedom, or Liberty, is essentially proper to God: He is free from coaction,
free from servitude, free from misery; he does whatsover he pleases, Psalm.
115.3. 1 Cor. 12.18. and wills most freely what is good, Exodus 33.19. Romans
9.15, 18. Psalm. 135.6. He is not bound to any Stoicall necessity, as if he
could not work without secondarie causes: For in his ordinary works of
Creation, he wrought without them; and in the extraordinary works of
Providence, he often uses them not. He made grass to grow, without rain or
dew, Genesis 1.12. Genesis 2.5, 6. and he made light in the world, Genesis 1.3. three
days before there were Sun, Moon, or Stars, Genesis 1.14. And surely, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are most free.

First, the Father is free: The rule of all his actions, is his own will, Luke
10.21. Luke 12.32. Ephesians. 1.11. Mat. 11.26. Ephesians. 3.11.

Secondly, the Son is free, Mat. 17.26. Where our Savior intimates; If the
sons of Kings are free, much more the Son of the King of Kings. He
therefore has freedom in himself, and gives freedom to others, Ioh. 8.36.
The rule of his works, is his own will, Mat. 8.3. Ephesians. 4.7. Joh. 1^.24.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is free. He is the free Spirit, Psalm. 51.12. He has
none to direct or counsel him, Isa. 40.13. The rule of his working, is his
own will, 1 Cor. 12.11.

The Father, the Word, and the Spirit, are one most free God, who are bound to
none, and have all one Power, one Essence, one Freedom.

CHAP. X.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are essentially holy.
Holiness is an essential property of God, Psalm. 22.3. None being holy as
the Lord is, 1 Samuel 2.2. He has holiness in himself, and of himself, and
works holiness in us: yea, it is one of his Names. Luke 1.49. Isa. 57.15.
His Name is Holy, and the Holy one of Israel, Isa. 10.21. Isa. 41.20. He only
is holy, Rev, 15.4. The holiness that we have, is accidental in us, and we
have it from him, and we depend on him. But the holiness that is in the Lord,
is essential and independent.

First, the Father is holy; Christ in his prayer to him, calls him holy
Father, Joh. 17.11.

Secondly, the Son is holy; he is Gods holy one, acknowledged so by the
Prophet, Psa. 16.11. averred so by the Apostles, Act. 2.37. Act. 13.35.
affirmed so to be by the Angel, Luke 1.35. yea so confessed by the Devils, Luke
4.34. Mar. 1.24. Holiness is one of his Names, Rev. 3.7. he is the most holy,
Dan. 9.23.

Thirdly, the Spirit is holy, Luke 1.35. usually therefore called the
Holy Ghost, whose Name has often times a double article in Greek put before it,
whereas it is taken Personally for the blessed Spirit, the third Person of the
Trinity, but it is never so put, when as it is taken for his gifts, as Luke
3.21. Mat. 12.32. John 14.26. Act. 1.16. Act. 5.3, 32. Act. 7.51. Act. 13.2, 4.
Act. 20.23, 28. Act. 21.11. Act. 28.25. Ephesians. 4.30. Heb. 3.7. Heb. 9.8. Heb.
10.15. and in diverse other places of the New Testament, where it is in the
Original, (...), that Spirit, that holy One. First, to distinguish him from
created Spirits. Secondly, to show that holiness is proper to him, he being
holy in himself, and works holiness in us, in whom he dwells; Yea, Ephesians.
1.14. where there is also a double Article of the Neuter gender added to his
Name: yet to prevent that blasphemous opinion of the Arrians, and others, which
make him only to be a gift of God, and a Power of God, and no certain Person;
the Apostle in the Relative, changes the gender from the Neuter to the
Masculine: and our Savior does the like, Joh. 16.13. (...): and so likewise,
Joh. 15.26. and Joh. 14.26. the Article is Neuter, but (...) is Masculine.

The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are one holy Lord God. John
describes God three ways, Rev. 4.8 First, by his Attribute of Holiness.
Secondly, by his Names. Thirdly, by his Eternity. First, by his Holiness,
three times stiling him holy, as Isaiah does the like, ^a. 6.3. with an
Antiphony; one Angel answering another, they acknowledge one God, whom they
worship, to be holy; and yet it is by saiah and John thrice repeated, to show
(as some of the Ancient Fathers and others do think) the mystery of the
Trinity. Secondly, there are three Names, Lord God Almighty. Thirdly, his
Eternity is described, in respect of us, in relation to all sorts of times,
which is, and which was, and which is to come. First, which was, without
beginning. Secondly, is of himself, without cause. Thirdly, is to come; he
will be for ever, without end. Where Father Son, and Holy Ghost, one holy
eternal Lord God, are described. Moreover, Joshua speaking of God uses one
word singular, and another plural, and joyneth them with Elohim, Josh. 24.19.
Hucedoshim Elohim, which word for word, is (ipse Dii sancti) we cannot
significantly render it in English, but we translate it, he is a holy God;
where, in the unity of the essence, there is a plurality of Holy Persons.
First, the Father is holy. Secondly, the Son is holy. Thirdly, the Spirit is
holy; who are not three Gods, but one holy God.

CHAP. XI.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are good.
Goodness is an essential property of God, whereby he is every way good both
in himself and toward all his creatures, Psa. 33.5. Psa. 145.9. Psa. 119.68.
he is good, and does good.

The Lord is essentially, absolutely, immutably and perfectly good, without any
dependence on any other, and without any limitation of his goodness. The
creature is good, so far as in the being thereof it agrees with the will of
the Creator by participating of that goodness which God has given it, 1 Cor.
3.8. Jam. 1.17. There is not the least drop of goodness in man, or Angel,
which it has not from the Creator; God only is essentially good, and of
himself: and thus, there is no^e good but one, that is God, Mat. 19 17. Mar.
10.18. Luke 18.19. and as his essence is one, so his goodness is one; yet this
one God being distinguished into three Persons, every Person in the sacred
Trinity is Good.

First, the Father is good, who shows the exceeding riches of his grace in
his goodness toward us through Christ, Ephesians. 2.7.

Secondly, the Son is good; he is the good Shepherd, that gives his life
for his sheep, Joh. 10.1. and knows his Sheep, and is known of them, Joh.
10.14. Goodness is essentially in Christ, as he is the Son of God, for so he
is equal with him, Phil. 2.6. in Nature, as also in goodness, and all his
Attributes. But as he is the Son of Man, he received his goodness, Joh.
7.16. my Doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is good: he is the good Spirit, Nehem. 9.20. Psalm.
143.10. Wis. 12.1. yea, that which Matthew calls, Mat. 7.11. good, Luke
renders it the Holy Spirit, Luke 11.13. and the vulgar Translation joining
both together, reads it, the good Spirit.

Yet Father, Son and Holy Spirit, though three Persons, are but one good Lord
God, Mat. 19.17.

CHAP. XII.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are gracious.
THe Lord is infinitely gracious: he is alone truly gracious, Exodus 34.6. and
that in and of himself: he has nothing to move him thereto, but his own
will, Exodus 33, 19 Romans 9.13. Jam. 1.18. John 1.13. Our salvation d^pendeth on
his grace, in regard of the beginning, progress, and finishing of it; we can
no way enter into heaven, or set forward one step in that way, but as he
helps us up by the scaling-Ladder of his own graces to us in Christ; and
thus the Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by
force, Mat. 11.12.

First, the Father is infinitely gracious: he is exceeding rich in grace,
Ephesians. 2.7. and, according to the good pleasure of his will, he enricheth us
therewith, to the praise of the glory of his grace, Ephesians. 1.5, 6. and we are
to pray to him for grace: so does Paul, Ephesians. 1.2. Tit. 1.4. and John, Rev.
1.4.

Secondly, the Son is infinitely gracious, 1 Timothy 1.16. He shows forth all
long-suffering in Paul, for a pattern for them which should hereafter believe:
From his fullness we receive grace for grace, Joh. 1.16. He is a full Vessel,
his overflowings fills all his members. The Apostle tells us, of the
unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians. 5.8. 2 Cor. 8.9. And Christ tells Paul,
his grace is sufficient for him, 2 Cor. 12.9. who gives grace as he will, Ephesians.
4.7. To whom we are to pray for grace. So Paul, 1 Cor. 16.23. Ephesians. 1.2. and
John, Rev. 1.5. 2 John 3. and Peter, 2 Pet. 1.2.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is infinitely gracious. He is the Spirit of grace,
Zach. 12.10. Heb. 10.29. Luke 2.40. He is rich in grace, giving his grace as he
will, 1 Cor. 12.11. The will of men, and Angels, are limited by their power;
they may will more, then they can effect: but the Power of the holy Spirit, in
giving grace, and in all his works, is limited only by his will, Isa. 40.13.
1 Cor. 12.11. who gives grace as he will: To whom we are to pray for grace. So
does Solomon, Cant. 4.16. and John likewise, Rev. 1.4.

The Father, the Word, and the Spirit, are one only gracious Lord God.

CHAP. XIII.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are the true God.
TRuth is one of Gods Attributes, Exodus: 34.6. who, in opposition to Idols, is
always styled the true God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. the Stock being a doctrine of
vanity, Jer. 10.8. and the Image a teacher of lies, Hab. 2.18. God is true in
himself, Joh. 17.3. and true in his promises to his Church and people, Tit.
1.3. He cannot lie, Heb. 6.18. It is impossible for him to be mutable. He is
the God that changes not, Mal. 3.6. For, he is not as man, that he should lie;
nor as the son of man, that he should repent, Number. 23.19. Let God therefore
be true, and every man a liar, Romans 3.4. The best of Creatures, even Angels,
have in regard of themselves a mutabilitie of nature: some continued not in the
truth, Joh. 8.44. they kept not their first estate, Jude 6. These he charged
with folly, Job 3.18. These, that did continue, did not stand through their
own strength, but by virtue of Gods election of them, who are therefore called
the elect Angels of God, 1 Timothy 5.21. But the Creature is subject to vanity,
Romans 8.21. No Creature is essentially, absolutely, independently true; for so,
Truth is essentially proper to God: who is, first, immutably true in himself;
secondly, he is immutably true, in respect of his gifts and graces, which he
bestows on his Church and people.

And thus, first, every Person of the Deity is true in himself.

First, the Father is true in himself. Christ tells the Jews, He that sent
him is true, Joh. 7.28. He is the only true God, Joh. 17.3. The word (only)
in that place restrains not the Subject, but the Predicate. You have the word
(only) twice so used in one Verse, Jer. 32.30. Again, he that believes on
the first Person only, excluding the Son and the Holy Ghost, believes not
rightly on the true God, but is an Antichristian, 1 John 2.22, 23.

Secondly, the Son is true in himself. He, with the Father and the
Holy Ghost, is the true God, 1 John 5.20. where Christ is called the true God.
He is Truth, 1 John 14.6. It is one of his Names, Rev. 3.7.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is true. He is Truth, 1 John 5.6. 1 John 2.27. and
therefore of the same essence with the Father and the Son, who is the true
God, and is Truth.

Secondly, all the three Persons are immutably true, in their gifts and graces;
all the gifts of God being without repentance, Romans 11.29.

First, the Father is immutably true, in regard of his gifts and graces: In the
Father of Lights there is no variableness, nor shadow of change, Jam. 1.17.
Where, if you take the word Father either essentially, or personally, this
Truth stands firm, That the Father is immutably true, in regard of his gifts
and graces.

Secondly, the Son is immutably true, in regard of his gifts and graces, Rev.
3.7. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8. He
is the true and faithful witness, Rev. 3.14.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is immutably true. He is the Spirit of Truth, Joh.
14.17. Joh. 15.26. who will guide us into all truth, Joh. 16.13. The word which
the Holy Ghost speaks, must needs be fulfilled, Act. 1.16.

The Father, the Word, and the Spirit therefore are one true God; who is true
in himself, and immutably true in all his Promises to his Church and people.

CHAP. XIV.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are one living God.
LIfe is essentially proper to God, Deuteronomy. 32.40. He only has immortality, 1 Timothy 6.16. He has his life and essence of himself, and is therefore styled,
him tha^ lives for ever, Dan. 4.34. The Creatures have their being from him,
who is their Creator, their preserver, Act. 17.28. In him they live, and move,
and have their being. The Lord is the Savior of all men, 1 Timothy 4.10.
preserving their corporal life, and delivering their bodies from danger; and
also preserving the Spiritual life of his Saints, to his heavenly Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.18. and delivers not only their bodies, but also their souls from
spiritual death, and eternal destruction.

And surely, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost have life.

First, the Father has life, Joh. 5.26. he is the living God, Mat. 16.16. Joh.
6.69.

Secondly, the Son has life in himself, Joh. 5.26. Life indeed was given to
him, as he was a Mediator of his Church; but in him is life, Joh. 1.4. and
that of himself, as God; and therefore Christ, who is Jehovah, (so Isaiah
calls him) swears as he lives, Isa. 45.25. with Romans 14.10.11. Job
acknowledges, that his Redeemer lives, Joh. 19.25. yea, he is the living God,
for the faithful are the Church of the living God, 1 Timothy 3.15. but the Church
is Christ's, Cant. 2.16. Cant. 6.3. Ephesians. 5.27. He is life, Joh. 14.6. and our
life. Col. 3.4.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost has life in himself; he is the incorruptible Spirit,
Wisd. 12.1. he is the living God: for the faithful, who are said to be the
temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19. are said to be Temples of the living
God, 2 Cor. 6.16. Because the Holy Ghost, who is the living God, dwells in
them, as in his Temple. The Spirit is life, Romans 8.10. First, he is the life of
the soul, regenerating it; Secondly, he is the life of the body, quickening it,
and raising it up, Romans 8.11.

Thus the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, is, Jer. 10.10. the living
God, (Hu Elohim Caiim) which we cannot express in English: there being one
word singular, and another plural joined with Elohim, a word of the plural
number, (ipse Dii viventes) Hu, or He, there is the unity: Elohim Caiim,
living Gods; there is the plurality of Persons: life being essentially proper
to the Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost; who, though three persons,
yet are but one living God.

CHAP. XV.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are glorious.
Glory, as also Life, Wisdom, Truth, Goodness, Holiness, etc. are the
essence of God. These in creatures are accidents, and qualities; but in the
Creator, in whom there are no accidents, but whatsoever is in him is his
essence: these therefore are his essence. Moses desires to see Gods glory,
Exodus 33.18. the Lord answering tells him, Exodus 33.20. Thou can not see my
face: for there shall no man see me, and live; intimating, that his face, or
essence, or glory, are all one; and so it is in all other of his Attributes.

Glory belongs only to God, to whom we are to ascribe it as most due, yea,
only due, Math. 6.13. 1 Timothy 1.17.

There is in God, both a Personal and an essential glory.

First, there is in God a Personal glory; as, First, the Fathers glory, is
to beget the Son, Joh. 17.5. Secondly, the Sons glory, is to be begotten
of the Father, Joh. 1.14. and to be equal with him, Phil. 2.6. Thirdly, the
Holy-Ghosts glory, is to proceed from both, and to be equal with both.

Secondly, there is in God an essential glory, which is not appropriated to
any Person of the Deity, but is common to all three Persons: and thus glory
is taken two ways;

First, improperly, for that worship and honor which the Church of God ascribe
to him, both by praying to him, and praising of him, which is the same with our
gloryfying of God; and of this God speaks, Isai. 42.7. I will not give my
glory to another; but of this hereafter.

Secondly, more properly, for that excellent Nature that is in God, who is
glorious in himself, and also glorious in his gifts and graces, which he
gives to his Church; this is essentially proper to the Father, to the Son,
and to the Holy Ghost.

First, the Father has glory in himself, and gives glory to his Church; he
prepares a kingdom for the faithful, Mat. 25.34. and it is his good pleasure
to give it them, Luke 12.32. he is the Father of glory, Ephesians. 1.17.

Secondly, the Son has glory in himself, Joh. 2.11. Mat. 19.28. Joh.
12.41. Jude, verse 24. and he gives glory to the faithful, Joh. 17.22. Joh.
14.2. and he is the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost has glory in himself, who both prepares glory for
the faithful, and also prepares the faithful for glory, and is the Spirit
of glory, 1 Pet. 4.14.

The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are one glorious Lord God, who has
glory essentially proper to him, and does give grace and glory to the
faithful, Psalm. 84.11. who is styled, First, the God of glory, Act. 7.2. in
regard of that glory which he has in himself, and of himself: Secondly, the
King of glory, Psalm. 24. in regard of that glory he gives to his Church.

CHAP. XVI.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are blessed.
Blessedness is an essential property of God, who has blessedness in
himself, and of himself, being free from all evil of all sorts whatsoever,
and abounds with all kind of Good; he perfectly knows, and certainly
enjoys his own blessedness; he, to and for himself, is sufficient, and
needs no help of any, Psalm. 16.2. Job 22.3. Job 35.6, 7. Romans 11.35. Psalm.
50.7, 8.9, 10.11, 12. God is debtor to none, men and Angels owe all that they
have unto him.

He is the blessed God, 1 Timothy 1.16. 2 Timothy 6.15.

First, the Father is blessed for evermore, 2 Cor. 11.31. so the high Priest
acknowledged him, Mark 14.61.

Secondly, the Son is blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. the children of the Jews
so acknowledged him, Mar. 11.9, 10. yea, (says the Psalmist) the Nations shall
call him blessed, Psalm. 72.17. so Paul, Tit. 2.13.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is blessed. Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his
place: or, as the Original will bear it; the blessed glory of the Lord, etc.
Ezekiel. 3.12. I know, that some refer this place to Christ, as spoken more
peculiar of him; others, to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: but I rather think
that acclamation to be given especially to the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of
glory, 1 Pet. 4.14. whose Divine work on the Prophet is twice mentioned almost
in the same words both immediately before, and immediately after this
acclamation, Ezekiel. 3.12, 13, 14. Then the Spirit took me up, and I heard
behind me a voice of a great rushing, saying, Blessed be the glory of the Lord
from his place; I heard also the noise of the wings of the living creatures
that touched one another, and the noise of the wheels over against them, and a
noise of a great rushing: so the Spirit lifted me up.

Thus Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one and the same blessed Lord God:
though the Son has his personalitie from the Father, that begets him,
Heb. 1.5. and the Holy Ghost has his from the Father, and the Son, from whom
he proceeds, Joh. 14.26. Joh. 15.26. yet the Son and Holy Ghost are God of
themselves, and have their blessedness (as being of one essence, substance,
and nature with the Father) of themselves, even as the Father has, who are
mutually in each other, Prove. 8.30. the Father in the Son, and the Son in
the Father, Joh. 14.11. Joh. 10.38. and the Father and the Son are in the
Spirit, Zach. 7.12. and the Spirit in them, 1 Cor. 2.11. even as the Spirit of
of man is in man: being most absolutely happy in action and contemplation. To
whom let us give praise, and say with the Psalmist, Blessed be the Lord God,
the God of Israel, who only does wondrous things, and blessed be his glorious
Name for ever, and let the whole earth be filled with his glory, Amen, and
Amen, Psalm. 72.18, 19.

The third Book.
The Works of GOD are equally wrought by FATHER, SON, and HOLY GHOST.
The first Section.
CHAP. I.
The Scriptures manifest the Son and the Holy Ghost to be God, equal with
the Father, by ascribing to them, equally with the Father, such Works as are
proper to God.
HE that works such Works as God alone works, is God, equal with the
Father in Power and Glory.

The Son and Holy Ghost work such Works as God alone works:

Therefore the Son and the Holy Ghost are God, equal with the Father in
Power and Glory.

The Works of God are of two kinds:

First, there is Opus ad intra, vel personale; the Personal Works of God,
which are begun by, and terminated in some Person of the Deity; as, the
generation of the Son by the Father, and the procession of the Holy Ghost
from the Father and the Son; these are simply personal Works, whereby the
Persons are distinguished from each other: These, some call Works of Relation.

Secondly, there is Opus ad extra, vel essentiale; Essential Works of God:
and they are such, as are common Works of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, and are terminated in the Creature: where it is the Scriptures use,
to attribute these common Works sometimes to one Person, and sometimes to
another; whereby they hold forth unto us the Unity both of Nature, and of
Working, which is in the Trinity of Persons.

These Essential Works are undivided, according to that known Axiom; Opera
Trinitatis ad extra, sunt indivisa: None of them does ought for us, without
all. My Father works hitherto (says Christ) and I work, Joh. 5.17. where,
as Ch^ysostome observes, He says not, My Father works, and I subminister to
him; but he using the same word of the Father and of himself, says, My Father
works, and I work; whatsoever things the Father does, the Son does
likewise, Joh. 5.19. and so the Holy Ghost, who speaks not of himself, but
whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, Joh. 16.13, 14. Hence every
Person Works of himself, according to that causall power which he
exercises; where there is not any pre-eminence, nor difference in dignity,
but an unity, and identitie of one and the same cause; they having one
Essence, there is therefore one operation; That therefore which the Father
does, the Son does; and what the Father, and the Son do, the Holy Ghost
likewise does, (as I shall show) in these Outward, Common, and Essential
actions.

Yet as there is a distinct order of subsisting, so they have a distinct manner
of working; and they being three Persons, they work in three distinct manners.
The Holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son, usually works from
them both; He shall receive of mine, says Christ, and show it unto you; all
things that the Father has, are mine, Joh. 16.14, 15. The Son having his
personalitie from the Father, usually works from the Father; The Son does
nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do, Joh. 5.17. Thus each
Person Works according to the manner of his subsisting, which manifests a
diversity of Persons, but no difference, or inequality of power; For they
Work not as Instruments one to another, but as Co-workers, tanquam principium
a principio, as one Principle from another, in regard of their Persons: but as
one, and the same Principle in regard of their Essence; where the Son, in
regard of his Essence, he is God of himself, and works of himself, and so
does the Holy Ghost likewise. But as the Son is begotten of the Father, so he
works from the Father.

These words (...), and (...), by, and in, which are ofttimes found in
Scripture, to express the Personal working of the Son, and Holy Ghost, yet
are not so used, as if the Son, and the Holy Ghost were subordinate
Instruments to the Father: but as one and the same efficient cause. For these
Prepositions you shall find indifferently prefixed to the Works of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

First, ((...)) or (by) is used in respect of,

First, the Father, Gal. 1.1. Paul an Apostle, not of men, nor by men, but by
Jesus Christ, and God the Father, Ephesians. 1.1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ by
the will of God, Col. 1.1. 2 Timothy 1.1. yea, the Father no Instrument of
choosing Paul to be an Apostle, but an efficient cause, Jude says Jude 1. we
are sanctified by God the Father; yet he is not the Instrument, but the cause
of our Sanctification. And Christ is said to be raised up by God the Father,
Romans 6.4. and God is faithful, by whom ye are called to the fellowship of his
Son, 1 Cor. 1.9. yet the Father is no Instrument, but a cause of Christ's
Resurrection, and of our Vocation.

Secondly, the Son, Joh. 1.3. Heb. 1.2. Col. 1.16. Ephesians. 3.9. Gal. 1.1.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost, Act. 11.28. 1 Cor. 12.3. yet in none of these places
is it used to note any instrument, but an efficient cause.

Secondly, the Preposition ((...)) or in, is placed likewise before the working
of,

First, the Father, as, Act. 17.28. Ephesians. 3.9. 1 Cor. 8.6. 1 These. 1.1. 2 These.
1.1. Romans 11.36. 1 Pet. 1.5.

Secondly, the Son, Joh. 1.4. 1 These. 1.1. 2 These. 1.1. Ephesians 1.1. Phil. 1.1.
Col. 1.14. Col. 2.11.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost, Jude 20. Ephesians. 4.30. Ephesians. 1.18. 1 Cor. 12.3. 1 Cor.
12.3. 1 Cor. 6.11:

By these and the like places, you may see the weak and sandy foundation, on
which they build their faith, who make the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost not
only to be unequal, but unlike in Nature, because the Apostle says, one God
of whom, 1 Cor. 8.6. one Lord by whom, 1 Cor. 8.6. and one Spirit in whom, 1
Cor. 12.3, 4, 13. For this different manner of speech does not argue a
different Nature in them, of whom he speaks, as they blindly collect, and
fondly imagine; For the same reason would prove the Father to be infeirour to
the Son, and it would make him his instrument, as in some places above
specified.

The Son, and the Holy Ghost are not instruments to, but co-workers with the
Father, they work together: First, in these common works, which extend
generally to all of all sorts, and kinds; Secondly, in these special works,
which reach especially to the Church of God.

First, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost work together in these Common
works, which extend generally to all, of all sorts and kinds, both of good and
bad, as namely, First, Creation: Secondly, Preservation or providence. First,
Universally, in regard of all creatures in all places of the World; Secondly,
particularly, in regard of the Sea; Thirdly, illumination, or working of common
gifts and graces in all men; Fourthly, judging the earth.

The Scriptures do manifest the Son, and the Holy Ghost to be God, equal
with the Father, by ascribing these works to them equally with the Father.

CHAP. II.
First, Creation is a work of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost.
CReation is a work of God alone, He stretches out the heavens alone, and
spreads abroad the earth by himself, Isa. 44.24 He alone spreads out the
heavens, and treads upon the waves of the Sea, Job 9.8. He is the builder and
maker of heaven, Heb. 11.10. and He laid the foundations of the earth, Job
38.4. yea, Isaiah represents the Lord speaking in his own person, I am the
Lord, and there is none elfe, I form the light, and I create darkness: I make
peace, I create evil, I the Lord do all these things, Isa. 45..6, 7, 8.

This our Creator is one in Essence. Have we not all one Father? has not one
God created us, says Malachi, Mal. 2.10. and yet there are three Persons that
did create us.

First, the Father creates; thus we acknowledge in the Creed, the Father to be
Creator of heaven and earth; and the Apostle affirms: Of him are all things,
1 Cor. 8.6. and by him are all things, Heb. 2.10.

Secondly, the Son creates; and thus the Apostle says, by him are all
things, 1 Cor. 8.6. all things were made by him, and without him was not any
thing made, that was made, Joh. 1.3. the heavens were made by him, Psalm. 33.6.
they are the work of his hands, and he laid the foundations of the earth, Heb.
1.10. by him were all things created that are in heaven; and that are in earth,
wither they be Thrones or Dominions, or Principalities or Powers, all things
were created by him, and for him, Col. 1.16. the World was made by him, Joh.
1.10.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost creates; He made man, Joh. 33.4. he made the body of
Christ out of the seed of the Woman, Mat. 1.18. Luke 1.35. he garnisheth the
heavens, Job 26.13. he moved upon the waters, Genesis 1.2. cherishing them, and
making them fruitful, and fit for the creatures to live in. By the Word of the
Lord were the heavens made, and all the Host of them by the Spirit of his
mouth; so it is according to the Original, Psalm. 33.6.

Thus the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost did create, and build the
World: and therefore God; for so the Apostle affirms, he that built all
things is God. Heb. 3.4. Yea, it is observeable, that Moses treating of the
creation, uses the word Elohim, and no other word above thirty times
together, Genesis 1. to show that all the three Persons did work this great work;
besides, in creating man, how plainly is the plurality of Persons in the
unity of the essence set forth, Genesis 1.26. and God said, (there the Noune is
plural, ard the Verb is singular) although after the Verb is plural; Let us
make man after our Image, and after our likeness; (is) and (our) surely note a
plurality of Persons. Besides, how absurd a thing would it be to imagine God,
if but one Person to speak to himself, and yet in the 27. verse. it is he made
man in his own image, to point forth to us the unity of his Essence.

I know the Jews object diverse ways against this.

Object. 1. That in the Scripture one man speaks plurally of himself: as,
First, Bildad, Job 18.2.3.

Sol. But he speaks not only of himself, but his other two friends;
Secondly, Absalom, 2 Samuel 16.20. but he speaks not only of himself, but of
his people and Army; Thirdly, Daniel, Dan. 2.36. but Daniel does speak of the
three Children that were his companions together with himself: Fourthly, Cant.
1.3. But the Church, although one, yet the members are many, 1 Cor. 12.12. and
as she is one body, she speaks singularly, but as she is many members, she
speaks plurally.

Object. 2. That God spoke after the manner of Kings.

Sol. First. That kind of speech was not then in use, as Abon-Ezra notes on
Genesis 29.27. Moreover in the examples of Kings speeches in the Scripture, there
is not the like, as, Genesis 14.21. Genesis 20.9. Dan. 2. Dan. 3. Dan. 4. Dan. 5.
Dan. 6. 2 Chr. 36.23. Ezr. 1.2. Ezr. 7. or in any King of Israel, or of Juda:
after ages brought in this custom among Kings.

Secondly, if the Lord would at any time have spoken plurally, it would have
been especially when he gave his Law: where although then he manifests the
plurality of Persons, Exodus 20.2, 5, 7, 10, 12. and uses the word Elohim
plurally, yet he speaks in the singular number, Exodus 20.2, 3, 5, 6, 7.
Thirdly, Kings do speak plurally, because they are public Persons, and
represent the whole Kingdom, and act by the advice of their Councels;
Fourthly, Kings do not use the singular and plural promiscuously, as the
Scripture does of God.

Object. 3. That God did speak to the Angels.

Sol. 1. God spoke to them, in whose Image man was to be made: but man is not
said to be made in the Image of Angels, but in the Image of God.

Secondly, the Angels did not make man, but God.

Thirdly, the Angels were not called in for advice: the Lord neither had, nor
did need any Counsel, Isai. 40.13. for he works all things after the
Council of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11. yet the Scripture treating of God as the
Creator, and maker of all things speaks not only in this place, but in
diverse other places plurally, as Eccles. 12.1. Remember thy Creators; Heb. and
Psalm. 49.2. Let Israel rejoy e in his Makers: Heb. Isai. 54.5. thy Makers are
thy Husbands, yea, Eloah, which is seldom used singularly, yet Job 35.10. it
is so used, and a word of the plural number is joined with it; Non^ says,
where is God, my Makers: God, there is the Unity: my Makers, there is the
Trinity.

And surely, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, if they did not with the Father,
make the World, they were subject to that imprecation which Jeremie teaches
the captived Jews, and delivers it in the Caldean Language, (although the
whole Book beside is written in H^^rew) that the Jews might answer the
Caldeans in their own Language, when they tempted them to worship God that
mad^ not the Heavens, Jer. 10.11. Th s shall ye say to them, The Gods which
made not the He^vens, and the earth, shall perish from the earth, and from
under these heavens. Woe therefore unto them that strive with their Maker,
Isai. 45.9. who count that their glory, which is their shame, Phil. 3.19.
namely, that they can contend with their Maker, and fight against the Deity of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, who together with the Father, did make them.
These are they which deny the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2.1. These bring on
themselves swift destruction.

CHAP. III.
The Works of Providence on the dry Land, are wrought by the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost.
PRovidence is a work of God, whereby he preserves and governs all his
Creatures, ordering them, and all their actions to his own glory. It requiring
the same power to preserve, as it did to create. He who is the Creator of all,
he is the Owner of all, Psalm. 50.11, 12. Psalm. 24.1. he that is the great
Housekeeper of heaven and earth, he provideth for all, Psalm. 104.28. they wait
on him for food, Psalm. 145.15, 16. he gives them their meat in due season, he
opens his hand, and satisfies the desire of every living thing; he is the
preservrr of men, as J^b styles him, Job 7.20. and the Savior of all, as Paul
shows, 1 Timothy 4.10. as Job therefore speaks: Ask now the Beasts, and they
shall teach thee, and the Fowls of the air, and they shall tell thee: or
speak to the earth, and it shall show thee, or to the Fishes of the Sea, and
they shall declare unto thee, who knows not in all these, the hand of the
Lord has wrought this? Job 12.7, 8, 9. where, in all the long controversy
between Job and his three friends, the Name Jehovah is used only there; even
when Job speaks of the Lords giving life, and being to all Creatures, and of
his preserving his life, and being, which he has given them; where though this
Jehovah, who alone provideth for all, is one; yet there are three Persons which
do distinctly work according to their personal order, in all the works of
providence, both, First, on the dry Land, as also, Secondly, on the broad Sea.

First, Gods providence is seen in the Works on the dry Land, and that in
regard of all the three Persons.

First, the Father provideth for us; He knows what things we have need of,
Mat. 6.32. he feeds the Ravens, ^loatheth the Lillies, and cares for man,
Mat. 6.26. Luke 12.24. etc. and gives good things to them that ^^ke, Mat.
7.11. and still works in regard of his providence, Joh. 5.17. preserving men
from danger.

Secondly, the Son, he provideth for us; He upholdeth all things by the Word
of his power, Heb. 1.34. by him all things were created, and do consist, Col.
1.16, 17. he does for us whatsoever we shall ask, Joh. 14.17. he works
always in regard of his providence, Joh. 5.17, 19. pro^ecting us, Mat. 23.34.
and preserving us from danger, Rev 3.10. Jude verse. 1.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost, he provideth for us; he prospered Zerubbabels
bulding, Zac. 4.6, 7, 8. he governed the Apostles in their journies: he sent
Philip to the Eunuch, to preach Christ to him at that time, when he was reading
of Christ in the Prophet Isaias, Act 8 29, 33, 35. he directed Paul to preach
the Gospel in some Countries, and suffered him not to preach in others, Act.
16.6, 7. Simeon to whom the Holy Ghost revealed, he should not dye, till he had
seen the Lord Chist, was directed by the Holy Ghost to go then into the
Temple, when Christ was there, Luke 2.27. he governs the faithful, Romans
8.14. and suffers them not to live after the flesh, but after his direction,
and guiding, and he works alwais in regard of his providence, both in
renewing of the Creatures. Psalm. 104.30. by producing a new generation of them,
as also in preserving men from danger, Psalm. 143. the good Spirit of the Lord
leads us.

Providence is the undevided work of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, and is equally competent to all the Persons in the holy Trinity:
and is not to be attributed principally to one Person, and less principally to
another; there being the same and equal Power, Wisdom, Will, and Operation,
of all, as Christ himself witnesses; My Father works hitherto, and I work,
Joh. 5.17. whence you may easily collect, the Father and the Son are
Coessentiall, and Cowarkers, and that in works of Providence, not only on the
Land, but also (as I shall show) on the Sea.

CHAP. IV.
Ruling the Sea is a Work of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost.
GOds providence is seen in every thing, the Lord is wonderful in all his
works, Psa. 98.1. Psa. 39.14. but especially is his overruling providence in
the great Waters, and he is wondrously wonderful in the Sea, Psalm. 107.24, 25.
both in the first making of it, causing the Waters to gather on heaps, Genesis
1.9. He shuts it up with doors, and bars, Job 38. He lays up the deep
as in a treasure-house, Psalm. 33.7. he gives stays and bounds to it, causing
the small sand to bound that, which if he command, shall break down Rocks, and
Mountains, Job 38.10.11. he for the drowning of the world, can open the
Fountains of the great deep, Genesis 6. making the Waters to overflow the earth.
as in the first Creation, and he can with a violent Wind, keep back the Sea,
and make it dry Land, Exodus 14. that Israel may pass through, Psalm. 78. Psalm.
106.

It is the Lord alone that rules the Sea, and stilleth the noise and Waves
thereof, Psalm. 65.7. he binds up the Sea in swadling-hands; Job 38.9. God
swadleth the Sea as easily as the Midwife does the young Infant. Now this Work
is not a Work of one Person alone, but of all three.

First, the Father binds the Waters as in a garment, Prove. 30.4. with the
Clouds above, and the Sands beneath, compassing them in.

Secondly, the Son quieteth the Sea, as a man would quiet an unrulie Child,
by commanding it to be silent, Mar. 4.39. or as one would tame an unruly Beast,
by putting a bridle into its mouth, (...), be thou with a bridled mouth, so the
word signifies; thus Christ puts a bridle into the mouth of the Sea, that
it can rage no more: where you may see effects both of his Humane as also of
his Divine Nature. First, of his Humane Nature, in sleeping in the Ship.
Secondly, of his Divine Nature, rebuking the wind, and the Sea, and they obey
^im.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost measures the waters in the hollow of his hand, Isa.
40.12. even as a man would measure a spoone-full of water. That this is the
Holy Ghost, the words following show: Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord?
Isa. 40.13.

The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost therefore are equal in ^ower,
Majesty, and Glory, and work together on the Land, and on the Sea; who are
one God, and rule all things by his providence, according to his own will,
Dan. 4.35.

CHAP. V.
Illumination is a work of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
ILlumination is a work of God, who works not only saving graces in the
hearts of his Elect, but also common graces in the hearts of good and bad; who
distributeth these his gifts according to his own will Heb. 2.4. He works
all his pleasure, Isa. 46.10. What his soul desires, that he does, Job 23.13.
in all places acting whatsoever he will, Psalm. 135. Dan. 4.33. Yea, the Lord
does not only what he will, without resistance, Psalm. 115.3. Romans 9.19. but he
makes his own will, in all works, of his divine dispensation, the rule of
his actions, which is proper to God alone. And thus,

First, the Father gives gifts to all; secondly, enlighteneth all with common
illuminating gifts, Jam. 1.17. thirdly, working all according to his own will
and pleasure, Mat. 11.26. Luke 10.21. Ephesians. 1.11.

Secondly, the Son gives gifts to men freely, Ephesians. 4.10. Joh. 15.5.
secondly, He enlighteneth all with common illuminating gifts, Joh. 1.9.
thirdly, He works all things according to his own will, Luke 5.13. Joh.
17.24. Joh. 5.21. Joh. 10.28. Ephesians. 4.7.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost gives gifts to men freely, 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10, 11.
secondly, He enlighteneth all with common gifts and graces, as he did Bezaliel
and others, Exodus 31.3, 4, 5. Exodus 28.3, 4. Exodus 35.31. It is a work of the
Spirit of God, to have skill to work in gold, and in silver: yea; it is his
work, that Saul can prophecy, and govern Israel, 1 Samuel 10.6. 1 Samuel 11.6.
thirdly, He gives his gifts to men as he pleases, dividing them to all
severally as he will, 1 Cor. 12.11.

There being one and the same Will in the Father, and the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, the same Power, are the same God in essence; what therefore the one
wills, the other wills: it is one and the same God, which works all in
all, 1 Cor. 12.6. and deals to every man his measure of gifts, Romans 12.5.

CHAP. VI.
To judge, and punish the World, is a Work of the Father, of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost.
TO Judge the World, and to punish those that offend the Supreme Majesty, is
the Work of God, who is the Judge of all the World: Genesis 8.25. There is but
one Lawgiver and Judge, Jam. 4.12. So Tremelius, and the Vulgar read it. He
judges particular men on the earth and he it is, which at the general
Judgment, which is called Gods day, 2 Pet. 3.12. judges the quick, and the
dead; Neither is there any that can deliver out of his hand, Deuteronomy. 32.39. and
if he work, who shall let it? Isa. 43.13. Where,

First, the Father judges the World, and punishes wicked men therein, Amos
4.10. I overthrew some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah; Patrem hic
loqui, and de filio dicere. Eusebius. lib. 5. de Demonstra. Evan. cap. 23. It is
the Father, who speaks of his punishing Israel with sin-revenging judgments,
even as the Son punished Sodom and Gomorrah. For although the Father is said
to judge no man, Joh. 5.22. we must not think (as Calvin observes, that the
Father sits idle, and does nothing; For he works hitherto, Joh. 5.17. But
this is spoken ex Hypothesi. He does not simply deny the Fathers judging the
earth, but speaks according to them to whom he directed his speech; He
denies the World to be so governed of the Father (as the Jews thought) which
did separate the Son from the Father: whereas the Father, as he made the
World by his Son, Ephesians. 3.9. so he judges likewise the world by his Son,
Act. 17.31.

Secondly, the Son judges the World, and punishes wicked men therein, Psalm.
72.4. He threatened to cast Jezabel into a bed, and those that commit
fornication with her into great tribulation, Rev. 2.23. He rebukes, and
chasteneth those that he loves, Rev. 3.19. He breaks his Enemies with a rod
of Iron, and dasheth them in pieces, like a Potters Vessel, Psalm. 2.9. when he
is angry, they perish from the way, Psalm. 2.12. He it was that reigned fire and
brimstone from heaven on Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 19.24. The Lord rained from
the Lord, fire and brimstone out of heaven; where Jehovah a Name of Gods
Essence, is there used Personally for the Father, and the Son. Yea, God the
Father speaking of this act, twice relates it in the same manner, as Moses
does; I overthrew some of you, (...) God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, Amos
3.10. Again, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and the neighbor Cities,
says the Lord. Jer. 50.14. Lo, God the Father relating, and God the Son
acting the destruction of these Cities. Moreover, in the Creed we acknowledge
Christ to be the Judge of the quick, and of the dead, whith the Scripture
likewise clears. For the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with his
mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, 2
These. 1.7, 8. and Paul speaking of this Judgment Seat, Romans 14.10. calls it
the Tribunal Seat of Christ, before whom we must appear to give an account;
yet in the 12. verse, he says, we must give an account to God; the Lord Jesus
being God as well as man; and 2 Cor. 5.10. speaking of the Judgment Seat of
Christ, and the terror thereof, calls it the terror of the Lord, verse. 12.
calling Christ God and Lord in these places, who, as he is the Son of Man, he
has this Work committed to him, Joh. 5.27. but he being the second Person of
the Trinity, and God equal in power and glory with the Father, so he has
this power of himself, as the Father has.

Thirdly, the Holy-Chost judges the World, and punishes the wicked therein.
The Spirit of the Lord gathers the unclean Creatures together, to punish the
enemies of the Church, Isai. 34.16. He that is a Comforter to the Elect, is a
Reprover, and Convincer to the World, Joh. 16.8. They that resist the
Holy Ghost, do it by gainsaying his Word, not by frustrating his Work; for
he convinces the World, either to conversion, or confusion. He punished
Ananias by Peter, Act. 5.5 and Elymas by Paul, who is then expressly said to
be full of the Holy Ghost, Act. 13.9, 10. He casts these Sinners, that do
despite unto him, Heb. 10.29. into eternal punishment. He that blaspemeth the
Holy Ghost, shall never be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come,
Mat. 12.32, 33. Mar. 3.29. Surely, there is not the like said of the Father, or
of the Son; yea, our Savior says the contrary of sins committed against
himself; not as if the Holy Ghost were greater then the Father, or the Son,
but only equal with them in Majesty, and in glory; This Sin is not only
against his Person, but against his operation, and working; It being a sin
against the light of illumination, which he terminatively works in them. A
sin against the Father, is remitted by the blood of the Son, which washes
away all sin, 1 John 1.7. and a sin against the Son, is done away by the
work of the Spirit, who applies the Merrits of Christ to every penetent
Soul, by faith, purifying their hearts, Act. 15.9. but if the sin be against
the Holy Ghost, and against his Works, by falling away from his graces, Heb.
6.4, 5. by grieving this holy Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. and by maliciously opposing,
and blasphemously doing despite to the Spirit of grace, Heb. 10.29. All hope of
obtaining pardon is quite cut off; for there is no fourth Person to cure this
Apostatizing relapse; and the Work cannot be wrought backward: for the Spirit
proceeds from the Father and the Son, in regard of his Personalitie,
works also from them both, who also begin that Work, which he terminateth,
which he perfecteth in us. Now the Spirit works neither by the Father, nor by
the Son, (as the Son is God, though he works by him, as I shall have
occasion to show, as he is the Son of man;) wherefore, where the Spirit
applies not the blood of Christ, there is no remission of sins; for there is
neither faith nor repentance wrought in that man's heart by the Spirit of God,
who terminateth, and perfecteth those graces; which also the Father and the
Son works with him, in the hearts of every true believer. This sin
therefore is also against the Father, and the Son, and not only against the
Holy Ghost; but because it is more immediately against his work; therefore it
is said to be against the Holy Ghost, who together with the Father and the
Son, punishes this Apostasy, by giving up such a wretch to his own hearts
lust, and by delivering him up to a reproba^e sense.

Thus Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are coworkers in this Work, namely, in
judging the earth, and in punishing the World; which the Lord does manifest,
when he was about to cast Adam and Eve out of Paradise; for God says, the man
is become like one of us, Genesis 3.22. which cannot be spoken, where there is but
one Person; again, in the destruction of Babel, and confusion of Languages,
the Lord says, Genesis 11.7. Come ye, and let us go down, and let us confound
their La^guages: where the Father speaks to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.
Besides, confusion of Languages is no work of the Creature, but a Work proper
to God alone; which is spoken in the plural Number, Let us go down, and let
us confound them; and yet to show the unity, it is Jehovah who is one, did
scatter and confound them, Genesis 11.8, 9. Moses relating that action in the
singular Number, which God himself speaks of plurally; it being the work of
one God in three Persons to effect this Work; Moreover, the Psalmists phrase
is remarkable, Psalm. 58.11. Jesh, Elohim Shophedim, (est dii judicantes, word
for word) one word singular, and another plural is joined with Elohim, a word
of the plural number, intimating the unity of that one God in Essence, and
Trinity of Persons that judge the earth.

Oh that men would sing Halelujah, and give praise to ^od for his work! And
surely, the first time that Hal^lujah is used in the Old Testament, is, Psalm.
104. last, wh^re consuming of sinners is mentioned; as in the New Testament, it
is first used in, Rev. 19. where the destruction of Antichrist, that man of
sin is foretold. Thus you may see, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost
is that one God that effects these Works, which extend Generally to all.

The second Section.
CHAP. I.
The Works of God, which do concern the Lord Jesus, the Head of the Church,
were wrought by the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
AS the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost did effect these common Works,
which extend generally to all; so also they effect these special Works, which
reach only to the Church of God, which are of two sorts; for, First, they are
such Works which God alone works, in regard either of Christ, the Head of
the Church: Or, Secondly, of the Church, which is the Body of Christ.

First, these Works which are wrought, in regard of Christ the Head of the
Church: as namely, First, Christ's Incarnation, Secondly, his Attestation:
Thirdly, his Vocation: Fourthly his miraculous Opperations: Fifthly, his Death
and Passion, for the sins of the World: Sixthly, his Resurrection: Seventhly,
his Assention were wrought by the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

The Scriptures do manifest the Son, and the Holy Ghost, to be God equal
with the Father by ascribing to them these Works equal with the Father.

CHAP. II.
Incarnation of the Word, was a Work of the Father, of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost.
THe Incarnation of the Word, is a Work of God: it is inchoative* an
Essential Work of God, common to the whole Trinity; though terminative, it
is terminated, perfected, and consummated in the Son of God, whose Personal
Work, it was to be made flesh. Joh. 1.14. and to have two Natures, Divine, and
Humane united in one Person; who, as he was the Son of God, was eternally
begotten, of his Father; but as he was the Son of man, he was borne of a
Woman in the fullness of time. Gal. 4.4. To us a Child is borne, Isai. 9.6.
and therefore man, to us a Son is given of God, and so he is God.

The efficient cause of Christ's Incarnation, is the whole Trinity; God sent
him, Joh. 3.34. He raised up this great Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18.15.18. the Lord
pitched this Tabernacle, and not man, Heb. 8.2.

First, the Father prepares a Body for him, Heb. 10.5. He sent his Son, made
of a Woman, Gal. 4.4. Mat. 10.40. After all his Servants, he sent unto them his
Son, saying, they will reverence my Son, Mat. 21.37. Mar. 12.6. Luke 20.13.
and our Savior tells us, he that honors not the Son, honors not the
Father that sent him, Joh. 7.23.

Secondly, the Sone, which as God, made all things, Joh. 1.3. made also his
own Body; for he emptyed himself, and took on him the form of a servant,
Phil. 2.7. He took not on him the Nature of Angels, but took on him the form
of Abraham, Heb. 2.15. Here are two Natures in Christ; First, the Nature,
emptying himself, and assuming: Secondly, the Nature taken, and assumed; He
took not on him the Nature of Angels, he was no created Spirit, as they are;
but he took on him the Seed of Abraham: and therefore surely, he was, before
he took this Nature of man on him and so he testifies of himself, Joh. 8.58.
He took part of our flesh and blood, Heb. 2.14. He made himself partaker of
that which was ours, that we might more easily take part of that which was his.

Thirdly, the Holy-^host formed his body; This the Evangelist affirms, Mat.
1.18. so the Angel foretold to Mary, Luke 1.35. and likewise tells Joseph,
Mat. 1.20. and we acknowledge in the Creed, that he was conceived by the
Holy Ghost.

Thus the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost equal in Power, and glory are
one, and the same efficient Cause of Christ's Incarnation, which was terminated
in the second Person; they wrought the Mantle of his Humanity which he put on;
who continuing that he was, is made that he was not. And indeed fit it was that
he, by whom man was crea^ed, should restore, and as it were recreate man, Joh.
1.3.4. Col. 1.16. Thus was the Maker of the earth, made man on the earth. He
that was the brightness of Glory, took upon him the vileness of our Nature.
The Lord Jesus, who was in the fo me of God and equal with God, took on him
the form of a servant, Phil. 2.6, 7. and made little lower then some of his
own Creatures, Heb. 2.7. He that was infinitely more excellent from all
Eternity then Angels, made himself a little while inferior to Angels, that
he might make us like unto Angels, Mat. 22. Oh that we had the tongue of Men
and Angels to sing forh his praise, who thus humbled himself, that he might
exalt us; that he to whom the Angels minister, Mat. 4. and do worship, Heb.
1.6. for our sakes should as it were leave the Mansions of heaven, and take up
his first Lodging in a Stall, and be crowded in a Manger, and swadled in a few
rags; such was the riches of his grace toward us, that though he were rich,
yet for our sakes he became poor, that we through his poverty, might be rich,
2 Cor. 8.9.

CHAP. III.
The Attestation, or the Witness hearing of the Messiah, was the Work of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
THe attestation of the Word, that he was the Messiah of the World, was a Work
of God. Fit it was, the Son of God should receive testimony from God; he
received not testimony from men, Joh. 5.31. God bare witness that he was the
Savior of the World; Angels and holy men bare witness of him secondarily, as
Gods Messengers to us; but God is that witness, on which our faith must
depend, Gal 1.8. If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is
greater; this is the witness of God, which he has testified of his Son,
Joh. 5.9. And surely, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, bare witness
to us of the Messiah.

First, the Father bare witness of him; So the Lord Christ assures us, Joh.
5.37. The Father which has sent me, has borne witness of me, Joh. 8.18. He
testified of him at his Baptism, Mat. 3.17. and at his transfiguratio^, Mat.
17.5.

Secondly, the Son indeed, as man, had no power to bear witness of
himself, Joh. 5.13. yet as God, he testified of himself, Joh. 8.18. and did
justify his own testification, Joh. 8.16, 17, 18. who, together with his
Father, witnessed that he was the Messiah, Joh. 4.26. Joh. 5.17. Joh. 10.25.
and that God was his Father, and he his Son, Joh. 5. Joh. 6. Joh. 10. yea,
the Lord Jesus tells the Jews, Except ye believe that I am, ye shall dye in
your sins; where the Lord styles himself, I am, a Name peculiar to God,
Exodus 3.14. and tells the Jews, they must believe it, unless they will dye
eternally. Let these that fight against the Divinity of the Lord that bought
them, seriously weigh this, and other places where he styles himself thus,
who say that Christ never professed himself to be God, or took any Name of
God, on him.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost bare witness of Christ; so he tells his Disciples:
He shall testify of me, Joh. 15.26. He shall receive of mine, and shall show
it unto you, Joh. 16.14. and the Apostles show the Jews, that the Holy Ghost
did bear witness of Christ, Act. 5.32. who bare witness of him at his
Baptism, by descending on Christ, Mat. 3.16. Luk 3.22. Joh. 1.33. and after
Christ's ascension, by dessending on the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, Act.
2. Act. 8. Act. 10. Act. 19.

There are three that bear record in Heaven: the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost, and these three are one, 1 John 5.7. not only one Witness, but
one God; which Text of Scripture, because it is a notable Pilate to steer the
Ship of the Church, in sailing between the Rocks of Arrianisme, den^ing Unity:
and of Sabellianisme, opposing the Trinity; the ^nemies of the truth have
therefore endeavored to destroy it: rasing this Text and others out of the
Scriptures. Thus the Arrians did corrupt this too, and other Texts, even as
Jerome complains, who notwithstanding, cites this place against them: so
does Fulgentius and Epiphonius; yea, Cipryan, in Lib. de unitate Eccles. who
lived before Arrius, rehearses it: and Athanasius cited it against Arrius in
the Nicene Council, (as Junius observes:) and it is to be found in the most
Ancient Copies, both Greek and Latin, and is so suitable to the matter the
Apostle treats of, and so fitly answering the eight and ninth Verses of the
same Chapter, and so consonant to the word, that there is no reason to think
this an addition to the Canon of the Scriptures.

CHAP. IV.
The Vocation of Christ to the Office of a Mediator, was a Work of the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
THe Vocation of Christ to his Mediator-ship, and the sending of him to preach,
was a Work of God alone. The Lord Jesus being to offer himself a Sacrifice
for the sins of the World, (wherein he was both Priest, and Sacrifice)
glorified not himself, to be made an High Priest, Heb. 5.3. as man, he took
not this Office on him; for no man takes this Honor on him, but he that was
called of God, as was Aaron, Heb. 5.4. as he was the Son of Man, he was
called of God, an High Priest, Heb. 5.10. but as God, being one with the
Father, and the Holy Ghost, so he voluntarily undertook this Office; the
efficient Cause of this Act, was the whole Trinity.

First, the Father sent him to preach; our Savior speaking to the Jews,
says, My Doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me, Joh. 7.16. He made him an
high Priest, who said, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee, Heb.
5.5. who was called of God, an high Priest after the Order of Melchizedeck,
Heb. 5.10. where it is observeable, that Christ as man, is said to be a Priest
after the Order of Melchizedeck, Heb. 5.6, 10. Heb. 6.20. Heb. 7.17. but as
Christ was the Son of God; so Melchizedeck is said to be made like unto him,
a Priest continually, Heb. 7.3.

Secondly, the Son of God made himself of no reputation, Phil. 2.7. He
voluntarily undertook this Office, for so he testified: For this cause came I
into the World, that I should bear witness unto the Truth, Joh. 18.37. Lo, I
come to do thy will, O God, Heb. 10.8.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost sent him. He was led by the Spirit into the
Wilderness, Luke 4.1. and returned in the power of the Spirit unto Galilee,
Luke 4.14. and was sent by the Spirit to preach the Gospel to the poor, and
anointed by him, with gifts without measure, Luke 4.18. Act. 10.38.

Thus there is one inseparable, and undivided Working of the Father, the Son,
and Holy Ghost, as there is one insepparable, and undivided Nature of them.

CHAP. V.
Christ's power as man to work Miracles, was a Work of the Father, of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
THe Miracles tbat Christ wrought, when he lived on the earth, were wrought by
the power of God, Joh. 10.38. God did them by him, Act. 2.22. they were wrought,

First, by the power of the Father. The Lord tells the Jews, many good
Works have I showed you from the Father, Joh. 10.32. the Father that is in me,
he does the Works, Joh. 14.10. the Son does nothing, but what he sees the
Father do, Joh. 5.19. He gave Christ the Works that he did, to finish, Joh.
5.36.

Secondly, by the Divine Power of the Son; whatsoever things the Father does,
these also does the Son likewise, Joh. 5.19. Thus by his own Power, he took
on him the form of a servant, Phil. 2.6. Heb. 2.16. in his Incarnation, he
raised up his own Body in his Resurrection, Joh. 2.19. he exalted his own
Body, and Soul into heaven, in his Ascension, Ephesians. 4.8, 9. 1 Pet. 3.21. He
manifested his glory in his Miracles, Joh. 2.11. As man, he had no power of
himself to do Miracles, but it was given him; and in regard of his humane
Nature, he was Anoint^d of God, with the Holy Ghost, and with power, Act.
10.38. But the Manhood being united to the second Person of the Godhead; he
both received power of God, as he was man; and he had power of himself, as he
was God to work Miracles; and therefore in many Miracles which he wrought, he
manifested both his Natures; as in curing of him that was Dumb, and Deaf,
Mar. 7.34. He looks up to heaven, and sigheth as Man; but he commanded as
God: be opened. In healing the Leper, Mat. 8.3. to confound Manicheus, denying
him to be Man, he touched him; and to confute Arrius, denying him to be God, he
commanded, I will be thou clean; manifesting that he, and none other cured
him, when he and none other touched him; in raising Lazarus, he prays as man,
but commands as God, Joh. 11.41.43. Christ did often cure without Prayer, but
yet sometimes he prayed, and that for our sakes; First, that we might know he
was sent from God, Joh. 11.45. Secondly, that he might teach us what to do,
when we undertake any weighty employment. As for that, where it is said, that
he could do no great Work there, because of their unbelief, Mar. 6.4. Mat.
13.58. We must consider there is a twofold Power in God; First, an absolute
Power, so the Lord can do any thing, if the doing thereof imployeth not a
contradiction; Secondly, a limited Power, which is limited by his Will, and
Decree; thus God by his absolute Power, could have destroyed Sodom, when Lot
was in it, by his limited power he could not, Genesis 19.22. Christ likewise by
his absolute Power, could have wrought Miracles in these unbeleeving Cities:
but in regard of his limited power, he could not, because it stood not with his
good will and pleasure; in the like manner, God could by his absolute Power,
have removed the Cup from Christ: as Christ shows, Mar. 14.36. All things
were possible to God. That therefore, which as Matthew puts it (if it be
possible) has telation to Gods limited Power, Mat. 26.36. which is limited by
his will; and therefore Luke well explaineth it, Lu. 22.42. Father, if thou be
willing; the unbelief therefore of the Capernaumites, did not make Christ
unable to do, but it made them unfit to receive; it did not diminish Christ's
Divine power, but their own mercies, which they might have recived if they
would have believed; for as faith on the one side stays Gods hand from
executing Vengeance, Exodus 32.10. so unbelief on the other side stays Gods
hand from reaching forth mercies.

Thirdly, by the power of the Holy Ghost; If I, (says Christ) by the Spirit of
God cast out Devils, then is the Kingdom of God come to you, Mat. 12.28. Jesus
was anointed with the Holy Ghost, and with power, and went about doing good,
etc. Act. 10.38.

Father, Son, and Holy Ghost therefore have one, and the same power of
working Miracles, yea, that was done by the power of the Father, and of the
Holy Ghost, of whom it is said, there went virtue, and healed them all, Luk
6.19. Mar. 5.30. whose Works, when the people saw: it is said they were all
amazed at the mighty power of God, Luke 9.43. yea, he tells you, that they
were his Works, and his Fathers which he did do, Joh 10.37 38.

CHAP. VI.
Christ's Death and Passion, that it might be a Ransom for the sins of the
world, was a Work of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
Christ's Death and Passion, that it might be a Ransom for the sins of the
World, was a Work of God; God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself,
2 Cor. 5.19. He made our sins, his sins, that he might make his
Righteousness, our Righteousness; for he made him to be sin for us, who
knew no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor.
5.2^. where the Apostle by an Hebrewisme calls the expiation of siinne by
sacrifice, sin, ( chata is to sin, but chitte in pihel, is to expiate
sin) Christ bare the punishment of sin, and became an offering for sin
for us, that we which had sinned, might in, and through him, have our
Consciences purged from dead Works, and we which were defiled therewith, might
be washed by the blood of Christ, 1 John 1.7. Rev. 1.5. wherein we may see a
Work of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

First, the Father gave us his Son the Lord Christ, Joh. 3.16. God so loved
the wo^ld, that he gave his only begotten Son, Romans 8.32. He spared ^ot his
own Son, but delivered him up for us all, 1 John 4.10. He sent his Son to
be a propitiation for our sins: Herod, Pontius-Pilate, the Gentiles, and the
Jews did that to Christ, which Gods hand and his Counsel determined to be
done, Act. 4.27, 28.

Secondly, the Son gave himself for us, Tit. 2.14. He gave himself for us,
to redeem us from all iniquity, Gal. 1.4. He gave himself for his Church,
that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it, Mat. 20.28. 1 Timothy 2.6. He gave his
life a ra^some for many, Heb 9.14. He offered up himself, Col. 2.20. He loved
me, (says Paul) and gave himself for me, Joh. 10.17.18. He laid down his life
of himself.

Thirdly, through the Holy Ghost, this Work was done, Heb. 19.14. Christ,
through the Eternal Spirit, offered himself; He sent him to do this Work,
Luke 4.18, 19.

This Work, though it was consummated, perfected, and terminated by the Son
of God, when his soul did make an offering for Sin, Isai. 53.10. (So the
Translators render it in the Margent) it being terminatively wrought by Christ;
yet inchoactively it was the Work of the whole Trinity, and so Isa. 53.10.
The Lord shall make his soul an offering for sin. And thus the Translators
render it in the Text; the Original will bear either; neither of them is
contrary to the Analogy of faith: for Christ suffered and dyed for the sins
of the World, by the common decree of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost: which was their essensiall, and common Work, Act. 2.23. He was
delivered by the determinate Counsel, and foreknowledge of God: whom the
Jews took, and by wicked hands crucified, and did slay. It being a work of
love to Man in God: but a Work of malice to Christ in the Jews.

CHAP. VII.
The raising of Christ's Body from death, was a Work of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
THe Resurrection of Christ, or raising up of his Body, was a Work of God,
Act. 3.15. Romans 10.9. Act. 10.40. Act. 2.32. Romans 4.24. Act. 4.10. It required
a Divine power to effect this.

Where the Lord Jesus may be considered, either,

First, essentially, as he is one Essence with the Father, and the Holy Ghost;
so he raises, and is not raised.

Secondly, Personally, and that, First, as he is the Son of Man; and so he is
raised, Mat. 17.22, 23. Luke 9.22. and raises not.

Secondly, as he is the second Person in the Trinity, which was made flesh,
Joh. 1.14. and thus he is raised, Luke 9.21. and did rise again, Luke 18.33.
yea, did raise up himself, Joh. 2.19. The resurrection of Christ from the
dead, is attributed to the whole Christ: and yet is was actively wrought
according to his Divinity: and passively, according to his Humanity. This
Doctrine was mightily explauded by Philosophy, who thought Paul to be a Babbler,
and setter forth of strange Gods, because he preached Christ's Resurrection,
Acts 17. but Christians do know by the Word,

First, the Father raises him, Gal. 1.1. 1 These. 1. last. Romans 6.4. Romans 8.11.
Act. 13.33.

Secondly, the Son raises himself, Joh. 2.19. 1 Pet. 3.16. 2 Cor. 13.4. 1
Cor. 15.12. Joh 10 17, 18. I have power to lay down my life, and I have power
to take it up; where he seems to compare his life to a garment, that he can
take up, and lay down at his pleasure; It was not possible that Death should
hold him by force.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost raises him, Romans 1.4. The Father therefore raises
the Son by the Son, and the Son raises himself by the Spirit of
Sanctification, whereby he is declared to be the Son of God: where therefore
the Scripture ascribes the raising of Christ from the dead to the Father: it
excludes not the power of the Son, and Holy Ghost, but shows the
Identitie, or samenesse of Will, Power, Operation in them.

Where if Christ had not dyed, we could not have lived: and if he had not risen
again, we had slept for ever; but lo, the Dragon is vanquished, and the Lamb
is victorious; the Lord of life grapling with Death, foiled him in his own
Territories; He brake all the Prisons of death, and unfettered all his
fellows. If, when Christ was borne, old Simeon was willing to dye, Luke 2.27.
how willingly ought we to dye, that know Christ is risen from the dead, and
become the first fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15.20. Seeing that the
first fruits differ only in maturity, from the time of the Harvest; Let an
Infidel sorrow immoderately for his friend that is dead, as for a man without
hope: and let an unbeleever bewail the misery of his dying soul; but we have
not so learned Christ, Ephesians. 4.20. Christ who is the Key of our resurrection,
has raised himself, and opened a way for us to follow, Heb. 10.20.

CHAP. VIII.
The lifting up of Christ's body into Heaven, or his ascension, was the Work of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
THe Ascension of Christ, or the lifting up his body into Heaven, is a work of
God; None but the Lord did receive him into glory, 1 Timothy 4, 16. and did set
him at his own right hand in heavenly places.

First, it was a Work of the Father, not only to raise him from the dead, but
by lifting up his body to to set him at his own right hand, Ephesians. 1.20.

Secondly, it was a work of the Son to ascend into Heaven; so the Psalmist
foresheweth, Psalm. 68.18. and the Apostle affirm, Ephesians. 4.8. 1 Pet. 3.22. and
Christ himself witnesses, Joh. 20.17. Joh. 3.13. Joh. 16.15. As man, he was
taken up into heaven, Mar. 16.19. Act. 1.9.11. and was set at Gods right hand:
which posture of his, imployeth, First, resting from his labors; Secondly,
reigning as a King; Thirdly, judging as a Judge; but as he was also God, so he
lifted up his own body, Psalm. 68.18. He assended by his own power: He that
did at the first make, Joh. 1.3. and does still support all things by his
power, Heb. 1.13. did likewise exalt himself, and ascend above all things, by
the power of himself, who used a cloud, rather to magnify his Divinity,
Psalm. 104.3. in his riding theteon, Psalm. 68 4. and commanding it, then for any
assistance he received from it; He supporteth the cloud, the cloud of itself
could not support him.

Thirdly, it was a Work of the Holy Ghost; He led Christ into the Wilderness,
Mar. 1.12. Mat. 4.1. Luke 4.1. He translated the bodies of the faithful from
place to place, 1 King. 18.12. Act. 8.39. He who formed Christ's body in the
Virgins Womb, Mat. 1.18, 20. Luke 1.33. who raised up his body out of the
grave, Romans 1.4. did also exal^ his body into heaven: who was exalted by the
right h^nd of God, Act. 2.33. Now the Spirit of God is called the Finger of
God. Luke 11.20. with Mat. 12.28. The Hand of God, Act. 11.21. Ezekiel. 8.1. Ezekiel.
1.3. Ezekiel. 3.14. yea, Peter, Act. 2.33. does distinguish this right hand of God
from the Father, and therefore it cannot be taken personally for him, where if
it be used Essentially, the Holy Ghost is necessarily included: but if
Personally, the Holy Ghost is then there described to be him, by whom Christ
was exalted.

Father, Son, and Holy Ghost do cooperate as they are three Persons, in
these Works which concern Christ the Head of the Church: and as they are one
Essence, so they are one, and the same cause of effecting them.

Oh that we could by the eye of faith, see Christ ascended into Heaven, and
placed on the right hand of his Father, then might we at once thereby behold
our Saviors honor, and our own happiness. It was expedient for him, for his
own honor to ascend into Heaven, and to lead Captivity captive, Ephesians. 4.8.
and to have Angels, and Authorities, and Powers made subject to him, 1 Pet.
3.22. in regard of us, it was expedient, Joh. 16.7. for our eternal safety,
for he is gone to prepare a place for us, Joh. 14.2. He is entered into heaven,
to appear in the presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24. and is at the right hand
of God, and makes intercession for us, Romans 8.34. Heb. 7.25.

The third Section.
CHAP. I.
The Works of God, which concern the Church in general, are the Common
Works of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
AS the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, do Cooperate in these Works,
which do concern Christ the Head of the Church: so they likewise effect these
Works, which do concern the body of Christ, the Church of God, which works
concern either, First the Church in general: or, Secondly, the faithful in
particular.

First, these Works which concern the Church in general; First, Gods
covenanting with his people; Secondly, his delivering Israel out of Egypt;
Thirdly, his sending Angels on any extraordinary message to his Church;
Fourthly, his sending Prophets under the Law; Fifthly, his sending Apostles;
Sixthly, appointing them to preach in some places, and not in others; Seventhly,
his speaking in, and by the Prophets, and Apostles; Eighthly, his strengthening
them in their callings; Ninthly, his sending Pastors, and Teachers; Tenthly,
his giving Laws to his Church; Eleventhly, his giving more particularly, the
Law unto Mount Sinai; Twelfthly, the transgression whereof is an offense
committed against him; and Thirteenthly, provokes him to wrath, grieveth him;
Fouretenthly, his wonders; Fifthteenthly, his gifts of Miracles; Sixteenthly,
his building the Church; Seventeenthly, his raising the dead; These Works are
wrought by the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

The Scriptures do manifest the Son, and Holy Ghost to be God, equal with
the Father by ascribing to them these Works equally with the Father.

CHAP. II.
The making of a Covenant with the Church, was a Work of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
THe Lords Covenanting with his Church and people, is a Work of God alone.
There is not any Dayes-man betwixt them, that can lay his hand upon them both,
Joh. 9.33, that should, or could Vmpire for them; only the Majesty of Heaven
is pleased so far to abase himself as to Covenant with us; for, whenas there
was such an infinite distance between heaven, and earth, God, and man, that man
could never have enjoyed Ged as his never-failing blessedness, or have had
communion with him, as his soule-filling happiness: but by the Lords voluntary
condescension to us, which he expresses by way of Covenant; it was out of the
riches of his grace to us in Christ, that his infinite Majesty humbled
himself to Covenant with us, that he would be our God, and that we should be
his people; in this work, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, have an equal share
with the Father, or rather they Co-worke.

First, the Father Covenanted with us in Christ; Hag. 2.5. According to the
word that I cove^anted with you, when ye came out of Aegipt; he covenanted with
them. First, that he would be their God; Secondly, that they should be his
People. Ezekiel 36.28. And thus Christ calls the Father; The Apostles, God and
Father; Ioh. 20.17. who, Thirdly, suffers in all the afflictions of his
Church and People; for so Esaias tells us, In all their afflictions, he is
afflicted. Esaias. 63.9.

Secondly, the Word, who being made flesh, is the Mediator of the Covenant, Heb
8.6. 1 Timothy 2.5. Mal. 3.1. Yet he being the second Person of the Trinity, is
the Testator and Covenanter of his Church: For if Christ be not a Testator,
whereunto tends the Apostles reasoning? Heb. 9.16. Where a Testament is,
there must of necessity be the death of a Testator. First, it was the Lord
Jesus that dyed; he is therefore the Testator, or Covenanter: secondly, the
Church of God are his people, Mat. 1.21. Luke 1.77. Zach. 2.11. Mat. 16.18.
Through him, and in him, God is ours, and we are his, Cant. 6.2. who, thirdly,
suffers in the afflictions of his people, Act. 9.4. The persecuted members
suffer on earth, and the Lord Jesus, the Head, complains from heaven; Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me?

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is the Author of this Covenant. So the Apostle
shows, Heb. 10.15, 16. The Holy Ghost also is a witness to us, for after he
had said before; This is the Covenant that I will make with them, etc. And
surely, there cannot be a better interpreter of the Leviticall Rites, then the
Apostle: who having spoken of the first Covenant, and of Divine Ordinances
pertaining to it, Heb. 9.18. which God had commanded, Exodus 26. Lev. 16. and
coming to show their signification, which was intended in them by God, that
ordained them, he says, Heb. 9.8. The Holy Ghost this signifying that the way
out of the Holiest was not yet made manifest, while as the first Tabernacle was
yet standing; as if he had said, the Holy Ghost in giving these ceremonial
laws, intended to show, that the way to Heaven was not so wide, not so common,
not so open, as it should be when Christ abolished in his flesh, the Law of
Commandments, contained in Ordinances Ephesians. 2.15. And blotted out the
handwriting that was against us, Col. 2.14. Secondly, the Church of God are
his People. So the Apostle shows, 2. Cor. 6.16. that this was the Holy Ghost.
appears by comparing this verse, with 1. Cor. 6.19. for we are the People of
God, who dwells in us, and whose Temples we are; but we are the Temples of
the Holy Ghost. 1. Cor. 6.19. 1. Cor. 3.16. and he dwells in us; Romans 8.11.
And Thirdly, he suffers in the persecutions of his people, and the
persecutors do resist him, Act. 7.51. and do despite to the Spirit of Grace,
Heb. 10.29.

Thus the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, are one God in Essence, and have
one common and essential operation; and are one and the same author of the
Covenant with the Church, though in respect of the order of their Relations,
and their personal manner of working; there is in this, and in all their
works a distinct order. Thus the Father makes a Covenant with his Church by
his Son; who is the Mediator. 1. Tim. 2.5. and through his Spirit, who is the
earnest of our inheritance, Ephesians. 1.14. Which shows no inequality in the
Persons, but only the voluntary dispensation of this, and other Divine
Actions; which God in his infinite Wisdom is pleased to use.

CHAP. III.
The delivering of Israel out of Egypt, was a work of the Father, of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
THe deliverance of Israel from Pharaoh, and the bringing them out of Egypt,
was a work of God, Psalm. 136.11. the Lord challenges it, as his work to
Israel, and requires obedience therefore from Israel, Ex^d. 20.2, 3. ^^al.
81.10. yea, the Lord alone did lead them, and there was no strange god with
him, Deuteronomy. 32.12. Yet this was an essential and common work of the Father,
the Word, and the Spirit.

First, the Father brought them out of Egypt: So he says, H s. 11.1. Out of
Egypt have I called my Son: Which was typically true of Israel, who is styled
Gods fi st-borne, Exodus 4.22. but prophetically fulfilled in Christ, Mat. 2.15.
who was the only begotten of the Father, Joh. 1.14, 18. Joh. 3.16, 18.

Secondly, the Son ^rought Israel out of Egypt, whom they tempted in the
Wilderness, 1 Cor. 10.4, 9. and were destroyed of the d^stroyer. He was Ehejeh
(I am) Exodus 3.14. that sent Moses to deliver Israel. To which Name, the Lord
Jesus does often allude in the New Testament, Joh. 8.24. Joh. 8.28. Joh. 8.58.
Joh. 13.19. Joh. 4.26. He was the Angel, that was sent to keep Israel in the
way, and to bring them into Canaan, Exodus 23.20. and was no created Angel, but
the Angel of the Covenant, God bl^ssed for ever. For, first, Israel was to obey
his voy^^; secondly, ^e had power to punish, or pardon sin; thir^ly, Gods
Name wa^ in him.

Thirdly, the holy Spirit brought Israel out of Egypt: he led them, Isa. 63.14.
and he was grieved by them with their rebellions in the way that he led them,
Act. 7.51. Heb. 3.7, 8, 9, 10. Isa. 63.10.

Yea, you have the Prophet Isaiah mentioning all three Persons, in treating of
this work of Isreal's deliverance from Egypt, Isa. 63.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
First, the Father, by a Synechdoche, called Jehovah: Secondly, the Word styled,
the Angel of his presence; who usually, in Scripture, has the name of an Angel
attributed to him, but never took the nature of an Angel on him, Heb. 2.16.
Thirdly, the Holy Ghost, who is called the Spirit, who effected this work.
Yea, 2 Samuel 7.23. Halecu Elohim, (both the Noune and the Verb are Plural) The
Gods went to redeem a people, and yet it is added, to himself (in the
Singular:) where the plurality of Persons, and the Unity of the Essence, is
evidently demonstrated; it being one and the same Divine Power in Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, that wrought this glorious deliverance for his Church
and people: who, as God himself, speaking to Israel, says, Exodus 20.2. Deuteronomy.
5.6. I am the Lord thy Gods (word for word in the Original) which brought thee
out of the Land of Egypt. What plurality is there, which he intimates? but
only that which Christ expresses, when he says, M^t. 28.19. In the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. IV.
The sending of Angels on extraordinary Messages to the Faithful, was a work
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
THe sending of Angels, as his Messengers, is a work ^o God. The Lord, who is
the God of his Church, and the Father of the Faithful, for the benefit of his
Church, and the good of his Faithful ones, has dispatched these Ambassadors
from Heaven to Earth, and has sent both Angels, which are his heavenly
Ministers, Heb. 1.14. and Ministers, which are his earthly Angels, Rev. 2.1.
and 12.18. Rev. 3.1, 7, 14. to fulfill his Will, and to deliver his Messages to
men. And surely, the Lord, who is the God, and maker of Angels, has alone
absolute Power of himself to send them, and they do his pleasure, Psalm.
103.21. They hearken to the voice of his wo^d, Psalm. 103.20. This is an
essential and common work of God: For,

First, the Father makes his Angels spirits, and his Ministers a flame of
fire, Heb. 1.7. Yea, Christ tells Peter, That at his prayer, his Father would
have given him more then twelve Legions of Angels, Mat. 26.53. More then
fourscore thousand heavenly soldiers are ready armed at Ch^ists prayer, as
man; but at his command, as God: For,

Secondly, the Son has twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels. That this
was Christ, is clear; for it was he that ascended on high, and that led
captivity captive, Psalm. 68.17, 18. which Paul, an un-erring interpreter, Ephesians.
4.8, 9, 10. shows to be the Lord Jesus. Moreover, he sends his Angels to
gather his elect, Mat. 24.31. Mat. 13.41. Mar. 13.27. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. And, he
sent his Angel to John, Rev. 22.6, 17. to show him things to come.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost sends Angels to the Faithful: The Angel, which
appeared to Cornel^us, Act. 10.2, 3. the Holy Ghost sent, Act. 10.19, 20. He
sent the men, by direction of that Angel, to Peter, Act. 10.22.

Thus it is the work of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, who are
equal in Power and Glory, to send Angels to the Church in any extraordinary
Message.

CHAP. V.
The sending of Prophets to the Church, was a work of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
THe Lord of the Harvest alone sends Laborers into his Harvest, Mat. 9.38.
The Vinitor provideth Laborers for his Vineyard, Mat. 20. God alone appoints
Ministers in his Church, Prove. 9.3. No man is to take this honor on him, but
he that is called thereunto of God, Heb. 9.4. How often did God complain of
false Prophets in the Old Testament, and false Teachers in the New; that they
did run, and God sent them not? Jer. 23. Mat. 7.21, 22, 23. The Church is Gods
Enclosure, taken out of the Commons of the World; none but he may appoint
Pastors, to feed his Flock therein.

It was therefore a work of God, to send Prophets under the Law: Which thing
the Prophets did usually manifest in their Writings, Jer. 1.1, 2. Ezekiel. 1.3.
Hos. 1.1. Joel 1.1. Jon. 1.1. Mic. 1.1. And therefore the Prophets were called
men of God, 1 King. 13. 2 King. 1. 2 King. 4. 2 King. 6. because they were
called of God, and manifested the Lords will to his people.

This work of God, of sending Prophets, was essential, and common to the
Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

First, the Father sent the Prophets. He who afterward sent his Son, did
first send Prophets to the Jews, Mat. 21.34, 35, 36, 37. Luke 20.10, 11, 12.
Mar. 12.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Heb. 1.1.

Secondly, the Son sent the Prophets, Mat. 23.34. Luke 11.49. The wisdom of
God (which was Christ, Prove. 8.) said, I will send them Prophets; who is also
called the Lord God of the Prop^ets, Rev. 22.6. compared with Rev. 22.17.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost sent the Prophets, Ezekiel. 11.1.4. he sent Ezekel and
bid him prophecy, Numb. 24.2. The Spirit of G^d came upon Balo^m when he
prophesied. The Holy Ghost spoke by David, Act. 1.16.2, Sam. 23.2. And Agabus
signified by the Spirit of a great dearth, Act. 11.28. and certifieth the
Church in the name of the Holy Ghost, that Paul should be bound at Jerusalem by
the Jews, Act. 21.11.

Yea, it was one action of the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, who is one God
in essence, to send Esaiah, Esa. 6.1. The Father sent him, Esa. 48.16. The Lord
God, and his Spirit sent me, when the Father and the Son, are called by the
Lord God; Secondly, The Son sent him, John. 12.40.41. Where he repeateth that
particular message, and shows that Esaias saw the glory of the Lord Jesus,
and spoke of him. Thirdly, The Holy Ghost sent him, whose glory Esaias saw,
Esa. 6. when he cites this same errand which Esaias was sent on; Act. 21.25, 26.
Esaias, 6, 10, 11. and Esaias witnesses, Esaias, 48.16. I know some Divines,
interpret ^his Prophecy, Esa. 48.16. of the Father, and the Holy Ghost,
sending Christ; where, First, That interpretation does also prove the equality
of the Holy Ghost, with the Father. Secondly, It does no way cross this; for
many things spoken of by the Prophets, were fulfilled in the Prophet, as in a
type of Christ; and in Christ, as in the Antitype of the Prophets; as he that
reads the Psalms of David, and other Prophesies of the Old Testament may
easily perceive. Thirdly, The other places, namely, Ioh. 12.40.41. and Act.
28.25. do sufficiently show, that the Son and the Holy Ghost did send
Isaiah; which that the Father sent also, I think none doubts.

CHAP. VI.
The sending of the Apostles, was a work of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost.
GOD, as he sent Prophets under the Law, so did send Ministers under the
Gospel; both extraordinary Messengers, as Apostles; as also ordinary
Ministers, as Pastors and Teachers.

Apostles were sent of God. And therefore, Matthias being to be chosen an
Apostle, they pray unto God, to show unto them, whether he had chosen Matthias,
or Joseph, Act. 1.24. And Paul tells us expressly, 1 Cor. 12.28. That God
sets Apostles in the Church. Where, the Name of God is taken, not
personally, but essentially for the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; the
sending of Apostles, being a work common to them.

First, the Father sent Apostles. So he sent Paul, who was an Apostle of God
the Father, Gal. 1.1. Gal. 1.16. by his w^ll 2 Cor. 1.1. and commandment.

Secondly, the Son sent Apostles, Joh. 4.38. Joh. 20.21. So he sent the
Twelve, Mat. 10.16. Mat. 28.19. as also Paul, Act. 26.16. Act. 22.21. who was
an Apostle of Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1.17. Gal. 1.1. Act. 9.15. and sent by his
commandment, 1 Timothy 1.1. and therefore he gives thanks to him, 1 Timothy 1.12.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost sent Apostles. He it was that gave commandment to the
Apostles, Act. 1.2. He sent Philip to the Eunuch, Act. 8.29. He sent Peter to
Cornelius, Act. 10.19, 20. Act. 11.12. He sent forth Barnabas and Paul, Act.
13.4. who were separated at his commandment, Act. 13.2.

Thus Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three Persons, but one God, sent Paul the
Apostle to preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. VII.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost did limit the bounds of the Apostles
Commissions, appointing them where they should preach the Gospel.
AS the Apostles had their Commissions from God to preach, so they had their
prohibitions from him, where they must not preach. To set Bounds and Limits to
the Apostles (who had generally the care of all Churches, 2 Cor. 11.28.) was a
work peculiar to God: It was He alone that gave them their Commissions, and
could alone limit those Commissions he had given them. This was an essential
work of God, common to all three Persons.

First, the Father, from whom Christ, as man, received his Commission, sends
this great Doctor of the Church, in his own Person, to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel only, Mat. 15.24. Romans 15.8. To him the Apostle Paul prayed,
to have his way directed to Thessalonica, 1 Thessalonians. 3.11.

Secondly, the Son prohibiteth the Apostles, in his first Commission that he
gave them, from going to the Gentiles, or to the Samaritans, Mat. 10.5. And to
him the Apostle prayed, to direct his way to Thessalonica, 1 Thessalonians. 3.11.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost forbids Paul and Timothy to preach in Asia, Act.
16.6. or in Bithynia, Act. 16.7. And Paul is bound in the Spirit to preach in
Jeruselem: which witnesses in every City, that bonds and afflictions wait for
him, Act. 20.22, 23. And Philip is caught away from the Eunuch by the Spirit,
that the Eunuch sees him no more, Act. 8.39.

There ir therefore one and the same Divine Will, and Power, of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost, with the Father, which gave Commissions to the Apostles to
preach, and limited their Commissions; that though they must preach in some
places, 1 Cor. 9.16. yet they might not preach in others.

CHAP. VIII.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, spoke in and by the Prophets and
Apostles.
THe Prophets, and the Apostles were but the voice, God was the speaker, he did
speak by the mouths (not of some only) but also all the Prophets, since the
World began, Luke 1.7. all Scripture both of Prophets, and Apostles, is of
divine Inspiration, 2 Timothy 3.16. yea, the Lord himself testifies, Hos. 12.10.
I have spoken by the Prophets, and I have multiplied Visions, and used
similitudes by the Ministry of the Prophets; and because the Lord is the
speaker in the Scriptures, the Scriptures therefore are called the Word of God.

This is an Essential and common Work of the Father, of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, to speak by the Apostles, and Prophets.

First, the Father spoke by the Apostles, and Prophets, Heb. 1.1.

Secondly, the Son spoke by the Apostles and Prophets. It was the Word of
Christ, that Paul spoke, Col. 3.16. Phil. 1.27. and it was the Lord Christ that
spoke in Paul. 2 Cor 13.3. he did speak by John in his Prophesies, Rev. 1.11,
12, 13, 14. he speaks in the Word, Heb. 12.25. and he did speak by the
Prophets, Zac. 2.8, 9, 10, 11. etc. Hos. 12.4.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost spoke in the Apostles and Prophets; he spoke in John.
(who was both an Apostle, and a Prophet) when he wrote to the seven Churches in
Asia, Rev. 2.7, 11, 17, 29. he was in Joseph, Genesis 41.38. and spoke in and by
the Prophets, Number. 24.2. Mich. 2.8. Nehem. 9.30. Number. 11.29. Heb. 3.7. with
Heb. 4.7. 2 Pet. 1.21. Act. 28.25. Act. 1.16. and he spoke in, and by the
Apostles, Mat. 10.20. Mar. 13.11. he taught them what to say, Luke 12.12. and
so inspired Stephen, that his enemies were not able to resist his wisdom,
Act. 6.10. he revealed the Mysteries of Christ to the Apostles, and Prophets,
Ephesians. 3.5. who was not only in them, but also on them, Luke 2.29 Luke 4.18.

Yea, you have the Word, and Spirit speaking in David from the Father, 2 Samuel
23.2, 3. It being the Essential Work of one God in three Persons, to speak
by David, and by all the Prophets and Apostles.

CHAP. IX.
The Father, the Word, and the Spirit, did strengthen the Apostles, and
Prophets, in their callings.
AS God alone did send the Prophets, and Apostles to his Church: so for the
good of the Church, he did strengthen the Apostles, and Prophets in their
callings; he made Ezekiels face strong against his enemies faces, and his
forehead strong against their foreheads, Ezekiel. 3.8. yea, he tells Jeremiah,
that he had made him a defenced City, an Iron pillar, and brazen walls against
the Land. All the calumnies, and oppositions, which they shot at him, could not
pierce him, to hurt him, they might, and did fight against him, but they should
not, they could not prevail against him: For I am with thee, (says the Lord)
to deliver thee, Jerem. 1.18.19.

This work is Essential, and it is common to all three Persons.

First, the Father strengthened them: he strengthened Paul, and Timothy, 2 Cor.
1.21. and therefore they give thanks to him for his mercy and comfort, 2 Cor.
1.3, 4.

Secondly, the Son strengthened them. So he promises to give his Disciples a
mouth, and wisdom, which all their Adversaries should not gainsay, nor
resist, Luke 21.15. he enabled Paul to the Ministry, 1 Timothy 1.12. yea, so
great was his strength in Paul, that the Apostle tells you, he is able to do
all things through Christ that strengthened him, Phil. 4.13.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost strengthens them. Micha tells you, he is full of
power by the Spirit of the Lord, Mich. 3.8. he it was that taught the Apostles,
how to answer their opposers, Mat. 10.19, 20. as also what to say, when they
were questioned, Luke 12.12. and indeed all Stevens Enemies were not able to
resist the wisdom, and the Spirit, by which he spoke, Act. 6.10.

The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost have the same operation, and the
same natural power, and are therefore of the same Essence, for the equality
of power, is from the equality of Nature in them.

CHAP. X.
The sending of Pastors, and Teachers unto the Church, is a Work of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
PAstors and Teachers are appointed of God, 1 Cor. 12.28. And therefore they
are styled men of God, 2 Timothy 3.17. No man may preach the Word, but he that is
sent, Romans 10.15.

This sending of Pastors, and Teachers into the Church, is a Work of God, Jer.
3.15. Jer. 23.4. and it is Essential, and common to all three Persons.

First, the Father appoints Pastors, and Teachers in the Ghurch, 1 Cor.
12.28. Whether you take God there, either Essentially for the Trinity, or
Personally for the Father, it will follow, that God the Father sets Teachers
in the Church.

Secondly, the Son gives Pastors, and Teachers in the Ghurch, Ephesians. 4.11. He,
namely Christ, gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some
Pastors, and Teachers. Moreover, they that are faithful in this Office, are
his Ministers, Col. 1.7. 1 Timothy 4.6. his Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5.20. his
Stewards, 1 Cor. 4.1.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost appoints Ministers, and Elders, and therefore Paul
charge the Elders of Ephesus, Act. 20.17. to take heed to the flock of God,
over which the Holy Ghost has made them Overseer^ Act. 20.28.

The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are one and the same God: there
being one and the same action, and Authority of them in sending Pastors, and
Teachers into the Church.

CHAP. XI.
The giving Laws to the Church, is a Work of the Father, of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost.
AS the Lord alone does appoint Officers to Teach, and to Rule in his Church;
so he only appoints Laws, by which his Church must be ordered, and guided.
There is but one Lawgiver, Jam. 4.12. whose Laws alone bind the Conscience:
yet he is distinguished into three Persons.

First, the Father gives Commandments to his Church. Thus John tells the
Elect Lady, 2 John 4. I rejoiced greatly, that I found of thy Children walking
in the truth, as I received Commandment from the Father.

Secondly, the Son gives Commandments to his Church. Thus the Lord Jesus
tells his Apostles; A new Commandment give I unto you, Joh. 13.14. not new
in matter, but new in form; we were by Moses commanded to love our Neighbor,
as our selves: but by the Lord Christ, we are commanded to love one another, as
he has loved us: yea, he tells his Disciples, Ye are my friends, if ye do
whatsoever I command you, Joh. 15.14. and Paul wills the Galathians, to love
one another, and so fulfill the Law of Christ, Gal. 6.2. the Law of God being
the Law of Christ, 1 Cor. 9.21.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost gives Laws to his Church; and therefore the Apostles
in their decrees, which they send to the Churches of the Gentiles, say, Act.
15.28. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay on you no greater
burden, then these necessary things. Had this holy Assembly forgotten to
mention God, as the Author of these Laws, and rest wholly on a Creatures
inspiration? (as some blasphemously imagine the Holy Ghost to be.) Surely, if
the Holy Ghost were not God, he had no Authority to prescribe Laws, as
necessary to the Church of God, Gal. 1.8. yea, Paul says, If any man think
himself to be a Prophet, or Spiritual, let him acknowledge the things that I
write are the Commandments of the Lord, 1 Cor. 12.37. as if he had said, if
there be a Prophet amon^st you, inspired by the Holy Ghost, he will acknowledge
the things that I write, I write by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost.

Thus you may see the giving of Laws to the Church, is an Essential Work of
God, common to the Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, who although
they be three Persons, or Subsistences, yet there is in them, but one
Substance, Nature, or Essence.

CHAP. XII.
The giving of the Law on Mount Sinai, was the Work of the Father, the Word,
and the Spirit.
AS the giving of other Laws to the Church, was a Work of God, so more
particularly, the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai, was his Work; It was
wrought by the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; It was Jehovah Elohim,
Exodus 20.2. Deuteronomy. 5.6. one G^d in three Persons that spoke to Moses.

First, the Father gave the Law to Moses; and therefore Christ tells the
Jews, that Moses accused them to his Father, Joh. 5.45., The Law which Moses
had from the Father, did accuse them, as breakers of that Law, to the Father.

Secondly, the Son gave this Law to Moses; He it was that spoke in Mount
Sinai, Act. 7.38, 38. called there an Angel, but he was the Angel of the
Covenant, which is Jehovah, Exodus 19.9, 20, 21* 22, 23, 24. the Israelites
desire not to hear the voice of God, Deuteronomy. 5.25. which the Apostle expounds,
Heb. 12.19. that the word may not be set before them; and he it was, that spoke
from heaven, Heb. 12.25.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost gave these Laws to Moses; This the Apostle
intimates, Heb. 9.8. for he giving the interpretation of some Laws, he
prefixeth this, the Holy Ghost this signifying, etc. as if he had said, this is
the interpretation of those Laws the Holy Ghost gave.

The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, which gave this Law, are one
Jehovah, Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God, is one God, and yet the
plurality of Persons (which is showed by our Savior, to be the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost) is intimated in the word Elohim, as R. Simeon, Ben.
Joha^, in Zoar, writing on th^s place, affirms: adding moreover, that this
Mystery shall not be revealed before the coming of the Messiah. The Doctrine
of the Trinity being maintained by the Ancienter Rabbis, but by these of
Latter times, in opposition to the Lord Jesus, this truth, as well as others,
is wilfully, and maliciously opposed.

CHAP. XIII.
The breach of these Laws, was an offense against the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost.
AS the Lord was the Maker, and giver of these Laws: so he it is that is
offended by the breakers of these Laws. And thus David acknowledges: although
he had sinned against Bathsheba, by enticing her to folly; againgst Uriah, by
murdering him; against the whole Army, by indangering them at the death of
Uriah; against the Church of God, by giving them an evil example; and against
the Children of Ammon, causing them by this his act to blaspheme God, and to
defy Israel, 2 Samuel 12. yet he says, against thee, against thee only have I
sinned, Psalm. 51.4. For the Lord is properly the party offended, whether the
sin be committed immediately against him, as in the sins against the first
Table; or whether the sin be committed mediately against him, as in sins
against the second Table. And surely the wrong done to the cr^ature, is
therefore a wrong because it is against the will, and the command of the
Creator: and were it not for that, no wrong were done to the creature. Now as
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, gave the Law: so sin which is the
transgression of the Law, is committed against the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, and does provoke them to wrath.

First, sin is an offense committed against,

First, the Father. Thus the Children of Israel sinned against him, in breaking
Moses Law, Joh. 7.19. and therefore Christ in his prayer, said, Luke 23.34.
Father, forgive them, they know not what they do. As God, he himself forgave
them, but as man, being the great high Priest, he prayed for them, and as the
Advocate of the Church, he excused them. It was great love in the Son of man
to forgive them, greater love to pray for them, but most great love to excuse
them.

Secondly, the Son. So the Children of Israel sinned against him in the
Wilderness; They tempted Christ, and were destroyed of the Destroyer, 1 Cor.
10.9. and the Apostle tells us, that they which wound the weak conscience of
their Brethren, sin against Christ, 1 Cor. 8.12. he likewise is reproached by
them that reproach his saints, Heb. 11.25. and persecuted by those that
persecute his people, Act. 9.4. yea, ungodly Apostataes do crucify afresh the
Son of God, and put him to an open shame, Heb. 6.6.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost. For surely the Children of Israel sinned against him;
They rebelled, and vexed the holy Spirit, Isa. 63.10. Act. 7.51. wicked men by
sin, do reproach him, 1 Pet. 4.14. An^nias, and Sapphira did lie to him,
Act. 5.3, 4. and did tempt him, Act. 5.9. and were taken away by sudden death,
Act. 5.5, 10. yea, our Savior tells you of a blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost, which shall never be forgiven, Mat. 12.32. Surely, the Holy Ghost
is God, equal with the Father, the blasphemy against him being irremissible.

Thus it is one God, who is distingushed into three Persons, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, who is the only Lawgiver, and against whom any
sin, when it is committed, is an offense, being contrary to his Will,
Justice, and Goodness.

CHAP. XIIII.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are provoked to wrath by sin.
SUrely, there is no such changeable passion in the immutable God, as wrath;
neither is there such an affection in him, as anger; But the Scriptures
condescending to our capacity, and speaking after the manner of men, do
attribute anger to God, and do ascribe wrath to the most high; there being
only the like effect of it wrought by his Justice, but no such affect (as the
Schools speak) in his Majesty; there being such effects, as anger produces
in man, wrought by him; though there is not any passion of anger in him. And
surely, if any thing could possibly make God to be angry with man, it would be
sin, which is so contrary to his Will, Nature, Holiness, and all his
Attributes; and therefore according to the language of the Scriptures, sin
provokes God to wrath, and grieveth the holy One of Israel.

First, the Father is provoked to wrath by sin, Rev. 6.16. He that sits in
the Throne, (where the Father is included, though the Son, and Holy Ghost are
not excluded, Rev. 22.1, 3. Rev. 5.6. his wrath is terrible to the great ones
of the earth.

Secondly, the Son is provoked to wrath by sin, Ps. 2.12. Kiss the Son, lest
he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a
little, blessed are all they that pu^ their trust in him. Perishing in the way,
imports sudden destruction, whiles they are doing their actions; yea, the
great Princes of the World shall be terrified with the wrath of the Lamb, Rev.
6.16

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is provoked to wrath by sin, Isai. 63.10. and
grieved thereby: and therefore the Apostle dehorting from sin, adds, Ephesians.
4.30. and grieve not the Holy Spirit; sin being that, which alone angreth,
and grieveth this holy Spirit.

The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost being of one Nature, Power, and
Authority, are alike grieved, and provoked to wrath, by the sins of the
wicked, and the transgressions of the ungodly. Oh that men would look in anger
upon their sins in time, which if not repented of, will make the Lord look in
anger on them for ever.

CHAP. XV.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, do only work Miracles.
THe Lord alone, for the good of his Church, can, and does only Work
Miracles, Psalm. 136.4. He alone does wondrous things, Psalm. 72.18. it is not in
the power of any Creature, properly to do any Miracle, Joh. 10.21. Angels,
good, and bad, may and often do effect great and strange Works, but it is not
without the help of God. First, they work by the h^lpe of God, they having
their power and being of him. Satan and his instruments can do no more then
the Lord gives them power. And it is Pareus observation: that the word (...)
it is given, is twenty times used in the Revelations, even then when the
Holy Ghost speaks of the power of evil Angels, and wicked men. Secondly,
they use the h lpe of Gods Creatures in all their works: But the Lord alone
works of himself, and wit out the help of any Creature.

First, he alone does wondrous things.

Secondly, He alone gives power to work Miracles.

First, The Lord alone does wondrous things.

First, God the Father does great wonders, Mat. 3.17. he caused his voice to be
heard from Heaven, to Earth, though it pass through many Mediums, and be many
Millions of Miles distant.

Secondly, God the Son does great wonders, He made a light to be seen above
the brightness of the Sun; Act. 26.13. and a voice to be heard from Heaven
to Earth, Act. 9.3.4. Act. 26.13, 14. God did this, and al other wonders by the
Lord Jesus, as he was man; Act. 2.22. But he did them by his own power as he
was God, Luke 6.19. Mar. 5.30. He cleanses the Leaper by his absolute power; he
touches him, and says, I will, be thou clean, Mat. 8.2. I will, is the style
of God only, who does whatsoever pleases him in Heaven, in Earth, and in the
Sea. Psalm. 135.6. The commanding word, I will, the Imperative Mood, be thou
clean (if we read not with the false-colouring Spectacles of Arrius) do
evidently show, that Christ is God, and wrought this by his own will, and
power; for he healed this Leaper in a most exact, and compendious manner both
by the operation of his humanity, in touching him; and of his Divinity, in
saying, I will, be thou clean; He raised likewise Magisterially the young man
from death; Luke 7.4. Youngman, I say unto thee, arise, with him it being al
one to say and to do; He effecting that with his Divine Power, which he
commanded with his humane voice; yea, in his own person, he grapled with death
in the grave, and conquered him in his own territories; 1. Cor. 15.55, 57.
Tryumphantly, raising himself from the dead; Joh. 2.19. Jo^. 10.18. 2 Cor.
13.4. He ascended into Heaven, Joh. 3.13. Joh. 6.62. Act. 1.9. And led
captivity, captive, Ephesians. 4.8. And he will at his second coming, make those
which have been dead for many hundred years, to hear his voice. Joh. 5.28.

Thirdly, God the Holy Ghost does great wonders; he can make his voice to be
heard from Heaven, to earth. Rev. 14.13. He made the Apostles in a moment, to
speak with strange toungs and several languages; they spoke as he gave them
utterance, Act. 2.4. That which multitude of Schoolmasters could not effect
in many years in one man, the Holy Spirit does effect it exactly in a moment,
and that in many; and no wonder, for man shall soon learn that, which the
Lord himself undertaketh to teach. It was the Holy Ghost, who led the people
of Jsrael, safely through the red Sea, and the wilderness, Esa. 63.14.

Thus the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, have one and the same power,
whereby they work miracles, and therefore none of them is greater or lesser,
then another, but are coequall, and consubstantiall.

CHAP. XVI.
Gifts of Miracles, is from the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
THough the Apostles and others wrought Miracles, yea, greater Miracles then
Christ, Joh. 14.12. as Peter's shadow cured many, Act. 5.15. and Paul's
Handkerchifs healed diseases. Act. 19.11. yet they did them not in the same
manner, as the Father, Son, or Holy Ghost did; There was these notable
differences. First, the Apostles had not this power at all times, Mat. 17.16.
Phil. 2.27. 1 Timothy 5.23. 2 Ti. 4.20. Secondly, they did not effect them by
their own power, or in their own name, Act. 3.1^.16. but by the power of God
who wrought these wonders by them, Act. 15.12. It was God that gave gifts of
healing, 1 Cor. 12.28. for it is God alone that can work Miracles, Psalm.
72.18. and therefore he alone can give this power of working Miracles to others.

The gift of Miracles, is an Essential work of God, and is common to the
Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

First the Father gives this power, and therefore the Apostles pray to him for
this power of Miracles, Act. 4.31. where the Father alone is not personally
prayed to, but Essentially with the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

Secondly, the Son gives this power to the Apostles, Luke 10.19. Mar. 6.7.
Mat. 10.1, 8. Mar. 16.17.18. Joh. 14, 12. and Miracles were done in his Name;
Peter tells Enea^, that Jesus Christ makes him whole, Act. 9.38. and shows
the chief Priests, that it was not their own power, and holiness, Act. 3.12.
but by faith in the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazaneth, they had made th clame
man strong, Act. 3.16. Act. 4.10. and Paul was restored to his sight by his
power, Act. 9.17. who though in Heaven, in regard of his bodily presence, yet
is also on earth, healing men by his Divine power.

Thirdly the Holy Ghost gives this power to men to work Miracles, 1 Cor.
12.9, 10. He so illuminated the eyes of Stephen, that being on earth, he did
not only by the eye of Faith, but with the eye of his bodily sense see Christ
from earth to Heaven, Act. 7.55. If the Holy Ghost had been a Creature, how
could he have given such power to Steven, it being proper only to God to
effect Wonders. And Paul full of the Holy Ghost, struck Elymas with blindness,
Act. 13.9, 10, 11.

Yea, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost wrought Miracles,
by the hands of Paul, Romans 15.17, 18, 19. I have (says he) therefore, whereof
I may glory through Jesus Christ, in those things that pertain to God,
(namely, in God the Fathers working Miracles by him) For I will not dare to
speak of any of these things, which Christ has not wrought by me, to make the
Gentiles obedient in word, and deed. (Thus the Lord Jesus wrought effectually
in him, in his Apostleship, and gifts of healing) through mighty signs and
wonders by the power of the Spirit of God.

(There is the Holy Ghost working Miracles by Paul.) Thus the Father, the Word,
and the Spirit, one God in Power, Majesty, and Essence, does great wonders,
and gave power to Paul, and others to work Miracles, and effect wondrous
things.

CHAP. XVII.
The building of the Church is a work of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost.
THe Church is Gods house, 1 Timothy 3.15. He is the builder of it, Heb. 3.3, 4.
the faithful are his building, 1 Cor. 3.9. Where,

First, not only the Father builds it, but also, secondly, the Son builds
the Church, Mat. 16.18. upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of
Hell shall not prevail against it. The gates of the City were the places,
where usually they sat in Council, 1 Kin. 22.10. and where their chiefest
strength lay. The Lord Jesus intimates in this his promise to his Church, that
neither the policy, nor power of Satan and his Angels, should ever prevail
against his Church; (a work proper to God to promise and to effect.) This is
the house which w^sedome built, Prove. 9.1. Yea, the Apostle proves Christ to
be God; First, because he built all things; Secondly, because he built the
Church which it his house, Heb. 3.3, 4, 5, 6. the Chuch is bis, Act. 20.28. the
faithful are his people, Mat. 1.21. Zac. 2.11.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost builds us up for an habitation of God, Ephesians. 2.22.

It being a Work of God to build the Church; the Son, and the Holy Ghost
building the Church, not instrumentally, but efficiently with the Father, are
therefore equal in Power, and Operation with him.

CHAP. XVIII.
The raising the Dead, is a work of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
TO restore a lost habit, was judged by Philosophy, a thing impossible; and if
impossibilities might admit of degrees, the raising of the Dead was thought
more impossible the^ other things. But the Pihlosophy of Christians not
contradicting, but transcending reason, has learned out of the Scripture
another Lesson, and their faith grounded on Gods word, makes them to believe
the resurrection of the Dead. And surely there is no impssibility in that which
God promises; He will assuredly effect that which he undertaketh: and he will
do all his pleasure, Isa. 46.10. If he work, who shall let it? Isa. 43.13.
this work therefore is great, is difficult, but it is to man, not to God; He
can as easily raise the Body out of something, as he did at the first create it
out of nothing. The Lord challenges this as his work; I even I am he, and
there is no God with me, I kill, and I make alive, Deuteronomy. 32.39. This Work is a
Work of one God, yet he is distinguished into three Persons, which effect this
great Work.

First, the Father raises up the Dead, John 5.21. not only these that are
spiritually dead in sin, but also those that are corporally Dead through
sin.

Secondly, the Son raises up the Dead; He promises to raise up those that
believe in him, Joh. 6.40, 54. Joh. 11.25. He changes our vile bodies, that
they may be fashioned according to his glorious working, whereby he is able to
subdue all things to himself, Phil. 3.21. yea, he raises all, both Good, and
Bad, they that have done good, to the Resurrection of life, and they that have
done evil, to the Resurrection of damnation, Joh. 5.28, 29.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost raises the Dead, Romans 8.11. He quickneth our Mortal
bodies, by the Spirit that dwells in us.

The Son, and Holy Ghost, are equal with the Father in Power, and Majesty,
and do Work together in these Works, which do concern the Church of God in
general.

The fourth Section.
CHAP. I.
The Works of God, which do concern the faithful in particular, are the
Common, and essential works of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
AS the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, do Co-work in these Actions of
theirs, which do concern the Church in general; so likewise they cooperate
in those works which concern the faithful in particular. As namely, 1. in
Election, 2. in Redemption, delivering us, First, from sin, Secondly, from
Satan, Thirdly, from the wrath to come; 3. in Justification, First, in the
remission of sins; Secondly, in the imputation of the Righteousness of Christ;
4. in faith, 5. in Hope, 6. in true saving, or sanctified knowledge, 7. in our
Union, and communion with God, 8. in Adoption, 9. in sanctification, both in
the beginning and progress of it, both by drawing us to himself, and
quickening us, as also by giving and multiplying graces in us; 10. in his
attestation, giving Testimony to us, we are his; 11. in sealing us, 12. in
giving us Christian liberty, 13. in salvation, or glorification. These are
wrought for us, and in us, by the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

The Scriptures do manifest Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit to be God,
equal with the Father, by ascribing to them these Works equally with the
Father.

CHAP. II.
Election is a Work of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
THere is a two fold Election, First there is an Election to a Ministerial
Office, or fun^^ion; thus Judas though a Devil, was chosen to be an Apostle,
Joh. 6.70. Secondly, there is an Election to life and glory; thus Judas though
chosen to be an Apostle, was not chosen to eternal life, Joh. 13.18. I speak
not of all, I know whom I have chosen. The former I have already showed to be
an Essential Work of God; I shall endeavor to make manifest the latter to be
a Work common to the Trinity.

The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows who
are his, 2 Timothy 2.19. Election is there stilled a foundation; First, in regard
of the immutabilitie, and firmness of it; Secondly, because it is the
beginning, and first principal of our salvation, and the means thereof, it
being built thereon. The Lord knows them that are his; He knows them, not
only in scientia cognitionis sed scientia dignationis, Psalm. 1.6. He knows
wicked men, and all their ways, but he will not own them, Mat. 7.23. He is
ashamed of them, Mar. 8.38. but he acknowledges, and rewards the Righteous;
he passes by the one, but he chooses the other. This Election is a Work of
one God in three Persons.

First, God the Father Electeth, Ephesians. 1.5. He chooses us in Christ, before
the foundation of the World. All the Sons elect, are the Fathers, Joh. 17.10.
His good will, and pleasure, as it is the ground of other graces, Jam. 1.18.
Ephesians. 1.14. Luke 12.32. so it is of his Election of us likewise, Ephesians. 1.5, 11.

Secondly, God the Son Electeth, Joh. 15.19. I have chosen you out of the
World, John 13.18. I know whom I have chosen, Joh. 6.64. He knew from the
beginning, who believed not; and in regard of this, the faithful are styled
his elect, Mat. 24.31. Mar. 13.27. All the Fathers elect are his likewise, Joh.
17.10. his will and good pleasure is the ground of our eternal happiness,
Joh. 17.24. I will, that they whom thou have given me, be with thee; where
though he prays as our Mediator, yet he wills it as our God, equal with
the Father.

Never any humble Supplicant would pray thus; I will this, or I will that.
Besides the Book of life, in which the Names of the Elect are written, is the
book of the Lamb, Rev. 21.27.

Thirdly, God the Holy Ghost electeth; the eternal Counsel of God is ascribed
to him, Isai. 40.31. who has directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his
Counselor has taught him? If the Father, or the Son choose without the
Spirit, they should direct him in his work: but he works according to his own
will, and good pleasure, for he divides his gifts, and graces to every man,
severally, as he will, 1 Cor. 12.11.

Thus Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, do Co-work in our Election.

CHAP. III.
Redemption is a work of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and that first, in
not only keeping, but also delivering us from the evil of sin.
REdemption is a Work wrought of the whole Trinity, as the first cause, and
therefore, Redeemer is a Name usually ascribed to God, Isai. 44.24. Isai. 34.4.
Isai. 41.14. Isai. 48.17. Isai. 49.7. Isa. 54.58. Jer. 50.43. but more
immediately was the Work wrought by Christ our Goel, Job. 19.25. our kinsman.
The nearest kinsman in the Leviticall Law, had power to revenge his Brothers
blood on the Murderer, out of the City of Refuge: and also to redeem his
inheritance being lost through poverty. The Lord Jesus, being our flesh, Heb.
2.14. is our Goel, our Kinsman; he is the revenger on Satan, that Murderer,
Joh. 8.44. and a Redeemer of a better Paradise for us, then that which Adam
lost by sin; he is the next and immediate principle of our Redemption, who as
he was the Son of God, in regard of his Divinity, became the Son of man,
in regard of his Humanity; for he that was the Son of God, became also the
Son of Man; that we, which were the Sons of men, might be made the Sons
of God. It seemed fit to the Lord, that he which was the Image of God, should
restore to man that Image, which man by sin had lost. That he, which had
created the world, should as it were recreate it. That he should take our
humane nature on him on earth, and that he should carry with him our humane
nature into heaven; that he which was our God by creation, should be our Lord
by Redemption.

The first cause of our Redemption, was the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. God challenges it as his Work, Isai. 44.5. Thus says the Lord the
King of Israel, and his Redeemer the Lord of Hosts, I am the first, and I am
the last, and besides me there is no God; and Isaiah shows, Isai. 45.11.
There is no God besides him, a just God and a Savior, there is none besides
him; It is the Lord, who,

First, keeps and delivers us from the evil of sin.

Secondly, comfort against Satan's assaults, and delivers us from him.

Thirdly, and principally, he freeth us from the evil of sin, and of
punishment, and delivers us from the wrath to come.

First, the Lord our Redeemer ke peth, and delivers us from the evil of sin,
and therefore we pray in ihe Lords prayer, Lead us not into tentation, but
deliver us from evil, Mat. 6.13.

First, the Father keeps us from the evil of sin. To this end Christ
prayed to his Father, Joh. 17.15. I pray not that thou should take them out
of the World, but that thou should keep them from the evil. As man, he
prayed to his Father to support his Disciples with his grace, but as God, he
himself is prayed to by his Disciples, for grace, 2 These. 2.16, 17. 2 Cor.
12.8, 9. and he does support them therewith.

Secondly, the Son keeps from the evil of sin, Jud^ 1. we are persecuted
in Christ Jesus; when ^aue had besought the Lord Jesus for grace, he received
this answer from him; My grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.8, 9. yea, so
sufficient was his grace to Paul, that he acknowledged, he could do all things
though Christ that strengthened him, Phil. 4.13. This was the end that he gave
himself for us, to deliver us from this present evil world. Gal. 1.4. yea it
is God our Savior, that keeps us from falling, and presents us faultlesse
before the presence of his glory, with exceeding joy. Jude 24.29. verse.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost keeps us from the evil of sin; It is through the
Spirit we mortify the deeds of the body, Romans 8.13. It is he that guides us
into all truth, Joh. 16.13. It is through the Holy Ghost, that any can say
Jesus is the Lord; and no man speaking by the Spirit, can call Jesus accursed,
1 Cor. 12.3.

The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, does redeem his Jsrael, the Church
from all their iniquities Psalm. 130.8.

CHAP. IV.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, comfort us against Satan's assaults,
and deliver us from his power.
IT is God alone, that comfort us against Satan's assaults, and delivers us
from his power; he can put a hook into the nose of this Leviathan, and bore
his jaw through with a thorn, Job. 42. He is the God of consolation, Romans
15.5. He it is that comfort those that are cast down, 2 Cor. 7.6. He
brings Satan under our feet, Romans 16.20. And he makes a way to all
tentations, that we may be able to bear them, 1 Cor, 10.13. He cures all
those wounds, which Satan makes in the Souls of his people; neither Angels,
nor Principalities, nor Powers, shall be able to separate us from the love of
God, that is in Christ, Romans 8.39. we are through him more then conquerers,
Romans 8.37. First, a Conqueror enjoys the benefit of his conquest, but for a
while; but we enjoy an everlasting benefit in our conquests. Secondly, He
conquereth only corporal enemies; we conquer spiritual. Thirdly, He
overcommeth Men, we overcome Devils. Fourthly, Worldly Soldiers, subdue their
enemies by killing; but the Lords Soldiers, overthrow all their enemies, by
dying; yet it is not of our selves, but through him that loved us; we may say
of our spiritual enemies as Jehoshaphat said of his Corporal, 2 Chr. 20.12. O
God we have no might against this great company, that comes against us;
neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee.

The comforting us against Satan's assaults, and the deliverance from his power,
the Scripture ascribes to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

First, God the Father comfort us; The Apostle prays to him to effect
this, 2 Thessalonians. 2.16. and gives thanks to him for effecting it, 2 Cor. 1, 3.4.
And he delivers us from the power of darkness, Col. 1.13.

Secondly, God the Son comfort us, 2 Cor. 1.5. Our consolations abound by
Christ, He is the consolation of Israel, Luke 2.25. He calls all that are
heavy laden, and promises to ease them, Mat. 11.29. Paul therefore prays to
him for comfort for himself, 1 Cor. 12.8, 9. and for the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 2.16. And in regard of the light of Grace and Consolation he himself
gives us: the Holy Ghost is styled, in relation to him, another comforter,
Joh. 14.16. we overcome Satan by the blood of the L^^b, Rev. 12.11. It is
Michael and his Angels, that fight against the Dragon and his Angels, Rev.
12.7. In vain, might even the Angels fight for us, if they had not the Lord
Jesus for their Captain. Neither Angel nor man ever prevailed without Christ.
They that fight under this head, are safe; those that fight without him, cannot
but perish. It is the Lord Jesus, who by his death, destroyed him that had the
power of death; that is, the Devil Heb. 2.14. He spoiled Principalities and
Powers, Col. 2.12. He is our Goel or kinsman, Job 19.25. that revenged us on
Satan.

Thirdly, it is God the Holy Ghost, who is a comforter to all the faithful; he
is often by the Lord Jesus styled the Comforter, Joh. 14.16, 26. Joh. 15.26, Joh.
16.7. He it is that works spiritual joy and comforts in the hearts of the
believers. Act. 9.31. Gal. 5.22. and by the sword of the spirit, which is the
word of God, we are armed against Satan and his adherents, Ephesians. 6.17. and well
may the Word of God be called the sword of the Spirit; The Spirit is the Author
of it, 2 Pet. 1.21. 2 Timothy 3.16. Ephesians. 3.5. he made this weapon for our use.
Secondly, the Spirit of God directs us how to use this Weapon, and helps
our infirmities, Romans 8.26. so that through him the weapons of our warfare are
mighty to the pulling down of strong holds, 2 Cor. 1.9.

Thus Father, Son, and Holy Ghost do comfort us against the assaults of
Satan, and deliver us from his power. For the Lord Jesus, who was our surety,
Heb. 7.22. gave himself a ra^some for us, Mat. 20.28. 1 Timothy 2.6. and thereby
has satisfied the justice of God, Isa. 53.5. 2 Cor. 5.21. 1 John 2.2. the d^bt
that we owed is paid by him, Isa. 53.6. the obligation is cancelled, the
handwriting of Ordinances that was against us is blotted out, Col. 2.14. the
Work of our redemption is thereby finished, Joh. 19.30. Gods justice being
satisfied we are delivered from Satan, Luke 11.21, 22. Heb. 2.14, 15. who is
but Gods Jailer, Luke 12.58. and who del vered us into his hand, Mat. 18.34.
Till his justice was satisfied, and the debt that we owed was discharged by
Christ, which being performed by him, we are redeemed out of the hands of all
our enemies, Luke 1.71.74.

CHAP. V.
3. The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, redeem us from eternal
destruction of body and soul.
THe Lord is especially our Redeemer in delivering our souls from destruction,
Psalm. 103.4. Zachariah blesses the Lord God of Israel, for visiting and
redeeming his people, Luke 1.68. which was not only the Father, or the Son,
but the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost as I have showed.

First, the Father redeemeth us, he delivers us from the power of darkness,
and translateth us to the Kingdom of his dear Son, Col. 1.13.

Secondly, the Son redeemeth us. He is the Lamb of God that takes away the
sins of the World, Joh. 1.29. that burden of sin, that did lie heavy on
us, he took and carried for us, Isa. 53.4. Isa. 53.11, 12. 1 Pet. 2.24. he is
our Goel or kinsman, Joh. 19.25. which did the part of a kinsman for us, in
redeeming us, and our heavenly inheritance to us, as it was figured, Levi.
25.25. and foretold, Hos. 13.14. he redeemed us by giving himself for us, Tit.
2.14. Act. 20.28. 1 Pet. 1.18. Ephesians. 5.2. Isa. 53.5, 6, 8* 10. Ephesians. 1.7. Col.
1.14. he has washed us with his blood, Rev. 1.3. Rev. 5.2. 1 John 1.7. Heb.
9.14. he became our surety, Heb. 7.22. and gave himself a ransom for us, Mark.
10.45. 1 Timothy 2.6. As God, he did redeem us by his power, but as man, he
purchased our redemption by his merits, actively fulfilling the Law for us,
Romans 5.18, 19. Heb. 7.26. 2 Cor. 5.21. and passive^y suff^ring for us the
punishments due to the transgressors of the Law, Gal. 3.13. Romans 3.24, 25. who
as God and man, is the Savior of his Church, Ephesians. 5.23. and people, Mat. 1.21.
delivering us from the wrath to come, 2 These. 2.10.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost redeemeth us; He is the earnest, and seal of our
inheritance, until the redemption of the purch^s^d possession to the praise of
his glory, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. yea the Spirit promises to them that overcome, that
they shall not be hurt of the second death, Rev. 2.11.

The Father, the Word, and the Spirit are equal in glory and power, and are
one, and the same first cause of our Redemption, which was inchoatively the
work of the Trinity; Although terminatively it was perfected and consummated
by the Son of God, to whose Person humane Nature was united, Joh. 1.14. So
that two whole, perfect, and distinct Natures, the Godhead, and the Manhood
were joined together in one Person especially without either Conversion,
Composition, or confusion of either, which though he had two Natures, yet he is
but one Christ, God and man, the only Mediator between God and us. 1 Timothy
2.5. and is the next and immediate principle of our Redemption, and he as our
high Priest once offered up himself, Heb. 7.27. for our sins, Heb. 10.12. as
a Lamb without blemish and without spot, 1 Pet. 1.19.

CHAP. VI.
Justification is a Work of the Father and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, and that, first, in regard of the remission of our sins, or
healing of our soule-sicknesse.
JUstification has two parts, (which as Tilenus observes) differ not
essentially, but rationally, Romans 4.6. There is, first, a remission of sins,
or healing of our souls; secondly, an imputation of the righteousness of
Jesus Christ.

First, the Lord alone forgiveth sins. He alone is the Physician that can
cure all the maladies of our sinsick souls; he challenges this as his own
prerogative, I, even I, (...) he tha^ b^o^teth out thy transgression^ for mine
own sake, and will not remember thy sins, Esa. 43.25. Sin is only
committed against God, Psalm. 51.5. He only therefore can remit it. And surely
when he has remitt^d it, who can lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect?
^or it is God that justifies; who shall condemn? it is Christ that dyed, Romans
8.33, 34. The words the Apostle uses are remarkable, (...), to call into
court, Satan may wranglingly dispute against thy soul, thy conscience may
erroneously accuse thee, the Law (...) produce cancelled Bills against thee,
but none of these shall hurt thee, that has an interest in Christ, who has
satisfied Gods justice for thee. And therefore, Secondly, the Apostle opposes
the death of Christ, by way of challenge to whatsoever Sin, Satan, Justice,
or Law can object; when he says not, Who shall accuse? (for we may have
accusers enough) but Who shall cond^mn? it is Christ that died. The Psalmist
may well conclude him to be blessed, to whom the Lord imputes no sin, Psalm.
32.2. If the Scribes and Pharisees had not maliciously erred in the person,
they had concluded well in the thing, None can fo give sins but God only,
Mark 2.7. Luke 5.21. For if man could do this, then he could br^ g a clean
thing out of an unclean, which none can do, Jo^ 14.4. but God only. He alone
can heal our backslidings, Hos. 14.4. which is nothing else, but a
forgiveness of sins; Mark calls that a forgiving of sins, Mark 4.12.
which say and Paul do call a healing of them, Esaias 6.10. Act. 28.25, 27. And
surely forgiveness of sins, or healing of the soul, is a work of God, Esaias
44.22. Psalm. 103.3. 2 Chronicles. 30.20. Psalm. 147.3. Psalm. 41.5. wrought by the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

First, the Father forgiveth sins, Matthew. 6.14. Mark 11.25. If ye forgive men
their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you. And thus Christ
as man prayed to his Father for his Enemies, Father, forgive them they know not
what they do, Luke 23.34. Moreover, healing the soul is the work of the
Father, Esa. 6.10. with Mat. 13.15. for he sent Esaiah, Esa. 48.16. as I have
showed.

Secondly, the Son forgiveth sins; so he says to Mary, Luke 7.48. Thy sins
be forgiven thee; and so likewise he told the sick of the Palsy, Mark 2. Luke
5.20. Matthew. 9.6. And this he did to manifest his power, Mark 2.10. That they
might know the Son of man had power on earth to forgive sins. Where the Lord
Jesus manifested his divine power, in healing corporally the sickness of the
body, and curing spiritually the infirmities of the soul. He caused the filthy
Garments to be taken away from the holy Priest, and he said, Behold, I have
caused thine iniquities to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee with change
of raiment, Zach. 3.4. he took away his sin, and clothed him with his
righteousness. And surely this is an unquestionable truth in the Apostles
judgment, and therefore he says, Col. 3.13. As Christ forgave you, so also do
ye. This healing of the soul is a work of Christ, Joh, 12.40. Luke 4.18. He as
God heals by the power of his Deity, but as man by the merit of his passion,
Esa. 53.5. his blood being a Sovereign balm to cure our sin-wounded soul,
yea Esa. 43.25. I, even I am he, that blot out thy transgressions for mine own
sake. He it is that forgiveth, who was made to serve with our sins, which was
Christ, who took on him the form^ of a servant, Philippians 2.6.

Secondly, he who forgiveth, forgiveth sins for his own sake, but our sins
are forgiven in christ; it is his blood w^sheth them away, 1 John 1.7. Rev.
1.5. Heb. 9.14. Acts 20.28. Ephesians. 5.2.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost forg^veth sins, Heb. 10.15.17. The Holy Ghost, that
made a Covenant with Israel (as I have showed) promises them to forgive their
sins. The Holy Ghost also commanded legal sacrifices, Heb. 9.8. whereby
atonement was made for sin; yea because the Holy Ghost does apply and
distribute remission of sins, which is obtained by the blood of Christ.
Therefore when as our Savior entrusteth his Disciples with the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven ministerially to bind or loose, he first says, Receive the
Holy Ghost, John 20.22. manifesting thereby, that it was the Holy Ghost who did
remit sins by them. It is the Spirit who promises to give to them that
overcome, a white stone, Rev. 2.17. The Holy Ghost alludeth to the custom of
the Gentiles, to whom he wrote; which used these stones in judicature. If the
Judge gave a white stone, it was a token of absolution; but if it were a black
stone, it was a sign of condemnation. The Spirit promises to give absolution,
or pardon of sin, or freedom from condemnation, to them that overcome.
Moreover, healing of the soul is a work of the Holy Ghost, so Paul
manifests, Acts 28.25, 27. And I should heal them (says the Holy Ghost
there.)

The Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost, are equal in Power, Majesty, and Glory.
and do co-worke in forgiving of sins, and healing of the soul of the believer.

CHAP. VII.
2. The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, do co-worke in imputing of
Christ's Righteousness.
ANd as not imputing our sins, is a work of God, 2 Cor. 5.19. so the
imputation of Christ's righteousness to the believer, is his work likewise.

Though we have not a righteousness of our own, yet the Lord gives us a
righteousness of his own, Romans 10.3. which is answerable to his justice, and
what man or Angel is able to resist it? He justifies, who shall condemn? Romans
8.33. It is one God that justifies the circumcised Jew by faith, and the
uncircumcised Gentile through faith, Romans 3.30. Yet this one God is
distinguished into three persons, who do cooperate in this great work of
justifying man through faith, by the imputative righteousness of Christ: which
word imputed, though divided by Papists, yet is eight times used by the Apostle
in one chapter, Romans 4.6, 8, 10, 11, 22, 23, 24.

First, The Father justifies us not only by pardoning of sin, but by imputing
of Christ's righteousness which the Apostle calls the righteousness of God,
Romans 10, 3. And that, first, because it is it, which God imputes for
righteousness to us: secondly, because it is that which God accounts for
righteousness in us: thirdly, because it is that righteousness which Jesus
Christ, who is God over all, bl^ssed for ever, Romans 9.5. has wrought for us.
Thus the Father, who raised Christ from the dead, Gal. 1.1. 1 These. 1.10.
imputes this righteousness to us, Romans 4.24.

Secondly, the Son justifies us. By his knowledge (says Esaias) shall he
justify many, Esa. 53.11. He it is that makes a reconciliation for sin, and
brings in everlasting righteousness, Dan. 9.24. But more clearly does the
Apostle show this truth, 1 Cor. 6.11. Ye are justified in the Name of the Lord
Jesus. This righteousness of ours by faith, Peter calls the righteousness
of God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.1. Not as if the Apostle
spoke of two distinct persons, there being but one Article in the Original,
and therefore there cannot be two distinct persons described thereby. Yea our
Lord Jesus promises to them that overcome, to clothe them in white raiment,
Rev. 3.5.

Thirdly, The Holy Ghost justifies us; Ye are justified in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, and the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6.11.

Thus the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, who are one God, are also one
and the same efficient cause of our justification, both in forgiving of sins,
and in imputing the righteousness of Christ through faith, which is the
instrument of our justification, and is also the work of God, John 6.29.

CHAP. VIII.
Faith is the work of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
FAith is the instrument, by which we are justified, that is, the hand by which
we lay hold on the Lord Jesus, and his righteousness, and apply it also to our
souls. Yet faith is a Gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. It is his work to purify our
hearts by faith, Acts 15.9. Yea it is a work of God, wherein he exercised the
same exceeding greatness of ^is power, in effecting it, that he used in
raising Christ from the dead, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. It being as great a work to work
faith in the heart of an unbeleever, who is spiritually dead, as it was to
raise Christ from the grave, when as he was corporally dead.

This being also an essential work of God, common to the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, undividably to effect.

First, the Father works faith in us; the Apostle prays to him for it, Ephesians.
6.23.

Secondly, the Son works faith in us; the Apostle prays to him for it,
Ephesians. 6.23. and the Disciples of him the increase thereof, Luke 17.5. And so
likewise does the father of the Lunatic, Mark. 9.24. By him do we believe in
God, 1 Pet. 1.21.

Thirdly, The Holy Ghost works faith in us, Cor. 12.9. It is a fruit of the
Spirit, Gal. 5.22. And we through the Spirit wait for the hope of
righteousness by faith, Gal. 5.5.

Thus the mighty work of faith is wrought in us by God, who is distinguished
into Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which do unseparably, undividably, and
unconfusedly work this grace in our hearts, in their personal order, making
us to believe, and hope in God.

CHAP. IX.
Hope is the Work of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
HOpe is the Work of God alone; it is the God of hope that must fill us with
hope, Romans 15.3. He is the God of hope, first, objecttive, our hope is to be
placed on him: Secondly, effective; our hope first is wrought by him only:
Secondly, He it is likewise that cherishes this hope in us; Paul therefore
prays to him for the increase thereof, Romans 13.13.

The working of hope in our souls, the Scripture ascribes to the Father, to
the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

First, the Father works hope in us; Paul acknowledges it, 2 Thessalonians. 2.16.
and Peter blesses the Father for begetting us again to a lively hope, 1 Pet.
1.3. He stablisheth our hearts, and gives us everlasting consolation, and good
hope through grace, 2 Thessalonians. 2.16, 17.

Secondly, the Son works hope in us; so the Apostle acknowledges; and he
prays to him for the Thessalonians; first, that he would establish them, and
give them everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace, 2 Thessalonians. 2.16,
17.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost works hope in us, Romans 5.5. We abound in hope,
through the power of the Holy Ghost, Romans 13.13. We through the Spirit wait for
the hope of righteousness, which is by faith, Gal. 5.5. He it is that gives
us consolation and comfort, Act. 9.29.

The Father, the Word, and the Spirit, do undividably cooperate in working
hope in our hearts, though there be a distinct and personal order observed by
them, in working this and all other graces in our souls.

CHAP. X.
True saving or sanctifying knowledge, is a Work of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
NOt only outward illumination, which God does sometime bestow on wicked men,
is a work of the Lord, (as I have showed) but also that knowledge which
accompanies justifying faith, and is proper only to the Elect is a work of
God, and is proper to him alone to effect, Exodus 4.11. Man alone cannot effect
it. Aristotle, a man of the deepest reach that antiquity ever bread, amongst
the many books he wrote, and are in part extant, how little did he write of
God; and how uncomfortably did he die in the midst of all his knowledge? Anxius
vixi dubious morior, nescio, quo vado. Bois on 1 John 5.6. I have lived
waveringly, I dye doubtfully; I know not whether I go. With all his wisdom,
and with all his experience, he could not give any true and proper knowledge,
but only that which is falsely so called, 1 Timothy 6.20. Those things never
entered into the heart of man, which God has prepared for them that love him,
1 Cor. 2.8, 9. Angels knew not the mysteries of Christ, till it was revealed by
God to his Church, Ephesians. 3.10. 1 Pet. 1.12. They did not teach the Church this
wisdom, but by the Church this wisdom of God is known unto them, Ephesians. 3.8,
9, 10. God alone is the teacher thereof, Esa. 54.13. He opens the heart to
receive it, Act. 16.14. He covenanteth with his Church to write his Law in
their hearts, Heb. 8.10. Yea the Scripture calls it, the giving of a new
heart, Ezekiel. 36.26. Ezekiel. 11.19. a work that God alone can effect.

First, the Father gives us this knowledge, the faithful learn it of him,
John 6.45. Peter's holy confession of Christ, was a work wrought in him by the
Father, Matthew. 16.17. and Paul prays to him for this grace on the Ephesians,
Ephesians. 1.17. and acknowledges he receives it from him, Gal. 1.16. And Christ
gives thanks to his Father, for hiding it from the prudent, and revealing it
to babe^, Mat. 11.25. Luke 10.21.

Secondly, the Son gives us this as well as other graces, Ephesians. 4.8. He
declares God to us, John 1.18. Paul, though brought up at Gamaliels feet, and
taught according to the perfect manner of the Law of the Fathers, Acts 22.3.
yet knew not the Gospel, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.12. He
is she light of the world, John 3.19. John 12.46. He gives light to the
faithful, Ephesians. 5.14. John 1.9. Luke 2.32. He reveals the knowledge of God to
us, Mat. 11.27. Luke 10.22. He opens the understanding, ^uke 24.45 He gives
us understanding, that we may know him that is true, 1 John 5.20. He teaches
us, Ephesians. 4.21, 22.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost gives us this knowledge, 1 Cor. 12.8. Neh. 9.20. he
is therefore styled the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord, Esa.
11.2. God reveals the hidden mysteries of our salvation by his Spirit, 1 Cor.
2.10, 11. neither can w^ know them without him, 1 Cor. 2.12. He teaches all
things, Joh. 14.26. 1 John 2.27.

We must learn of God, what we must think of him. It is a vain labor to
seek for any knowledge of him, without him; who is no otherwise known of us,
but as he reveals himself to us; which revelation of himself, is a work of
the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. XI.
The Union that is between God and us, is a work of the Father, of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost.
THere is a near Union between the Lord and every believer: The Lord is his
Churches portion, Psalm. 142.5. Psalm 73.26. Jer. 51.19. Jer. 10.16. Lam. 3.24.
And the Church is Gods portion, Jer. 12.10. Deuteronomy. 32.9.

By faith which the Lord works in our souls, and by his Spirit, which he
sends forth into our hearts, Gal. 4.6. we are united to him, 2 Pet. 1.4. we
have communion with him, 1 John 1.3. and he dwells in us, 1 John 4, 12. and
we in him, 1 John 4.13.

First, the Father uniteth us to himself, John 17.21. And secondly, we have
fellowship and communion with him, 1 John 1.3. And thirdly, in regard of this
communion, he dwells in us, John 14.23. and we in him, 1 Thessalonians. 11. 2 Thessalonians.
1.1.

Secondly, the Son uniteth us to himself, John 17.21. Secondly, we have
communion and fellowship with him, 1 John 1.3. And in regard of this communion,
thirdly, he dwells in us, for so he promises, Zach. 2.10. John 14.23. and
that he performs by residing in the hearts of all believers, Ephesians. 3.17. Col.
1.27. John 6.56. 2 Cor. 13.5. And we likewise are in him, 2 Cor. 5.17. 1 Thessalonians.
1.1. 2 Thessalonians. 1.1. Phil. 1.1. Ephesians. 1.1. Romans 16.7. John 6.56.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost uniteth us to himself, 1 Cor. 6.17. Secondly, we have
communion and fellowship with him, 2 Cor. 13. last. Phil. 2.1. And in r^gard of
this communion, thirdly, the Holy Ghost dwells in us, 2 Timothy 1.14. Romans 8.9,
11. 1 Cor. 13.16. 1 Cor. 6.19. Jam. 4.5. 1 Pet. 4.14. And we are in him, Jude
20. 1 Cor. 12.3. Gal. 5.16. Gal. 5.26.

Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are the husbands of the Church, in the plural
number, Esa. 54.5. and yet but one Lord, for so it follows, The Lord of Hosts
is his Name.

Oh the soule-ravishing estate of the believer, who has God so nearly united
to him, and has such a sweet communion b^tweene the Lord and his soul, that
God dwells in him, and he through Christ in him. And there is no wonder, that
the Lord bestows this, and all other mercies on his soul, when as it
pleases him to adopt him to himself, to be his son, which also is a work
of God.

CHAP. XII.
Adoption is a work of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
ADoption is a work proper to God: He alone adopteth children to himself; who
both can, and will, and also does make them Heirs of God, even joint Heirs
with Christ in Glory, Romans 8.17. Which grace of adoption is the undivided work
of one God in three Persons; who as he is our Father, so we are his children by
adoption, who of his own will begat us, Jam. 1.18. we being begotten by
counsel, and not by nature. ^or so the Lord Jesus is the only begotten Son of
the Father, ^oh. 3.16, 18. Joh. 1.14, 18. 1 John 4.9. the Father being his
proper Father, Joh. 5.18, and he his proper Son, Romans 8.32.

First, the Father adopteth us. He has predestined us to the adoption of
children by Christ, Ephesians. 1.5. It is our everlasting happiness, that we are so
nearly admitted into the presence of God, that his only Son stands betwixt
us and him; and that the Lord Jesus calls us his brethren, Heb. 2.11. by the
Fathers choice of us in him.

Secondly, the Son adopteth us: As many as received him, he gave power to
become the Sons of God, even to them as believe in his name, John 1.12.

Thirdly, The Holy Ghost adopteth us; and therefore he is called the Spirit of
Adoption, Romans 8.15. He it is that makes us children of God, Romans 8.14. As
many as are led by the Spirit nf God, they are the Sons of God. The Spirit
leading us, as a Father leads his child.

Adoption therefore is a work of the Father, of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, being styled our Father, as in the Lords Prayer; where the name
Father is not taken personally, but essentially; namely, for one God
distinguished into three persons. And surely the Son and the Holy Ghost have
this Name Father ascribed to them in Scripture (as I have showed) and they are
with the first Person, a Father to us, not only in regard of Adoption, but
also in regard of Regeneration or Sanctification; as I shall show.

CHAP. XIII.
Sanctification is a work of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
SAnctification, which in Scripture is sometimes called Regeneration,
Renovation, Conversion, Repentance, New Life, New obedience, etc. is the Work
of God, Joh. 1.13. If to create man be in the power of God alone; then surely
to re-create him, is in his power only. For the former is called the work of
Gods fingers, Psalm. 8. but the latter is ascribed to the strength of hi^ arms,
Luke 1. And surely none is able to repair the depravations of nature, but the
God of nature. He it is that takes from us our hearts of stone, and gives
unto us an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 11.19. Ezekiel. 36 26. The Lord challenges it as
his work, I am the Lord that sanctify you, Levit. 20.8. Paul prays to God
to effect this grace thoroughly in the Thessalonians, 1 Th^ss. 5.23. He gives
men repentance, 2 Timothy 2.25. He quickneth those thae are dead in trespasses,
and in sins, Ephesians. 2.1, 5. He brings to the birth, and he brings forth,
Esa. 66.9. He says to them which lie weltring in the blood of their natural
uncl^annesse, Live, Ez k. 16.

Secondly, they that are sanctified, are the children of God, Joh. 1.12, 13.
borne of the Spirit, John 3.5. and borne of God, 1 John 3.9.

Although the Scripture usually ascribes sanctification to the Holy Ghost who
does peculiarly terminate this work; yet it is not to exclud^ the Father, and
the Son from it.

First, the Father sanctifies us, Joh. 17.17. The Lord Jesus prays to his
Father to sanctify his Disciples, no^ only to the office of an Apostleship,
but to a fuller me sure of grace, as 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. The Father begette^h us
ag^ine to a lively hope, 1 Pet 1.3. He makes us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1.12. which is done by sanctification:
For without holi^esse no man shall see God, Heb. 12.14. The Lord will have none
to dwell with him in happiness, which will not h ve him to dwell with them in
holiness. Yea Jude ^leerly manifests, Jude 1. that we are sanctsfied by God
the Father

Secondly, The Son sanctifies us: If he wash not us, we have no part in him,
Joh. 13.8. we are sanctified in him, 1 Cor. 6.11. 1 Cor. 1.2. He sanctifies
and cleanses his Church, Ephesians. 5.26. Mal. 3.2. He is to them as a refiners fire
to try them, and not as a consuming fire to d^stroy them. He purifieth to
himself a peculiar people zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. they being a
peculiar people to him, must yield peculiar obedience to him. He presents us
holy and blameless, Col. 1.22. He that sanctifies (says the Apostle) Heb.
2.11. and they that are sanctified, are all of one; for which cause he is not
ashamed to call them brethren. The Lord Jesus sanctifies us two ways: First,
as God equal with the Father; so he sanctifies by the power of his Deity,
even by faith in him, Acts 26.18. Secondly, as he is God and man, our Redeemer,
so he sanctifies us by the merits of his humanity, Heb. 9.9, 10, 14. Heb.
10.10. washing us with his blood, 1 John 1.7. Rev. 1.5.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost sanctifies us, 1 Peter 1.2. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. 1 Cor.
6.11. Romans 15.16. For which cause all the graces in us are called the fruits of
the Spirit, Ephesians. 5.9. Gal. 5.22. we are borne again of the Spirit, John 3.6,
8. For as Christ the head was conceived by the Holy Ghost, Matthew 1.18. so the
mystical Body of Christ is regenerated and borne again of the Spirit, Joh.
3.5. and renewed of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. We are changed into the Image of
the Lord by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. who is the Spirit of
holiness, Romans 1.4. who is holy in himself, and also works holiness in us,
gradually cleansing us from all impurity. Things are purified two ways from
natural corruptions; first by fire; secondly, by water. And thus in the
Leviticall Law, things legally unclean, were l^gally purified, Number. 21.33. And
surely the Holy Ghost in regard of his cleansing us from spiritual
corruptions, is usually compared to these two Elements; first to fire, as Mark.
9.49. Matthew. 3.11. Secondly, to water, as Eze. 36.25. with 27. 1 Cor. 6.11.
Esa. 44.3. Joel. 2.28.

Sanctification is thetefore an essential work of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, which is signified to us in our Baptism being baptized
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19.
We are washed therefore, and cleansed from sin, by the joint, yet undivided
work of the three persons of one Essence; who are not divided in working, as
they are not divided in nature; but are one God in nature, and in working, as
will appear in the particular effects and fruits of sanctification; some
whereof I have already treated of. It now remains, that I further manifest
how the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, do cooperate, both in the
beginning progress, and full perfecting this work in us; showing how that
they do draw us, and quicken us, and increase grace already wrought in us.

CHAP. XIIII.
The Father, the Word, and the Spirit, do draw us.
THe Scripture sets forth our unwillingnesse in the first act of our
conversion two ways, by two several sorts of Metaphors: First, by comparing
us to an unwilling creature, that will not follow, but it must be drawn.
Secondly, by comparing us to a dead creature, that cannot follow, unless it be
made alive. First, God draws and leads us to himself: he drew the
Israelites with the cords of love, with the bands of a man, Hos. 11.4. God of
us men, that are unwilling by nature, does make us willing through grace,
powerfully inclining our wills and affections to follow himself; we having
without him no sufficiency of our selves, 2 Cor. 3.5. 1 Cor. 4.7.

This work is equally wrought, both by

First, God the Father, who draws us to Christ, for so the Lord Jesus
witnesses, John 65 44. No man can come to me, except the Father that sent me,
draw him, And surely when the Father has drawn us into Christ's hands, it is
not all the powers of the Prince of darkness shall draw us back, Mat. 16.18.
Joh. 10.29. It is a gift given to us of the Father, that we have any power to
do good, Joh. 6.65. Jam. 1.17.

Secondly, God the Son, who draws us to himself; so he promises, John
12.30. When he is lifted up from the earth, he will draw all men to him; and
thus the Church desires of Christ, Cant. 1.3. Draw me, and we will run after
thee. And no wonder, for without him we can do nothing, Joh. 15.4, 5. it is
from him we have power to do good, Phil. 413. he it is that strengthens us
with his grace, that all the principalities and powers of the Prince of
darkness, shall never pluck us away, or draw us back from him, Joh. 10.28.

Thirdly, God the Holy Ghost, who draws us, Jer. 31.3. who in the same
chapter (as I have showed out of the 31. verse, with Heb. 10.15, 16.) makes a
Covenant with us. He it is that the children of God are led by, Romans 8.14. even
as blind and impotent persons by a guide. We cannot confess Jesus to be the
Lord without him, 1 Cor. 12.3.

Through Christ we have an access by one spirit unto the Father, Ephesians. 2.18.
Lo all the three Persons described by the Apostle, in working this work: The
Father, to whom we have access; the Son, as the way, Joh. 14.6. through whom
we have access, and the Holy Ghost in whom we have access, as our guide and
Conductor.

There is there distinct and Personal order of working, in which they work as
they are three distinct Persons, whose Power and Essence is one, as their work
is one; In respect therefore of the Essence, there may be said to be one common
operation, but in respect of the distinction of Persons, there is a distinct
manner of working,

CHAP. XV.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, do quicken us.
THe Lord quickneth us with his grace, who were dead in tres^asses and sins,
Ephesians. 5.1, 5. 1 Timothy 5.6. Mat. 8.22. It is a Work of one God in three Persons to
give not only corporal life, 2 Kin. 5.7. but also spiritual life, Hos. 6.1,
2.

First the Father quickneth whom he will, Joh. 5.21.

Secondly, the Son quickneth whom he will, Joh. 5.21.

Thirdly the Holy Ghost quickneth, Joh. 6.63. Romans 8.11. and it is whom he
will, he quickneth; For he di^^^eth his Gra es severally as he will, 1 Cor.
12.8, 11.

This mighty Work of quickening those that were dead in trespasses and sins,
is wrought by the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, who do cooperate and
yet are one and the same efficient cause (as they are one God) of that
spiritual life which the children of God live by.

CHAP. XVI.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, do give Grace to us, and multiply
Grace on us.
THe Lord does not only give Grace to us, but he also increases his gifts,
and multiplyeth his graces on us. He is the God of peace, that sanctifies us
throughout, 1 These. 5.23. he does begin good in us, he does perfect it, he does
finish it, Phil. 1.6. Phil. 2.13.

This is an essential work of God, and is common to the Father, to the Son,
and to the Holy Ghost.

First, the Father gives us Grace and Peace; For this cause the Apostles pray
to him for it, Ephesians. 1.2. Col. 1.2. Phil. 1.2. Romans 1.7. Rev. 1.4. and he
multiplieth his Graces, he gives us, Jude ver. 2.

Secondly, the Son gives us Grace, and Peace; For this cause the Apostles
pray to him for it, Col. 1.2. Ephesians. 1.2. 1 These. 1.1. Rev. 1.4, 5. and he
multiplyeth those Graces he gives us, 2 Pet. 1, 2. Jude ver. 2.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost gives us Grace and peace; The Apostle for this cause
prays to him for it, Rev. 1.4. who though one, Ephesians. 2.18. 2 Cor. 11.4. 1 Cor.
12.4. yet is he called the seven Spirits; First, in regard of his manifold
Gifts and operations to all Churches; Secondly, in regard of particular
relation that he had to these seven Churches, to whom John wrote; Thirdly, he
describes him, as he saw him in the Vision, who is after described of John, as
seen of him in the form of seven lights, Rev. 4.5. Secondly, he multiplyeth
the graces he gives us, strengthening us with might in the Inner man, Ephesians.
3.16.

It is the undivided Work of one God in three Persons to give grace, and to
multiply on the Church those graces he has given it, causing it to increase
with the increase of God, as Paul speaks, Col. 2.19.

CHAP. XVII.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost do give Testimony to us, assuring
us we are the Lords.
THe Lord does not only give Grace to us, and increase the Graces he has
wrought in us, 1 These, 5.24. Phil. 1.6. but also witnesses to our souls the
sincerity of these graces, he works in us, and testifies in our hearts his
salvation he has wrought in Christ for us; for surely, he that alone made the
heart, he that alone searches the heart, he that alone works grace in the
heart, can alone testify unto the heart with comfort, Act. 15.8. the truth of
those soule-satisfying graces that he has wrought in us, whenas by faith he
purifyeth the heart, Act. 15.9. The comfortable attestation of these graces
therefore in our hearts, is a work of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who
(as I have already showed, made the heart, know the heart, and work grace in
the heart, and do work in witnesse-bearing to our hearts, of the truth of
those soule-comforting graces, that are therein.)

First the Father witnesses it to us; he sends forth his Spirit into our
hearts, whereby we cry Abba Father, Gal. 4.6.

Secondly, the Son witnesses it to us; he is the true and faithful
witness, Rev. 3.16. Rev. 1.5. he witnesses in us our salvation, 1 Cor. 1.6.
and testifyeth to us the comfort that are in his word.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost witnesses it to us; he bears witness with our
spirits, that we a^e the Children of God, Romans 8.16.

There is three that bear record in heaven, (which do not only testify
Christ to be the Messiah, or Savior of the world, but also to be our Messiah,
and Savior) the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one,
1 John 5.7. one God, one witness. Yea, our Savior Christ speaks of this
testimony plurally, Joh. 3.11. we speak that we do know, and testify that we
have seen, and ye receive not our witness,; a place not to be paralelld in
the Evangelists, where our Savior speaks plurally: not in the name of John
Baptist, or the Prophets; (for their authority could no way add to his,
neither did he receive testimony from man, Joh. 5.34. where he spoke it most
peculiarly in regard of John, Joh. 5.33.) but he spoke in his Fathers name, and
also in the Holy Spirits name, whose testimony and authority he often urged, Joh.
5.32. Joh. 8.18. Luke 4.18, 19. and surely if Angel, or Archangel, or any
Creature in heaven or in earth, should only witness our salvation to ^s in
Christ, we might then doubt; but why should we doubt, when the Lord himself
witnesses it? First by word, calling us in Scriptures his Children; Secondly,
by deeds, working in us grace, which are the fruits of his spirit, Gal. 5.22.
and Thirdly, by seal, (as I shall now show ratifying it to our souls, Ephesians.
1.13.

CHAP. XVIII.
Sealing of us is a Work of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost
FIrst, sealing is a note of appropriation; we work that which is our own, and
that which we have confirmed and sealed, we do account it our own, now these
whom the Lord chooses to himself, he seals The Lord knows who are his,
having this seal, 2 Timothy; 2.9.

Secondly, sealing is a sign of distinction; Lawyers cause seals to be put to
Evidences, Merchants set marks on their wares, and Shepherds have brands for
their sheep to know and distinguish them. Thus Christ in a peculiar manner is
sealed of God the Father, Joh 6.27. and all the Elect are seal^d in him, Ephesians.
1.4.

Thirdly, sealing is a work of conforming; There is a likeness of the seal
imprinted on the thing sealed; and surely when the child of God is sealed of
God, there is then an Image of God wrought on his soul.

God therefore seals us; First to appropriate us as his own; Secondly, to
distinguish us from others; Thirdly, to conform us to his own Image; which
work of sealing us is wrought by one God in three Persons.

First, God the Father seals us; so the Apostle shows, Ephesians. 1.13. 2 Cor.
1.22.

Secondly, the Son seals us, Ezekiel. 9.3, 4. He is the Angel of the Covenant,
Mal. 3.1. that has the seal of the living God, Rev. 7.2. who though an Angel
by name yet is he not an Angel, but a Son by nature, Heb, 2.16. Heb. 1.3. to
13. where the Apostle distinguishes the creating Son from the created
Angels, plainly proving the Son to be the Creator, but Angels to be but
creatures.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost seals us; Grieve not the Holy spirit of God, by
which we are sealed to the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. where the Apostle
meets with two contrary errors, First, the Righteous after their calling may
fall into sin, and so grieve the spirit God, yet, Secondly, they cannot fall
totally and finally, for they are sealed by the spirit of God to the day of
redemption.

Sealing of us therefore is the Work of one God, who is one in Power, Will,
and Operation, who seals his Children in their hearts, confirming them
thereby to his own Image; and also sealing them in their foreheads; imboldening
them to profess him. By the former he makes us to love him, by the latter he
causes us to acknowledge him.

CHAP. XIX.
Christian Liberty is a Work of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost.
BEing Redeemed, Justified, Adopted, and Sanctified, and sealed by God, we have
the glorious Liberty of the children of God; We that were Bondmen by nature,
Tit. 3.3. Ephesians. 2.2, 3. become the Lords freemen through gtace, 1 Cor. 7.22,
Lawyers tell us, that if any Lord of a Manor do contract with his Villain,
(...) is by that Act of his Lords d^liv^^^^^ from his most slavish tenure of
Villenage, and made free thereby; surely, the Lord our God condescending so
low, as to covenant with us in Christ, he does thereby free us from that
slavish tenure we held by since Adams fall, and makes us therewith free
Denizens of Heaven, fellow-Citizens of the Saints, and of the household of God,
Ephesians. 2.19. we are freed from sin, Romans 6.22. Romans 6.14. Romans 8.33. we are set
at liberty from Satan, Heb. 2.14, 15. Luke 11.21, 22. from the Law, Romans 7.3,
6. Gal. 5.18. Romans 6.18. from it is curses and maledictions, Gal. 3.13. from
it is condemnation, Romans 8.1. and from its rigor, Gal. 3.10. there was
Personal, Universal, Actual, and Constant obedience required in every title,
which left no place of repentance, (Repentance being an Evangelicall grace, the
proper privilege of the covenant of grace; Christ came from heaven to publish
it, Luke 5.31, 32. Mat. 4.17. he shed his blood to purchase it, Act. 5.31. he
bids his Disciples to preach it, Luke 24.47. and surely therefore it cannot be
legal: the apostatizing Angels had not the benefit of it, nor man, till Christ
had purchased it,) Christ has freed us from this rigor of the Law, and from
the wrath of God, Romans 5.9. 1 These. 1.10.

This Work is a Work of God, none could effect it. But,

First, the Father procures us Liberty; He delivers us from captivity. Paul
gives thanks to God for it, Romans 7.24 25. where God is taken Essentially, and
not Personally, for the Son and Holy Ghost free us from our slavish captivity
together with the Father.

Secondly, the Son procures us Liberty, Gal. 5.1. Stand fast in the Liberty
wherewith Christ has made you free. There are two things which the Lord has
entrusted in his Churches hand, First, christian faith, for which we must
earnestly contend, Jude ver. 3. Secondly, christian Liberty in which we must
stand fast; The Apostle calls it the Liberty we have in Christ, Gal. 2.4.
which is Christian liberty, not only because we must use it to the glory of
Christ, and according to his rules; but because he is the Author of it. If the
Son make you free, then are you free indeed, Joh. 8.36. he delivers us who
through fear of death were all our lifetime subject to bondage, Heb. 2.15.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost gives us liberty, 2 Cor. 3.15. where the Spirit of
the Lord is, the^e is liberty. David calls the Holy Ghost the free Spirit,
Psalm. 51.12. First, because he works freely in us, 1 Cor. 12.11. Secondly,
because he works freedom in us, and for us; and therefore the Apostle
tells us: The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ has made us free from the
law of sin and death, Romans 8.2.

It is manifest Christian liberty is a work of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, who work this work in us, and for us; God loosing us from all
bondage, that we may serve him, Luke 1.74. and delivers us from the slavery
of our enemies, to tie us more firmly to his service.

CHAP. XX.
Salvation, or Glorification, is a Work of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost.
SAlvation, or Glorification, is the work of God alone. I, even I, am the
Lord, and besides me there is no Savior, Isai. 41.11. Isa. 43.23. he saves
us, 1 Timothy 1.9. he gives us eternal life, Romans 6. last. Ephesians. 2.8.

First, the Father saves us, so he promises, Hos. 1.7. I will save them by
the Lord their God. Here are two Persons styled Jehovah; First, the Father
promises to save Israel; Secondly the Son by whom this deliverance is
wrought, and Israel is saved. And the Lord Jesus tells us, John 10.29. None
can pluck his sheep out of his Fathers hands. Intimating thereby, that he will
preserve them to that Kingdom which he has prepared for them, Matthew. 25.34.
and according to his good pleasure gives them it, Luke 12.32. And to this end
out of his love to us, was it, that he gave his only begotten Son for us,
John 3.16. yea, even for his little ones, those who are little in their own
eyes through humility, little in the eyes of others through contempt: yet it is
not his will that any one of these little ones should perish, Matthew. 18.14.

Secondly, the Son saves us, John 6.33. He gives life to the world. So the
Father promises, Hos. 1.7. and he himself affirms, that he will give them
that are faithful to death a Crown of life, Rev. 2.10. He gives his sheep
eternal life, John 10.28. It is his mercy we must look for unto eternal life,
Jude ver. 21. It is his Name by which we are saved, Act. 4.12. There is no
other Name given under heaven whereby we must be saved. According to the merit
of our salvation, Christ Jesus is alone; But according to the efficacy, and
application of it, it is common to him with the Father, and the Holy Ghost.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost saves us. He is the Spirit of life, Romans 8. that
gives life to us, we being saved by the renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5.
who promises to give to them that overcome, to eat of the tree of life, Rev.
2.7. and that they shall not be hurt of the second death, Rev. 2.12.

Thus these Actions and Works of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are
their joint and undivid^d Works, because there is not in God a divided, or
multiplied Essence, but one and the same divine Essence; it being the same God
which works all in all, 1 Cor. 12.6. The unity of whose working depends on
the unity of their power. That therefore which the Scripture ascribes to one
Person of the Godhead, it ascribes sometimes to another. As in the seven
Epistles to the Churches in Asia, the Son in the beginning is described as
the Author of them; yet in the conclusion we must here what is spoken, as
spoken by the Spirit of the seven Churches, Rev. 2. Rev. 3. Again, the gifs
that are given to the seven Churches, some times the Spirit does promise them,
as to Ephesus, Rev 2.7. to Smyrna, Rev. 2.11. to Pergamus, Rev. 2.17. and
sometimes Jesus Christ promises them, as to Thyatyra. Rev. 2.28. to Sardis,
Rev. 3.5. to Phyladelphia. Rev. 3.12. to Laodicea, Rev. 3.21.

Though therefore the Scripture in setting down the graces, does usually ascribe
them to the Father, in the Son, and by the Spirit, Ephesians. 1.4, 5. 1 Cor.
6.10. Tit. 3.4, 5. This order of dispensation holds forth unto us a
distinction of persons only, and no division of Essence. It shows an order
in which they work; no inequality in regard of their Nature, Essence, and
Substance which is one: their Majesty, Power, and Glory is one, though in
respect of the distinction of Persons, they are Relatives: and therefore so are
not one, but are thus co-equall and co-eternall.

Oh that we would look into the Glass of Gods Word, then might we see
clearly, how the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost do work in all their
Works in us, and for us. Oh what unspeakable comfort would this work in our
souls, to prais^ God for his mercies. And Oh what soule-comforting matter
would this yield to stir up our Brethren to praise the Lord for his mercies,
there might we say one to another, Come, and hear all ye that fear God, and I
will tell you what he has done for my soul, Psalm. 66.16. then might we sing
praise one with another, saying, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from
everlasting to everlasting, and let all the people say Amen, Praise ye the
Lord, Psalm. 106.48.

The fourth Book.
Divine Honor is given to FATHER, SON, and HOLY GHOST.
CHAP. I.
The Scriptures manifest the Son and the Holy Ghost to be God equal with the
Father by ascribing to them equally with the Father, such Honor and religious
worship as is due to God only.
THEY who have the same Honor, or religious Worship given truly to them, which
is given to the Father, are God equal with the Father.

But the Son and Holy Ghost have the same honor given truly unto them, as is
given to the Father.

Therefore the Son, and Holy Ghost are God, equal with the Father.

I shall first clear the major, (though undeniably true) and then show the
truth of the minor in diverse particulars.

The Lord is a jealous God, Exodus 20.4. As a King of his Church he will not
endure a partner in his throne: or as a Husband of her, he will not away with a
Rival in his bed. He will not give his Glory to another, nor his praise to
Graven Images, Isai. 42.8. We are to worship the Lord, and to do service to
him only, Mat. 4.8. we are not to do service to any that is not a God by
Nature, Gal. 4.8. The Apostle blamed the Heathen for this sin, much more it
is blameworthy in Christians. He may wink at gross Idolatries in them, Act.
17.30. which he will not pardon in his own people, Amos 3.2. The Lord knew
Israel by his mercies, and he will make Israel know by his judgments what it
is to sin against him. If therefore the Heathenish Galathians may not do
service to them that are not Gods by Nature, much more may not Christians give
this honor unto him, who is not a God by Nature. Where the distinction inter
(...), will not serve the true, for he reproves them that (...) gave service
to them which by nature are no Gods. If the Lord Jesus be no God by Nature, nor
the Holy Ghost, how is that Divine Honor has been given to the Son and
Holy Ghost equally with the Father? Does not the Scripture enjoyne such worship
to be given to them as is due to God alone? For first Religious worship is due
to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; First, from Men: Secondly, from Angels:
Thirdly, we are to obey and serve: Fourthly, Love: Fifthly, Hear: Sixthly
Know: Seventhly, Believe: Eighthly, Hope or trust in them: Ninthly, to be
baptized in their name: Tenthly, Paul swears by them: Eleventhly, we are to
pray to them: Twelfthly, praise is given to them by men: Thirteently, Angels:
Fourteenthly, the Temple was built: Fifthteenthly, and Sacrifice offered to
them: Sixthteenthly, we are to glorify in our lives the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, who though distinguished into three Persons, yet are
Essentially one, and the same eternal and everliving Lord God.

CHAP. II.
Divine worship is due from man to the Father, to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost,
DIvine and Religious Worship is due to God, both from men and Angels.

First, Religious worship is due to God from men. So our Savior answered Satan
tempting him to worship him, Mat. 4.4. Thou shall worship the Lord ^^y God, and
him only shall thou serve.

This one God whom we are to worship, is the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost.

First, God the Father is to be wor^hiped. The true Worshippers worship the
Father in Spirt and in truth, and the Father seeks such to worship him, Joh.
4.23.

Secondly, the Son is to be worshipped. So Isaiah shows that every knee
shall bow to him, Isa. 45.23. That this was the Lord Jesus, Paul manifests,
Romans 14.10, 11. So likewise the Church is commanded, Psa. 45.11. He is thy Lord
(it is spoken of Christ) and worship thou him. Yea, all the faithful are thus
enjoined, Psalm. 2.12. Kiss the Sun lest he be angry? There was a kiss of
homage due to Christ from all the world, even such a kiss of homage Samuel
gave to Saul, when he anointed him King, 1 Samuel 10.1. Idolaters did
superstitiously give this to their Idols; as the Arabians when they saw the new
Moon, because they could not reach to kiss her, they kissed their hands in
homage to her; from this Idolatry Job purges himself; If I beheld the Sun
when it shined, or the Moon walking in brightness; And my heart has been
secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand; This were an iniquity to be
punished by the Judge, for I should have denied the God that is above, Job
31.26, 27, 28. Thus the Israelites gave this kiss of homage to their Calves,
Hos. 13.2. and to Baal, 1 King. 19.18. giving that worship due to Christ to
their Idols; yea, when Christ required faith of the blind man, he received
faith and worship of him, Joh. 9.35.38. he was also worshipped of the holy
women, Mat. 28.9. and of his Disciples, Luke 24.52. Mat. 28.17. and of the
Cananitish woman, Mat. 15.25.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is to be worshipped, Psalm. 95.6. The Prophets inviteth
all to worship him, whom he after introduces, speaking in the four next
verses, where the Apostle shows to be the Holy Ghost, Heb. 3.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
The Church ministered unto the Lord and fasted, Act. 13.2. that the Lord whom
they ministered in the Holy Ghost is evident, for he that was supplicated to,
and worshipped, gives an answer to them; As they ministered to the Lord and
fasted; separate me Paul and Barnabas for the work whereunto I have called
them; and they obey his voice and send them forth at his command, Act. 13.4.
and surely, he that has Temples consecrated to his service, has, or ough to
have worship given to him in those Temples. How therefore are we the Temples of
the Holy Ghost? 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. 1 Cor. 6.19. why are we consecrated in
baptism to his worship and service? Mat. 28.19. if we may not worship him? if
we may not serve him? moreover we are to believe in him, (so we profess in the
Creed.) Him therefore whom we believe in, we may worship. The Apostle joyneth
faith and invocat^on together, Rom, 10.14. we are therefore to serve God the
Spirit; So Ambrose Lib. 2. de Spirit. Sanct, would have Phil. 3.3. to be read
according to the Original.

The Son, and the Holy Ghost in whom (as I shall show) we are to believe in
with the Father, and to whom in baptism we give up our names to serve them,
who are one God with the Father, ought to have one and the same worship given
to them with the Father, who will not give his glory to another: neither would
he join himself in covenanting with his Church, to have the same worship
given by her to them, if that they were not in the form of God, and had not
one and the same Essence with him, being equal with him in Majesty and glory.

CHAP. III.
The Angels do worship, serve, and minister at the command of the Father, of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
DIvine worship is due to God from Angels, Neh. 9.6. The Host of heaven
worshipeth him, and he commands and gives charge to them, Psalm. 91.11. and
they are ministering spirits, Heb. 1.14. sent forth at the command of the
Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

First, Angels are ministering spirits sent forth at the Fathers command, Heb.
1.7. They behold his face, Mat. 18.10. they stand in the presence of thi^ great
King, and are ready to do his will, who do give worship to him, Rev. 5.11,
12, 13. as John there shows; They worship him who sent Isaiah, Isai. 6.2, 9.
which was the Father, Isai. 48.16.

Secondly, Angels are ministering spirits sent forth at the Sons command, Rev.
22.16. and did minister to him, Mat 4.11. they are his Angels, Mar. 13.27. Mat.
13.41. 2 These. 7.8. and serve him, but attend us, Psa. 91.11, 12. Satan cited
this place falsely, Mat. 4.6. two ways, First, he corrupted the Text, he left
out part of it: Secondly, he mis-applyed the Text to the Lord Christ it being
only true of his Members, for whom he has procured this ministry: for the
Lord Jesus is the head of the Angels, Col. 2.18. and ^ardeth them, they keep
not Christ himself, they were made by him, and for him, Col. 1.16. they
worship him, Rev. 5.11, 12. Heb. 1.6. so Isaiah shows, Isa. 6.2.3. they
worship him who sent the Prophet Isaiah. That it is the Lord Christ whose glory
Isaiah saw when he was sent by him. John a faithful interpreter affirms,
Joh. 12 40, 41. yea, not only the good Angels worship him, but evil Angels
also, First, acknowledge Christ and obey him. Mar. 1.27. Secondly, they
profess Christ, and acknowledge him to be the Son of God, Mar. 1.21. Luke
4.34. Thirdly, they worship him, Mar. 5.6. Fourthly, they pray to him and
beseech him, Mar. 5.10. Luke 8.28. Fifthly, they fear, Mar. 5.7. Luke 8.31.
Sixthly, they believe, Jam. 2.19. That worship which the proud Spirit would
have Christ, Matthew. 4. given him, he gives to Christ fearfully, servilely,
forcedly, Mar. 5.

Thirdly Angels are ministering Spirits sent forth at the Holy-Ghosts command.
So Luke shows, Act. 10. Cornelius sending men to Peter at the command of an
Angel, yet the Holy Ghost is said to send them, Act. 10.20. He sent that Angel
to warn Comelius, who is said to be warned from God by an holy Angel, Act.
10.22. it being God the Holy Ghost as I have showed) that sent him. An Angel is
by him employed as a messenger to direct Philip to Gaza, Act. 8.26. Where the
Holy Ghost (as the Syriack expressly shows) imployeth Philip in preaching to
the Eunuch, Act. 8.29. yea, the Angels worship the Holy Ghost; for he that sent
Isaiah was worshipped of Angels, Isa. 6.2, 3, 9. That this was the Holy Ghost
who sent him, Paul a witness beyond exceptions testifies it, Act. 28.25. and
Isaiah himself averreth it, Isa. 48.16.

The Father, the Son, and the Holy-Gost are of one and the same Divine
Essence and Nature, having one and the same Religious worship given them of
Angels. And surely those who have Divine worship, given them of the Holy
Angels, may be worshipped of the Faithful; for they direct us to God as the
only object of Religious adoration, and Divine worship, Rev. 19.10. Rev. 22.9.
who is alone worthy of worship and honor, and is only religiously to be
served and obeyed as of Angels, so of men.

CHAP. IV.
We are to obey and serve, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
WE are to obey the Lord, and serve him with all our heart, and with all our
soul, Deu. 10.12. It was Samuels command to Israel, that they should serve the
Lord-onely, 1 Samuel 7.5, and Isreal's commendation by Samuel, that they served
the Lord only, 1 Samuel 7.4. It is the honor which he requires of us, and
which he will not give to another; this obedience he accounts for sacrince,
Heb. 13.16. yea, he prefers it before sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15.22. It was the
sin of the Idolatrous Gentiles to give the Lords service to Devils, 1 Cor.
10. and to serve the creature more then the Creator, Rom 1.25. whenas they
yielded obedience, and did service to them which by nature are no Gods, Gal.
4.8. we who are dehorted from being the servants of men, are exhorted to serve
and obey the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

First, the Father is to be obeyed and served. And herein we have the example
of Christ, who was in the form of God, and equal with God in regard of his
Divine Nature: yet taking on him the form of a servant, he humbled himself,
and as Man became obedient, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. or as the Apostle expresses it,
Heb. 5.8. Though a Son, ^et learned he obedience. Obedience being not due in
regard of stis Divine Nature, but he barned it as Man. Though he was most dear
to his Father, yet the Father imposes, and the Son willingly undergoeth both
a bitter death on his body, as also the wrath of God lying heavy on his soul,
Isa. 53.4, 5, 6. which made his body to sweat no faint dew, but solid drops of
blood, Luke 22.43. and his soul (as Mark expresses it) began (...) to be
astonished with terror, and ready to dye with grief, Mar. 14.33. These
unknown sufferings, felt by him, not distinctly known to us, made him to
complain to the Apostles, Mar. 14.34. and to cry to his Father, Mar. 14.36.
Mar. 15.34. Heb. 5.7. And yet he for our sakes, and for our example willingly
obeyed and suffered. And there is good reason why we should obey likewise the
Father, we are not our own, we are his, Joh. 17.16. Thine they are, faith
Christ of his Disciples to his Father.

Secondly, the Son is to be obeyed, and served. It was prophesied of Christ,
Psalm. 72.11. Dan. 7.14.27. All Nations should serve him; this Kingdom is given
to him as the Son of Man, Dan. 7.13, 14. Luke 1.32. but it was his own as he
is the Son of God, John 16.15. The Lord Jesus is Lord of all, Act. 10.36.
First, by right of Creation, he created all, John 1.2. Col. 1.16. Secondly, by
right of preservation, he preserves all, Heb. 1.3. Col. 1.17. Thirdly, by
right of redemption, he redeemed all his Elect, Ephesians. 5.25. 2 Timothy 2.6. 1 John
2.2. Fourthly, by right of dominion, he rules all, Rev. 19.16. Ephesians. 1.22. and
therefore he is surely to be obeyed and served. He reproves them that call him
Lord, and do not the things that he commands, Luke 6.46. The Israelites were
commanded to obey the voice of the Angel that went before them, for Gods Name
was in him, Exodus 23.21. which was Jehovah, Exodus 13.21. with Exodus 14.19, 24.
Deuteronomy. 1.31, 32. even the Lord Christ's, 1 Cor. 10.9. God the Father being in
him, and he in the Father, John 14.10. Joh. 10.38. And Isaias commands us to
sanctify the Lord God of Hoasts himself: Let him be your fear, and let him
be your dread, and he shall be for a Sanctuary but for a stone of stumbling,
and for a rock of offense to both the houses of Israel, Isai. 8.13.14. That
this Lord of Hoasts whom we are commanded to obey and serve, was the Lord
Jesus: we have four unerring Interpreters: First, Old Simeon guided by the
Holy Ghost, Luke 2.25, 34. Secondly, Christ himself, Mat. 21.48. Luke 20.18.
Thirdly, Peter (to whom the Gospel of Circumcision was committed) 1 Pet. 2.7.
and Fourthly, Paul (to whom the Gospel of uncircumcision was committed) Romans
9.33. all agreeing and interpreting of Christ whom we are to serve, Col. 3.24.
and surely there is good reason why we should obey and serve him, we are not
our own, we are his, 1 Cor. 5.15. 1 Cor. 7.22. purchased with his own blood,
Acts 20.28. and we must bring into Captivity, every thought to the obedience of
Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is to be obeyed and served; Stephen complains of the
Jews for resisting the Holy Ghost, Acts 7.51. Ye always resist the
Holy Ghost, as your Fathers did, so do you. Their Fathers resisted him in the
Wilderness rebelling against him and vexing him, Isai. 63.10. and grieving
him, Heb. 3.7, 9, 10. The Church of Antioch obey him in sending forth Paul and
Barnabas, Acts 13.4. who were to do the work he appointed them, Acts 13.2.
who did obey him in their travels, Acts 13.4. Acts 16.6. and so did Philip,
Acts. 8.29, 30. who being by him, bid only to go to the Chariot of the
Eunuch, he ran thither. And surely there is good reason why we should obey the
Holy Ghost, we are not our own, but his, so the Apostle shows 1 Cor. 6.20.
That this is the Holy Ghost, is evident; for his we are whose Temples we are:
but we are the Temples of the Holy Ghost,, as the Apostle did show in the
former verse, whom we are to serve and obey as God in his Temple.

Oh let us strive to serve and obey the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
whose we are, in regard of all their Works both common and Essential (as I
have showed) to whom by so many ways are we tied to service and obedience; but
more especially are we bound to love him, for he has loved us first, 1 John
4.19.

CHAP. V.
We must love the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
GOD is the only proper Object of our love, whom we must love for himself,
but our Brother in and for God. He is to be loved with all our heart, with all
our soul, and with all our might; this is the first and treatest Commandment,
Mar. 12.30. He is one Lord, Mar. 12.29. but three Persons, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, who is thus to be loved.

First, the Father is thus to be loved. This the Apostle supposes: If any man
love the world, the love of the Father is not in him, 2 John 2.15.

Secondly the Son is thus to be loved. This our Savior enjoyneth us to love
him above our Neighbor of what near relation soever he be to us, yea, above
our self; and therefore with the love required in the first and great
Commandment. It being that love which is due to God alone, Luke 14.26. If any
man come to me, and hate not his Father; and Mother, and Wife, and Children,
and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my
Disciple. The Father loves them that love the Son, John 14.24. And no
marvel for the loving of the Son, is the loving the Father; and the hating
of the Son is the hating of the Father also, John 15.23, 24. Three times did
the Lord demand of Peter, who had three times denied his Lord. Simon son of
Jonas love thou me, John 21.15, 16, 17. yea, the Apostle Paul commands, 1
Cor. 16.22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema
Maranatha, accursed till the Lord comes. And surely, the love of Christ to us
was boundless, Ephe. 3.19. our love to him must be so likewise, if possibly we
can, he is the First and the Last, Rev. 1.17. Rev. 2.8. The first good cause,
and the last good end he is the chief good to the soul, and therefore to be
loved above all by the soul.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is thus to be loved. This the Apostle John supposes.
Every one that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him,
1 John 5.1. We are begotten and regenerated of the Spirit, John 3.5, 6, 8. whom
we are to love above our Brother that is begotten of him: for we are to love
our Brother in him, and for him. Paul beseeches the Romans by the love of the
spirit, Romans 15.30. Not that love wherewith he loved us, but wherewith we love
him. I beseech you says he, for the Lord Jesus sake, and for the love of the
spirit, that ye strive together is your prayers to God for me; But why says
he, for the Lords sake, and for the Spirits sake, or for the love of the
Spirit. Surely it was to set forth unto them his vehement obtestation or
greater desire. There being a greater tie of love that we are bound withal to
the Lord Jesus, and to the Holy Ghost, then there is to any particular Brother,
or to the whole Church of God, for these are equally to be loved with the
Father.

Thus the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost is that one Jehovah, our God
whom we must love with all our hearts, with all our souls, and with all our
mights, Deu. 6.4, 5. where there is two causes employed, why we ought to love
this one Lord; First, for his, own Nature and being. He is Jehovah, who as he
has being of himself, and gives being to us: so he is to be loved of himself
and for himself, but our Brother is to be loved in him and for him; Secondly,
for his Covenant of grace which he made with his Church and people, which
brought Israel out of Egypt, which gave his Law to Israel, which was the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost (as I have showed.) If therefore our love
be free, let us set it on him, who is worthy to be loved; but if our love be
vendible, who is fitter for it then God, who has paid so dear a price for it,
and so dearly bought it? Let us give him our Mites, who has given us so many
Talents? Let us love him with all our hearts, who has loved us with such an
infinite love? Let our whole affection of love be wholly placed on him who is
truly lovely, who placed his love on us, when there was nothing in us worthy of
his love; for he did not find, but did make us lovely, Ezekiel. 16.6.

CHAP. VI.
We must hear the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
AS we must give Divine Worship to God, serve him, and love him; So must we
like wise believe (...) him who is the only object of our Faith. It is the
honor of the true God to be believed on his Word: but man who is subject to
error, 1 Cor. 13.7. may not challenge this to himself. The Lord can neither
deceive, nor be deceived: but the best of Men may deceive, and be deceived,
Gal. 2.13 1 King. 13.18. we Therefore First, Hear God; Secondly, Know God,
Thirdly, Believe in God, Fourthly, Hope and trust in him.


First, we must hear God. He that is of God, hears God and his word, John
8.41. It is the mark that Christ gives to his Sheep, that they will not hear
the voice of strangers, John 10. yea, hearing is the ordinary means of
salvation, Romans 10.13, 14. That which David called a boring of the ear, Psalm.
40. the Apostle citing that place, called it a fitting of the body of Christ,
Heb. 10.5. A body have thou fitted me, why? because the ear was a principal
member, whereby he gave obedience to God his Father. This duty we owe to God
alone, to whose Word we must yield the obedience of faith, Romans 16.26. and
therefore believe, because he speaks. It is the Psalmist argument, He that
made the ear, shall he not hear? Psalm. 94. And surely, we may likewise
conclude, He that made the ear, shall not he be heard? In regard therefore of
creation, we owe this duty to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

First, the Father is to be heard. This Christ supposes, when that he says,
Luke 10. He that hears me, hears him that sent me. Christ indeed as God and
Man, as he was the Minister of Circumcision, Romans 15.8. the great Doctor of the
Church taught them from his Father, John 12.49. He came in his Fathers Name,
John 5.43. and his Doctrine was his Fathers, John 7.16. He did not speak of
himself, John 7.17. But as he is the Son of God equal with the Father, so we
are to hear him as we hear the Father, thus he bears witness of himself,
John 8.18.

Secondly, the Son is to be heard, Ephesians. 4.21. So the Father commands,
Mat. 17.5. This is my well-beloved Son, hear him. The Son himself
requires it, and promises eternal life to them that hear him, John 5.24.
And the Holy Ghost enjoyneth it, D^ut. 18.15. Heb. 2.5. Heb. 12.25. threatening
destruction to them that will not hear him; and Christ tells you that his
sheep have his eare-marke by which they are known, They hear his voice, Joh.
10.4, 5. we must hear the Voice of Christ's Ministers, but it is only as they
are his Ambassadors, and are not to be heard in their own, but in his Name.

There is therefore a great deal of difference between the hearing of Christ,
and the hearing a Disciple of Christ Jesus. First, the Lord Jesus is to be
heard as the Lawgiver, Joh. 13.34. but they are to be heard as the
Interpreters of the Law; Secondly, the Lord Jesus is to be heard of and for
himself: the Word we receive is his Word, Col. 3.16. and he delivers it in
his own Name, Verily I say unto you, John 3.3, 5, 11. Joh. 5.24, 25. Joh. 6.47,
53. Joh. 8.51. Joh. 10.7. Joh. 12.24. He opposes his own Authority against the
false glosses of the false Teachers, Mat. 5.22, 32, 34, 39, 44. If he did urge
Scripture, it was not that he did receive testimony from any of the Writers
thereof, Joh. 5.33, 34. but first, in regard of his Hearers weakness, who not
knowing him to be the Son of God, preferred the writings of his servants the
Prophets before his Word, Joh. 5.39. secondly, it was to teach us by his
example what to do; thirdly, it was not to confirm his words to us by
Scripture, but to confirm to us our faith in the Scriptures. But the word that
the Prophets and Apostles had, was from him. That which I have heard from the
Lord of Hoasts, the God of Israel, have I showed you says Isaias, Isai, 21.10.
and that which I received from the Lord Jesus, delivered I unto you, says
Paul, 1 Cor. 11.23. they deliver the word not in their own names, but in the
Name of Christ, whose Ambassadors they are, and in whose stead they are to be
heard, 2 Cor. 5.20.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is to be heard. Let him that has an Ear, hear what
the Spirit says unto the Churches, Rev 1.7, 11, 17, 29. Rev. 3.6, 13, 22. It
was a sin reproved in the Jews by Stephen, that were uncircumcised, not only
in heart, but also in ear, who did always resist the Holy Ghost, Act. 7.51.
His power they could not resist, but his Doctrine they did, whenas they would
not hear it, they would not receive it. And it was confessed by the Jews as a
great transgression, Nehem. 9.3O. that they would not give care to the Spirit
of God, testifying against them by the Prophets.

We are therefore to hear the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: yea, the
hearing of one, is the hearing of all, the despising of one, is the despising
of all. He that hears the Son, hears the Father, Joh. 5.38. Luke 10.16.
He that hears the Holy Ghost, hears likewise the Son, Rev. 2.1, 7. The
words which in the beginning of the seven Epistles, are ascribed to the Son
of God, are in the conclusion of them attributed to the Spirit of God. Jesus
Christ is described in all the Prefaces, yet in the end of them, as if the
Holy Ghost were the only Author, we are commanded to hear what the spirit
says to the Churches; Because the hearing of the Spirit, is the hearing of
Christ, who together with the Father is one with the Spirit, who are
Essentially one God; The Spirit proceeding inseparably from God, cannot be
divided from the Father, and the Son: For though he be Personally
distinguished, yet is not Essentially divided from them, 1 Cor. 2.11. He is in
the Father and the Son, as the Spirit of man is in man, which is not
essentially distinct from the man in whom it is.

CHAP. VII.
The Knowledge of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, is requisite
to salvation.
THe Lord Jesus will be revealed from Heaven in flami^g fire, rendering
vengeance to all them that know not God, 2 These. 1.7. This Knowledge of God
(even as all the Honor we give to him) we have from God; He gives us first
ability to know him, and we return but that to him which we have received from
him, we give God his own, 1 Chronicles. 29.12. He gives us understanding that we
may know him that is true, 1 John 5.20. we cannot know God, but by that
knowledge which is given us of God. None knows who the Son is but the Father,
and who the Father is but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him,
Luke 10.22. And as it is the Work of God which he does work in us rightly to
know him; So it is an honor which he requires of us, and our duty which we
must do to him, rightly for to know him. He that comes to God must believe
that God is, and that he is the rewarder of them that seek him, Heb. 11.6. For
if we are without the knowledge of God, we are Aliens to the Commonwealth of
Israel, Ephesians. 2.12.

First, we know God the Father. It is eternal life to know him, John 17.3. the
want of this knowledge of him, makes Men fall into sin, Joh. 16.2, 3.

Secondly, we must know God the Son. It is eternal life to know him, John
17.3. 1 John.5.20. the want of the knowledge of him causes men to fall into
sin, John 16.2, 3. and to be stranger^ to the Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians.
2.12. Paul desired to know nothing but Christ, and him crucefied, 1 Cor. 2.2.
accounting all things else in comparison of this to be loss and dung, Phil.
3.8.

Thirdly, we must know God the Holy Ghost. It is a mark of those that have
eternal life to know him Joh. 14.17. Our Savior makes it a difference
between the World, and his Disciples, the Unbeleevers, and the faithful; They
know him not, but these truly know him and believe in him

Endeavor therefore to inform thy soul with the true knowledge of God;
without this Knowledge in vain do we know all other things. The least glimpse
of the knowledge of these 3 in one essence, is better then all the brightest
gleam^s of humane Philosophy, or earthly skill. Where the true knowledge of one
Person in the Godhead, is the knowledge of the other. If thou know the
Son, thou know the Father also, Joh. 8.19. John 14.7. the seeing of the
one, is the seeing of the other also, Joh 14.9. Joh. 12.45. He that denies the
Son, the same has not the Father, 1 John 2.23. He that has the Holy-Chost,
has the Son also. For when Christ would send the Holy Ghost, he faith, I
will not leave you comforthlesse, I will come to you, John 14.18. He came in
the Holy Ghost. For as he Father and Son are one, John 10.30. so the Son
and Holy Ghost are one, yea, all the three are one, 1 John 5.7. and mutually in
each other. The Father in the Son, and the Son in the Father, John 10.38.
John 14.11. and the spirit in the Father ana the Son, as the spirit of man is
in man, as the Apostle intim^teth 1 Cor. 2.11. and the Father and the Son are
in the spirit, Zack. 7.12. The Lord of Hoasts in his spirit has sent by the
hand of his Prophets, (so it is word for word in the Original) which was the
Father and the Son, who are called by the same Prophet particularly the Lord
of Hoasts. The Father is so called, Zach. 2.9. and the Son likewise, Zac. 2.8.
yea, the Holy Ghost is not only, (...), 1 Cor. 2.11. the Spirit of God, but
(...), 1 Cor. 2.12. That spirit which is of God, and therefore of the same
nature co-essentiall with him.

CHAP. VIII.
We must believe in the Father, and in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost.
THe greatest honor we can do to God, is believe him; Whereas contrariwise it
is the greatest affront we can offer unto him, not to believe him. He that
beleeveeh not God, has made him a liar, 1 John 5.10. And what greater disgrace
can be put upon any, then to give him the lie? How much more disgraceful is it
not to believe the God of truth? He enjoyneth us to believe in him: Not for any
Good he receives thereby, Job 22.2, 3. Job 35.6, 7 Psalm. 16.2. but for our
good, which we shall enjoy by doing that which he requires, even by believing
that which he promises; Without it i^ impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. or
to have our souls saved, Mar. 16.16. we must therefore believe in God this
Father; This faith thou professest in the Creed, when thou say, I believe in
God the Father. Our Savior shows, they that believe in him, have everlasting
life, Joh. 5.24.

Secondly, the Son. This faith we prosesse in the Creed, when in the second
Article we say, and is Jesus Christ. This faith in Christ, God the Father
commands, Joh. 6.29. This is the work of God that ye believe on him whom he
has sent. God the Son requires it of his Disciples, John 14.1. Ye believe
in G^d, believe also in me. He requires it also of the blind man; Do thou
believe in the Son of G^^?. Joh. 9.35. yea, he requires it of all, John
3.15, 16. John 12.36. promising to him that believes in him, out of (...)
^elly shall flow Rivers of living water, John 7.38. He Lastly commends the
Church of Pergamus for not denying his faith, Rev. 2.13. God the Holy Ghost
reproves the want of it in the World, John 16.9. John Baptist the forerunner
of Christ, does make it an infallible mark of those that have eternal life,
even as sure as if they did already enjoy it, Joh. 3.36. And the Lord Jesus
tells the Jews, that if ye believe not that I am, ye shall dye in your
sins, Joh.8.24. And no marvel for the believing in Christ is the beleevi^g
in God, Ioh. 12.44. Act. 16.31. with 34. and the not believing in Christ is to
make God a liar, 1 Ioh. 5.10. whereas by faith in him, we are sanctified, Act.
26.18. and justified, Romans 3.26.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost. This faith we profess in the Creed, in the eighth
Article, when as we say, I believe in the Holy Ghost. The Apostle showed that
the Israelites entered not into Canaan, because of unbeleefe, Heb. 3.18. whom
did they not believe? was it not He whom they tempted, proved, and grieved?
Heb. 3.9, 10. That this was the Holy Ghost, the Apostle expressly affirms,
Heb. 3.7. Besides, how can they call on him, in whom they have not believed?
Romans 10.14. Or how can we be B^ptized in the Name of him in whom we do not
believe? Mat. 28.19. There being but one faith, one baptism, one God, Ephesians.
4.5, 6. One faith, and one baptism, in regard of the object that is to be
believed on, and to be baptized in; though there be diverse in regard of the
subject, who believes and is baptized. The Holy Ghost therefore in whose Name
we are baptized, is to be believed in.

There is but one faith in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who are
therefore one God. For if the Son and the Holy Ghost were not one with the
Father, but did differ in Essence, and Nature; they would be diverse Gods, and
the faith in them likewise would be diverse.

And surely in the Creed we profess our faith in one God, and yet three
Persons are named, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

Where the unity of the Godhead, and the Trinity of Persons is intimated and
employed.

CHAP. IX.
We are to hope, and trust in the Father, in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost.
AS God alone is the object of our faith, so is he likewise of our hope. We are
commanded to hope, and trust in him, 1 Timothy 6.17. we are commanded, and blessed
for it, Prove. 16,20. Psalm. 84. last Psalm. 146.5. Jer. 17.7. whereas, they are
discommended and cursed, who trust in man, and depart from God, Ier. 17.5. The
Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the Righteous fly unto it, and are safe,
Prove. 18.10. They are set aloft (so the Original will bear it) out of the
reach of danger. It is the singular Phraise of Abraham, that against hope he
believed in hope, Romans 4.18. It was without the hope of nature, yet in the hope
of grace; above the h^ in man, yet under the hope in God.

We must hope and trust in God,

First, the Father. Thus we are to place our hope in God that cannot lie, Tit.
1.2. who promised salvation to us in Christ, before the world began, 2 Timothy 1.9.

Secondly, the Son. Thus did Paul, Ephesians. 1.12. Phil. 2.19. And good reason,
for he is our hope. 1 Timothy 1.1. Col. 1.27 The hope of Israel, Act. 28.20 and he
in whom the Gentiles trust, Romans 15.12. yea, they are blessed that trust him,
Psalm. 2.12.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost. A woe is denounced against the people of Israel tor
trusting in Egypt, and not on him, who as the Prophet speaks, cover with a
covering, but not of Gods Spirit, Isai. 30.1.2 sheltering themselves in time of
danger under humane aid, and neglecting the Divine protection of Geds Spirit.

The Apostle shows there is but one hope of our calling, as well as one Lord,
one faith, one baptism, one God, Ephesians. 4 4, 5, 6. If therefore the Son, and
Holy Ghost was not one and the same God and Lord with the Father, it would not
be one and the same hope in the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. And without doubt
we believe in him, we hope in him, to whom we give up our Names in Baptism,
and with whom we do then make a Covenant, which is one God in three Persons,
we being baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
Holy Ghost.

CHAP. X.
We are Baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost.
Baptism properly, and strictly taken is a Sacrament of initiation, wherein
those to whom the Covenant belongs, being washed with water, are consecrated
to the service of the great Lord of heaven and earth, ingrafted into the
Church, made partakers of all the privileges of the Saints, and are bound by
baptism to believe on him, to love him, to obey him to worship him, and to
glorify him.

Where, First, that we are to be baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, is manifest both out of the command of Christ,
Mat. 28.19. Teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost* As also from the continued practice of the
Church of God in all ages, and places of the Christian World. Secondly,
Baptism is a seal of the Covenant (as Paul calls circumcision Romans 4.11.)
which the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost does make with the Church, wherein God
on his part promises to be our God, which is our happiness; and we on our
part do promise and oblige our selves to serve him, which is our duty.

Thirdly, Baptism is one, Ephesians. 4.5. Not only because it is once administered;
neither is it so only, because it is one seal of one and the same faith in
all; Nor is it so only because it makes all those that are baptized, to be
one body; But principally in regard of the Object, it is one and the same
Covenant in all, which we make with one and the same God. The Apostle
therefore, Ephesians. 4.5.6. joyneth one Lord, one faith, one Baptism, and one God
together: putting Lord and God, before and after faith and baptism. It being
one Lord and God in whom we believe, and one Lord and God in whole Name we are
baptized.

Fourthly, we being received into Covenant with God in Baptism, do profess
that God alone can wash away the filth of our sins, and cleanse all the
pollutions of our souls. To which the Apostle seems to allude, 1 Cor. 6.11.
But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of
the Lord, Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. For as Water washes our bodies,
so are our souls washed of God the Father, by the sprinkling of the blood of
Christ, 1 Pet. 1.2. and by the renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. The
Apostle Paul in the former place, names all three Persons. Our God, there is
the Father: in the Name of the Lord Jesus, there is the Son: and by the
Spirit, there is the Holy Ghost. By the grace, benefit, and operation of these
three, we are Washed, Justified, Sanctified.

Fifthly, in that the Son, and Holy Ghost are joined with as in one Covenant
with the Father, wherein we equally promise Faith, Obedience, and Worship to
them with the Father; they therefore are not creatures. For first, if creatures
should have the same Covenant made with them as is with God, and that at Gods
command, This would be in God a giving of his glory to another, which God
disclaimeth, Isai. 48.11. secondly, we should then confide and trust in a
Creature, which would be a withdrawing of our hearts from the living God, and
we should by this means, bring a curse on us, and not a blessing, Jer. 17.5,
7. thirdly, we should then be tied by Covenant to give Religious worship,
service, and obedience to a Creature, which is expressly forbidden, Mat. 4.8.
and we ought not to give the least Religious worship to them, which by nature
are no Gods, Gal. 4.8. Rev. 19.10. Rev. 22.9. Fourthly, we should then be
baptized into the Name of Creatures; It was a thing that Paul abhorred, that
any should think he did baptize in his own Name, 1 Cor. 1.13.15.

Sixthly, we being baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, have one and the same Communion with the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost. For we have

First, Communion with the Father, 1 John 1.3.

Secondly, Commmnion with the Son, 1 John 1.3.

Thirdly, Communion with the Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 13. last Phil. 2.1.

Seventhly, the Name of God in Scripture is used, first, sometimes for Gods
Attributes, Psalm. 9.11. They that know thy Name shall trust in thee, and Isai.
52.6. My people shall know my Names, and again, Psalm. 91.14. I will set him on
high, because he has known my Name. We know Gods Attributes, but not his
Essence: we see his back-purts, but not his face, Exodus 33.23. with Exodus 34.6,
7. secondly, it is taken sometime for God himself, Psalm. 20.1. The Name of the
God of Jaacob defend thee, and Pro. 18.10. The Name of the Lord is a strong
Tower, (a Metonymie of the adjunct for the subject, as Cartwright observes)
and so likewise it is taken, Exodus 23.21. My Name, (says God the Father) is in
him, God the Father was in him, 2 Cor. 5.19. and he in the Father, Joh. 10.38.
thirdly, it is taken (...) Power and Authority. The high Priests examining of
Peter and John, and demanding of them (by what Power and Name have ye done
this?) receive this answer from them. If ye examine by what means this man is
made whole. Be it known unto you all, it is by the name of Jesus Christ ^f
Nazareth. Act. 4.9.10. fourthly, it is taken sometime for the glory of God. I
have manifested thy Name to the men of the World, Job. 17.6. and again, Father
glorify thy Name, Joh. 12.28. fifthly, it is taken sometimes for our faith and
confidence in God. I come to thee in the Name of the Lord 1 Samuel 17.45. Our
Lord Christ, who is God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. Joh. 1.14.
commands us to be baptized in the Name, and not in the Names, Mat. 28.19. He
intimates thereby therefore, that there is one Power, one Godhead, one glory,
one Faith and Confidence, one Obligation in Baptism to this one Jehovah, in
whose Name we are baptized; who is absolutely one in respect of his Essence and
Name, though Relatively in respect of the Persons, he is three: The Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost. Three are named, and yet but one Name of them three;
teaching us thereby, that those three, the Father the Son, and the Holy Ghost
are named, which are truly distinct as Relatives one from the other; yet they
are not three Lords, or three Gods, but one Lord God, whom by Covenant in
Baptism we are to obey and serve, and in whose Name we are to swear.

CHAP. XII.
Paul calls to witness, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, swearing
by them.
IT was a Command that God joined Israel and annexed to his Law as part of that
Honor which Israel owed to him, and he required of them, Deuteronomy. 6.13. Deuteronomy.
10.20. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him, and swear by his Name.
Which was not only required of the Church of the Jews only, but also of the
Church of the Gentiles, Isai. 45.23. The swearing by them that are no Gods, is
set down by the Prophet (I had almost said) as an unpardonable sin, Jer. 5.7.
How shall I pardon thee for this? thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by
them that are no Gods; Yea, the Lord ranketh them with Idolaters in reproof,
and joyneth them together in punishment, Zeph. 1.4, 5. that swear by the
Lords, and by Malcham, which was the Name of their Idol, and of their King.
Surely the Holy Ghost which forbids the swearing by them which are no Gods,
would not direct his Penmen to swear by them which are not truly God; Yet we
have Paul, who wi^^eth according to the wisdom given him, 2 Pet. 3. swearing
by all three Persons, calling them severally to witness.

First, the Father is called to witness by Paul, 2 Cor. 11.31. The God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ knows that I lie not.

Secondly, the Son is called to witness by Paul, Romans 9.1. I speak the
truth in Christ, or by Christ, I lie not. Where the Apostle treating of the
rejection of the Jews, first, for the honor of the Jews, of whom Christ came:
secondly, for the honor of Christ, whom the Jews blasphemed: he sets down
the Divine Nature of Christ, two ways; first, Implicitly in the beginning and
proeme of his speech, swearing by Christ, ver. 1. secondly, more expressly in
the conclusion, and epilogue thereof in his doxology, ver. 5. who is over all,
God blessed for ever. The like expression he uses, 2 Cor. 12.2. yea that place
of Isaiah, of swearing to Jehovah, Isai. 45.23. Paul affirms it to be to
Christ, Romans 14.10.11.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is called to witness by Paul, Romans 9.1. Mine own
Conscience also bearing me witness by the Holy Ghost. So the Old English
Bible, Willet. Beza, Marlorat, Piscator, Tremelius, Vatablu^, etc. read it.
The same preposition in the Original being used also, Mat. 5.34, 35, 36. yea
Pareus, Beza, Wilson, Theophilac. show that he appaleth to the Son, and
Holy Ghost as witnesses, and swears by them: where though he mentions his
conscience, as knowing that which he spoke to be true, yet he intimates that
Christ and the Spirit knew it more perfectly; and surely Paul foreseeing the
Divinity of Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Ghost to be blasphemously denied by
the Jews, in their malicious opposition of Christ, might therefore to show the
Omnisciency, Omnisciency, Omnipotency, and divine nature of the Son, and Holy
Ghost, purposely (when he treats of the Jews) swear by them, and call them
to winesse, as he does the Father els-where, for they have Omnisciency to know
the truth, Omnipresency to be present with him that swears, and Omnipotency
to defend the swearer if he swear truly, and to punish him, if he swear
falsely; which are the Attributes of the only Lord God, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, as I have showed. Yea the Apostle speaking of the unbeleeving Jews,
uses a vehement obtestation by the Son, and Holy Ghost, Romans 13.30. and not
at all mentioning the Father, as he does likewise, Phil. 2.1. And this he does,
that we should not be troubled, when in like manner he may name the Father, and
the Son, and not the Spirit: or when he names the Father, and the Spirit,
and not the Son: or when he names the Father only: for he does not always
in one and the some manner set down the Trinity.

CHAP. XII.
We may pray to the Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.
IT is Gods Honor to be prayed unto; and it is our happiness that he is God
that hears prayers, Psa. 65.2. We are taught this duty, both by Gods precept,
Psalm. 50.14. and the faithful man's practice.

There are seven conditions r quisite to Prayer, two in regard of the Person
invocating, and five in regard of the Person invocated; which makes prayer
incompatible to any, but to God alone.

First, it is required in the Person invocating, that first he has a precept
commanding him, or at the least wise a precedent in holy Scripture directing
him to the duty he practices. But there is neither precept, nor president for
Prayer to any, but to God alone. It is a challenge sufficient to stop the
mouths of all contradictory will-worshippers, That amongst all the Prayers
made by the Saints Prophets, and Apostles, there is not one Prayer put up to
any Saint or Angel recorded in the Word. Secondly, it is requisite to encourage
us to pray with comfort that there be a promise of being heard. Now God alone
promises to hear those that pray unto hm, Psalm. 50.14. Mat. 7.7. Isai 65.24.

Secondly, is is required in the Person invocated, the first of all that he be
Omniscient, able to know all thin^s, more especially, first that he know our
wants: secondly, that he know how to supply all our wants: thirdly, that he
know our hearts, whether we pray with a pure heart: fourthly that he know
whether we pray with faith, for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, Romans 14.
last. Now the Lord alone is able truly to search out all these things.
Secondly, it is requisite that he be Omnipresent, that he be present with us,
and do hear our prayers: otherwise men may be subject to Elijahs bitter
Sarcasme which he gave to the Priests of Baal, 1 K^n. 18.27. Cry aloud, he is a
God, either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or
peradventure he sleeps, and must be awa^ed; But the Lord is alone every where
present. Thirdly, it is necessary that he be Omnipotent, able to supply all our
wants, and to help us against our corporal enemies, and spiritual adversaries,
when we sue unto him. But God only is a mighty God, and is nigh unto them that
call upon him, and will fulfill the desire of them that fear him, he also will
hear their cry, and will save them, Psalm. 145.18, 19. Psalm. 34.6, 8. And that
is a fourth condition requisite in him that is prayed to, that he be willing to
help us, which is proper to God, who is ready at all times to help his
supplya^ts; whenas other creatures may ans. theirs, as the K. of Israel
answered his, 2 Ki. 6.27. If the Lord do not help thee, whence should I help
thee? Fifthly, it is needful that he be the object of our faith to whom we
pray; for how shall we call on them in whom we have not believed? Romans 10.14.
And as there is but one Baptism, by which God is tied in Covenant to us to be
our God, and we are tied in Covenant to be his servants. So there, is but one
faith in this one God, in whom we must believe, and to whom we must pray. Yet
this one God is distinguished into three Persons, the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, where you may safely, and with comfort direct your Prayers to
one, yet with due care in worshipping all in one. Exclude any of the Persons,
when you fix your heart on one, you offend, 1 Job. 2.23. Joh. 15.23, 24. Joh.
5.23. retain all, and mention one, you offend not, Luke 22.42. Luke 23.34.
Joh, 5.23.

For first, the Father is prayed to Christ as man prayed to him, Luke 23.46.
Father, into thy hands I commend my spiri. And Paul prayed to the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3.14. Yea, the Apostles writing to the Churches, wish
grace and peace to them from the Father, Rom, 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.3. 2 Cor. 1.2. Gal.
1.3. Ephesians. 1.2. Phil. 1.2. Col. 1.2. 1 These. 1.1. 2 These. 1.1. Rev. 1.4. But
writing to particular Persons desire from the Father grace mercy, and peace, 1 Timothy 1.2. 2 Timothy 1.2. Tit. 1.4. 2 John 3.

Secondly, the Son is prayed to; Jaacob prays to him, and styles him an
Angel, and attributes his redemption from evil to him, Genesis 48.16. David
prays to him as the Creator of Heaven and earth, Psalm. 102. 22, 24. with Heb.
1.10.11, 12. Paul prays to him, and receives a speedy answer from him, 2
Cor. 12, 8, 9. Yea, he promises to hear our prayers, John 14.13 besides, 2
These, 2.16. Paul in his prayer puts him before the Father. Stephen the first of
the Martyrs, Act. 7.59. and John the last of all Canonical writers, pray to
him, Rev. 22.20. yea all the Church pray to him, 1 Cor. 1.2. so it was
foretold, Psalm. 72.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. He promises to give us what we ask in
his Name, Joh. 14.13. The Apostles writing to the Churches, pray to him,
wishing grace and peace from Jesus Christ, To. 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.3. 2 Cor. 1.2.
Gal. 1.3. Ephesians. 1.2. Phil. 1.2. Col. 1.2. 1 These. 1.1. 2 Thessalonians. 1.1. 2 Pet.
1.2. Rev. 1.5. But the Apostles writing to particular persons, desire from him,
grace, mercy, and peace, 1 Timothy 1.2. 2 Timothy 1.2. Tit. 1.4. 2 John 3.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is prayed to by John, Rev. 1.4. and by Paul, 2 Cor.
13.14. 2 Thessalonians. 3.5. The Lord direct your hearts to the love of God, and the
patient waiting for of Christ. first, it is he that terminative works these
graces in us. which the Apostle prays for. He terminateth, consummateth, and
perfecteth them: albeit inchoative they are not only his work, but the work
also of the Father, and the Son. secondly, if the Apostle h^d prayed in this
place to the Father, he needed not to have said, to the love of God, but he
would have said, the Lord direct your hearts to his love. Or if he had prayed
to Christ, he would not have said the patient waiting for of Christ, but
rather, the Lord direct your hearts to the patient waiting for of him. Thus you
may see the Person that is prayed to, is distinct from the Father, and the
Son; yea the whole Church prays to the Holy Ghost to be made fit for
Christ's presence, Cant. 4. last. Awake O North wind, and come thou South, blow
upon my Garden, that the spices therein may flow out. O blessed spirit breath
thou in my heart, that it may send forth a sweet savor of grace.

Thus Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are prayed to personally; yea, you have
them all three joined together by Paul, 2 Cor. 13. last. the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the love of God the Father, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost,
be with you all, Amen. Where, foreseeing the Heresy of Arryus, does there in
his prayer, and also. 2 Thessalonians. 2.16. put the Lord Jesus before the Father.
Again, 1 Thessalonians. 3.11.12. God himself, even our Father, and the Lord Jesus
direct our way unto you, and the Lord make you to increase, and abound in love
one toward another, and toward all men, even as we do toward you. To the end
he may establish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God, even our
Father at the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, with all his Saints. Where all
three Persons are personally prayed to; first, the Father and the Son, in the
eleventh verse; secondly, the Holy Ghost in the 12. and 13. verses; whereby the
Name of Lord, the Holy Ghost is necessarily understood for the forementioned
reasons. For first, it is the spirit of God, that terminatively works those
graces in us, to whom he prays in the third place to effect them. Secondly,
if it had been the Father he had prayed to he would have said before him, and
not before G d ou^ Father, and if he had prayed to Christ, he would have said
at the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. John likewise names them severally in
one Prayer, gra^e be to you, and peace from him, which is, and which was, and
which is to come, and from the seven Spirits which are before his Throne, and
from Jesus Christ, etc. Rev. 1.4, 5. whereto oppose the Heresy of Macedonius,
the Holy Ghost is put between tne Father, and the Son, under the name of
seven spirits; who though one in his subsistence, yet he is styled seven in
regard of his graces. That this was not Angels (as the Papists imagine) but the
Holy Ghost, is clear. First, grace and peace comes from him, together with
the Father, and the Son, but come not from these glorious Creatures, which
though they minister to us, Heb. 1.14. yet they work not grace in us.
Secondly, in this benediction, the 7. spirits are set before the Lord Jesus,
which Cannot be so done, if they were Angels, for they are his creatures made
by him, and for him, Col. 1.16, he is their head, Col. 1.18. and they worshi^
him, He. 1.6. thirdly, the 7. spirits are set between the Father, and the Son
as being of the same power, co-workers of the same grace, and givers of the
same peace, which cannot be so asscribed to Creatures, For thus to join the
creature with his Creator, it would be a giving of Gods glory to another, which
the Lord will not do, Isa. 48.11. Fourthly, the Lamb is said to have seven
horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits, Rev. 5.6. The spirit is of
the same substance with the Son, as the eye is of the body.

Seeing therefore we are to pray to one God alone, and yet we pray to the
Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, as one in Essence, yet three in
Persons; we see these three Persons are one Jehovah, or Lord. In which
indivissible Unity we adore first, the Father, as being altogether of himself:
secondly, the consubstantiall Word, who is begotten of his Father, Joh. 1.16.
and the co-essentiall Spirit, who proceeded from the Father and the Son, and is
the Spirit both of the Father, and of the Son. Oh that we could in all our
wants fly unto this trinne God, as to a most sure Rock of defense, then should
we not need to fear the fierce wrath of man, nor the fiery rage of Satan; For
the wrath of man would he restrain, Psalm. 76.10. and through him we should be
able to quench all the fiery darts of the Devil, Ephesians. 6.16.

CHAP. XIII.
We are to render Blessing, Praise Honor, and Glory, to the Father, to the
Son, and to the Holy Ghost.
AS it is the Lords Honor to be prayed to in our necessities, so likewise it
is to be praised for his graces. When therefore God blesses us with his
mercies, we must bless him with our praises. For surely we receive all from
him, fit it is that we return all we can to him. Thus David receiving
blessings from God, tells you, that not only his heart is inditing a good
matter, Psalm. 45.1. but his tongue and his lips shall utter praise, Psalm.
119.171. In both places there is a Metaphor (as some think) from a Fountain
that continually bubleth up water: or as others from a full stomach and they
translate it eructare, to belch up. Eructation proccedeth from fullness of
stomach; first, David spoke not of himself, but out of fullness of the Spirit;
secondly, Gods blessings lay heavy on David's stomach he could not be at ease,
till he had vented himself by thanksgiving. This was a holy surfeit (as Luther
calls it) in David, who desired to praise God with heart and tongue. This
Praise, Honor, Blessing and Glory, is due to God from men and Angels. It is
that which God will not give to another, Isa. 42.8.

First, it is due to God alone, from men. The Lord alone is thus to be exalted,
Isai. 2.11. we must make mention of his Righteousness, even of his only,
Psalm. 71.16. we must even as we have received, so baptize; and as we baptize,
even so believe: and as we believe, so pray: and as we pray, so give thanks. We
baptize in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
Mat. 28, 19. we believe in the Father, and in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost,
(as it is briefly set down in the Apostles Creed) we pray for blessings from
the Father, from the Son, and from the Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 13.14. Rev. 1.4, 5.
1 These. 3.11, 12, 13. and we must ascribe glory to the Facher, to the Son,
and to the Holy Ghost.

For Blessing, Praise, and Glory, is to be rendered.

First, to the Father. Thus Paul by his example teaches us, it is our duty to
bless God the Father, 2 Cor. 1.3. Ephesians. 1.3. Gal. 1.5. And Peter likewise, 1
Pet. 1.3. and James makes it, not only his own, but others practice also,
Jam. 3.9. And surely we ought to render praise to him who works all things to
the praise of his glory, Ephesians. 1.6.

Secondly, to the Son. The Psalmist prophesies, that daily should he be
praised, Psalm. 72.15. and all Nations shall call him blessed, Psalm. 72.17. John
renders praise and dominion to him, Rev. 1.6. and Peter ascribes glory to him
for ever, 2 Pet. 3.18. and Jude likewise, Glory, and Majesty, Dominion, and
Power, now and ever, Jude 25. The Apostle Paul gives thanks to him for
enabling him to the Ministry. 1 Timothy 1.12. The Ephesians do magnify his
Name, Act. 19.17. yea, not only the faithful in the Church militant, but also
the Saints in the Church triumphant, acknowledge the Lamb to be worthy to
receive Praise, Honor, Glory, and Blessing, Rev. 5.12, 13.

Thirdly, to the Holy Ghost. Zachery blesses the Lord God of Israel, Luke
1.68. That this was the Holy Ghost, whom he praises with the Father, and the
Son, is evident out of the 70. v^rse. For it is he whom he blesses, that
spoke by the mouth of all the Prophets, which was the blessed and glorious
Spirit, 2 Pet. 1.21. 1 Pet. 1.11. Ephesians. 3.5. Ezekiel. 11.1 4, 5. 2 Samuel 23. 2. Mar.
12.36. He is our Creator with the Father, and the Son, and therefore with
them God blessed for ever, Romans 1.25. he is the Spirit of Glory, 1 Pet. 4.14.
He works those graces in us, which are forerunners of our Glory, and we ought
to do and speak that which will tend to his glory. And surely, the ascribing
blessing to him is not to be doubted of, whenas w^ hear truth it self
averring, that the speaking against the Holy Ghost, even the blaspheming of him
to be unpardonable. Mat. 12.32. Luke 12.10.

That Doxology (glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost, etc.) was used in the Church long before Arrius time, and urged by
Faebadius against the Arians, lib. cont. Arrian. If, says he, there be that
inequality, which the Arrians affirm, then do we every day blaspheme God,
when we acknowledge these things common to the Father, and the Son. The
Arrians being pinched with this argument, hereupon altered the form and gave
glory, to the Father, by the Son, and in the Spirit; which had not the
Arrians given it a sinister construction, and made it an especial mark of
recognizance, even this form also had not been the voice of Error and
Schism, but of sound Doctrine, and sincere Religion. And therefore Basil, no
friend to the Doctrine of Arrius, yet uses this very form sometime: but it
was to the offense of some weak Christians, who did therefore traduce him, and
against whom he did largely apologize, excusing this his act to his friends,
yet justifying it against his enemies.

Oh that we could enjoy the happy Vision of the glorious Deity, that we might
in the society, and unity of the glorified Saints and holy Angels, sing praises
for ever to the glorious Trinity, and rejoice in our Makers (so it is in the
Original,) Psalm. 149.2. Oh the blessed estate of the Saints, and the glorious
condition of the believer, which is not to be expressed by him, even when he is
glorified. Let us therefore pray, that whiles we live on earth, we may glorify
the Lords Name willingly, readily, cheerfully, even as the Angels do in
heaven; for this is likewise their work.

CHAP. XIV.
Angels do sing praises to the Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.
IT is not only the Work of Men on Earth, but it is the whole employment of
the Angels in Heaven to sing forth Gods praises, and to do that which may
glorify his Name. At the Creation of the World by the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, these Sons of God shouted for joy, Job 38.7. At the birth of our
Savior, no less then a whole Host of these heavenly soldiers are praising
and glorifying the Lord, Luk 2.14. And surely, if we had the tongues, not only
of Men, but also of Angels, we could not raise this note high enough to the
glory of our Redeemer; yea, it is the constant work of the glorified Saints,
and Holy Angels to sing forth the praises of God, day and night, Rev. 4. Rev.
5. Rev. 6. Rev. 7. Rev. 19. Yea, the Seraphins cry one to another, holy, holy,
holy, is the Lord of Hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory, Isai. 6.2, 3.
That this was the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, who is there praised
by the Angels, is manifest.

First, it was the Father; For he whose praise is there exalted, did send
Isaias the Prophet, verse 9. which was the Lord God, and his Spirit, Isai.
4.48, 16. the Father, together with the Son, and the Holy Spirit.

Secondly, it was the Son also; For he whose praise is there celebrated, Isai
saw his glory, Isai. 6.1. Now that this was the Lord Jesus, whose glory Isaiah
saw, we have a witness beyond all exceptions: even the Evangelist John
testifying it, Job. 12.41. And surely, Jesus Christ, God, and Man, is joined
with God in the same Doxology, Rev. 5. who is there called a Lamb, being so
typifyed in the legal Rites, and so manifested to John in his heavenly Vision.
He has ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands of Angels
celebrating his praise, Rev. 5.11, 13. and no marvel, for these holy Creatures
were made by him, and for him, Col. 1.16.

Thirdly, it was the Holy Ghost likewise; for he that is their magnified, did
speak by, and unto Isaiah, Isa. 6.9, 10. Which that it was the Holy Ghost, is
clear, both by the testimony of Isai, Isai. 48.16. and Paul's also, Act. 28.25.
yea, to him do the Angels give glory, when he was pleased for the good of the
Church to use the Ministry of Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 3.12, 13, 14. So the Spirit took
me up, and I heard behind me the voice of a great rushing, saying, blessed be
the glory of the Lord from his place: I heard also, the noise of the Wings of
the living creatures, that touched one another, and the noise of the wheels
over against them, and a noise of a great rushing; so the Spirit lifted me up,
and took me away, etc. It being the glorious appearance of the Spirit to
Ezekiel, that in this place is described, as one and the same action of him,
both before and after shows, who is there glorified with the Father, and the
Son. For the honoring and glorifying one, is the honoring, and glorifying
the other also, Joh. 5.23.

Thus is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who are one God, though three persons,
is one and the same Divine praise celebrated by the glorious Angels. And surely
if the Son, and Holy Ghost had not been God equal with the Father, they had
not had one and the same praise given by Angels to them, with the Father; For
otherwise Gods glory had been given to another, which the jealous Lord God
would not endure, Isai. 48.11. The filching of temporal things by men, may be
acquitted either with a single, or double, a fourfold, or sevenfold
restitution. But the filching and stealing of Gods glory by Angels, could
never, have been answered.

Oh the Divinenesse of that soul, which would stir up those glorious Angels,
Psalm. 103.20, 21, 22. to do that work, which they of themselves at all times
and in all places readily perform, willingly celebrating the praise of the
glorious Trinity.

CHAP. XV.
The Temple of Jerusalem, was the House of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
It was the Honor of the Lord to have a public place of Worship; wherein the
Jews offered both spiritual sacrifices of prayer, and praise, as also
corporal sacrifices expiatory, and gratulatory of sheep, and beasts, etc.
which place of Divine worship, was called the House of God, Isa. 56.7. The
Temple of the Lord, Psalm, 65.5. Mat. 21.12. His dwelling place, 2 Chr. 36.15.
Psalm 9.11. Psalm. 74.2. yea the Jews held forth this as a buckler against all
blows, putting a carnal confidence in this spiritual privilege. They
thought it Canon proof against all the oppositions of their enemies, and
supposed though they took liberty to live as, they list, yet that God would not
suffer his Sanctuary to be defiled by the Heathens, or trodden under foot of
the Gentiles. They trusted in lying words, saying, The Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord, Jer. 7.3. Thus had they made lies their refuge, and under
falsehood did they hide themselves. But the Lord cared not to live in a House of
Stone amongst them, who would not have themselves living stones built up to
him, 1 Pet. 2. He would not dwell in them as in a material Temple, which
refused to have him to dwell in them, as in his spiritual Temple;
Notwithstanding, as long as Israel kept Covenant with God, God dwelt in this
House amongst them, and God was honored, and worshipped by them, in this place
which was the Temple of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

First, it was the Temple of God the Father. The Lord Jesus calls it his
Fathers House, Joh. 2.16.

Secondly, it was the Temple of God the Son, Mal. 3.1. The Lord whom ye seek
shall suddenly come to his Temple. His was the material Temple, whose body,
Joh. 2.19, 21. was that holy Temple, in whom all the fullness of the Godhead
dwelt bodily, Col. 2.9. And in regard of Christ's Corporal presence in this:
the glory of the second Temple was greater then the glory of the former, Hag.
2.9. Albeit there was neither in this latter, (as there was in the former) the
Ark, nor Mercy-seat, nor Cherabins, nor fire from heaven which consumed the
sacrifice, nor the Majesty of divine presence called Shekena, nor Priest with
Urim, and Thummim, nor after Malach any Prophet. (The Holy Ghost, as the Jews
say, being gone into Heaven) yet in regard the Lord of glory preached there in
his own Person, the glory of this Temple, was greater then the glory of
Solomon's. Besides, the Lord Jesus purging this Temple and driving out the
usurpers thereof, manifested himself to be the Lord, not only of this place,
but of the World, who not only taught with Authority, but also acted with such
divine power, as none durst resist him, Mar. 11.15, 16, 17, 18.

Thirdly, is was the Temple of God the Holy Ghost who gave these divine
Oracles, Levit. 16.2. with Heb. 9.6, 7, 8. He appointed the Legal services
therein. This the Apostle takes as granted, Heb. 9.7, 8. For after he had
specified the particulars, and the Laws ordained by God for the manner, and use
of them, he adds by way of interpretation. The Holy Ghost this signifying,
etc. And without doubt his was the material Temple of stone, who has
spiritual living Temples consecrated to him, and by him, 1 Cor. 6.19. 1 Car.
3.16. who being God dwells in us as in his Temple. None but God alone ought
to have any Temple consecrated to his service.

Seeing that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, have one, and the same Temple
consecrated to the service of them, they are therefore co-equall in power and
glory, being one and the same God which was worshipped in this House, and whom
Isaiah saw in a Vision sitting on his Throne (as I have formerly showed) and
his Train filled the Temple, Isai 6.1. And because the Lord more delights to
dwell in Temples made with his own hands, then he did in Temples made with men's
hands; Let us endeavor that we may be as lively stones built up a spirituale
House to him, 1 Pet. 2.5. That the Lord of glory may dwell in us, as in his
Temple

CHAP. XVI.
Legal Sacrifices were offered to the Father, to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost.
GOd commanded in his Law, that Sacrifices should be offered to him only,
Exodus 22.20. He that sacrificed to any other, was to be destroyed, Deu. 13.13,
14, 15.

Yet sacrifices was offered,

First, to the Father, Heb. 10.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Sacrifice and offering thou
would not have, but a body thou have prepared me. Of this Legal worship our
Savior speaks. Joh. 4.21. Ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor at
Jerusalem worship the Father.

Secondly, to the Son. Although, first, as he is the Mediator of the New
Covenant, God and man, his blood and Sacrifice was typified in the blood and
Sacrifice of the Law, Heb. 9. Heb. 10. which in themselves were shadows of
things to come, but the body of Christ, Col. 2.17. without this one oblation
offered by Christ, all other were imperfect, unsatisfactory, Heb. 10.1. for the
sins of mankind had so kindled the fiery wrath of God, that the Blood of Bulls,
or of Goats, or of Sheep, could no longer quench it, but it would have broken
out into an open flame, if so be that the Son of God had not come, and
extinguished it with his own blood; It being not possible that the blood of
Bulls, or of Goats, should take away sins, Heb. 10.4. But Christ by one
offering has perfected for ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.12, 14. Heb.
9.28. And thus he was a sacrifice for sin; yet secondly, as he was the second
Person of the Trinity, God blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. He was equal with the
Father, Zac. 13.7. Phil. 2.6. and he was together with the Father sacrificed
to; Jaacob was commanded to go to Bethel, and build an Altar there unto God
that appeared unto him, Genesis 35.1, 7. And Jaacob powered on the Altar, he built
a drink offering, and oil, Genesis 35.9, 14. That this was Christ, Hoseah shows
Hos. 12.4, 5. when he called him an Angel, yet his Name was the Lord of Hoasts.
The Son in Scripture being usually so styled: who was an Angel in Name, but
not in Nature, Heb. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Heb. 2.16. He was that
Angel which spoke to Moses on the Mount, Act. 7.38. and and commanded the
Sacrifices offered to himself.

Thirdly, to the Holy Ghost. The Atonement was made to him, together with the
Father, and the Son, who did appear in the Cloud upon the Mercy-seat, Lev.
19.2. with Heb. 9.7, 8. where the Apostle does expressly say (interpreting these
Leviticall Rites) that it was the Holy Ghost that signified this thereby.

Seeing therefore, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, had one and the
same honor done to them by Sacrifice in the Temple, you may see that their
service is one, their worship one, their honor one, their glory one, who are
one, and the same God in Essence, Substance, and Nature, though they be three
Persons, subsistences, or Relations, in which they differ from one another.

CHAP. XVII.
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are to be glorified in our lives
and conversations.
IT is the duty of the faithful to make Gods glory the highest and ultimate
end of all their Actions and that they live so, that they may glorify God
here, and that God may glorify them hereafter. God electeth us for this end,
Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6. He creates us for this end, Isa. 43, 7. Pro. 16.4. He
redeemeth us for this end, 1 Cor. 6.20. H justifies us for this end, Romans
3.23. He sanctifies us for this end, Mat. 5.16. He afflicts us for this end,
1 Pet. 4.16. And gives us for this end, temporal deliverance here, Ps. 50.15.
and eternal salvation hereafter. For God is glorified in his Saints, 2 These.
1.10. that has Saints may be glorified in him, 2 These. 1.12. Man being a
Creature, for him to propose, either his own self for his end, or any other end
but that which God has proposed to him, namely Gods glory, would be a robbing
of God of his right, and an usurping of his glory.

First, the Father is to be glorified, Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine
before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which
is in Heaven. The light of grace that is in thee, must so shine forth from
thee, that other men may have the light of grace communicated to them to see
how to glorify God thereby. And Paul would have us with one mind, and with one
mouth, glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 15.6.

Secondly, the Son is to be glorified. Christ was glorified in his Apostles,
Joh. 17.10. They were to his praise, and instruments of his glory. It was Paul's
end in living; To me to live is Christ says he, Phil. 1.22, 23. and Christ
shall be magnified in my body, whether by life, or death, Phi. 1.20. yea, Peter
exhorts, 1 Pet. 3.15. to sanctify, or glorify the Lord God in your hearts,
and thereupo^ adds, that they may be ashamd that accuse your good
conversation in Christ, 1 Pet. 3.16. by having a good conversation, we glorify
Christ which is truly God, 1 John 5.20.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is to be glorified; this the Apostle Peter supposes
the faithful will do. And therefore he concludes them happy that suffer for
the Name of Christ, 1 Pet. 4.14. For the spirit of glory, and of God, rests
on you, on their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified:
and surely the custom of the Primitive Church before the Counsel of Nice was
to worship and glorify the holy spirit; So Justin in 2. Apolog. pro Christian.
ad M. Antonium Pium, (...), we worship and adore the Prophetical spirit,
honoring him in word and deed.

Thus we are to endeavor both by word and deed, to glorify the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost. And surely the glorifying of one Person, is the
glorifying of all. The Leper who fell Christ's feet, and gave thanks to him, is
said to glorify God, Luke 17.15, 16. glorifying thereby, not only the Son,
but also the Father, and the Holy Ghost; yea, Peter shows you, that the
suffering patiently for the Name of Christ, is the glorifying of the Father, 1
Pet. 4.11, 16. and of the Son, 1 Pet. 3.15, 16. 1 Pet. 16. and of the
Holy Ghost, 1 Pet. 4.14, 16. The honoring one, is the honoring of the other,
1 John 2.23. Joh. 5.23. whereas contrariwise, he that by Apostasy or
Antichristianisme dishonors one, dishonors the other likewise, 1 John
2.23. Joh. 5.23. Take heed therefore of Satan's spetious delusions, who would
have thee honor the Father, by denying the Son. He that denies the Son,
the same has not the Father, 1 John 2.23. but is an Antichrist, 1 John 2.22.
he is Antichrist, that denies the Father, and the Son. Jews, Turks, Arrians
and other Heretics, may affirm they worship him that was the true God who was
the Creator of the World, but he is the Father of Christ, and him they deny:
wherefore they deny also the Father, he being not a Father, if he have not a
Son, and he has no other Son properly, but Christ. Let us endeavor in the
whole course of our lives, to give the Lord the honor due to his Name. Let us
therefore in heart and voice give glory to the Father, to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost; and let us conclude with the Psalmist, in stirring up o^^^^ to this
duty, saying, Let every thing that has breath^ praise the Lord: praise ye the
Lord, Psalm. 150. last.

FINIS.
Imprimator,

Edm. Calamy.


