THE Christian Moderator: OR, PERSECUTION FOR RELIGION CONDEMNED, By the Light
of Nature. Law of God. Evidence of our own Principles.



JAMES II. XII. So speak you and so do, as they that are judged by the law of
liberty: for they shall be judged without mercy that have showed no mercy.
Mill hominum species, and rerum discolor usus, -- per me equidem sint omnia
protinus alba. Printed for H. J. in the year 1651.

Persecution for Religion condemned, and.
WHen I consider how tenderly your Savior Christ recommends the precept of
mutual love to all that profess his Name, making it the Character of his
followers. By this all men shall know that you are my Disciples, if you love
one another, John 13. 35. And when I reflect how highly the great Apostle Paul
exalts the same Commandment, abridging into this one precious ^^^^ble, the
whole duty of a Christian, All the Law is fulfilled in one word, Thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thy self, Gal. 5. I cannot sufficiently wonder, to see
most Christians in this present age with fire and sword persecute each other,
only upon the account of Religion: how are we degenerated from the Primitive
Believers, who would rather have given their own lives, to persuade their
enemies to piety, then sought to take away the lives of their Brethren, to
force them to Hypocrisy?

Yet has it pleased the Lord Christ in our days, upon whom the ends of the
world are come, to infuse the like tenderness into the breasts of many
conscientious and godly minded people of this Nation, (who seeing the deformity
and unreasonablenesse of those cruel Maxims, that preach ruin and
destruction for the least difference in belief) cease not to pray unto the God
of heaven, and solicit the Governors of the earth, that an impartial
freedom, and absolute incoercency in matters of Religion may be firmly and
irrevocably established, for all that profess the Gospel of Christ.

For encouragement of which holy design, woven out of the bowels of mercy, and
for determent of those tempestuous spirits, that with thunder and lightning
strive to storm men's consciences, I have endeavored in this short discourse to
demonstrate, that Conscience-persecution amongst Christians is clearly
repugnant to the Light of Nature, the Law of God, and the evidence of our own
Principles.

Demonstrative Reasons against forcing of Conscience.
1. SInce we have so happily shaken off that intolerable Yoke of Popish
infallibility ( which neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear) it is
become to us not only tyrannical, but absurd, to compel others to a way, that
our selves confess may possibly be erroneous; we see one Parliament repeals
those Articles of faith which a former enacted; that form of worship which the
Laws of the last age introduced, is now generally exploded; nay, the very last
Reformation, settled with so solemn a Covenant, and carried on with so furious a
Zeal, is already by better lights discovered to be merely humane, and therefore
deservedly laid aside: The late Synods Confession of Faith (hatched by so many
years sitting) is now learnedly examined, and indeed for a great part solidly
confuted, by Mr. W. Parker, and other learned persons in print; how
preposterous is it then to constrain a soul, not only to forsake his
conscience, which may be truth, but drive him contrary to his own heart, to a
way that may be error!

2. Since the Word of God is the sole Rule of Faith, and no humane authority so
highly empowered, as to bind up our assents to whatsoever interpretation it
shall please to propose; it clearly follows, that as all the children of God
have equal interest in the Testament of their Father, so no one amongst them
has any right to impose a force upon the judgment of his brother: One holds
Baptism of children to be necessary, another esteems it unlawful, a third
denies both these Opinions, admitting well that it may, but not that it must be
done: they confer Texts, look into Original Tongues, pray incessantly to
God, and profess solemnly the sincerity of their intentions; yet after all
their diligences and devotions, steadfastly remain in their former persuasion;
truly for my part, he that should advise persecution in such a case (unless
his fire brought light too with it, to demonstrate the truth) would scarce
satisfy my suspicion, that his coals were fetched from the infernal pit.

3. If we reflect upon the difficulties that encounter us in the way to Truth,
for strait is the gate, nnd narrow is the path, and withal consider the
shortness of our sight, for here we see but in part, and understand but in
part: there will appear more reason to endeavor the mutual assistance and
support, then malicious ruin and destruction one of another. However, since
all have neither equal depth of natural judgment, nor the same measure of
supernatural illumination, but the spirit blows how and where it pleases,
we ought not to attempt so high a presumption, as to despise or persecute our
b^other for his innocent and blameless mistakes, lest we be found to fight
against God, who is the free disposer of his gifts; we know the way of man is
not in himself, Jer. 10. 23. but his steps are ruled by the Lord, Pro. 20. 24.
and therefore certainly, did we bear a due respect to God, we would be content
to wait his leisure, who has engaged himself by his Apostle, Phil. 3. 15. If
any man be otherwise minded, God shall in time reveal even this unto him: let
us therefore entertain such an one, who proceeds in the simplicity of his
heart, with milk, till he grow stronger to digest strong meat.

4. All compulsion upon the Conscience returns us flatly to our old slavery
under the Prelates, nay more to the implicit faith of the Papists, with this
only difference, that we are worse then either, because our consciences accuse
us of doing that which we condemn in others; for whatsoever I am constrained to
swear or profess more then I am convinced of, proceeds from as great a tyranny
as the High Commission, and is as blind an assent, as can be matched in the
grossest Popery, and dare we think that doing the same things we judge in
others, we shall escape the Judgment of God, Romans 2. 3.

5. Force is punishment, and consequently not just, unless the offense be
voluntary, but he that believes according to the evidence of his own reason, is
necessitated to that belief, and to compel him against it, were to drive him
to renounce the most essential part of man his reason. Why should we be
commanded to try the spirits, 1 John 4. 1. to prove all things, 1 These. 5. 21.
if there be not a faculty in the soul to judge for her self? why are we
enjoined to hold fast that which we find to be best, if after our most serious
and deliberate election we shall be whipped out of our conscience by penalties?
To what purpose do we preach poor souls into just so much liberty of Scripture,
as may beget their torture, and not permit them to rest where they find
satisfaction; Either prohibit to search at all, or leave us sensible of some
benefit by teaching; To believe what appears untrue, seems to me impossible, to
profess what we believe untrue, I am sure is damnable.

6. As it is certain, whosoever swerves from the dictate of his Conscience
commits a grievous sin, Romans 14. So without question they that endeavor by
force or artifice to draw any man to profess or act contrary to what his soul
believes, are as deeply guilty of the same crime, When you wound the weak
consciences of your brethren, you sin against Christ, 1 Cor. 8. 12. How
dangerously then do they expose themselves to the just indignation of God, who
by Oaths, Imprisonments, Forfeitures, etc. both drive others, and fall
themselves into eternal perdition? How desperately do they attempt to
extinguish the light of Nature, which indispensably obliges all men to deal
with others, as they would be dealt with themselves, a light placed by God in
clear and candid souls to shine and guide them, but in black ones to condemn
and burn them; I shall close this discourse with the advice of the Apostle,
Romans 14. 13. Let us therefore use our judgment rather in this, that no man put
a stumbling block before his Brother.

2. Unanswerable Texts of Scripture against coercency in Religion.
NOr are these so excellent and important truths built only upon the firm
foundation of solid reason, but also upon the infallible authority of evident
Scripture, 2 Timothy 2. 24 etc. The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be
gentle unto all men, apt to teach, for bearing, in meekness instructing those
that are contrary minded, if God peradventure will give them repentance, to the
acknowledging of the truth, that they may recover themselves out of the snare
of the devil, who are taken captive by him at his will: and another Apostle
forbidding us to condemn one another, says ( James 4. 12) There is one
Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy: who art thou that judge
another? and in Paul to the Romans 14. 4. Who art thou that judge another
servant? to his own Master he stands or falls, yea he shall be holden up,
for God is able to make him stand; one man esteems one day above another,
another esteems every day alike, let every man be fully persuaded in his own
mind, have thou faith? have it to thy self before God, happy is he that
condemns not himself in that which he allows, that is, whose conscience
inwardly accuses not his outward profession; The same most zealous Preacher of
the Gospel returns so condescending and moderate an answer to a case of a far
harder sound then we undertake to maintain, that it sufficiently proves he took
his gentle pen from the soft wing of the Dove, 1 Cor. 7. 12. etc. If any
brother has a wise that believes not, and she be pleased to dwell with him,
let him not put her away, and the woman that has a husband that believes not,
and he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave him, but if the
unbelieving depart, let him depart; a brother or a sister is not in bondage in
such cases, but God has called us to peace; for what know thou O wife,
whither thou shall save thy husband? and what know thou O man whither thou
shall save thy wife? as God has distributed to every man, as the Lord has
called every one, so let him walk, and so ordain I in all Churches. What can be
said more efficaciously to oblige Christians, in charity and meekness to
forbear one another, then so express an Injunction of so great an Apostle, to
live peaceably even with an Infidel? and again 2 Cor. 1. 24. He denies that
even the Apostles themselves have any Sovereignty over the Conscience, but only
Commissions to assist the conscientious, not that we have (says he to the
Corinthians) Dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy; therein
exactly observing the orders which Christ gave to his Apostles, Go and teach,
not compel, and if any one receive you not, shake off the dust of your feet,
no^ trample upon them, as dust under your feet, Mat. 10. 14. Constant to which
Doctrine of Meekness, our Savior thus instructs his Disciples, Mat. 23. 9. Be
not called Rabbi (that is Masters in spiritual matters ( for one is your
Master, even Christ, and all you are brethren. To this belongs the patient
forbearing the tares, and letting them grow together with the wheat till the
time of harvest: as also that admirable president of mildness toward the
Samaritanes, who refused to receive even Christ himself, whereupon the
Disciples James and John, would immediately command fire from heaven to consume
them, as in the days of Elias, but our merciful Lord rebuked their zeal, with
this sweet and tender reply, You know not what manner of spirit you are of, the
Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them, Luke 9. 54.
which one example abundantly satisfies all objections drawn from the practice
of Elias, Jehu, the sons of Levi, etc. in the old Testament, for as they had an
express command from God to warrant their Zeal, we have an express warrant
from Christ to command us meekness. If any one shall shuffle in a suspicion,
that this moderate temper was meant only for the times of persecutition, when
the Christians had no temporal Power; let him first confess that those were
the best and purest times, and then show a Warrant dormant under our Saviors
hand (that is in his Gospel) to Commissionate his Disciples as soon as they
should get the Sword into their hands, to cut the throats of all disobeyers,
and I submit; but if they can cite no such authority, let them freely
acknowledge that persecution for Conscience is an unwarrantable tyranny over
the just privileges and liberty of a Christian.

3. Our own Principles against constraint upon the Conscience.
COnsonant to these reasons and clear Texts of Scripture, are the Principles of
all the godly and well-affected of this Nation: to begin with them to whom we
owe this liberty of discoursing, the unparalled Army, in all whose
proceedings, and Declarations (especially since managed by the prodigiously
successful hands of the two later Generals) their Motto has been Liberty to
all tender and oppressed Consciences, the glory of which so dazles the eyes of
our enemies, and incourages the hearts of our friends, that notwithstanding
whatever other disadvantage, we still find the Author of our Victory mindful
of the word, which himself gave to our Army, The meek shall inherit the Land;
Of which short Texts written in our Ensigns, we may read a clear and perfect
Commentary in the Proposalls of the same still triumphing Army. 1 Aug. 1647.
when penetrating exactly into the true state of the Question, they prudently
distinguish between quiet exercicers of their Consciences, and active
prejudicers of the Commonwealth, and thereupon offer their earnest desires,
that all coercive Power, and all civil Penalties for nonconformity be wholly
repealed, and some other provision made against such Papists as should disturb
the public peace.

Many and wonderful are the deliverances which our good God has dispensed to
his servants, in reward of this their inclination to mercifullnesse, yet
amongst all the glorious appearances of the Lord for his people, none can be
found more eminent then the renowned victory over that rigid and severe
Kirk-army of the Scots, September 1650. who declining the mild counsel of our
Savior, to possess their souls with patience, deservedly lost their lives by
violence, a fatal argument, deciding manifestly this very controversy in
favor of meekness, where the maintainers of compulsion were no less
ingeniously then cruelly confuted, whilst assuming to themselves a Power to
force our souls, they could not so much as defend their own bodies.

In memory of which great Salvation from the pride and fury of the Presbyterian
Priesthood, the Parliament, as a new Covenant of Thanksgiving for so seasonable
a mercy, in the same month enacted an abolishment of diverse rigorous and
penal Statutes, contrived on purpose by the haughty Prelates, to break the
hearts of those, whose consciences they could not bend, which one Act has won
more hearts to acknowledge and love the authority of the Parliament, then all
their stupendous victories have forced bodies to confess and fear their
Power* and if it be not checked by limitations and partiality in the execution,
will render them absolute Masters of all that understand their own felicity:
for what can be imagined more welcome to a Christian people newly delivered
from an Antichristian bondage, then to see themselves infranchised into a holy
Liberty of proceeding sincerely, according to their consciences in the Worship
of their God?

Wherefore as we are full of joy for so excellent an Act, by which (as the
Apostle says) we are called unto Liberty, so we are full of hopes to be
perfectly happy, by the free and universal observation thereof, without the
least self-interest or respect of persons, being so conformable to the constant
received Maxims and solemn deliberate profession of the Parliament, as appears
by the Declaration of the Lords and Commons, in answer to the Scotch papers, 4
Mar. 1647. where folio 43. the Discipline of Ecclesiastical Censures, and all
other punishmeuts for matters of Religion are disclaimed, as grounded upon
Popish and Prelaticall Principles, not to be revived under any image or shape
whatsoever; and a little after folio 63. they proceed in the same sense, We
shall not be afraid at the day of Judgment, that we have been more forward to
set Christ at liberty, then to cast him in prison, it being better in our
opinion (where the case is not very clear) to leave God to deal against many
errors, then to use his authority for the suppressing of one truth; the
weapons of fasting and prayer, being both more Christian, and more available in
such cases, then those of force and violence: and yet more fully (if possible)
in another Declaration in answer to the letters of the Scotch Commissioners,
17. Feb. 1648. As for the truth and power of Religion, it being a thing
intrinsecall between God and the soul, and the matters of Faith in the Gospel
being such as no natural light does reach unto, we conceive there is no humane
power of coertion thereunto, nor to restrain men from believing what God
suffers their judgments to be persuaded of. Words of that solid weight and
precious value, as deserve to be engraven with letters of gold, and religiously
observed for ever by all render consciences, as an Oracle.

Conformable to the aforesaid Principles is that excellent Doctrine and advise
set down by Mr. Parker and his Brethren, in their Examen of the late Synods
Confession of Faith, in these words, page 128. Liberty of Conscience may be
infringed, first by seeking by violent means to alter conscientious men's
judgments, and their present persuasion; for it is the office of him who is the
Lord of Conscience, to lighten and change men's minds, when and how he pleases,
Phil. 3. 15. Let us therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded, and if in
any thing you be otherwise minded, God shall reveal this unto you.

2. By inciting another by like forcible means, to will and act against his
Conscience, and much more by imprisonment, mulcts, terrors or threats, Romans
14. 15. 20. 21. For this is to make him destroy his soul, ver. 20. 23.

3. We may not disturb the peace of men's Consciences, or make their hearts sad
with our invectives, or menacing them causlesly with terrors from the Lord,
Ezechiel 13. 32. Because with lies ye have made the hearts of the righteous
sad, whom I have not made sad, etc. And in page 230. thus, But we would not
have you assume to your selves, or attribute unto others, a Power to Lord it
over men's Faith and Consciences, especially when men walk obediently toward
those that are in places of Rule and Authority, and live a godly, sober,
honest, peaceable, and unblameable life. If men will do wickedly, and defend a
Liberty in Christ so to do, let them be liable to the Sword of Justice for so
doing. But far be it from us, so much as by example, to draw a weak brother, a
Saint and fellow servants of the Lord, whom no man can accuse, but for his
differing judgment, to do any thing against Conscience, whereby he should
condemn himself, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 14. How much more ought Governors
to be tender and abstemious in the use of violent and coercive means, to
precipitate men into such perilous and destructive courses. All authority is
given of God for men's welfare, and much more for the preservation, and not the
destruction of the soul.

By these considerations (I conceive) is clearly demonstrated the freedom of a
Christian soul in her commerce for heaven, which since the merciful bounty of
God holds forth indifferently to all, the cruel covetousness of man ought not
to obstruct to any, surely it is the worst of Monopolies to lay Impositions
upon the way to Paradise; Christ by his death, removed the Angel that chased
from thence our first parents; and shall any of us take the Flaming Sword into
our hands, to sheath it in the bowels of a poor Pilgrim, who with a sincere
heart travails to the same Country, only because he goes not in our company?
In my Fathers house are many Mansions, says Christ, why may there not be as
many paths that lead to them? If they that have no Law, shall be judged without
the Law, certainly they that unblameably mistake the Law, shall be tried
according to those Expositions which appeared unto them, to be the meaning of
the Lawgiver, (for the sense is the Law, and not the letter) specially having
so gracious a Judge, who has already declared by his Apostle, 2 Cor. 8. If
there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to what a man has, and
not according to what he has not.

Wherefore let us not by a sudden violence break into pieces the consciences
of our brethren, but mildly thaw them into a cordial and ingenuous unity, that
righteousness and peace may flow together in the same channel, and not as
broken Ice dash one against another: let us patiently expect, till the Lord be
pleased to take off the vail from their hearts that are otherwise minded, and
not by forcing their judgments, add to their vail of ignorance a worser of
hypocrisy, it being now a common experiment, that generally the issue of
compulsionary and forced conformity closes in this, to make some few
counterfeit Protestants, and a great many real Atheists; whence it is clearly
concluded, that the only true means of winning souls to God, is the Gospellary
way of meekness and persuasion, and indeed it may worthily be esteemed the
prime miracle of Christianity, that a person so humble as our Savior appeared,
without the assistance of Kings and Princes, without the enchanting words of
man's wisdom, without the affrighting threats of fines, imprisonments, and
deaths, (though all these were absolutely subject to his pleasure,) should
conquer Powers and Principalities, should out-charm the Magic of humane
eloquence, and by the admirable success of his mildness, condemn all those
politic Religions that confess their own crazinesse, by using cruelty to
support them; whereas to reduce the disobedient only with the spirit of
gentleness, and admonition, or at most desertion, argues indeed a Divinity in
the Author, and a Purity in the Ordinance: and here we may fitly apply the
words of our Lord, John 14. If it had been otherwise, I would have told you; if
the way of planting my Faith had been by imposing penalties on the hearers, and
not rather by exposing the Preachers thereof to dangers, I would have told you:
if the means of preserving Religion had been by watering it with the blood of
refusers to embrace it, rather then of those that sought to propogate it, I
would have told you either by my example (all the world being in the power of
my Deity) or by my Doctrine, all justifiable proceedings concerning the
government of my Flock, being derived from the warrant of my Word; thus we see
our gracious Lawmakers, faithful and constant to his own Principles, The Son
of man came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them: Thus we see our own
duty to learn of him, for he is meek and humble of heart; let us not therefore
judge one another any more, but use our judgment rather in this, that no man
put an occasion to fall, or a stumbling block before his brother, Romans 14. 13.
Let us always remember the advertisement which the beloved Disciple gives to
all his fellow servants of the Lord Christ, John 13. 16. The servant is not
greater then his Lord, if you know these things, happy are you if you do them.

Of tender Consciences.
THese few unpolisht lines, which I here present for encouragement of
tenderness, I desire may not be stretched to draw in a wild and extravagant
licentiousness, since they aim no farther then to hold up a Liberty to such
only as profess Christ, and walk before the Lord in the integrity of their
heart, who by the following marks are easily discernable from all those that
for their blasphemies in Doctrines and debauchery in manners are worthily
excluded from the benefit of this Indulgence.

Supposing first, as confessed by all understanding men, that tenderness of
Conscience is not the same thing with truth of judgment, (else there could be
but one only kind, because truth is but one) but it signifies a proceeding bona
fide, without sinister respects, or dissimulation, seeking before all things to
know God, and fearing above all things to offend him. And secondly, since in
our enquiry, to whom belongs so honorable a title, we cannot pierce into the
inward thoughts of men, we must give sentence as they appear to us, which rule
in cases of this quality is in it self sufficiently certain; however, it is the
only means God has allowed our nature to guide her resolutions in the judging
of others.

The signs then of tender Consciences are these, if they lead regular,
virtuous, and peaceable lives; if their opinions be not justly accuseable of
self-interest or licentiousness, but rather require of them a prudent and
religious severity against the inclinations of corrupted nature; if their
judgemen^s be steady, not fanned to a new sense with every breath of wind; if
they continue in the same persuasions at their death, which is no time for
dissembling, at least we ought to judge so, if they not only die in their
Faith, but for it, not only give away good part of their estates charitably,
but suffer all to be taken away patiently, and all this for Christ's sake, or
(to speak more closely) for that which they believe to be his will and
Commandment, no higher testimony of a true and real sincerity can possibly be
given, or easily imagined; and whosoever doubts after such evidence, (chiefly
if many concur in the same way) deserves to be condemned, as the most
passionate, malicious and uncharitable person in the world, for though one man
may value his fancy above his life or estate, yet it is very near an absolute
impossibility, that many (especially if they be discreet and rational in other
negotiations) should agree to undo themselves for a mere conceit, did they not
seriously believe, it more imports them to keep their Faith, then lose their
fortunes.

By these rules we may easily conclude the admission of those pious and
religious persons, who were imprisoned and persecuted by the late Prelates,
into the number of tender Consciences, as also those precious servants of the
Lord, who by a voluntary banishment left their friends and Country to plant
the liberty of the Gospel amongst the savage Heathens of America.

Whilst I was finishing these lines, a worthy friend of mine came to honor me
with the civility of a visit, to whom reading these last two or three
considerations, he told me, that as he believed, the Characters I had given of
a tender Conscience, were most evidently true, and to all unbiased-minds
perfectly satisfactory, yet they were appliable to a sort of people in this
Nation, whose being discountenanced, is thought so profitable to the State, and
so pleasing to a certain froward part of the Ministry, that he feared my
reasons might encounter some opposition, unless they met with very ingenuous
and disinteressed readers, plainly telling me, that the measures I had cut out
for tender Consciences would fit the Papists as well as if they had been made
for them, for who live more peaceably with their neighbors, (says he) who
deal more justly with all men, then they? who are more constant in their
Religion, and more scrupulous in the observances of their Law, then they? who
suffer for their Faith more then they; nay at this time, who besides them? they
submit their understandings to the definitions of their Church, and their wills
to the obedience of it is Discipline, in Fasting, Confession, and many other
burdensome duties, all which are very disagreeable to the Dictates of flesh
and blood, as containing the real practice of the highest self-denial that can
be imagined: and for the serious hour of death, I must confess, I have known
many of us turn Papists upon our deathbed, but never in all my life so much as
once the contrary; and to speak ingenuously, I have often observed, that they
who go from us to them, seem (which you make the only judge) more spiritual,
retired, and devout, then before they left us, whereas of the Papists that
become Protestants (besides the worldly designs they may easily be thought to
have) most commonly they grow more licentious, both in Faith and manners,
especially the Priests, who seldom or never are converted, if once past the
age of marrying.

I, who had always believed the punishments laid upon them, were reducible to
civil crimes, though defended by them as points of Religion, resolved to
follow those so certain and evident Principles, which I had already framed (for
discerning of tender Consciences) whithersoever they should lead me; and
therefore desired my friend to bring me to the knowledge of some moderate and
discreet Papist, that I might examine their Tenants, not doubling their easy
exclusion from the privileges of tender Consciences, this my friend
immediately did, recommending one to me, a morally honest and understanding
man, though (says he) a little abused in his Religion, and a great deal for
it; After we had met, and agreed to discourse with all freedom, the Recusant
began with a short story of the present sufferings of Papists; whereof (he
said) Some are sequestered for Delinquency, and those of all Cavaliers (caeteris
paribus) the most severely, though of all the most excuseable, because wholly
depending upon the pleasure of the late King, and infinitely obliged to his
Royal Lenity; noting it as an unanswerable argument of their fidelity and
gratitude toward such as deal with them in mercy, as also that their declining
to receive the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, for which they have
heretofore been so violently persecuted, proceeded not from any aversion to
civil obedience, but because there were mingled in those oaths certain
expressions of a pure spiritual nature, repugnant to their Consciences, and
altogether unnecessary to the common security.

Others are equally punished, that is their whole estates sequestered, allowing
only a fifth part for their wives and children, though in true reason they are
altogether justifiable, having never been in any Engagement, but found only in
some Garrisons of the King, whether they were driven for refuge, being put out
of the protection of the Parliament by public Proclamation, their houses
every where rifled, their goods plundered, and lives endangered by the
soldiers, whose condition seems clearly to be within the equity of that
Article of the Armies Proposalls, Aug. 1647. That the Kings meniall servants,
who never took up Arms, but only attended on his Person, according to their
Offices, be freed from Composition; much more those who had both the civil
reason of duty, and the unanswerable argument of necessity, to plead for their
discharge: And (which is yet more hard) some Recusants of this Class, who
never bare Arms, but were only found in Garrisons, for their own personal
security, as aforesaid, are now ranked among the highest Delinquents, and their
estates to be sold, such are Sir Henry Beddingfield, Mr. Bodenham, Mr. Gefford,
etc.

As for the single Recusants, two thirds of their estates are seized upon, only
for the cause of Religion, under which notion are included all such as were
heretofore convict of not resorting to Common Prayers, or do now refuse the
Oath of Abjuration, a new Oath made by the two Houses, when the former kind of
service was abolish't, wherein the practice is strangely severe; for upon bare
information, the estate of the suspected is secured, that is his rents etc.
suspended, before any trial, or legal proof, even in these times of peace,
and being once thus half-condemn'd, he has no other remedy to help himself, but
by forswearing his Religion, and so by an oath a thousand times harsher then
that Ex Officio, they draw out of his own mouth his condemnation.

When the Sequestrators have thus seized into their hands two thirds of the
most innocent Recusants lands and goods, then come the Excize-men,
Tax-gatherers, and other Collectors, and pinch away no small part of the poor
third penny that was left them; so that after these deductions I have known
some estates of three hundred pound a year, reduced to less then threescore, a
lean pittance to maint^in them and their children, being persons for the most
part of good quality, and civil education: and as for Priests it is made as
great a crime, to have taken Orders after the rites of their Church, as to have
committed the most heinous treason that can be imagined, and they are far more
cruelly punished, then those that murder their own Parents.

Besides these extreme and fatal Penalties that lie upon the Recusants merely
for their Conscience, there are many other afflictions whereof few take notice,
which though of lesser weight, yet being added to the former, quite sink them
down to the bottom of sorrow and perplexity; as their continual fear of having
their houses broken open, and searched by Pursuivants, who enter at what hours
they please, and do there what they list, taking away, not only all the
instruments of their Religion, but oftentimes money, plate, watches, and other
such Popish Idols, especially if they be found in the same room with any
Pictures, and so infected with a relative superstition.

Another of their afflictions is, that they, I mean these single Recusants,
have no power to sell or morgage the least part of their estates, either to pay
their just debts, or defray their necessary expenses, whereby they are disabled
for all commerce, and their credit being utterly lost, (upon which many of them
now provide even their daily bread) they must needs in a short time be brought
to a desperate necessity, if not absolute ruin; and if any, the most quiet and
moderate amongst them, should desire to transplant himself to a milder Climate,
and to endeavor to avoid the offense that is taken against him in his own
Country, he cannot so dispose of his estate here, as by Bill of exchange, or
any other way, to provide the least subsistence for himself and his Family, a
severity far beyond the most rigid practice of the Scotch Kirk; for there (as I
am informed) the persons of Recusants are only banished out of the Kingdom, and
prohibited to reside at their own homes above forty days in a year, which time
is allowed them for the managing of their estates, and their estates allowed
them for their maintenance abroad: A proceeding which their Principles would
clearly justify, if they could justify their Principles: but in England,
where compulsion upon the Conscience is decryed as the worst of slaveries, to
punish men so sharply for matters of Religion, contrary to the Principles
publicly received, is a course that must needs beget over all the world a
strong suspicion and prejudice against the honor and reputation of that State,
which at the same time can practice such manifest contradictions.

To this deplorable condition ( said he almost weeping) are the English
Catholics now reduced, yet they bear all, not only with patience, but even
silence; for amongst the printed complaints so frequent in these times, never
any thing has been seen to proceed from them, though always the chief, and now
the sole sufferers for their Consciences, except (not to be altogether wanting
to themselves) some modest Petitions humbly addressed to the Parliament, though
such has been their unhappiness, that more weighty affairs have still
disappointed their being taken into consideration; else were they admitted to
clear themselves of the mistakes and scandalls unjustly imputed to them, they
would not doubt fully to satisfy all ingenuous and unpassionate men, nay even
whomsoever, that were but moderately prejudiced against them.

To this I answered, that as every one sees the severity of the Penalties which
Papists suffer, so for my self, I believe the tenderness of their Consciences,
because they suffer: and upon this ground we see our Judges and Commi^ee-men
allow Deeds, where they find clear proof of a valuable consideration: but
Idolatry, and the destructive Principles concerning Civil Government, seem to
me the two points that are only and altogether intolerable in that Religion.

Whether Papists be guilty of Idolatry in the Question of Angels, Saints, and
Pictures.
THe Papist here first took for granted, which indeed I could not deny, that if
any Opinion be probably true, persecution in that case is certainly unlawful,
because otherwise both sides, for both are probable, if one be, might
justifiably persecute one another, to the utter destruction of all Society, and
after returned this answer to my first objection.

We reverence indeed ( says he) the Angels and blessed Saints, with a respect
far more then we use to men, because far above their Dignity, but infinitely
below the adoration we give to GOD, because infinitely below his excellency.
All the mistakes in this controversy arising from hence, that the language of
men has more distinctivenesse and variety then the gestures of their bodies,
and yet is far less copious then the thoughts of their minds, whence it is
they so frequently apply to most different conceptions the self-same words and
postures of body, as the titles of sacred Majesty, most High, most Mighty,
given to Kings and States, the style of Grace to Dukes and Archbishops, of Lord
to Noblemen, Generals, Ambassadors, etc. of Worship to Gentlemen of quality,
and such as bear any considerable Office in the Commonwealth; so kneeling to
Parents, standing bare to the Parloament, and other Courts, bowing to one
another, etc. all these very expressions are the same we use toward God
himself, and pass innocently, when rightly understood, but to a scrupulous and
wilful spirit, how offensive would this one word Worshipful be, if he
reflected with a little rigor and frowardness upon it? now as every old woman
has capacity enough to make a different apprehension betwixt going to speak
with one at the Lion in Cheapside, and going to see the Lion in the Tower, so
may any the most simple Catholic in the world, by a very little teaching,
learn to distinguish the Crucifix which he sees in the Church, from Christ whom
he believes to be in heaven, and consequently in no more danger of committing
Idolatry to that Picture, then the other of fearing to he torn in pieces by the
Sign.

Upon this Argument of the Papist, I called to mind what I had read my self in
Scripture, how the Prophet Balaam fell flat upon the ground, and adored an
Angel, Number. 22. 31. and Joshua gave the same honor to another, that styled
himself Captain of the Lords Host, and therefore could not be the Lord, Jos. 5.
13. nay he was commanded yet farther, to put off his shoes, because the ground
was holy, by the presence of an Angel; these examples I confess, being
related in the Bible, without the least note of reproof, enforce us to admit
several degrees of worship, infinitely differing in the intention of the mind,
though very little in outward expressions. Now by whatsoever names we
Protestants shall agree to call this behavior of Balaam, Joshua, and even all
the Jews before the Ark and Cherubins, I see plainly will fully express, and
shrewdly justify (at least from Idolatry) all the approved practices of the
Papists, which truly cast up, as far as I can discern, amount to no more then a
reverence toward Saints and Angels, suitable to the excellency of their
State, and for Churches, Altars, Pictures, etc. only to an Ecclesiastical kind
of good manners. And by the Light of Nature thus far seems to me evident, that
all honor or dishonor done to the Image, reflects upon the Principal, since
not one amongst us but would condemn him for a Malignant, that should shoot at
my Lord Generals Picture without Temple Bar, and if any should reprove him for
his temerity, we would presently conclude such person well-affected to the
present Government, and not at all sequestrable for Idolatry, unless we could
prove that the abused and doting people superstitiously adored the painted
cloth, which kind of worship, I am satisfied, no Recusant gives even to the
picture of our Savionr.

Lastly, I think it probable, not certain, as the Papists do, that the second
Commandment intends not to forbid any such inferior spiritual civilities,
because wise Governors contrive their Laws against those vices, to which they
see their Subjects particularly inclined, and therefore downright Idolatry, by
offering Sacrifice to Gods, made with hands, and reposing confidence in their
assistance, being the common sins of those times, it is probable we ought to
interpret this Precept, as a provision against Heathenish Idolatry, not against
such kind of reverences as the Jews by Gods own appointment used before the
Ark and Cherubins.

Agreeable to this, is the Opinion of the learned Mr. Hobs in his Leviathan,
where fol. 360. he affirms that to worship God in some peculiar place, or
turning a man's face toward an Image, is not to worship the place or Image, but
to acknowledge them holy, that is to say, set apart from common use; for that
is the meaning of the word holy, which implies no new quality in the place or
Image, but only a new relation by appropriation to God, and therefore is not
idolatry. But to worship God, as inanimating or inhabiting such place or Image,
is idolatry, as also to worship God, not as inanimating or present in the place
or Image, but to the end to be put in mind of him or of some of his works, in
case the place or image be dedicated or set up by private authority, and not by
the authority of them that are our sovereign Pastors, is idolatry: for the
Commandment is, THOU SHALL NOT MAKE TO THY SELF ANY GRAVEN IMAGE.

Thus in my judgment does that learned Protestant absolutely clear the Papists
of idolatry, though perhaps he had more precisely expressed this last way of
transgressing the second Commandment, if he had called it will worship rather
then idolatry, because there is only a want of commission, no excess in the
degree of reverence: And though afterward he condemn praying to Saints
departed, as idolatry, yet it is only upon a particular supposition of his own,
that there is yet no such thing as Saints in heaven.

When I had read this passage of so famous an Author to the Recusant, he to
requite my civility, immediately showed me the words of the Council of Trent*
which he said differed nothing at all from Mr. Hobs, and very little from me:
For as I thought, that the exhibition of some inferior kind of reverence
toward Churches, and other instruments of piety, was probably unforbidden: So
that Council decrees the absolute lawfulness thereof in the 25. Session,
where to the Canon concerning Images are added these words of explanation: Not
that there is believed any divinity or virtue in them, for which they ought to
be worshipped, or that they are to be petitioned for any thing, or any
confidence ought to be reposed in images, as of old was done by the Gentiles,
who placed their hope in Idols, but because the honor exhibited to them is
referred to the Prototypes they represent, that so thorough the Images, which
we kiss and before which we bare our heads and kneel down, we may adore Christ
and venerate his Saints.

Upon occasion of which words, the Papist assured me, that in no Council is
used the phrase of Religious worship, when they treat of these questions, nor
any thing concerning them commanded as necessary, but only their lawfullnesse
declared, that such as find benefit by their assisting the memory, or exciting
the affections, may safely use them, the rest may let them alone, provided they
censure not the practice of others, over whom they have no Jurisdiction, nor
condemn the judgment of the Church, who has Jurisdiction over them.

And hereupon we both agreed in this collateral observation, that if all
modern Controvertists would restrain their disputes to positions generally
received as of Faith in the Church, of which they are members, attending only
to her expressions, and not to the terms of particular Writers, the
differences amongst Christians, so fatal to the peace of Europe, would be both
less numerous, and far more reconcilable.

Whether Papists be guilty of Idolatry in the Eucharist.
BEfore we could proceed to the second part of this Question, the Recusant upon
some occasions was obliged to go into the Country, whence he sent me this
following paper.

Since it is concluded between us, that probability exempts from persecution, I
shall endeavor to prove that the real presence of our Savior in the
Eucharist, is at least a probable Opinion; and in order thereunto, cite the
most express and direct terms of the holy Scripture, as first the promise of
our SAVIOR, John. 6. 5. The bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will
give for the life of the world, and verse 55. My Flesh is meat indeed, and my
Blood is drink indeed. Secondly, The performance of that promise, in the words
of Institution, Take eat, this is my Body; punctually repeated by the other
three Evangelists, Mat. 26. 26. Mar. 14. 22. Luke 22. 19. And thirdly, the
places declaring the use of this Sacrament in the Apostles time, 1 Cor. 10. 16.
The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of
Christ? and the bread which we break is it not the participation of the Body of
the Lord? 1 Cor. 11. 29. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords Body. Thus the great
Apostle S. Paul, and all the four Evangelists unanimously teach the Doctrine
of the Real Presence, and not one single place produceable that in direct
terms calls the Eucharist, a sign or figure of Christ's Body, notwithstanding
the maintainers thereof admit no proof as authentical but the precise text of
Scripture, yet in this so important controversy they fly to logical
inferences and Philosophical discourses, and so make their own reason the
Judge, and not the Word of God, rendering by their now and private
interpretations this great Sacrament inferior in dignity, not only to the
Paschall Lamb, a type of Christ, but even to Manna, which was but a figure of
this very mystery.

Surely if we shall add to so many and evident texts of Scripture, the constant
judgment of the Fathers, and the universal practice of the whole Christian
world for above a thousand years (since so long is acknowledged the absolute
reign of our Religion) we may safely conclude the Doctrine of our Saviors
presence in the Eucharist to be at least probable, and consequently Catholics
in no wise accusable of rashness or obstinacy, in believing a Position so
efficaciously recommended unto them.

But admitting the Doctrine of non-reality to be true, ( said the Letter of the
Recusant) yet ought not Catholics to be judged guilty of the sin of idolatry,
because their adoration is not intentionally directed to any creature, but to
the Person of Christ our Lord: and if He be not there, their worship is
mistaken in the place, not in the object, and therefore at most an error of
fact, and no formal Idolatry, which no temperate Judge will impute unto sin,
much less our merciful Redeemer, who came to save, not to destroy, who
accepts of the good meaning of his servants, though mingled with humane
infirmities, as when Abimelech mis-took Sara from her husband, being informed
by Abraham that she was his Sister, the sincere and conscientious King received
absolution from God himself, upon this account, that he did it (says the text)
in the simplicity of his heart, Genesis 20. 6. which seems an express and
infallible decision of this Controversy, that men may be unhappy by being
deceived, but are not guilty, unless they deceive themselves.

This kind of reasoning prevailed somewhat the more with me, because the
Apology of the reformed Churches of France, expressly approves it; saying, if
an Apostle had by mistake adored some other man resembling Christ, when he
lived on earth, his error would have excused him, Daille chap. 11. As on the
other side, Mary Magdalens not adoring Christ, when he appeared to her in the
habit of a Gardener, John 20. 15. was never accused as a defect of devotion;
wherefore since the Papists all profess not to terminate their adoration in
the species of Bread and Wine, nor any other creature, but in the blessed
person of our Lord, I conclude them erroneous in their Doctrine, but not
Idolatrous in their practice, to be pitied as souls misled, not persecuted as
malicious.

Nor can I satisfy my Conscience, since as to this point the Opinion of the
Papists is no more opposite to us, then that of the Lutherans, why we should
freely allow Communion to these even of spiritual things, and in the mean
while not afford them so much as the liberty to possess their own temporal
goods. The Lutherans believe our SAVIOR to be as really in the Eucharist, as
he was upon the Cross, but do not adore him; the Papists both believe and
adore; for my part, I should clearly, either do both, or neither, at least I
shall never be brought to this partiality, to cherish the one as brethren, and
persecute the other as enemies; especially when I consider the Christian
proceedings of the Protestants in New England, Virginia, and the other
plantations in the Indies, where we abhor to destroy the Natives, though
confessedly Idolaters, but rather strive to convert them, by holding out the
truth in love.

Whether Papists are inconsistent with Civil Government.
BY the next Post I received from the same hand another Letter concerning the
common objection, that Papists hold many Principles destructive to civil
Society; wherein the Recusant protesting first solemnly, as in the sight of God
and his holy Angels, to use all ingenuity and candor in his relation of the
Catholic Doctrine, earnestly entreated me to give credit to his report in the
matters of Fact, and for the right, to judge freely, as I saw cause.

We will divide ( says he) the main Question into two points, as it relates
either to our equals, or Superiors: for the first touching Commerce and
Conversation, we absolutely disclaim that scandalous opinion, that no Faith is
to kept with Heretics, and flatly deny, that our Engagement, promise, or
contract, may lawfully be broken by our selves, or dispensed with by any Power
on earth, to the prejudice of a third person, of what Religion soever, and for
equivocation, mental reservation, etc. I am confident, though I have not here
any opportunity to look into books, that no General Council mentions either
any such word, or any such thing; Schoolmen indeed frequently dispute such
subtilties, which by men of different principles and affections in Religion are
easily misunderstood, and often perverted, but amongst Catholics every one
has liberty to deny them as he pleases, without any prejudice to Faith: and
though those speculations generally deserve encouragement, yet when they arrive
at a certain degree of niceness, they rather become an innocent curiosity,
then profitable euployment, and in such an infinity of Opinions, as Catholic
writers have leisure to publish, it is impossible, but that thorough passion,
unwariness, or humane frailty, some mistakes must escape, and then the
unhappiness is, that prejudiced and captious Readers applying their whole
study to find faults, forget the good and wholesome notions they meet, and
remember nothing but the errors.

As to the second branch concerning our duty to Magistrates, we deny, says the
letter, any earthly power can dispense with our civil obedience, and
acknowledge our selves bound, not only by the Law of Nature, but by the
express Word of God, to render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, to be
subject not only for fear, but conscience sake; What Christian Prince or State
is there in the world, whom the Subjects serve with more fidelity then the
Spaniard, French, and Italian, all Catholic Dominions? and particularly in
England, where we are some of Paul, and some of Apollo, and some of Cephas,
what comparison is there betwixt the behavior of Catholics, toward H. 8.
Edw. 6. and Eliz. and the fury of Lutherans and Calvinists in Germany, and
indeed wheresoever they are discontented; yet there is a vast difference, as to
Government, between these two cases, to oppose by force the introduce men of
innovations, by which the peace must needs be endangered, and to attempt by
force the extinguishment of an ancient Religion, whereof the people are
universally in quiet and immemoriall possession, the one drives others out of
possession, the other maintains himself in, the one invades his neighbors
rights, the other defends his own.

How many modern experiences (the easiest argument to be understood, and surest
to be relied on) clearly resolve this question; if we but consider the union of
hearts, and common interests of State, between the Protestant and Catholic
Cantons of Switzerland, where very many Churches serve by turns upon the same
day, for the exercise of both Religions, dividing every Sunday morning into two
parts, and assigning to each about three hours for their devotions, wherein
they are so punctual to maintain equality, that if the Protestants have the
first three hours one morning, next week they are to have the last; and this
they continually practice, without enterfering or offending one another.

To this so pregnant example (sufficient of it self to clear the consistency
of those two Religions) I shall further add their fair comportment one toward
another, in many Provinces, and free Towns in Germany; but most remarkable is
their friendly and peaceable living together in Holland, even during so long
and dangerous wars with Spain; Spain the chief protector of the Catholic
Faith; Spain the most zealous propagator of the Pontificiall Authority, to
whose Dominion, if the united Provinces should again return, certainly the
Catholics there might prudently promise to themselves all possible advantages;
yet notwithstanding so great occasion of jealousy, the States (then whom none
are more vigilant over their true Interest) have not only with security, but
exceeding benefit to their Commonwealth, tolerated the Catholics of quiet
Conversation, to live freely amongst them. And on the other side the
Catholics, in gratitude for so favorable a treating, have exactly
corresponded to the mercy of their Magistrates, with a most constant, sincere,
and faithful obedience.

To none of these suspicions are the Recusants of England in the least measure
obnoxious, because whatever change of Government can happen, they must expect
but a milder degree of disaffection toward them, at most a sufferance, no
encouragement, or particular confidence; and infallibly, if the rigor of the
Laws (made upon far different motives which are now no ways pressing) were
qualified to a temper of mercy, that the Catholics might enjoy but half the
Liberties to which they were born, they would be the most quiet and useful
Subjects of England, since their Religion obliges them to obey the lawful
commands of their Superiors, not only for fear, but conscience. Nor did ever
the very worst of them stir in any sedition at a time when they were admitted
to but half the common rights of Englishmen, nor were they many that ever
attempted their own relief by endangering their Countries peace, all the rest
sitting quietly and patiently under the burdens which the heavy hand of those
times continually heapt upon them.

Now that the crimes (though never so heinous) of a few discontented and
desperate spirits, should be imputed to their Religion, whose Principles
expressly condemn such conspiracies, seems extremely rigorous; but when to
those dishonorable imputations are joined intolerable penalties, both upon our
lives and estates, and not only against the then living Catholics, but all
their Posterity to this very day, surely it must needs appear the most harsh
and severe proceeding that ever was practiced in the world: wherefore I shall
close this second Letter with my humble prayers to the gracious Redeemer of our
souls, that you would cease to impute all our faults to our Religion, and we
begin to commit no other fault but our Religion, so should we happily overcome
our own infirmities, and fully satisfy your jealousies.

When I had well perused this Gentleman's discourse, and attentively read his
letters, I must freely confess, I could not have believed that either the
Papists had suffered so much from us, or been able to say so much for
themselves, I do not mean in order to prove the truth of their Religion, but
the unreasonablenesse of our persecution; since really to my understanding our
jealousies of their obedience seem as unnecessary unto us, as prejudicial to
them; for I am confident there is no Religion in the world, but by good Laws
against breach of Peace, and due execution of them, may be made consistent with
any Kingdom or Commonwealth whatsoever; who more opposite in belief then
Christians, Jews, and Turks, yet we see by experience that Jews are not
inconsistent with the Government of Christians, nor Christians with that of the
Turks, no not such Christians as are here in question, Papists;

As concerning the Doctrine we charge upon them, of the Popes power over
Supreme Magistrates, I had the fortune some few years since, to meet with a
paper that clearly answered all my difficulties, wherein were written the
negative subscriptions of many English Recusants against these three following
Propositions, as no part of their Faith or Religion, the Subscribers being both
in number and quality sufficient to represent the whole body of them in this
Nation.

1. That the Pope or Church has power to absolve any person or persons from
their obedience to the civil and political Government established, or to be
established in this Nation in Civil and Political Affairs. 2. That by the
command or dispensation of the Pope or Church, it is lawful to kill, destroy,
or do any injury to any person or persons living within the Kings Dominions,
because that such a person or persons are accused, condemned, censured, or
excommunicated for Error, Schism, or Heresy. 3. That it is lawful in it
self, or by dispensation from the Pope, to break promise or oath made to any of
the foresaid persons, under pretense that they are Heretics.
These they utterly disclaim, and renounce as no part of their belief,
professing under their hands their readiness to abjure (if the State should so
require) the practice and execution of them all, which gave me so much the more
satisfaction, by how much it was besides my expectation, nor have I now any
thing to say against them upon that account.

And indeed if we consider these differences between us impartially, our
suspicions are not only confuted, but shamed by our own daily experience, for
we trust Papists in all Negotiations, as indifferently as Protestants, nay even
our Travelers and Merchants beyond Seas (where the Papists are Masters)
converse and traffic securely with them, and yet I never heard the least
complaint of any one single Protestant's being cheated by them, upon pretense
of exemption or dispensation, and therefore since they practice not that part,
which may sometimes be profitable, I cannot think they hold to no purpose, that
which is always prejudicial.

For my small experience in the world, all the objection that ever I heard of
against the credit of our Papists, was their being disabled by sequestrations
to pay their debts, not taught by their Religion to deceive the Creditors.

If their Doctrines were so destructive to civil Society, as our accusations
pretend, how comes it to pass that all our fundamental Laws were enacted by
them, who invested the Supreme Authority of this Nation with so honorable
Privileges, and yet provided so prudently for the just security of the people,
against the unjust inc^oachments of Prerogative? from whom have all those
excellent customs and Statutes of this Nation descended upon us? is it
possible we should derive all the ancient Privileges of Parliament; and
Liberties of the Subject contained in Magna Charta, etc. from the times their
Religion governed the Land, and yet say now their Religion is inconsistent with
the Government of the Land? as it is very true, that sometimes the Popes power
here was abused to support a temporal interest, so it is evident to those that
know History, that his mediation has been often available, both for the
preventing and reconciling of our differences, as well with our neighboring
Kingdoms, as amongst our selves.

Nor is it possible that any Model of Government should be absolutely proof
against all exceptions, but in the experience of five or six hundred years some
abuses will certainly happen; whence it is easy for a severe observer to gather
objections enough to puzzle the most able and politic Statist in the world to
answer, especially if they be managed with dexterity and eloquence amongst a
half-witted and stubborn people, who neither can guide themselves, nor will be
led by others, not blind enough to be ignorant, where they are, and yet too
short-sighted to see whether they go; unhappy chiefly in this, that they are
tender in the sense of any present evil, and wholly incapable of foreseeing
the destruction that follows their impatience.

Hear what is charitably said of Papists in the foresaid Examination of the
late Synods Confession of Faith ( page 266.) The Papists believe in the same
God with the Protestants, even in the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
though they differ in some Articles, or branches of Articles of their belief,
and in their way of worship; yea some of the Papists are regenerate,
conscientious, and virtuous persons.

Wherefore (I humbly conceive) our Magistrates and Ministers ought sincerely to
enquire into the truth of things, and make a conscience of judging or preaching
otherwise then secundum probata, and not upon bare jealousies, or the blind
opinion of the vulgar condemn any freeborn member of this Nation farther then
he shall be proved to be guilty: Nor do I believe it reasonable, to charge
every unjustifiable action of particular Papists, or extravagant opinion of any
private writer amongst them, upon the whole Body of their Religion; The Decrees
of their Counsels, they profess to be the only absolute declarers of their
Faith, amongst whose determinations there are faults enough, which they strive
to defend, no need of imposing upon them errors, which they flatly deny* Let us
lay our hands upon our own hearts, we our selves want not our capriches and
exorbitant conceits, which ough^ not to be imputed to the whole reformed
Religion, but to the imperfection of humane nature, easily deceived with the
color of truth, and passionately in love with it is own invention.

Besides instead of jealousies and dangers, I cannot see but great security and
advantages would accrue to this Nation, by treating in mercy all peaceable
Papists; the Pope would be deprived of that specious pretext of relieving his
distressed Flock; the Princes and States of that Religion, would for honor as
well as conscience, upon all occasions, express their satisfaction to see them
mercifully used, whom for their profession they account brethren, and for their
sufferings, Martyrs. The Protestants in other Countries would be more assured
of the freedom they enjoy, and more hopeful of obtaining new increases of
their liberty; The Papists of England would be bound by their own interest (the
strongest obligation amongst wisemen) to live peaceably and thankfully in the
private exercise of their consciences, and, becoming gainers by such
compassion, could not so reasonably be distrusted, as the Prelaticall or
Presbyterian Party, who must needs reckon themselves no small losers, in that
the reins of authority are taken out of their hands, which they had by turns
abused into mere whips for their brethren.

Of the one we have had too long experience in their High Commission,
especially since its power was overgrown by the conspiracy of the Starchamber;
a Court, where fines were imposed not according to the quality of the offenses,
but of the Judges, who thought it below their honor to punish under thousands
of pounds for every Peccadillo.

Of the other, though our trial has been but short, yet it was very smart, and
lives still in the memory of England, which is every day refresht by the
present practice of Scotland, where the Kirk has condemned all that differ in
the least tittle from her humor, crying Anathema Maranatha upon all the
Congregations of the Saints, as appears by their Synodicall Act, set forth in
Jan. 1650. and sent to their Brethren in Edinburgh, where, having first called
our ways abominations, and our selves a perverse generation, and branded those
few honest Scots, who suffered themselves to be undeceived by the reasons and
civility of our Army, with the infamous name of Apostates, they proceed to the
most bitter, malicious, and scandalous words that an enraged Scot can utter,
speaking thus to their Party. We exhort you, and by all the power over you: we
have in the Lord, require you, carefully to avoid all familiar converse of
every degree, above all, that you beware to join with them (those that adhere
to the Parliament of England) in any public or private exercise of Religion,
those who will adventure to touch pitch, may be defiled before they be aware,
those who will not abstain from the Harlots house, shall not be innocent* take
heed (dearly beloved) of them that are led by the subtilty and depth of the
Devil, and among all his instruments, we entreat you to avoid none more then
these miserable Apostates of our own Nation, for we conceive none more sitted
to work mischief among you then this sort of men: and in their motives or
grounds for a Fast in June 1651. their expressions against us are no less
bitter: see how their zeal boyles, while they are but a kindling, while we
choke the fuel in its own smoke, how will their fury run over, when the fire
shall by any success be raised into a flame! how will they drown the whole
Country in an inuadation of more then Antichristian slavery!

But because I perceived by a passage in the Recusants discourse, that nothing
lay more heavy upon them then the new Oath of Abjuration made by the
Presbyterian Party in the beginning of the late troubles; I shall adventure
humbly to move some Queres thereupon, transcribing first a true Copy of the
Oath it self.

J. A. B. Do abjure and renounce the Popes Supremacy and Authority over the
Catholic Church in general, and over my self in particular, and I do believe
that there is not any Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
or in the Elements of Bread and Wine after Consecration thereof, by any person
whatsoever; and I do believe that there is not any Purgatory; and that the
consecrated Host, Crucifixes or Images ought not to be worshipped, neither that
any worship is due unto them; and I also believe that Salvation cannot be
merited by works, and all Doctrines in affirmation of the said points, I do
abjure and renounce without any AEquivocation; mental reservation, or secret
evasion whatsoever, taking the words by me spoken, according to the common and
usual meaning of them, So help me God.

1. Whether this Oath do not flatly contradict the known Laws of the Land, by
enforcing a freeborn Englishman to accuse himself* with so strong and
dangerous a temptation to perjury, where the choice is only this, either
forswear your Religion, or ruin your estate; a severity that far exceeds the
tyranny of the Prelates, whose indignation stayed it self upon the exterior
nonconformity; whereas this passes on to constrain the inward belief of the
mind, which God (the searcher of all hearts) has reserved to himself, and all
this, in Questions no ways concerning either Idolatry, or the security of the
State; as Purgatory, and the Doctrine of merits, for that conscience that is
not wide enough to swallow all the Oath, how great soever the part is that he
can digest, it will do him no good.

2. This Oath being wholly Negative, and no Positive Articles established by the
Parliament, to be proposed to all as the touchstone of Faith, whether it be
conscientious to oblige the Papist to swear away his own Religion, before we
have provided another for him?

3. Whether it be conscientious or reasonable for us to enforce this Oath on
the Papists, since we have many godly persons of our own party, who will not
take it, and others who will not swear at all: Hear what is said in the
Examination of the before mentioned Synodicall Confession, page 238. There is a
greater restraint laid upon us now then in the old Testament, Mat. 5. 34. James
5. 12. which has made some to shun Oaths, though called to swear by the
Magistrate in matters lawful. And again, that it is a sin in those, who impose
unnecessary, subtle and ensnaring oaths, Zach. 5. 3. 4. There is a curse gone
out against swearers, as well as against thieves, because of needless
swearing, as well as false swearing, a Land is made to mourn, Jer. 23. 10.

4. Since all these Negatives are not clearly set down in Scripture, as
fundamental paints of Christian Faith, but deduced from passages, to which the
Answers are believed as probable by them, as the arguments by us, why should we
so cruelly persecute one another for Doctrines; that are either obscurely
revealed, or not necessarily enjoined.

5. How shall we defend the Oath against this Objection, that any Jew, Turk or
Infidel may take it lawfully, according to their Principles, nay will delight
to swear against so many points of that Church, which (by reason of their
confining Territories) mainly opposes them; nor have we any Law at all (to my
knowledge) for which Jew, Turk, Heathen, or the most gross Heathenish Idolator
is sequestrable, nor any penal Oath against the most extravagant blasphemies,
that a loose wit can imagine, and a profane tongue utter, as Ranters,
Antitrinitarians, and the like? what can be more destructive to the very
foundation of Christianity, then the profane and scandalous blasphemies of Mr.
Fry, a late Member of Parliament, who publicly in print, not only denies, but
decides that Supreme Mystery of Christian Religion, the sacred Trinity, calling
it a chaffy and absurd Opinion, etc. yet the mercy of the Parliament contented
it self with a moderate and favorable punishment, excluding him only from
sitting amongst them; and if his Dignity and public Character had not rendered
him obnoxious to the crime of scandal, he might perhaps have remained as free
from trouble, as all the rest of his Opinion do, who never yet have suffered
the least molestation for the greatest exorbitances that can be devised.

In particular at the Quarter Sessions at Westminster, on the 24. of June 1651.
there wered five Ranters convented before Colonel Baxter, and other Justices,
and sufficient proof, that they had maintained that one Robins a Glazier was a
Prophet, and that his wife was with child of the Messiah, with such other
blasphemous stuff; but four of these, not then absolutely asserting these
Opinions, nor yet denying them, but evading the several questions demanded of
them by the Bench, were discharged, the fifth was committed (as he well
deserved) not for his Opinions, but for calling the Justices Traitors, etc. On
the same day a gentlewoman great with child, and some others, were also
convented, for a supposed hearing of Mass, on the day commonly called
Christmas day 1650. at the then French Agents in Long Acre, and though there
was no direct proof that they were at Mass, but at Mattins or Prayers before
Mass, yet Colonel Baxter did maintain against some other of the Justices,
that Mattins and Mass was all one, and so the gentlewoman and the rest were
fined one hundred marks a piece, and sent to prison, according to the rigor of
the Statute in that behalf formerly made, the severity of which last
proceeding, and the partiality of the first, needs no Comment.

Why must the Papist be thus singled out from all the rest, and peremptorily
forced to this hard choice, of either forfeiting his estate, or forsaking his
Conscience? if we fear their increase, we overvalue their Religion, if we doubt
their disturbing us, we undervalue our own strength, abundantly sufficient are
the means which God has put into our hands, to secure our selves from a few
disarmed Papists, abundantly sufficient were this only provision, to exclude
them from Offices of importance, and execute severe punishment upon such as
should actually attempt any thing to the discomposure of the State.

Nor can such gentleness and moderation toward quiet Recusants, be justly
accounted a toleration of them, because (I conceive) that word signifies an
absolute equality in all civil respects, betwixt Subjects of different
judgments in Religion, else the present sufferings of Papists, paying their
two thirds, might by the same frowardness be accused as a toleration; whereas
the Penalties indeed are altogether intolerable: Not to inflict the utmost
severity of punishment, is not presently to be reputed an allowance of the
crime, God himself suffers all the sins we commit, but approves none of them;
we our selves daily permit mischiefs to avoid in conveniences, and for that
reason we prohibit not Mass in the houses of Ambassadors, nor pnnish usury,
though the Statute it self 13. Eliz. 8. brands it with the name of Vice, and
most Divines hold it a detestable sin, expressly forbidden by the Law of God.

A conscientious way of settling Religion proposed.
IN the same place where God commands children to obey their parents, he
forbids parents to provoke their children, Ephesians. 6. And where he exacts
fidelity in servants, he likewise requires moderation in Masters, nay more, the
text includes even bondmen and slaves, enjoining the Masters to forbear
threatening, knowing that their Master also is in heaven, neither is there
respect of persons with him: thus clearly does the Word of God condemn as well
harshnesse and cruelty in Governors, as stubbornness and treachery in
Subjects; so that there is also a tenderness of conscience requisite on the
Magistrates part, to proceed sincerely and purely for the good of the people,
that he may truly say with the Apostle, I seek not yours, but you, 2 Cor. 12.
1. and again verse 17. Did I make a gain of you, by any of them whom I sent
unto you? in which two lines we are plainly advertised of the chief danger
which Superiors ought carefully to avoid, that neither themselves, nor their
Underofficers make a profit of men's consciences concerning matters of Religion.

Since therefore the only tolerable design of the Corrector in such cases is
the benefit of the sufferer, it necessarily follows, that before we can with
the least color of Justice inflict a penalty upon any different profession, we
ought to use all means possible to recover them to truth, and therefore our
first work should be to collect a body of positive Articles, evidently
contained in Gods Word, and absolutely necessary to man's salvation; it being
very improper, to pen the public form of Faith in the Negative, because my
believing Christian truths makes me a Christian, and not my disbelieving the
errors that oppose it, else he that believes nothing at all would be the best
Christian.

In order to which collection, the most religious way is, that every one that
will modestly, may safely propose and discuss those difficulties he meets with
in Gods Word, and if after all possible diligences of study, meditation and
prayer, no satisfaction or union follow in any point, it is an evident sign the
question is either obscure or unnecessary, and then provide for the peace of
the Commonwealth, and submit the rest to the pleasure of God.

When we have agreed upon a summary of belief, according to these three
conditions positive, evident, and fundamental, (with which the Creed, commonly
called the Apostles, suits best of any I ever saw) then ought the Magistrates
hold forth in the spirit of love and meekness, those so clear and important
verities, and if any shall be found dissenting (which I am confident will be
very few) let us follow the Apostles rule in punishing, a gentle one it is
indeed, but powerful, 2 These. 3. 6. Withdraw from such a one, that he may be
ashamed, and verse 15. esteem him not an enemy, but correct him as a brother,
at worst, rebuke him sharply, Tit. 1. 13. and after the first and second
admonition reject him, Tit. 3. 10. that is, leave him to the hardness of his
heart: if his conscience grow tender, it will check; if obdutate, he will soon
break out into lewdness; and then be justly punishable by the Law, as other
criminal Malefactors; only we must be careful not to anticipate his
condemnation before he be legally convinced of some actual offense against the
public repose.

If we suspect the disaffection of any Party, as the Papists, let us first make
it their interest to love their Country by treating them at least mercifully
in it, and then we shall have a fair trial of their fidelity; I do not know
one example, where, to a Prince or State that used them well, they have shown
themselves ungrateful.

And though it be the duty of every Christian to love his enemy, and do good to
those that persecute him, yet surely it is a hard saying, and the most sincere
professors of any Religion whatsoever find difficulty enough to observe it,
even Protestants as well as Papists know how to fall out with those Magistrates
that oppress them, else how shall we excuse the civil wars of France,
Germany, Holland, etc. if we have not recourse to the harsh usage of their
Superiors; nor need we seek the reason of these disorders amongst the Articles
of any Parties Religion, when by the instinct of nature, not only man, but even
the most trivial creature that seems to have no interest in the world, attends
with diligence to the preservation of it self: who can blame the humble worm,
that whil^st we walk fairly by, it prostrates it self before us, and lowly
creeps upon the ground, if when we tread upon it, it lift its head, and strive
to wring it self from under our cruel feet? Notable to this purpose is the old
example of the Privernates, an ancient people of Italy, who having rebelled
against the Commonwealth of Rome, and being almost quite reduced by force of
Arms, they dispatch their Ambassadors for terms of peace; the Senate sternly
ask them, What new peace they could expect, who had so insolently infringed the
old? to which they stoutly answered, We must now take such conditions as you
please to give; if they be moderate, you shall find us faithful, if too heavy,
we shall observe them only till we may safely break them; which free and
generous expression induced that wise Senate to assign them their own demands.
This so full and pregnant instance I humbly offer, as most worthy the imitation
of our English Senate, that even to Recusants, who engage to live innocently
and quietly amongst us, such reasonable conditions of subsistence may be
allowed (since they are equally with our selves born to the freedom of this
Nation) as their consciences be not violated, their spirits embittered, nor
humane infirmity tempted to despair; let us rather encourage them to come to
our meetings, and freely propose their difficulties, which now they dare not,
for fear of discovering their judgments, to the ruin of their estates; let us
use the same gentleness here in England, that his Excellency the Lord General
practices in Scotland, toward those that are not only otherwise minded in
Religion, but contrary minded in civil concernments, and actually in arms to
maintain their opposition: he invites them to conferences, and himself with
admirable temper and moderation manages the discourse, allowing free liberty of
reply to the adverse party, without passion, bitterness or threatening, and
though he find not the event answerable to his endeavors, remains at least
satisfied in his conscience, by having given a reason of his actions; and whom
can we better imitate, then so great an instrument of the liberty we all enjoy?
or wherein can we follow him with so much praise both of God and man, as in the
mildness of his spirit, by which he conquers more powerfully, then by the
sharpness of his Sword? have not the Papists understandings as well as we,
which our Arguments may rectify? have they not souls to save, which our
charity may gain to heaven? why do we not erect a Committee to purchase souls,
as we have Contracters to sell Lands? why is there not established a Committee
of Salvation, as well as of Indemnity, where the Questions of Religion may be
freely discust, and the distresses of tender and innocent consciences
impartially relieved? if men dealt mildly, and only by the Gospel way of
persuasion, surely there would in time grow Society, Commerce, and mutual
confidence, and so frequent oportunities of clearer information: when once all
jealousies and misunderstandings of one another shall be laid aside, the
differences amongst Christians will soon be reconciled, if not to an absolute
and precise unity of Faith and Doctrine, yet at least to a blessed union of
peace and love.

Oh how much better and more admirably divine is the gentle method of the
Christian, how to propagate it self in plain evidence of the spirit, then the
unnatural Turkish cruelty, of taking children from their parents! or the
unworthy Machiavillian policy of taking the inheritance from the children! or
lastly, which is, worse then either, the barbarous Heathenish tyranny of
shedding blood, and tearing limb from limb merely upon the account of Religion.

Nor can I find any satisfaction in that shuffling and hypocritical
distinction, invented by the Lawyers to deceive the common people, whose
simplicity and innocence they easily beguile, by pretending that none are
executed for Religion, but for offending against the Laws? what can be more
palpably false, or divellishly malicious then this? who does not see but by
this rule those bloody tyrants, Nero, Dioclesian, and the rest of the ten
infamous persecuters, must be canonized for good and conscientious Justicers,
because they judged according to Law? who does not see that by this rule those
glorious Martyrs, who watered the Christian Faith with their precious blood,
must be accounted Traitors, because they suffered according to Law? nay even
the cursed Jews, who crucified our blessed Savior, impiously alleged the self
same reason for themselves, We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to die, John
19. 7.

Nor can I forbear to profess how extremely unwelcome that scurvy news was to
me, of one Wright a Jesuit, being drawn to Tiburn as a Traitor upon a hurdle
for his Religion, on the 19. of May 1651. because I had so often commended the
moderation of the present Authority, as having never spilt one drop of Blood
for Religion: and though the Sequestrations of all peaceable Recusants* were
flatly against our Maxims, yet the pressing necessities of the State, and
their purpose (which I always believed) of taking away all penalties upon the
conscience, after a short time, when the Government should be a little better
settled) exceedingly qualified the harshnesse of those pecuniary severities; but
now with grief I must lay down my arms, and with shame revoke all my arguments
which I have hitherto used, to lessen the injustice of our sequestring for
conscience, and pacify the ruins of many well-affected and religious persons,
who highly disliked even that soul-money, as King James used to call it,
wherein as I have had no small success: so now I cannot with a safe conscience
endeavor any more, least I should cooperate to deceive the people;
Sequestrations I confess did shrewdly crack, but this killing has broken quite
in pieces all our Principles. Against what have we principally fought all this
while, but coercency in Religion? for what have we made so many tedious marches
and Declarations, but liberty of tender Consciences? is this to hold forth the
truth in love? is this to instruct in meekness, as becomes the servants of the
Lord? let us take heed how we fall into the hands of the living God, let us
always remember that voice speaking within us, They shall be judged without
mercy, that have showed no mercy.

Besides the sharpness of the sentence, the very trial (as I am informed) had
many singular and unusual passages, as that nothing was proved against the
Prisoner, but that a great many years ago he had said Mass in Flanders, and
this only by one witness, and one who in open Sessions professed a particular
pique and quarrel toward him, alleging an old grudge as one of the reasons
why he came up out of the Country to swear against him, no disturbance of the
public repose, nor so much as the least breach of peace laid to his charge,
but only his being a Priest, and in England: And that this was his only crime,
is unquestionably clear by the Ministers charitable offer at the Gallows, that
there was yet time enough for him to save his life, if he would renounce his
Religion, and become a Protestant; which he resolutely denying, as against his
conscience, was first hanged amongst the thieves and murderers, and then
quartered as a Traitor; and yet both Sheriff, Jury, Judge, and every one that
cooperated to the execution; all seriously profess, that nothing is so dear to
them, nothing so reasonable in it self, as incoercency in matters concerning
the salvation of our Souls. I pray God we be not too guilty of having a form of
godliness, but denying the power thereof. I pray God these severe and
ungospellary proceedings (especially this last of blood, so displeasing to the
Spectators, and unprofitable to the Authors) become not in time a prejudice to
our Brethren beyond the Seas, a discontenting of our friends at home, and a
scandal to all the world; for that very day of the Priests execution I
o'reheard a nimble witted man say these very words, Since we are come to this
pass that we can fight against the Covenant for Reformation of the Kirk,
sequester men for Recusants, and continue their Sequestrations, whether they
continue their Recusancy or no, make a close peace with Spain, and openly hang
up Jesuits, SIT ANIMA MEA CUM PHILOSOPHIS.

Surely it were far better to let the Papists for a while practice their kind
of Christianity, then upon a sudden deprive them of the only Religion to which
they are accustomed, and so endanger the driving of them to Atheism, instead
of reducing them to Protestancy.

Besides how easily may the like severity be exercised against our selves, if
any Power disaffected to godliness should gain authority over us? it is but
straining the word Recusant a little above the common note, it is but making
our holy conferences Treason by Statute, and then all the precious Saints and
dearest servants of the Lord, may be hanged, drawn and quartered by Law, and
yet at the same time our Executioners may profess (as seriously as we now seem
to do) Liberty of Conscience; only they will think it reasonable to their own
interpreters, and consequently intend by this charming sound of Liberty, an
absolute and uncontrollable freedom indeed, but to be enjoyed by none but
themselves.

How do the Papists themselves in France outgo us in their tender and moderate
behavior toward the Protestants of their Country, notwithstanding former
provocations to jealousy in the last civil wars? nay notwithstanding present
provocations by our severity against all of their profession in England, they
dispute openly and frequently together, not only the Clergy, but tradesmen one
with another: at many of which conferences I have been present in Paris, where
every one freely defended his own Opinion, so civilly and peaceably, that I
never returned from the place of those discourses, without exceeding comfort
and satisfaction, thinking often with my self, it were a fashion as worthy to
be transpoorted into England, as any our Gallants bring from thence.

At the end of the Dispute, (which is not upon any solemn challenge, but
casual, though very often) if either party seem unsatisfied, his liberty is
inviolably preserved, without seizing upon a penny of his estate (which there
is accounted but a politic covetousness) or touching so much as a hair of
his head, (not to speak of spilling his blood for a different opinion) which
they detest as a most abominable cruelty, but with a courteous friendlinesse
and mutual compassion, part in as perfect charity as they met, each hoping and
praying for the others conversion: in the mean while the King allows a certain
number of public Churches to Protestants, and as much liberty in private for
the exercise of their consciences, as any disagreers from the common belief of
the State can reasonably desire.

Nay, even the Spanish Inquisition (so universally abhorred) practices all
imaginable means toward the accused, to reduce his judgment to theirs, before
they pronounce theirs against him, and upon conformity immediately acquit him;
whereas our conscience-sequestrations are laid on, without any disputing; and
hardly taken off, upon never so much conforming; which very thing I have heard
some Presbyterians object to us, though themselves made the abjuring Oath on
purpose to pinch the Papist, yet they said it was intended only for times of
war, when all other ways, either of convincing by reasons, or convicting by
Law were obstructed.

And, proceeding upon the same subject; they alleged diverse Papists by name,
who have not only gone to Church, but taken both the Communion, Oath of
Abjuration, and Engagement; and all this undeniably proved by sufficient
Testimony, yet after solemn debate upon their Petitions in Haberdashers Hall to
be no longer punished, since they were no longer guilty, the Commissioners
declared that it was not expressed in any Act or instructions from the present
Parliament, what should amount unto, or be adjudged by them to be a Conformity;
and therefore they continue the Sequestrations as formerly, notwithstanding
such conformity as aforesaid; In particular, on Wednesday the second of July
16^1. It was the case (says my Presbyterian friend) of one Smith, a suspected
Papist; who had Lands in the Soke of Winchester sequestered; upon his appeal at
Haberdashers Hall, he produced sufficient proof that he had been several Lords
days at Church, and had twice taken the Oath of Abjuration, but one of the
Commissioners made answer that this was not enough, he must also take the
Communion, otherwise must continue sequestered as a Papist: whereto Smiths
Council replied, That if it were a mark of Papists not to have received the
Communion, we are (said he) all Papists in our Parish, for we have had no
Communion in our Church these four years: And it is very probable that that very
Commissioner who made this objection, has not of late, and perhaps will not
receive the Communion, in manner as is prescribed by the Statute; and certainly
it is a very sad case for us to force others, under so great a penalty, as the
sequestration of their estates, to do that which we will not do our selves: All
the relief and hopes, that Smith and others in his condition (who have both
gone to Church, and taken the Communion and Oath of Abjuration) have received
at the said Hall, is, that the said Commissioners have promised to move the
Parliament, to know what shall amount unto a Conformity; and it might also be
desired to know what Religion the Papists (in case they be forced to leave
their own) shall conform unto, since we have three several Religions, that at
present seem to have an equal power or influence: the Prelaticall or old
Protestant (as some call it) is established by Law; the Presbyterian carries the
vogue in the Pulpit; but the Independent has the power and countenance of the
State. Certainly the abovesaid strange proceedings must needs appear, both to
all the reformed Churches abroad, and to very many conscientious people at
home, as savouring of a design to make sure of the Papists estates, whatsoever
becomes of their souls.

And all this while we hold forth meekness, and all this while we cry up
Liberty of Conscience! is it possible we should so far forget our principles,
as to seize the estates of our neighbors and kindred for Religion, and at the
same time profess to venture all our own to purchase freedom of Religion? is
it possible we should expose our own lives in so long and dangerous a war, to
establish and secure Liberty of Conscience; and at the same instant of time,
hang, draw, and quarter men for their Consciences? how shall we answer at the
day of Judgment our shedding so much blood to deliver our Country from
coercency in matters of belief, if as soon as the power is in our hands we
emb^e them in the blood of our Countrymen merely for their Religion; have we
so soon forgot those sharp reproofs of the Apostle, Romans 2. Behold you are
called Jews and rest in the Law, and make your boast of God, you know his will,
and approve the things that are more excellent, you are confident that your
selves are guides of the blind, and lights to them which are in darkness,
instructers of the foolish, and teachers of babes, who have the form of
knowledge and of truth in the Law; you therefore, who teach another, teach you
not your selves? you that preach a man should not steal, do you steal? you
that abhor idols do you commit sacrilege? In the day when God shall judge the
secrets of men by Jesus Christ: how can we answer that excellent and
self-evident precept of nature, do as you would be done unto? God is not
mocked, he promises indeed, that the meek shall inherit the Land, but surely
means not such as seem meek only to inherit the Land.

Thus sharly went on my angry Presbyterian, and I confess I was extremely
ashamed to hear him say so much reason, that used to speak nothing but passion,
and to see my self so confounded by one, that I have always overcome with ease
upon any other subject, and should have liked far better his observations
(which with grief I acknowledge to be too true and open to all the world) if
they had come from an indifferent and unfactious spirit, because I suspect they
may perhaps proceed rather from envy toward the gainers, then pity upon the
losers: for during the violent, and therefore short, Dominion of the
Presbyterians, never were more cruel torturers of the Conscience, then they,
never a more tyrannical Tribunal then their Jure divine Assembly, and
classical High Commission, but the hand of the Lord stopped them in their full
career, and by woeful experience they now find the truth of Gods threatenings,
If you bite and devour one another, take heed you be not consumed one of
another, Gal. 5. 15.

Wherefore it shall be my daily prayer to our great and good God, that he would
graciously inspire his servants, who now sit at the Helm, to prevent the like
heavy judgments upon themselves; and seriously considering that both their
allegiance to reason, their duty to God, their Engagement to their own
Principles, call so loudly upon them, they would fulfill now our joy, and
complete the good work so happily begun, by puttting the tender-conscienced and
peaceable-minded people of this Nation into a condition of perfect security for
matters of Religion, which cannot be effected without a general Act of
Conscience-indemnity, firmly to be established as a fundamental and unalterable
Law of the Land, for all that profess the Gospel of Christ.

FINIS.
Postscript.
SInce there is scarce one whom something in these few sheets will not please,
nor very many whom something will not displease, they therefore freely submit
themselves, not only to the judgment of the civil Magistrate, but of every
civil man; and I have (according to the Order of Parliament) hereunto
subscribed my name,

William Birchley.


