West Rid. Com. Ebor. ss.

Ad general. Session. pacis Dom. Regis tent. apud Doncaster, per adjourn. in
and per le West Rid. Com. praed. decimo sexto die Januarii, Anno Regni Dom.
nostri Caroli secundi nunc Regis Angl. etc. tricesimo quarto.
The Humble Presentment of the Grand Jury at the said Sessions, as follows.
WE do present, That nothing like Union both in Church and State, can
contribute to the happiness of this Government, and to its continuance, as it
is now established by Law.

That remissness both in Magistrates and Officers, as to the putting all Laws
in execution against Popish and Protestant Dissenters is hurtful to the same.

We do also present, That all persons whose Worship is contrary to the Liturgy
and Practice of the Church of England, are equally dangerous to the Government;
and that all Magistrates are under an equal obligation to put the Laws in
execution, as well against Popish as Protestant Dissenters.

We do also present, That where any Magistrates are observed to favor
factions, and not to put the Laws in execution, as aforesaid, the King ought to
be acquainted therewith, that his authority may not be made use of, to protect
where it ought to punish.

We do also present, That the names of all persons, whether Papists or
Protestant Dissenters, known to be disaffected, consequently dangerous to the
Government, ought to be represented to the Lord Lieutenant or his Deputies, to
the end they may forthwith be disarmed, according to the Laws and Statutes of
this Realm.

We do further present, That the neglects of Constables, and other Officers, in
putting the Laws in execution against Rogues, Vagrants, petty Chap-men and
Scotch Pedlars is dangerous and prejudicial to his Majesty's Subjects, and
especially to the Tradesmen of this Kingdom.

WE his Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said Riding, present at the said
Sessions, do hereby declare our consent and concurrence with the Gentlemen of
the Grand Jury, representing the body of the said Riding, in their abovesaid
Presentment; and have resolved, in order thereunto, to use all diligent and
lawful means of contriving to put the Laws in execution against all Dissenters,
as well Popish as Protestant; persons, who though they differ in the manner,
yet agree too visibly in the matter, of fostering and encouraging of Schism and
Faction.

We further Order, the like Warrants be sent out from this Sessions which were
from the last, to all Chief Constables, Petty Constables, Churchwardens and
Overseers of the Poor, commanding them, and every of them, to give an account
in Writing, upon Oath, to the Justices of the Peace at the next Sessions, to be
held at Pontefract, for this Riding, what Conventicles are held, and who are
Dissenters, with their Names, in their respective Parishes, Towns or Hamblets,
to the end they may be proceeded against, and prosecuted according to Law.

We further Order, this Presentment be Printed, and one of them be affixed to
every Warrant so distributed and sent out, to the end we may first rightly
execute the trust reposed in us by his Sacred Majesty, in the execution of the
Laws; and that all Dissenters, of either or any persuasion, knowing our
resolutions herein, may have warning thereby to reconcile themselves to the
Church, and to avoid the penalty of the Laws.

And we further Order, That all persons that keep Alehouses or
Victualling-houses, or other public Houses within the said Riding, bring a
Certificate under the hand of the Parson of the Parish, or other Incumbent
there, at the same time that they come to renew their Licenses for the ensuing
year, that they have duly repaired to their Parish Churches, and received the
Sacrament, according to Law.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Davis. 1683.


