THE Christian Moderator. THIRD PART. OR, The OATH of ABJVRATION ARRAIGNED BY
THE Common Law and Common sense, Ancient and modern Acts of Parl. Declarations
of the Army, Law of GOD and consent of Reformed Divines.
AND Humbly submitted to receive JVDGMENT From this Honorable Representative.

ESAIAS. 58. 6. 8. Dissolve the Bonds of Iniquity, take off all heavy Burdens,
break every Yoke, and let the oppressed go free.

Then shall your light break out as the morning, and your health spring forth
speedily: your Righteousness shall go before you, and the Glory of the Lord
gather you up.

LONDON* Printed by J. G. for Richard Lowndes at the White-Lyon in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1653.

THE OATH OF ABJVRATION Arraigned, etc.
Die Sabbathi. 19. Augusti 1643.
BE it Ordained by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament; That all such
persons, as being of the Age of one and twenty years or above, shall refuse to
take the Oath hereafter expressed, which Oath any two or more of the said
Committees for Sequestration in every County, City or place respectively, or
any two Justices of the Peace, or the Major, Baliffs or other head Officer of
any City or Town Corporate shall have power to Administer to any such Person or
Persons, shall forfeit as Papists within this and the former Ordinances, and
Seizure and Sequestration of two third parts of all their Goods and Estates
real and personal, and sale of such proportion of their Goods, so Seized and
Sequestered, shall be made, and their Rents and Estates disposed of, in such
Manner and Proportion, and by such Persons, as by the said Ordinance of
Sequestration is appointed for Papists. The Tenor of which Oath follows.

The OATH.
IA. B. Do abjure and renounce the Popes Supremacy and Authority over the
Catholic Church in general, and over my self in particular, and I do believe
that there is not any Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
or in the Elements of Bread and Wine after Consecration thereof by any person
whatsoever; and I do believe that there is not any Purgatory; and that the
consecrated Host, Crucifix or Images ought not to be worshipped, neither that
any worship is due unto them; And also believe, that Salvation cannot be
merited by Works; And all Doctrines in affirmation of the said points, I do
abjure and renounce without any Equivocation, mental Reservation, or secret
Evasion whatsoever, taking the words by me spoken, according to the common and
usual meaning of them. So help me God.

MY Tears are on my Cheeks, Lam. 1.
and mine Eyes run down with Water, Lam. 4. 1
because the Comforter, that should relieve my soul, is far from me: Jer. 14.
19.
how is the Gold become dim, and the most fine Gold changed? Lam. 2. 19
How have we looked for the time of healing and behold trouble? Arise, cry out
in the night, in the beginning of the Watches, pour fourth thy heart like
Water before the face of the Lord, for they have healed the hurt of the
Daughter of my people slightly, they have still left a dangerous wound even in
the heart of our liberty. Jer. 8. 22.
Is there no Balm in Gilead? is there no Physician? why then is not the health
of the Daughter of my people recovered? Why are these Oaths continued with so
sharp a double edge, that unavoidably they either cut the purse or kill the
Conscience?

I confess my own weakness in the Government of my self, I confess my own
ignorance in prescribing to others; yet the desires of prosperity to this
Nation have taken such strong hold upon my Soul, and I feel my Spirit so
powerfully drawn forth to advance the things that belong to its peace, that I
cannot refrain my Pen from humbly and earnestly soliciting a more firm and
perfect establishment of the two principal Pillars of all flourishing
Commonwealths, Mercy to such as suffer for Conscience; and impartial Justice
to all men.

As these considerations have engaged me once more to expose the most secret
and retired thoughts of my heart to be seen by others; So I assure the Reader
this shall be their last appearance in public, that he may rest secure from
all fear of losing his time upon any thing of mine hereafter: But lest I offend
too much in the present trouble I give him; I shall imediatly apply my self to
my task, and endeavor with a gentle, yet faithful hand, to open the orifice
of the neglected wound, humbly imploring the gracious influence of Heaven to
govern our Great College in their grave and charitable consults for the
perfect cure of all our sorrows.

And in searching how mortal a stroke such Oaths, as this of Abjuration,
give to the known Rights, and Privileges of the People of this Land, my Method
shall be directed by these Heads.

That they are Fundamentally repugnant to the Common Laws and ancient Statutes
of this Nation. Directly contrary to many Acts even of the last Parliament, and
Declarations of the present Army. Absolutely prohibited by the Law of God, and
inconsistent with the general judgment of all Reformed Churches.

MAgistrates being originally instituted for this principal end, Thoughts
unpunisht because unoffensive.
to maintain a just order and harmony in the outward Motions of the multitude,
it necessarily follows that the general design of Government is little
concerned, what noat we make in our single selves, if we be in tune with our
Companions.

Upon which ground the Common Law of this Land directs all its care to rule and
treat us, as we are considered in reference to one another, and therefore
neither limits our private expenses, nor obliges to any course of Physic;
because our particular fortunes and health are of very little importance to the
Public, and of very much to our selves; And since nothing is more reasonable
then to entrust those with the managery of an affair, whom the issue most
concerns, it cannot be denied, but as this freedom (without which we were
absolute Slaves,) is allowed us in relation to our Bodies and Estates: So our
Souls (as far as may consist with the public peace) ought to enjoy a just and
proportionable share in the same liberty.

Much less does the Law either punish or reward our thoughts, because they
neither disappoint nor advance its ends; The intention of Murder (though in
the highest degree of premeditated malice) is no way subject to any legal
account, if the mischievous purpose stay at the fancy, and proceed no farther
to any outward attempt: By which necessary distinction betwixt Divine and Human
Jurisdiction, the Law religiously preserves its reverence to the great
Tribunal of God, before whom only, we are to answer for the private errors and
secret vices of our hearts, as we are accountable to the Magistrate for the
open Crimes and scandalous Actions of our hand^.

If any conceive it just to enact a Law against Erroneous Thoughts in Religion,
with an Oath of Aburation to make the suspected accuse himself, why should they
not as well impose a penalty upon the vicious Thoughts of Hatred, Revenge or
Ambition: And then force every one to swear whether he be guilty? Certainly
Magistrates may as lawfully put us to our Oaths, whether we have assented to
any traitorous thought against our Country, or coveted our Neighbors Goods or
Wife, as what we think of such a point of Divinity.

Should it be pretended, that the Oath of Abjuration commits no force upon the
mind, but only upon the mouth; gives free leave to think what we will, if we
swear as it commands; Such liberty of Conscience (to believe in our hearts
contrary to what we profess with our lips) Nero himself allowed; Such liberty
of Conscience (that is, damnable hypocrisy) is indeed the proper and natural
effect of compulsion upon the Conscience: Surely by this glorious word (
liberty) something more is intended to be left us, then what no Tyrant can take
from us; Surely it ought at least to be so courteously interpreted, that by this
kind phrase ( Liberty of Conscience) be understood a liberty consistent with
Conscience; a condition, wherein every peaceable Christian may follow our
Principles, without renouncing his own honesty: yet I confess it puzzels all
the reason I am owner of, that they who take this Oath (though very credibly
against their Consciences) shall enjoy the full benefit of tender Consciences;
And if any refuse it (because against his Conscience) he is wholly excluded
from the least mercy provided for tender Consciences.

Besides, Thoughts not punished because incapable of proof.
this dispunishableness of thoughts arises as well from the impossibility of
lawful proof, as from their innocence in not offending others; And therefore a
secret promise (though most seriously and deliberatly resolved on) if reserved
in the parties own Conscience, creates no legal Obligation of performance;
which could not be true, Doctor and Student p. 104.
if the Law did allow any proceeding, whereby the party were compellable to
accuse himself.

And therefore, even in Chancery (though that be a swearing Court) if a Bill of
Perjury be sued upon the Statute (5. Dyer 288. 49 Ed 3^1 Challenge 100.
Eliz.) the Defendant shall not be forced to make Answer upon Oath either to
the Bill or Interrogatories. So if a Juror be challenged for partiallity,
grounded upon some indifferent and unreproachfull objection (as Kindred to one
of the parties, etc.) he shall be admitted to clear such a question by his own
Oath; but if the charge be either ignominous or dangerous, as bribery, etc. the
challenger must maintain his Assertion by witnesses; Crompton in his Justice of
P. 193.
It being unreasonable (in the wise and moderate judgment of the Law) that any
one be enforced to become his own accuser. With these agree many other
Authorities, all unanimously subscribing to this conclusion, as an undeniable
Maxim of Law, Dalton 299 Fullers Argument 10.
that, None can be lawfully examined upon Oath, concerning any thing that
sounds to his own prejudice.

Nay so great an abhorrence has the Common Law of the parties being forced to
prosecute and condemn himself, that it employs an extraordinary diligence to
prevent so destructive an abuse; And therefore in Fitzherberts Natura Brevium,
if any had been cited into the Spiritual Court to accuse himself pro salute
Animae, as they called it, a Prohibition lay at the Common Law to stop and
supersede their proceedings; And it is a case adjudged, that, if in a paenall
Law, the jurisdiction of the Ordinary be saved, as in 1 Eliz. Coke mag. circa
657.
2. for hearing of Mass, the party shall not be examined upon Oath before the
Ordinary concerning that point, because it might become an evidence against
himself, Leighes case. and 18.
if questioned afterward in the temporal Courts, which is a direct Authority
in the very point out of a Book licensed and Printed by special Order of the
last Parliament, Eliz. Dyer 175.
clearly proving, that as the Papists ought to be tried by witnesses, Hinds
case.
and not themselves examined upon Oath, concerning their going to Mass; So,
much less concerning their inward belief, especially when such ruin attends
them in their Estates, if they dare refuse to swear against their Consciences.

It is true by the Common Law in some personal Actions the Defendant is
admitted (not compelld) to his Oath, as in Case of wager of Law, 21 Ed. 3. 10.
etc. 33. H. 6. 10. of non summons in a Praecipe quod reddat, and of
garnishment, upon a Scire Facias, etc. But all these Oaths are either
voluntarily offered by the party himself, not enforced upon him by the Judges,
and go in discharge, not condemnation of him; or else concern only some
collateral passage of little importance to the decision of the main
controversy, nor is the least shadow of such practice to be seen in any penal
Law, which is the only point we dispute upon, and which we here undertake to
prove; a proceeding altogether unknown to our Laws, that any one should be
constrained to inform against himself, and so become his own Executioner.

Upon this ground Sir Thomas Moore (a person completely learned in the Laws of
this Land, and universally famous for courage and resolution, according to his
principles) refused the then new Oath concerning the Kings Supreamacy and
Divorce, alleging for his defense at the Bar, that he never spoke or acted
any thing against that Statute, and upon this Plea he relied, as an evident
justification in Law, which never (said he) was strained so far as to reach our
thoughts; and for his inward judgment, he freely professed that Oath to be
against it, offering before the Judges to swear, that the unsatisfaction of
his Conscience therein was the only cause of his refusal to comply with their
Commands.

And if we look back upon times behind us, we shall often see the outward words
and actions censured by the Magistrate, but never the least attempt upon the
Thoughts not punished by Acts of Parliament before the Reformation.
inward belief; though the principles heretofore entertained concerning the use
of force in Religion have generally been far more rigid, then those we now
profess.

Therefore in the Acts of 5. Hen. 2. 5. and 2. Hen. 4. 14. and 2. Hen. 5. 1.
(made even in Popish times which we so much condemn for cruelty) those that
began new opinions contrary to the received Religion of the Nation, 5 Hen. 2. 5
2 He. 4 14. 2 Hen. 5. 1.
are prohibited to Preach publicly any doctrine destructive of the Established
Laws, or by their subtle Sermons to draw the people after them; But not a
word of forcing to swear the contrary.

They are forbidden to write Books in defense of their singularities, or make
unlawful Conventicles to the endangering of the public Peace; But not a
syllable of renouncing what they believed in their heart.

The Statute of 31. 31 and 34 Hen 8. Nor in the beginning of the Reformation.
Hen. 8. 14. lays a forfeiture upon any that by Word, Writing, Printing,
Publishing, Preaching or Teaching, shall maintain any of the Opinions in six
Articles therein prohibited: But not a Letter of Abjuring their inward
persuasion.

And what the Lord Herbert in his History of Henry the 8. Lord Herberts Hen. 8
fol. 447, 448.
says concerning this Statute is worth consideration, his words are these. The
six Articles being now published, gave no little occasion of murmur, since to
revoke the Conscience not only from its own Court, but from the ordinary ways
of resolving Controversies, to such an abrupt decision of the Common Law, as is
there set down, was thought to be a deturning of Religion from its right and
usual course; since the Conscience must be taught, not forced; without that it
should at any time be handled roughly, as being of so delicate a temper, as
though it suffer an edge to be put on, who does more, diminishes or breaks
it: Besides to make the contravening of Doctrines, to be capital, before they
be fully proved, is prejudicial to that liberty, without which none can
justify himself before God or Man: For if it be death ( and Sequestration is a
kind of death) to believe otherwise then we are commanded; how unsafe will it
be to make exact enquiry? and without it, who can say his Religion is best?
Besides the Example is dangerous; For if Infidels and Heathens (to retain their
People in obedience) should do the like, who would ever turn Christian?
Therefore Cranmer for three days together in the open Assembly opposed these
Articles boldly, etc. Thus far this learned Historian.

The Statute of 1 Edw. 6. 1. (in the beginning of the Reformation) continued
the same style of punishing only the outward Act, whilst it declares, if any
shall deprave, despise or contemn the Sacrament of the Altar (so called in the
Act, according to the Language of those times) he should suffer imprisonment
and make fine and ransom at the Kings pleasure. Nor since the Reformation.


In the Statutes of 1. Eliz. 1. and 8. Eliz. 10. it is Enacted; That if any
person shall by Writing, 1 El^z. 1. 8 Eliz. 10.
Printing, Teaching or Preaching extol, etc. The authority of the Bishop of
Rome, or by any Speeches, Deed or open Act attribute any authority here in
England to the said Bishop, he shall incur the penalty mentioned in that
Statute.

Agreeable to the former Statutes is (13 Eliz. 13 Eliz. 12
c. 12.) being the Act made for the subscription to the Articles of Religion,
then newly modelled into a public form of confession of Faith. The words of
the Act are these. If any such Ecclesiastical person shall advisedly maintain
or affirm any doctrine directly contrary or repugnant to the said 39 Articles,
and shall persist therein and not revoke his error, such maintaining or
affirming and persisting, shall be just cause to deprive such person of his
Ecclesiastical promotions. Upon which Statute these things are observable.

First, that these subscriptions being concerning matters of Faith are required
of Scholars and Divines upon their pretense to Church preferments, not of lay
persons, to dispossess them of their temporal inheritances.

Secondly, they must maintain or affirm some doctrine opposite to these
Articles, to bring them within the penalty of that Law. So that the believing
only of the contrary is not sufficient.

Thirdly, such maintaining or affirming is to be voluntary, and not drawn out
of them by the rack of an Oath.

Fourthly, it, being made a cause of Deprivation, must be by witnesses, and not
by the enforced abjuration of the party.

Fifthly, they are to lose only their Ecclesiastical promotions, and not to be
deprived of their temporal Estate. Not one of these so rational and necessary
cautions is at all now considered in the modern proceedings against Papists;
but the most unlearned Tradesman and ignorant Woman amongst them are compelled
to accuse themselves, their Judges never asking after witnesses; And this under
forfeiture of full two thirds of all their Goods and Lands.

And even in the last Parliament many Ordinances have followed the same way of
prohibiting external disorders, Norby the last Parliament it self.
occasioned from difference in opinions, but not precisely for the bare
difference in opinion; As that of the 11 Aug. 1645. made by the Lords and
Commons. 11 Aug. 1645.
Wherein it is Ordained, that what person soever shall endeavor to bring the
Directory into contempt, or raise any opposition against it, or shall practice,
write or Print, or cause to be written or Printed any thing in derogation or
depraving of the said Directory, shall lose and forfeit for such offense such a
sum of money, as shall at the time of his conviction be thought fit to be
imposed upon him, by him before whom he shall have his trial.

Conformable to this was an Order made in Parliament December. 22 December: 1646.
22. 1646. The Parliament taking into consideration, that some Anabaptists and
other Sectaries have disturbed the Ministers and Congregations in some Churches
of this Realm, in disparagement of the Laws, Statutes and Governments
thereof, do Order that the Constables and Headboroughs within their several
Parishes, etc. shall arrest the bodies of all such persons as shall disturb
any Ministers in holy Orders, whilst he is in place of exercising his public
Calling, by speaking to him, or using irreverent gestures or actions; and that
they carry the bodies of such Offenders before some Justice of Peace of the
same County to be dealt with, as to Justice shall appertain.

So likewise 9. 9 Aug. 1650.
Aug. 1650. It is Enacted, that every person that shall presume avowedly by
words to profess, or shall by writing proceed to affirm any Blasphemous,
Atheistical or execrable Opinions derogatory to the Honor of God, such
persons so avowedly professing, maintaining or publishing the said Opinions or
any of them, shall incurr the penalties of the said Statute. Which shows
plainly that the last Parliament thought it not fit to punish any for erroneous
Opinions, (though of the highest nature) If the party shall only believe them
in his heart, and keep them within his own breast.

Lastly, (as a final decision of this point and full satisfaction of those
objections, which some make against the validity of an Ordinance) it was
Enacted (17 Car.) by the King, Lords, and Commons, That no person whatsoever
exercizing any Ecclesiastical (much less temporal) jurisdiction shall tender
any Oath to any person, either Ex Officio or at the instance of any whosoever,
whereby he may be charged to confess or accuse himself of any crime, and so
expose himself to punishment: then which no clearer or more definitive
sentence can be imagined.

And (which is very observable) never in former times was any Abjuration
required, but of such, as were first legally convict of Heresy; Never till
these times, was the Abjuration it self made the conviction, 2 Hen. 4. 15
and therefore in the Statute of 2 Hen. 4. 15. These two conditions are
punctually expressed, That in case of Abjuration the opinion to be abjured be a
known heresy, and the party to abjure be legally found guilty, before they
proceed to exact his Abjuration.

According to this tenor run many other Statutes both ancient and modern, which
my design of brevity enforces me to omit, and the full sufficiency of the Laws
already cited renders altogether unnecessary; only I shall desire leave to
extract these few sound and excellent words out of the Petition of Right, 3
Car. That no free men be compelled to take any Oath, not warranted by the Laws
of the Realm.

This being then concluded, that thoughts are free from all humane Laws, and
self accusation contrary to the English Laws; it is very suitable to our
Method, to consider next what provision our Commonwealth has made for
discovery and conviction of Offenders; Wherein after I have slightly touched
some of the Arguments mentioned in the first part of this Moderator, I shall
pass on to those aditionall reasons I have since collected,

And that the way of Indictment and conviction of witnesses and Jury is the
only proceeding owned by the fundamental Laws of this Land,

IS abundantly proved by the chief Author and surest defender of all our
Liberties, Magna Carta, so often confirmed in our ancient Parliaments, so
reverently upon all occasions cited by the last: where every English man may
read with joy these precious words. No free man may be arrested or imprisoned,
but by due Process of Law. No man shall be put out of his freehold by either the
King himself, Coke Mag. Carta. 45. and 46.
or any Commissioners, but every ones right to be tried by a Jury of his
equals. Of which happy-freedom the Papists (who long since procured it for
this Nation) enjoy not now the least shadow.

5 Ed. 3. 9. It is enacted that no man from hence forth shall be attached upon
any occasion, nor his Lands, Tenements, Goods, or Chattells seized against the
form of the great Charter or against the Law of the Land. To this regular form
of proceeding Thieves and Robbers have a clear and allowed right, only Papists
upon the single account of Religion are altogether excluded.

25. Ed. 3. c. 4. None is to be convicted of any offense, unless by
indictment, or presentment of good, and lawful men, where such offense is
supposed to be done. This Justice every Murderer can claim and no Judge dare
deny; only the Papist whom we can accuse of no other crime; then difference of
judgment in Religion, is forced to convict himself by his own Oath, without
the least color of any legal Indictment, so expressly contrary to the known
Laws and ancient liberties of this Nation.

28. Ed. 3. c. 3. No man of what Condition or Estate soever shall be put out of
his Lands or Tenements without being brought to answer by due process of Law.
This privilege the most trivial fellow, that has but a Cottage to hide his
head in, may uncontrollably challenge, and God forbid it should be refused him;
but then how is it reasonable that Recusants (many of them persons of very
considerable, quality) be dispossessed of so great Estates, upon their own
enforced Oaths without any due process of Law?

42. Ed. 3. cap. 1. It is enacted that the great Charter shall be held, and
kept in all points, and if any Statute be made to the contrary it shall be
void. Nay so great account have our wisest Ancestors made of this Magna Carta,
so carefully provided for its preservation and universal observance, that it
has no less then 30 times been solemnly confirmed by Authority of Parliament,
as is at large declared in Sir Ed. Coke's 5. Report fol. 64. B. and in his 8.
Report fol. 19. B.

42. Ed. 3. cap. 3. It is Enacted, That no man shall be put to answer without
presentment before Justices or matter of Record, or by due process, according to
the Law of the Land, and if any thing from henceforth be done to the contrary,
it shall be void in Law and holden for error. No Court disallowes this
advantage to the worst of Traitors; no Committee allows it to the quietest of
Recusants.

All these so excellent Laws (such as no People under Heaven enjoy) were made
when the Legislative power was absolutely in the hands of Papists; all these
Privilege (so high and extraordinary that they deserve the name, rather of the
Peoples Prerogatives then their Liberties) the Papists obtained and establishd
in their times, and carefully transmitted to their posterities: All these wise
and prudent Cautions (which so safely fence and preserve our Common Freedom
from the encroachment of Arbitrary power) were providently contrived by the
Papists, and from them are happily descended upon us. And shall we now, (having
reformed their Faith) forget our own reason so far, as to deprive our Brethren
of the benefit of those Laws, which their Fathers made, only because they
resemble them most in Religion? Shall we so far yield to passion, as utterly
deny them the immmunities of their Ancesters? Or can we possibly arrive at this
degree of partiality, as not permit the greatest Malefactor to be his own
accuser, and yet enforce the most peaceable Recusant to be his own condemner?
Nay though the Thief (arraigned at the Bar) confess his guilt, our Judges
mercifully decline to condemn him, without some Testimony of witnesses: But if
a Recusant will not voluntarily both arraign and condemn himself, the practice
of Haberdashers Hall is, (without thinking of further proof) immediately to
proceed to Execution.

Nor was this tenderness toward the liberty of the subject regarded only in
those old days, but we have fresh Examples of a greater zeal and jealousy,
then ever those times were acquainted with; For in the great Petition of Right
(3. Car.) all these Statutes were particularly recited and earnestly insisted
upon by the Parliament then assembled. And yet a fresher instance is that of
the last Parliament, who (in their Act for Regulation of the Privy Council and
abolition of the Star Chamber) did punctually repeat again all those Statutes,
and rely upon them as the Fundamental and unchangeable Law of the Land.

Besides, whereas Copyhold Estates by the ancient Laws and Customs of this
Nation, were never comprehended within the general words of any Act of
Parliament, which alters the interest of the Land or the Custom of the Manor,
to the prejudice either of Lord or Tennant, as is resolved in Sir Edw. Coke's
second Report, fol. 8. Sir Fran. More's Reports 199. 428, etc. Because no
stranger can become Tennant of any Copyhold Estate, without the Lords special
assent and admission; For which cause no Copyholds were ever liable to any
Execution of Statutes or Recognizances in debts or Formdon, nor were within the
Statute of 2 Hen. 5. cap. 15. for Heresy, nor were seizable within the Statute
29 Eliz. cap. 6. nor 3. Jac. cap. 4. for Recusancy; Yet (contrary to this
ancient fundamental Law) the Copyhold Estates of every suspected Recusant are
seized upon and sequestered, although there be no Ordinance or Act of Parliament
expressly warranting any such proceedings.

Thus have we clearly demonstrated, that the only course allowed by the Law
for determination of all Controversies, is the ordinary Process by Writ in
Civil Causes, and by indictment in Criminal and in both by Witnesses and a
Jury of the Neighborhood, where the scene of the question lies. And now we
shall fully satisfy our undertaking, if we can also prove

That the late Parliament often engaged by solemn Acts and Declarations to
maintain the Laws of the Land.

WHerein it is impossible for any that can read English, to retain the least
doubt, when he has perused these few Citations.

26 May, Exact collections, fol. 267. Ib. fol. 660
1642. The Lords and Commons declare, That they will be very tender of the
Laws, which they acknowledge to be the safeguard and custody of all public
and private interest.

23 October 1642. They further declare, That they must own it, as their duty,
to use their best endeavors that the meanest of the Commonwealth may enjoy
their own Birthrights, Freedom and Liberty of the Laws of the Land, being
equally entitled thereunto with the greatest Subject.

November 1642. 1642. Ibi^ fol. 694.
They further declare, That slavery must be the Peoples condition, if the two
Houses should go about to overthrow the Laws of the Land and the property of
every Man's Estate.

26. Exact col. fol. 78.
May 1642. If such things may be done by Law without due process, the subject
has a very poor defense, and a very small, if any proportion of property
thereby.

17 April 1646. Book of Ordinances fol. 878
The Parliament declared, That they will not, nor any, by color of any
authority derived from them, shall interrupt the ordinary course of Justice.

The Parliament declared, 15 Junii. 1647.
That they will preserve unto the People their Laws, and will Govern by them.
And before and after they several times declared, that the Laws of the Land
are the undoubted birthright and inheritance of the meanest Subject.

By a special Act, 9 Febr. 1648.
the Parliament of England declared, That they are fully resolved to maintain
and preserve the Fundamental Laws of this Nation, for and concerning the
properties of the people with all things incident thereunto.

Now after all these Ordinances, who could be so undutifull as to entertain the
least fear of being ever hereafter forced to accuse himself? Upon these so many
so solemn Declarations, who could have excused the presumption and perverseness
of his heart, if he dared to doubt of their observance; Especially since the
Parliament did not proclaim to us its sense by bare words, but advanced farther
to severe Executions, and by the Example of the Earl of Strafford strictly
prohibited the introducement of any novelty in the practice of the Law. Against
whom the Parliament in their third Article brought this charge, That he had
proceeded summarily in the matter of the Lord Mont-Norris; And in the sixth
Article, his accusation was, that he had dispossessed the Lord Mont-Norris of his
Lands by a summary process contrary to Law; And in the seventh Article the like
charge was again repeated; That he had deprived the Lady Hibbots of her
possessions by a summary way of proceeding.

These misdemeanors (though not the only Crimes of which he was accused, yet)
added such a weight to his other offenses that altogether they sunk him into
his Grave. In the whole course of whose trial I meet with nothing more worthy
to be staid upon, then this consideration; That the Parliament did not so much
urge against him the illegality, as the unlawfulness of his proceedings, nor
condemn him barely for want of a Commission or authority, but because his
Actions were in themselves tirannicall, and dangerous encroachments upon the
Fundamental Liberty of this Nation; Yet he examined Witnesses, but after a
fashion of his own devising, and left the common road of trial by the verdict
of a Jury.

And can there be a more summary Process, then to accuse any whom we suspect of
a Crime, and (unless he immediately swear himself unguilty) immediately
condemn him, as guilty? Can there be a more quick and cutting dispatch, then in
half an hour to turn a just owner out of his ancient possession, because he
will not swear against his Conscience? and (which is yet worse) can there be a
more compendious (if not preposterous) way, then first to seize upon and secure
the Estate, and then hear the party speak for himself? Book of O^dinances for
sequestrations fol 40
Yet these are the express Instructions to the Committees for Sequestrations in
the Year 1643. That where they find any doubt concerning any person whether he
be comprehended within the said Ordinance (for Sequestration) they are to
certify the same to the Committee of Lords and Commons for that service, and in
the mean time to secure the Estate of such persons, until they receive
further Instructions.

And now when I consider the Office of a Parliament, which is principally to
reform the abuses, that time (conspiring with our corrupted nature) brings into
the administration of the Laws, when I consider the quality of the last
Parliament, professing so scrupulous and precise a respect to the preservation
of our ancient Liberties: I cannot sufficiently wonder from what cause this
unhappy effect should flow, by which a freeborn Englishman is compelled to be
his own accuser in matters of so tender a nature, as Conscience and Religion,
and of so high a concernment, as the utter impoverishment of himself and his
family; But after a little ranging about I soon discovered the fountain head in
a dark hollow place, where three or four hundred springs of fresh water met
together in one channel, of which, some having passed through hot and
sulphurous veins, quite changed the taste and color of the rest, and the
stormy weather of that season quickly raised the whole stream into a fierce and
violent current, whose fury soon broke the common banks and bore down all
before it like a deluge. The truth of which Metaphor, is as easily proved, as
the sense of it understood; being no more then that the Introducer of this
cruel Oath, was an Ordinance hastily huddled up in the destroying time of
Presbytery and War.

For then it was, August 17. 1643.
that where the people had thown in their Rings and Jewels, there came forth
the golden Covenant, before which all the Nation must fall down and worship.
Book of O^dinan. 289. 408. Jul 19. 1643


Then it was the Presbyter-Divines petitioned both Houses for a perfect
Reformation and settling of the Kirk Discipline and Classical Government.

Then it was that penalties began to be imposed upon all Refusers of the
Covenant, Great Boo. of O^din.
and none to bear Office but such as had taken the Covenant; fol 240. 30. Nov.
1643.
nay all be punished as spies, that denied to take the Covenant. Ordin. 390.
399. 20 (...). 1643.


Not long after was published the Directory or new Almanac to pray by, taken
out of the Ephemerides of Scotland, and calculated for the Elevation of the new
Kirk of England by the Assembly of well wishers to Divinity. Ordi. 404.


Not long after were the Apocriphall Elders brought in, Ordi. 802.
and Tyrannical Classes erected; November 26. 1644.
Both the Houses declaring their intentions to settle Religion in the purity
thereof according to the Covenant, Gr. Book of Ordin. 809.
which surely was a mistake in the Printer, to say Covenant instead of the Word
of God. Thus plainly it appears, that the Presbyterian Stars (or Comets
rather, by the shortness and terror of their blaze) reigned in the firmament
of our State at the birth of this unlucky Oath of Abjuration, and long after.

The second branch of the task I undertook was, That these sudden and sharp
proceedings of sequestring upon the bare refusal of an Oath, without any
legal process, were occasioned by the exigencies of the War; an assertion most
fully and evidently proved by the first Ordinance against Delinquents and
Papists; 1. Apr. 1643
In the preamble whereof the Lords and Commons (reciting the calamities of the
War) declare, That all the sequestered Estates should be applied toward the
supportation of the great charges of the Commonwealth; And in the first
Instructions to the Committees, they are charged to use their best care and
diligence for the speedy execution of the Ordinance for Sequestration, as being
a matter of great necessity and importance for the subsistence of the Army.
Great Book of Ordin. fol. 360. and 511.
And observing some slowness in the Committee, the Earl of Manchester (a
Commander in chief) was empowred to execute that Ordinance; and the
Sequestrators commanded to pay the money they raised, to the Committee of the
Army.

One other argument there is, that inclines me to believe the Parliament
intended this Ordinance only as a provision in those distracted times, and not
as a standing Law for ever; else surely they would never have put into their
Commission so slight a thing as a Bailiff of a Corporation. Were it handsome
that the Mayor of Rising should come down from thatching some trivial
Alehouse, to tender the Oath of Abjuration to the noble Earl of Arundell? or
indeed how should a common tradesman (whom without breach of charity we may
presume can neither write nor read) know what he does, when he commands others
to forswear such hard long words, as Supremacy, Purgatory, and
Transubstantiation? what shall we (that accuse the Papists of blind obedience)
say to our selves, when our very leaders are so short-sighted?

It Is true, all these fair and just exceptions are fully answered by this one
word Necessity, a Heteroclyte that has no Rule, no Law, and therefore, as it
is without Law, to be judged without Law. But then at least it ought to be a
Law unto it self, that is, confined to circumstances, wherein there is a true
and real necessity, and therefore during the furious violence and careir of
war, such summary proceedings (to prove without Witness and condemn without
Jurors) might easily find excuse, but being restored now to a perfect calm and
universal peace, we are certainly obliged to return again to the known English
trial by Indictment and Conviction, and not continue still throwing our
neighbors goods overboard, so long after the storm is ended.

If any object, though the reason of Necessity remains now no longer, since the
gates of Westminster Hall are open, and the old crowd of Suitors march
peaceably there under the Scotch Colors; yet the Supreme Authority of the
Nation is bound to render no other account of their Acts, then the French King
of his Edicts, which always close with this Frank and resolute Period, Car tell
est nostre plaisir.

single person of a King or the multiplied of a Council.



In which respect, never did any Parliament give such high hopes of a through
redress, as that which lately sat, by erecting so carefully those two grand
Committees for regulating the Law and propagating the Gospel, by inviting so
solemnly all that would offer their proposalls to come into their assistance.
And as the whole Nation remains infinitely bound to the solicitude of the Army,
for whose satisfaction both those Committees were established: So are we all no
less obliged to the Zeal of the General, by whose personal presence every day
at that of Religion it received so great Countenance and Encouragement. And
therefore I shall not entertain the least suspicion that these few thoughts of
mine should beget any offense, since they aim only to propose the
unsuitableness of this new uncharitable Oath of Abjuration to the ancient and
best Laws of the Land.

Even the Pope admits his Subjects (when they apprehend some error in the
proceedings) to appeal from himself misinformed, to himself better informed
and yet we call his absolute ness, a Tyranny, and their obedience, blindness.
How much more then may those true lovers of their Countries happiness promise
themselves security, if not acceptance from the Parliament, who either by
humble Petition or other modest and untumultuous way represent to their
consideration any mis-practiseor inconvenience, which in time might prove a
dangerous precedent to the just liberties of their Country.



A short Parallel between this Oath of Abjuration and that Ex Officio.

IN the grand Petition signed by the 9. Sept. 1640.
Lords, and presented to the late King at York, we find this recorded as one of
the principal grievances; That many innovations in Oaths and Canons had been
lately imposed upon the Clergy and other his Majesty's Subjects, etc. In
redress of which mischievous encroachment upon our just libertyes, In 17.
Caroli.
the late long Parliament enacted; That no person exercising any
Ecclesiastical Power or Authority shall ex Officio or at the instance or
promotion of any person whatsoever urge, enforce, tender, give, or minister to
any person whatsoever any Oath, whereby he shall or may be charged to confess
or accuse himself of any crime, offense, delinquency, misdemeanour, matter or
thing* by reason whereof he shall or may be liable to any penalty or punishment
whatsoever.

Before which Statute ( viz. 1607.) the unreasonableness and illegality of that
Oath had been clearly convinced by a learned Treatise of Oaths purposely
written against it, as also by M. Fuller in his arguments at the then Kings
Bench against some branches of the High Commission Court* both which pursued
their points so efficaciously, that the grievances they opposed were
unanimously condemned as intolerable abuses. And certainly no Mathematical
Demonstration can bear a higher and clearer evidence, then that the principal
reasons (which I have here collected out of both those Treatises) against that
Oath Ex Officio are more strongly appiable to this of Abjuration.

Thus then they begin their just charge upon that unjust Oath. That contrary to
the Law of Nature and the Fundamental Laws and Customs of this Nation, the
party examined is thereby forced to swear against himself in a criminal
cause before he knows his Accuser, and consequently compelled to be
isntrumental to his own punishment. This was condemned in the beginning of
the last Parliament with infinite applause, as a most unsufferable Tyranny; but
the Oath of Abjuration far exceeds it, even in its two worst qualities, cruelty
and illegality. Every Recusant (whose Conscience cannot down with the Oath)
being unavoidably necessitated either to ruin his Soul by taking it against
Conscience, or his Estate by loss of two thirds, if he refuse it: Wherein there
is one circumstance practiced, that raises this Oath to a most exorbitant
unconscionableness; For as to those, whose Judgments take any other road, as
Antinomians, Socinians, or even Jews, their course is smooth and free, but if
we espy one whom we guess to be a Papist, and whose Conscience we think is not
plyant and nimble enough to leap over the block, then presently this break-neck
Oath of Abjuration is clapped in his way; against which our own hearts (if we but
lay our hands upon them) will tell us, he must necessarily either stumble into
a desperate poverty, or (which is worse) fall downright into a damnable
perjury.

The Oath Ex Officio was aver'd to be a mere Alien, introduced by the Prelates,
upon pretext of purging their Provinces of seduced people; but indeed to
maintain their Hierarchy and tyrannize over the Consciences of all dissenters
contrary to Law and Equity; This of Abjuration is a greater stranger, never
heard of till 1643, when the Presbyterian faction thought it a fit engine to
skrew up their intended Kirk-tyranny.

Ex Officio, men were examined upon captious questions concerning their very
Thoughts, to the sifting and ransacking of their Hearts and Consciences, and
were therein subjected to a far greater Tyranny then that of the Spanish
Inquisition, which extends to words and actions only. This of Abjuration
compells even women and illiterate persons positively to renounce (by mere
adventure or implicit Faith) many controversiall Doctrines, about which the
greatest Divines of Europe have so long disputed, and are like perhaps never to
agree; Nor is this Oath contented with a modest and simple professing, that
they do not believe there is a Purgatory: but absolutely exacts of them to
swear down right there is none, in the last period of the Oath, where they are
enforced, to abjure and renounce all Doctrines in affirmation of the said
points. For my part, as I think it a wild conceit, to hold there is a new
World in the Moon; So I am sure it is a desperate presumption positively to
swear the contrary.

That Oath Ex Officio (being commonly tendered to such as are suspected guilty
of the crimes, whereof they are to clear themselves by their own Oath, or
otherwise to undergo a penalty) must in all probability be an occasion of
frequent perjuries, to the loss not only of many Souls, but to the great
abuse of the name and majesty of God. This of Abjuration exposes men to the
same danger, and God to the same dishonor; And besides has been so far from
ever gaining any true convert to the Protestant Religion, that it has made
many swear away that little Religion they had, and ever after profess none:
For such indifferent and lukewarm Papists, as take this Oath, usually say,
they will rather trust God with their Souls then the Commonwealth with their
estates.

Whence certainly it was that the famous Judge, Cokes fourth Report, f. 95.
Sir Edward Coke, breaks out into this complaint; Experience now proves, the
Consciences of men are grown so large, that the respect of their private
interests and commodities does for the most part induce them to perjury.
According to which he there sets it down for a Rule, that, to swear in a man's
own case is frequently in this Age, the Devils precipice, whereby to throw
men headlong into Hell. And yet to these straits (which my heart even bleeds to
think) has this cruel Oath of Abjuration driven all Recusants, live they
never so peaceably and unoffensively; This dangerous snare (for it deserves no
milder name, since we never think of endeavoring by any rational motives to
persuade them out of their errors) lies continually before their feet to
entrap them. Where is our charity to Christians, professing the same Savior,
and believing the same Scriptures, with our selves? Where is our Justice to
neighbors, equally entitled by their birthright to the same freedom with our
selves? Is the extraordinary Liberty, we held forth to all the World, shrunk
into this narrowness, that any peaceable person, who professes the Gospel of
Christ (though in some things mistaken) should by us be compelled to this sad
necessity, either of absolute forswearing himself, or utter impoverishing his
family, which in plain English signifies (I tremble to utter it) either Devil
take his Soul, or Sequestrator his Estate. I acknowledge this a very harsh
expression, but he that reflects upon the general proceedings hitherto with
Recusants, that we appoint no godly and gifted men to convert them, but only
Committeemen to ruin them, will I fear find too much truth in my words.

Upon occasion of the Oath Ex Officio, See Book of Speeches, page 314.
a learned Member moved in Parliament, ( December, 1640.) That the Law might
punish, not make Offenders; That words and actions might be subject to Law,
Master Bagshaw, ibid. p. 347
but thoughts be free. Another of the same learning and dignity (in a speech in
Parliament against the Oath Ex Officio) set upon it this public Brand,
November. 7. 1640.
That it was grown monstrous, and become indeed no other then Carnificina
Conscientiae. Upon the same ground was built the fourth Article of the charge
against the Bishop of Bath and Wells, ibid p. 319
that he questioned one Master James a Minister of his Diocese, not only for
matters of outward fact, but likewise concerning secret thoughts.

All which extreme and unsufferable inconveniences I confess are so evidently
appliable to the Oath of Abjuration, that you need but only change names, to
make them exactly true of either except that in the one both far more difficult
questions are required, and far greater penalties imposed, whereas in the
other, the point in doubt was very easy to resolve, whether you had slept with
your neighbors wife, and the punishment a little piece of money to repair
Paul's.

And certainly it was with reflection upon this Oath of Abjuration, Master
Hobbs in his Christian Commonwealth, p. 378.
that the learned Master Hobbs says, There is another error, to extend the
power of the Law (which is the Rule of actions only) to the bare thoughts and
Consciences of men, by examination and inquisition of what they hold; whereby
men are either punished for their very thoughts, or constrained to answer an
untruth for fear of punishment; By which means they are forced to accuse
themselves of their opinions, which is against the Law of Nature.

Nor does this Oath of Abjuration extort the secret thoughts only, but compells
the renouncing of some positions, which (in the opinion of diverse venerable
writers) are more receivable, then the Doctrine of some avowed Protestants. I
instance in the point of Transubstantiation (one of the Articles to be abjured)
which In consens. de re Sacram. Art. 24. p. 75^.
Calvin says is more rational then the Doctrine of Consubstantiation, and yet
this the Lutherans (our brethren) unanimously hold. Part. 2. Histor Sacram.
fol. 754.
Hospinian (another Protestant writer) says the like; And De Coena Domini. p.
216.
Beza acknowledges Transubstantiation to be an inevitably consequent of the
Doctrine of the Real presence, which all Lutherans maintain, and is not
against this Oath.

How then comes it to pass that the Real presence in the Lords Supper may be
lawfully, at least safely maintained, which many Protestants herein England do,
and all Lutherans every where; yer under most severe penalties the intrinsic
belief of Transubstantiation must be abjured, which (in the judgment of those
famous Reformers) is an inevitable consequence of it, and more rational, then
the opinion of Consubstantiation, yet this may be defended without being
subject to the least question; Nay more, there is no Oath nor penalty against
the public professing of Consubstantiation, no nor against the public
practice according to that opinion, and yet the very inward belief of
Transubstantiation is made so heinous a crime, so severely punishable, that
they who are but lookers on, and only see the burdens laid upon refusers of
this Oath, feel in their breasts a certain instinct by which they protest
themselves secretly and strangely enforced to grieve and sigh at the cruel and
rigorous proceedings even of their own Party.

And that this compassion toward sufferers, upon the account of Religion,
rises not so much from softness of Nature, as from the tenderness of the
Spirit, will certainly find an easy belief, if, in stead of a flock of tame
and weeping women, we can pick out an Army of victorious Soldiers, whose
courage neither knows to fear the face of such as threaten war, nor conscience
endures to force the heart of those that will live in peace; Of which too
evident truths, if any deny the first, let him read their past victories, if
doubt of the second, I desire him to peruse their following

DECLARATIONS.

NOw to the comfort and even amazement of the Spirit, let us contemplat the
constant pious intentions held forth by the Army. No sooner had their many
victories rendered them the terror of the World, (our own as fearfully as
neighboring Nations expecting what great design of blood they next would
enterprise) but they threw aside the cruelty and ostentation of Conquest, and
took into themselves the bowels of mercy; They presently looked round about
them on their afflicted Christian Brethren: and, knowing nothing more precious,
nothing more comfortable to the godly then liberty of conscience, by their
frequent Declarations to the World, and zealous addresses to the late
Parliament, they manifested how unalterable they were in their holy Principles.
No licentious avarice emboldned them to divide the spoil, no wantonness
provoked them to surfeit with the fruit of the Land they had subdued; So far
from growing insolent with success, that even their enemies have confessed,
There was never in any age known so great a modesty in so continued a victory,
nor such excellent discipline in a conquering Army. Their own interest never
regarded by themselves, only to improve the quiet and repose of the
Conscientious, was their endeavor, which they pursued with so religious a
noble courage, that they took their lives into their hands, and with the
greatest hazard to self-preservation, removed that Power which grew sloathfull,
and halted in the way of Godliness, and have moddel'd such a Government, as
shall intend chiefly to give balsome to the many wounds of the afflicted. This
relief is the expectation and hope of many Consciences now in anguish and
tribulation, who cannot but with comfort remember, how the Army ever had that
compassion which the Clergy wanted, and the Millitary piety has been still
eminent above the Civil or Ecclesiastic. What their godliness will be, we
cheerfully and confidently expect; what hitherto it has, these ensuing
Expressions will declare.

It was humbly desired by the Army; Armies Declaration 14. June 1647. p. 12
That ( according to the Declaration of the Parliament, promising a provision
for tender Consciences) there might be some effectual course taken according
to the intent thereof, and that such, as upon conscientious grounds differ from
the established forms, may not for that be debarred from the common rights,
liberty and benifits equally belonging to all, as Members of the
Commonwealth, Narration of the Army printed at Oxford. 1647. Page 11.
whilst they live soberly and inoffensively to others, and peaceably and
faithfully to the State.

Likewise, That sufficient care be taken for the liberty and protection of
those, who cannot submit to the external worship of this Nation, though
otherwise conformable to the civil power and authority thereof.

They desired, Army's Declaration 2. Aug 1647.
That an Act might be passed to take away all Coercive Power extending to any
Civil penalties upon any, for matters of Conscience; and expressly, That
Papists be subject to punishment, only for disturbing the State, Page 7.
and that men may not be compelled to take any Oath against their judgment and
consciences, Their Proposals, 16 September 1647.
but that all Orders and Ordinances to that purpose may be repealed.

That none may be compelled by penalties to answer to questions tending to
accuse themselves; Page 8.
And that consideration might be had of all Statutes and Ordinances, Page 10.
imposing any Oaths, and that they might be either repealed or at least so
qualified, that they might not extend or be construed to the molestation or
punishment of Religious and peaceable people for nonconformity to fixed
forms, bounds, and limits, thereby to confine Gods holy Spirit; as if Religion
consisted more in such outward forms and rites, according to the manner of
Moses, then in power and virtue according to the Gospel.

Again, Proceedings of the Army, 15 Novem. 1647.
That matters of Religion and the ways of Gods worship are not by them
entrusted to any humane power, because therein they cannot remit or exceed a
tittle of what their consciences dictate unto them, to be the word of God,
without wilful sin: nevertheless the public way of instructing the
Nation, so it be not compulsive, is referred to the discretion of the
Parliament. Page 9.


His Excellency and Council of War declare, That the Covenant be not enforced,
Lord Genesis Cromwell's Declaration 1647.
nor any penalties imposed on the Refusers, whereby men might be constrained to
take it against their judgments, but that all Orders and Ordinances to that
purpose might be repealed. That consideration be had of Statutes, Page 10. 13
Laws and Customs of Corporations, imposing any Oaths, and that they may be
either repealed or so qualified, that they may not extend or be construed to
the molestation or ensnaring of Religious and peaceable People, merely for a
nonconformity in Religion.

Again his Excellency thus learnedly and religiously, If outward things may not
be contended for, Lord Genesis Declarat. 21. March 1650.
much less may the doctrines of Faith (which are the works of Grace and the
Spirit) be endeavored by unsuitable means: He that bids us contend for the
Faith once delivered to the Saints, tells us we should do it by building up
our selves in the most holy Faith, Page 2. 3.
not pinning it upon other men's sleeves, keeping our selves in the love of God,
not destroying men, because they will not be of our faith, etc.

As for the people ( speaking of Ireland) what thoughts they have in matters of
Religion in their own breast, I cannot reach, but think is my duty, if they
walk honestly and peaceably, not to cause them in the least degree to suffer
for the same, Page 5.
but to endeavor to walk patiently, and in love toward them; to see if at
any time it shall please God to give them another or a better mind.

And in a Letter to the then Governor of Rosse in Ireland, Lord Generals
Letter dat. 19. October. 1649.
his Excellency (speaking of Religion) says, He meddles not with any man's
private Conscience.

The Army further declare, Narrarive of the Army 30. April 1649.
That they do not empower or entrust their Representatives to continue in
Force or make any Laws, Oaths, or Covenants, whereby to compel by penalties
or otherwise, any person to any thing, Page 5.
in or about matters of Faith, Religion, or Gods worship, or to restrain any
person from the profession of his Faith, or exercise of Religion, according to
his Conscience. Or to punish any person for refusing to answer to questions in
criminal causes.

These Declarations of the Army were seconded by a Petition from the Cities of
London and Westminster, Petition presented 11. Sept. 1648.
and Borough of Southwark, to the Parliament, in these words, That they would
exempt matters of Religion and Gods worship from the compulsive and restrictive
power of any authority upon earth, and refer them to the supreme power of
Almighty God. And that the Parliament would not proceed in making Ordinances,
or Laws, or in appointing punishments concerning opinions, wherein themselves
may easily be mistaken, etc.

On all oportunities, thus has the Army declared what was the light they
walked by in the dark thorny ways of their precedent dangers; And in the
endeavor that every Conscience may have a comfortable repose, they continue
constant still, and vigorous; Nor can there be the least suspicion of straying
from these religious Principles, having for their Guide, his Excellency, who
has fought his enemies as much into confusion, by an unexampled regularity of
manners, and holy encouraging to piety, by frequent exhortations, tears, and
prayers, as by the sharpness of his sword, and a courage ever invincible.

Our next Progress shall be to evince the truth and holiness of these
principles of the Army, against the enforcing of Oaths, and coertion in
Religion, to be clearly established upon that sure foundation

THE LAW OF GOD.

OF which three words, being of greater weight then three thousand volumes of
men's Discourses, I shall content my self, and hope to content my Reader with
the citation of these few Texts;

One witness shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity, Deuteronomy. 19 15.
fault, etc. (much less shall a man rise up against himself) but in the mouth
of two or three witnesses shall the matter be established; which Rule is
confirmed in the Gospel, Mat. 18. 16.
In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established, And
our Lord Christ himself said to the woman accused of Adultery, John. 8 11.
Where be thy accusers, if they condemn thee not, neither do I. In the
proceedings upon this Oath of Abjuration, there is no accuser, no witness; the
party himself must be both against himself; and what can be more opposite to
Scripture, then such enforcement?

And that carnal men, and they, who build on the Authority of Academick
learning, may see how abhorring to truth all force and violence offered to the
Conscience is: let their patience go a little forward and find what have been

The Opinions of the most eminent Divines in the Reformed Churches.

NOne are to be compelled to profess the true Religion, Ofiander Cent. 7. fol.
94.
by imprisonment or loss of goods; The Magistrate ought to force no man to
subscribe Articles concerning Religion, Bucer Comment. Evangel. fol. 428.
but that is to be left to the grace of God in every one, as the Lord shall
direct.

The Magistrate misuses his power, Bucan. in loc. com fol 33.
if he impose Laws upon our Consciences; For Paul did not subject the
Consciences of Christians to humane Laws, Sect. 18.
but to the Ordinances of God.

Men are to be persuaded to Religion by reason, Fox. Acts and Mon. fol. 1650.
and 1638.
not compelled thereunto by punishment: The Gospel allows not the Law of
compulsion to be put upon the Conscience, Beza in his Theological Tract. fol.
90. and 118.
but only of council and exhortation.

The Scripture commands, that they who are weak in faith are to be borne
withal, until the Lord shall reveal unto them all such things wherein they
are ignorant, and in the mean while they ought to be instructed, not punished.
Calvin. Comment. in 1 Cor. 8. 7.


All men erring from the true Religion are to be reclaimed by fatherly
exhortations, Polanus Syntag. liber. 10. ca. 65.
hearing the Word, and good instructions, not by force and violence. The Lord
has definitively declared, that the Magistrates are not fit Judges in matters
of Religion, Jac. Acontius in Strat. Satan. fol. 158. and 161.
and therefore has interdicted them all use of such Jurisdiction, and reserved
it to himself, who at the last day by his Angels shall separate the Tares from
the Wheat. Perkins in 6. Galat. fol. 477.


God alone is Lord of the Conscience, and has left it free from the Doctrines
and Commandments of men, which are in any thing beside his Word in matters of
Faith: Assembly of Divines Conf. of Faith, chap. 19. sect. 2.
so that to believe such Doctrines, or to obey such Commands out of Conscience,
is to betray our liberty of Conscience, and the requiring of an absolute
obedience, is to destroy liberty of Conscience and Reason also.

Faith has no relation unto, Mr Hobs in his Christian Commonwealth fo. 270.
nor dependency at all upon compulsion and commandment, but only upon
certainty and probability of arguguments, drawn from reason, or from something
which men believe already: Therefore the Ministers of Christ in this world have
no power to punish any for not believing; 1 Corinthians. 1. 24 Fol. 271.
since Paul himself professes, We have no dominion over your faith. Ephesians. 2.
Faith (both in respect of the Object and of the Assent) being the free gift of
God; which Man can neither give nor take away by promise of rewards nor menace
of tortures. Fol. 26^.
There is no coercive power left by our Savior upon earth in matters of
Religion, but only a power to proclaim the Kingdom of Christ, and persuade
men to submit themselves thereunto, and by precepts and good counsel to teach
them that have submitted what to do, that they may be received into the
Kingdom of God when it comes, etc.

Q. Camdens El^z.
Eliz. in her own private judgment often declared, That she never thought it
fit that the Consciences of her Subjects ought to be enforced; Annis 1577. fol.
86. and 1581. fol 11.
albeit the Bishops prevailed with her against her own judgment to the contrary.

Nothing is more against Religion, M* ^h^ll^ngworth.
then to force Religion; For as Paul says, the weapons of Christian warfare
are not carnal; Page 167.
Humane violence may make men counterfeit, but cannot make them believe, and is
therefore fit for nothing but to breed Form without, and Atheism within; and
infinite prejudice to the Kingdom of Christ, and consequently to the
propagation of the Gospel does follow thereby. Such who have their portions in
this life, who serve no higher State; then England, nor this neither any
farther then they serve themselves, who think of no other happiness, but the
preservation of their own Fortunes in this world, and of no other means to
preserve States but human policy, and believe no other Creed, but Regi aut
Civitati imperium habenti, nihil injustum quod utile, such it may become to
maintain by worldly power, and violence their State-instrument Religion; But
they, who are indeed servants and lovers of Christ, know, that to no State any
thing can be profitable, which is unjust and that nothing can be more evidently
unjust, then to force men to the profession of such points of Religion, which
they believe not.

They who run into extremes in opposition to the Church of Rome, M. Chil. in
his Preface, fol. 7.
they who put down the Infallibility of the Church of Rome, and set up their
own, they who declaime against the tyranny of that Church, and themselves
exercise as great or greater over others, are the men that give the Church of
Rome the greatest advantage; whereas men of more moderate spirits, such as
require of Christians to believe only in Christ, upon such as these the Church
of Rome cannot tell how to fasten. Fol. 100.
Nor can it be any way advantageous to the Civil State, that Men, without
warrant from God, should usurp a Tyranny over other men's consciences, and
prescribe unto them without reason, and sometimes against reason, Fol. 179.
what they should believe; We therefore are willing to leave all men to their
liberty, provided they improve it not to a tyranny over others.

This presumptuous imposing of the senses of men upon the words of God, Fol.
180.
and the special senses of men upon the general words of God, and laying them
upon men's consciences together under severe penalties; the deifying of men's
own interpretations, and tyrannically imposing them upon others, the
restraining of the understanding of men, wherein Christ and his Apostles left
them free, is and has been the only Fountain of the Schisms of the Church.
Take away this persecuting of men for not subscribing to the words of men, as
the words of God; require of Christians only to believe Christ; In a word, take
away Tyranny (which is the Devils instrument to support Errors) and restore
Christians to their just and full liberty, and it may well be hoped by Gods
blessing, that universal liberty, thus moderated, may quickly reduce
Christendom to truth and unity, the contrary effects whereof happen by the
tyrannous imposition of opinions upon other men's Consciences, Fol. 198.
whereby they are, as it were grievosly exulcerated.

All the power of the world is neither fit to convince, nor able to compel a
man's conscience to consent to any thing; indeed worldly terror may prevail so
far, as to make men profess a Religion, which they believe not; such men, who
know not that there is a Heaven provided for Martyrs, and a Hell for those that
dissemble such Truths as are necessary to be professed; But to force any man to
believe what he knows not, or any honest man to dissemble what he does believe,
if God commands him to profess it, or to profess what he does not believe,
all the swords in the world are too weak, with all the powers of Hell to assist
them. Fol. 16.


It is a damnable sin for any man to profess an error against his Conscience,
though the error in it self and to him that believes it be not damnable; Nay
the profession not only of an error but of a truth, if not believed, is a
mortal sin, unless hypocrisy and dissimulation in Religion be not so.

If a Papist be convinced or persuaded in conscience, Fol. 19.
that the Protestant Religion is irroneous, the profession of it, though in it
self most true, would be to him damnable. See his Reasons, fol. 132.

Thus in a full speed I have run over all that I could observe, to satisfy my
Spirit concerning the illegality of this Oath in Common Law or Common Reason,
in ancient or modern Acts of Parliament, in the Declarations of the Army (when
success had left them no employment but their piety) in the Opinions of the
most Learned Reformed Divines, and above all in the Law of God; And the charity
I owe my afflicted Brethren has forced me to communicate this to the Godly and
Religious, that they may with compassion reflect on those who eat their Bread
moistened with their Tears, and weep over their Houses, become desolate,
because they would keep up their Consciences from ruin.

I have collected this for information of such, who have bowels, and disdain a
glory or benefit that may rise by treading on their necks, who suffer only for
Religion; Who (if they err) err to their own temporal prejudice, and can in
their error have no design of flesh and blood; Whom discovered to have any
conspiracy against Government I would have most severely punished, and whom
quiet and inoffensive in practice of their own Consciences, I would have
pitied and relieved; And this I seriously desire all religious spirits to
weigh in their most godly and most prudent thoughts; That looking back on the
last hundred years, they shall find every subversion of Government in this
Nation (either Papal, Prelaticall, or Presbyterian) to have bin wrought by a
too rigorous coertion of the Conscience; Religion ever falling down to the
dust, when it leanes too much on the weak treacherous Prop of humane Policy, or
endeavors to stand only by punishment of their brethren, modestly dissenting
in some opinions.

And why may not I with an humble boldness lay down these Observations at the
door of the supreme Authority the Parliament, etc. now sitting at Westminster?
Why may I not solicit their mercy (by contemplating, what a series of
providence have fettled them in the present Power, and redeemed their
Consciences from a designed slavery) to take into their first consideration the
deplorable condition of the most oppressed people in the world? Why may not the
severity of the Eternal Justice, executed on former Governements, instruct
them to meekness toward their Brethren in such a sad forlorn affliction? and
thereby preserve themselves and their successors to a continued blessing by
that Hand, which shakes down the Palaces of the proud and uncompassionate, and
out of their rubbish builds up a Tabernacle of glory for the humble and
merciful.

Nor can I at any distance how remote soever (though we squint on carnal
interests) discover whence any the least prejudice can reach the Government, in
not offering violence by Oaths to the Conscience; unless we reckon on the loss
of that Rent is annually extorted by violence from the Conscience? And how
unhandsom and (above that) unchristian will it appear, that we can tenderly
maintain every Congregation, but only that, the not protecting which is for our
temporal emolument and supplies of the Treasury; In recompense whereof, we may
bring in the universal comfort of the whole Nation, when liberty of Conscience
shall be so general, that in that harmony no one string shall be out of tune;
Every spirit charitably embracing each other, and though not fully consenting
in every circumstance, yet all agreeing in one belief of one God, and one
acknowledging of one Mediator.

And thus in a perfect unity at home, how safe shall we be against the sordidly
avaritious, or disorderly ambitious of our enemies abroad; who as they fear
that Sword, which the Almighty has put into our hands; So will they court that
Nations friendship, which is so piously frindly in it self. How religious will
they believe all leagues? how happy all commerce with a people so
conscientious, that (only on the account of tenderness) throws away the
covetous severity of their Predecessors, and takes into one common liberty
every Conscience under their protection. To offer the reputation and honor
hereby to be gained with our most powerful Neighbors (which notwithstanding
the wisest and noblest Republiques have ever highly valued) may perhaps be
rejected, as a carnal vanity; But the many blessings which the Eternal Mercy
may be humbly hoped, will hereupon plentifully shower down upon the merciful,
is comfortably to be reflected on. Every Conscience thus set at liberty, being
obliged in all Christian duty, continually to invoak a happiness on those
Governors, who have broken asunder the fetters in which so many were sadly
bound up, and who have enlarged them to sing Hymns of praise for so great, so
charitable a Deliverance.

WILL. BIRCHLEY.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 11. lin. 28. read Privileges, p. 14. l. 14. r. all together, p. 22. l.
30. r. two evident.


